

THE EASTERN QUESTION:
BEING
AN EXHIBITION OF THE LIGHT SHED BY THE
SCRIPTURES OF TRUTH,
ON TUB MATTERS INVOLVED IN
THE CRISIS THAT HAS ARRIVED IH EASTERN AFFAIRS,
f
SHOWING
THE APPROACHING FALL OF THE OTTOMAN EMPIRE; WAR BETWEEN
ENGLAND AND RUSSIA ; THE SETTLEMENT OP THE JEWS
IN SYRIA UNDER BRITISH PROTECTORATE;
The Appearing of Christ, the Infliction of Divine Vengeance
on Mankind, and
THE SETTING-UP OF THE KINGDOM OF GOD.
BY 38, O BERT KOBE It TS,
W OF BIRMINGHAM.
REPRINTED FOR AUSTRALIAN CIRCULATION
Melbourne; M‘Carron, Bird & Co., Printers, 37 Flinders Lane W.
1877.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
IJNDJEKS JUAJS.K . r~>
-UJ




PROPHECY
t
(T bc (L : a st t rn Question:
BEING
AN EXHIBITION OF THE LIGHT SHED BY THE
SCRIPTURES OF TRUTH,
ON THE MATTERS INVOLVED IN
THE CRISIS THAT HAS ARRIVED IN EASTERN AFFAIRS,
SHOWING
THE APPROACHING PALL OF THE OTTOMAN HjkPIRE; WAR BETWEEN
> 7 v
ENGLAND AND RUSSIA; THE SETTLEMENT OP THE JEWS
IN SYRIA UNDER BRITISH PROTECTORATE;
The Appearing of Christ, the Infliction of Divine Vengeance
on Mankind, and
THE SETTING-UP OF THE KINGDOM OF GOD.
BY ROBERT ROBERTS,
OF BIRMINGHAM.
REPRINTED FOR AUSTRALIAN CIRCULATION.
Melbourne: M‘Carron, Bird & Co., Printers, 37 Flinders Lane West.
1877.


Most of the works referred to on page 5 may be had on loan, free,
of John Kitchen, Waterloo Street, St. Kilda; and tracts, for free
circulation, bearing either directly or indirectly on the same momentous
subjects, may be had at the gentlem n’s waiting-room, Hobson’s Bay
Railway Station, Melbourne.


2 r JANI993 2
(Via 650/ t
PROPHECY AND THE EASTERN QUESTION.
CHAPTER I.
Public alarm at the Eastern Question—The political possibilities involved in
it—Popular fears about prophecy—The reality of the foundation of
them —Educated aversion to the subject unreasonable —The facts of the
case —Human action under divine guidance—Historic illustrations —
First clue to the Eastern Question — God's purpose in the Holy Land—
His promise to Abraham—The question of fulfilment considered.
The Eastern Question has once again obtruded itself upon univer-
sal attention, with the effect of widespread public alarm. The
sentiment of commiseration on behalf of the unhappy inhabitants
of Bulgaria, aroused by the recital of the barbarities perpetrated
among them by the Turks, has already given place to an uneasy
apprehension that Russia may turn the opportunity to account for
her own advantage, by making an assault, under cover of the
popular indignation, upon the tottering edifice of Ottoman
power, and acquire possession of Constantinople and the splendid
territories so long desolated by the Turk. What this would
mean, as regards the interests of Britain, is gravely known to all
who have weighed the matter in all its bearings. It would be a
menace to British power in India, and to menace that power
would be to put in jeopardy the position, and ultimately the
very existence of Britain in the world. The strange vicissitudes
of history justify this view as involving at least a possible
eventuality. Russia may be poor if we measure her resources by
the requirements of British population; but she is a giant
notwithstanding. She commands an army ten times the size of
the British army, composed of hardy and hearty men, united by
the enthusiasm of a common creed and faith in destiny. Politi-
cally, she is strengthened by the virtual alliance of Austria and


Germany, who command between them 2,000,000 of armed men.
Consequently, the possibility of war between Russia and England
is regarded with great and just apprehensiveness by all classes of
English people; and the future is regarded with something akin
to a feeling of dread—a feeling reflected in the depressed state of
all the institutions of the country.
But there is another element in the case which adds to the
perturbation of public feeling, and imparts a peculiar solemnity to
the crisis which is now engaging the thoughts of men : it is the
feeling that is abroad that these impending events have something
to do with prophecy—that programme of Divine opei’ations on
earth revealed ages ago to the prophets of Israel. This feeling
is a vague feeling in the majority of cases. Few people could
give a reasonable account of it. It is a something they have
caught up from popular hearsay in a form they could scarcely
define, and a something in which they place very little faith, but
which at times of public peril like this, recurs to them with
discomfort as a something in which there may be a foundation of
truth somewhere if they could get at it. Educated people regard
the whole matter as a popular delusion, and, therefore, beneath
their attention. But even they, in times like these, have
occasional qualms of apprehension that there may lurk some
truth inside this popular tradition.
What is the foundation of this vague association of prophecy
with the public events of these times ? On what does the
tradition rest 1 ? Is it possible to get at an accurate and satis-
factory knowledge of the subject 1 Can it be shown, on the one
hand, that it is possible rationally to trace the finger of God in these
events, and to anticipate with clear reason, unusual and
momentous issues from their culmination'? Or, on the other
hand, can it be demonstrated that such a view is the mere
fantasy of superstition ? An interesting inquiry, all will agree, at
the present crisis, and one which it would be satisfactory to
prosecute to one or other of these definite results.
The object of this pamphlet will be to show that the former of
these hypotheses stands upon ground deserving the gravest con-


sideration of all reasonable men. It will be a fact in favour of
the attempt, that this is not the first time it has been made. The
view to be advocated, as thousands of persons are aware, has been
steadily and consistently presented for the last forty years, by the
party represented by this pamphlet. A limited public have
evidence of the truth of this statement in books, covering in the
time occupied in their production, the period mentioned. Five
vols. of the Apostolic Advocate (1836-40,) edited by Dr. Thomas ;
five vols. of the Herald of the Future Age (ditto), 1844-49 ;
eleven vols. of the Herald of the Kingdom and Age to come
(ditto), 1850-61 ; twelve volumes of the Christadelphian (R.
Roberts), 1864-76, (besides other works, — Elpis Israel, Anatolia ,
Eiireka, Twelve Lectures), constitute a mass of incontestable
■evidence that the views presented in this pamphlet are not
manufactured to suit current facts. They are not like the
conclusions of a man who, seeing public events assume a certain
shape, sets himself to work to construct a theory to suit the
circumstances; as in the case of the Baxterian Louis Napoleon
theory, which the writers of the foregoing literature condemned
long before its unfounded character was proclaimed to the world
by the catastrophe of Sedan, and the death of the inmate of
Chiselhurst. They are rather the sober and reasonable anticipa-
tions arising from a rational and reverential study of the prophetic
word, at a time when appearances were often against them, but
which are now being verified in a manner calculated to arrest
the attention of all who believe the Bible to be the Word of
God.
There is a general disposition, particularly among the educated,
to scout the application of prophecy to such subjects. The failure
of interpretation in the hands of fantastic and incompetent writers,
is made a reason for dismissing the whole subject from considera-
tion or respect. That this is reasonable will not be contended for
by reasonable men. It may be natural, but natural only with
those who are influenced by appearances. A subject that was not
beneath the study and reverence of the discoverer of gravitation,
cannot lack claims on the attention and confidence of the common


run of men. Only those who reject the Bible can consistently
disregard the indications of the prophetic word; and the Bible can
not be rejected without doing violence to the commonest elements
of fact and evidence. This is not the place to consider the claims
of the Bible to our confidence. These remarks are addressed
to those who believe in the resurrection of Christ, and, therefore,
in the divinity of the Scriptures endorsed by Him. Such ai’e
aware that prophecy has been too signally fulfilled in the past
to leave any doubt as to its reliability for the future.
Ho man can be acquainted with the Bible without perceiving
that its prophecies are of a very exalted order. They are not the
mere foretelling of events in the idle sense of telling beforehand
what is going to happen: they are the outlinings of the leading
events in history in so far only as they are related to the Divine
purpose on earth. They do not include all histories or all the
events of any history. They are intended to throw light on God’s
purpose alone, and, therefore, are found clustered around the one
people on earth whom He has chosen as the basis of His plan, in
the past and future —the Jews, of whom it is said, “You only have
I known of all the families of the earth” (Amos iii. 2); and again,
“Salvation is of the Jews.”—(Johniv, 22). The perception of
this simple fact relieves the subject of many perplexities.
That in this channel, the events of the future have been fore-
shown is a demonstrable and important fact. The evidence is too
extensive even to look at here. It will transpire in great measure
in the course of the following pages. Meanwhile, it may not
be without advantage to quote one or two express statements
on the point: “Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but He
revealeth His secret to His servants the prophets.”—(Amos iii. 7).
“There is a God in heaven that revealeth secrets and maketh
known to the king Nebuchadnezzar what shall come to pass in the
latter days,”—(Dan. ii. 28.) “The revelation of Jesus Christ
which God gave unto him to shew unto His servants things which
must shortly come to pass, and He sent and signified it by His
angel unto His servant John.” —(Rev. i. 1). If these statements
are true, we ought to be able to find recognizable and measurable


light in the Scriptures on the leading events of history, and,
therefore, on such a gigantic affair as the Eastern Question, which
so radically affects and imperils great national interests, and
involves the destiny of the land of Jehovah itself—now a pachalic
of the threatened empire of Turkey.
But it may be objected that the affairs in question are perfectly
human in their character. It may be said their origin can be so
exactly traced to natural causes as to exclude the possible operation
of occult influences. The Turks, it may be said, being a brutal
race, have for centuries brutally treated the races that have been
brought under their subjection by conquest, and that as a result,
their empire is weak; and that Russia, by the operation of a
perfectly natural ambition, desires possession of a desirable terri-
tory so evidently destined to fall out of Turkish hands by-and-bye:
that, therefore, it is absurd to seek for a Divine view of the case,
or to regard the consequent events as forming any part of a Divine
programme.
The answer is obvious to those who accept the Bible and have
made themselves familiar with its contents. We there discover
that the springs of human action are accessible to Divine control,
and that men under the influence of feelings perfectly natural to
themselves are often made use of to accomplish things that God
has purposed without their being in the least aware of it. Let
two illustrations suffice where there are hundreds. Israel revolted
from the law of God. In punishment for their revolt, God sent
upon them the King of Assyria to desolate the land and subject
the inhabitants to the horrors of invasion. The fact is stated
thus: “ O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger . . I will send him
against a hypocritical nation, and against the people of my wrath
will I give him a charge .” At first sight it would seem from this
as if a direct and personal commission were sent by messenger to
the Assyrian court, and that the Assyrian monarch acted in con-
sequence as the witting and willing agent of Jehovah in the punish-
ment of Israel. But this view is expressly excluded by what follows;
we are given to understand that the Assyrian acted out his own
view without even being aware that God was using him. It is


added: “ Howbeit, he meaneth not so, neither doth Ids heart think
so; but it is in his heart to destroy and to cut off nations not a
few. For he saith, Are not my princes altogether kings.
He saith, By the strength of my hand I have done it, and by my
wisdom, for I am prudent.” The Divine comment on the
Assyrian pretensions in the case is unmistakable. It is this:
“Shall the axe boast itself against him that heweth therewith]
Or shall the saw magnify itself against him that shaketh it?” —
(Isaiah x. 5, 13, 15). Thus the Assyrian was aiming at the
accomplishment of his own ambitions, in utter ignorance of the
fact that God was using him as an axe to hew down the Israelitish
tree of wickedness. The event was perfectly human in its
character, so far as the agency was concerned, and yet was a
Divine operation intended to effectuate Divine objects.
The other instance is similar: “Lo, I raise up the Chaldeans,
that bitter and hasty nation, which shall march through the
breadth of the land and possess the dwellings that are not theirs.
He shall pass over and offend and impute this his
power unto his God.” What is the comment? “Lord, Thou hast
ordained them for judgment. 0 mighty God, Thou hast established
them for correction .” —(Hab. i. 6, 12.) So also with the Roman
invasion, foretold ages before by Moses as a Divine visitation for
the sins of Israel: the Romans were unconscious of being divinely
guided in their proceedings. They but yielded to the natural im-
pulse of conquest, and to those who witnessed their proceedings
on the spot, there would have appeared to be nothing divine in
the events.
On the same principle, the events now impending in the East
may be of and intent, though perfectly natural
on the surface. The simple question is, Have these events been
made the subject of prophecy? Have they any relation to the
purpose of God on earth, as revealed to the prophets of Israel,
and set forth in the writings in which they were instructed to
record the revelation? If so, the perfect naturalness of them on
the surface will be no bar to a divine construction of them by such
as apprehend the facts involved in the foregoing argument.


The first clue is simple and palpable. It is a geographical one:
Turkey has possession of the Holy Land, and whatever happens to
Turkey must affect that land as part of her dominion. To see this
fact in its true importance, we must look at another, viz., that the
Holy Land is the geographical basis of the Divine work upon earth.
No one will question this as regards the past. In the Holy Land
the divine nation of Israel was established. Moses and Joshua
guided them thither from Egypt. In the Holy Land Samuel
judged them, and David and Solomon reigned. In the Holy
Land, Jesus, the Son of God, appeared, and lived His wondrous
life, which in its effect has already largely changed the condition
of mankind. The Bible is the book of the Holy Land. So much
all admit concerning the past. But is there no future for the Holy
Land ?
This is the question which gives the Eastern embroglio its
chiefest interest and importance. It is a question, the answer to
which is one of the plainest things taught in the Bible, and yet
to which there is the strongest opposition on the part of the great
bulk of professing Christians. The answer is one which we must
establish before we can hope to create for the Eastern Question
that interest which sensible people, recognising the facts of the
case, must feel; and before we can attract to it that amount of
attention which it cannot fail to receive at the hands of such.
It is very easily established when once resurrection is accepted
as the mode of future retribution; and the earth recognised
as the arena of the Divine purpose with regard to man living
upon it.
The future portion of the righteous is frequently spoken of in
the New Testament as “the inheritance,” and this inheritance is
said to be a thing promised—(Gal, iii. 18). Standing foremost—
at the very beginning, indeed, of this promise—we find Abraham,
in whose case we are able to localise the inheritance at the start.
It is testified that Abraham had the honour to receive the
promises (Heb, xi. 17). “To Abraham and his seed were the
promises made.” —(Gal. iii. 16), As to the subject of the promise,
so far as Abraham’s personal part in it was concerned, we are in-


formed that “God gave the inheritance to Abraham by promise”
(verse 18). Now what was this inheritance that was given to
Abraham by promise? This question is answered by Paul in a
way that is simple, conclusive, and in harmony with the meaning
of the term and the facts of Abraham’s case. “By faith Abraham,
when he was called to go out into A place which he should after
receive for an inheritance, obeyed, and went out, not knowing
whither he went. By faith he sojourned in the land of promise
as in a strange country, dwelling in tabernacles with Isaac and
Jacob, the heirs with Him of the same promise”—(Heb, xi. 8,9.)
Here we have “a place” and “a land” as the subject of the pro-
mise of inheritance. There will, of course, be no question that
this is the Holy Land, now in Turkish grasp, for it was in this
Holy Land that Abraham, when he lived, sojourned as a stranger,
and Isaac and Jacob after him.
The only question will be whether the promise was ever ful-
filled. On this point, infidels take strong ground as against
Christians of the popular type. They say Abraham never in-
herited the land, and that, therefore, the Divine promise has
failed. If it can be shown that Abraham is to receive possession
of the land at the coming of Christ to set up the kingdom of his
father David (Luke i. 32), the force of their argument is gone;
but ordinary Christians do not believe this, and, consequently,
have no answer to the infidel, except the unsatisfactory one that
the promise was fulfilled in the occupation of the Holy Land by
the Jews under the law of Moses.
But the answer indicated is the true one. The infidels, of
course, are wrong; but so also are the Christians when they deny
that Abraham will receive the land for an inheritance, in which,
in the days of his probation, he sojourned as a stranger. Their
explanation that he received it when the Jewish nation occupied
it under the law, is inconsistent with Paul’s express reasoning on
the subject. Paul says, “If the inheritance be of the law, it is
no more of promise, but God gave it to Abraham by promise .”—
(Gal, iii. 18.) He also says, “The promise that he should be the
heir of the world was not to Abraham or his seed through the


law, but through the righteousness of faith.” “If they who are
of the law be heirs, faith is made void, and the promise made of
none effect.” (Rom. iv. 13.) Now the Jews held the land
under the law of Moses, which made their occupation of it con-
ditional on obedience to its provisions.—(See Dent, xxviii.,
entire.) They did not render this obedience, and they were con-
sequently scattered among the nations of the eai'th as at this day.
The dispersion of Israel is evidence that their occupation of the
land of promise, was under the laio and nit under the promise.
Consequently, there remains a future occupation by Abraham
under the promise; for it is beyond question that Abraham never
inherited the land during his own life.—(Acts vii. 5; Gen. xxiii.
4; Heb. xi. 13.)
It is this future occupation that forms the pivot of the entire
prophetic scheme. Let anyone read the books of Isaiah, Jere-
miah, Ezekiel, &c., &c., and he will be fully convinced of this.
Two examples from the first of these books may suffice for what,
without exaggeration, may be called hundreds. The second
chapter foretells a day when “nation shall not lift up sword
against nation, neither shall they learn war any more”—(lsaiah
ii. 4). There is no need to prove that this is future. Now,
observe the geographical surroundings of this state of things.
“ The mountain of the house of the Lord shall be exalted above
the hills .... The law shall go forth from
Zion: and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem ” —(verses 2-3).
The 25th chapter foretells (verse 8) a day when tears will be
wiped from all faces, and death shall be swallowed up of victory.
There is need to prove that this is yet future. Observe then the
geographical surroundings identical with the other case. “In
that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah ” —(xxvi.
1). “The Lord of Hosts shall reign in Mount Zion and in
Jerusalem ” —(xxiv. 23). The whole of the prophets have the
same characteristic: their delineations of the coming glory are in-
terwoven inseparably with the land promised to Abraham.
Let not the reader regard this as an unimportant fact. Let
him not suppose it is unconnected with the glory and the work of


Christ. Let him remember that the spirit of Christ in the pro-
phets “testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ and the glory
that should follow” (1 Peter i. 11), and that therefore the
writings of the prophets, which Peter styles “the sure word of
prophecy,” are “a light in a dark place, until the day dawn,” to
which “we do well that we take heed”—(2 Peter i. 19). The
day spoken of has not yet dawned, but it will arise in due time,
and that due time there is reason to believe to be near at hand, as
will appear in what is to follow. It is the day of the glory of the
Holy Land, as the inheritance of the chosen of God, and the
scene of the exaltation of Jesus, returned in power and great
glory, to sit on the throne of David, and reign over all peoples,
nations and languages.—(lsaiah ix. 6; Jer. xxiii. 5; Luke i. 32;
Dan. vii. 15 ; Rev. xi. 15).
CHAPTER 11.
The reason for looking for the end in our day—Expiration of the prophetic
periods — Widespread expectation of Christ's appearing as at His first
advent—Approaching revival of Jewish prosperity—Consequent necessity
for Turkish dissolution—The symbolic representation of these things in
the Apocalypse.
Having answered the question, Is there no future to the Holy
Land ? the next point to consider is, the reason for looking at this
particular time in the world’s history for events of special signifi-
cance as bearing on the Holy Land. Why, in the nineteenth
century, any more than in the fifth, or tenth, or fifteenth, or
thirtieth, should we look for the occurrence of events tending to
precipitate the destiny of the land of promise, and to introduce
the great day of glory so long foreshadowed in the sure word of
prophecy 1 ?
The answer to this question is susceptible of very extensive
treatment. We must be content with a mere indication of it. In
brief it is this, that in our day the period expires which has been
appointed for the desolation of Israel and their land, in punish


ment for tlieir sins. There are several illustrations of this. The
period of Gentile supremacy has been measured and defined in
various ways in the prophetic word, and the working-out of all
the specifications—checking and counterchecking one another—
leads to the same result. One illustration of how the result is
arrived at must suffice.
It is well to remember that at the first advent of Christ, just
before His appearance, there was a widespread expectation, both in
the Jewish and Pagan worlds, that this appearance would take
place, though no definite idea existed as to its manner and effect.
The fact of this expectation is testified to by both Josephus and
Tacitus, both writers of the first century. The reason of the
expectation was that a prophecy had been recorded by Daniel
(chap. ix. 24-26), that in seventy weeks (of years) from the date
of the Persian decree for the rebuilding of Jerusalem, after her
seventy years’ desolation at the hands of Babylon, the Messiah
should appear. This period was about to expire at the time
Jesus appeared; hence the widespread expectation and the saying
of Jesus: “The time is fulfilled; the kingdom of God is at hand;
repent ye, and believe the gospel.”—(Mark i. 15.) In our day,
there is again a widespread expectation of His appearance, and the
reason is of the same sort. Certain periods prophetically specified
as those at the end of which He will re-appear, expire in our
generation.
Jesus, foretelling the overthrow of the Jewish state, said,
“Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles until the times
of the Gentiles he fulfilled .”—(Luke xxi. 25.) When did these
“ times of the Gentiles” begin! and how long do they last! If we
can ascertain these two points, we know the conclusion of the
times. There is a prophecy on this subject in Dan. viii. on which
it is necessary to remark that it is a symbolic prophecy in which
events of magnitude are represented by petty objects, and time is
also signified on a reduced scale; but, at the same time, accom-
panied by explanations that make it plain. The time is measured
on the scale of a day for a year, as expressed by Ezek. iv, 5: “I
have appointed thee each day for a year;” and conclusively


illustrated by the crucifixion, which it was foretold (Dan. ix.
24-26) would occur at the end of seventy weeks from the Persian
edict for the rescue of Jerusalem from her Babylonish desolation.
Seventy weeks are 490 days, and the period from B.C. 456 (the
date of the edict by the hand of Nehemiah in the twentieth year
of the reign of Artaxerxes—Nehemiah ii. 1-8) to the crucifixion,
was 490 years.
In the prophecy to which I refer (Dan. viii.), Daniel was shown
a ram, a goat, horns, stars, and an army, with the Holy Land as
the base of the symbol. He observed certain movements among
the objects of the symbol, and received certain explanations by
which we are enabled to read the meaning of them. The expla-
nation, in brief, was (verses 20-24) that the ram and goat with
horns represented the Persian, Greek, and Roman power's in their
hostile relation to the land and people of the Jews. The holy
nation was to be prevailed against by these powers successively.
This foreshadowing has been verified in history as our own eyes
witness, for the Jews and their land are yet unrecovered from the
great Roman catastrophe.
The principal point is the question of time. Daniel heard one
personage in the vision ask another how long a period of time the
vision would cover—(verse 13). The answer was (verse 14),
“Until two thousand three hundred days: then shall the sanctuary
be cleansed.” There is an alternative reading of this number. The
Septuagint, and certain ancient Hebrew MSS., have “two thou-
sand four hundred.” This difference, however, is deprived of its
embarrassment by the fact that 2400 years have elapsed since the
commencement of the events of the vision, showing the 2300
reading to be the incorrect one. How, the first event seen in the
vision was the uprise of the two-horned ram. The ram is ex-
plained to mean the double-dynastied power of Persia. Conse-
quently, if we get the date of the establishment of the empire
of Darius and Cyrus, we get the commencement of the 2400 year-
days and a clue to our present whereabouts with regard to the end
of it. History points to about B.C. 540 as the date in question.
This figure, added to the present year 1877, gives 2417 as the


number of years that have elapsed since the commencement of the
events symbolised in the vision. It is that number of years since
the political ram appeared in the arena of imperial power. In a
word, the time for Israel’s desolation is past, and we are in the era
of the revival signified by the words, “Then shall the sanctuary be
cleansed,” or, in other words, the resuscitation of the Jewish
power, which is predicted by other prophets in very plain terms.
This furnishes the true meaning of the many events that are now
tending to bring the Jewish nation and the Jewish land into
prominance; and is one of the several facts which justify the
believing reader of the Word of God in regarding this particular
century with special interest and anticipation in connection with
the predicted return of favour to Zion.
The approach of favour to Zion must involve the dissolution of
the power that acts the part of her desolator as that time
approaches. In this light alone, the decay of the Turkish empire
and her threatened disappearance from the scene altogether, is an
interesting and significant fact.
But without something in the nature of more special indication
on the subject, we should be unable to attach that amount of
interest to the Eastern Question which scripturally belongs to it.
This more special indication we find in another part of the Word of
God, and to that we must now look. It is a part of God’s Word,
against which a great amount of prejudice exists, even on the part
of such as regard it as divine. It is the last book in the Bible.
The prejudice against it is without true reason, and can only
be entertained by such as are not practicably acquainted with it.
What is the nature of this book 1 It is defined in its very first
sentence: “ The revelation of Jesus Christ which God gave unto
him to show unto His servants things which must shortly come
to pass.” —(Rev. i. 1). A concluding statement of the book con-
firms this representation of its character; “I, Jesus, have sent
mine angel to testify unto you these things in the churches.”
—(Rev. xxii. 16). The book is, therefore, a message from Christ,
setting forth certain things that were about to happen among men,
that His servants might know beforehand, and be prepared to


estimate public events in their divine light, and to frame their
action accordingly. No man receiving Revelations as divine can
deny this.
From this it follows that the message is capable of being under-
stood ; for how otherwise could it “ show unto His servants” the
things represented ? The message is communicated in symbol and
enigma, it is true; but it is accompanied with words of explanation
here and there, which act as keys to the diligent and the wise, and
by them it may be unlocked. Knowledge concealed but not abso-
lutely inaccessible is more interesting than what is spread on the
surface; and, in this case, there was a special reason for concealing
it; that it might be withheld from the undeserving class, who
were to be the agents in transacting the events foretold. Its
intelligibility to those who set themselves to understand, is
manifest from the occurrence of such statements as this : “ Here is
the mind that hath wisdom: the seven heads are seven mountains
on which the woman sitteth,” &c.
Now when Revelations is thoroughly dissected (see Eureka , Dr.
Thomas’s Exposition of the Apocalypse), it is found to set forth,
symbolically, yet in chronological order, the leading features of
European history during the interval lying between the day when
it was given to John in Patmos and the time when Christ should
reappear, and when “ The kingdoms of this world should become
the kingdoms of our Lord and His Christ, and He should reign for
ever and ever,” —(Rev. xi. 15). The framework of the scheme by
which all these events are exhibited is on the basis of the number
seven—the numerical of completeness. Opening with
messages to seven particular churches, as representing all the rest,
there is introduced a book or scroll, sealed with seven seals, after
the ancient custom —the closed book representing unknown
futurity, and the seals its subdivisions of time. The first seal is
broken, and certain things are exhibited appertaining to the firs-
historical period coming after A.D. 98—the time when the revela
tion was given; then the second seal is broken, and the events of the
next succeeding period exhibited; then the third seal is broken, and
so on to the seventh. The events of the seventh seal comprise a new


subdivision of the time succeeding to it: seven angels are introduced
with trumpets. A trumpet is an instrument to summon soldiers or
servants, and the trumpets are used here to symbolise the judg-
ments which God should bring on Europe for their corruption of
His way. The judgments historically come one after the other in
the order of the trumpets. The first angel sounds, and certain
symbolic occurrences ensue, representing the events that transpired
during the period symbolised. Then the second angel sounds, and
certain other things take place which correspond to the events of
the period next ensuing, and so on to the seventh. Then a new
symbol is introduced for the subdivision of the remaining time.
Among the events of the seventh trumpet, seven angels receive
seven vials, which they empty one after another on certain spe-
cified objects and areas, with consumptive effects after the analogy
of chemical transformations. In most cases, they waste away the
things that were brought upon the scene in judgment by the
trumpets.
The entire representation covers the period lying between the
prosperous days of the Roman Empire under Hadrian and the
Antonines, to the catastrophe of Russo-headed militarism at
Armageddon, ensuing upon the disappearance of the Turkish
Empire under the sixth vial. It is under the sixth vial that we
meet with the Eastern Question, so far as the Apocalypse is con-
cerned. The sixth trumpet brings the Turks into Europe under
the symbol of fiery horsemen (see Rev. ix. 13-21); the sixth vial
dries up their power under the symbol of the river Euphrates.
That this is the meaning of the symbol is evident from the fact:
first, that waters in oceanic collection are employed to represent
the populations of the world. Thus, “the water that thou sawest
are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues” (Rev. xvii,
15); and second, that a local water, such as a river, is employed to
represent the power in occupation of the territory irrigated by it..
Thus, the aggressive power of Assyria is spoken of under the
symbol of its principal river in a state of inundation: “The Lord
shall bring upon thee (Israel) the waters of the rivet-, strong and
many, even the king of Assyria, and all his glory; and he shall


come up over all his channels, and overflow all his banks ” (Isaiah
viii. 7,8). This is a political figure, of which there are other
illustrations. For the sixth angel to pour his vial upon the river
Euphrates, therefore, is to intimate the adverse operation of Pro-
vidence against the power of whose territory the Euphrates is the
characteristic river, viz., the Turkish power, of which the symbol
is the more appropriate in that the Turkish power, geographically
speaking, is of Euphratean origin in relation to Europe. The
object of this adverse operation is clearly stated: u And the sixth
angel poured out his vial upon the great river Euphrates; and the
water thereof was dried xip, that the way of the kings of the East
might be prepared” (Rev. xvi. 12). What is this but the gradual
exhaustion of the Ottoman power? This was seen to be the
meaning two hundred years ago by Tillinghast, who remarked
upon the improbability of the prophecy from a human point of
view, as at that time the Turkish power was the strongest upon
earth. A writer also, at the beginning of the present century, re-
marked to the same effect, expressing his inability to imagine by
what means so great a power as the Ottoman power then was
could be brought to a state of decay. In our day, the decayed
state of the Ottoman power is the most notorious fact of European
politics, and its downfall has been a matter of expectation
throughorrt the world for a considerable time. This fact is one of
the great signs of the times from a Bible point of view. It indi-
cates the proximity of the events to which the sixth vial stands
related. The nature of these we shall presently see. Suffice it
here to say that they comprise the Russian conquest of Turkey,
the reorganisation of the Jewish nationality on a limited scale,
war between England and Russia, and the reappearance of Christ
upon earth, to change the face of the scene.


CHAPTER 111.
Daniel’s “time of the end ” —lts nature defined —Its coincidence with Ezekiel’s
“latter days”—The sixth vial’s relation to that now-current period of the
world’s history—The object of Turkey's decay from a Providential point
of view—The imminent uprise of a new order of Kings.
In the book of the prophet Daniel, we read of “the time of the
end”—(Dan. xi. 40). The nature of the “end” involved in this
phrase is defined as “the end of the days ” —(Dan. xii. 13). The
“ days,” so far as the one period which we have looked at is con-
cerned, begin with the domination of the Persian Empire over the
Holy Land. They number 2400, It is that number of years and
a little more since Cyrus reigned. Consequently, the prophetic
“ days,” which represent years, are ended, and our generation
marks “the time of their end.” This conclusion is yielded by
several other periods, for the exhibition of which in detail we
must refer to works advertised herewith. That which in Daniel
is spoken of as “ the time of the end,” is in Ezekiel described as
“ the latter days ” and “ the latter years ” —(Ezekiel xxxviii.
8, 16).
The sixth vial is a symbolic representation of the events that
belong to this “ time of the end ” —this overlapping margin styled
“the latter days.” This is evident, not only from the position in
which the sixth vial is found when the events of the Apocalypse,
as a whole, are chronologically traced, but from the coincidence of
its terminal events with those of Daniel’s “ time of the end ” and
Ezekiel’s “ latter days.” It is this fact which invests the sixth
vial with such especial interest as furnishing a clue for the
reading of current public events in their bearing upon the Divine
programme which is being worked out in the affairs of men, and
which ultimates in the overthrow of all human power, and the
establishment of a Divine universal despotism in the hands of
Jesus, enthroned in Zion.
Its bearing on the state of Turkey we have seen, but we have
not considered the statement as to the object divinely proposed in


the removal of Turkey: “ that the way of the kings of the East
might be prepared.” This statement will be comprehended by
those who apprehend the argument of the chapter bearing on the
Holy Land. The great event that is looming, is the re-establish-
ment of Jehovah’s kingdom in the land of promise, in the hands
of a new order of kings. These kings are the saints (1 Cor. vi. 2 ;
Dan. vii. 27); a mighty company, who are avo ava.ro\uv 7j\io V—
translated “ from the East,” but more exactly, “ from the risings of
the sun.” They spring into being at the rising of the Sun of
Righteousness (Mai. iv. 2), viz., at the return of the Lord Jesus,
who says, in connection with this very sixth vial: “ Behold /
come as a thief; blessed is he that watcheth.” These saints —
comprehensive of “ the dead Thy servants, the
prophets, and the saints, and they who fear Jehovah’s name, small
and great” (Rev. xi. 18) —are styled “the seed of Abraham, and
heirs according to the promise .”—(Gal. iii. 29.) Consequently,
they are the coming inheritors with Abraham of the land in
which he sojourned as a stranger. When they inherit it, they
inherit it in power and great glory, as the lords of mankind—the
rulers of the new order of things, when “ The Lord shall be king
over all the earth,” and the saints shall reign kings and priests
with him.—(Zech, xiv. 9 ; Rev. v, 10; xx. 5.)
Now, as a preparation for the events that develop this new
order of things, the Turkish power, which obstructs “ the way ” by
its desolating presence in the Holy Land, has to be removed.
With this view, it has been gradually drying up, through a series
of providentially-regulated circumstances; and at this moment
stands on the verge of destruction. If we had no other light than
is contained in the symbolography of the sixth vial, we should not
know whether Turkey would continue to the end, or be over-
thrown by another power. But we have other light, and know
that she is destined to fall in her decrepitude into the arms
of Russia.


CHAPTER IV.
The. frog section of the sixth vial—The effects of French diplomacy—Gigantic
armaments of the present hour—Despairing prospect apart from
prophecy—War preparations an appointed condition of the end —“ The
tear of the great day of God Almighty ” —lts object the punishment and
purification of the ivorld.
There is another matter in the sixth vial which is very important
to understand. While the Euphrates was drying, John saw (Rev.
xvi. 13) three frog-shaped things emerge from the mouths of
three great symbols, the dragon, the beast and false prophet,
representing three great systems in Europe. The spirits like
frogs went forth from these centres to the nations of the earth,
with this mission : “to gather them to the war (for the word in the
original is iroXepos) of that great day of God Almighty .”—
(verse 14.)
We shall not devote much space to the consideration of the
frogs, as it is the result of their mission that is more particularly
to be regarded. Suffice it to say that they must represent
influences at work while the political Euphrates is drying, for
they form part and parcel of the same vial \ second, they must be
political influences, for only political influences gather nations to
war; and third, they must be identified with a power associated
in political heraldry with the frog, as the rule of symbolic
prophecy is to adopt the symbols used by nations to represent
their power: e.g., the winged lion of Babylon: the ram of
Persia, the goat of Greece, &c. These principles of elucidation
point to France, which commenced its national career under the
symbol of a frog, on banner, shield and coin, representative of the
marshy country of Westphalia in which the Franks had their
origin ; which has, till the downfall of the French Empire, been a
potent intriguing influence in European affairs concurrently with
the decay of the Ottoman Empire; and which, during the reign of
Napoleon 111., diplomatically went forth with war-causing effects,
from 1. Constantinople (the mouth of the Pagan dragon of


apocalyptic symbolism) leading to the Crimean war; 2. Vienna,
(the month of the earth-beast of Rev. xiii. 11): leading to the
Austro-Sardinian war; 3. Rome (the mouth of the false prophet
of European ecclesiasticism), causing the Garibaldi-Italian war.
The combined result of these diplomatic and military frog-
excited disturbances of the European system, is to be seen in the
gigantic armaments of the present hour. By universal conscrip-
tion and other means, indirectly stimulated into development by
French political influence, the world is now prepared for war as
it never has been in any period of the world’s history. Before-
time, nations had armies: now they are armies. Every man in
Europe is a soldier, on or off duty. What does it mean 1 ? No
man knows apart from prophecy. Well-wishers of their kind stand
aghast at the spectacle presented by civilised Europe as one vast
camp. Away from the light shed by prophecy, we might well
despair.
But prophecy sheds great light on the subject. The symbolism of
the sixth vial shows us that unprecedented war preparation was
appointed for the time of the end, and was to be providentially
developed by the political Franco-frogs of the nineteenth century.
It shows us also what it is leading up to; it is a preparation for
the great appointed collision between God and man, when the
world is to be punished, and prepared for the righteous govern-
ment of Christ by a time of unparalleled judgment. Such a crisis
was foretold by other prophets long before the days of John.
John’s revelation is in fact an exhibition, in greater detail than
had been before revealed, of the things foreshown to the prophets
of former ages. (Any one may satisfy himself of the identity of
John’s revelation and previous prophecy, by consulting the follow-
ing passages in Revelations:—chap. x. 7; xix. 10; xxii. 6,9.)
In what was shown to the prophets before the days of John,
nothing is more clearly revealed than that the time of the end
would be a time of general war-preparation and at last of general
war, in which the power of man should be \miversally broken by
Divine judgments in the transition from the kingdom of man to
the kingdom of God. A few illustrations of this may be in place.


In Joel we read (and that what we read appertains to the latter-
day rest oration of Israel, will he apparent to even a superficial
reading of the context): —
“Proclaim ye this among the Gentiles; prepare war, wake up the mighty
men; let all the men of war draw near; let them come up. Beat your
plowshares into swords, and your pruning-hooks into spears; let the weak
say lam strong. Assemble yourselves and come, all ye heathen, and
gather yourselves together round about; and (marginal reading ) the Lord
shall bring down His mighty ones. ”
In Zech. xiv. 2-4, 9, we read thus:
“I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle. . . . Then
shall the Lord go forth and fight against those nations as when he fought
in the day of battle. And His feet shall stand on that day upon the
Mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the east. . . . And
the Lord shall be king over all the earth; in that day, there shall be one
Lord and His name one.”
Zeph. iii. 8, speaks in the same strain:
“My determination is to gather the nations that I may assemble the
kingdoms to pour upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger;
for all the earth shall be devoured by the fire of my jealousy.”
Isaiah, by the Spirit, pictures the situation as follows, xvii. 12-14 :
“Woe to the multitude of many people which make a noise like the
noise of the seas; and to the rushing of nations that make a rushing like
the rushing of mighty waters. The nations shall rush like the rushing of
many waters, but God shall rebuke them, and they shall flee afar off, and
shall be chased like the chaff of the mountains before the wind, and like
thistle-down before the whirlwind. And behold at eveningtide trouble,
and before the morning, he is not. This is the portion of them that
trouble us, 311 d the lot of them that rob us.”
Other illustrations are as follow:
‘ ‘ Enter into the rock and hide thee in the dust, for fear of the Lord and
for the glory of His majesty. The lofty looks of man shall be humbled,
and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and the Lord alone
shall be exalted in that day They shall go into the
holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the earth, for fear of the Lord and
for the glory of His majesty, when He ariseth to shake terribly the earth”
—(ls. ii. 10, 11, 19.)
“He (Jehovah) shall judge among many people, and rebuke strong nations
afar off, and they shall beat their swords into plowshares and their spears
into pruning hooks”—(Micah iv. 3).
“I will give thee (the Son) the heathen for thy inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. And thou shalt break
them with a rod of iron, and dash them in pieces like a potter’s vessel”
(Psa. ii. 8).
“And I saw the Beast and the kings of the earth and their armies
gather together, to make war against him that sat on the horse and
against his army” (Rev. xix. 19). “These (ten kings) shall make war with
the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them”—(Rev. xvii. 14).
These citations from the prophetic testimony amply confirm the
statement that the time of the end is a time of war, and that its
closing episode could not be more appropriately designated than


by the Apocalyptic phrase: “THE WAR OF THE GREAT
DAY OF GOD ALMIGHTY.” The period, as a whole, is styled
“The day of the Lord’s vengeance”—(lsaiah Ixiii. 4; xxxiv. 8).
Christ’s work at the crisis is said to be that of treading the wine-
press of Jehovah’s anger (Rev. xix. 15; Joel iii. 13); taking
vengeance on them that know not God and obey not the gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ—(2 Thess. i. 8.) By Daniel, it is
described as “a time of trouble such as never was since there was
a nation upon earth” (Dan, xii. 1); and he goes on to state that
the incidents of the situation include the resurrection of some to
everlasting life and some to shame and everlasting contempt. The
general character of the period is graphically pourtrayed in the
following quotation from Jeremiah:—
“For, 10, I begin to bring evil on the city which is called by my name,
and should ye be utterly unpunished? Ye shall not be unpunished: for I
will call for a sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth, saith the Lord of
hosts. Therefore prophesy thou against them all these words, and say
unto them, the Lord shall roar from on high and utter His voice from
His holy habitation; He shall mightily roar upon His habitation; He shall
give a shout as they that tread the grapes against all the inhabitants of the
earth. A noise shall come even to the ends of the earth; for the Lord
hath a controversy with the nations : He will plead with all flesh; He will
give them that are wicked to the sword, saith the Lord. Thus saith the
Lord of hosts, Behold evil shall go forth from nation to nation, and a great
whirlwind shall be raised up from the coasts of the earth. And the slain
of the Lord shall be at that day from one end of the earth even unto the
other end of the earth; they shall not be lamented, neither gathered, nor
Hiried; they shall be dung upon the ground. ”
The effect of this period of tempest, at first sight calculated to
be destructive of the human species, is defined in the following-
language:—“When Thy judgments are in the earth, then will the
inhabitants of the world learn righteousness .”—(lsaiah xxvi. 9.)
“ All nations shall come and worship before Thee, for Thy judgments
are made manifest.”—(Rev. xv. 4.) “Come, and behold the works
of the Lord, what desolations He hath made. He rnaketh war to
cease unto the ends of the earth Be still and know
that lam God. 7 will be exalted among the heathen; I will be
exalted in the earth All nations whom Thou hast
made shall come and worship before Thee, 0 Lord, and shall glorify
Thy name, for Thou art great and doest wondrous things.” (Psa.
xlvi. 8-10: Ixxxvi. 9.)


CHAPTER V.
The particular shape of the conflict —The predictions of Daniel and Ezekiel
—The war between Turkey and Egypt thirty years ago—ldentification of
Russia as the subject of prophecy—Her destined overthrow of Turkey
sooner or later—The situation preparing before our eyes.
.From all this, it will be seen that the symbolism of the sixth A 7 ial
is only in harmony with the rest of the Scriptures in representing
a warlike attitude, and finally a war-making policy on the part of
all the nations of the world as the characteristic of the time of the
end. The particular shape of the conflict as it approaches its last
dread crisis, when the judgments of God—ministered by Christ,
personally returned to the earth—become a visible element of the
situation, is also revealed; and it is the revelation on this point
(next to the decay of the Turkish Empire) that imparts to the
Eastern Question its peculiar intex’est from a scriptural point of
view.
This revelation is contained in two notable prophecies—one by
Daniel and the other by Ezekiel. That of Daniel first merits
attention. It is in the 11th chapter of his book. The chapter
has to do with two kings who are called, with reference to their
geographical relation to Jerusalem (as will be apparent to the
intelligent reader), “the king of the north” and “the king of the
south.” The prophetic sketch comprises the period extending
from the days of the Persian Xerxes to “the time of the end,”
which is introduced in verse 40. After the overthrow of the
Persian monarchy by Alexander the Great, the Gx*eek empire, on
Alexander’s death, was divided ixxto four independent sections,
which may be roughly specified as Macedonia, Persia, Syria, and
Egypt. The two last were north and south of Jerusalem, and
their kings are spoken of as “the king of the south” and “the king
of the north” throughout the chapter with the modifications
imposed by the changes of history. The history of their wars is
px’ophetically given with coxxsiderable minuteness down to a
certain point. Then Pome appears on the territory of the king


of the north, and we have the history of the intervening ages
compressed into two or three verses (36-39), and then “the time
of the end ’is introduced at verse 40. This time we have reached,
as before indicated, and in our day the Sultan of Turkey occupies
the territory anciently occupied by “the king of the north” of the
principal part of the chapter' and the quasi-independent Viceroy
of Egypt, the territory of the king of the south. There is there-
fore no difficulty in placing the prophecy in its modern appli-
cations in those two cases.
But there is a second king of the north introduced at the time
of the end—a king north of the northern king of Dan. xi. This
is manifest from the description of what is to happen at the time
of the end. Thus: “at the time of the end, the king of the south
shall push at him (the king of the north); and the king of the
north shall come against him (the king of the north).” Thus, the
power which is spoken of throughout the chapter as “the king of
the north,” is at the time of the end itself assailed by a power
farther north than itself, and therefore by a power which, at the time
of the end, is emphatically “the king of the north.” In the days of
the Ptolemies and the Antiochuses, there was no such power. The
earth to the north of them was an unsubdued waste of barbarians,
without nationality or cohesion. But in our day—in “the time
of the end”—the situation is entirely changed. To the north of
the northernmost section of the divided empire of the Greeks, is a
colossal power of ever-growing extent and solidity. In “the
autocrat of the north,” —for his dominion girdles the northern zone
in Europe and Asia, —we have a power exactly answering to the
implications of the prophecy as it approaches “the time of the
end.” The position of the Sultan, as lord of both the Macedonian
and Syrian sections of the divided empire of the ancient Greeks,
leaves no doubt as to his being the subject of this time-of-the-end
prophecy. We have but to look at his political surroundings,
to be able to see its drift with regard to his future. The prophecy
is—
“At the time of the end shall the king of the south push at
him, and the king of the north shall come against him like a


whirlwind with chariots and with horsemen, and with many ships,
and he shall enter into the countries and shall overflow and pass
over. He shall enter also into the glorious land, and many
countries shall be overthrown. . . . The land of Egypt shall
not escape.”—(Dan. xi. 40-42).
First, we have the king of the south introduced to notice in his
latter-day relation to the occupier of Macedon and Syria, which is
Tui’key. We look at Egypt and enquire if modern history
supplies the required parallel. Egypt, it is true, is nominally
part of the Turkish Empire; but she is a practically independent
power for all that. She has her own government and her own
king. She pays a tribute to Constantinople, but makes her own
wars, and enacts her own laws, without any power on the part of
the Sultan to interfere. Has Egypt “ pushed at” the Sultan in
this “time of the end?” The elder living generation is witness to
the answer. Not long before the terrible revolutions of 1848,
Mehemet Ali, the ruler of Egypt, made war on the Sultan, and
carried his invasion of Turkey successfully as far as Smyrna, and
would to all appearances have overthrown the Sultan’s power
altogether if the “Great Powers” had not interfered, and by force
compelled Mehemet Ali to evacuate Syria, surrender the Turkish
fleet, which had revolted to him; and retire to Egypt with a
recognition of the right of his lineal successors to the throne of
the country. The “king of the south pushed at” the Syro-Macedo-
nian “king of the north:” having “pushed,” he had to retire; but
not so with the next enemy of the pushed-at power. This enemy,
—situated to the north of the Syro-Macedonian king of the north,
—“comes against him like a whirlwind,” and overthrows the many
countries in his possession.
That this northern time-of-the-end vanquisher of the latter-day
occupant of Syria and Macedonia (Turkey) is Russia, is made
certain by Ezekiel’s portraiture of him. The description will be
found in chapters 38 and 39 of the prophet, and is well worth
attentive perusal by those who earnestly desire to know the truth
of the matter. We have already remarked on the time to which
the prophecy relates. It is specified in verse 16, chapter xxxviii.,


“It shall be in the latter days'' The power described is exhibited
in the light of an invader of Syria (now in Turkish possession):
“ In the latter years, thou shalt come unto the land that is brought
back from the sword and is gathered out of many people, against
the mountains of Israel which have been always waste, but it is
brought forth out of the nations, and they shall dwell safely all of
them. Thou shalt ascend and come like a storm; thou shalt be
like a cloud to cover the land, thou and all thy bands and many
people with thee” (verses 8 and 9). Who is this that is thus
addressed, and to whom is assigned this latter-day invasion of
territories now forming part of the Turco-northern horn of Daniel’s
Greek goat 1 The answer is found in the opening verses of the
chapter, particularly verse 2: “Prince of Posh, Meshech and
Tubal.” The English version does not give “ Posh:” the Greek
(Septuagint) version does. Why the difference ? Simply because
Posh is both a proper name and a general term, and it is a matter
of judgment which is to be chosen. As a general term, Posh
means chief; as a proper name it points to the region where,
according to Gesenius, the Poschi lived, whose name survives
in modern geographical nomenclature in the form of Pussia and
Russians, Which does it mean in the prophecy? Its association
with other geographical terms would indicate the latter. The
Seventy were of this opinion, and certainly their judgment is of
more weight, living over 2000 years ago, and possessing a better
knowledge of the ancient names of countries than English transla-
tors, only 300 years ago. But the identification of Pussia witli
the power spoken of is not dependent upon the term Posh. It
comes out of the other terms —Meshech and Tubal, which have
their modern and modified equivalents in Moscovy and Tobolsk,
“ The land of Magog” points to Germany, and indicates a Russo-
German combination in the operations described. The identifica-
tion of Pussia is completed by the statement in verse 15 : “ Thou
shalt come out of thy place in the north parts."
Russia is the leader of an extensive confederacy. This is
evident from the following language:—“l will bring thee forth
and all thine army . . . Persia, Ethiopia, and Lybia with


them, all of them with shield and helmet. Gomer and all his
bands, the house of Togarmah of the north quarter and all his
bands, and many people with thee. Be thou prepared and pre-
pare for thyself, thou and all thy company that are assembled unto
thee, and be thou a guard unto them. ... I will bring thee
against my land”—(verses 1-7; 16). This presents us with the
specific form of that military gathering of nations described
generally in the passages quoted earlier in the pamphlet.
We see the situation in preparation before our eyes. For years
Russia has been steadily advancing towards the position of
European leadership. Her territorial expansion has at the same
time progressed at a rate exceeding all other countries put to-
gether, and in a way (particularly in Asia) to cause great concern
to a certain class of politicians who fear Russian aggression on
India. The celebrated will of Peter the Great, whether genuine
or spurious, has been faithfully followed, and Russia is steadily
advancing to a position which promises the acquisition of universal
dominion. At the present moment, she has succeeded in allying
all Europe diplomatically with herself against Turkey; and her
armies are massing in Bessarabia, under a veiy distinct intimation
from the Czar that he intends to extort by arms what Turkey has
refused to the assembled ambassadors of Europe. In such a case,
we all know that the exactions of the sword go far beyond the re-
quests of diplomacy. War between Russia and Turkey must be.
It is precisely the event required by the times, and its result,
whether immediately or subsequently, will lay Turkey in the
dust, and plant Russia both in Constantinople and Egypt. There
may be a little tortuosity and length in the road, but it has only
one ending, and that ending may be reached without delay. The
advanced state of the times and the language of the prophecy
seem alike to require celerity in the triumph of the arms of the
north. Turkey down, there may be a lull for the development of
the final combination which brings Russia and England to a
death-struggle on the mountains of Israel, the exigencies and
momentous results of which will engage our consideration in
another chapter.


CHAPTER VI.
Britain's part in the coming conflict —The parties to the struggle—lts
beginning—lts clouds and portents now overhanging the world—The part
that belongs to the Jews—At first an unarmed agricultural colony in
Palestine—The Jews defended from Bussian aggression by Tarshish —
The evidence that modern Britain is ancient Tarshish—A difficulty met.
Britain’s part in the coming conflict is involved, though not ex-
pressed, in the symbolography of Rev. xvi. It is comprehended
in the phrase which we have already had to look at: “ the war of
the great day of God Almighty.” The events of the sixth vial
period have to do with preparing the situation for that war. The
first event—the decay and removal of the Turkish Empire—clears
the country where it is to take place, viz., the Holy Land, as
revealed by Joel, Ezekiel, and other prophets already quoted. The
second event—the operation and results of the Franco-political
intrigues symbolised by the frogs—develops such a situation
among the nations of the earth, as that they shall be ready to
participate in such a mighty struggle. Both these things are fax-
advanced in their accomplishment. The appointed sequel becomes
now the natural object of expectancy.
The parties to the struggle, in its preliminary form, are four in
in number. They are, as we have seen, 1, Russia; 2, the Jews;
3, a power friendly to the Jews (to which as yet only allusion has
been made); and 4, the Almighty, in the person of His glorified
Son, returned to earth a second time, to break in pieces the
governments of men, and establish Himself on the throne of
David as universal king.—(Acts i. 11 ; hi. 20 ; Psalm ii. 8 ; Luke
i. 32; Isaiah ix. 6; Jer. xxiii. 5; Dan. vii. 15.) The pi-ophecies
already quoted show that war is in actual progress among the
three first, when the Divine element supervenes. “ The war of
the great day of God Almighty ” begins in the diplomatic
and military sphere, and is, in its first stages, to all appearance,
perfectly natural. Its clouds and portents are now ovei'hanging
the world. Russia wanted to avert the Eastern Question, which


all European statesmen regard with dread. England was still
more strongly of the same mind; but the hands of both have
been forced by the action of Sclavonic societies and the barbarities
of the Turks. The question which they were labouring to keep
dormant, has burst in terrific blaze before the world. That which
they feared to allude to in their private despatches, has become
the subject of open and peremptory discussion at a public
Conference of the assembled Powers of Europe—a Conference
which England a year ago emphatically refused ; which she now
takes the leading part in, and at which she is in agreement with
Russia against Turkey in opposition to the cherished policy
of forty years. And the Conference assembled to make peace, has
only made war more certain for Europe and more fatal to the
doomed Ottoman.
We have already looked at the part prophetically assigned to
Russia: it is, to overthrow Turkey in conjunction with other
powers with which she is confederated as the leader and head.
The part that belongs to the Jews is at first a subordinate one.
In the estimation of politicians, the Jews will be an absolutely
insignificant element in the situation. Yet they are the kernel of
the whole question from a divine point of view, as the sequel will
prove ; that is, the Jewish nationality, in a new form, will be the
pivot around which all the subsequent evolutions will develop
themselves ; and the centre in which all political power will be
absorbed, and from which a new and unparalleled conquest will
be effected, resulting in the submission of all nations to the
sceptre of the house of David, in the hands of the Son of David
returned to reign where He was crucified.
In the beginning of the struggle, the Jews are a feeble and
newly-formed colony in the previously long desolate land of
Israel. Anyone may be convinced of this by reading Ezekiel’s
description of their state at the time of the Russian invasion.
The description has already been quoted in part, but it was for
another purpose, and may be reproduced without detriment: —
‘ ‘ In the latter years, thou shalt come into the land that is brought back
from the sword, and is gathered out of many people ; against the mountains
of Israel, which have been ahvays waste, but it is brought forth out of


the nations, and they shall dwell safely all of them. Thou shalt ascend
and come like a storm. Thou shalt be like a cloud to cover the land, thou
and all thy bands, and many people with thee Thou shalt
think an evil thought, and thou shalt say, ‘ I will go up to the land of
unwalled villages. I will go to them that are at rest —that dwell safely all
of them, dwelling without walls and having neither bars nor gates, to take a
spoil and take a prey ; to turn thine hand upon the desolate places that are
now inhabited, and upon the people that are gathered out of the nations,
which have gotten cattle and goods, and dwell in the midst of the land.’’
Concerning which occurrences, it is expressly stated at verse 16 : ‘lt shall
be in the latter days
From this it is evident that it is the object of the invader to
take possession of a flourishing but unarmed agricultural colony
recently developed in the land of Israel, “which,” says the
prophecy, speaking retrospectively from the latter-day point of
observation, “ hath been always waste, but is now brought forth.”
“ A desolate place now inhabited,” is the description put into
the mouth of Gog at the time of the invasion (verse 12), which
shows the land of Israel to have been recently recovered from
desolation, but not to have reached a self-protecting position.
This suggests a question, to which we indirectly obtain an
answer in the same chapter : How comes it, in the face of armed
military nations, that Israel should re-establish themselves in their
desolate mountains, without armament to protect their newly-
acquired prosperity ? To what power do they trust in this
“dwelling at rest, having neither bars nor gates'?” The answer
is seen in the challenge thrown in the face of the Gogian invader,
when he enters the land (verse 13): “Sheba and Dedan, and the
merchants of Tarshish, and all the young lions thereof shall say
unto thee, Art thou come to take a spoil ? Hast thou gathered
thy company to take a prey T Here is a power that steps forth
as the latter-day defender of Israel, under whose protection, the
newly-established settlement on the mountains of Israel had been
developed. Is it possible to identify this description with any
modern power ? A conclusive mode of reasoning identifies it
with Britain. The evidence is collected in an anonymous work,
entitled The Kings of the East, and published in 1842. The
evidence is not well digested in that work ; we give the pith of it
in our own way.
The first fact to be looked at is the one stated in Ezek. xxvii. 12


that Tarshish was a merchant of Tyre (ancient Phoenicia),
supplying the Tyrian market with “silver, iron, tin, and lead.”
If the source of the supply of these metals to the Tyrian market
can be ascertained, the Scripture Tarshish is discovered.
It is .a fact that tin was universally used by the ancients as the
alloy for the hardening of copper, in the making of swords and
other implements. It is another fact that none of the ancient
civilised countries possessed tin mines. It is another fact that,
till the destruction of Tyre by Alexander, all countries were
supplied by the market of Tyre, and that the source of the supply
was, till that time, a secret. The secret was afterwards open to
the Greeks and Homans, who went to the same source of supply.
What source was that] The answer derivable from Strabo, Hero-
dotus, and other ancient historians, is that the Greeks and Homans,
like the Phoenicians before them, went for tin to the islands
known as the “ Cassiterides. ”
What does “Cassiterides” mean? The tin islands, from cassi-
teros—the name given by the Greeks to tin. Look on any ancient
map, and Cassiterides will be found marked under the British
Islands. But originally the Greeks did not know the name by
which the Cassiterides were known to the original Phoenician
traders. They only knew there were such islands without knowing
where, or what geographical phrase they were known by. When
they did know, they found that they were known as the Britannic
Isles. Why Britannic Isles]
Britannia is a Celtic name. The Celtic language is Phoenician
naturalised in these islands from the first settlers, the descendants
of Tarshish,, son of Javan, one of those by whom “the isles of the
Gentiles were divided in their lands.”—(Gen. x. 5.) In pure
Celtic, Britannia signifies the land of metals; in Syriac, from
which it is derived, Baratanac means the land of tin. The modern
name, Britain, is but a modification of the ancient Baratanac or
Britannia, consecpiently, The British Isles literally mean the tin
isles, and identify Britain as the Cassiterides (tin islands) of the
Greeks, and the Tarshish of the Scriptures which supplied Tyre
with “silver, iron, tin, and lead.”


In addition to the evidence of historians that Tyre drew her
mineral supplies from certain northern islands beyond the pillars
of Hercules (the Straits of Gibraltar), there is abundant evidence in
Cornwall and the south and west coasts of Ireland of the existence
of ancient mineral mines worked by Phoenician enterprise. Not
only are numerous exhausted tin mines found in various localities,
whose history is totally unknown, but implements of Phoenician
workmanship are found abundantly. Messrs. Lysons, in their
account of Cornwall (page 204), say: “Cornwall has been cele-
brated for its tin mines from vexy x*emote antiquity. We learn
from Strabo, Hei'odotus, and other ancient writers, that the
Phoenicians, and after them the Greeks and Romans, traded for
tin to Cornwall, under the name of the Cassitexides, fi’om a vexy
eaxdy period. Diodorus Siculus, who wrote in the reign of Augxxstus,
gives a particular description of the manner in which the valuable
metal was dug and px-epared by the Britons.” Fragments of
ancient weapons are frequently discovex’ed in Cornwall, in stx-eams
and buried in the gx-ound. Messx’s. Lysons, ixx the book already
quoted, say, “they ax’e instx’uments of mixed xxxetal, commonly
called celts, apparently cast in imitatioxx of the stone hatchets axxd
chisels of the early inhabitants. They are found in greater
abundance ixx Cornwall than in any other part of the kingdom.
. . . . Sevex’al wex-e found oxx the side of the Kaxuxbx’i Hill ixx
the year 1844, In the paxish of Halant, four miles xxorth of
St. Michael’s Moxxnt, in the year 1802, a farmer discovex-ed, about
two feet below the surface of the earth, a quantity of celts,
weighixxg about fourteexx to fifteexx pouxxds, with pieces of copper
swords axxd heavy lumps of fine copper Another
large quantity of celts, with spear heads axxd broken pieces of
copper swords, with several lumps of metal, weighixxg altogether
about eighty pounds, was discovered ixx the parish of St. Hilaxy
about the year 1800.” Other similar discoveries have been made,
and a comparison of these anciexxt relics, with the armour described
by Homer ixx the Iliad, as worn by the Gx-eeks (who were supplied
by Tyre), shows they are idexxtical ixx xxxetal axxd manufacture. As
regards Ireland, a report oxx the metallic mines of Leinster was


pi’esented to the Royal Dublin Society in 1828, in which the
following paragraph occurs: “If we may judge from the number
of ancient mine excavations, which are still visible in almost
every part of Ireland, it would appear that an ardent spirit for
mining adventure must have pervaded this country at some very
remote period. Many of our mining excavations exhibit appear-
ances similar to the surface workings of the most ancient mines
of Cornwall , which are generally attributed to the Phcenicians .”
M. Moore, in his first volume of the History of Ireland , says:
“Numbers of swords made of brass have been found in different
parts of the country It has been thought not im-
probable that all these weapons, the Irish as well as the others,
were of the same Punic or Phoenician origin, and may be traced
to those colonies on the coast of Spain which traded anciently with
the British Isles.” The Rev. Dr. Vincent, in his treatise on the
commerce and navigation of the ancients in the Indian Ocean,
says: “Tin is mentioned as an import into Africa, Arabia, Scindi,
and the coast of Malabar. It has continued an article of com-
merce, BROUGHT OUT of Britain in all ages, and conveyed to all
the countries in the Mediterranean by the Phoenicians, Greeks, and
Romans, and carried into the Eastern Ocean from the origin of
commerce.”
There were two places called Tarshish—the one in the east, the
other in the west. This is evident from the fact that the ships of
Solomon, built at Ezion-geber, went to Tarshish, bringing, once in
three years, “gold and silver, ivory, apes, and peacocks” (1 Kings
x. 22); while Jonah, in attempting to escape the presence of the
Lord, shipped at Joppa (modern Jaffa) to go to a place of the same
name (Jonah i. 3). Now Joppa is in the Mediterranean and
Ezion-geber is in the Red Sea; and as the passage round the Cape
of Good Hope was unknown, it follows that there was a Tarshish
in the east and a Tarshish in the west—probably owing to their
both springing from the same family of colonists, the descendants
of Tarshish, the grandson of Japheth. The western Tarshish
produced “silver, iron, tin, and lead;” the eastern “gold and
silver, ivory, apes, and peacocks.” The products of the first point


to Britain, the undoubted Bavatanac of the Phoenicians, and Gas-
siterides of the Greeks; and the products of the second (con-
sidered in connection with the length of time occupied by the
voyage) point to India. It requires but to be mentioned that both
realms are in our day united under British sovereignty, which also-
holds Gibraltar in Spain, a midway station corresponding to the
ancient Gadir, or Tartessus (Cadiz), which some, on insufficient
grounds, think to be Tarshish. The position of Britain thus
covers the whole of the area to which the name of Tarshish can
be applied.
It may seem a difficulty that the naine' Tarshish should have
been so entirely lost in connection with Britain. It must be re-
membered, however, that the names in Hebrew, by which the
lands and nations are spoken of in the Scriptures, rarely resemble
those by which they were known to the inhabitants of those
countries themselves; and as it is by the latter names that they
become known to profane writers, and perpetuated in history, it
is no marvel that there should be a discrepancy between the
nomenclature of Scripture and the nomenclature of the nations.
The identification of them is more dependent upon facts than re-
semblance in sound.
The facts of the case are in a nutshell. It is testified that
Tarshish supplied Tyre (the Phenice of profane writers) with
“silver, iron, lead, and tin.” It is demonstrated that these
supplies came from Baratanac (the isles of tin) softened in the
course of ages into Britain. The conclusion follows that the
Bible Tarshish is Britain.
The conclusion is made certain by the position of Britain.
Tarshish is described as “the merchants of Tarshish and all the
young lions thereof.” Britain is the mercantile power of the
world; she is to the modern world what Tyre, her ancestor, was.
to the ancient world. Again, Tarshish, in the latter day, is
described as the possessor of ships; “the ships of Tarshish” (Is.
ii. 16): and, behold, Britain has more ships than all the other
nations put together. “The young lions thereof” agrees with the
heraldry of the British Power. “The ships of Tarshish” is


smother phrase by which she is characterised in Isaiah lx. 8, in
connection with the time of Israel’s restoration—a phrase
applicable to Britain alone as a characteristic description : for she
rules the seas, and her ships outnumber those of all other nations
put together. Some have broached the idea that Tarshish was
the ancient Tartessus in Spain (the modern Cadiz); but there is
little to favour that idea beyond a superficial resemblance in the
name, while there is the fact that Tartessus was made use of as a
port of call by the ships trading between the tin islands and Tyre.
The ancient Tartessus has disappeared from the historic arena,
while the song of the tin islands (“Buie Britannia ”) is heard
throughout the world. •
“ Sheba and Dedan (districts in Southern Arabia, anciently so
called, indirectly subject do the British crown), and the merchants
of Tarshish and the young lions thereof,” is, without doubt, the
prophetic description of the wide-shadowing power of Britain in
the latter days, whence it follows that Britain is the latter-day
protector of the Jews against the Busso-European attempt that
will be made (for political reasons) to take possession of their
flourishing colony to be established in the land of Israel.
CHAPTER VII.
Britain’s latter-day friendship for the Jeios —The Scripture testimony on the
subject —The human cause of that friendship, ami of England’s antagonism
to Russia —The British Empire in India—Britain’s communications
through Asiatic Turkey—Purchase of the Suez Canal, and coming British
occupation of Egypt and Syria—Current schemes for Jewish settlement
in Palestine—The Monte fore Testimonial —Jewish views on the subject —
A Jew at the head of the British Government.
The evidence of Britain’s latter-day friendship for the Jews is not
confined to the passage quoted from Ezekiel. Isaiah plainly
speaks of it. Beferring to the day when “the Bedeemer shall
come to Zion,” which Paul quotes as an unaccomplished prophecy
in his day, and which therefore relates to the second coming


of Christ—(Acts i. 11; Heb. ix. 28; 1 Pet. v. 4),—Jehovah, by the
prophet, thus addresses Israel: “Arise, shine, for thy light is
come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. For behold,,
the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people.
But the Lord shall arise upon thee, and His glory shall be seen
upon thee, and the Gentiles shall come to thy light and kings to
the brightness of thy rising . . . Surely the isles shall wait
for me, and the ships of Tarshish first, to bring thy sons from far
and thy daughters from the ends of the earth”—(lsaiah lx. 1-3, 9).
Again, in Isaiah xviii. we meet with the following address to
a land in the latter days “ shadowing with wings,” or exercising a
widely-extended imperial jurisdiction, which is the case with
Britain only. The land is described as one that “ sendeth her
ambassadors by the sea,” which shows that it is in an insular
situation as Britain, and no other country is. Other nations send
ambassadors by land, but England is obliged to use the sea. Her
ambassadors are said, in the English version, to go “in vessels of
bulrushes,” but this, it is agreed by several eminent Hebraists,
ought to be “vessels of turning things,” or whirling things—a
distinct allusion to the invention of steamships. “Vessels of
bulrushes” would be useless on the ocean, though they may suit
the smooth water of the Nile. The next sentence in the passage
settles the point, “Go ye sioifit messengers:” this is a suitable
description of Britain’s steam vessels, and not of Egyptian boats of
papyrus. Well, on what errand are “the swift messengers” to be
sent 1 ? “Go, ye swift messengers, to a nation scattered and peeled,
to a people terrible from their beginning hitherto: a nation meted
out and trodden down, whose land the rivers (military powers)
have spoiled.” The scattered nation whose land has been de-
troy ed, is the Jewish nation. What is the object of this mission
of the steamships of Tarshish to the scattered nation? The
answer is in verse 7 of the chapter : “In that time shall the
present be brought unto the Lord of Hosts, of a people scattered
and peeled, .... to the place of the name of the Lord of
Hosts, the Mount Zion ” —(lsaiah xviii. i. 7). In short, Britain’s,
ships are destined to be employed in the work of gathering the


Jews from all parts of the world. But this not until the Divine
intei’ference that follows the Russian attempt to wrest the infant
“ Judaic ” colony from the hands of Britain.
What is it, as regards the human exigencies of the case, that
leads England to be friendly to the Jews, and antagonistic to
Russia! The answer has been displayed in a thousand news-
papers, and resounded from a thousand public platforms during the
past twelve months. The possession of India by England, and
the determination of all classes of Englishmen that India shall
remain in English possession, is the soul and marrow of England’s
policy on the Eastern Question, If England did not possess
India, the fate of Turkey would be as immaterial to England as
the cession of Nice and Savoy to France. But she possesses
India; and her communications with India lie through the
Turkish empire. These communications are safe so long as
the Sultan of Constantinople is lord of the empire, but let Turkey
fall, and there is nothing to interpose a barrier between these com-
munications and the might of the Russian colossus which presses
southward both in Europe and Asia with irresistible gravitation.
It is the fear that Russia would, in such a case, ultimately become
strong for aggression in India, that inspires English statesmen
of all parties with such a supreme interest in the fate of the
Turks and the countries in Turkish possession. It is this which
has originated what is known as u the traditional policy of the
Foreign office,” in favour of the maintenance of the independence
and integrity of the Ottoman empire. This policy has been
abandoned under the pressure of events, and Turkey is likely to
be left to her fate at the hand of Russia. But nothing can
destroy the necessity for England preserving her Indian communi-
cations. Hence if the woi’st befall Turkey, England is bound, in
the interests of self-preservation, to secure ascendancy in the
Asiatic part of the Turkish empire. The purchase of the Suez
Canal is a step in this direction. Prophecy reveals another in her
coming patronage of the Jewish colonisation of Palestine.
Four hundred years ago, there was nothing to give England
that connection with Bible lands which she was destined to sustain


in the time of the end. The conquest of India was the great
event in Providence that has brought her into this connection, and
will yet develop it more distinctly. So long as Turkey was quiet
and safe from aggression, there was no need for overt steps on the
part of Britain to establish herself in Egypt and Syria. Turkey
was a sufficient barrier between Russia and her Indian communi-
cations; but now that the existence of Turkey is imperilled,
England is roused to definite action, and in the event of the dis-
memberment of the Ottoman empire, must add the occupation of
Egypt and Syria to the purchase of the Suez Canal. The ten-
dency of events is therefore visibly in the direction foreshown in
the sure word of prophecy.
That England will occupy Egypt, and that Egypt will be
wrested from her hands by Russian armies, results from several
intimations in this “ sure word of prophecy.” We have already
seen that Britain is the power mentioned in Ezek. xxxviii. 13, as
the antagonist of the Russo-German invader of Palestine, in the
latter days, under the name of “the merchants of Tarshish and
all the young lions thereof.” According to Daniel xi., in the
words already quoted, this northern invader prevails against all
opposition, and, therefore, against the opposition of the Anglo-
Tarshish merchant-power, up to a certain point. The countries,
“ Edom and Moab and the chief of the children of Ammon,” re-
main in the hands of Gog’s Tarshish opponents (Dan. xi. 41); but
“ the land of Egypt shall not escape" (verse 42), implying that
the land of Egypt is, in the first instance, in the hands of the
possessor of Edom and Moab, namely—Tarshish or Britain. This
view is confirmed by a peculiar expression in Isaiah xliii. 3.
Referring to the future deliverance of Israel, when it will be said
to the south, “Give up,” and to the north, “Keep not back,”
Jehovah says, “ I gave Egypt for thy ransom , Ethiopia and Seba
for thee ” —(lsaiah xliii. 3). This implies thab the transferring of
Egypt to some power, brings about or is connected with the
ransom of Israel in its preliminary stage. Egypt was given as
“wages” to Nebuchadnezzar twenty-five centuries ago, for his
service as Jehovah’s instrument against Tyrus (Ezek. xxix. 18,


19), without Nebuchadnezzar knowing either that he served God
in the matter of Tjrus, or that he got Egypt for a recompense.
So Britain will receive Egypt as the price of Israel’s deliverance,
without either the deliverance or the payment of the ransom
appearing in any other light than as a natural transaction, except
to those who look at the affairs of nations from a Divine stand-
point. The possession of Egypt has become a political necessity
to England, for the reasons already mentioned; and the preserva-
tion of her footing in Egypt, particularly in defence of the Suez
Canal, by the interposition of a territorial buffer between that
canal and Russian advances from the Caucasus, leads, in the
ai-rangement of the Eastern Question, to her occupation of the
Holy Land and the settlement of Israel there. }■'
Already, numerous schemes exist for the re-settlement of
Palestine by Jews; and one of them has assumed practical and
organic shape, in the form of a testimonial to Sir Moses Monte-
fiore, who requested that the testimonial should take the form of
a plan for improving the condition of the Jews of Palestine. A
gentleman has been appointed as the committee’s agent in the
execution of the scheme; but, for the present, during the uncer-
tainties of the Eastern Question, the scheme is in abeyance. If
the upshot of the present crisis should be, as is more than proba-
ble, the overthrow of the Turkish Empire, the way will be open
for the development of this scheme to an indefinite extent. The
one great barrier in the way of all such schemes, hitherto, has
been the uncertainty of life and property in Syria under the
Turkish Government. Under British protection, this state of
uncertainty would soon vanish, and the formation of a Jewish
settlement on the scale required by prophecy, would be a matter
of a very few years. The agitation of the Montefiore scheme has
disposed the minds of thousands of the race of Israel throughout
the world, to return to their land as soon as a scheme for that
purpose is sufficiently matured. In Boumania, the Jews are being-
expelled from whole districts, and would gladly avail themselves
of such an opportunity.
The minds of the superior class of J ews are also exercised in


the same direction, but from another point of view. This is
signally illustrated in George Eliot’s new work, “Daniel Deronda,”
in which a Jew is made to express himself in the following
manner:—
“What wonder that multitudes of our people are ignorant, narrow,
superstitious? What wonder? What wonder? The night is unto them,
they have no vision; in their darkness they are unable to divine; the sun
is gone down over the prophets, and the day is dark above them; their
observances are as nameless relics. . . . Revive the organic centre;
let the unity of Israel whiSh has made the growth and form of its religion,
be an outward reality. Looking towards a land and a polity, our dispersed
people in all the ends of the earth may share the dignity of a national
life, which has a voice among the peoples of the East and the West —which
will plant the wisdom and skill of our race so that it may be, as of old, a.
medium of transmission and understanding. Let that come to pass, and
the living warmth will spread to the weak extremities of Israel, and
superstition will vanish, not in the lawlessness of the renegade, but in the
illumination of great facts which widen feeling, and make all knowledge
alive as the young offspring of beloved memories
I say that the effect of our separateness will not be completed and have
its highest transformation, unless our race takes on again the character of
a nationality. That is the fulfilment of the religious trust that moulded
them into a people, whose life has made half the inspiration of the world.
What is it to me that the ten tribes are lost untraceably, or that multitudes
of the children of Judah have mixed themselves with the Gentile popula-
tions as a river with rivers? Behold our people still! Their skirts spread
afar; they are torn and soiled and trodden on; but there is a jewelled
breast-plate. Let the wealthy men, the monarchs of commerce, the
learned in all knowledge, the skilful in all arts, the speakers, the political
councillors, who carry in their veins the Hebrew blood which has main-
tained its vigour in all climates, and the pliancy of the Hebrew genius for
which difficulty means new device —let them say, ‘We will lift up a
standard, we will unite in a labour hard but glorious, like that of Moses
and Ezra, a labour which shall be a worthy fruit of the long anguish
whereby our fathers maintained their separateness, refusing the ease
of falsehood. ’ They have wealth enough to redeem the soil from
debauched and paupered conquerors; they have the skill of the statesman:
to devise, the tongue of the orator to persuade.”
The Hebrew Observer has also delivered itself on the same
subject as follows:
‘ ‘ Is there no other destiny for Palestine but to remain a desert, or to
become the appendage of an ambitious foreign power ? Syria will ere long
be the entrepot between the East and West. On the Euphrates and along
the coast, old cities will revive and new ones will be built; the old times
will come back on a scale of greater vastness and splendour; and bridging
the level districts, the steam car will run in the track of the caravan.
Syria, then, will be a place of trade—pre-eminently. And who are
pre-eminently the traders of the world? Will there, when the coming
change takes place, be any more congenial field for the energies of the
Jew? The country wants capital and population. The Jews can give it
both. And has not England a special interest in promoting such a restora-
tion? Russia covets Syria, and desires to have a Greek patriarch supreme
at Jerusalem. It would be a blow to England if either of her great rivals
got hold of Syria. Her empire, reaching from Canada in the West to


Calcutta and Australia in the south-east, would be cut in two. England
does not covet new territories, but she must see they do not get into the
hands of her rival Powers. She must preserve Syria to herself through
the Syrians. Does not policy, then—if that were all—exhort England to
foster the nationality of the Jews, and aid them, as opportunity may offer,
to return as a leavening power to their old country? Rome has persecuted
the Jews. Nowhere has oppression and contempt attended the Jews so
much as in Rome, in the despised Ghetto quarter of the Eternal City.
Russia, too, in her Greek orthodoxy, condemns the Jew. But in England
he is unfrowned on by the Church, and endowed with the fullest rights of
citizen. England, also, is the great maritime power of the world. To
England, then, naturally belongs the role favouring the settlement of the
Jews in Syria. Do not the dictates of policy exhort her to the same
course? The nationality of the Jews exists: the spirit is there, and has
been for three thousand years; but the external form, the crowning bond
of union, is still wanting. A nation must have a| country. And is not
Syria open to them ? They seized it of yore, as a wave of armed and r _,
enthusiastic warriors; will they not, ere long, return to it as pioneers of<7>
civilisation to reclothe the land with fertility, and as the busy agents of ah
commerce which will bring together both East and West on of
land between the Euphrates and the Levant? The old land and the old
people, and commerce flowing again in its old channels. We see strange
things now-a-days; may not this also be one of the notable sights of this
epoch of resurrection?”
All these circumstances indicate a preparation for the work of
Jewish revival as soon as the way is open. Nor can it he
forgotten that Lord Beaconsfxeld, the disposer of British power
at the present moment, is a Jew, who in his works before the
woxdd, has given strong evidence of his “Judaic sympathies” in
general, and his predisposition to Jewish restoration in particular.
That such a man, at such a time, should hold the reins of
government in the nation to which is prophetically assigned the
work of befriending the Jews in the time of the end, cannot but
be looked upon as something more than an interesting circum-
stance.
CHAPTER VIII.
Dismemberment of the Turkish Empire—A peaceful interval —Russian
attack upon Syria in British occupation—Defeat of the British forces
and Russian seizure of North Palestine and Egypt — Christ's arrival on
the scene — Violent overthrow of the invader, and the destruction of the
British fleet —The object of these mighty events and their sequel.
The break-up of the Turkish Empire, as before stated, will
compel England to secure her footing in Asiatic Tux-key, for the
px’otection of India; and all thixxgs seem to be working together


to lead lier to favour the Jewish resettlement of Palestine, with a
view to that end. Turkey overthrown and dismembered, then
will probably ensue a brief respite in the march of events, during
v, hich this work of resettlement goes forward. This peaceful
interval is closed by a renewal of the jealousies belonging
inherently to the incompatible interests of Pussia and England,
the fermentation ends in war. Pussia and the many people
with her come “ like a storm ” upon Syria, hoping to replenish an
exhausted exchequer by the riches of a thriving Jewish colony,
and at the same time, intent upon advancing on British communi-
cations with India, with a view to the overthrow of the British
supremacy which is such an offence to the ambitions of military
Europe. The invasion is successful. Syria is occupied and
Egypt overrun; Jerusalem taken after a siege, and the remnant
of the broken forces of Britain brought to bay in Edom and Moab,
the south-eastern corner of the Holy Land.
Russia and her confederates are on the point of achieving the
dominion of the world, when a power appears on the scene, alike
unexpected by Pussia and England. Christ arrives on the scene,
invisibly to the enemies’ forces. The crash of heaven’s artillery
startles the assembled nations of the world : panic throws them
into confusion; the rage of the elements decimates the struggling
oO O
thousands. Fix’e from heaven, the hot thunderbolt, bituminous
burning rain, make short work of the multitudinous and embattled
foe, and drive a miserable remnant, amounting to a sixth, out of
the country, pursued by a handful of Jewish soldiers, acting
under the orders of a new and unknown leadership. These facts
are stated in the following prophetic testimonies :
“And it shall come to pass at the same time when Gog shall come against
the land of Israel, saith the Lord God, that my fury shall come up in my
face. For in my jealousy and in the fire of my wrath have I spoken, surely
in that day there shall he a great shaking in the land of Israel: so that the
fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the air, and the beasts of the field, and
the creeping things that creep upon the earth, and all the men that are
upon the face of the earth shall shake at my presence, and the mountains
shall be thrown down and the steep places shall fall; and every wall shall
fall to the ground. And I will call for a sword against him throughout all
my mountains, saith the Lord God; every man’s sword shall be against his
brother. And I will plead against him with pestilence and with blood;
and I will rain upon him and upon his bands, and upon the many people
that are with him, and overflowing rain and great hailstones, fire and
brimstone.”—(Ezek. xxxviii. 18-22).


“And I will turn thee back and will leave but the sixth part of thee, and
will cause thee to come out of the north parts, and will bring thee upon the
mountains of Israel. And I will smite thy bow out of thy left hand, and
will cause thine arrows to fall out of thy right hand. Thou shalt fall upon
the mountains of Israel, thou and all thy bands and the people that is with
thee; I will give thee unto the ravenous birds of every sort, and to the beasts
of the field to be devoured. Thou shalt fall upon the open fields, for I have
spoken it, saith the Lord God.” —(Ezek. xxxix. 2-5).
‘ ‘ Then shall the Lord go forth and fight against those nations as He fought in
the day of battle. And His feet shall stand on that day on the Mount of Olives
which is before Jerusalem on the east, and the Mount of Olives shall cleave
in the midst thereof, toward the east and toward the west, and there shall
be a great valley; and half of the mountain shall remove toward the north
and half toward the south. And ye shall flee to the valley of the mountains;
for the valley of the mountains shall reach unto Azal; yea, ye shall flee like
as ye fled from before the earthquake in the days of IJzziah, King of Judah;
and the Lord my God shall come, and all the saints with thee
And this shall be the plague wherewith the Lord shall smite the people
that have fought against Jerusalem. Their flesh shall consume away whilst
they stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall consume away in their
holes, and their tongue shall consume away in their mouth. And it shall
come to pass in that day that a great tumult from the Lord shall be among
them; and they shall lay hold everyone on the hand of his neighbour, and
his hand shall rise up against the hand of his neighbour.”—(Zech. xiv. 3-5-
12, 13).
“Let the nations be awakened and come up the valley of Jehoshaphat:
for there will I sit to judge all the heathen round about. Put ye in the
sickle: for the harvest is ripe; come, get you down, for the press is full, the
fats overflow; for their wickedness is great. Multitudes, multitudes in the
valley of decision; for the day of the Lord is near in the valley of decision.
The sun and the moon shall be darkened and the stars shall withdraw their
shining. The Lord shall roar out of Zion and utter His voice from Jerusa-
lem; and the heavens and the earth shall shake; but the Lord shall be
the hope of His people and the strength of the children of Israel.”—(Joel iii
12-16).
“Come near, all ye nations to hear, and hearken, ye people; let the earth
hear, and all that is therein; the world and all things that come forth of it.
For the indignation of the Lord is upon all nations, and his fury upon all
their armies; He hath utterly destroyed them; He hath delivered them
to the slaughter. Their slain also shall be cast out and their stink shall
come up out of their carcases, and the mountains shall melt with their
blood . , . For it is the day of the Lord’s vengeance, and the year
of recompenses for the controversy of Zion.”—(lsaiah xxxiv. 1-3, 8).
“And I saw an angel standing in the sun; and he cried with a loud voice
saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven, Come and gather
yourselves together unto the supper of the Great God: that ye may eat the
flesh of kings and the flesh of captains, and the flesh of mighty men, and
the flesh of horses and of them that sit on them, and the flesh of all men,
both free and bond, both small and great. And I saw the beast, and the
kings of the earth and their armies, gathered together to make war against
him that sat on the horse, and against his army. And the beast was taker,
and with him the false prophet that wrought miracles before him, with
which he deceived them that had the mark of the beast, and them that
worshipped his image. These both were cast alike into a lake of fire
burning with brimstone. And the remnant were slain with the sword of
him that sat upon the white horse, which sword proceeded out of his
mouth: and all the fowls were filled with their flesh.”—(Rev. xix. 17-21).
The object of the cataclysm is similar to that of the plagues of


Egypt. The object of these is thus stated; 11 That thou mightest
know that the Lord He is God; there is none else beside Him.”—
(Dent. iv. 35). The object of the Armageddon overthrow is thus
defined: “I will bring thee, 0 Gog, against my land, that the
heathen {goyim, nations) may know Me when I shall be sanctified
in thee before their eyes . . . Thus will I magnify myself
and sanctify myself, and I will he known in the eyes of many
nations, and they shall know that I am Jehovah .”—(Ezek. xxxviii.
16, 23). “All the nations shall see the judgment that I have
executed and the hand that I have laid upon them." —(xxxix. 21).
It is a long time since God made the visible interposition which
wrote His name in the nation of Israel. In the lapse of time, the
impression has almost faded, and it is to be renewed with terrible
deeds of judgment; as He saith by Isaiah: “For a long time have
I holden my peace; I have been still and refrained myself. Now
will I cry like a travailing woman. I will destroy and devour at
once.”—(lsaiah xlii. 14).
Will British power escape the blow that is intended to level all
human pride in the dust? Not so: “The day of the Lord of
Hosts shall be upon everyone that is proud and lofty and upon
everyone that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low . .. ;
and upon all the ships of Tarshish, and upon all pleasant
pictures. And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the
haughtiness of men shall be made low, and the Lord alone shall
be exalted in that day”—(lsaiah ii. 12, 17). This specific allusion
to the ships of Tarshish—the navy of Great Britain, which is the
pride and power of the country—would indicate that it shares in
the disaster that shatters the northern league. The form of the
disaster seems to be hinted at in another prophecy, which is
couched in the language of accomplished fact—a common pecu-
liarity in Bible prophecy: “Lo, the kings were assembled; they
passed by together. They saw; so they marvelled; they were
troubled, so they hasted away. Fear took hold upon them there,
and pain as of a woman in travail. Thou hreakest the ships of
Tarshish with an east wind —(Psalm xlviii. 4-7). From this it
would appear that the outburst of elemental power that scatters


the hosts of Gog, extends also to the neighbouring Mediterranean,
and involves the British fleet in the common destruction.
This is but the commencement of “the great day of the Lord.”
What follows 1 ? The subsequent re-establishment of the kingdom
of Israel in the hands of the long-rejected but then newly-arrived
King of the Jews, who retains in His hands the marks of cruci-
fixion, which He exhibits to the Jews in proof of His identity,
with the result of inducing a great and national mourning for
their past crimes (Zech. xii. 10-14); and Christ’s subsequent call
to the governments of the world to surrender to Him, which will
•engage our attention in another chapter.
CHAPTER IX.
Jswish fortunes the 'peculiar feature of the latter days—Popular repugnance
to the fact —Gentile views and God’s purpose in opposition—Jewish hear-
ing of the Armageddon catastrophe and the Jewish nation as a Divine
instrument after it—Who the Jews are, their present position and coming
restoration—First as a colony, then as a nation —Consternation of the
kings at Christ—The war they wage against Him—His victory—The
subsequent raising of the fallen tabernacle of David—Reign of Christ as
the imperial and absolute Lord of mankind—The saints reign with Him —
Palestine turned into a Paradise.
It has been sufficiently apparent that the events of “the latter
days” involve peculiarly the fortunes of the Jewish nation. This
is so essential a feature of the latter-day situation, that the angel
who came to reveal the whole course of events to Daniel, said to him,
“I am come to make thee understand what shall hefal thy people
in the latter days ” —(Dan. x. 14), The political occurrences of
former days had to do with God’s nation, when the men having
to do with them knew nothing about it. Thus we read in
Isa. xliii. 14: “For your sokes , I have sent to Babylon and
brought down all their nobles.” That the affairs of men should
be Divinely manipulated with Jewish objects is a view repugnant
to the common run of men: they look upon the Jews as a


contemptible and effete race, whose part in history is played-
Apart from revelation, no doubt this is a natural view; but in
view of the purpose of God, as revealed by the prophets, it is one
that will be rejected by those who believe what Paul states in
Heb. i. 1: “God at sundry times and in divers manners, spake
unto the fathers by the prophets” The Gentile view of the case
and the purpose of God are brought into juxtaposition in Micah
iv. 11: “Many nations are gathered against thee (Israel), saying,
Let her be defiled; let our eyes look upon Zion. But they hnom
not the thoughts of the Lord, neither understand they His counsel:
for He shall gather them (the nations) as the sheaves unto the
floor. Arise and thresh, O daughter of Zion, for I will make thy
horn iron and thy hoofs brass, and thou shalt beat in pieces many
people.”
One of the very objects of the gathering of the nations to
Armageddon is thus expressed in Joel iii.: “I will gather all
nations, and bring them down into the valley of Jehoshaphat,
and will plead with them there for my people and for my heritage ,
Israel, whom they have scattered amongst the nations and parted
my land.” The nations have a responsibility to discharge for
their treatment of the Jews, and the discharging of it will involve
a time of trouble such as never was since there was a nation upon
ear th (Dan. xii. 1). A feature of this time of trouble will be
that the Jews will be made use of to follow up the Divine stroke
of Armageddon, in the process of subjugating the whole earth to
the sceptre of the king of the Jews. Thus it is testified: “ Thou
art my battleaxe and weapons of war; with thee (Israel) will I
break in pieces the nations; with thee will I destroy kingdoms”
(Jer. li. 20); and also; “The remnant of Jacob shall be among
the Gentiles in the midst of many people as a lion among the
beast of the forest, and as a young lion among the flocks of sheep,
who, if he go through, both treadeth down and breaketh in
pieces” —(Micah v. 8).
Who are these Jews, who occupy such a prominent position in
the latter-day work of God, even as they did in the work of old \
The answer is to be read in the words addressed by Moses to the


children of Israel after the exodus from Egypt: “The Lord thy
God has chosen thee to be a special people unto Himself above all
people that are on the face of the earth”—(Dent, vii, 6). The Jews
are therefore God’s nation on the earth. Ay, but, say some, they
are cast off. But why? Hearken to the word of God by Amos:
“ You only have I known of all the families of the earth; there-
fore I will punish you for all your iniquity.” Israel’s cast-off
state in punishment of her sins, is therefore evidence that they
are the people of Divine choice and destiny. Are they to remain
cast off for ever? Let the same word answer the question. “ I
will gather her that is driven out and her that I have afflicted,
and I will make her that halted a preserved people, and her that
was cast far off A strong nation” —(Mich, iv. 6). “ I will bring
them again to place them; for I have mercy upon them, and they
shall he as though I had not cast them off ” —(Zech. x. 6). But you
say, they are a bad and disobedient race; never mind: God has
chosen them; and this is a sufficient reason for our recognition of
them in their true character. Remember David’s treatment of an
evil Saul, because he was “the Lord’s anointed” —(1 Sam. xxvi.
11). Ponder also this solemn reproof of a contrary mind; “Con-
siderest thou not what this people have spoken, saying, The two
families which the Lord hath chosen, He hath even cast them off.
Thus they have despised my people, that they should be no more
a nation before them. Thus saith the Lord, If my covenant be
not with day and night, and if I have not appointed the ordi-
nances of heaven and earth, then will I cast away the seed of
Jacob”—(Jer. xxxiii. 24; also xxxi. 37). Anyone desiring further
evidence of God’s purpose to restore Israel to their land may con-
sult the following scriptures: —Isaiah xi. 11-12; xlix. 18 to the
end; Ezek. xxxvii. 21 to the end; xxxix. 21 to the end; and on
a reading of the prophets, the earnest and attentive reader will
find many other such like declarations, throwing light on the
expectation of the disciples of Christ, as expressed in their parting
question: “Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom
to Israel?” —(Acts i. 6).
The Jews in their restoration are to be purified from the evil in


their midst: “He shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as
gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in
righteousness. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem
be pleasant unto the Lord as in the days of old, and as in former
years”—(Mai. iff. 3). “I will take away out of thee them that
rejoice in thy 'pride; thou shalt no more be haughty because of
mine holy mountain. I will also leave in the midst of thee an
afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the name of the
Lord”—(Zeph. iff. 11). “I will purge out from among you the
rebels and them that transgress against me. I will bring them
forth out of the countries where they sojourn, and they shall not
enter into the land of Israel”—(Ezek. xx, 38). In view of these
testimonies, there is no room for the objection which many feel to
the idea of Israel’s restoration on the score of their national insub-
ordination to the ways of God. But even if there were not the ex-
planation which there is on this point, the evidence would be con-
clusive to such as regard the Bible as the Word of God, that the
Jews are destined to play an important part in the terrible period
that marks the transition from the present constitution of things
to the “world to come,” or new order of things when “the king-
doms of this world shall have become the kingdoms of our Lord
and of His Christ, and He shall reign for ever and ever”—(Rev.
xi. 15).
Previous chapters have shown them planted in a partial restora-
tion, on the mountains of Israel, as an agricultural and commercial
colony under British auspices, when the Turkish empire shall
have passed away. We have seen Russian armies descend upon
the prospering infant colony, and wrest the country from British
hands. We have seen the assembled armies smitten with a
Divine stroke which drives them out of the country, and leaves
but a sixth part. We have seen Britain prostrate by the same
power, and Israel abased in the uttermost depths of national
remorse, at the discovery that their deliverer is the Nazarene
whom they have with bitterness rejected in all their generations.
What is the next item in the stupendous programme 1 ? Has the
work to be done attained at that stage, the point of completion?


The answer is in harmony with the fitness of things. The stag-
gering blow inflicted on human power in Palestine, is but the
beginning of a process which is to grind the universal fabric of
human government to pieces. “I will send those that escape
of them unto the nations ... to the isles afar off that
have not heard of my fame, neither have seen my glory, and they
shall declare my glory among the Gentiles”—(lsa. Ixvi. 19). “I
will send a fire on Magog, and among them that dwell carelessly
in the isles, and they shall know that I am the Lord.”—(Ezekiel
xxxix. 6). A message goes forth from the Holy Land, 11 Fear God
and give Him glory, for the hour of His judgment is come.” —(Rev.
xiv. 7). “Be wise now, therefore, oye kings; be instructed, ye
judges of the earth. . , . Kiss the Son, lest He be angry, and
ye perish from the way, when His wrath is kindled but a little.”—
(Ps. ii. 10-12). “Kings shall shut their mouths at Him, for that
which had not been told them shall they see, and that which they
had not heard shall they consider.”—(lsa. lii. 15).
The shutting of their mouths, on the part of the kings, is the
combined result of consternation at the message which they
receive, and determination to have no parley with the insolent
successor of Mahomet, as they will conceive him to be. With
the exception of Britain, they raise armies against Him and
assemble to attempt His overthrow. —(Rev. xix. 19). The war
that ensues is the most terrible experience of the era. War might
be considered impossible in such a situation of things. That the
nations should fight against Christ may seem incredible, but so
was His crucifixion. It is testified they will fight against Him,
and that is enough. They are qualified for the part they have
to perform, by the utter misconception that prevails concerning His
future work —a misconception due to a false theology and igno-
rance of the Scriptures. They are permitted to fight that scope
may be afforded for those terrible judgments glanced at in an
earlier part of the pamphlet, which are to teach them righteousness
and fit the world for the government of the kingdom of God.
Christ could overthrow the most formidable league of nations in a
moment; with a word of His mouth: but the object in view pre-


eludes this summary exercise of power, as in the case of Pharaoh,
who was allowed to put forth all his power in a series of acts of
resistance, before he was finally submerged in the perdition of the
Red Sea. The result, though delayed, is not for a moment doubt-
ful. “The Lamb shall overcome them, for He is King of kings
and Lord of lords, and they that are with Him are called and
chosen and faithful.”—(Rev. xvii. 14).
The power of all Gentile governments vanquished, what follows 1
“In that day, I will raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen ,
and close up the breaches thereof, and I will raise up his ruins and
build it as in the days of old.”—(Amos ix. 11). “Of the increase
of his (the son of David’s) government and peace there shall be no
end, upon the throne of David and upon his kingdom , to order it
and to establish it with justice and with judgment from hence-
forth, even for ever.” —(Isaiah ix. 8,9). “A king (the son of
David; see context) shall reign and prosper and execute justice and
judgment in the earth. In his days Judah shall be saved, and
Israel shall dwell safely.”—(Jer. xxiii. 5). That this is Jesus, is
made certain by its New Testament application.—(Luke i. 32;
Acts ii. 30). That it will be fulfilled only when Christ has
returned, is also certain from His own statements: e.g. “When the
Son of Man shall sit on the throne of His glory, ye also (my
twelve apostles), shall sit with me on twelve thrones, judging the
twelve tribes of Israel.”—(Matt. xix. 28; Luke xxii. 30). When
does the Son of Man sit on the throne of His glory 1 He answers
“ When the Son of Man shall come in His glory and all the holy
angels with Him, then shall He sit on the throne of His glory.”
—(Matt. xxv. 31). Hence it is that the appearing and the
kingdom of Christ are apostolically associated as in the following
instance: “The Lord Jesus Christ shall judge the living and the
dead at His appearing and His kingdom .”—(2 Tim. iv. 1). Not
only the apostles, but all who, with them, believe on Christ and
obey His commandments, will share in “the glory revealed.” “If
we suffer with Him, we shall reign with Him” — no empty words
(2 Tim ii. 12). Of the crown laid up for Paul to be given “at
that day,” Paul says it will be “ not to him only but to all them


also that love His appearing” —(2 Tim. iv. 8). Hence, where this
class is dramatically exhibited in the Apocalypse, in their collec-
tive completeness, they sing ‘‘Thou hast made us unto our God,
kings and priests, and we shall reign on the earth,”—(Rev. v. 10).
This fact enables us to apprehend the force of Paul’s question in
impressing on the Corinthian believers the meetness of their
settling their own affairs, instead of having recourse to worldly
tribunals: ‘‘Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the
world 1”—(1 Cor. vi. 2).
The prospect opened out in all these testimonies (w hich are only
a few of very many) is that when the present political system is
abolished by violence in the impending crisis, it will be replaced
by the imperial and absolute authority of David’s son and Lord in
Jerusalem, and administered in all the earth through His accepted
and glorified friends (and who they are may be learnt from John
xv. 14). The governing race and nation will be the nation of
Israel restored to their land—the first and favoured realm of the
empire (Zech. viii. 23; Isaiah lx. 12, 15; Micah iv. 8; Jer.
iii. 17; Ezekiel xxxvi. 19-38); but all the nations of mankind
will rejoice with them in the glories of a reign which will diffuse
peace, justice, and enlightenment to the end of the earth, and
secure that right distribution of earth’s abundance, which all
human systems of government have failed and must ever fail
to accomplish (Is. ii. 3; Zech. ii. 10-12; Ps. Ixxii). At this
time only will be realised in its fulness the promise to Abraham,
that in him should all the families of the earth be blessed. At
this time, also, will the promise of the personal possession of the
land be realised, when they shall say “This land that was
desolate is become like the garden of Eden” (Ezekiel xxxvi. 35);
and when Jehovah has fulfilled the word He has spoken:
“ Whereas thou (the land of Israel) hast been forsaken and hated
so that no man went through thee, I will make thee an eternal
excellency, the joy of many generations.”—(lsaiah lx. 15.)


CHAPTER X.
The whole matter brought to a focus — Nebuchadnezzar’s vision—The great
image of four metals — Daniel’s interpretation—A prophetic compendium
of universal history—The Prophecy fulfilled—Babylon, Persia, Greece
and Rome —The Gothic subversion of the Roman empire — Uprise of the
Papacy—The appointed period of its domination expired—lmpending
perdition of the European body politic—The Eastern Question—The final
situation—“ Prophecy and the Eastern Question” no fanatical collocation
of terms —The Divine fiat —The world ripe for judgment—The glorious
sequel—All hail the coming day !
In tlxis, the concluding chapter, it will he of advantage to look at
the whole matter brought to a focus in the two visions exhibited
with the interpretation, to Daniel, a Jewish captive of the seed
royal at the court of Nebuchadnezzar, The common prejudice
against the visions of Daniel we may well disregard in view of
Christ’s allusion to Daniel as a prophet, in whose writings
information was to be found as to the events revealed.—(Matt,
xxiv. 16): u When ye therefore shall see the abomination of
desolation spoken by Daniel the prophet, stand in the holy place
(whoso readeth let him understand ).”
In Daniel ii. we have a vision that is very simple, striking, his-
torically true, and very intelligible, in the scheme and upshot of
it. Nebuchadnezzar had a dream. His dream was prefaced by a
little contemplation on his part, as he lay in bed before he went to
sleep, with regard to the future. He at that time was head of an
empire that had carried all before it. Kings were subj ect to him; and
his authority was coextensive with the civilised world. He
naturally wondered what should be after him. God revealed this
to him, and here is testified what was revealed. The revelation
was imparted at first in the form of a dream, but he could not
recall the dream. He summoned the magicians, astrologers,
sorcerers, and Chaldeans to be brought before him, to tell him his
dream and the interpretation of the dream, threatening death in
case they did not do so. They could not supply the information
desired, and the decree went forth that they should be slain.


Daniel was among the wise men of the king, and also his three
companions, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, and they were
included in the general edict that the wise men should be slain.
Prompted by the natural desire for self-preservation, they that
night assembled together in seclusion, and prayed to God that He
would divulge this secret to them, that their lives may be saved.
Their prayer was answered, and Daniel went next day before the
king and said—“ The secret which the king hath commanded
cannot the wise men, the astrologers, the magicians, the sooth-
sayers, show unto the king;” but, says he, “ There is a God in
heaven that revealeth secrets and maketh known to the king
Nebuchadnezzar what shall he in the latter days ” —(verse 27, 28).
Then he tells his dream.
He says the king saw a great image composed of divers metals :
the head of gold, the breast and arms of silver, the belly
and thighs of brass, the legs of iron, the feet with the ten toes,
part iron and part clay ; and while the king looked at the image,
he saw a little stone, cut out of an adjacent mountain without
hands, descend with violence upon the feet of the image, as the
result of which, the image crumbled to pieces, was reduced to
powder, the dust of which was carried away by the wind; and
the little stone, gradually enlarging in size, became a great
mountain, and filled the whole earth. This was the dream,
and he says, “I will show the interpretation; Thou, 0 king, art
a king of kings .... Thou art this head of gold. And,
after thee shall arise another kingdom,” not a kingdom in the
limited sense of a dominion recognising the sovereignty of a king,
but a kingdom in the sense in which the empire of Babylon was
a kingdom; that is, an imperial power overshadowing all other
nations; “after thee shall arise another kingdom inferior to thee,”
and, therefore, represented by silver, which is inferior to gold;
and after that, a third kingdom of brass, represented by the belly
and thighs of brass; and, after that, there shall be another
kingdom, strong as iron, which shall be greater than the others,
inasmuch as he says the iron is stronger than the other metals;
but he says, as ye saw clay mixed with the iron towards the feet,
so as ye get towards that period of time, the kingdom will be


weakened by the introduction of a foreign element. And then he
says (verse 44), 11 In the days of these kings shall the God of
Heaven set up a Kingdom, which shall never he destroyed, and
the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break
in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for
ever; forasmuch as thou sawest that the stone was cut out of the
mountain without hands, and that it brake in pieces the iron, the
brass, the clay, the silver and the gold;” as much as to say, “the
meaning of the stone descending and destroying the image is, that
God will set up a kingdom that will supersede all the human
empires that will appear on earth.”
Now what do we find in regard to the history thus fore-
shadowed 1 We find that it has run in the course marked out up
to the present moment. The empire of Daniel was succeeded
(before even Daniel had passed off the scene), by the empire of
the Medes and Persians. The empire of the Medes and Persians
was succeeded by the brazen-coated Greek empire, appropriately
represented by the brass of the image. We find that after the
lapse of nearly two centuries, the kingdom of the Greeks ap-
peared on the scene, under Alexander the Great, and abolished
the empire of the Persians. The empire of the Greeks broke up
into four parts after the death of Alexander, as plainly foretold
in Dan. viii. 22; also, xi. 4, This was succeeded by an empire
as much stronger than the others as iron is stronger than the
other metals; an empire which superseded all the others in every-
thing that can constitute a dominion great. It is proverbial
in all history and in all political lessons, that the Roman
empire was the most magnificent political organisation that ever
exercised authority. The whole civilised world was under its
heel; from Rome, on the Tiber, it governed the world in one vast
system of universal dominion. But this empire waned in its
greatness. It “declined and fell;” as the vision foreshadowed.
There would come a time when the iron would be mixed up with
clay, and when the iron dominion would be divided into little
bits, symbolised by the ten toes. What we see now in Europe is
an exemplification of this feature of the symbolism.
It will help the perception of the whole matter to look at a


vision that Daniel himself had of the same thing—(Dan. vii. 2.)
*‘l saw in my vision by night, and behold the four winds of the
heaven strove upon the great sea. And four great beasts came up
from the sea, diverse from one another I beheld till
the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of Days did sit,
whose garment was white as snow The judgment
was set and the books were opened I saw in the
night visions, and behold, one like the Son of Man came with the
clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of Days, and they
brought him near before Him. And there was given him
dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and
languages should serve him; his dominion is an everlasting
dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that
which shall not be destroyed.” Now, what is the meaning of
this? We are not left to guess. It is made as plain as we could
desire. “These great beasts, which are four, are four kings (or
kingdoms), which shall arise out of the earth. But the saints of
the Most High shall take the kingdom and possess the kingdom
for ever, even for ever and ever” (verses 17, 18.)
In Nebuchadnezzar’s vision, after the four metals, came a
destroying stone: in this, after the four beasts, came another
dominion—the saints of the Most High. But Daniel was struck
with the fourth beast, not only on account of its greater size and
dreadfulness, but from seeing ten horns in its head, and from
noticing another rising up among the ten, and displacing three of
them, and exhibiting the peculiarities of eyes and mouth, and
speaking loud words. So he asks about it. He says—“ Then
I would know the truth of the fourth beast, which was diverse
from all the others .... and of the ten horns that were
in his head, and of the others which came up, and before whom
three fell; even of that horn that had eyes, and a mouth that
spoke very great things. I beheld, and the same horn made war
with the saints, and prevailed against them; until the Ancient
of Days came, and judgment was given to the saints of the
Most High; and the time came that the saints possessed the
kingdom.” Thus he said : the fourth beast shall be the fourth


kingdom upon earth, which shall be diverse from all kingdoms,
and shall devour the whole earth, and shall tread it down, and
break it in pieces. And the ten horns out of this kingdom are
ten kings that shall arise; (and, therefore, ten kingdoms; for
there cannot be ten kings without ten kingdoms;) and another
shall arise after them; and he shall be diverse from the first, and
he shall subdue three kings. And he shall speak great words
against the Most High, and shall wear out the saints of the Most
High, and think to change times and laws; and they shall be
given into his hand until a time and times and the dividing of
time. But the judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his
dominion to consume and to destroy it unto the end. And the
kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under
the whole heavens, shall be given to the people of the saints of the
Most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all
dominions shall serve and obey Him.
Looking at this in the light of history, what do we see in
connection with the Roman empire 1 ? That after a prosperous
career of about six centuries, the Roman empire was broken up
by the irruption from the north of those barbarian hordes,
represented by the clay, the Goths, and Huns, and Yandals, and
other races of people that inhabited the northern and central
countries of Europe and Asia; which came down and upset the
Roman empire. They did not abolish the Roman empire in the
absolute sense, but amalgamated with it after the figure of the
clay mixing with iron. They came down and settled in the
Roman countries, under Roman civilisation, and in many instances
co-operating with Roman authority, but ultimately broke up the
unity of Roman dominion. This was not the work of a day : the
revolution that led to that result extended over a hundred years.
It was a long time impending; the Romans for a long time
resisted the encroachments of the barbarians, and held them
at bay; but at last came the catastrophe; the barriers were
thrown down, and the northern flood swept everything before it.
Now what we have to look at is this : that as the final result of
their subversion of the Roman empire, the barbarians divided the


Roman empire substantially into ten political sections. The first
political settlement of the empire, after the great catastrophe from
the north, presents us with a ten-fold division; viz.: 1. Vandals ;
2. Suevians; 3. Visigoths; 4. Alans; 5. Burgundians; 6. Franks;
7. Hindi; 8. Huns; 9. Lombards; 10. Ravenna. Machiavelli,
the historian of Florence, in the first chapter of his history, gives
an enumeration of the kingdoms that rose out of the ruins of the
Roman empire, and the number is ten. Sir Isaac Newton gives
the same number, though his mode of enumeration is a little
different. We see Daniel’s vision verified to that extent, that this
fourth empire came to be divided into ten parts, as represented by
the ten horns on the head of the beast symbolising it. It would
be interesting to bestow a moment’s attention on the other little
horn that rose after the ten, that had in it eyes and mouth, that
supplanted three of the ten, that spoke great words against God,
and sought to change times and laws, and that arrogated to itself
general authority. Suffice it to say, that one hundred years after
the uprise of the ten kingdoms in Roman Europe, the papal power
made its appearance, answering to all the peculiarities of the
symbol representing it. This power has been more stout in his
looks, and more arrogant in his pretensions than the ten, has made
war against the saints; has prevailed against them ; has drenched
the soil with their blood; has spoken great things against God ;
has dictated to all the world; has called himself King of
kings and Lord of lords; has proudly called his city the
Eternal City; has claimed the right to crown the other horns, and
even demanded, in token of their subordination to him, that they
should kiss his toe. You see it now in the decrepitude required
by the fact that the prophetic measurement of his power is nearly
up. “ Time, times, and the dividing of time,” is reducible to
1260 days, the number of years the Pope has been ecclesiastical
lord of men “by law established.”
What we have more particularly to mark is, the event which
terminates the career of this little horn with eyes and mouth.
That event is thus defined in the chapter, first in symbol, then in
the plain language of interpretation. The Symbol :• “ I beheld


then, because of the voice of the great words which the horn
spake. I beheld, even till the Beast was slain and his body
destroyed and given to the burning flame”—(verse 11.) The
interpretation: “The judgment shall sit, and they shall take away
his dominion to consume and to destroy it unto the end. And
the kingdom and the dominion, and the greatness of the king-
dom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the
saints of the Most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom,
and all dominions shall serve and obey Him.”
Putting the two visions together, they both point to one great
climax, —the violent substitution of the authority of God,
embodied in Christ and His glorified friends, for the various
systems of government that now exist in the world. They illus-
trate, in a simple and dramatic way, the issues of history as
required by the promises made to Abraham and his seed, foretold
in the more complex prophecies considered in the earlier parts of
this pamphlet. They help us to estimate the Eastern Question in
its true character, as the providential development of the situation
which has been arranged beforehand, as the appropriate occasion
for the accomplishment of God’s purpose to bring the world into
subjection by judgment, and bless it with a righteous and universal
government, in the hands of His glorious Son, enthroned in “the
city of the Great King”—Jerusalem, honoured before-time as the
seat of a Divine government, and again to be chosen as the throne
of Divine power and glory —(Jer. iii. 17; Zech. ii. 12).
“Prophecy and the Eastern Question” is no artificial or fanatical
collocation of terms. It soberly represents the true character of
the times we live in. God has spoken; centuries ago, He issued
the fiat which is complicating European affairs. He decreed the
political entanglement which should break up Turkey, decimate
the Pope, and bring Russia, with a multitude of people at her
steps, to the mountains of Israel, to be broken by Jesus, the King
of Israel, preparatory to his re-establishment of the kingdom of
David, through which to rule all nations in righteousness for a
thousand years. Those who have surrendered themselves to the
power of Jehovah’s word, “lift up their heads” with quick, in-


stinctive joy, at the accumulating symptoms of the approaching
tumult of nations, when “rushing like the rushing of many
waters, God shall rebuke them, and they shall flee afar off!”
(Isaiah xvii. 13).
The prospect which fills the world with alarm, generates in
Israel’s children a glow of triumphant ecstacy. The world cannot
understand this. The common run of people lift their hands and
eyes with pious horror at the relish with which the scene of
coming catastrophe and bloodshed is contemplated by the class
believing in prophecy: who appear to them in the light of blood-
thirsty war dogs, constantly on the scent for scenes of violence.
The world, as of old, calls good evil, and evil good \ darkness light,
and light darkness. No doubt, our modern Christians would
have objected to the flood, and the destruction of Sodom and
Gomorrah, and shuddered at the barbarism of Moses and Joshua
in putting women and children to the sword, and the shocking-
cold-blooded ferocity of Samuel in hewing Agag to pieces. And
what would they have said to Jesus, when he rudely overthrew
the tables of the money changers in the temple, and expelled
them with “a whip of small cords V They are not Christian at
all in the true sense. They are poor effeminate creatures of the
flesh, who mistake the feeble impulses of the unenlightened moral
sentiments for the Divine law. “Cursed be he that doeth the
work of the Lord deceitfully, and cursed be he that keepeth back
his sword from blood”—(Jer. xlviii. 10).
The world is ripe for Divine judgment. The grape-bunches are
ready to be reaped for the winepress of God’s anger, and the time
is near at hand for the WORD OF GOD to come forth to the
bloody work of treading out the wicked fruit. With this work,
all who are touched with the zeal of the Divine service have
sympathy- not that they delight in evil, per se, but that they
have learnt that the stroke of judgment will alone break up the
inextricable tangle of evil in which human affairs are, in the pre-
sent state, involved; that the storm of Divine vengeance will alone
relieve the atmosphere of the foetid and oppressive elements with
which it is charged, and produce health to the nations by the


healthy respiration of righteousness and peace; that the relentless
arm of righteous retribution—for in righteousness doth He judge
and make war—is alone adequate to deal that justice to the
peoples which will clear away all encumbrances, and lay the
foundation of that state of things in which mankind, first being
pure, will be peaceable, filled with goodwill and glory to God.
All hail the coming day! ye have long tanned; break now in
glory on our dark horizon, where faith alone, begotten of Yahweh’s
word, can see the glimmer of Thy coming dawn. Oh, we wait
with strong desire; give us the first token; send athwart our
night the gleaming messenger of Thy presence. Release Thy
prisoners; justify Thy children; give them to see with their eyes
the unbared arm of Omnipotence lifted up to save His chosen, and
to smite all the proud and lofty. Oh, lift the curtain that shuts us
out in the darkness which covers all the earth; unveil the impend-
ing glory; open the temple; uncover the ark of our covenant with
God; scatter the lightnings of Jehovah’s anger among the nations.
Crash, ye hidden thunders! and destroy them that destroy the
earth; bring to the dust the high refuges of rebellion and lies;
cast down the thrones; slay the Mother of Harlots; bring per-
dition on the Fourth Beast; and let all the world know that there
is a God who judgeth, and who, though long silent, will not
always be still, blit will rise to avenge His own elect, to carry
out His own purpose, and to vindicate His own majesty and honour,
against the ignorance, brutishness, perversity and wickedness of
a hundred generations. Now shall men see the glory of
Yahweh; for His hand is about to be lifted up. The end has
come; the times of the Gentiles are knelling to a close. Behold
the signs !


CONTENTS
CHAPTER I
Public alarm at the Eastern Question—The political possibilities involved in it—
Popular fears about prophecy—The reality of the foundation of them—Educated
aversion to the subject unreasonable—The facts of the case—Human action under
Divine guidance—Historic illustrations—First clue to the Eastern Question —God’s
purpose with the Holy Land—His promise to Abraham—The question of fulfilment
or non-fulfilment considered ... ... ... ... ... 3
Page 3.
CHAPTER 11.
The reason for looking for the end in our day—Expiration of the prophetic periods—
Wide-spread expectation of Christ’s appearing as at His first advent—Approaching
revival of Jewish prosperity—Consequent necessity for Turkish dissolution—The
symbolic representation of these things in the Apocalypse ... ... Page 12.
CHAPTER 111.
Daniel’s “time of the end”—lts nature defined—lts coincidence with Ezekiel’s “latter
days”—The sixth vial’s relation to that now current period of the world’s history—
The object of Turkey’s decay from a Providential point of view—The imminent
uprise of a new order of things ... ... ... ... ... Page 19.
CHAPTER IY,
The frog section of the sixth vial—The effects of French diplomacy—Gigantic
armaments of the present hour —Despairing prospect apart from prophecy—The light
of prophecy—War preparations an appointed condition of the end—“ The war of
the great day of God Almighty” —Its object the punishment and purification of the
world ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Page 21.
CHAPTER V.
The particular shape of the conflict—The predictions of Daniel and Ezekiel—The
war between Turkey and Egypt thirty years ago—ldentification of Russia as the
subject of prophecy —Her destined overthrow of Turkey sooner or later—The
situation preparing before our eyes ... ... ... ... Page 25.


BlfcUo
i »“ *** **
K t m*,. 64
CHAPTER VI.
CHAPTER VII.
CHAPTER VIII.
CHAPTER IX.
• CHAPTER X.
Britain’s part in the coming conflict—The parties to the struggle—lts beginning—
Its clouds and portents now overhanging the world —The part that belongs to the
j ews —At first an agricultural colony in Palestine—The Jews defended from
Russian aggression by Tarshish—The evidence that modern Britain is ancient
Tarshish —A difficulty met ... ... ••• ••• ••• Page 30.
Britain’s latter-day friendship for the Jews—The Scripture testimony on the
subject—The human cause of that friendship, and of England’s antagonism to
Russia—The British Empire in India—Britain’s communications through Asiatic
Turkey—Purchase of the Suez Canal, and coming British occupation of Egypt and
gyria Current schemes for Jewish settlement in Palestine —The Montefiore testi-
monial Jewish views on the subject—A Jew at the head of the British govern-
ment ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• P a S e 37.
Dismemberment of the Turkish Empire—A peaceful interval—Russian attack upon
Syria in British occupation—Defeat of the British forces and Russian seizure of
North Palestine and Egypt —Christ’s arrival on the scene —Violent overthrow of
the invader and the destruction of the British fleet—The object of these mighty
events and their sequel ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• Page 43.
Jewish fortunes the peculiar feature of the latter days—Popular repugnance to the
fact—Gentile views and God’s purpose in opposition—Jewish bearing of the
Armageddon catastrophe and the Jewish nation as a divine instrument after it—
Who the Jews are, their present position and coming restoration, —first as a colony,
then as a nation—Consternation of the kings at Christ—The war they wage against
Him His victory—The subsequent raising of the fallen tabernacle of David—Reign
of Christ as the imperial and absolute Lord of mankind—The saints reign with
Him—Palestine turned into a paradise ... ... ... ... Page 47.
The whole matter brought to a focus—Nebuchadnezzar’s vision—The great image
of four metals—Daniel’s interpretation—A prophetic compendium of universal
history—The prophecy fulfilled—Babylon, Persia, Greece and Rome—The Gothic
subversion of the Roman Empire—Uprise of the papacy—The appointed period of
its domination expired—lmpending perdition of the European body politic iho
Eastern Question and the final situation—“ Prophecy and the Eastern Question,”
no fanatical collocation of terms—The Divine fiat—The world ripe for judgment—
Thedorious sequel—All hail the coming day ! ... ... ••• Page 54.
