

PROPAGANDISM IN THE PACIFIC.'*
Every one knows something respect-
ing Tahiti—the beauty of its scenery,
and its hospitable inhabitants; for who
has not read the narrative of Cook’s
voyages, or Cowper’s verses on the
“ gentle savage” whom the illustrious
navigator brought from the simple
usages of his native island to wit-
ness the ever-varying features of our
complicated civilization. Although the
group of the Society Islands was dis-
covered by the Spanish navigator
Quiros, it is to the admirable and un-
rivalled sagacity of Cook that we are
indebted for those vivid descriptions
which have interested all Europe, and
have been translated into so many lan-
guages. The surpassing beauty of
these remote islands, the splendour and
utility of their previously unknown
vegetable productions, and above all,
a variety of our race differing in com-
plexion as well as in social condition
from the rest of mankind, at once mild
and energetic, slothful and lively,
could not fail to arrest the attention
of the most incurious. The Polyne-
sian race to which we were intro-
duced, has its own national character,
no less distinct from that of the labo-
rious and patient African, than the
nut-brown complexion of the Tahitian
differs from the jet-black of an inhabi-
tant of the Gold coast. Probably no
two races of mankind exhibit greater
contrasts than the stern, melancholy
and vindictive American, cherishing
vengeance for years, as if he had been
descended from the first murderer,
making war as he hunts, by stratagem,
and more like a tiger than a man:
and the Polynesian, on the other hand,
cheerful and volatile, fighting in large
bodies in the open field or in war-
canoes, regardless, it is true, of human
life or suffering, but not sullenly and
enduringly vindictive.
The peculiar state of society ob-
served in the Polynesian islands may
be easily accounted for : the territory
they inhabited was of small extent,
and they had no wild animals to chase,
but were compelled to become fishers
and cultivators; thus, according to
the modern theory of colonisation, dis-
persion was prevented, and men living
in communities necessarily made more
progress, and framed more complicated
systems of policy and mythology. The
ancients believed that the Ichthyopha-
gous tribes were the most barbarous
of our species; but a more extensive
knowledge of the races of mankind
has refuted this idea. The Indians of
the islands and deeply-indented shores
of north-west America are a far more
civilizable race than the wanderers
amidst the boundless forests, in the
same manner as the Polynesian is supe-
rior to the inhabitants of the island-
continent of New Holland. The reason
of this appears to be, that insular and
coast tribes must know how to con-
struct a canoe and manufacture fish-
ing implements; hence more manual
dexterity, as well as more extensive
views of natural phenomena. Such
maritime tribes, even under the great-
est diversity of climate, are remarkably
uniform, because the temperature of
the sea and its capacity for sustaining
animal life is every where more uni-
form than that of the land, producing
a similarity of character, the result
of similar pursuits. In this point of
view, strange as it may appear,
no two races are more alike than
the Esquimaux of Greenland and the
islanders of the South-Sea: we find
among both a high degree of manual
dexterity, and skill in managing their
canoes; we find in both a systematic
and rather complex mythology, and
the same joyous volatile nature de-
lighting in the feast and the dance.
The Polynesian, however, has more
points of interest than the Green-
lander : instead of everlasting icebergs
and barren rocks, a cloudy summer
and dark polar winter, he lives amidst
* Voyages aux Isles du Grand Ocean: par Moerenhout. Polynesian
Researches: by William Ellis. Hawaiian Spectator: Oahu, Sandwich Islands.
History of the Hawaiian or Sandwich Islands ; by James Jackson Jarves, 1843.


a lovely scenery and the most varied
phenomena with which man can be
brought into contact. We may easily
form a general notion of the appearance
of an island in the tropical part of the
Pacific. An immense and lofty mountain
emerges from the ocean, its summit
usually immersed in clouds, and gives
origin to numerous alpine streams.
But from time to time more awful
events take place, and the crater of
the volcano pours forth streams of
molten rocks, producing barren spaces,
which contrast strongly with the sur-
rounding verdure. The base of the
mountain is split into deep ravines,
which, as they approach the shore,
expand into fertile valleys, abounding
in bread-fruit trees and mulberries,
and plantations of Arum and sweet
potato. As the valleys expand to-
wards the sea, we observe that the
island is surrounded by a breakwater
of coral, and thus appears with re-
spect to its zone of corals like a pic-
ture in its frame ; while the smooth
pellucid water between the coral and
the island, the favourite resort of
fishes, forms a contrast with the ever
restless surge which rolls without.
Nor is the value of the natural pro-
ductions inferior to this beauty: the
forest which delights the eye also
affords food and clothing; the cocoa-
nut, the plantain, and the bread-fruit
tree afford a never-failing supply of
food ; and the bark of the Broussonetia
supplies a cloth suited to the climate.
To crown all, the people, generous as
the soil they inhabit, welcome their
foreign visitors with the kind and pro-
digal hospitality so consonant to their
nature ; and to the imaginative mind,
the golden age appeared to linger in
the groves of Tahiti.
A more close inspection of these
blooming scenes soon dissipates the
dreams of poets and the speculations
of philosophers; and the Utopia of
a Rousseau or a Condorcet, like a
southern Austral continent, still re-
mains to be discovered. On the con-
trary, a more intimate acquaintance
with the Hesperides of the South-Sea
is little creditable either to the primeval
simplicity of the islanders, or to the
influence which civilized man exerts
over his less fortunate fellows. The
Tahitians, when visited by Cook, prac-
tised infanticide, offered human sacri-
fices, had an Arreoy society, were
engaged in perpetual wars, and gave
themselves up to the most unbridled
licentiousness. If the islanders were
thus depraved, their early intercourse
with civilized man was to them the
source of pure and unmitigated evil—its
only consequence was, that the most
odious vices of civilized life were en-
grafted on the natural and inevitable
vices of barbarians. That this state-
ment is not one of sickly sentimentalism
is obvious from the decisive fact, that
since the period of Cook’s voyages the
population of the islands has been
decreasing with fearful rapidity—a
truth which proves that the amount of
human misery has been going on in a
ratio, whose increase is in proportion
to the extent of their intercourse with
Europeans. According to Captain
Cook, the number of inhabitants of
Tahiti amounted to two hundred thou-
sand ; and his learned companion Dr.
John Reinhold Forster, after a more
elaborate calculation, founded upon
the number of war-canoes furnished
by each district, estimated the popula-
tion of Tahiti and the adjacent island
of Eimeo at 150,000: at present, the
number of inhabitants of the two
islands is short of 13,000. In the
Sandwich Islands, the same melancholy
result has taken place, although not to
the same amount. The population of
this group was supposed by Cook to
amount to 400,000; in 1832 it was
132.000, and in 1836 it had sunk to
110.000. It is obvious, therefore,
that making every allowance for. ex-
aggerated statements, the number
of deaths far exceeds that of births ;
and that sooner or later the race will
become extinct, and this
people will ultimately disappear from
the globe, like those strange animals,
concerning whose history geologists
are so much interested.
If we investigate with a moderate
degree of care the causes of this rapid
decrease of population, we will find
that they are abundantly intelligible
and obvious. We will specify in the
first place the partial introduction of
* Paper on the population of Hawaii, by Rev. A. Bishop —Hatcaian Spectator ,
vol. i. p. 62.


fire-arms—we say partial—for, if the
supply had corresponded to the demand,
so that the different chiefs had retained
the same relative strength, no addi-
tional stimulus to war would have been
given. As it happened, the chief whose
district was most frequented, obtained
the greatest supply ; and when, in ad-
dition, he obtained the aid of a few
runaway sailors, his power excited
jealousy, and led to incessant warfare.
This evil, from its nature, was only
temporary, and led to its own cure, by
the establishment of one superior chief:
so that, by putting an end to petty war-
fare, it ultimately proved a benefit both
to the Society and Sandwich Islands,
although much suffering and evil was
encountered during the process. Two
evils of a far more fatal tendency re-
main to be noticed—the introduction
of spirituous liquors and distillation,
and of disease, the result of licentious
intercourse ; and the combined opera-
tion of these causes has tainted the
constitutions, and shortened the days
of vast numbers. Speaking of the
Sandwich Islands, Mr. Bishop informs
us, “ that, at the present day, there
are a large number of childless families
who have no heir to inherit their little
property. Perhaps, not one in four of
the families now existing, have children
of their own alive. Many have no
family at all, and a great majority of
the children born in the islands die
before they are two years old.” Such
is a brief view of this painful topic,
and it is truly mortifying to reflect that
the visits of civilized men, brought up
amidst the philosophy and morality of
the eighteenth century, should prove
as fatal to the uncivilized tribes, as were
the swords of Cortez and Pizarro in
an age of barbarous fanaticism.
It is, however, pleasing to remem-
ber, that if our age has its evils, it
also possesses its advantages—if our
fathers performed the part of man-
stealers on the coast of Africa, we
have emancipated the negro—and if
South-Sea whalers and runaway con-
victs have demoralized the islands of
the Pacific, we have reclaimed the in-
habitants from idolatry, and placed
them in such a position of improved
intellect and morality, that their pro-
gress in the right direction was certain,
provided they had been left to them-
selves. How these fair hopes have
been blighted, and the morals, even of
men emerging from barbarism, have
been deteriorated by the interference
of the infidel and the Jesuit, it will be
instructive to consider.
But, before entering into any details
respecting Tahiti, or the Sandwich Is-
lands, we are desirous of saying a few
words respecting a work, whose title we
have mentioned at the commencement of
this article. The work of Moerenhout
only merits attention in connection
with the present question : the author
a merchant, and at present, we believe,
residing in Tahiti, can be characterized
by no other appellation than that of a
thoroughly unprincipled adventurer.
This Moerenhout is, we believe, by
birth a Belgian. Some time ago he
went to South America, and carried
on business at Valparaiso ; he after-
wards settled at Tahiti, and obtain-
ed the situation of consul for the
United States. Here, by his own
account, he sold spirits to the natives,
interfered in the affairs of the island,
and in short, proved a pest to everyone
—and was finally dismissed from the
American consulate for breach of trust.
While in Paris, some years since, he
published his voyages—and what was
worse, he put his name to the work,
and by a singular fatality, the title of
American consul is appended, so that,
by publishing this title-page, M. Moe-
renhout has, as it were, constructed
his own pillory. We now proceed to
make good our assertions, to which we
may add, that there is not a page in
his two volumes, the title-page inclu-
sive, which does not contain a false-
hood.
Moerenhout professes to give a great
amount of new information on all
matters relating to the islands of the
Pacific : we shall allow him to speak
for himself. “ I owe,” says he, “to
the singularity of a situation altogether
peculiar, the advantage of having ob-
tained information concerning Oceania
and the Oceanians, which no one could
accomplish so well as myself—neither
the navigators, who move from place to
place—nor the missionaries, on account
of the prejudices proper to their calling;
information, the want of which has ren-
dered the conduct of the Indians (he
means Polynesians) an inexplicable enig-
ma up to the present day.”—(Preface,
p. vi.) The mode in which our worthy
obtained his information respecting the
mythology of Tahiti is rather curious.
> f fHtwv- mfmmn


namely, in nocturnal conferences with
an old priest, apparently a concealed
idolater. After some edifying dis-
course, Moerenhout assures the priest
that his national god, Taaroa, and the
God of the Christians is the same.
The priest then expresses himself—
“ Ah ! why did not your predecessors
think as you do? We should then
have retained the religion of our
fathers ; by modifying it, and correct-
ing its abuses, we might have preserved
our old customs and government, and
not have fallen into the present degra-
dation, without religion, government,
or national character—we have ac-
quired all the vices of foreigners,
without adopting their virtues, or re-
taining our own. My friend, what a
wound have you re-opened, into what
a state has my country fallen ? O,
Otaiti—alas I alas ! alas !” It is need-
less to say that no Polynesian that ever
lived would speak or think in this
style—it is clearly, neither the compo-
sition of the priest, nor even of Moe-
renhout, but of some Parisian literary
artist, who has been employed to get
up the book—in fact, almost as much
is admitted in a foot note, the only
approximation to honesty which we
have found in the work. The narra-
tion is concluded by the following
statement:—“ It is to him (the priest)
that I owe all the traditions relating
to cosmogony : it is he who is my
authority and guarantee for all the
following details, concerning the con-
dition of the people at the time *of
the discovery, and concerning what
they may have been at more remote
periods.—(Vol. i. p. 394.)
Having stated Moerenhout’s preten-
sions, and in his own language, we
have no hesitation in asserting in the
most unqualified manner, that his whole
work is a tissue of deliberate false-
hoods. The truth is, that all that he
has told of the manners, customs, and
history of Tahiti is stolen from Ellis’s
Polynesian Researches. Sometimes
entire sentences are translated—and
everywhere a little attention enables
one to restore the pillaged property to
its lawful owner. On comparing the
two works together, (Ellis and Moeren-
hout,) we found, under every head, that
this writer had borrowed from the work
of the English missionary. On look-
ing over Moerenhout’s remarks on the
grammatical structure of the Tahitian
You XXII— No. 127.
language, we sought as usual in Ellis,
but this time our search was fruitless \
it occurred, however, that the infor-
mation was not new to us, and fortu-
nately, we had a Polynesian grammar
published in Tahiti, by the missiona-
ries, as far back as 1823, and here at
once we found the source whence
the information had been derived.
Every remark is taken from the gram-
mar—nay, by a strange negligence,
the very same words and phrases are
given as illustrations. We confess,
any thing like honour on the part of
Moerenhout would be an anomaly in
his character; if we could not vindi-
cate his honesty in a single instance,
we have no desire to rob him of the
palm of consistency. We must, how-
ever, mention that there are a few
Tahitian ballads, relating to mytho-
logical subjects, which we have not
been able to find in any other work.
We will venture, however, to conjec-
ture whence they came. In the first
place, M. Moerenhout will say he got
them, at the midnight hour, from his
old priest; and we, on our parts, have
a hypothesis of our own. In these
ballads of our Tahitian Chatterton,
we observe that the orthography, with
insignificant exceptions, is that invented
by the English missionaries, and con-
sequently different from what a French-
man would adopt. One of the Tahi-
tian missionaries, the Rev. Mr. Ors-
mond, has bestowed much attention in
the collecting of the old traditions.
Moerenhout mentions, in several parts
of his work, Mr. Orsmond as a person
with whom he was acquainted. They
are, therefore, in our opinion, the un-
acknowledged treasures of Mr. Ors-
mond. If it turns out that we are
mistaken, we have this consolation,
that we have done Moerenhout’s cha-
racter no wrong.
We have a few remarks further to
offer concerning this work. Vices*
like misfortunes, seldom come sin-
gle ; and to falsehood Moerenhout
adds malignity. He has not merely
appropriated the labours of another
out of vanity and self-love: he has
written to malign the very men to
whom he is indebted for every thing
he knows respecting Polynesia. The
revolting calumnies which he has in-
vented against the Protestant mission-
aries require some notice. The fol-
lowing description of an annual reli-


gious meeting, held in Tahiti, will
give an idea of the malignity of his
character. In the morning the
missionaries passed him au grand
galop. There are few countries in
•which horses are of less value than
Tahiti; the meeting was an annual
one, and all the missionaries would be
present, that is, between fourteen and
sixteen men. We never knew that
the island possessed so many horses.
Moerenhout might as well have talked
of navigating the sands of Africa in a
steam-boat. The object of the meet-
ing was to explain to the natives that
since the people of England had ex-
pended so much money for their wel-
fare, they should now contribute some-
thing for themselves. Moerenhout
tells us the subscriptions did not go
on, and the affair of the subscriptions
ended as it had commenced, with a
prayer (v. i. p. 241). This, accord-
ing to Moerenhout, was in 1829; un-
fortunately, we have no records of
that year to appeal to ; but we know
that, on one occasion, his late majesty,
George the Fourth, ordered this na-
tive contribution to be admitted duty
free, which was esteemed equivalent
to a donation of four hundred pounds.
The following quotation will afford a
very good illustration of Moerenhout’s
character. It has often struck us as
a remarkable peculiarity, that no
French writer can touch upon the
subject of Tahiti without reverting to
Cyprus, Cytherea, and the peculiar
train of ideas associated with these
places. Nor is Moerenhout, or the
person he employed to get up his
book, deficient in this respect. Every
one has heard of the infamous Arreoy
society, which formerly existed in the
Society islands. What a mind can
that man have, who could write as
follows ? “ These songs called to mind
those of the ancient Arreoys of Otaiti,
during the brilliant festivals which
they celebrated in the bye-gone days
of their glorious independence” (v. i.
p. 96). We shall say no more con-
cerning Moerenhout for the present,
except to remark that he has been the
fitting associate of the Romish priests,
and the bitter calumniator of the Pro-
testant missionaries. Of these calum-
nies we are certain, after what we
have stated, we need only say they are
false, and that the counter statements
of honourable men, like Captains Gam-
bier, Waldegrave, and Fitzroy, and of
Mr. Darwin, are of themselves vindi-
cation enough.
We shall now proceed to give an
account of the French doings in Poly-
nesia, at the same time availing our-
selves of such collateral topics as illus-
trate the character of the Jesuits and
the objects of the French king, in
affording them such powerful support.
There is one circumstance of remark-
able meanness in this transaction ; we
allude to the intrusion of the Romish
priests upon a field which had been pre-
occupied by others for upwards of forty
years. The interest attached to Tahiti
ever since the brilliant voyages of Cooke,
were shared by some pious and benevo-
lent individuals, and by their efforts
Protestant missionaries were sent out
in 1796. The attempt was made on
a great scale, and a ship was sent out
to effect establishments on several of
the groiips, but the Tahitian was the
only one which survived. The com-
mander of the vessel, Captain Wilson,
who tendered his gratuitous services
on the occasion, was in every way a
remarkable man, whose previous his-
tory possessed all the interest of a ro-
mance. The missionaries laboured in
vain for fifteen tedious years, often
despairing, their exertions unregarded,
and the island ruined by vice, and dis-
tracted by incessant wars and murders.
At last, however, about 1813, their
labours met with an abundant recom-
pense ; and, in a few years, Chris-
tianity prevailed, not only in Tahiti,
but also in all the islands of the
Georgian and Society groups. We
may, therefore, briefly state some of
the more important changes which
have been effected. This we shall do
with but few comments ; for if, on
the one hand,we cannot approve of
the bad taste with which friends some-
times speak and write, far less can we
approve of the irreligious and bigoted
manner in which the subject is dis-
cussed, especially by those who know
least about it, for bigotry is but ano-
ther name for wilful ignorance. The
changes, or rather benefits, for in this
instance the words are synonymous,
were of two kinds; in some, every
individual in the nation participated,
and others were necessarily more li-
mited. We believe every one will
agree that the abolition of infanticide,
and of human sacrifices, were unmin-


gled good. The abolition of the tabu,
which prevented men and women from
eating together, removed a powerful
obstacle to domestic happiness; and
the abolition of idolatry emancipated
the mind from much superstition, and
every one will rejoice in the downfall
of the Arreoy institution. The change
was not limited to abandoning what was
bad ; it also consisted in adopting what
is good. Wars ceased, and all acknow-
ledged their sovereign ; education was
introduced, and many hundreds were
taught to read and write, and very
many of the Tahitians gave every evi-
dence of sincerity that the most scepti-
cal could desire. One honourable fea-
ture of the affair is, that it was free
from compulsion, and the effect of ar-
gument and entreaty, and a blameless
life on the part of the teachers. We
had no jugglery or lying miracles—no
frauds practised on the simplicity of
the natives. It is also to be observed
that nothing was done to debase the
intellect; no rosaries, crucifixes, or
images ; no attempt made against the
national independence, by bringing
their consciences under the tutelage
of an Italian priest. The Bible was
translated and printed, and with
that confidence becoming Protestants,
placed fearlessly in the hands of all.
How different the measures of the
Romish polytheism ! In Mexico, some
years after the conquest, an old priest
writes home that he has almost for-
gotten his native tongue, from his long
residence among the Indians, that he
had baptized we do not know how
many thousands, and ending by a re-
quest that they would send him a book
called the Bible, for he had none, and
could not procure one in the country.
Nor was this all; the people were not
only improved in morals but in indus-
try, and of course in amount of com-
forts and enjoyments of life ; and had
they been left free from foreign inter-
ference, their progress would have
been in the right direction. We have
now, however, to look to another
series of events, in a moral point of
view, most disastrous to the w'hole
Polynesian race.
For several years past, the French
government of Louis Philippe, aided
by the Romish priesthood, have been
persevering in their endeavours to ob-
tain a political ascendancy in the Pa-
cific ; and had this been done in an
open and manly way, our remarks
might have been brief; we shall, howr-
ever, as the matter stands, enter into
some detail. We must, in the first
place, allude to a law which has ex-
isted in Tahiti, and also, we believe, in
the Sandwich islands, that no fo-
reigner is allowed to take up his per-
manent residence, unless he obtain
permission from the constituted au-
thorities. The object of this law
enacted long before the intrusion of the
Romish priests, was to abate a nui-
sance of a different kind, and to pre-
vent the settlement of runaway con-
victs or sailors in the islands, to the
detriment of all morality, and had no
prospective bearing upon the Jesuits.
In 1836, two Romish priests at-
tempted to settle in Tahiti, and the
manner in which these incendiaries
sneaked into the country is quite cha-
racteristic. They did not land at the
usual anchorage, but on the opposite
side of the island. This proceeding
being in contravention of a long-
standing law of the island, by which no
master or commander of a vessel is
allowed to land any passenger without
a special permission from the queen
and governors, the strangers were de-
sired to leave the island; and upon
their obstinate refusal, they were
conveyed back to their vessel, without
the slightest injury to their persons or
property. Now, in all this, which we
have quoted from the organ of the
London Missionary Society, there was
certainly nothing that could offend
France ; it was precisely what the
French government would have done,
if an English Protestant preacher had
landed at Calais without a passport,
and commenced teaching the inhabi-
tants. Here we must interrupt our
narrative for a moment, to offer a
well-meant piece of rebuke to the di-
rectors of the London Missionary
Society. These respected and bene-
volent persons must be in full posses-
sion of all the details of the case, and
why do they injure their cause by only
dealing in general statements? What
we require of them is that they pub-
lish a complete and minute statement
of every fact bearing upon the case. If
Moerenhout sold spirits, why not say so ?
They surely can give the names of the
B omish priests; they can tell if any
of them were English or Irish, and
many other things which we wish


to know ; and they cannot have
a better model for such statements
than that afforded by the Ame-
rican missionaries in the Sandwich
islands. The tenor of this article
will be, we trust, accepted as sufficient
evidence that nothing but friendship
to their cause, and a love of our com-
mon Protestantism, has prompted us
to request that they should break
through this over-fastidious Christian
delicacy. In the absence of such offi-
cial information, we must avail our-
selves of the honest and plain-spoken
statement of the Rev. Dr. Lang,
then residing at Sidney, and conse-
quently in a position where correct in-
formation could be obtained. Accord-
ing to the account of this honest man,
two French Roman Catholic priests
landed clandestinely on the Island of
Tahiti, with the view of propagating
among the Protestant natives of the
island the errors of popery. They had
come in a small schooner from Gam-
bier’s Island, where a Roman Catholic
mission had been established, and after
traversing the south-western side of
Tahiti, proclaiming that they were the
only teachers of the truth, and that the
Protestant missionaries were false
teachers (in proof of which they
alleged the astounding fact of the
latter being married ), they were re-
ceived and accommodated in a cottage
on the premises of M. J. A. Moeren-
hout, American consul, a Belgian we
believe by birth, and a Roman Catho-
lic by profession. To this indivi-
dual, and to the two priests whom he
took under his protection it was inti-
mated by the Queen of Tahiti, who
was apprehensive of disquiet and dis-
turbance from the character and
machinations of the priests, that the
latter must leave the island by the
schooner in which they had arrived ;
and Moerenhout and the priests hav-
ing refused obedience, they were fur-
nished with a copy of one of the
Tahitian laws, enacted years before,
which prohibited the residence of any
foreigners in the island without the
express permission of the government.
The two priests having expressed their
determination to sit violently, as they
say in Scotland, notwithstanding this
communication, and having accord-
ingly locked themselves up in their
cottage, a posse of Tahitian consta-
bles were sent under the direction of
one of the district judges, who was
present to protect the priests from
personal violence, to compel them to
embark on board the schooner which
was ready for sea. Finding the door
locked from within, the constables
lifted up the rafters of the roof of the
house from the wallplate, and spring-
ing over the wall, opened the door
from within. One of the priests find-
ing resistance no longer practicable,
walked down to the canoe that was
waiting for him ; the other refusing
to move, was lifted up as gently as pos-
sible by the natives, and placed in the
canoe with all their property, and rowed
off to the schooner. With respect to
Moerenhout, Dr. Lang informs us that
he had written most impertinently to
the queen, whose authority he pretended
to set at nought, on the ground of her
being under the influence of Mr.
Pritchard, now British consul, who
had formerly been a Protestant mis-
sionary on the island. As a proof,
however, of the manner in which this
individual’s conduct throughout the
whole affair was viewed by the Ame-
rican government, the circumstances
of the case were no sooner made
known to the President, than Moeren-
hout ivas dismissed from his consulate.
The next step in this history is a
curious one. Moerenhout, while yet
American consul, actually sent a re-
monstrance to the French govern-
ment ; that is, he was guilty of a
breach of the most sacred trust, inas-
much as any such memorial should
have been forwarded in the first in-
stance to the government of the
United States. Of course we do not
know its contents; but they would
be out of harmony with the charac-
ter of this individual if they were
true. The piety of Louis Philippe,
however, was offended, and Captain
Du Petit Thouars was dispatched to
obtain redress, and the conduct of
this officer was sufficiently disgusting.
The French captain, instead of treat-
ing with the native authorities at once,
put himself in connection with the
grog dealer, Moerenhout, who was at
the same time consul for the United
States and secret agent for France.
The consequence of this dishonourable
conference was, a demand for an
apology and for the sum of two thou-
sand dollars as a fine for the conduct
of the queen in dismissing the priests.


Unless this was done, the valiant Du
Petit Thouars threatened to batter
down the town of Matavai, and
establish a creature of Moerenhout’s
as sovereign. What follows is honour-
able to Englishmen: the unfortunate
Tahitians had no money, but the sum
was advanced by three British subjects,
Mr. Pritchard, the British consul.
Dr. Vaughan, and Mr. Bicknell, the
son of one of the missionaries. We
feel curious to know what became of
this and other sums extorted from the
Polynesians. Did it go to the French
exchequer, or was it absorbed by that
money-getting polypus, La Fayette’s
Utopia, and the best of all possible
republics, Louis Philippe ?
Disgrace is progressive, and like vir-
tue, advances gradually to perfection.
Du Petit Thouars arrived at Tahiti
in August, 1838, and in April, 1839,
the French frigate, L’Artemise, Captain
La Place, visited the islands. This
ship had sustained some damage from
striking on a coral reef, and nearly
three months were occupied in its
repair. During all this time the un-
suspecting Tahitians afforded the most
generous and unsuspecting aid to the
distressed crew. In return for this
hospitality Captain La Place threatened
to land five hundred men, and abro-
gate the government unless the law
under which priests were excluded
was repealed. The hapless Tahitians
had no alternative, and of course sub-
mitted, and since then Jesuits and
runaway convicts may find an asylum
in Tahiti. In the meanwhile Moeren-
hout, now French consul, like an ob-
scene fowl, was busy at the work
of demoralization, inundating the un-
happy land with floods of brandy. It
is astonishing to contemplate the want
of tact and common decency on the
part of the French and their ecclesi-
astical impostors. In May, 1842, the
French ship of war L’Aube, Captain
Dubuset, visited the islands, and the
parable of the wolf and the lamb was
again exhibited. A short time pre-
viously the captain of a French whaler
had been guilty of drunkenness and
riot, for which, as in any civilized
country, he was put in confinement.
To punish a drunken rioter touched
French honour, and the poor queen
was subjected to the humiliation of
being compelled to dismiss her po-
lice force by the order of Cap-
tain Dubuset. Alas, for French chi-
valry ! such things were enough to
make the gallant De Foix, if come to
life again, ashamed of his country.
We must now come to the climax
of these iniquities and the crowning
exploit of Du Petit Thouars ; and we
may venture to assert that the odious
combination of obscenity and false-
hood, priestcraft and infidelity, is a
disgrace to a nation calling itself
civilized. But the iniquities of Du
Petit Thouars were preceded by an
appropriate prelude by the French con-
sul, Moerenhout. This person, some
monthsbefore the arrival of the French
frigate, and apparently in anticipation
of that event, and when the queen was
absent from the island, endeavoured
to prevail upon the chiefs to sign a
letter surrendering the sovereignty
of Tahiti to Louis Philippe. The
deceived chiefs afterwards declared
that they were not aware of the con-
sequences of this act, and immedi-
ately retracted it on the representation
of the other chiefs. The queen her-
self, in letters to the Queen of England
and to the President of the United
States, declared that she had been
deceived by Moerenhout, and that she
had taken no part in an act which
went to deprive her of her sovereignty,
and that she relied upon the support
of these friendly powers. After this
fraud Du Petit Thouars arrived in
September 1842; and we have now
to record acts which would have ca-
shiered any English officer, and have
permanently expelled him from all
correct and moral society. For some
days after the arrival of our buccaneer
all was quiet, and many professions of
peace were made on the part of the
French. The queen and principal
chiefs were then requested to visits
the frigate, that the commander might
pay his respects to them, and of course
it was understood that his visit was of
a friendly nature. The poor queen
however was in hourly expectation of
her confinement, of which Du Petit
Thouars appears to have taken un-
manly advantage ; and it will hereafter
be seen that under any circumstances
this officer was no fitting society for
a modest woman. The mingled cow-
ardice and meanness of what fol-
lowed requires no comment. In the
evening the British and American
consuls received an official document


stating the differences that existed
between the Tahitian and French go-
vernments, which would probably lead
to hostilities ; and all French, British,
and American subjects were therefore
warned to take means for securing
their persons and property.
Before the queen or her friends could
be consulted, or the day appointed had
arrived, the French admiral had settled
the affair by means of fraud and false-
hood, equal to any thing to be found in
the memoirs of his countryman Vidocq.
A secret meeting was held during the
night, at which four chiefs attended,
and a document was signed by them
resigning the sovereignty of the island
to the French king. Next morning,
the queen was required to sign this act
of abdication within twenty-four hours,
or to pay a fine of ten thousand dol-
lars. But a sad experience had taught
the islanders the terrific power of
France, and had rendered her very
name odious among them. The queen
declared she would rather die than
subscribe to this swindling document;
and although in a situation whose de-
licacy would have called for some for-
bearance and courtesy on the part of
a gentleman, Admiral Du Petit Thou-
ars was inexorable ; and as the mo-
ney could not be procured, she affixed
her signature just one hour before the
firing was to commence. The follow-
ing account of this transaction, ex-
tracted from a letter from Tahiti,
which was published in The Times
of March 29, deserves to be quoted :
“ The French commander sent an emis-
sary to the queen, declaring that if
the money was not paid within twenty-
four hours, he would bombard the
island, and destroy every thing. The
queen positively declared she would
sooner die trusting in God than pay
this extortion, and a council of the
chiefs was held to decide on the best
means of defence. The next morning,
however, the French landed their ma-
rines, and demanded the immediate
ratification of a treaty (if her majesty
would not pay the money) placing
Otahiti, with the whole of the Society
Islands, under the soi-disant protection
of France, This the queen, by the
force and menaces of French bayonets,
was reluctantly compelled to sign,
amidst the beating of drums and the
cheers of the marines and sailors, as if
it was a voluntary act on the part of
the queen and the chiefs, who were,
and are, all opposed to the treaty, and
which has been extorted from them by
main force.”
No honest man can entertain a doubt
as to the mode in which Tahiti was
brought under the supremacy of France.
It was compulsory in the strictest sense
of the word; and it is therefore with
a feeling of humiliation that we have
to refer to Admiral Du Petit Thouars’s
official account of the transaction.
Nothing can better show the opinion
of the French admiral respecting his
own conduct than that he has been
obliged, in order to give a plausible
statement of these misdeeds, to fill his
official report with falsehoods of the.
most disgraceful nature. We must
quote his own words —“ Ensuite des
griefs et reclamations des nosnationaux
a Otahiti, par la demande d’une in-
demnite de 10,000 piastres fortes, re-
paration facile en egard de Vabondance
de numeraire dans ce pays." We are
informed that in consequence of wrongs
complained of by the French subjects
residing in Tahiti, the sum of ten
thousand dollars was demanded as an
easy compensation on account of the
abundance of money in the island.
The only French residents we have
heard of in Tahiti, were Moerenhout
and his priests. As to any complaint
from that worthy, there is an antece-
dent probability of its mendacity ; but
be that as it may, no complaint has
ever yet been detailed. As to the
admiral’s assertion respecting the abun-
dance of money in Tahiti, no man alive
knows the falsehood of the statement
better than the man who made it.
We will only advance the decisive
evidence of this deliberately-made ac-
cusation. In 1838, this identical Du
Petit Thouars visited Tahiti, and de-
manded a fine of only two thousand
dollars. The queen was too poor
to pay it, and the sum was advanced
on her behalf by three English gentle-
men, to avert the calamity of the
islands falling into the hands of the
French. We shall just quote another
example of the veracity of this gentle-
man. Speaking of the submission of
the island to the French, he adds—.
“ O'est de plein gre et spontanement
qu' on s'offert h nous." That is, k
was surrendered willingly and cheer-
fully. But enough.
As it is perfectly just and proper


that every detail should be given, we
have now to refer to another part of
the admiral’s conduct. One of the
grievances experienced by the French
ships visiting Tahiti was the obstruc-
tions thrown in the way of their licen-
tious pursuits. We will state this
charge in the words of one of Du Petit
Thouar’s officers, in a letter in the
Journal des JDelats, from one who is
described as an officer of the Reine
Blanche, and an eye-witness of the
whole scene —“ The severity of the
English missionaries is sometimes very
inopportune, and they were certainly
the cause of our receiving the visits of
several of the women ; for the admiral
would not have permitted us to receive
them on board if the missionaries had
not ridiculously opposed. This is how
it happened. The officers, w T ho had
landed the day after our arrival, had
brought back with them three or four
women to show them the vessel, and
gratify them with music. In the
evening the officers invited them to
dinner, and only sent them back when
they expressed a wish to that purpose,
which was rather at a late hour. The
missionaries, having learned of s this
adventure, wanted to impose a fine
upon the women for having gone to see
the ship. On the news of this there
were great murmurs on board the fri-
gate. The circumstances were re-
ported to the admiral, who gave orders
that the women might come on board
whenever they pleased. In the even-
ing, more than a hundred women came
on board. From that day a crowd of
women used to come at three o’clock to
hear the music. The officers invited
them to dine, and in the evening they
returned in their canoes.” We need
not enter into any minute details re-
specting the nocturnal orgies and re-
volting debaucheries of Admiral Du
Petit Thouars and his crew. Suffice
it to say that the obstructing of them
was one of the wrongs which led to
the demand for compensation. If the
admiral and his crew were not to be
regarded in the light of people engaged
in spreading the Romish faith, we
should not have alluded to this topic;
but as they were a sort of crusaders—
“ Banditti saints disturbing distant
lands,”
we may subjoin a few remarks. One
gratifying circumstance is, that if
matter of recrimination is sought for,
we shall find no precedent for the con-
duct of the French admiral, employed
in a mission of a religious nature, and
perfectly aware that the eyes of Europe
would be directed towards his beha-
viour. It has been the practice of the
infidel and the Romanist to scoff at
the efforts of Christian philanthropists
to ameliorate the lot of their ignorant
and barbarous fellow-men; and here
we have an apt illustration of the mode
in which these parties conduct them-
selves in their efforts to spread piety
and civilization. Middleton’s Letter
was far from exhausting the parallels
between ancient and modern Roman
polytheism. The present history af-
fords an instructive one. Licentious-
ness and the real presence proceeded
with equal steps, and the rites of
Paphos were identified with the pro-
gress of Popery. It remains only to be
added that all these transactions have
met with the full approbation of Louis
Philippe, who has bestowed on the ad-
miral the cross of the Legion of Honour.
We would suggest, that in addition, he
be created chief of the Arreoys, and
sent back to Polynesia with a cargo of
Jesuits. *
We have thus seen the approved
mode of obtaining the sovereignty over
a defenceless people. Priests are smug-
gled in in opposition to the police re-
gulations of the country, a French
agent or consul demoralizes the peo-
ple by the sale of spirits, the greatest
crime a European residing among
harous races can be guilty of. The
priest and the agent stir up strife, they
are ordered to quit the country, French
honour is insulted, a frigate arrives,
demands a fine, calculated on purpose
to be so high, that it cannot be paid.
* There is something in all this we cannot fathom. Admiral Du Petit Thouars
is the son of a brave officer, who fell gloriously at Aboukir, and his uncle was an
amiable and respected member of the French Institute. Still, we cannot accept
him as a sample of French naval officers. We rather suspect that he and Captain
La Place are not over fastidious, and therefore sometimes useful people, who will
undertake duties which men of nicer feelings would decline.


and as a compensation, the country is
taken possession of under the sove-
reignty of France. This general state-
ment is fully borne out by the conduct
of the French in the Sandwich Islands,
a conduct perfectly parallel to that
pursued in the Society Islands, of
which we will now give some ac-
count.
In a recent number of this magazine,
in an article on Roman Missionaries,* we
gave an outline of the shameful con-
duct of the French priests and naval
officers, in relation to the civil autho-
rities and Protestant missionaries in
Owyhee, we have now to add some
supplementary observations. It will
be remembered that idolatry, with its
tabus, was prohibited before any mis-
sionary had arrived in the Sandwich
Islands, and solely on the ground, that
the old religion hindered the progress
of the nation toward civilization. It
was a purely utilitarian change, and
had regard only to the material inter-
ests of the country. This change,
however, excited the discontent of
many, and three unsuccessful rebel-
lions ensued; hence the worship of
images, and abstinence from certain
kinds of food, were as unequivocal evi-
dences of disloyalty, as the belief in
the real presence and in the supremacy
of the pope, were in the days of Eli-
zabeth and James the First. When
the Christian, or what is the same
thing, the Protestant missionaries ar-
rived from America, they found the
country without a religion; but in a
few years, by the efforts of these ad-
mirable men, a most satisfactory
change was effected ; multitudes were
brought to the truth, and the standard
of morality was raised to a height pre-
viously unknown. During this propi-
tious period every thing proceeded as
the most benevolent could have wished,
when the fair bloomings of Christianity
were nipt by the chilling interference
of priestly political incendiaries. The
history of the interference of these
vicious pests is almost a repetition of
what happened in Tahiti. In the first
place, after the usual manner, certain
priests crept in clandestinely without
ever requesting permission from the
constituted authorities. For some
time they obstinately refused to quit
the island, although the native autho-
rities were alarmed at their presence,
and earnestly urged it. The grounds
of this anxiety were not unreasonable,
but founded upon views which in the
circumstances of the case afforded a high
degree of plausibility. On investigating
the details of the Romish ceremonial,
and comparing it with the Christian
worship to which they had been accus-
tomed, the chiefs argued in the follow r-
ing by no means illogical manner;—
Three rebellions have already taken
place, and in each instance the rallying
word has been the tabus and the wor-
ship of images. This new religion of
Rome tabus food on certain days,
and worships dead men’s bones; it is
a return to our old superstition, and
will again prove the nucleus of treason
and insurrection; as a measure of pre-
caution, therefore, the departure of the
priests was insisted on and ultimately
accomplished. But the unsophisticated
Sandwich Islanders did not need to re-
fuse on mere abstract principles, or
to wait until Gibbon’s prophecy should
be realized, when New Zealand should
produce its Hume or Newton; on the
contrary. Fathers Bachelot, Short and
Walsh, soon proved by their acts the
necessity of their banishment, not on
the grounds of speculative expediency,
but on the palpable basis of decency
and morality.
The greatest curses of the Polyne-
sian Islands are the unrestricted use of
ardent spirits, and the ministration to
the licentious passions of the ships’
crews who visit their shores. To pre-
vent these evils the native government
prohibited women from visiting the
ships, and the sale of spirituous liquors.
In consequence of these salutary re-
gulations two vested interests were
greatly injured, and those who profited
by the abuses were rendered disloyal
and discontented, we venture to say
the only discontented parties in the
country. Of course, worthy Father
Bachelot required support, and let the
truth be told in plain English, he iden-
tified his character with that of the
brothel-keepers and grog-sellers of Ho-
nolulu ; and will our readers believe
it, his banishment, now required by
public decency, was sanctioned by no
less a personage than Du Petit Thouars.
* Article on Romish Missionaries in our number for February, p. 221.


Lest we should be disbelieved, we shall
quote his own w r ords :
“ Honolulu, July 21, 1837.
“ The undersigned commander of the
French frigate La Venus, promises in
the name of M. Bachelot, that he will
seize the first favourable opportunity
■which offers to quit these islands, and
go either to Manilla, Lima, Valparaiso,
or any civilized part of the world ; and
in case such a one is not presented, on
the arrival of the first French man-of-
war which visits these islands, he shall
be received on board, in the meantime
M. Bachelot shall not preach.
“ A. Du Petit Thouars,
“ Post Captain, commanding French frigate,
“ La Venus.”
Concerning this part of the affair,
we do not wish to enter into further
details. Father Bachelot is now no
more, and we will say nothing to in-
jure his memory, unless provoked by
recriminations.
We have now to follow out the
parallel between Tahiti and Hawaii.
In July, 1839, the French frigate
L’Artemise, captain La Place, arrived
at Honolulu, the seat of government
of the Sandwich Islands, under the
same insolent pretext as was used at
Tahiti, that French honour had been
insulted. Here we may express our
wonder;—it appears that ninety per
cent, of the vessels visiting that
port are English, or American, and
in no instance has the honour of
the Union-jack or the star-bespangled
banner suffered wrong, while the infi-
nitesimal commercial interest, trading
under the tricolor, has had its sensi-
tive glory so frequently tarnished. Of
the disgraceful and dishonourable pro-
ceedings to which French honour and
propagandism had recourse, the fol-
lowing will be a sufficient illustration.
Captain La Place enumerates among
other insults, that the Roman religion
had been tarnished with ‘the name of
idolatry, and certain papal priests ex-
pelled from the island.* We have seen
that this expulsion was sanctioned by
Du Petit Thouars himself, how then
could it be a grievance to France ? In
his manifesto, the French commander
requires the government to conform
to the usages of civilized nations, and
with an aifdacity certainly unsurpassed
he asserts, “ there was not even one
that did not permit in its territory the
free toleration of all religions.” What
fatuity could impel a man in Captain
La Place’s situation, even to utter
such a shameful untruth as this ? In
his own country, at the present day,
free toleration does not exist, and the
French government itself makes no
unfrequent practice of expelling reli-
gious teachers, on the very same
grounds on which the government of
the Sandwich Islands acted. A pre-
cedent for the expulsion of Father
Bachelot from Honolulu, was afforded
by the expulsion of the Trappists of
La Meilleraye in 1830, and penal laws
against the Jesuits are still unrepealed
in France, while that power is forcing
these unwelcome guests upon the unof-
fending Polynesians.
What follows is still more astound-
ing ; after proclaiming universal tole-
ration with singular baseness and ef-
frontery, he turns round to insult the
Protestant faith, the religion of the
islands, in the persons of its teachers.
La Place, at the time he issued his
manifesto, also addressed a letter to
the American consul, at Oahu, where,
after warning him of the probability
that hostilities would commence, and
offering American citizens an asylum
on board his ship, he subjoins the fol-
lowing insolent restriction, to which
we invite, in an especial manner, our
reader’s attention :—“ I do not include
in this class the individuals” (that is
American citizens) “ who, although
born it is said in'the United States, make
a part of s the Protestant clergy of the
chief of this archipelago, direct his coun-
sels, influence his conduct, and are thfi
true authors of the insults given by
him to France. For me, they com-
pose a part of the native population,
and must undergo the unhappy con-
sequences of a war which they shall
have brought upon this country.” We
shall not allude to the insult rendered
* With respect to the charge of idolatry, we may mention that in Ceylon a few
years since, the idolatry of the Romanists appeared too gross for the Buddhists of
that island, and “ induced them to prohibit or modify some of their public proces-
sions, which were too obviously of heathen origin.”—See Annual Report of Ame-
rican Board of Foreign Missions, 1841, p. 227.


to the United States in this chivalrous
epistle, but merely direct our reader’s
attention to the spirit of bigotry and
propagandism with which it is replete.
The treaty now enforced at the can-
non’s mouth, deserves to be noted.
By one of the articles, a site for a
Roman Catholic church at Honolulu
is granted, to be ministered by French
priests, that is, by political emissaries
from that nation. Another article is
truly disgraceful. French brandies
are to be admitted on paying a duty
of five per cent. The consequences
of this article soon became apparent;
the French consul, for whose benefit it
was insisted on, soon obtained a mono-
poly of the spirit trade, and caused an
amount of demoralization of which
few but Captain La Place would care
to incur the responsibility. We have
already noticed in the case of Tahiti,
the strange triumph of popery and li-
centiousness, and now in that of Hawaii,
the combined movement of Jesuitism
and intoxication.* Another demand,
enforced by the French captain, was
for 20,000 dollars ; and all being con-
cluded by this act of pillage, unwor-
thy of a buccaneer, the ship took her
departure.
We should have felt happy to have
concluded here, but after the dissection
we have made of the conduct of the
French, however humiliating the task
maybe, we must state as explicitly what
is known respecting very disgraceful
conduct which could have been effec-
tually prevented or censured by the
English government. By the unhappy
appointment of Mr. Charlton as British
consul to the Sandwich Islands, great
mischief was occasioned by the perse-
vering opposition which for many
years he offered to every tendency to-
ward the moral progress of the is-
landers. This individual was in some
respects the Moerenhout of the Sand-
wich Islands, and the parallel holds
true to the extent that he was the
steady partizan of the priests, and the
uniform opponent of the Protestant
missions. Into the details of this me-
lancholy topic we shall not enter, nor
shall we comment on the disgraceful
exhibition of the representative of
Protestant England performing the
inglorious part of abetting the inte-
rests of France and popery. We shall
only quote a few extracts from the
very interesting work of Mr. Jarves,
in the hope of exciting inquiry, and
directing attention to the subject.
Mr. Jarves is an American, and a man
of literary acquirements ; he resided
for four years in the Sandwich Islands
in quest of health ; he arrived preju-
diced against the missionaries, and still
differs from them in religious opinions,
but bears ample testimony to the value
of their labours. The following quo-
tation is from Mr. Jarves : “ But
those low men,” (the profligate Euro-
peans and Americans,) “ who formerly
held unlimited influence over the chiefs,
formed the nucleus of a party—men
whose interests and sensuality were
curtailed by the increasing civilization.
At their head now appeared the English
consul. In the selection of this indi-
vidual, the government, for its own
credit, has been most unfortunate. So
popular had Vancouver and Lord
Byron made that nation, that an offi-
cial agent of generous sentiments and
general intelligence might have secured
an influence which would have has-
tened the progress of civilization, and
conferred honour upon himself. But
this man was of an irritable tempera-
ment, profligate habits, and moderate
abilities. His character for mendacity
soon became proverbial throughout
the nation, and he was considered a
reproach to his own countrymen by
those who had an opportunity of know-
ing him,”— Jarves, p. 245. “ Failing
in defeating the progress of the Ame-
rican mission at this period, he pro-
claimed it his intention to divide the
nation, and create a rival religion, by
the introduction of English Roman
* No sooner had this treaty been concluded, than the French consul (M. Duboit
we believe) imported a cargo of spirits from Valparaiso ; the same vessel brought
the Bishop of Nilopolis, M. Maigret and two other priests. On the arrival of the
liquor. Father Walsh, a man of low habits and violent temper, encouraged its
use both by precept and example. In the Sandwich Islands the term palani
(Jarves, p. 302) signifies brandy, a papist, or Frenchman. So deep has the sense of
wrong sunk into the heart of the nation, that children, when quarrelling, use it
towards each other as a term of reproach.


been promulgated that Christian mar-
riage was proper both for man and
woman; and to put an end to the
polygamy and polyandry of the natives,
penalties were enforced for the viola-
tion of this statute .... Mr.
Catholic priests.”—p. 247. When the
chiefs proposed to enact regulations,
restricting the sale of ardent spirits,
“ the vengeance of the British go-
vernment was threatened by the Eng-
lish consul, if they dared to legislate
for themselves.”—p. 250. The fol-
lowing statement is so shocking, that
an explanation is imperiously de-
manded ; it is mortal either to the re-
putation of the narrator or the actor; —
“ Previous to this enactment it had
Charlton with pompous words endea-
voured to bully the chiefs ; he declared
it necessary for all laws passed by them
to receive the sanction of the king of
England.” —p. 263. In supporting
the Romish interest, Mr. Charlton,
according to Mr. Jarves’s account,
appears to have acted precisely as he
would have done, had he, like Moer-
enhout, been the agent of the obscu-
rantists of the Tuileries. In 1836,
when Father Walsh was ordered to
quit the island, although an objection-
able person on moral grounds, his
cause was espoused by Mr, Charlton,
and subsequently by Lord Edward
Russell, probably at the consul’s insti-
gation. In Captain Russell, a gay
and thoughtless young nobleman, that
party” (the consul’s) “found a man
accessible to their views, and reckless
of their motives.”—pp. 277, 278, 279.
Again in 1837 we find the humiliating
spectacle of the captains of English
and French men-of-war identifying
our national flag with the cause of the
camarilla of the Tuileries. “ On
the 7th July, 1837, Captain Belcher,
of the English surveying ship. Sul-
phur, influenced altogether by the
English consul, demanded the release
of Mr. Short, and threatened, in case
of refusal, to land him by force.”
“ On the 10th, the French frigate
Venus, Captain Du Petit Thouars,
anchored off the port. tie united
with Belcher in a demand for the in-
stant landing ; this not being obtained,
a body of marines from the Sulphur
was sent to the Clementine. Thence es-
corted by them , the priests proceeded
to the shore, the commanders of the
men-of-war attending them to their
residence.”—p. 284. We shall now
see the mode in which Captain Belcher,
according to Mr. Jarves, treated the
Protestant missionaries. In conse-
quence of these events an interview
took place between the two captains
and the king. “ The two commanders
refused to admit the interpretations of
Mr. Bingham, who had been selected
by the king for that purpose., Mr.
Andrews, of the mission, was then
chosen, with their approbation, and
Mr. Bingham retired to the opposite
part of the room. One of the foreign
officers present crowded him back
against the wall; upon stepping aside
to avoid this he received a violent blow
from a movement of the elbow of the
individual who so determinedly in-
sulted him. Another officer drew his
sword partly from its scabbard, and,
slipping up to Mr. Bingham, said me-
nacingly, * Do you see that ?’ Accord-
ing to the testimony of Mr. Short,
Captain Belcher threatened to hang
Mr. Bingham to the yard-arm of his
vessel; though better authority re-
lates that he merely said, if any of his
men were injured in doing their duty,
he would be the first man he should
seize.”—p. 215.
We have selected these shocking
accusations, brought forward, not in
the heat of passion, but by an educated
man residing on the spot, while some
of them occurred, in a country where
the rival parties were ready to detect
the smallest error of an opponent.
For the honour of the country, a full
and uncompromising investigation is
demanded. We think public attention
can be beneficially directed to such
topics, for expressing no opinion on
the present case, we know that a fear-
ful amount of crime is committed by
the adventurers who visit the Pacific
and if one-tenth of what Mr. Jarves
asserts be true, we trust that govern-
ment will take proper steps to wipe
away a national disgrace.
Before concluding this part of the
subject, it may be of use to quote an
example by way of contrast to that
of the French officers, and we do so
the more cheerfully, as it is honour-
able to the government of the United
States.” At Hawaii, the missionaries
preached chastity ; and under the in-
fluence of the Gospel, laws were made
against licentiousness,and especially the


intercourse of women with the ship-
ping, before that time universally car-
ried on. These laws were vehemently
opposed by the emissaries of com-
merce. In one instance, a ship’s crew
came ashore demanding liquor and
women. Neither were to be had.
They returned on board, threatening
violence, and soon afterwards landed
again to execute it. The natives
sent their women to the mountains
for protection, and after searching
the town, with fearful oaths and hor-
rible language, the sailors attacked
the house of the missionary. Being
repulsed, the seamen went on board
the ship and cannonaded the house for
some time. Several scenes like this
occurred at different places, in one of
which a naval officer of the United
States was concerned. Evidence of
this is now in the national archives at
Washington. As the officer was dis-
graced sufficiently at the time, and has
felt the effects of his conduct in his
thing of a question of good taste and
gentlemanly feeling which would be
thrown away upon the parties con-
cerned. We might however inquire
why the French priests have selected
two groups of islands, already Chris-
tian and improving ; there were
surely abundance of unoccupied hea-
then tribes on which they might try
the effects of their religion, and en-
deavour, by honourable means, to ex-
cel their rivals. The London Mis-
sionary Society has laboured for the
welfare of Tahiti for more than thirty
years, and expended upwards of thirty
thousand pounds in its benevolent
and most prosperous exertions to dif-
fuse the blessings of the religion of
the Bible through the Society islands.
The state of society in the Sandwich
Islands was such as could not but be
contemplated with pleasure, not mere-
ly by a Christian, but by any one who
had a heart to be pleased with the
welfare of his fellow-men'. The fol-
professibn, we will not mention his lowing statement, taken from a source
name. (Du Petit Thouars would have ' which no one will accuse of bigotry in
small chance of promotion in the Ame- i such matters, affords a condensed view
rican navy.) Matters came to such a ‘‘ of what this fine group of islands
state, that the United States govern- owe to the labours of the Christian
ment despatched the sloop-of-war, missionary.!
Vincennes, with a letter to the king, “ In May, 1840, twenty years after
concerning the conduct of the Ameri- the missionaries landed at the islands,
can citizens engaged in these affrays. there were in the whole group, nine-
Tbe stand taken by Captain Finch, teennative churches, numbering 18,450
and the example set by him, added to communicants of good standing. Up-
the letter of the president, checked wards of 800 natives have died in full
and humbled the violence of the rio- communion and profession of faith,
ters. At the same time the American There were nearly 6,000 baptized chil-
board published the names of the dren ; and during the year 1840, there
traders and masters of vessels engaged were 12,000 Christian marriages and
in the riots, and also of the American 1,700 baptisms. There were 200
merchants who persisted in sending common schools, with 14,000 scholars,
into that country the prohibited car- of whom 10,000 are able to read,
goes. This completed the triumph of Besides these common schools, there is
the efforts of the natives after good a seminary for the instruction of native
order and morals, and in a few years preachers, and alarge number of board-
the Sandwich Islands were perhaps ing-schools both for boys and girls,
the most temperate colony in the These schools all owe their institution
globe. 1 " to the missionaries, and are either
It will now be necessary that we • taught by the missionaries, or by
should investigate the causes and ulti- persons educated under their care,
mate tendency of these proceedings, Printing in the Hawaian language is
and the light in which they should extensively done. It was begun by
be regarded by Protestants, the friends the missionaries, and is still carried
of civil and religious liberty. In a on under the care and patronage of
case including so many iniquities, it the American board. During the
is perhaps unnecessary to say any year 1840, there were printed and :a
. U ■ V i.. f-U
* North American Review, July, 1842. f Ibid, July, 1842, p. 194,


bound in that language, upwards of
100,000 copies of books treating upon
all subjects; arithmetic, geography,
general knowledge and science, the
general laws and local regulations of
the government, as well as the Scrip-
tures, and works more strictly theo-
logical. Several stone meeting-houses
have been built by the natives, and
good houses are common. Roads and
bridges are fast improving. A con-
stitution and a complete code of laws
are preparing under the superinten-
dence of an American gentleman, who
was formerly a missionary, but re-
signed his office, in order that the
mission might be entirely disconnected
from the civil power.” We may now
ask what right has France, with her
infidel officers and intriguing priests,
to disturb and interrupt the steady
progress of the Gospel of morality,
civilization, and commerce, among
the most interesting and improvable
of the Oceanic family ? The commer-
cial interests of France in the Pacific
are contemptible compared with those
of England and America. And by
what strange inversion of morality is
it that France is incessantly insulted,
while England and America have never
complained of the native governments,
but on the contrary, the latter has
condemned the disgraceful conduct
of its own subjects ? However,
such things may be overdone, and
the vile associations with which the
spread of Romanism in Polynesia is
now irretrievably connected, may be
rendered a powerful weapon in the
hands of Protestants.
The matter may be viewed in ano-
ther and very important light. Ori-
ginally the priests were expelled from
Tahiti and Hawaii, in virtue of a law
which permitted no one to settle on the
islands without the permission of the
government. Now, not to speak of the
absurdity of the interference of the
French in this matter (the interference
of a government which punishes any
twenty Protestants who dare to hold a
prayer meeting), one should think that
when toleration for popery was secured
all cause of complaint was removed.
Had the priests been then left to make
the best of their cause we should have
thought little of the matter, and felt
no fear for the result, a healthy, and
intellectual, and scriptural faith would
infallibly have carried the day against
the idle superstitions of our modern
polytheism. But an attack was made
on the liberty of conscience, when the
influence of a government of thirty
millions of men was thrown into the one
scale, while the other contained only
the contributions and influence of an
humble Christian association. The
harassing vexations to which the
native government were exposed, the
pillaging of their resources, the forcing
upon them of immoral and ruinous
practices, as in the compulsory intro-
duction of brandy, and the insults
offered to the American missionaries
in Hawaii were all so many efforts to
ruin their labours, and to encourage
the intrigues of their opponents.
There is another grave considera-
tion connected with this subject well
deserving our notice. Nothing is
more certain than that the population
of the Polynesian regions has been
diminishing with a fearfully rapid ratio.
The present inhabitants of Tahiti and
Rimeo amount to about twelve thou-
sand, or nearly a seventieth of what their
population was in the time of Cook.
It is certain that this progress towards
extinction, whose rapid approach had
alarmed even the natives themselves,
received a check when they embraced
Christianity. For a few years after
this beneficent event no numerical in-
crease was apparent, for this obvious*
reason that great numbers of the more
aged had no families : at last, however,
the births began to exceed the deaths,
the population is increasing, and we
have no hesitation in stating our opi-
nion that the very existence of those
nations is owing to the introduction of
the Gospel among them. The causes
of extinction, we have already stated,
were spirituous liquors and vice, the
one destroyed the existing race, and
the other rendered the future inex-
istent. In Tahiti, under the French
rule, we fear even more than the spread
of superstition awaits the unfortunate
race, already Moerenhout, the French
consul, is letting loose a deluge of in-
toxicating liquors upon a doomed race,
and a garrison of two hundred men
will soon arrive to demoralize the
islands. In short, the French consul
and admiral on the one hand, with
their priests on the other, making this
irruption upon an inoffensive people


reminds us of Milton’s account of the
intrusion of death and sin into the
primeval abode of our race.
The causes which have led to these
strange transactions are not difficult to
discover. No one will be simple
enough to believe that piety or reli-
gious motives actuated the French
government in these crusades to the
antipodes. We would as soon expect
that the Religious Tract Society should
publish a cheap edition of Volney’s
Catechism. In fact, it is purely a poli-
tical speculation in which any other
form of religion would have been em-
ployed as readily as the Roman, pro-
vided it proved itself an equally effica-
cious instrument to bring about the
ends sought for. We believe there
are two objects more particularly
aimed at, and also that the forcing of
priests and brandy on the islands of the
Pacific is only a small part of a very
comprehensive scheme. One object
of this propagandism is what may be
called a dynastic one. We believe
there is but little attachment to the
Orleans family in France, while it
is viewed with rooted aversion by that
great part of the nation which calls
itself liberal—and in truth, Louis
Philippe occupies a lonely position
more removed from the sympathies of
his people than Louis the Eighteenth
and Charles the Tenth, As some
party is better than none the present
attempt is to obtain the adhesion of the
priest party, and of course along with
it the friendship of Rome and Vienna.
In this point of view it is strangely
instructive to take a retrospect of the
events in France since the reign of
Charles the Tenth. That unfortunate
and most foolish prince was driven
from his throne for attempting a frac-
tion of what his able successor has
accomplished. No part of Charles’
conduct was more unpopular than his
devotion to an intolerant and bigoted
priesthood, and who could have be-
lieved that a few years could scarcely
have elapsed before his successor had
transplanted to the Tuileries vigorous
shoots of obscurantism from Munich
and Vienna.
This system . of propagandism is
equally active in France as in Poly-
nesia, and in the former country it
chiefly manifests itself in hostility to
the Protestants: and it is a sad reflec-
tion that the religious liberties of that
most respectable part of the nation
were far safer and better respected
under Charles the Tenth than under
Louis Philippe. Since the three days,
as they are called, the condition of the
Protestants has been considerably
deteriorated ; they have been exposed
to ceaseless annoyances, if they wish to
build a new place of worship every
obstruction is offered, and if they ven-
ture to meet for social worship they
are fined or imprisoned. One instru-
ment of oppression has been in opera-
tion since 1834. A law aimed at poli-
tical associations was then passed, and
one of its articles prohibited, under
the penalty of fine and imprisonment,
the association of more than twenty
persons. Two judicious deputies,
M.M. Roger and Dubois, proposed
that a clause should be inserted ex-
cepting religious meetings. Instead of
adopting this honest and common
sense suggestion M. Persil, the minis-
ter of justice, solemnly declared that
the law did not relate to religious
meetings ; but the truth is, that ever
since the enactment came into force it
has been most unscrupulously employed
putting down every kind of Protes-
tant religious association. Not only
have the religious liberties of the Pro-
testants been curtailed, but attempts
have been made to alter the constitu-
tion of their churches with the view
of rendering it all but impossible to
erect new ones. All this is done by a
government which sends men-of-war
to the antipodes under the pretext of
vindicating the rights erf conscience.
There is also another object to be
gained by this propagandism, as we
have stated the whole affair is merely
a political speculation, and indeed this
is so far from being disavowed,is openly
and boldly proclaimed, M. de Came,
a member of the Chamber of Depu-
ties, and a zealous propagandist, in-
forms us that the maintenance of Ca-
tholic influence in the East is insepa-
rably united to the influence of France.
Nor has it been or can it ever be other-
wise ; the Romish religion is essentially
political; its head is the monarch of a
second-rate kingdom, and its members
everywhere must profess allegiance to
an Italian prince as well as to their
native sovereign. In this respect the
contrast with Protestant missions is


remarkable ; they are merely associa-
tions of Christians ; they defray their
own expenses, manage their own affairs,
and the government takes no cogni-
zance of their acts, and extends to
their missionaries no other protection
than that due to British subjects;
and further, as each denomination
supports its own missions, it is suffi-
ciently obvious that by the very nature
of the system there can be no political
intrigues, nor any subserviency to the
aims of government. On the con-
trary, the Romish monastic orders
have ever been employed both by
France and Spain with political views.
In Spanish America the conquerors
destroyed the national spirit and
ruined the political systems of the
Indian empires; but the business was
only half done, until the intellect
of the natives had been prostrated,
and the memory of their ancient in-
dependence effaced by the lessons of
the priests. It is, however, in Canada,
while under the French, that this is
best seen ; for that province, in contact
with the frontiers of the English co-
lonies, gave ample scope for the ac-
tivity and dexterity of the Jesuits.
During the period we allude to these
fathers were as essential for the de-
fence of Canada as its fortifications
and artillery. The great use of
the Jesuits was, to bring over the
Indian tribes to the French alliance,
to detach as many Indians as possible
from the English interest. During
the period w r e allude to it might be
said of the worthy fathers what is said
of the Brahmins of India, that there
was no mischief or intrigue set agoing
of which they were not the prime
movers. Kalm, the intelligent Swedish
traveller, who visited Canada in 1749,
describes these propagandists very
correctly. “ The Jesuits,” he says,
“ are of great use to their king ; for
they are frequently able to persuade
the Indians to break their treaty with
the English ; make war upon them ;
to bring their furs to the French, and
not to permit the English to come
among them. But there is some
danger attending these attempts ; for
when the Indians are in liquor, they
sometimes kill the missionaries who
live among them, calling them spies,
or excusing themselves by saying that
the brandy had killed them.” In the
history of the Jesuits in Canada we
must say that the accounts published
by members of their own order are
complete tissues of falsehood, even
when the narrator speaks from per-
sonal knowledge. We shall give a
specimen of the Canadian Jesuits.
Charlevoix, himself a Jesuit, and
probably residing in Canada at the
time, gives the following martyrology
of Father Rasle, who was killed .by
Massachuset’s men ; “ Father Charle-
voix tells us that the Jesuit was shot
at the foot of the cross along with
seven Indians, who offered their bodies
as a protection for his. Thus died
this kind shepherd, giving his life for
his sheep ; thus was a priest treated
in his mission at the foot of the cross.”
This is a specimen of what is to be
found in every number of Annals of
the Faith. The following is the cor-
rect account: —The good father was
incessantly stirring up the Abenaki
Indians to make war upon the English.
When his papers were examined after
his death, it was found that he was in
correspondence with M. De Vau-
dreuil, the governor of Canada, for
the purpose of raising up trouble to
the New Englanders. As to dying at
the cross, so far from it, he retired
to his wigwam, and in the first place,
he endeavoured to kill an English
captive in the cabin, a boy of fourteen
years ; he shot him through the thigh,
and stabbed him in several places,
although he afterwards recovered.
An officer forced open the wigwam,
and shot the father through the head.
We have quoted this as an illustration
of the occupations of these propa-
gandists, and the usual character of
their martyrdoms. The same system
of unblushing falsehood is in use at
the present day; and the priests in
Tahiti write home to their superiors
for publication after the following
style:—that the English missionaries
assemble the people in their chapel,
and instead of ’preaching exhibit, by a
magic lantern, the pope and the Catholic
priests burning the Protestants in a
furnace.
That enormous system of fraud
and imposture the Propaganda has
existed in France under various
forms and with various fortunes
since 1635. At present it is in
part supported by government grants.


and in part by contributions. The
income of this association amounted
in 1841 to about £142,000, collected
throughout the papal countries. In
1841 the contribution from Ireland
amounted to nearly £B,OOO. Scot-
land, however, is in a bad case; she
is fairly in partibus iufidelium, and so
far from contributing, required a
grant of about one thousand pounds to
remove the woeful spiritual destitution
of the descendants of the covenanters.
That this is a political as well as a
Romish association is admitted by its
friends as well as its opponents; and
under this important fact some very
serious considerations arise. A vast
number of missionaries are sent to the
Mediterranean and to the east, and all
of course sent from France, and of
course so many political agents for
that country. Such being the case,
we would suggest to our generous but
mistaken countrymen, whether it is in
good taste, or consistent with unsullied
loyalty to contribute along with a
foreign government for purposes be-
yond the propagation of religion. It
is humiliating to be gulled in this man-
ner ; and why do they, if they wish
to spread their faith, not insist that
the directors of the plan should reside
in Dublin, and thus place their loyalty
beyond suspicion. The occupation of
Tahiti is an event of no political or
commercial importance: a more value-
less colony can scarcely be conceived.
It is not so with the Sandwich Islands;
they occupy a midway station between
China and America; they afford an
asylum to the South-sea whalers and
vessels passing between Asia and
America. It is needless to say that
their importance will rise yearly, in
proportion as the China trade in-
creases. The occupation of these
islands by France would, in the event
of war, give her great influence in the
Pacific; it would be to her what the
Mauritius was with respect to the
Indian Ocean—a nest of privateers.
The government of the United States
are aware of the importance of the
subject, and we suspect their efforts
will rescue the Sandwich Islands.
But there is another circumstance
deserving of notice; it is obvious that
no Briton can in any way abet the
efforts of France; he may remain
inactive, but he cannot exert himself
against his country. Now, the fol-
lowing circumstance deserves to be
remembered: Ireland sends a contri-
bution of eight thousand pounds per
annum to the French Propaganda;
and these funds have furnished and
sent out Father Short, and Father
Walsh, both Irishmen, two inde-
fatigable agents in the interest of
France in the Sandwich Islands; or
in other words, their loyalty to their
queen, and patriotism towards their
native land, is as dust in the balance,
compared with their zeal for the pope,
or their devotion to the cause of
Prance. We shall conclude with a
single remark—lt is possible that the
doings in Tahiti may bring more harm
than good to the Roman Catholic cause.
For many years the dissenters of Eng-
land and Scotland have been the sup-
porters of the political claims of the
Romanists. The cause of Tahiti is
taken up by the dissenters; and may
not a Protestant re-action in England
prove too high a price for a triumph
of popery at the antipodes ?
