

FltkOAtZitZ. FihHra.
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND COMPANY,
ESTABLISHED 1825, BY ACT OF PARLIAMENT, 6 GEO. IV. C. 39, AND INCORPORATED BY ROYAL CHARTER.
JOSEPH CRIPPS, Esq.,
M.P., Governor.
WILLIAM BURNIE, Esq., Deputy Governor.
EUrcctot'o.
JOSEPH BOND, Esq.
THOMAS HARRISON, Esq.
JOHN MITCHELL, Juk., Esq.
WILLIAM GILL PAXTON, Esq.
BRICE PEARSE, Esq.
WILLIAM BORRADAILE, Esq.
JOHN CATTLEY, Esq.
BARTHOLOMEW JEFFERY, Esq.
FELIX C. LADBROKE, Esq.
Gen. Sir R. M'FARLANE, K.C.B.
HARRY MACKENZIE, Esq.
EDWARD MARSHALL, Esq.
RICHARD DAWKINS, Esa.
JOHN PEARSE, Esq.
Sir F. HASTINGS DOYLE, Bart.
EDWARD FLETCHER, Esq.
GEORGE ROUGEMONT, Esq.
T. SHEPPARD, Esq., M.P.
fluUitore.
JAMES ALEXANDER, Esq.
SAMUEL MILLS, Esq.
1 WILLIAM WILKINSON, Esq.
SAMUEL R. EWEN, Esq., Secretary,
The Island of Van Diemen’s Land is a British Colony, situate between 40° 20 m and 43° 40 m south latitude, and 144° 30 ra
and 148° 30 m east longitude; its extent from north to south is about 200 miles, and from east to west about 160 miles,
containing an area about equal to that of Ireland, namely 15,000,000 superficial square acres. The general character of
Van Diemen’s Land is hilly and mountainous, with many large tracts of open country, and with others heavily timbered;
the soil is in general good and productive; and the climate salubrious, not being subject to the extremes of heat and cold;
the spring commences in September, the summer in December, the autumn in March, and the winter in June.
The productions are sheep, cattle, horses, pigs, and poultry. Wool, corn, and bark are the chief articles of export;
a considerable source of profit is also derived from the whale fisheries on the coasts and neighbouring islands. The colony
is under a Lieutenant Governor and Legislative Council; the taxes are trifling, and there are no tithes. The principal rivers
are the Derwent in the south, on which the capital, Hobart Town, is situate, and the Tamar in the north, on which
Launceston, the second town in population and importance, is built; besides these there are other rivers and streams which
intersect the island in every direction.
THE VAN DIEMEN’S LAND COMPANY’S LOCATIONS OF LAND CONSIST OF
100,000 Acres at Woolnorth, in one continuous tract.
10,000 Acres, the estimated quantity of good land i" the three islands, viz: —Robins’ Island, Walker’s Island,
and Trefoil Island.
20,000 Acres at Circular Head, and the coast adjoining.
50,000 Acres, being the tract of land through which the road passes from Emu Bay to the Hampshire and
Surrey Hills.
10,000 Acres at the Hampshire Hills, in one continuous tract.
150,000 Acres at the Surrey Hills, in one continuous tract.
10,000 Acres at the Middlesex Plains, in one continuous tract.
Total .. 350,000 Acres.
PROPOSALS TO FARMERS
AND OTHER EMIGRANTS, POSSESSED OF SMALL CAPITALS,
AS TENANTS.
1. The Directors of the Van Diemen’s Land Company having lately received very favourable accounts of their
live stock of sheep, pigs, cattle, and horses, —improved by the best breeds from Europe,—are now enabled to hold out
encouragement to emigrants and others to settle as tenants upon the Company’s lands: and for this purpose a portion of
the extensive location from Emu Bay to the Surrey and Hampshire Hills, in the interior of the Island, comprising 128,000
acres, or 200 square miles, has been reserved.
2. The Surrey and Hampshire Hills are situated about twenty miles inland south of Emu Bay, and about forty miles
south-west of Circular Head, a promontory on the north coast, where the Company’s chief agent resides.
3. The soil of these hills is of good quality, being rich enough for grain of any kind in ordinary seasons, though oats,
from the prevalence of summer frosts, sometimes fail. Turnips, peas, beans, and cabbages, yield a pretty certain return.
The soil consists of a hazel loam, with a tendency to clay, upon a bottom of mixed stone and clay, or firm clayey gravel.
The face of the country is very uneven, and intersected by innumerable streams of water, suitable for saw and flour mills;
indeed, a tract of 100 acres can scarcely be found without its run of water. The land is very irregularly covered with
timber, as there are open plains, varying in extent from 300 to 1,500 acres.
4. The stringy bark and gum trees are in most parts plentiful, and serve for the carpenter and for fences. The
qualities of the indigenous myrtle have not yet been ascertained, but it is believed to be a good furniture wood, and for
the inside work of houses.
5. Lime-stone has been found at these hills; and stone of a rough but durable nature, fit for common buildings,
is plentiful.
6. Though the climate of these hills is humid, fogs are almost unknown ; and though high winds commonly prevail,
their force is a good deal mitigated by the height of the trees. Snow falls in winter to the depth of a foot or more,
but never lies long, as the heavy rains soon carry it off. Summer frosts are frequent, and sometimes destructive to
potatoes and tender plants. Still the summer is generally so sunny and hot, as to ripen the harvest; and the fact, that
the Company’s surveyors and their attendants were exposed for a whole year, in tents, to the vicissitudes of the seasons,
without any bad effects, proves the climate to be salubrious.


Working bullocks, each
. . ti
0
0
Cart or dray
. . 15
0
0
Plough
. . 3
10
0
Pair of harrows
. . 1
15
0
Bullocks’ chains, bows, and yokes .
. . 3
10
0
Various small implements, about
. . 10
0
0
7. The herbage of the district, though too coarse for Merino and fine wool sheep, affords, when burnt, good
pasture for more hardy sheep; as the Cheviot, Cotswold, Leicester, and cross breeds with the Merino, thrive well upon it,
and their wool finds a ready sale. After burning in spring, the natural grass grows rapidly to a considerable height,
and some of the marshes produce a fine blady grass in great profusion, and of excellent quality.
8. Cattle thrive at these hills even on the native pastures; and when managed on the English system will,
doubtless, do still better. The young stock there is of a very good kind, the original cows having been selected from the
best in the Colony, and the original bulls, with the exception of one of the Ayrshire breed, having been imported of the
pure Durham short-horned breed.
9. Blood horses succeed well in the district, as do the Cleveland breed, and both kinds are much sought after.
10. Wild kangaroos are abundant, and form a palatable food; their skins are worth about 9 d. each. Emu, quail.
snipes, and wild ducks are occasionally met with.
11. Working bullocks are fast going out of use near Hobart Town and Launceston, their places being taken by
horses, for which there is a progressive demand for the plough, team, and saddle. Hence a corresponding demand for oats,
which will be very beneficial to the hill districts, if the crops there be not cut off by frost, the light soils of other districts
not being fit for the growth of that grain.
12. The settled districts of Van Diemen’s Land are particularly adapted to fine wool sheep; and consequently sheep
are rapidly multiplying, and cattle diminishing there; mutton, therefore, is plentiful, and beef scarce, though it bears a
highly remunerating price. Stall-fed beef is always in demand in Van Diemen’s Land, being retailed by the butchers at
from 6d. to B d. per lb., whilst mutton and grass-fed beef are retailed at 3 \d. per lb. But 3d. per lb. would amply remunerate
a tenant at the hills.
13. Van Diemen’s Land being the only extensive region with a temperate climate in that part of the globe, pork and
beef could be readily cured on the hills, and with due attention, would soon supersede the salt provisions now imported from
Ireland. Pork, either salt or fresh, and bacon and hams, always command a ready sale; fresh pork fetches from s d. to 9 d.
per lb., and bacon and hams fetch from KM. to Is. 4 d. per lb., and even higher.
14. The same observations apply to dairy produce, which bears a very high price in Van Diemen’s Land, and
must continue to do so, because the old districts are generally ill suited to cattle, and daily become more closely stocked
with sheep. Cheese fetches from 9d. to Is., and fresh butter from Is. 8c?. to 2s. 6d. per lb.
15. The establishment of breweries at the hills, may probably hereafter be a profitable investment of capital.
16. The Company’s lands will be let to tenants, in plots of one square mile, or 640 acres; or in greater or smaller
allotments, at two shillings per acre, according to the capital and means of the tenant; the farms will not, however, be invariably
arranged in square blocks, but will vary in shape according to the natural boundaries of the country.
17. The rent, which for 640 acres is £64 per annum, is, for the first two years and a half, to be expended by the
tenant in fencing, or in other permanent improvements; but all subsequent rent is to be paid in cash.
18. Leases will be granted for twenty-one years to the first twenty settlers from England, who will have the preference
in the choice of location. Leases to subsequent settlers will not be granted for a longer period than fourteen years.
19. Cottages in Van Diemen’s Land may be erected at a moderate expense; but small portable cottages from England
may preferably be taken out at a trifling cost.
20. Assistance and advice as to the growth and sale of produce will, at all times, be given by the Company’s
officers, and the chief agent will be ready to make the best arrangements in his power for the general benefit of the whole
body of tenants.
21. Tenants may be supplied by the Company Ui simes, on moderate terms; and also, on laying down a certain
number of acres under the plough, with needful loans of seed-corn, clover-seed, and grass-seed, to be repaid out of their first
crops ; and likewise with live stock, at reasonable prices, one moiety whereof is to be paid at a credit of twelve months,
and the other moiety in acceptances for such periods as shall be agreed upon.
22. Timber carriages, to assist in clearing away' trees, will be lent gratis to tenants of forest lands.
23. The services also of the Company’s medical officers may always be obtained upon very reasonable terms.
24. When the population shall have sufficiently increased, schools will be established, and artisans will be settled.
25. Tenants will be received, on landing in the Colony, by the Company’s agents, who are interested in pro-
tecting them.
26. The Company reserve to themselves the right of making roads and bridges wherever they may consider it necessary
for the good of the general body of tenantry.
27. The passage from England to Van Diemen’s Land usually occupies from four to five months. The expense
depends upon the accommodation and comforts provided, and varies from £l6 to £25 each for steerage adult passengers;
and less in proportion for children.
28. According to late despatches, supplies may be obtained in the colony at the under-mentioned prices, for
cash, viz ;
£ s. d.
Meat, 4d. per lb.; flour, 2d. to 2id. ditto; sugar, 2Jd. to 4d. ditto; tea, 2s. to 35.; soap, 7 d. to B d.
29. From the foregoing data, the tenant may calculate the cost of maintaining a family, until such time as he can
reckon upon returns from his own cultivation; and, if industrious and possessed of from £3OO to £5OO, he may undertake
a farm with a reasonable hope of a sufficient maintenance from his own produce after the second year, and with confidence
of ultimate success, more especially if he has children to assist him.
30. The allowances which the Government requires to be issued to a convict servant, are as follows, viz
10J lbs. bread or flour.
7 lbs. fresh meat.
7 oz. of sugar and 7 oz. of roasted wheat or coffee, or 14 pints of milk, or
14 pints of table beer. > per week.
3J oz. of soap.
2 oz. of salt.
Besides which, the convict’s clothing costs about £6 a year in the colony. On these terms convict labour is generally
advantageous to the settler, and convicts, under proper management, commonly conduct themselves tolerably well.


31. The artisans who would meet with employment at good and steady wages, so soon as the settlement advances,
a ,. e —blacksmiths, carpenters, coopers, sawyers, shoemakers, boat-builders, millers, tanners, brewers, maltsters, wheelwTights,
bricklayers, masons, shipwrights, brickmakers, horse-breakers, and saddlers.
32. Applications from persons intending to emigrate, are to be made personally, or by letter, post paid, to
Me. SAMUEL R. EWEN,
At the Van Diemen’s Land Company’s Office,
55, OLD BROAD STREET, LONDON.
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND COMPANY.
Established 1825, by Act 6th George IVth, Cap. 39, and Incorporated by Royal Charter.
TO EMIGRANTS PROCEEDING TO THE AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.
NOTICE is hereby given, that the Directors of the Van Diemen’s Land Company are ready to supply from their Establishment
at Circular Head, situated in Bass’ Straits, on the North Coast of Van Diemen’s Land, in 41° 15 South Latitude and
145" 20' East Longitude, being the nearest Port to South Australia; LIVE STOCK of the purest Breeds, consisting of Saxon,
Nigretti, Leicester, Cotswold, and Cheviot, RAMS; also Durham BULLS, and Cleveland STALLIONS. Application to be
made personally or by Letter, Post Paid, to
SAMUEL R. EWEN,
SECRETARY.
Van Diemen’s Land Company’s Office,
56, Old Broad Street.
G. Wood fall, Printer, Angel Court, Skinner Street, London.


