

&to
3>(7
FRO POSED MARSDEN CROSS-
BY ARCHDEACON WALSH.
/ [Extract from the New Zealand Hekald,
Saturday, October 14, 1903.]
On Christmas Day, 1814, at Rangihoua,
a Bay of Islands, the first Christian service
was held in New Zealand. The time I think
\ has com© when an event of such deep
and fair-reaching importance should be mark-
\ ed by some fitting memorial, and it has
been suggested that this take the form of a
stone cross to be erected on the hallowed
spot.
At the invitation of Ruatara, an adven-
turous young chief of the Bay of Islands
who had made several voyages in English
ships, the Rev. Samuel Marsden, chaplain
to the penal settlement at Parramatta),
N.S.W., determined on the hazardous en-
terprise of trying to introduce the gospel
message to the natives of New Zealand.
It took a good deal of time and persever-
ence, however, before the Church Mission-
ary Society and their friends in England
would consent to give any support to this
undertaking. There was a strong feeling
both at Home and in the colonies against
the Maoris, who were looked upon as ir-
reclaimahl© barbarians, and this feeling had
been lately intensified by the massacre of
the crew of the Boyd, which occurred in
Whangaroa Harbour in 1809.
Mr. Marsden, however, persevered, and
in the middle of 1814 he was able to send
Mr. Kendall and Mr. Hall as a sort of re-
connoitring party to ascertain the temper of
the people and the practicability of estab-
lishing a mission among them. The emis-
saries arrived in due time, and though not
a little startled at the wiM and savage ap-
pearance and custom® of the natives, yet
the kind welcome they received soon dis-
pelled any thoughts of personal fear, and
after spending six weeks among them they
felt no hesitation as to their future course.
On their return to Sydney they were ac-
companied by Ruatara, Hongi, and Koro-
koro, when their report filled Mr. Marsden’®
anxious heart with gratitude and joy.
In selecting a site for the mission station
Mr. Marsden was of course limited to the
territory of these friendly chiefs, which
extended along the northern shore of the
Bay of Islands The situation was con-
venient and central, and its only drawback
was its proximity to the settlement of Koro-
rareka (now Russell), a port of call for
trading vessels, and already the happy hunt-
ing ground of runaway sailors and escaped


convicts, whose ponduct soon earned for it
the title of the Alsatia) of the South Pacific.
All preliminaries having been satisfac-
torily arranged Mr. Marsden purchased a
small brig named the Active at his own
risk, and sailed for New Zealand on the
28th of November, 1814, taking with him
the three missionaries whom be proposed
to settle, viz., Messrs. Kendall, King, and
Hall, with their wives and families, the
three returning chiefs, and a gentleman
named Nicholas, who published a most
interesting account of the voyage and of
his experiences in the country. On the
15th of December they sighted New Zea-
land, and rounding the North Cape made
their way down the coast towards their des-
tination. They were met at several places
by bodies of natives, who came off in their
canoes, and at one point they went ashore,
where Mr. Marsden and Mr. Nicholas ac-
tually spent the night in the camp of the
chief who had taken the lead in the affair
of the Boyd, and who was at the time at
open enmity with the tribe amongst whom
he proposed to settle the mission. The
marvellous intrepidity of the man so im-
pressed the savages that they not only
promised to forbear from molesting the
settlement, but they agreed to make peace
with their traditional enemies of the Bay
of Islands.
A fair wind soon brought the party to
their destination, and the Active came to
anchor on December 22, in a beautiful
little crescent-shaped bay, right “ under
the guns” of Ruatara’s Pa. Mr. Marsden’s
name was already well known, and the
welcome they received from the natives
was intended to show their respect and
regard, but the form which it took—a pre-
tended attack on the ship by 10 large war-
canoes, full of armed men—was enough to
strike terror into the most stout-hearted
of those who were acquainted with Maori
usage. One can easily imagine how
the spirits of those young missionaries
would sink within them at the thought that
they were about to be left to live alone
and unprotected among those wild and law-
less savages.
The. first Sunday happened to be Clirist-
mais Day, and the first sight that greeted
Mr. Marsden’s eyes as he went on deck
in the morning was the British flag flying
over the pa. On going ashore he : found
that Ruatara had rigged up a church in, a
sort of rude imitation of what he had seen
at Parramatta. About half an acre was
enclosed with a fence and in the centre a
piece, of a canoe was fixed end up in the


ground, with a little desk in front, to re-
present a pulpit. Some old canoes turned
upside down and covered with native mats
were arranged as seats for the Europeans,
the Maoris being satisfied with a seat on the
ground. Here amid their strange surround-
ings was held the first Christian service in
New Zealand.
Mr. Marsden’s own account of the won-
derful scene is as follows:—“When we
landed we found Korokoro, Ruatara, and
Hongi, dressed in regimentals, given them
by Governor Macquarie, with their men
drawn up ready to march into the enclosure
to attend Divine service. We entered, and
were placed on the seats on each side of
the pulpit. Korokoro marched his men
in, and placed them on my right hand
behind the Europeans ; Ruatara placed his
on the left. The inhabitants of the town,
with the women and children, and a number
of other chiefs, formed a circle round the
whole. A very solemn silence prevailed. I
rose and began the service by singing the
Old Hundredth Psalm, and I felt my very
»u, melt within me when I viewed my
congregation, and considered the state they
were in. After reading the service I preach-
from St. Luke ii. 10 : ‘ Behold, I bring you
glad tidings of great joy.’ The natives
told Ruatara that thev could not under-
stand what I meant. He told them not to
mind now, for that they would understand
it by and by, and that he would explain
my meaning as far as he could. When the
teetrvice was over we returned on board,
much gratified, and with the strongest
persuasion that the time was at hand when
the glory of the Lord would be revealed
to these poor benighted heathen, and that
the labours of those who remained on the
island would be crowned and blessed with
success.”
The whole scene comes up irresistibly
to anyone who visits the place and is
acquainted with its history. There is no
difficulty in identifying the spot. The
“half acre of ground” is the only level
space in the neighbourhood—a little shingle
flat above the beach where the party must
have landed. To the left is the pa—the
“town” as they sometimes called it—with
its ditches and terraces still clear and dis-
tinct, though the houses and palisading
have, with its thousand inhabitants, long
since disappeared, while to the right is the
sloping ground afterwards occupied by the
dwellings and cultivations of the mission-
aries, the levelled sites of the buildings
being still plainly traceable. Local tradi-
tion states that the spot occupied by the


pulpit was sheltered by a spreading pohu-
tukawa tree, but this beautiful landmark
was unfortunately destroyed by fire many
years ago.
A block of 62 acres extending inland
from the beach was purchased by the
C.M.S. as a site for the settlement, and
houses were soon built and gardens
brought under cultivation. On the mission
being removed to Kerikeri, however, it
was no longer required, and was sold with
the exception of one acre which had origin-
ally been reserved ds a church site and
burial ground. This piece extends down
to the beach, and includes at least a por-
tion of the ground enclosed by Ruatara for
the Christmas service. Here of course is
the site for the memorial.
Through the generosity of Mr. G. W.
Childs, of Philadelphia, the Bishop of Sam
Francisco was able to place some years
ago near the “ Golden Gate” a gigantic
monument, known as “ The Prayer Book
Cross," to mark the spot on which Sir
Francis Drake’s chaplain held the first
Anglican service on the Pacific coast of
America. It is not likely that we should
be able to afford a monument on the same
scale, but we could easily manage a sub-
stantial stone cross of sufficient dimensions
to be a conspicuous landmark plainly visible
from the ships entering the Bay of Islands.
The scale of the cross would of course
depend on the funds available, but the ob-
ject being one thait appeals so strongly
to every Christian in New Zealand, there
should lie no difficulty in obtaining a sum
sufficient to erect a really worthy monu-
ment. I have already received a promise
of £lOO and three promises of £5 each on
the condition that the memorial be in the
. shape of a stone cross to be erected on, or as
near as possible to, the spot on which the
service wa)s held, and that the matter be
taken in hand without delay. The Bishop
of Auckland hais given his cordial approval
to the movement, and I hereby invite con-
tributions from all those who are dwelling
under the shelter of the great tree that by
the providence of God has so marvellously
grown from the grain of mustard seed
sown over 90 years ago.
Subscriptions mav be naid either to the
Bishop of Auckland, to Mr. W. S. Cochrane,
Diocesan Office, Shortland-street, Auck-
land. or to me, Philip Walsh, Archdeacon
of Waimate.
Waimate North, October 4, 1905.
