

PROPOSAL TO EXTEND THE NATIONAL LIBRARY
EVIDENCE SUBMITTED BY THE COMMONWEALTH LIBRARIAN (H.L. WHITE)
TO THE PUBLIC WORKS COMMITTEE - FRIDAY. 2ND SEPTEMBER, 1949.
Origin of the
National Library
The need for a separate building in Canberra
for the National Library was recognised by Parliament
while the Seat of Government was still in Melbourne.
This reflected general approval of the Library
Committee r s policy enunciated in its early reports.
In 1903 it reported to Parliament as follows:-
"The Committee has realised that the duties
intrusted to it by the Houses of the Federal
Parliament are of the utmost importance, as
it has looked forward to the probability of
the establishment of a Federal Public Library,
of which the Parliamentary Library will be
only one department."
and again in 190?
"The Library Committee is keeping before it the
ideal of building up, for the time when Parlia-
ment shall be established in the Federal
Capital, a great Public Library on the lines
of the world-famed Library of Congress at
Washington; such a Library,, indeed, as shall
be worthy of the Australian Nation; the home
of the literature, not of a State, or of a
period, but of the world, and of all time;
a centre to which may gravitate, as years pass,
manuscripts and other documents and records
of all kinds whatever, relating to the dis-
covery, colonization, history and develop-
ment of Australia and its adjacent regions,
to which public funds and private benefactors
may all contribute. While the Library will be
of a general and comprehensive character,
especial attention has been paid, since the
first books were purchased in 1902? to all
literature relating in any way to Australia,
especially in connexion with its discovery
and early days. ... In the Federal Capital it
is hoped that the student of any subject con-
cerning Australia - Voyages, History, Religion,
Politics, Law, Science, Literature, Biography,-
may find the aid he needs in this National
Library. ... The Committee believes that as
time goes on and the National character of the
Library is more widely recognised patriotic
Australians will find increasing delight in
presenting valuable gifts to so noble an
institution,"
Today, when many of these hopes have been
realised, we can still envy and admire the confident
note on which the report concludes -
'‘the Committee does not restrict itself in the
purchase of books by consideration of mere
price provided they come within the aim it
has before it".


Early proposals
for
Accommodation
Accordingly, the accommodation allotted
to the library in the Parliament building
designed for Canberra in 1929 was limited to the
minimum required for the immediate servicing _
of the Parliament, and the Public Works Committee
was asked to investigate in Melbourne a proposal
to erect a building for the National_ Library. ihe
Committee recommended that the building now known
as West Block Offices be erected in time for the
transfer of Parliament to Canberra. It further
recommended that the building should be shared
with a number of Government Departments. In
the Library occupied the building, on which its
name appeared prominently until, at the urgent
request of the Government, it was vacated to
provide space needed for additional Departments.
The nresent site was allocated to the Library
and the first wing of the permanent building
erected in 1934-35.
The
Present
Crisis
During the 14 years since,the accommodation
position has deteriorated progressively as new
functions have been added and the rate of growth
of the collections increased. In 1927, with a
staff of 12 and approximately 60,000 printed
volumes and less than 2000 pictures, prints
maps, the Library occupied 19,000 sq. ft. inside
Parliament House and 19,000 sq.ft, outside. Today,
with approximately 300,000 bound volumes and tens
of thousands of pictures, prints, historical objects,
maps, and manuscripts, hundreds of thousands of
feet of moving picture films, and tens of thousands
of feet of microfilm, the space inside Parliament
House has increased to over 20,000 sq.ft., but that
outside is still approximately 15,000.
Effect on its
Services
While the general effect of this over-
crowding on the working of an expanding institution
is obvious, its implications for the future are so
serious that I should like to outline them for the
Committee in some detail.
This is, perhaps, best done by considering
the present functions of the Library in order.
This will also serve to remind Members of their
number and variety, and so help to explain the
extent and nature of our building requirements,
which are considerable.
Service to
Parliament
The services of the National Library hove
been modelled on those of other National Libraries,
especially the Library of Congress. But in the
variety of its functions, though of course in no
other respect, it could be said that the pupil has
outdone the master.
The first responsibility of the Library,
and the one which will always remain its primary
function, is the provision of reference and research
services and general reading for Members of the
Commonwealth Parliament. Though some attempt has
been made to keep the material most^ likely to serve
these needs in the Parliament building itself, or
in the properly equipped stacks at the National


Library building, thousands of volumes required
for the normal use of Members are stored in
heterogeneous collection of temporary buildings,
most of them unsafe and relatively inaccessible.
A recital of the purposes they originally served
is lugubrious enough - the laundry and mortuary
of the Old Hospital, the basement of the Institute
of Anatomy, the explosives store H nugga Quarry.
But the next stage in our planned occupation
includes buildings which are even more distant,
less well supervised and still more unsavoury,
such as the Old Abattoirs on the Tharwa road.
During each of the years required to erect the
proposed extension to the National Library, most
of the expected in-take of at least 25,000 volumeo,
or whst it replaces, will need to be housed in
these remote areas.
Already the Library Commit teeafter
inspection and due consideration, has decided to
cease service on a wide range of journals and
newspapers which are stacked from floor .
ceiling in such a way as to constitute an industrial
hazard. Even service on the accessible material
has ureatly increased in cost and continues to
decrease in efficiency. ■ Additional resources
have been given the Library to provide services
for the expanded Parliament and in recognition
of the increasing complexity and wider problems
with which Parliament and Government Departments
have to grapple in trade, commerce, agriculture,
economic and industrial relations, foreign
affairs, law and administration, social services
and welfare a.s they affect the world at large,
but clearly these resources cannot be fully
effective without the necessary accommodation.
i_. Reference and Research:
Closely related to this primary service
to Parliament is the provision of reference and
research services for the growing needs of
Commonwealth Departments and agencies in Canoerra,
in the States and in the 35 countries abroad
where Australia is represented.
The field of interest of the Executive
Departments of a Government is as wide as that of
a Parliament itself, and their responsibility
for formulating and administering legislation
reouires them also to have ready access to the
widest range of detailed and precise information
about other countries, including their
geographical, economic, and historical background
as well as their current activities in all fields.
One of the most fruitful and reliable
sources of inf or mat ion is the pub lie a. t ions of
Governments themselves. This explains, in
part, why libraries serving sovereign national
Governments effectively need to acquire and
preserve a wider range of material than even
the most important libraries serving millions


of ordinary• citizens. In Washington, for
example, a city of little more than half a
million people, the Library of Congress finds
it necessary to add 187,0C0 volumes per anr.ua
to its present total of almost B*ooo,ooo,
while the New York Public Library, serving
a city of over 8 million people, adds only
about BC,OOO volumes per annum to its stock of
slightly less than 5,000,000. At the end
of 19/4.6, to which these figures relate, the
material in the Library of Congress was listed
as follows;-
Nature of Material No« of
Volume s and pa tnph lets 7,9U6 , U6c
found newspaper volumes _ 118,159
Manuscripts (pieces) 6,121,913
Maps and views , 1,711,292
Microfilms (reels and strips) 59,001
Motion pictures (reels) k 3,555
Music (volumes and pieces) 1,719,610
Phonograph recordings (records) 260,58 b
Photographic negatives,
prints and slides ' 950,83 d
Prints, fine (pieces) 576,9^0
Other (broadsides, photostats,
posters, etc.) 287,237
The same comparisons already hold good
in Australia. Though the Natio ial Library is
not yet 50 years old, its acquisitions
year exceeded 20,000 volumes, a total well in
excess of that of any other library in Australia.
Moreover, our Government Publications Lxchange
programme has so far been limited largely to
English speaking countries. As it is
extended to cover foreign Governments, as it
must be, this total will need to be doubled
before it can be said that Australia has the
governmental source material needed to inform
herself adequately on other countries. In
this respect the policy of the Library
Committee, supported by successive Governments,
has been based on the assumption that our
remoteness and our place in world affairs
intensify rather than diminish our need for
information about 01her countries. it was in
accordance with this policy that in 19U7 the
Government created in the National Li orary
an Lxchange Agency under the control of an
Inter-Departmental Committee to further
develop the exchange of publications with
other countries and to co-ordinate tne overseas
exchange relations of individual Commonwealth
Denartments• The objective is to create in the


National Library a strong central source of
information about the modern world on which
Parliament and all Government agencies can
draw. This policy is recognised not only as
an essential aid to Government, but as an
important economy, making the development and
staffing of large Departmental libraries
unnecessary.
This is the policy, but it cannot be
made effective without a really generous
provision for housing material of all kinds
especially the books, periodicals and maps which
Governments issue in increasing numbers.
Adequate working areas must also be provided for
users. Free and ready access to the collections,
which is so valuable to the growing number of
research officers in Government Departments, is
at present difficult and will soon become
impossible. This position will become still
more acute as the transfer of Departmental
officers proceeds in accordance with the plan
for 19,000 by i 960.
Increasing demand for the use of this
Governmental material is also being made by the
many representatives of overseas Governments in
Australia but this service, once freely provided,
can now be offered only with reservations.
2» Official Records;
The Library’s relations with
Commonwealth Departments are also seriously
threatened through its inability to house their
official records for which the Librarian is
responsible as an Archival Authority. When the
records of day to day Departmental business are-
no longer in common use, the Librarian, after
consultation with Departmental officers, takes
over from all except the Services and related
Departments, such material as is likely to be
needed by future administrators, by citizens
desiring to protect their rights, or by students
for research.
The bulk of such records coming to the
Library now, and likely to come in the immediate
future, is very great for a number of reasons.
The Departments are anxious to remove inactive
records from high rental city areas; they have
no immediate need for the records of war-time
activities which have ceased or of controls,
such as rationing, when they have been lifted.
Finally, as this system of records control was
established only in 19U5? the systematic transfer
of records dating back to 1901 is just
beginning. An exact estimate of the Quantity
of records to be preserved cannot be made until
the bulk of what exists is known, and more
knowledge gained of what should be preserved.
However, the experience of the United liingdom
and the United States, which have already outgrown


Service to
Commonwealth
Pepartmen t s
(Sontd.)
buildings,complete d in 1899 end 1937
respectively , suggests that it will be
considerable* Profiting from the experience
of these countries, we are also moving some of
the material in Melbourne and Sydney to inter-
mediate repositories in low rental areas in
those cities.
Service to
students of
Australian
life and
development
The function of preserving the records
of Government, like the three functions already
outlined, is National in scope and importance
because they serve the needs of the
Government and protect the rights of its citizens.
But in practice, this material is used equally
by historians, such as the team of War Historians
working under Mr* Gavin Long, and by other
research workers, including many members of the
staff and students from the Social Science
Faculties of the Universities.
It is this function of preserving
material for research and historical
which people most readily associate with the idea
of a National Library. It was also the one most
dear to the hearts of early Library Committees
and one which has been discharged consistently
since. It consists in collecting books and
other materials, including manuscripts, pictures,
sound recordings and films which record the
life and development of the Australian people _ .
and in promoting their appreciation and effective
use, both in Australia and abroad, through
research and reference services, bibliography,
publication and exhibition.
This is an activity of far-reaching
and vital importance to the Australian people to
which the National Library could not fail to
contribute in an important way, not only because
its own official records, mentioned above, will
obviously grow in importance as time_ passes,
but because, as with other National Libraries,
it enjoys the privilege of Australian copyright
which carries the obligation to preserve materials
and to make them known.
Adding to this privilege, the Library
can expect support from gifts and endowments,
as experience has shown. The Petherick
collection of books, pictures, manuscripts and
prints relating to Australia, bequeathed to the
Library by Act of Parliament in 1911 and the
Gregory Mathews collection of ornithological
works relating to Australia donated in 1939 -
to name the two largest single gifts -together
have a replacement value of more t than £lOO,OOO.
Others of equal importance are now under offer
and in process of transfer to the Commonwealth
the Hon. Mr. Justice Ferguson’s collection of
books and manuscripts relating to Australia and


Service to
students of
Australian
life and
development
d.)
the South Pacific and the Hex Nan Live 11
collection equally important for pictorial
material relating to these regions. But it
will become increasingly difficult even to
accept such gifts unless we can provide the
proper conditions for their custody, display
and effective use.
It is, therefore, distressing to
contemplate the continued storage of books,
pictures, prints and manuscripts of great
public interest and value under conditions so
different from those envisaged by their donors.
It is with a due sense of responsibility I say
that I believe that no national collection of
the kind is so badly housed anywhere in the
world and that there is a constant danger to
the security and safety of this rare and valuable-
material, the public reaction to which cannot be
indefinitely overlooked.
All the Australian activities are
suffering equally from over-crowding. The
programme for bringing to Australia copies of
original material relating to its history, but
housed in institutions abroad, in which the New
South Wales Government is a partner and in which
other States are anxious to participate, is
seriously hampered by the lack of suitable-
facilities for storing the tens of thousands of
feet of negative film from which all future copies
will be made as well as for reading of the
prints.
Service to
Libraries in
the States
Another function of the Library
involving use of the ms in bulk of the reference
collection is the provision of reference and
research services to supplement the resources
available to students and research workers in
the State, University, and other libraries in
Australia, This service, again modelled on
that provided by the Library of Congress, has
been 'freely offered to libraries in the States,
and is highly valued throughout Australia.
At present it is of greatest importance to the
smaller States, but it will be much more used by
all Libraries when they appreciate fully the
economy of borrowing material they need only
occasionally from Canberra. As advances in
methods of photographic reproduction hasten this
development, the National Library must be in a
position to provide this central service effic-
iently. This requires that the extensive
collection of material, particularly of the
scholarly and unusual kind required for advanced
research, must be readily available through
adequate housing and union cataloguing.


There is, however, one institution
to which this Central Service is specially
important. I refer to the National
University which, as a post-graduate research
institution, may be expected to use both
primary and secondary source materials more
extensively than perhaps any other University
in Australia. In the physical and biological
sciences, in which the National Library
collections are not extensive, the University
is assembling its own material freely, but in
the social sciences and Pacific studies, for
which it is also developing special research
schools, the National Library already has much
of the indispensable material and a more active
acquisition policy than any other library in
Australia. As it is not expected that the
University will ever duplicate this material,
except for a limited number of standard works,
the cost of providing the necessary library
services for the National University will be
enormously reduced. It is, therefore, clear
that the prompt and adequate housing of the .
National Library’s collections and services is
almost as important to the Government from the
point of view of the University as from that of
Parliament and the Government Departments. 'To
the University itself, it might be considered
almost as important as the housing of its staff
and students in these fields.
These arguments apply also to the
Canberra University College with the modifications
which its scope and purpose require. For the
twenty years since its establishment, it has made
free and effective use of the' National Library
collections and will continue to do so.
The enormous growth in the
responsibilities of Government have more than
justified the wide charter drawn up for the
National Library by its founders. The creation
of institutions, such as these universities in
Canberra, make its further extension and proper
housing a necessity.
Lack of accommodation is also retarding
the development of a proper training system for
members of the staff of the Library and of
Commonwealth Departments and for librarians in
the States. For the last ten years, the
National Library and other Commonwealth Libraries
have attracted to their service mainly librarians
trained by and at the expense of the New South
Wales Government, primarily for service in free
public libraries in that State. The National
Library has, therefore, appointed a Director of
Training who will return to Canberra this month,
after a study tour of library teaching methods
in the United Kingdom and the United States
under the auspices of the British Council and the
Carnegie Corporation of New York. But the
Library still has no space whatever where training
can be carried out. Such formal training as has
been attempted has been given, by courtesy of the


Service to
Library
Students
(*Cont d.)
President of the Senate, in the Senate
Committee Room, and, by courtesy of a Minister,
in his rooms during his absence from Canberra.
Central Library
Service ior
Documentary and
Educational
Films
In some respects, the most
inadequately housed of all the activities of
the Library is the most recent but rapidly
developing service to Commonwealth and State
agencies through films, film strips and other
visual aids. All the work, including the
actual projection, is carried out at present
amongst book stacks in the National Library
building. The Film Division of the Library
is the Central Library and Non-Theatrical
Distributing Agency of the Australian National
Film Board. In addition to distributing in
Australia the films, numbering almost 100, made
by the Board, the Library is building up a
comprehensive collection of documentary films
and film strips from overseas countries. The
collection now numbers more than 2,000 prints.
Distribution to adult groups totalling l\. million
per annum is made through Commonwealth Departments
and State Advisory Committees set up by the States
and to children through the Departments of
Education. Special storage conditions,
laboratory space, checking and projection
facilities are essential for the proper functioning
of this Division, and for protection of the
Commonwealth’s asset in material where capital
cost and depreciation are high in any case.
Public Library
Services to
Commonwealth
Territories
The public library services of the
National Library are also hampered by lack of
space. Since the transfer to Canberra in 1927?
the Department of the Interior has looked to the
National Library for the free library services
which residents of the Australian Capital
Territory should enjoy, and these have been
provided on a limited basis as a by-product of
our National services, since 1935 ? from the
Reading Room of the National Library. The
service was recently extended to Jervis Bay,
and the need for extending it to adults in out-
lying suburbs in Canberra and in rural areas
and to all children, has now been recognised.
It is likely that a mobile unit will first be
used, and that Branch libraries will come later.
But we shall need a proper base from which to
operate the service which may be expected to
reach most of the 50,000 residents planned for
1960.
Free library services to other
Commonwealth Territories - Fapua-New Guinea,
Northern Territory, Norfolk Island, Nauru -
and to Ocean Island, provided in association
with the respective administrations, are served
largely through book-box services.


Public Library
Services to
Commonwealth
Territories
(Contd.y -
These public library services do not
require large areas in the extension to the
building, but provision for them is none the Uss
urgent and important.
Service to
Cultural and
Other Groups
The provision of Book services to residents
of the Australian Capital Territory will coincide
with the programme for Improved cultural
opportunities, the need for which led the Prime
Minister recently to set up a Committee to
encourage and subsidise active groups in drama,
tmslc, films , the fine arts and discussion groups
of all kinds. All these activities have been
restricted through the lack of suitable accommodation
much of which would be provided in our propose
small theatre equipped for non-theatrical fil --?
chamber music * sound recordings , play .
It will serve for performances both lor the
Public Service population in the area at ■
and for the general public, both local and viuiUng,
at all times. The exhibition areas will allow
local and travelling exhibitions to be properly
displayed along with the Library's own pictures,
prints and manuscripts and historical objec o.
The Australian public now visiting
Canberra in increasing numbers includes not only
tourists but many groups engaged in important
nation-wide conferences. At present they are
without any really adequate meeting place. T e
proposed Library would offer unique facilitieo to
such groups, especially those to whom the use= of
the collections and the viewing of ±il ms mi S
be important.
The
Gommonwealth's
Memorial to
President
Roosevelt
Finally, lack of accommodation is having
a very special effect on the development of the
Franklin Roosevelt Library of American
established by the Government in * memorial
to President Roosevelt and as a _permanent
contribution to Australian-American under ? tending.
Already we have had e ncouragmg _ co-operation from
the Department of State at Washington and irom
/merican institutions such as the Library of
Congress, including substantial gifts such as one
of more than 500 important American booku irom t
Rockefeller Foundation. We have also acquired,
on the advice of Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt, Salisbury
uortrait of the late President. .The objective u
to provide a comprehensive record of the ana
development of American civilization, to be studied
along with the record of Australian development
in the National Library. But it can be Uttjt
more than an idea until accommodation is provided
and. in any case, the memorial can never have its
full significance until it is housed in the wing
of the Library specially set apart and designs
for it*


It has not been easy to plan a building
which can be erected to meet these many and
diverse requirements and to meet them before
the service breaks down entirely. The simplest
and most rapid solution would have been to
proceed with the original plan, which included
six wings similar to the existing one, grouped
around central courts and linked with an
administrative block. But it did not provide
the most economical relationship between the
many processes involved in the acquisition,
treatment and use of Library materials. When
the bulk and variety of the material is so great,
economical organisation of the flow of work
becomes a vital matter. The plan, therefore,
needed to be functional.
It was realised also that as Library
materials and processes are changing in nature,
especially under the influence of photography,
the plan should be flexible. This would also
suit the functions of an institution which has
developed rapidly even during the last decade
and is still developing. It has been said that
what v/e really need in libraries to-day is some
kind of rubber structure that can be inflated and
expanded, with the floors floating on air and the
roof held up by sky hooks.
The best possibilities for functional and
flexible planning seemed to lie in what is known
as ’'modular’', of which a modification has,
therefore, been adopted. The ’’modular'’ design
is increasingly favoured by architects and
librarians, both in the United Kingdom and
especially in the United States where it has been
adopted or i*a proposed for a number of important
libraries large and small. Examples are the
Universities of lov/a, Georgia, Princeton and
Texas, and the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. lowa plans for a solid block
300 feet square and sto 6 stories high. As
you are doubtless aware, ’’modular” discards
permanent features, not only those of a monumental
character but also the inflexible steel stack,
in favour of a construction permitting extreme
flexibility in the arrangement of all materials
and services. Sub-division can be easily and
quickly effected for office use, reading rooms
or book stacks. Internal partitions and even
floor levels may be varied from time to time to
meet changing needs without the need of major
reconstruction. The whole of the internal area
can be served by air-conditioning, designed to
provide suitable working conditions for staff
and readers as well as to ensure the optimum
conditions necessary for the preservation of books
a,nd manuscripts. ’’Modular” lends itself to the
economical distribution and local control of
temperature and humidity within separate areas
and this is, of course, necessary to make the
flexible quality of the planning effective. For


the optimum temperature and humidity for human
comfort and the preservation of library
materials of different kinds all vary
considerably and, for human comfort, change
with the seasons. The ranges needed, according
to the results of research and experiment in other
countries, are l±o%-6CP/o for humidity, and
l}.0 o — 80°F. for temperature. The unusually low
minimum temperature is required for films only.
The '’modular’' plan having been
chosen 5 the next problem was to decide the
general form and the size of the structure.
The form was determined by choosing
a ground area sufficient to contain, and to
relate economically, all the processes involved
in the preparation and use of the main bulk of
printed materials, using the catalogue as the
focal point so that both staff and readers
would have free and direct access to this key
to the Library collections.
The size was determined by choosing
a target 20 years ahead, sufficiently distant
to avoid the common criticism that Library
buildings are scarcely completed before they
are outgrown or outmoded, but not so distant as
to be out of harmony with the present building
situation. It was considered, moreover, that
by 1970 the effect of photography and other
mechanical devices on the use of printed materials
and library processes would have developed to a
point where a new assessment of library functions
and needs might be necessary.
Because of the flexibility of the
’’modular" plan, all unused accommodation during
the early years can be economically and
effectively used by any other suitable agency of
the Commonwealth. This sharing, though not
normal Library practice, is not new either to
this National Library or to others. Since 1902
we have lived in harmony with the other
Departments of Parliament here and in Melbourne,
while the National Library of Switzerland, when
faced with this very problem, solved it by
erecting a building to house 2-g- million volumes
and sharing it with appropriate Swiss Government
Departments. T]iere are a number of Commonwealth
Deoartments whose work is closely related to our
own, who use Library materials extensively and
who might well find the other facilities, such as
the theatre and conference rooms, of special
advantage. Such are the Office of Education,
the Department of Information and the Australian
Broadcasting Commission. Other appropriate
associates would be the Social Sciences and
Pacific Studies Schools of the National University
to which, as indicated earlier, the National
Library resources are of primary importance. The
needs of the Canberra University College, though
more complex from this point of view, might also
be considered. If the building were erected


any time within the next five years, for
example, the whole of the reserve stack on the
2nd Mezzanine Floor, comprising 27,000 sq.feet,
could be released, providing accommodation
for approximately 300 persons. If the need for
office or other storage accommodation in Canberra
at the time demands it, even further space
could be alienated.
So much for the principle involved
in determining the size of the building. The
practical problem was to determine what space
would be needed in twenty years for the following
purposes
Stacks
Readers
Exhibition and public performance
31 af f
General purposes
In estimating Stack requirements, we kept in mind
all those considerations mentioned earlier when we
were discussing our present difficulties and the
experience of other libraries, especially the
Library of Congress, of which it was recently
written:-
"Until 1897 the Library had
occupied an inconveniently increasing
part of the Capitol in which all the
sittings and business of Congress had
to be carried on. In 1868 the necessary
Act had been passed for the erection of
a separate library and $L\., 000,000 were
appropriated for the purpose.
Ten acres immediately to the east
'were cleared of houses. The plans were
drawn to the then almost Utopian number
of 1j.,500,000 volumes.... The floor space...
measured 326,195 square feet, or nearly
8 acres.''
Despite what at the time seemed a particularly lavish
provision for stack space, it was found necessary
within \\2 years (1939) to build an annex capable
of holding a further 10,000,000 volumes.
We have estimated on an intake of
printed materials rising from the equivalent of
25.000 volumes in 1950 to 50,000 in 19/0,
providing an increase' from the present stock of
300.000 to approximately 1 million. The intake
of records from Commonwealth Government Depart-
ments, known as Archives, might be expected to
approach half that bulk within the 20-year period.


For purposes of comparison, the existing
stock of other Libraries, including several
National Libraries, quoting as far as possible
figures, is as follows
Volumes
United States of America -
Library of Congress,
Washington ( inc. pamphs .)
New York Public Library 4,700,000
Harvard University
Library, Massachusetts I+, 800,000 ( inc. pamphs.)
Yale University Library,
New Haven 3 *600,000 ( inc.pamphs.)
California University,
Berkeley 1,1+22,000
Burope -
British Museum, London 5*000,000
Bodleian Library,
Oxford 1,1+00,000
Bibliotheque Nationale,
Paris I+, 000,000
Bibliotheque Nationale,
Berne, Switzerland 1,000,000
Australia -
State Public Libraries -
New South Wales 550,000 (approx.)
Victoria 658,000 11
Queensland 100,000 11
South Australia 283*000
Western Australia 200,000 "
Tasmania 160,000 "
State University Libraries -
New South Wales 310,000 "
Victoria 150,000 "
Queensland 90,000 "
South Australia 157*000
Wes.tern Australia 87*000
Tasmania 70,000 '*
State Parliamentary Libraries -
New South Wales 100,000
Victoria 100,000
Others between 20,000 and 100,000.
A total stack area of approximately
130,000 so.feet will provide for this equivalent
of lj million volumes adopting the if Cubook i! system
of measurement to our conditions. The !, Gubook”
is the volume of space required to shelve the
average size book in a typical library and rough
estimates of the size of the stack are usually
made by allowing 11 cubooks per sq.foot of floor,
area. Therefore, a stack to house 14 million
cubooks would need to measure 136,362 aq.feet.
Our accessions include an unusually high proportion
of bound periodicals which are larger than the
average size book, but this is largely offset by
the fact that the ’'Gubook 1 ' system allows 10%
free space.


The 39,000 sq.feet for Archives includes
a Safe Area of 3,000 sq.feet for confidential or
restricted records and the whole, because of i o
nature, will be under special control. .-bout
12,000 sq.feet of the stack areas is allocate
special collections such as the Petherick, the _
Mathews, the Ferguson and the Roosevelt, ion wnic
separate areas are provided to discharge special
obligations associated with their development or
acceptance. For maps and music, separate areas
are required for their actual use.
Areas for readers comprise approximately
PO OCO ecu feet. Of these, one of 726 sq.feet
has been "set aside, as in the Library of Congress,
for t he exclusive use of Members of Parllamen
wishing to pursue their work with free and direc
access'to the whole of the Library s
This will not in any way limn: the extent to which
the whole of the collections and services will
continue to bo at the service of Parliament
through the present Reading Room which should
always be retained. The general lending and general
reference and browsing rooms, comprising approx-
iraately 10,OCO sq.feet, will also house substantial
collections of books in open access. Together,
thev might be expected to house 126 readers. the
newspaper reading room will provide for the use of
micro-film users as well as filed newspapers and
might accommodate lj.o readers. The Archives
reading rooms will be used by about 25 readers,
both officials from Departments consulting iiies
and students of all kinds. The carrels on the
First Mezzanine, numbering 30 and uotailing
2 goo sc;. feet will be created as required to provide
the best individual study opportunities for those
doing advanced or prolonged research, and give iree
and direct access to i million books.
No attempt has been made to reproduce the
impressive reading rooms such as the domed room
at the British Museum or the Public Library of
Victoria, or even the lofty rectangular reading
room of the Public Library of New South Wales.
Exhibition areas provide a spedal^ problem.
There is great public interest especially in t
pictures/' prints, manuscripts and historical
objects illustrating Australian development which
the Library possesses, and there is important
educational value in their display ,■it it loetleot
ively done. Moreover, we have an oblige., o ion
both to the Australian public and to those who
have made gifts to the National collection, dut
this must be regarded as a secondary function of a
research library to which only a limited amount
Of space can reasonably be given and, as far as
possible, this should be isolated from the actual
reference use of the collections.


Space for
Exhibit ion
and Public
Performance
(Contd. 7
The problem has been solved by
associating exhibitions with the other public
areas of the building. Substantial areas .
totalling 16,500 sq.feet have, therefore, been
provided on the ground and Ist Mezzanine floors
near the main entrance and the theatre entrance,
and a display and art gallery of 10,000 sq.feet
at the other extremity of the building on the
top floor. In order to isolate the general
public from the intermediate floors, it will
probably prove wisest to use the display areas
shown on the plan on these floors for other
purposes. This would not, of course, allow the
exhibition at any one time of more than a small
proportion of the suitable material which the
Library already possesses but there are advantages
in changing displays. The gallery will have the
advantage of top lighting.
The theatre will be used for conferences
of all kinds as well as for film showings, chamber
music, sound recordings, play readings, lectures,
and the gallery can serve for local and travelling
exhibitions such as those being sent increasingly
by overseas countries such as the United Kingdom,
through the British Council, the United States
through its Information Service, the Indian and
other Governments.
Staff
space
Staff space, comprising 32,500 sq.feet
includes space for the substantial office equipment
and reference tools needed for library workers.
The present staff establishment is 103*
Space for
Ge neral
Purposes
Areas for general purposes include
approximately 18,000 sq.feet, as follows
Library School ij.,000
Bindery 3?000
Packing and unpacking,
temporary storage 1,850
Cleaning and fumigating 1,650
Equipment and stores i.j.,800
Garage, including ramp 2,200
The areas mentioned total 230,000
sq.feet exclusive of mechanical equipment, plant
rooms, public and staff amenities, internal
passages, lavatories, store and lift wells, etc.
In passing, it might be remarked that
the floor space of the Library proper is
approximately the same as that of the existing
sections of the unfinished Universitat Biblioteket
in Oslo, which combines the functions of the
Norwegian National Library and a Library for the
University of Oslo. In this city of less than
300,000 people, capital of a nation of just over
3,000,000 inhabitants, there is also the large
well-stocked and busy Municipal Library which
carries out some of the activities that the National


Space for
Ge neral
Purposes
"XContd.)
Library performs for the Australian Capital
Territory and other territories of the
Commonwealth. To cite the case of Switzerland,
a nation of IpV million inhabitants, the area is
less than that of the National Library at Berne
which was built shortly before tne last war and
not only provides splendid office, reading room,
catalogue and work spa.ce, but accommodation tor
an ultimate book collection of 2-g- million
volumes, its present collection being about
1 million.
Urgency of the
bui 1 ding project
In concluding, I should like to
stress the extreme urgency of a decision to
commence the building and invite members of the
Committee to make a personal inspection of the
conditions under which the Library is attempting
to perform its services. They are dispersed
through 8 different areas in Canberra, making
efficient and economical administration impossible.
We are able to co-ordinate the work only through
the courtesy of Parliament in allowing us to
retain our central administration here. Both
Members and staff have been very tolerant of the
anomalous situation under which a staff of 60,
performing an increasing variety of extra
Parliamentary services, continues to occupy within
the building an area far beyond the minimum
requirements for servicing the Parliament itself.
Depending on the wish of Parliament at the time
and the provision of a prompt delivery service
to give to Parliament from the new building a
better service than it could receive from a
purely'Parliamentary Library, an area from up to
13,000 sq.feet could be returned to Parliament for
its own immediate purposes. When the permanent
Parliamentary building is erected, an underground
tunnel similar to that from the Library of Congress
to the Capitol would be advisable so that materia.l
needed at Parliament can be provided promptly._
In the meantime, as an experiment, a similar link
might be provided between the Library and new
administrative building under construction.
Finally, I should like to make a •
plea on behalf of a loyal and a hard-working
staff which is giving its best in public service
under conditions which must be among the worst
in Canberra in the confidence that their
reasonable needs and the long-standing require-
ments of the institution itself are about to be
recognised.
