

I, < fW ?§*$.
|E ■ N
f\ ‘f
fe *\/ ■ t /t>V*
P' • ' X Tf / J 7
n JL x Jil




«y
t£«. ; tyfo . 77 4 . •&*< y^Jt
“ <51.. cK. *>» iTt • < y^-" —.


PROPOSALS
FOR THE
FOUNDATION AND SUPPORT
PUBLIC
IN THE
TO WN OF S YDNE Y, NE W SOUTH WALES;
RESPECTFULLY SUBMITTED TO THE
CONSIDERATION OF THE GOVERNOR & COUNCIL;
AND or THE
INHABITANTS OF THAT INTERESTING COLONY;
LAURENCE HALLORAN, D. D,
Professor of the Classics, and of Mathematics.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY K. HOWE, GOVERNMENT PRINTER,
1825.




Sydney, 9th September, 1825.
SPHE Term of my Exile has at length
closed. With my latest breath, and on
the verge of eternity, I will persist in de-
nouncing the iniquity of the sentence,
under which 1 have so long, and so se-
verely suffered. On its fatal results to my
family I will not dilate ; though, while I
retain memory, and feeling, I must re-
member, and resent them!
But I turn to the more pleasing re-
collection of the kindness and sympathy,
which I have experienced in this Colony,
from the more respectable portion of its
population. On my arrival, I had the
consolation to meet a friend, who had
known me under happier circumstances;
who received me with the warmest cor-
diality, and with the most delicate consi-
deration ; and who generously aided me
by his influence, and his purse, in forming


the Establishment, which I have so long
(upwards of six years,) and 1 hope I may
add without presumption, so usefully con-
ducted. My sense of obligation to him is
indelible. I can more easily forgive fifty
iujuries, than I can forget one act of dis-
interested kindness ! This Gentleman’s
good offices were seconded by the liberal
confidence of many others, who com-
mitted their children to my care, to whose
friendship and patronage I owe whatever
success has attended my exertions, and to
whom I acknowledge a debt of gratitude,
I can never adequately repay i From a
wish, however, to afford the strongest de-
monstration in my power of the sincerity
of the feelings I profess, I have arranged,
and I now beg leave to submit to general
consideration, the outlines of a Plan,
which carried into effect and matured,
will, I am convinced, be productive of
extensive public utility. I believe# my
establishment was the first, as it has long
been the only one,formed in Sydney, for
classical and mathematical education.
My advanced period of life precludes any
rational hope, that should I even remain
in this Colony, I can persevere many
years longer in the performance of the


arduous duties of my present profession, to
which nearly forty years of my existence
have been devoted. But it is my earnest
wish, and the object of my most anxious
solicitude, to perpetuate in Sydney the
benefits of a liberal education, and to
place them within the reach of the middle
class of society, who, from the present
unavoidably expensive charges, for in-
struction in the higher branches of litera-
ture, are, in great measure, precluded from
affording a participation of them to their
children. With this view 1 beg to submit
to the candid consideration of the Govern-
ment, and of the Public, the following, I
conceive, plain and feasible propositions,
for the formation, and endowment of a
Public Grammar School, in Sydney.
From the state of the Colony, the institu-
tion must necessarily, in the first instance,
be upon a limited scale, but, containing in
its principles, the germs, and capacity of
gradual expansion, I would propose,
therefore.
That, in limine, thirty free scholars only
be admitted, of whom two thirds shall be
natives of the Colony, and the residue, the
sons of officers of Government, holding
inferior employments, with inadequate sa-


laries for the liberal education of their
families; and that the same ratio, with
respect to each class be observed, to any
increased number of free scholars, to which
it may be determined, at a future day, to
extend the benefits of the institution.
That the management of the establish-
ment be vested in thirty governors, to each
of whom shall attach, during his natural
life, the right, and privilege of nominating
one free scholar, and, on every vacancy, of
renewing such nomination.
That a subscription of fifty pounds con-
stitute a governor for life, and that the
amount of the first thirty subscriptions be
employed in the purchase of a suitable
house for the head master, and in the
erection of a capacious school-room, with
attached apartments for the under master.
That a president, a treasurer, and a
committee of seven, be elected from the
body of governors, for the management
of the funds, and for the regulation of the
concerns of the establishment.
That the head, and under master be
chosen by a majority of the subscribers,
subject to the approval of the Governor
and Council, and retain their employments,
fjuamdiu se bene gesserint.


That the head master be allowed to re-
ceive twenty scholars on his own terms,
and for his exclusive advantage ; and that
one guinea per quarter be paid by each
tree scholar, as an equivalent for a salary
to the under master.
That on the death or resignation of a
governor, an advertisement be inserted in
the public papers, giving notice of such
vacancy, and inviting a subscriber of the
like sum of fifty pounds, to supply his
place, with similar rights and privileges.
That such subscriptions be placed at
interest, on good security, in order to form
a growing capital, which may enable the
governors to afford an adequate salary to
the masters, and to meet the incidental
expences of the establishment.
That, in the meantime, the thirty ori-
ginal subscribers present a respectful me-
morial to His Excellency the Governor,
praying him to become the patron of the
institution, and to grant from the police
fund, a stipend for the head master,
adequate to the support of his family,
suitably to the utility and importance of
his respectable and arduous office.
That His Excellency be further res-
pectfully solicited, to appropriate a fund


for sending, every three years, from this
establishment, two youths, born in the
Colony, to one of the English universities,
with a view to their admission to holy
orders, expressly for the purpose of exer-
cising the functions of the ministry, in
their native country.
That, whenever it may be deemed ex-
pedient, to augment the number of free
scholars, an equal number of new subscri-
bers, of fifty pounds each, be invited ;
that is to sajr, a new governor for each
additional scholar, with the same right of
nomination, &c. as the original governors
possessed; and that these subscriptions
form a fund, for paying a stipend to an
additional master, and for gradually re-
lieving the Government from the whole,
or a part, of the stipend, allowed to the
head master.
That, should the proposed mission of
two youths, triennially, to an English
university, at the expense of Government,
be considered to involve too serious a
burthen on the public funds, in that case,
that the education of a fixed number of
colonial youths, selected for the ministry,
be continued at the public school, till they
attain the age of twenty-two yearn, at


which that two be sent every third
year to Calcutta, for ordination, as chap-?
laind for this Colony, by the bishop of
the diocese* to which it is attached.
That honorary rewards of medals,
books, &c. be provided at the expense of
the school fund, and. distributed at the
half-yearly public examinations, to 7 the
lour youths, who, ceteris paribus, shall be
adjudged to’have made the greatest pro-
ficiency in their respective studies. (These
premiums I have hitherto distributed at
my own expense. They have excited a
spirit of laudable emulation among my
pupils, and have encouraged application
and assiduity, which have necessarily, ex-
pedited their progress, in no common
degree; so that, notwithstanding the
scepticism of certain interested individuals;
in two years,some of my pupils have been
as far advanced in classical learning,-as
boysiof the same age usually are in double
that time, at the public grammar schools
in England; a fact, which, if the persons
alluded to ,had condescended to attend my
public examinations, agreably to invita-
tion, notwithstanding their incredulity,
they would • have been compelled to ac-
knowledge. The amount of my disburse-


merits for the purpose of these rewards,
has somewhat exceeded .£l2O in six
years.)
That, should the proposed pecuniary al-
lowances from Government, be at present
considered too heavy a charge on the
colonial resources, His Excellency the
Governor be requested to appropriate a
tract of land for the benefit of the esta-
blishment, from which may be derived a
revenue adequate to its present support;
and, in process of time, to the future ex-
tended scale, prospectively contemplated.
In offering my services for the present,
to conduct this establishment, I desire to
derive no other advantage, from the in-
creased labour, attending the instruction of
so many additional pupils, than a dwelling-
house, and school-house, free of expense ;
and an equivalent for the reduction of the
number of pupils, who now pay me twenty
guineas each, per annum ; and which 1
consent to limit to twenty only. Of my
competency for the office, it behoves not
me to speak. 1 appeal to the testimony
of facts, to the experience of nearly forty
years, and to an infallible criterion, af-
forded by the number of gentlemen edu-
cated by me in England, who now fill,


with honor, high situations in that country,
in the church, the law, the army, the
navy, and in the commercial world.
In conclusion, I would beg to suggest
to parents, having children born in the
Colony, the good policy of contributing as
subscribers, and thence of becoming go-
vernors of the proposed institution. On
the present terms of education, 50 guineas
are paid in two years and a ball) for the
classical education of each child; whereas,
a single subscription of £5O constitutes a
governor for life, during which, his right
of nomination would enable him to pro-
cure a liberal education lor several children
successively, at an expense, comparatively
inconsiderable indeed-
L. H. HALLORAN.


The following Documents I annex for public
information, without comment. The ori-
ginals, with other important papers, teere
transmitted by the ship Piince Regent, in
November last, to Lord Gifford, to he sub-
mitted by him to the candid consideration
of Karl Bathurst.
No. I.
The Governor has received Dr.
Halloran’s memorial, dated the 29th of
last month ; and in reply, begs to assure
him, that it will afford him a particular
pleasure, to give the earliest, and most fa-
vourable consideration to his request, for
a mitigation of his sentence, consistent
with the rules and regulations, he has laid
down, for his own guidance on such
occasions, and, according to them, he la-
ments it is out of his power, at present, to
comply with Dr. Halloran’s request.
Monday Morning, Sydney ,7
January 30, 1820, j
A true copy,
George Grece.
L. H. Halloran, jun.


The Governor’s time has been so
completely occupied, ever since his receipt
of Dr. Halloran’s letter, of the 12th in-
stant, in making up his despatches for
England, to go home in the Coromandel,
that he has been precluded from answering
it, till now.
The Governor begs Dr. Halloran will
accept his best thanks, for the very hand-
some and flattering manner, in which he
conveyed his congratulations to him, on
his return to the Seat of Government,
In return, the Governor begs to congra-
tulate Dr Halloran on the arrival of bis
son from England, which must be a most
gratifying proof of the young man’s strong-
filial affection, —and which the Governor
very highly admires.
The only thing, the Governor can do for
Dr. Halloran’s son, is giving him a small
grant of land, which he will be very happy
to do, before he leaves the Colony, if the
young man himself will make application
for that indulgence, by memorial.
Government'house, Sydney, July 26,1821.
A true copy,
George Grece.
L. H. Halloran, jun.


No. 111.
Sydney, December 5, 1821.
I have now to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter, of date 29th u!t.
which 1 have been prevented answering
sooner, by a press of business, attendant
on giving up charge of this Government,
to my Successor.
I regret exceedingly, that I am pre-
cluded by circumstances, over which 1
have no controul, from affording you a
mitigation of your present sentence ; but,
1 have no hesitation in stating, that your
general conduct, as far as it has fallen
under my cognizance, at least, has beep
marked by correctness, utility, and recti-
tude, since your arrival in this Colony.
I remain. Sir,
Your most obedient Servant,
L. MACQUARIE.
To Dr. L. H. Halloran,
Phillip-street, Sydney.
A true copy,
George Grece.
L. H. Halloran, jun.


The late Governor has received
Doctor Halloran’s letter of yesterday’s
date; and, in compliance with his request,
will have much pleasure in stating to His
Majesty’s Ministers, on his arrival in
England, his sense of Dr. Halloran’s
correct conduct, and great usefulness in
this Colony.
Sydney, Dec. 7, 1821.
A true copy,
George Grece.
L. H. Halloran, jun.
To His Excellency Lachlan Macquarie,
Esquire, Governor, Captain General
and Commander in Chief of His Ma-
jesty’s Colony of New South Wales,
Sic. ST c. Sic.
The undersigned, having sons under
the care of Dr. Halloran, beg leave to re-
present to your Excellency their warm
approbation of their children’s improve-
ment in their studies, under his tuition ;
and their sense of the very great utility to
this Colony of the establishment which
he conducts.


Influenced by these sentiments, and
conscious of your Excellency’s prompti-
tude on every occasion to encourage the
deserving, the undersigned, individuals
and collectively, make it their earnest but
respectful request, that your Excellency
will be graciously pleased to extend to
Dr. Halloran, in your benevolent consider-
ation, those indulgences, which it appears
have been conceded, at as early a period,
to persons under similar circumstances, as
the unfortunate gentleman, for whom
they implore this favour and distinction,
for his good conduct and utility.
The undersigned beg to express to your
Excellency their high respect and consi-
deration :
S. LORI), Magistrate of Sydney ;
R. CAMPBELL, jun. Merchant;
J. WILD, Adjutant 48th Regt,
.L STUBBS, Quarter-Master, 48lh Regf.
.1. CHISHOLM, Wine and Spirit Merchant ;
JOSEPH UNDERWOOD, by his Attorney,
John Atkinson ;
M. ROBINSON, Deputy Provost Marshal ;
G. BLAXLAND, Free Settler;
F. H. GUEENWAY, Civil Architect ;
J. MEEHAN. Deputy Surveyor General ;
GEORGE HOWE, Government Printer ;
ROBERT JENKINS, Merchant ;
JAMES WILSHIRE, Tanner.
July 7, 1820.


To His Excellency Major General Mac-
quarie, Governor, Captain General, and
Commander in Chief, Sc. S'c. Sc.
In consideration of Dr. Halloran’s
respectable conduct, and acknowledged
public utility in this Colony, the under-
signed beg leave, respectfully to recom-
mend him to your Excellency’s favorable
attention for those indulgences, which
your Excellency has been accustomed,
occasionally to extend, at as early a period,
to deserving persons, under similarly un-
fortunate circumstances.
JAMES ERSKINB, Lieutenant Governor.
Wm. MINCHIN, Principal Superintendent of Police.
JOHN PIPER (J. P.) Nava! Officer.
R. BROOKS, (J. P.)
S. LORD, (J. P.)
Sir JOHN JAMISON, (J.P.)K. G.V.
GEORGE DRUITT, Major 48ih, Chief Engineer,
12 ih November, 1820.
We, the undersigned, inhabitants of New
South Wales, being parents, relatives, or
guardians of youth, under the tuition of
Dr. Halloran, do certify, that the conduct
of that gentleman, during the period in
which we have known him in his scholas-
tic capacity, has been most exemplary ;
that the youth m our charge have, under


bis guidance, improved in every branch of
education, in a degree unattainable, under
any other colonial instructor; that we feel,
that he has rendered it unnecessary to send
our children to Europe, in search of classi-
cal or mathematical acquirements ; and,
therefore, do consider his academical in-
stitution as a great public benefit, and beg
to recommend him to His Excellency the
Governor, not only on the ground of bis
general utility, as the teacher of our youth,
but on the score of his orderly, peaceable,
and gentlemanly behaviour, which we have
witnessed, since his arrival in the Colony,
JOHN PIPER, Naval Officer ;
J. STUBBS, Q. M. 48th Regt.
THOS. WYLDE, Clerk of the Peace;
J. WYLDE, Adjt. 48lh Regt,
GREGORY BLAXLAND;
ROBERT JENKINS;
JAMES CHISHOLM ;
SIMEON LORD;
ROBERT CAMPBELL, jun.
JAMES WILSHIRE;
JOHN RICKARDS;
HENRY MARR;
MICHAEL ROBINSON;
F. H. GREENWAY;
SAMUEL TERRY;
EDWARD SMITH HALL;
JOSEPH UNDERWOOD;
JAMES SMITH ;
JOHN CROKER;
J. ROBERTS ;
M. BACON.
4 th June, 1821.
