

PROPOSALS,
FOR
EMPLOYING CONVICTS,
WITHIN THIS
KINGDOM;
INSTEAD OF SENDING THEM TO
BO T A N T - B A T;
ALSO;
For raifing SEAMEN, and the MILITIA;
Encouraging the GROWTH of TIMBER,
AND
PROVIDING FOR THE POOR;
TIKEWISE
Hints for the better Provifion of the inferior
CLERGY;
With feveral other Proportions.
LONDON:
Printed in the Year, MDCCLXXXVII.


CONTENTS.
Pjsge
BOTANY-Bay, Letter I. i
Ditto Ditto 11. 4
The Poor —■ ■ ——— 12
Strolling Beggars 14
Obfervations ——— 16
Hints relative to the taking off the Wheel-
Tax 24
Ale.Houfes - 26.
Propofals for railing Seamen, &c. 30
Militia 36
Hints publiihed in General Advertifer 40
Agriculture 42
Remarks on felling uncultivated Eftates 48
For manuring Kitchen Garden ground 52
To recover young Fruit Trees on taking
root in a bad foil 53
Hints refpedting Wafte Lands, &c. 54
Thoughts relative to the unequal diftri-
bution of Livings to the beneficed
Clergy 55
Hints refpe£fing Noblemen and Gentle-
men going to the Univerfitics 58


CONTENTS.
PAGE
Hints relative to a Provifion being made
for Gentlemen's Servants 59
To encourage the Harvefl: being got in, &c. 65
Obfervations relative to a diftreffed Fe-
male ■ —— 67
Propofals for conveying Paupers to their
refpeftive Parilhes 69,
PREFACE.


P R E F A C E.
J~HE follozving Jheets, which are nozv offered for
the public perufal, were the produce of my lei fur e .
hours at different times, and originated with a
view to ferve my king and country; how far they
may meet with the approbation of the public, I
know not; but I fatter myfelf, when they are
affured the above motive was the caufe thereof
whatever defeEls may appear in this publication,
the generous part of mankind, 1 hope, will excufe,
and rather applaud me for my intent, anxious zeal,
and endeavour of pi omoting profperity to my coun-
try ; and being alfo encouraged by a zvorthy gentle-
man, who honoured me with the perufal of Jomt
of my plans, referred me to a gentleman
well known for fever al publications for the better
regulations of the poor ; and zvho liftened to my
endeavours, and gave me the pleafing profpedt of
fuccefs in purfuing my feveial plans, by adding,
that my hints were good, and that merit ought to
be rewarded.
However,


However, lam now led to make the following
cbfervaiion, that gleaners, in h arvefi-time, are
too apt to pluck the Jheaf and Jlunding corn, when
opportunity offers —this by way of allufion: the
author, to prevent ungenerous means being taken
from his laying open his feveral plans for the peru-
fal of —, was induced to addrefs —■ -
with the following letter :
Honored Sir,
By your kind permijjion, I have left you
the enclojed, and fiould be glad to be favoured
with your opinion, whether the enclofed, or thofe
you have already favoured me with your perufal,
may be thought worthy of notice, the fubjeld mat-
ter, is the principal objedl of this enquiry. I
crave leave to call, Sir, for your anfwer, on
Monday next, or at any other time, your Honor
Jhall appoint.
June 19, lam yours, &c.
1784. G- R .
The gentleman's anfwer was ;
" fhat I had given myfelf a great deal of
trouble, and the hints which 1 had given, were
nothing new, and would aivife me, to give myfelf
no further trouble about politics."
ii


I was ftartled at the anfwer, which was fo con-
tradictory to his former advice; determined me to
publijh a pamphlet, as alfo this pamphlet, with
additional obfervations, and leave the -public at
large to determine, whether any indulgence is du(
lo their
Humble
Tht JUT HO &:
iii


Thefe POLITICAL HINTS are humbly
offered by G R , for the Pe-
rufal of the Nobility and Gentry, through
an anxious Intention, andDefireof ferv-
ing his King and Country.
LETTER I.
Ith e following Letter was printed in the Morning
Chronicle on the 29th of December, 1786.
BOTANY BAY.
To prevent evil is for every man to point out
fome good, and to a£t accordingly; there-
fore, Sir, by giving this letter a place in
an early day in your ufeful paper, I hope
it will be found to be of fome fervice at
this juncture.
AFTER a fubjed: has been difcuffed, and
a refolution formed in the minifterial ca-
binet, it may feem impertinent in me, as an
individual, to offer my opinion upon it—but
what proceeds from a good intention merits not
cenfure.
A When


When I am informed that it is intended td
fow fome of the worft feeds in the world, upon
fome of its belt land, I cannot help thinking
there is inconfiftency in the conclufion. This
is, however, the advifed intention refpedling
the colonization of Botany Bay.
I would alk, therefore, what method can be
advifed to enforce five, fix, or feven hundred
convidts or more, villains by profeffion, to the
pradtice of thofe duties of religion and mora-
lity, fo eflentially neceffary to the fupport and
prefervation of focieties, without which no
colony can be expedted to improve, no nation,
indeed, long to flourifh ? And what can in-
duce a man of only common prudence, ever
to go to a country where he mull neceffarily
afiociate with a fet of unprincipled wretches,
amongft whom his property can never be de-
clared lafe, his life, perhaps, never out of
danger.
If Botany Bay be of that fertile nature, as
is fo confidently afferted,- let a governor of
fome confiderable confequence be lent over to
refide there, with a number of good foldiers,
fufficient to fecure him and themfelves from
any dangers which might be apprehended in
the
2


the new fettlement. Then let it be made pub-
lic in England, that any farmer or mechanic,
who will become a fubjedt of that promifing
country called Botany Bay, lhall be prefented
with a confiderable quantity of that mod fer-
tile foil, for the ufe of himfelf and his heirs
for ever. Let the foldiers theptfelves be em-
ployed in the cultivation of particular allot-
ments of land, with the gift of which they
ihould afterwards be rewarded for their feyvices.
I am of opinion, that if the above mode of
colonizing and cultivating Botany Bay, were
to be adopted, the former would be done at
lefs expence, the latter to greater advantage,
than by that already to be concluded upon.
If I am told, that by the adoption of' the
above plan, a total flop would be put; a proper
difpofal or employment of our convidts, I an-
fwer, they may be difpofed of and employed
better at home ; and am almoft perfuaded, that
the plan I have already drawn up for that pur-
po.fe, (which my zeal for the public gooB 1 may
prevail upon me to publilh) will tend more to
the prevention of villainy than any now in
practice.
A 2 LET.
3


LETTTER 11.
2# the Members of both Houfes of Parliament.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Would wifli not to be imagined a dictator
to the legiflature, but only to throw my
ideas in a fcale to be weighed, which, if found
of weight, and worthy of obfervation, it will
anfwer my defign of an anxious defire to ferve
my king and country, however, I may fuffer
from expenees arifing therefrom, though I
flatter myfelf from my former,* as well this
pub-
* In my former pamphlet which was printed in 1786,
alfo in the Morning Chronicle in 1783, made mention of
regiftering feamen, which I wi(h to fay a little more on the
fubjeft ; that is, I would recommend fchools to be adopted,
for boys on board of fuch fhip or (hips that may fail from the
different ports of the kingdom to the boys to be at the
age of 12 years old ; then to go on board of fuch fhips that
fhould be adopted for that purport, and the boys to go fuch
voyage or voyages till they be at the age of 14, then to be
fet at liberty, then go to fuch trade or bufinefs as he or they
may think proper to follow, and when at the age of 21, to
be intitled to their freedom to fet up trade in any corporation
town in this kingdom. Some of the county-houfes of in-
duftry for boys, might be fituated near to the fea-port towns,
on account of being near to the fhipping, and being wanted
for the beforementioned purport, the boys in the houfes of
induftry
4


publication, may, by a generous and noble
mind, meet with that reward, that an honeft
individual deferves for his zeal and attention
to the intereft o,f the community at large.
There
induftry might be taught in fome meafure a little of the mi-
litary difcipline, if the fame were to be obferved in mod:
fchools, it would be found to be a very good thing. My
pamphlet likewife contained fome hints refpedting to the
militia, &c. As the militia is formed for perfonal
prote&ion, and national defence of this kingdom; I think
the legiflature ftiould confider, that a cripple of property
has a greater right to contribute for the fafety of his perfon,,
than a young man of eighteen, and from that to the age of
forty-five, though a great number of that defcription are
objected to for want of proper fize, &c. therefore I propofe
the following.
That every perfon from the age of fixteen, to pay two
{hillings and fix-pence yearly, or —, paupers ex-
cepted; the monies arifing therefrom, to be paid into a
fund for the ufe of fuch perfon or perfons that fhall be bal-
loted to ferve in the militia; that is, for fuch perfons that
be balloted, provided he ferves himfelf in the militia, to
be entitled to 51. per year over and above his pay ; but if
fuch perfon that be balloted, hire a fubftitute, fuch fubftitute
to be entitled only to 21. 10s. per year; but if in time of
war, fuch fubftitutes then to be entitled to 51. per year.
If any money Ihould remain in the fund over and above pay-
ing the faid men, the overplus to go towards procuring
buildings, or ere£f new ones for the ufe of foldiers, their
arms, &c.
5


There are in this kingdom many thoufand
acres of wafte crown lands and others undif-
pofed of, and which, I prefume, if put into
an improvable ftate, would anfwer in two re-
ipedts, by enhancing the value, and make them
more eligible to the purchafer : for which pur-
pofe, I would advife employing part of the
convidts in collecting the ftones off the lands,
and in making walls, &c. as draining, pulh
ploughing, and burning where neceflary; and
in making bank fences round the different al-
lotments ; and if at the time of raifing the
bank fences., attention was paid to pre-
ferve the bell foil round them, for the purpofe
of fowing the feeds of timber and fruit trees,
&c. in little more than half a century, the na-
tion would be poffeffed of a valuable ftore of
timber of feveral kinds, with an increafe of
fuel in thofe parts of the kingdom, where
coal is very expenfive, by reafon of land-car-
riage, &c. The utility of encouraging plants
for timber, muft appear very evident, efpeci-
ally upon appropriated parts, where lands are
now almoft ufelefs; were the allotments of the
fame not to exceed 150 acres in one allotment,
and under that number as may beft fait; every
allotment to be particularized by a ftake fixed
on the fame, with its particular number, and
the number of acres belonging thereto, with
their fituation; the value of the land would be
much
6


much better come at, on account of the lands
being broken into, by making fences, &Ci
The lands being managed as here fet forth*
and by advertifing the number of allotments
in each county. The faid allotments to be
difpofed of feparately by auftion, at each
county town. The allotments to be advertifed
three months before the day of fale, as it will
give an opportunity to perfons who would
chufe to become a bidder for the faid lands;
it would give them alio an opportunity to value
the faid lands, and might take the number of
any allotments as fuch perfons would like to
bid money for. Lands now in leafe under
the crown, to be advertifed 12 months before
they are out of leafe, then fold as before.
On adopting the above plan, government
would be thereby enabled to purchafe timber
for building of {hips, &c; at a much cheaper
rate than keeping lands for that purpofe; as
falaries for different appointments to infpedt
the fame, are attended with a heavy cxpence.
And further, when the lands were fold, let the
purchafer be informed, that at the commence-
ment of the firft feven years after the now barren
lands be fold, then to be valued, and pay two
fhillings in the pound for land tax,one fhilling and
eight-pence in the pound for tithes, and four-
pence
7


pence in the pound for a finking fund; the laft
mentioned money to be applied for the ufe of
fuch perfons that may have been great fufferers
by fire, or other great loffes by water, &c.
&c. fuch a plan* if adopted, would far exceed
the prefent mode of having briefs for that pur-
port; no money to be paid out of the fund,
but what fhould be allowed by the parliament,
the faid land and premifes to be re-valued at
the expiration of every 2.1 years, and to pay
land tax, tithes, and to the fund in proportion
to the increafe and value arifing from faid
lands. The fame to be obferved if an equal
land tax was to take place, would in a few years
meet with an univerfal approbation, as every
one would pay an equal proportion for having
their property protected; at prefent, fome pay
little or nothing for their land, while others
are burthened. Few farms pay more than fix-
pence in the pound, but more that pays not fo
much as fix-pence, befides fome hundred thou-
fands acres of land that pay nothing.
An fqual land tax has been long wanted,
for very obvious and particular reafons well
known; however, objections may arife from
fome, alledging they give more for their pur-
chafe, on account of being exempt from pay-
ing
8


ing little or no land tax. I anfwer, that thofe
who have a great property to protedt in this
kingdom, it is but reafonable they lhould pay
accordingly.
Propofals for thofe convidts that are not em-
ployed in cultivating the crown lands, men and
women convidts, being natives of this king-
dom, be fent to their refpedtive parilhes or
townlhips, if fuch cannot be afcertained, then
to be fent to the parilh or townlhip where the
crime was committed, and to wear a diftin-
guilhing drefs, and an engraved badge expref-
live of their names and crimes, the crime to
be engraved in latin, and to be employed in
fuch work as the majority of the parilhioners
of each parilh or townfliip lhall judge moft
fuitable for them fo to do. Likewife, the pa-
rifliioners of each parifti or townfhip, to build,
hire, or purchafe for every fuch perfon, a
room to relide in, and in fuch a fituation,
where they might be under the greateft infpec-
tion. Alfo, the parifliioners of each parilh or
townfliip, to be at the expence of the livery
of lhame, that each perfon fliould wear in the
faid parilh or townfliip ; a regular attendance
at church in the above-mentioned drefs, which
lhould be enforced for a certain length of time,
that the riling generation haying the example
B fo
9


fo frequently in their fight, may deter others,
and prevent fuch a fhameful example. An at-
tempt to efcape by any means whatever, Ihould
be puniffied with feverity, or made a capital
offence :
And I further add,
T tars. Months,
Provided his or her
good behaviour
If a perfon was fen- merited an allevia-
tenced for - - x tion of ——- 3
Their punilhment to
wear the livery of
To labour for
Ox for life No longer than 3 yrs.
Note. —Any perfon on negledt of their duty ?
before the term of years were expired for
which they were fentenced, to wear the livery
of ffiame again. The convidts employed on
the crown lands, a day book to be kept of
their labour and behaviour, and at the
expiration of their time, to be rewarded ac-
cording to their merit; I would propofe a
fmall houfe,- and a little land, as many might
not choofe to return to their friends, and would
meet with difficulties of obtaining employ-
ment;
10


merit j therefore, if a reward was held out fo
their proper condudt, it might be a means of
preventing them from returning to their former
bad ways of life.
Convidts employed on the crown lands, the
parifhioners, where he or ,fhe was born, or
where the crime was committed, to be charged
with the livery of fhame, but government te
be at all other expences.
The other eonvidts that were fent to the
parifh or townlhip where they were born, or
to the parifh where they committed the fadfc
for which they received fentence: on their
good behaviour and induftry during the time
they ferved, and fhall have earned any money
over and above paying for their maintenance,
as the parifhioners fhall ipake an agreement
with fome perfon for their board; and like-
wife make an agreement for wages with fuch
perfon or perfons that they may work with;
and the overplus money they may fpare, over
and above paying for their cloathing and main-
tenance, the officers of the parifh to receive the
fame, and enter it into the parifh book; and for
every perfon fet at liberty, on good behaviour,
to receive one half the faid money, the other
B 2 half
11


half at the commencement of iz months
after.
The POOR
Conjidered, you parifhioners be upon your guard
and let not your legacy donations be taken from you,
I believe them to be parifh property ; I fay, let all
the legacy donations of each different parifh or
townfhip be entered into the parifh or townfhip's
book, then if a veftry meeting was called every
Sunday, for the parifhioners of each parifh and
townfnip, to enquire and confider who were
proper obje&s of charity in their parifh or
townfhip ; alfo to fix on fuch pay as may ap-
pear neceffary for he, fhe or them to have,
likewife at every meeting to call over all the
names of their cafual poor, and enquire after
their health and fituation in life, as it would be a
means of finding where it would be neceffary
to continue fuch perfon or perfons having pay,
and others, that the parifhioners may think
proper to take their pay off, and not fuffer them
to be continued as cafual poor any longer, but
to ceafe from having pay, unlefs fuch perfon
or perfons go into the parifh work-houfe, or
to fuch other work-houfe as the parifhioners of
the parilh or townfhip may be under contrad:
with to maintain their poor at each per-
fon per week, any perfon or perfons going for
their
12


their donation, which fhould be to the veftry
meeting, and fnch perfons to convey agree-
able to orders, donations to fuch perfons that
be not able to go for the fame •, any perfon on
negledting fo to do, to fuffer fuch punilhment
as fhall be diredted ; any perfon receiving a
donation, the value thereof; with the perfon's
name to be entered in a book for that purport,
with the day of the month, as the fame may
be feen every veftry meeting. And further,
that when any perfon or perfons from age, o r
being rendered not able to do any work, to
have a feparate apartment adjoining to the
faid houfe of induftry, for fuch perfons to re-
fide in from the others; if a chapel of eafe
were eredted near the houfes it would be very-
proper, likewife fome land joining thereto,
the fame to be confecrated for the burial of
the dead of fuch houfe, and for any other
corpfe that may be thought proper for the
inhabitants of the parifhto bring there to inter;
fuch land being very much wanted at many
chapels of eafe for that purpofe, as many dif-
ficulties attend the great diftances of taking the
corpfe to fome burial grounds, which calls
very much for fome great amendment refpedt-
ing the fame. Numbers of chapels of eafe are
now much wanted in various parts of this
.kingdom, which would be the means of pre-
vent-
13


venting fo many diffenters; likewife be a pre,
ventive to a great number of meeting-houfes,
which will be a means of putting a check to
many weak arguments that arifes therefrom,
a great deal might be faid refpedfing the hint
above-mentioned, which I do not doubt but
what there have been before this day ; but on
account of the extenfive fcale that it might
appear in, might be the principal reafon of fo
voluminous an undertaking were omitted.
Therefore Ihould thefe hints, or any part of
them, meet with the attention of the legifla-
ture, perhaps then there might be a probability
of killing two birds with one ftone, in many
parts of this kingdom, refpedting the fame,
STROLLING BEGGARS
Might be reduced by the following plan,
or fomethiag fimilar, which is by having a
houfe of relief in every parifh in the cities of
London and Weftminfter; likewife in all mar-
ket towns and where neceflary, for the fol-
lowing purport; that is, in fuch houfes proper,
provifion be kept for the ufe of the faid ftrolling
beggars, &c. to be relieved with, till they
can get to their refpedtive parifh to where he,
fhe, or they belong to, each perfon to be
obferved to have a pafsport figned by a juftice
to
1 4


to entitle them to the relief, the houfes to be
continued on with provifion as abovemen-
tioned, for the relief of fuch perfons that have
a pafsport to the parifh ro where they
belong, and likewife for fuch other perfons that
may be caft pennylefs on their journey too;
provided fuch perfon or perfons get a permit
from a juftice of peace, that will entitle he,
Ihe, or them, to the above relief.
Note. All paupers to have his, or her name
entered in a book kept for that purpofe, with
the day of the month, and as often as each per-
fon mefs therein, and other favours that they
may receive, with proper defcription of their
perfons, age, and infirmities, and where they
belong to. To prevent impofitions; punifh-
ment, either corporeal or imprifonment, to
fuch as are found offending : rule? and orders
to be previoufly made known to them on their
examination for admittance into tRe faid mefs-
houfe. It would be neceffary to have an ad-
ditional houfe of induftry in every county;
then fuch paupers that cannot give a good ac-
count of themfelves, to be taken up, and fent
to the county-houfe of induftry, and there to
remain, and to be employed in doing fuch
work as they fhould be found capable of; and
according to their merit to be regarded.
OBSEll-
15


OBSERVATION S,
For proper per Jons to be appointed at each houfe for
the relief of pajfport paupers.
If an adting juftice were eftablilhed at, or
near every fuch houfe, it would make a readier
mode for tranfadting bufinefs ; alfo a clerk for
taking down every perfon's name that Ihould
be relieved at fuch houfes, &c. Likewife if
forne of the apartments in the faid houfes,
were to be fitted up with decent beds and bed-
ding, fome of the apartments with clean ftraw,
for good reafons; for thofe unfortunate per-
fons who might be deftitute of lodgings, to
lay upon, for a night or fo.
The money for fupporting the above men-
tioned houfes, and falaries for an adting juftice,
alfo a clerk to ditto ; I fay, let the overfeers of
every parifh and townlhip that is the neareft
to any of the faid mefs-houfes, them for to
fefs and colledt in the pound of the parilhioners
for the ufe beforementioned; the money to be
paid into the hands of the truftees of the faid
houfe where relief Ihould be had for the pafs-
port paupers. The perfons entitled to the
place
16


place of the adting juilice, to be licenfed at-
torneys in<khe faid diitridt, the manner of
choofing them, that each perfon to have their
name put in a bag and drawn, the firft drawn to
be entitled to the place; fuch a mode being
adopted, will prevent much trouble and con-
fufion, which too often attends balloting, &c.
the clerk to have been an articled clerk to
fome attorney in the faid diitridt, and to be
chofe by the fame mode as the adting juitice
were; if the mailers of all the united poor-
houfes and others were chofe in the fame man-
ner, would be the means of preventing a great
deal of partiality, &c« Clerks and the fexton*
to the pariih churches, want fomething of the
kind very much.
Governors of the above houfes, will be re-
quired, to infpedl and; make fuch rules, and re-
gulations as may be thought proper: fay, ap-
point the corporation of each county-town to
be governors over the county-houfes of in-
duftry, the faid haufe tp. b.e fupported out of
the county ftock.
Governors oyer the pafsport-houfes, to be
the juftices of fuch diviiicfn, that the faid
houfe or houfes may iland in.
C Governors
17


Governors over parifti poor-houfes, but in
particular where parilhes or townfhips are
united, fuch poor-houfes, to be governed by
a certain number of fuch perfons whofe names
had been put down to ferve as high conftable
in that diftridt where the faid poor-houfe or
houfes may {land in; fpeaking of an increafe of
chapels, in the former part of this letter will
require an increafe of clergymen therefore, to
make living for the fame. I propofe at the
death of the incumbents of fuch livings be-
longing to the crown, the two Univerfities,
Bilhops, Deans, and the Lord Chancellor; to
dedudt ten per cent, out of all livings that ex-
ceeds no/, per year. Livings being the pro-
perty of noblemen, or private perfons, at the
death of the prefent incumbents to dedudt from
them five per cent, and the money arifing there-
from, to be applied for the ufebeforementioned.
Hares and rabbits, in many parts of this
kingdom are much encouraged, which animals
do a deal of harm in corn fields, and to the
young pi ants that were intended for timber trees,
&c. befides, is the caufe of a great many neigh-
bours being at variance with each other, there-
fore if the fchemes, expences and trouble which
many perfons are at in preferving thofe animals,
were
18


were the fame applied to find the beft way that
would Caufe an encreafe of Iheep; what a great
difference it would make to this country, and
to the people that are in it. I have an idea,
what I think would be a good fcheme for to
caufe an encreafe of fheep; and that is, a tax
on dogs, which has been fo long talked of,
and if the money arifing from the tax on
dogs, was applied to the ufe of buying lands and
ere&ing chapels thereon, as beforementioned,
when the number of chapels is eredted that
are wanted in each county, then the money
arifing from the faid tax, to be divided amongft
that number of clergymen, which then might
have the livings of fuch chapels.
Permit me to give a hint refpe&ing the tax
on dogs, fuppofing the fame to take place, the
firftyear at 2s. 6d. for each dog, and afterwards
as may be judged proper, it will by fo doing
prevent many difputes on account of pro-
ving their kinds ; befides making it an eafy tax
for the firft year or two, it would prevent the
too great daughter amongft thofe ufeful animals,
if any diftinftion be made, it fhould be on the
Dane kind, it ought to be made a fine for any fuch
dogs going ioofe on any road, for they frighten
the children very much, artd do other da-
mages, and are very ufelefs animals.
C 2 Further
19


Further fay, that every bitch, which may
bring forth a pup or puppies, the owners of
the faid bitch, fhould let the overfeer or fuch
other officer that may be appointed, know in
the fpace of nine days, and on negledt thereof,
every fuch perfon to pay a fine of as the
faid pup or puppies fhould be entered into the
parifh,or townfhip book, and in thirty one days
after fuch pup or puppies be entered into the
faid book, the owner thereof to pay fix-pence
for every pup that he may have, and at the
commencement of fix months, to pay for each
eighteen pence, twelve months, two fhillings
and fix-pence.
Note. Let the number of chapels of eafe
that may be l'uppofed to be wanted in each
county ; let each name of every place where
wanted be taken down, and fame be put in a
bag, then draw, and the names that fhall be
firft drawn, fuch chapels to be eredted firft.
Where any poor perfon' not being qualified
to fupport their children, fuch boys and girls,
then be fent to different places that might be
eredted in each county, fimilar to the Foundling
Hofpital, there let the girls be taught the work
ofhoufewifry, iniuch houfe orhoufesthat might
be
20


be required for them, the bdys in their houfes
might alfo be taught to card, fpin, knit, making
of lace, &c. youth being taught the above
work, would be found ufeful to them in all
ages, all feafons of the year, in all kinds of
weather, and would be found proper amufe-
ment for many perfons when grown to the age
of maturity, likewife in fome kinds of iicknefies,
and other misfortunes. Many day labourers,
or other perfons, when not able to work at
a trade, likewife not able to thralh, mow,
plow, or fow, probably fuch perfon or per-
fons might be able either to card, fpin,
knit, or make lace, &e. Such work being
taught to youth, are very likely when grown up
to know the value of tlieir wearing apparel,
it would not be Unlikely then but thoufands
of perfons in every county, would be apt to
knit their own ftockings, alfo kint pieces for
breeches and waiftcoats for their own wear and
likewife for fale; fuch induftry being brought
about, would caufe a great plenty of fuch
commodities for the home Confumption, like-
wife to fpare for a foreign market, which is
well known will for wear, far exceed thofe that
are woven,befides caufing induftry in the nation,
would alfo be a great check to vice, by youth
being taught and employed in doing fuch work
as here fet forth. See the want of fuch work
being
21


being taught to children in and about Man-
chefter, and many other trading towns, and in
general every part almofl; elfewhere in the
kingdom, but in particular where trade is car-
ried on; for inftance, how many thoufands of
perfons were out of employ fome time back,
on account of the cotton trade, being rather at
a ftand ; though the cotton trade be of very
great fervice for employing children, it is the
greateft caufe of the increafe of the poor, and
for other bad vices; for this reafon, when the
boys grow up to be young men, alfo the girls
to be young women, too often are difcarded on
account of their wanting more wages, which
they think themfelves entitled to; on being out
of employ, they foon come to be diftrefled, and
very likely married, for in the trading towns
in general, young perfons often marry very
early in life, on account of coming fo foon to
the knowledge of money, before they know how
to make good ufeof it, they therefore too often,
fpend it on a large young family, and the par-
ents themfelves toooften fo reduced, by bringing
up their family, the hufband not qualified to
turn his hands to any other kind of work ex-
cepting to hulbandry, and not being accuftomed
to that kind of work, for that reafon find many
farmers that will only employ them in the
time
22


time of the farmer's neceffity. Then their
fate is to go to the work houfe, where too
often fuch poor fouls meet with a bare main-
tenance. Therefore were the youth taught
to card, fpin, knit, and make kce, &c. the
ufeful practice of which, of late years, has
been greatly omitted, to the injury of children,
as it was a means of providing employment in
and out of fchool-hours, and keeping them
frpm jdlenefs, and other vices.
Printed
23


Printed in the Morning Chronicle, Friday,
QElober 20th, 1786.
THE following hints arc offered for the
conlideration of the legiflature, to take off
the prefent wheel-tax, except public carriages,
on different lives —■
Every perfon under the age of 25.
£• s • d.
For a four wheel carriage 150 o a
If more than ditto, for each 200 o o
For a two wheel carriage 80 o o
More than one ditto, ditto 100 o o
Private fedan, ditto 50 o o
From 25 to 30.
For a four wheel carriage 125 o o,
If more than one ditto, for each 150 o o
For a two wheel carriage - 60 o o
More than one ditto, for each 80 o o
Private fedan, ditto —— 40 o o
From 30 to 45.
For a four wheel carriage 100 o o
More than one ditto, for each 150 o o
Two wheel carriage —— 50 o o
More than one ditto, for each 60 o o
Sedan ■ ——■ 30 o o
From
24


From 45 to 55.
For a four wheel carriage 90 o o
More than one ditto, for each 150 o o
Two wheel carriage ——— 40 o o
More than one ditto, for each 60 o o
Sedan ■ ■l■ - 20 o o
From 50 to 60
Four wheel carriage So o o
More than one ditto, for each 150 o o
Two wheel carriage 30 o o
More than one ditto, for each 50 o o
Sedan, for each 10 o o
All perfons upwards of 60.
For a four wheel carriage 30 op
More than one, for each r- 100 op
Two wheel carriage . .■ 10 o o
More than one ditto, for each 30 o o
Sedan tax then to ceafe.
The monies to be funk in a fund for the ufe
of government.
I am of opinion, if the above tax were to
take place, it would prevent many fetting up
carriages, that have not fufficient means to fup-
port the expences thereof; alfo prevent the
D public
2 5


public from being fo frequently impofed on by
deceptive appearances. Objections may arife
on the propofed tax, on the firft view; but
upon due confideration, the advantages arifing
therefrom, would overcome any objection that
can be made thereon. Impofitions on govern-
ment by the prcfent tax would be avoided;
the expences of collecting the prefent tax, as
well preventing the nobility and gentry from
having difagreeable applications made to them
for payment of the tax on carriages, by paying
the tax at one payment, and that being done,
when they were in fuli power, and affluence
fo to do; and it might be a means to check
young perfons from extravagance in their firft
letting out in life; and government would, by
intereft accumulating, find great advantage
within a few years.
G. R.
ALE-HQ U S E S.
Obferving notice have been taken of many
inconveniencies from the great number of
alehoufes, and I am of opinion, as well as
a great many more, is a means of incfeafing
the poor, by corrupting their morals, diffipa-
ting their fubftance, and rendering them idle
and
26


and carelefs of themfelves-and difireffed fami-
lies; therefore, were ale-houfes reduced to a lefs
number, which is much wifhed for in mod parts
Of this kingdom, feveral advantages would
arife, even to mechanics; matters would find
their* fervants more induftrious, and ready of
gaining a livelihood { by that means, trade
would be more agreeably carried on, and many
poor families might be better provided for,
and reap the advantages of fobriety and indus-
try : Whereas, at prefent, many journeymen,
&c. are addidted to frequent public-houfes,
and gaming being too frequently fuffered;
therefore, if ale-h'oufes were reduced, and
greater reftri&ions obferved, it woyld be a
means to give a check to the idle and ditto,
lute, and in time extricate the pernicious con-
fequences complained of; and in order for the
better obfervance of the fabbath day, publi-
cans not to be allowed to fell or draw liquors
on the above -mentioned day, but at the follow-
ing hours, from eight to nine in the morning,
from twelve to two in the afternoon, and from
four to eight in the evening.
If government would alfo take the following
proportions into confederation, I apprehend it
would be the means of anfwering various good
.purpofes.
D 2 It
27


It is faid to be in agitation, for toreduce the
number of public-houfes, if fo, Ihould it not
be confidered that fome allowance Ihould, and
ought to be made to the publicans for their
brewing utenfils, &c. Likewife, to prevent
partiality in putting down public houfes.
For every publican that doth not pay 21. 10s.
a fitting, or 151. per year for excife, government
then to give to fuch publicans 251.; every
publican that exceeds 21. 10s. and not exceed
41. per fitting, or 241. per year, government
to give them 161.; all publicans that exceed
41. per fitting, or 241. per year, to have iol. If
the above plan was adopted, fuch publicans who
had a mind to retire from felling ale, &c. &c.
would have a little money to turn their hands
to.
Now to recompence them for their money paid
as abovementioned :—Say, for every ale licence
to pay for the firft year 251. the fecond year 151.
the third year iol. and the fourth year 31. and
fo remain. Spirits and wine licence to be in
proportion to the ale licence. This plan or
fomething fimilar, would be a great means to
prevent perfons from keeping a public-houfe of
no property.
No
28


No publican to be allowed to tvuft a day
labourer more than two-pence per day for li-
quor of any kind, nor ferve them with liquor
on truft, not more than feven days, if fuch they
do, then to be at fuch perfon's option whe.
tber they pay any of the faid debt; fuch rules
and regulations to be wrote up in the entrance
of every fuch houfe as above-mentioned.
PRO-
29


PROPOSALS
For A itiore (eligible, certain, and
expeditious Mode of railing SEA-
MEN, and preventing them from
entering into foreign Service, &c.
Published in the Mornings-Chronicle, 1783, *
by G— ■R— :
No. t.
For regifierlng and granting certificates.
THAT able feamen, from the age of
twenty to thirty years, have their names
entered and regiftered in the Navy-office, or fuch
other office or offices as may be appointed in the
different parts of the kingdom for that purpofe;
and on every feaman being regiftered, lhallhave
and receive a certificate thereof, which certifi-
cate lhall entitle him, from the day of the date
* Notice thereof was taken by a Noble Earl in the Houfe
of Lords in 1784.
of
30


of fuch certificate, to be paid, and received
annually, the fum of free and clear
from any deduction or expence whatfoever, or
in proportion, during the time he was un-
employed.
Notice of Sqiling.
That every fuch feaman, unemployed in his
Majefty's fervice, lhall have liberty to enter on
board any English merchant fhip> or veffel, on
his forthwith giving notice thereof to a proper
officer affigjied for that purpofe in the different
parts of the kindom, from whence he is to fail,
and where bound for, with the name of the.
captain, or matter of fuch fhip, or veffel; and on
his return to England, to notify the fame at the
office where he regiftered himfelf, by producing a
certificate of his difcharge from the captain, or
matter with whom he failed; and in cafe any
feaman Ihould defert or leave his ffiip, of veffel,
the captain or matter thereof, to be compelled*
on his arrival in any port in England, to make
the fame known in perfon, or fend notice there-
of, under his own hand-writing, to the Navy-
office, that fuch perfon or perfons abfconding f
or deferting his fhip, or veffel, fhall be ftruckout
of the regitter, and for ever to be excluded the
benefit and advantage of fuch provifion made as
aforefaid, unlefs fuch perfon or perfons do return^
to
31


to England within months from his or their
abfconding, or deferting his or their Ihip or vef-
fel, producing fufficient reafons for fo doing, by
affidavit made, taken, and attefled by one of his
Majefty's confuls, &c. refiding neareft to the
place from whence he or they abfeonded, or de-
ferred, as aforefaid; then and in fuch cafe, the
perfon or perfons to continue and remain in the
regifter book, and be intitled to, and receive
the provifions made as aforefaid.
Frovijlon for difabledfeamen.
Every able feaman, being duly regiftered as
before mentioned, and ferving on board any of
his Majefty's fhips of war, Ihould by any means
on board thereof lpfe a limb, or limbs, and be
thereby rendered incapable of ferving his Ma-
jefty, and of earning his livelihpod, to be paid
and receive yearly the full fum of
clear and free from any deduction, or expence
whatfoever; but if difcharged, and able to fol-
low any employment, to receive the full fupi of
per annum, free from any deduftions
as aforefaid.
Provifions for ordinary feamen.
That ordinary feamen, from the age
of fixteen to twenty-three years, regiftering
them-
32


felves in manner and form afcrefaid> to receive
and be paid tbe full fum of L a y'earj
clear as aforefaid, till fuch time as they Ihall
produce a certificate from the laft captain, ot
mafter, they failed with s of being able feamenj,
then to be rated, and intitled to fuch provifioa
as made and mentioned for able Teamem
Regulations■>
Ordinary feame'n to be fubjedfc to the feveral
orders, reftridtions and regulations, as before
mentioned and expreffedv
Provifion for ordinary difibled Seamen.
Every ordinary feaman, as above deferibed 4
lofing a limb or limbs, on board any of his
majefty's {hips, and thereby rendered incapable
of ferving his majefty, and of earning his
livelihood, to be paid and receive yearly the
fum of clear of any deduction as afore*-
faid; but if difchatged from his majefty *s Ihip,
and able to follow any employment, to receive
Only the fum of per annum, clear of deduc*
fen as aforefaid,
E Gtrti*
33.


Certificates of difcharge to be produced, for receiving
penfions.
All able feamen, or ordinary as aforefaid,
to produce certificates of their difcharge from
their refpedtive fhips, figned by their officers
and dodtors, fetting forth where wounded, and
by what means they received their feveral and
refpedtive injuries, which fhall entitle them to
receive fuch yearly penfions as before-men-
tioned and provided.
Provifion for fuperannuated feamen.
Every regiftered feaman, attaining the age of
fifty years, fliall have his difcharge from his
majefty's fea-fervice; and if not provided for on
fhore, in any of his majefty's dock yards, hofpi-
tals, &c. fhall be intitled to, and paid, the full
fum of yearly, for ten years, and at the
expiration thereof, fhall receive and be paid the
full fum of per annum, during life.
Provifion for widows.
Every regiftered feaman, lofing his life on
board, in his majefty's fervice, and leaving a wife
and child, or children; fuch widow, producing
a certificate of her marriage, fhall, during her
widowhood, be intitled and paid the full fum of
34


a year, clear, as before-mentioned; if no
child, then fuch widow to be intitled to and re-
ceive only the full fum of a year, during
her widowhood.
For regijiering on removing, &c.
And that the navy-office may at all times be
enabled to have, and keep, an exadt and correct
account of the number of fuch regiftered feamen,
and of their feveral and refpecftive refidence, fuch
feamen removing from any pariffi, or country,
wherein they were, or are regiftered, ffiall, on
their removal therefrom, give proper notice
thereof at the office where they were regiftered ;
and an ejcadt lift of all the regifters made, to be
tranfmitted to the navy-office, from time to time,
as fhall be fixed upon, from each and every
office in the faid kingdom, appointed for the
purpofe aforefaid.
Note. The feveral fums of the different pro-
vifions are left open for the determination of the
legiflature.
Thefe propofals, it is humbly prefumed,
would anfwer, with the concurrence of parlia-
ment, the purpofe of preventing our feamen
from entering into foreign fervice; and to en-
E a able
35


able government, in time of" war, toman a fleet o-f
fhips, from thirty to fifty fail of the line, exchifiv*'
of the ihips kept in corn million in time of
peace, Alfo, prevent the inconveniences am
landing the imprefs fervice j and likewife he at
great faving to the nation, by raifing feameu
without the expence qf bounty-money,
MIIi r J A
iam of the opinion, were the militia to bo
;egula.ted on the following plan, or iowethmg;
smilar, would far exceed the prefent mode of'
tailing the militia, likewife a greater preventive,
to inyaficns, My propofal is for eredtmg, oaf-
procuring of buildings in. all market-towns- an*|
large villages; the buildings. to, be for the ufo
of flot'ng the arms, &c.«, belonging to, the
militia; the building aright be made lo com-
modious as to- receive a. segiajeat of foldiers^
when on the march to—* , or likewife at:
quarters, inftcadof" being quartered at public-%
houfes. if fuch a plan was to take pi-ace, ip
would remove a great many grievances,
3 6


And that a proper number of men, with ferae
of the officers and private men, pickt out from
among the invalids, be appointed to take care
of the arms, &e« and for the convenience of
which, as the ferjeants, corporals, and fuch
who receive full pay, with an addition of pay
thereto, might at their lei lure time, initruCt
fuch perfens who might, be inclined to learn the
military difeipline, which would renderthcraof
immediate ufe s Alfa, if the artillery was to be
placed in market-towns, with a few pieces of
cannon, the art of gunnery might thereby be
acquired by fuch perfons who might be inclined
to lie taught the artillery, which, upon any
emergency , the cannon and men would he ready,
if wanted, and be of particular ferric e; as
30,000, or upwards -veil dueipFused men, might
be railed at the fhorteft notice-, By having
men in market -towns, and large villages, it
would prevent many good hufbandmen being
taken from the plough, and ruined, by diftrcf-
fffig them and their families.
Such men, who voluntarily take up arms, ffec
their defence of king and country, to fee al-
lowed one guinea per annum, and when called
into a#ual fervke, t© havs one fhifeSing per
file m, at the expiration of yr«4 of faith-
S\^
4144
37


ful fervice Such men as are not pofieffed of
five pounds a year, nor pay the ten pounds,
if rendered incapable of bearing arms, or fol-
lowing any bufinefs for a livelihood, to have
a penfion of ten guineas j and the widow of fuch
perfons, not poffefiing two pounds twelve {hil-
lings a year, nor pay the rent of five pounds a
year, to have a penfion of five guineas a year.
By having men on the above plan, there
Would be no occafion to have the men em-
bodied, even in time of war ; only when an
enemy is landed, or attempting fo to do, then
two or three field-days in the year, for the of-
ficers to fee if the men had kept themfelves in
proper difcipline, which would be quite fuf-
ficient, and when fuch field-days were ap-
pointed, then where towns lay convenient, the
men in the faid towns might march to fome
convenient fpot of ground, that lay between the
towns, for them to do their exercife on, and
when they had gone through their exercife,
each man might then return home at night to
his own camp.
This would be good oeconomy, and be a pre-
ventive to a great deal of future wickednefs
fifing, which has been too much the cafe,
when-
38


whenever they were at quarters, or embodied*
Another advantage might be to the nation;
for fuch men would learn their difcipline, and
fight, if wanted, in their own coat, as well as
in a red one, at the expence of the nation: and
by having all forts of warlike ftores in the faid
buildings; What enemy would dare to land any
troops in this kingdom, when it was fo well
prepared ?. if fo an apparent good undertaking
fhould not be encouraged, What may be ex-
pected in the hour of diftrefs ?
HINTS
39


HINTS,
FuMiJbedm ADVERT ISE FT|
By " G
Jftne xyth, 17841
Mr. Editor t
IF lotteries are granted, to anfwer particular
purpofes, for the benefit of individuals, why
is there not one at this time thought of to en*
courage manufacture and agriculture ? there-
by rendering it ufeful in its nature, and a defera-
ble objedt to adventurers ; that, and the fol*
lowing hints I fhall add, I prefume will, in a
great meafure, anfwer feveral good purpofes.
That all the crown lands, now lying wafte,
be parcelled out in diftindt allotments, and pro-
portions for prizes. The loweft allotment to
contain 20 acres, and the higheftnot to exceed
150 acres. Every allotment to be particu-
larized by a flake fixed on the fame, with its
par-
40


particular number, and the number of acres
belonging thereto.
Every prize ticket to bear the number of the
allotment, with its fituation.
Every perfon who occupies any land, to have
liberty of killing game thereon, by hawking,
or fair fhooring with a gun; and that no game
fhould be permitted to be deftroyed by any netj
or nets, or taken by any other means than with
a hawk, or fair fhooting the fame. Any perfon
or perfons found offending, contrary to fuch
directions, fhould pay a fine of
Every perfon who carries a gun, to pay an-
nually, the fum of five fhillings, and to have
his name and place of abode engraved on a plate
affixed thereto. Whether the tax on
game-keepers, was not borrowed from this.
Note, IF any dog fhould be found worrying
or killing fheep, without a collar, fignifying
the owner's name and place of abode, engraved
thereon, to pay double damages, or any dog
running mad at large, without a collar as afore-
faid, to pay a fine, as may be judged proper.
F On
41


On AGRICULTURE.
It will be needlefs for me to give the reader
more trouble than what isabfolutely neceffary,
on the following fubjedt, as many judicious per-
fons in hufbandry have written more good things
on the improvement of agriculture, than has
ever been yet practiced, and the utility proved ;
for which reafon many men, who have got a
tolerable fliare of the practical part of hufbandry,
can do little in propagating the fame, for want
of a knowledge in the theory part; and he that
hath the theory part of hufbandry, is very often
much deficient in the practical part. There-
fore the want of a knowledge, both of the theory
and practical part, prevents the improvement
of agriculture, which fhould at all times be
encouraged, and would not only benefit the
landed gentlemen, but alfo the country in
general.
Some perfons probably may be of an opinion,
that thele obfervations will give gentlemen too
much infight and knowledge of making the
belt of their lands: however, lam of opinion,
42


that gentlemen poffeffing landed eftates, lhould
have the knowledge of agriculture, they being
able to improve lands, by making experiments
to effedt the fame.
If gentlemen of landed property, would ac-
cuftom themfelves to take their fons or heirs
apparent, when they return from fchool, col-
lege, &c. to vifit with him his tenants, and
infpedt the lands and premifes, by fo doing,
would make themfelves better acquainted with
the neceffary repairs wanted, and fee that the
land at the fame time was manured at a proper
feafon. It would alfo be the means of ground-
ing the theory and practical part of hufbandry,
in its different branches, into the minds of fuch
fons or heirs, who would reap great advantages
■ thereby, when grown up to the years of rjia-
turity, and taking poffeffion of eftates. Agri-
culture, by that means, would be learnt by
amufement, and recreation, of riding frequently
on their paternal eftates. I advife, gentlemen
would have accurate plans of their different
farms, defcribing particularly the arable and
meadow land; that is, the number of acres
and fences which are on them, or bounded by
others, to be diftinguifhed by different colour-
ings in the plan.
It
43


It is well known, that merchants, tradefmen,
See. all toil and labour with a view of attain-
ing a fortune, which, when acquired, are gene,
rally anxious in purchafing eftates; and who are,
too often, ill ufed, by confiding in ignorant or
avaricious perfons, to tranladf their bufinefs, in
letting lands, farms, or of holding of lands
farms, &c.
Hufbandry certainly is pleafing in the fight
of God; and man being fent on the earth to be
induftrious, and to till the earth, fo that the
earth lhould caft out of her bowels a greater
abundance, to fupport the increafe of fouls,
and living creatures. Therefore, it is very
evident, that arts and fciences are dependant
On that heavenly art—hufbandry.
Farmers have been at great expences in
many counties, in railing thorn fences; like-
wife cutting down iuch fences, after many
years lhading his lands, and damaging them;
and when thorns are cut down, are of little
mfe, than for dead fences. Therefore, were
thorn fences only encouraged at the ends of
the fields, that is, where the horfes and the
plough frequently turn about, upon which is
called the head land; when fuchclofe or clofes
be
44


be ploughed, to plough the head land, on ac-
count of making it not fo liable to misfortunes,
for when fuch lands are harrowed, and the
head land being grafs, by the harrow flicking
in the faid grafs, often caufes them to be
broken, with other misfortunes, fuch as turn-
ing the harrows over upon the horfes, which
too often happen, by the harrows going upon
the grafs; particularly when the driver of the
horfes be carelefs.
1 am of an opinion, that if the feeds and
cuttings of fuch timber trees, fruit trees, and
underwood, that might be deemed proper for
the fide fences of any clofe, fuch being en-
couraged to grow inftead of thorns, the uti-
lity thereof would he found in a few years,
particularly, was there five or fix yards broad
left for grafs next fuch fences, it would caufe
early grafs in the fpring; alfo, prevent the
plough from being interrupted by roats,
that might proceed from the hedgerow timber
that might be fuffered to grow. There appears
in my eyes, great advantages which would arifc
from fuch fences being encouraged. Give me
leave to make a few remarks, what fome of the
advantages would be.
Firft.—■
45


firft.—Coal mines themfelves may be ex-
haufted;—whence then is the deficiency to be
fupplied, but by the encouragement of the
growth of timber and underwood.
Second.—ln twelve or fourteen years, there
would be great plenty of fmall timber and un-
derwood, to make thofe kind of hurdles, which
are made ufeof in fomeparts of Staffordfhire and
Warwickfhire. Likewife, in many parts of
this kingdom, the hurdles is very light, being
made of underwood, &c. twilled together, the
faid hurdles might be made by day labourers
and fervants in bad weather, which work, if
adopted, would be found very profitable to the
farmer, &c.
Such hurdles, with care, will ferve feveral
years, and where a clofe is ploughed, by leaving
afewyardsforbroad grafs,nextto the fide fence,
as beforementioned, the fame being wanted
to be eat, the hurdles then might be put up
between the corn and grafs, then the faid grafs
may be eat with fheep and young cattle. And
if timber plants was encouraged to grow for
fences, particularly fuch plants, that when the
boughs were cut off in full leaf, lheep might
eat the leaves and buds, of fome kinds, then
the (ticks might be taken home for fuel, or
burnt for afhes, &c,
I fur-
46


I further obferve, how unthinking many of
our landed gentlemen are; fome deceive them-
felves by their own imagination—others are
led into errors by the perfuafions of unlkilful,
avaricious ftewards, &c. to lay farm to farm,
whereby they injure their eftates by fo doing;
therefore, if farms did not exceed one hundred
acres in a farm, it would be of great utility to
the nation ; and fuch farm-houfe and barn be"
ing near the lands, 'tis needlefs to mention the
favings, conveniency, and expedition of getting
in their corn, hay, &c. and the ready convey-
ance of manure, &c. for cultivating their lands,
&c. Therefore it muft, to every perfon,
evidently appear in favour thereof, and would
foon repay the expence, either for buildings or
repairs, made on the eftate. I would recom-
mend a tax of fix-pence per acre, to be laid on
fuch perfons who rent above one hundred acres,
and one fhilling on thofe that exceed one
hundred and fifty acres, and fo on, in propor-
tion, for all above that number.
RE-
47


REMARKS,
On felling EJlates uncultivated.
IT is an old obfervation, that poverty is the
caufe of many landed eftates being fold; and
had many of the owners been able to put their
land into better condition, they would certainly,
for their own benefit, have done it, before dif-
pofing of the fame. I would advife, therefore,
government, not to difpofe of the wafte crown
lands in the date they are now in, but put them
into a better ftate for cultivation, which lam
fenfible may eafily be effedted, by employing
fome of the men convidts, likewife the mili-
tary, and their horfes ; whereby great expences
would be faved in the above undertaking, not-
withflanding an additional pay was given to the
foldiers employed, as an encouragement for
their labour and induftry.—Temporary build-
ings might be eredted for the ufe of fuch labour-
ers, where the land was diftant from a town, or
village ; which buildings to go with the land-
And fuch convidts on their good behaviour, and
induftry, to have theirliberty after fuch a time,
as might be adjudged.
Having
48


Having recommended fowing feed of timber
trees on proper parts of the waile crown lands*
for railing timber, whereby government will be
enabled to purchafe timber for building fhips,
See. at a much cheaper rate than keeping lands
for that purpofe, as falaries for different appoint-
ments to infpedt the fame, will be attended
with an heavy expence, before any benefit can
be received therefrom. Trees and underwood
growing in corners of fields, will grow quicker
by being in clumps; they would afford alhade
to the cattle in fummer, and be lhelter for them
in winter. The underwood will make a good
cover for game; and fuch underwood, when cut
from among the trees, will be ufeful for feveral
purpofes. lam of the opinion, if many kinds
of timber trees, fuch as oak, alh, holly, and
fome others were to be lopped fmooth by bill,
or chiffrl, in May or the beginning of June, as
the fap then riling will caufe the bark fooner to
grow over. By fawing off the limbs, it leaves
a roughnefs, which catches and caufes the
tree to decay; but if cut with a faw, I would
advife the roughnefs taken off by a bill, chilfel*
&c. I would recommend holly and thorn for a
fence round clumps, as a guard againft cattle,
a nd a means of preventing leaves at their fall
being carried in fuch quantities in the field
leaves being pernicious to cattle particularly
G alhj
49


afh ; the roots alfo are bad for the land ; for
which reafon the alh ftiould be planted in the
centre of the clumps. Trees in hedge-rows
fliade the land, and are hurtful to the fences if
not trees were to be fuffercd to remain between
clutnp and clump, and corners of fields where
trees are encouraged to grow therein, the land
would be benefitted thereby, extend the prof-
pedt, and render it more pleafing to the eye.
If leafes were granted for not lefs than twenty
one years, and the tenant allowed, at the ex-
piration thereof, ten pounds in the hundred
for all improvements upon the gowth of timber,
and the leflor not to raife the tenant above half
the value of the improvement made on the land;
the lefior would find his advantage therein, and
the leffee would take greater care than in gene-
ral is done; for when leafes run Ihort, the lands
frequently are in worfe condition at the expira-
tion of the term, than when it commenced.
Short leafes is a great hindrance to the far.
mevs, keeping bees, likewife railing friut trees,
IN
50


IN a former part, of this pamphlet, where
is mentioned for fixing refidence, and em-
ployment for the poor, I add, and recommend,
planting great quantities of mulberry-trees,
for encouraging filk-worms, which would be
a means of employing the poor;—if bees
were alfo encouraged, would it not be very
advantageous in many refpedts, by employing
the poor in making hives for bees, and taking
care of them ? The produdt from the mul-
berries and the leaves, alfo from honey and the
wax, would be of great ufe, and well pay the
encouragement here mentioned.
<3>uery. —Whether turneps, if fown in the
month of May, or before, upon fuch lands as
were intended for fummer fallow, would not
anfvver the farmer's purpofe upon trial of fuch
lands, without manuring the fame, particularly
fuch lands that lay the greateft diftance from
the manure. It is well known, many farmers
make fummer fallow, and have no manure to
let on the fame; and it very often happens, if
the farmer has manure, many of his fields
laying at fo great a diftance, very often pre-
vents getting the faid manure on the faid lands,
being prevented by wet feafons, &c.
G 2 There-
51


Therefore, if fowing fome turnep-.feed in an
earlier feafon of the year, and the fame having
fuccefs thereby-—Whether on heavy or light
land, by eating the fame off by Iheep in the
months of July or Auguft, would not the land
produce a better crop of wheat, &c. the fol-
lowing year, by fo doing; and the farmer
might referve greater plenty of grafs for his
cattle, in the advanced feafon of the year.
For manuring kitchen garden ground.
I recommend penning flieep thereon, rvhere
manure is fcarce, which would prevent gar-
deners from robbing corn and meadow lands
of its manure; and from making garden
ground too rank for the pure growth of fome
kinds of vegetables—which is frequently done
by unfkilful gardeners,
I obferve, if fnch farmers who have light
land to fow with in the fpring, would, after
the fame being harrowed, to get fheep where
thole ufeful animals are to be had, there to
drive them upon fuch lands inftead of rolling,
they will be found to be of greater ufe, by
prolonging the moifture longer in fuch ground,
to
5 2


To recover young fruit trees , on taking root in a
bad foil.
Clear off the foil from the roots of thofe
that can be got up, the others to be cut off;
then take out a foot and half of foil, fill up
the fame with good foil, fpreading the roots
on the fame, and covering them with well
prepared foil.
Another method for that purpofe.
Make a trench each fide of the tree, diftant
four feet; each trench to be of a fufficient
width, that two men may work a crofs-cut
faw. The depth of the trench to be accord-
ing to the goodnefs of the foil.
Note. —Sawing off the fibres, which have
ftruck into bad foil, will add greatly to the
vigour of the tree, preferve the natural deli-
cious flavour of its fruit, and prolong the
growth thereof. The faw for the above pur-
pofe mull be about two inches and an half in
width, and three yards in length, for the
greater facility of working the fame in the foil-
The narrownefs of the faw will admit of its
being turned, in cafe of obftrudtions by ftones.
THE
53


TH E following remarks appeared in the
public papers as hereunder mentioned*
which I have thought proper to infert in this
publication, as it convinces me the general prin-
ciples of mankind are not fo bafe, or depraved,
as out of fpirit of contradiction, to oppofe every
good meafure laid down, merely becaufe they
would not efpoufe any one thought, that did
not originate from themfelves.
From the MORNING CHRONICLE,
Printed in October, 1785.
" Wafte Lands Revenue
" The are no oppofing indications, to di£_
1£ courage the fuggeftion of felling the wafte
" lands by lotteries.
11 In the firft inftance, if the tickets were at
" a low price, .there would be fcarcely one in-
<c dividual in the kingdom, who would not
<* buy one.
" In every foreign country, the difcontent,
the defultory, the fanguine, the avaricious;
they who are addiCted to gaming, would all
" try their chance. What an immediate influx
4< of wealth, from the contributary vices of every
foreign nation. " The
54


" The probable excefs of the amount, far
tc out-runs computation-—even conjecture can
" hardly come up to it."
The above remarks, allude to page 39,
" Hints, publifhed in the General Advertifer,
,e June 29th, 1784,
Having confidercd the great difpro«
portion of the dijlrihution of bene-
to the Clergy ;
Some having feveral great livings, while
others are neglected, not having any, are re-
duced to accept of a fmall ftipend, barely fuf-
ficient to fupport themfelves, much lefs their
wives, and numerous families, which, through
poverty, too frequently occafions them to be-
come the ridicule and ielt of the ignorant and
low part of mankind, which is a difgrace to the
church, caufes irreverence, excites difrefpedt
on their function, and checks religion, and in-
troduces many different opinions, daily fpring-
ing up and undermining the church, by fangled
dodlrine, vain conceit of the obllinate, and il-
literate; hence it is, there abounds fo many
dif-
55


different fedts of religion, and, what is worfe,
perfons who turn religion into ridicule, and be-
comes a pell; to decency and fociety, 1 am
forry to obferve, a coolnefs and inattention in
fome of the clergy, in discharging their duty,
and Seemingly more anxious for the worldly af-
fairs, than future felicity.
The prefentmode of gathering'tythes, caufes
great murmuring in the country, and feveral
perfons take a difguft, to the difgrace and
honour of religion, by bringing heavy and vex-
atious fuits on account of tythes. Therefore if
the prefent cuftom of gathering the great and
fmall tythes was abolifhed, and all lands an<|
premifes throughout the kingdom that are
tytheable, the fame to be valued, and in lieu of
the prefent tythes, to pay one Shilling and eight
pence in the pound. At the expiration of
every twenty-one years, all lands and premifes
pa be re-valued, and for every pound that lands
increafed in value, to pay as aforefaid, if alj
livings belonging to the crown, the two univer-
sities, bifhops, and the lord chancellor, &c. for
the time being, fuch livings to be difpofed of
by the king, and the members of the houfe of
commons; the king to have the difpofal of
every tenth living—the members to have the
difpofal of the others by rotation; and to abolifh
the
56


the prefent cuftom of franking letters, by
which means a confiderhble increafe of revenue
to government would arife, and the members
would be rewarded in lieu of the benefit of
franking letters,"
If the dignity of the Church was
regulated, as here laid down, or
fomething fimilar,
Would be a great means of relieving many
pitiful and diftreflfed families, likewife would
be a preventive to a great deal of partiality for
the future, and if adopted would caufe brotherly
love to be better eftablifhed amongfi: the fouls
which may then be breathing in this kingdom;
therefore were the privileges which arife, to
the chureh, that is, for fuch monies to be put
into a fund ; then for the worihipful brethren
to receive as follows; in lieu of their prefent
emoluments, (furplice fees excepted, that to
be received as ufually, ) then fay, for every
bilhop to have £2OOO per year; deans to have
£BOO per year ; reftors to have £3OO per year,
and no curate to have lefs than £IOO per year.
Each recftor to have the infpcction over as
H many
57


mnny churches and chapels as may be thought
proper by the bifhops and judges to appoint
for their infpedtion, if the faid redtors was to
have the privilege to confirm in fuch churches
as he might be infpedtor over, whereby it
would lave great expences, befides much
trouble, which attends the bilhops when they
have it to do. I further obferve, if
one-half, for the two firft years of each perfon's
living, as above mentioned, was to be funk in
the funds, for the benefit of making provifion for
the clergymen's widows, it would alfo be
found a very good plan, if it was fo adopted,
by having only one half ( of their emoluments
for the two firft years, it would be the caufe of
putting many fuch perlons upon ceconomy
when they firft come to fuch livings.
HINTS,
Refpebling t.he Noblemen and Gentlemen going to
the Univerjities.
Every nobleman and gentleman, upon his
being admitted into any college, or hall, in
either of the uniyerfities, to pay a fum of
money in proportion to rank and fortune,
and
58


and no one to be admitted without paying fifty
pounds towards the benefit of the indigent or-
phans of the clergy.
It would be proper to have different places
in each county for the reception of fuch per-
fons, fo that the youth, both boys and girls,
might there be educated, with all other
ful necelfaries; many of the aged indigents,
might be ufefully employed, by initrudting
the faid youth in learning, &c.
HINTS ,
Refpecling Provifion being made for Gentlemen's
Servants, by rendering them more eligible, to
accept of fuch Places as may offer.
I am forry to fee youth, being puffed up by
their fuperiors, to that pitch they are now ar-
rived to, being of that clafs, without a proper
difcernmenr, whereby too many feel the dif-
agreeable effedt arifing therefrom. Therefore
I would advifc gentlemen and ladies, to infill
that none of their domefiic fervants fhould be-
H 2 deck
59


deck themfelves beyond their circumftances ;
if this was the means made ufe of, then fueh
gentlemen and ladies would find themfelves,'
their vifitors, and their bufinefs better attended
to. The fervant, when out of place would
be more like themfelves; whereby it would
add more to the fervant's intereft, when out of
place, which lam forry to fee fo many fervants
of different capacities out of employ. I do not
doubt, but many of them being thus fituated,
may arife from their own mifcondudt.—But
I am forry to add; that there, are many j uft and
honeft fervants, both men and women, that are
now in the fame fituation and diftrefs'd, almoft
to the utmoft degree. lam well allured, that
the principle caufe of fo many being in fuch:
great diftrefs, arifes in a great meafure from
having been unfortunately fituated in not the
moft eligible families. I would recommend
to ladies, the orphans of clergy and reputable
tradefmen, and fuch who had a tolerable edu-
cation, inftead of the general let that now is*
too much encouraged, by fo doing, would
prevent the great number of difcords and
jealoufies that are continually arifing ir»families;
if the above mode was adopted, I am perfuaded
it would be the means of preventing a great
many difagreeable eife&s, well underftood.
There.
60


Therefore feveral propofitions offered in this
pamphlet for the confideration of the legifia-
ture, are founded on a principle to fervc my
king and country. I beg leave to remark,
that among the various inftitutions of charity
and benevolence to protect and affifl pcrfons
under various defcriptions, one, that appears
to me effentially neceffary, hitherto has been
omitted ; and I hope, from my reprefentation,
the charity I mean to propofe, may meet with
the concurrence of thofe it is addreffed to—the
affluent, who indeed ufed to be fo remarkably
"diftinguilhed for humanity, the admiration of
all foreigners; and it has been faid, that
humanity, charity, and generality, were natu-
rally implanted in the bread of an Englishman,
The particular objedts which I could wifh
to have a provifion made for, are thofe, who
by long and faithful fervitude are worn out,
either by years, or fome accidental misfortunes
in fervice. But an objection may arife front
the parfimonious, by obferving, that fervants
are taxed ; query, whether fervants are not the
grcated fufferers by that impofl.
I allow there arc, and have been, in dances
of worthy families, who provide for their aged.
and
61


and neceffitous fervants; but, alas! 'tis rather
rare now a-days; I would therefore wifli there
was a fund raifed for the benefit of fervants,
under the defcription hereafter-mentioned.
Why not reward the poor honefl worn-out fer-
vant, as well as an adtor, a mufician, Italian
dancers, fingers, &c. ? The merit of an ho-
nefl induftrious fervant, in my eye, furpafles
thofe, who by profligacy, or an unthinking
mind, have wafled their profits arifing from
public folly, luxury, and it may be faid, vice-
Under thefe and the following confiderations
and obfervations, I hope my plan for the bene-
fit of fervants may be adopted, as reafonable,
jufl, and laudable.
Were the nobility and gentry to pay five
pounds for every fervant they now keep, and
the money to be depofited in a fund for the
benefit of fuch fervants (they being all to be
regiflered in places appointed for thatpurpofe)
and upon being rendered, either by age or ac-
cidental misfortune, incapable of getting their
bread. No benefit to arife from the fund, till
the expiration of three years after the monies
arc paid in, which faid three years are to take
place from the entry of fuch payment, for the
advantage of the principal to accumulate by
its
62


its intereft; and on parting with a fervant, not
to engage another, unlefs regiftered, and the
fum paid as above mentioned for fuch fervant*
No fervant to have the benefit of the fund,
without having a certificate of his or her ho-
nefty, from the laft perfon they ferved.
The above method would be a tie upon fer-
vants for good behaviour, and would prevent
a great many bad effefts, which are daily in-
creafing. Numbers flocking to London, or
large towns, in veiw of getting into gentle-
men's families j on difappointment thereof,
depredations, or bad habits, are too frequently
the confequence.
Public places, &c. would not be peftered
with fo many loofe perfons, under pretence
of feeking for gentlemen's fervice«
All perfons applying for places, and not
having a certificate of their regifter, to be li-
able to be taken up as impofters.
No innholders to employ any fervant but
what is regiftered
Any
63


Any fervant committing a theft, the matter
or mittrefs fhall have liberty to have fuch per-
fon ftruck off the regifter ; or any perfon re-
giftered, and not being in fervice, if found
guilty of theft, to be ftruck off.
Servants being under the above defcription,
to receive five pounds a year from the fund.
Servants regiftered fifteen years, if not; worth
ten pounds a year, nor pay a rent of twenty
pounds per annum, to be entitled to fix pounds
a year from the fund.—lf regiftered twenty-
five years, to receive from the fund, yearly,
eight pounds, on the afore-mentioned condi-
tions.—Regiftered thirty years, to have twelve
pounds, and fo in proportion.
If tradefmen were to raife a fund for the be-
nefit of apprentices, when bound, it would
prevent thoufands becoming troublefome to
the parifh.
If various funds were adopted fimilar to the
above, would be found of equal ufe.—lf every
parent, who had ability, was to fink five pounds
on the birth of every child, it would be means
of making fome provifion for it, in cafe of any
misfortune,
64


To encourage harvejl being got in } tvhen the fea-
fons ferve.
I would be far from encouraging breaking
in upon the Lord's Day, which is fet apart for
the adoring and returning thanks to the Al-
mighty, for his wonderous works and good-
nefs towards man and beaft. And on that day }
fet apart for their mutual reft from their labour,
and to be fenfible of their great Creator's giving
them an opportunity of lauding, and magni-
fying his holy name. But it is apparently evi-
dent, that the Lord's Day is too frequently
negletfted, and made a day of traffick, drunk-
ennefs, and other enormities, not for the real
ufe of mankind, but to pleafe palates, and
fatisfy the epicure.—Witnefs, how the com-
mandment is obferved, " Thou fhalt keep holy
" the Sabbath Day."
But for the conveniency of gratifying a
lord's palate, whether bifhop, or even a dean,
mackarel is allowed to be openly cried and
fold on the Lord's Day, being faid to be pe-
rilhable. Notwithftanding there is a feafon
fufficient to fatisfy the wants of the poor and
induftrious, within a proper, and an allotted
time from the great provider of our neceffities.
I A
6 5


As fuch is the cafe, why not for the real
good and conveniency of mankind in general,
fuffer our harveft to be forwarded ? No, it
may be faid by fome perfons, that nei-
ther ourfelves, ox, nor our afs, are to toil on
the Lord's Day. I allow the proper injunction
for fo doing, unlefs from occalional change of
weather, we may likely be fufferers thereby.
The Almighty, the great provider of mankind,
never intended to hinder us from occupations
wherein we might be ufeful to ourfelves. As
fuch, I would obferve, that on particular cir_
cumftances, any farmer Ihould be allowed to.
forward in getting in his grain in a proper
time, (Sunday's not excepted) this may appear
to fome in a finful light. I anfwer, the pre-
fervation of human fpecies ordered by pro-
vidence, might be more reafonably allowed
than balls, or concerts, broad-wheel waggons,
or boats upon narrow rivers, being allowed on
Sabbath-day, to the profanation and difcou-
ragement of all honefty and religion.
I fay, if the encouragement of the harveft
was allowed to be fafely repolrted in the barns
of fecurity, the perfons in trade would not
have an excufe for want of the delay of harveft
being compleated and employed on Sundays.
But more particularly of a Peer, I would add,
1 if
66


of poffible, noble, but forry am I to obferve,
that the profanation of the fabbath. I cannot
give its proper epithet, for where mufic is the
fole objedt of the mind, without a proper in-
fluence, void of every religious
What may be expedted from fuch proceedings,
but an influenza, which graces not the honour
of a court.
Would paftors with a free, open, and gene-
rous mind, adhere to the principles they lay
down religion perhaps would fl'ourifh; but alas!
;Jie want of fome of them fulfilling what they
daily pray for in the litany, &c. they are not re-
fpedted or beheld, but in that light or con-
tempt, which they are defervedly feen through*
-0 B S E R FATIONS,
Arifing from a female, who was noticed
in the ftreet by a humane gentleman, being
very lame, and in feeming great diftrefs, with
true chriftianity, lie ordered His carriage to flop,
and gave her iriftant relief, with a direction to
his refidence, and upon her application there,
gave her a recommendatory letter for admiffion
into St. George's Hofpitai, which was on the
2. tft of March lad, and who was difmiffed
I 2 there-
6 7


therefrom on the 23d of Mav following, being
cured, but alas! pennylefs, fhe being deftitute
of every means of the common neceffaries of
life, but having gained a gentleman's name of
property, who was of her country, immediately
applied for relief. The author hereof was
ftruck at the apparent negledt of turning adrift
poor helplefs perfons from hofpitals, deftitute
of fuccour even for one day, and fcarce
cloathing to cover their nakednefs; can this be
called charity ? Is not poverty the means of
the production of molt evils, and if endowed
with honcft intentions of earning their bread
by their labour and induftry, not a perfon will
employ fuch a one from their outward appear-
ance. Therefore lam of opinion, that a ftrict
enquiry fhould be made to what parifh each
patient belongs to, before they are difcharged
from any hofpital, and from thence fent to
fuch parifn he or fhe belongs to; if it appears
they are deftitute of employment, and if he
or fire cannot afcertain the parifh to where they
belong, to be fent to the county-houfe of in-
duftry, as is particularly mentioned in the for-
mer part of this pamphlet.
PRO-
68


PROPOSALS
For Paupers travelling to the Parijh, where they
may refpeSlively belong to.
'IF A. B. now in the parifh of St. George's,
who is a parifhioner of —— in Man-
chefter, fhould firft apply to St. George's houfc
of relief, where the clerk thereof fhould take
down the full and particular defcription of the
faid A. B. and where fhe is bound for, and the
day of the month fhe fet off on her journey
for the fame place; and from thence to be re-
lieved with a few pence from the juftice, or
fuch perfon as fhall, or may be appointed for
that purpofe, for a relief to Barnet, or any
other proper diftance to another houfe of relief
appointed for fuch purpofe. And that every
clerk at the different ftages are to return proper
notices of fuch perfon's arrival, to the clerk of
the preceding place where they fct off from,
that no delay may be made on the furtherance
of their journey. And in cafe a return fhould
not be made by the failure of the clerk's no.
tice, then fuch clerk to be difcharged for
want of giving proper notice thereof; which
fhould be, that on any omiffion of the parties
concerned, particularly the clerk, who by giv-
ing
6 9


ing notice thereof to the juftice of the peace,
or fuch others who may be appointed to infpeft
and prevent impofitions, that an advertifement
might appear to prevent any further fraud or
delufion on any parifh or parifhes, from artful
and defigning perfon or perfons, and upon de-
tection of fuch perfon or perfons, to be com-
mitted to the county-houfe of indufhy, to do
fuch work as he or fhe may be qualified for,
without thofe indulgencies that deceit prevents
1? t N I Si
70
