

Ifn^uA?
FYa
PROPOSED RESOLUTIONS.
I.?That, on the 14th September, 1800 (that is, within nine months
from and after the proclamation of Queensland as a British Colony, and
during the first Session of its first Parliament), the following Resolutions
were unanimously passed, on the motion of Mr. Charles (now His
Honour Mr. Justice) Lilley, who w'as then a leading Member of the
Local Parliament:?
?1, That the thanks of this House be given to the Reverend John
Dunmore Lang, D.D., for his able and successful efforts to effect the
separation of Moreton Hay from New South Wales, and to found
the Colony of Queensland.?
?2, That this resolution be transmitted to His Excellency the
Governor, with a request that he will be pleased to forward a copy
of the same to Dr. Lang.?
2.?That, in the year 1864, when the Colony had increased greatly
both in wealth and population, John Douglas, Esq., M.L.A., moved
?That a grant of Five Thousand Pounds be made to Dr. Lang?that
being the estimated amount of the expenditure voluntarily incurred by
him in rendering these services to the Colony; ? but the vote having
been reduced by the House to One Thousand Pounds, the Colonial
Treasurer of the period withheld the said vote from the Appropriation
Act of that year, and no part of the amount then voted has ever been
paid to the present day.
3. ?That Dr. Lang?s claim having been again submitted to Parliament
during the present Session, it was strongly repudiated, and all sense of
obligation disclaimed, by a majority of the Legislative Assembly.
4. That, in these circumstances ?the public faith of the Colony
having been pledged to Dr. Lang and subsequently broken?it is the
opinion of this Meeting that it is the duty of the people of Queensland
to associate for the maintenance of the public credit in the case, and
the performance of an act of justice to Dr. Lang, by contributing for
the payment of the repudiated vote of 1864, with interest to the
present day.
s.?That the following gentlemen be a Committee for the carrying out
of this Resolution, viz.: ?-
His Worship the Mayor, JAMES SWAN, Esq.
GEORGE EDMONDSTONE, Esq., M.L.A.
Mr. Alderman WARRY
Mr. JOHN PETRIE
Mr. ALEXANDER EYFE, late M.L.A.
Mr. ROBERT CRIBB
Mr. JAMES CAMPBELL
Mr. WILLIAM COOTE
Rev. CHARLES OGG, and
Mr. W. MUNRO SMITH,
With power to add to their number.
o.?That Mr. W. COOTE be Honorary Secretary, and His Worship
the Mayor, JAMES SWAN, Esq., Treasurer.
7. ?That the co-operation of the other towns and districts of the
Colony be respectfully requested.
