

rf<4o 7
fT ' .V"’. '
, •*
PK OPOSALS
FOR ESTABLISHING A
HSritisjj Antipo&fnn
TO PROMOTE SETTLEMENT IN
AUSTRALIA, TASMANIA, & NEW ZEALAND,
LARGE STEAMSHIPS AND MODERATE FARES,
THE CARE ROUTE.
f3y jI. Perry.
ADELAIDE: J. WILLIAMS. AUCKLAND: G. T. CHAPMAN.
BALLARAT I W. L. MULLEN. BRISBANE : THEOPHILUS P. PUGH.
DUNEDIN : H. WISE. GEELONG : HENRY FRANKS.
HOBART TOWN: WALCH AND SONS.
LAUNCESTON: WALCH BROS. AND BIRCHALL.
MELBOURNE : SANDS AND MCDOUGALL. SYDNEY: J. SANDS.
WELLINGTON: W. LYON.
MDCCCXjXVIII.
PRICE ONE SHIELING.


Also F /






PROPOSALS
FOR ESTABLISHING A
TO PROMOTE SETTLEMENT IN
AUSTRALIA, TASMANIA, & NEW ZEALAND,
LAEGE STEAMSHIPS AND MODEEATE EAEES,
THE CAPE ROUTE.
By J. PERRY.
ADELAIDE : J. WILLIAMS. AUCKLAND .' G. T. CHAPMAN.
BALLAARAT : W. L. MULLEN. BRISBANE t THEOPHILUS P. PUGH.
DUNEDIN: H. WISE. GEELONG: HENRY FRANKS.
HOBART TOWN : WALCH AND SONS.
LAUNCESTON: WALCH BROS. AND BIRCHALL.
MELBOURNE : SANDS AND MODOUGALL. SYDNEY : J. SANDS.
WELLINGTON: W LYON.
PRICE ONE SHILLING


. * ■ ♦
. i !
AND MCDOUGALL, PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET WEST.


PREFACE.
That portion of the colonial public which more
or less persistently looks on the existing state
of Australasian affairs in the hope that ere long
a more general and decidedly national feeling
than now exists will by some means be aroused,
will not perhaps be unprepared to admit that
the improvement of our means of communica-
tion with the mother country is a subject which,
if dealt with by the colonies on strictly mutual
principles, may and ought to afford much favor-
able ground for promoting the ends they have
in view. It is quite possible that by such a
treatment of this subject narrower and antago-
nistic interests and opinions may be interfered
with, but still it is worthy of consideration
whether the opportunity which the unoccupied
Cape route yet presents, for securing great
direct and indirect national advantages, shall be
partially or entirely lost by heedlessly allowing
them to fall into the hands of inefficient vested
interests, whose objects will of necessity be


that can be required. If each of the colonies
were in a position to establish for itself by a
single operation a complete and efficient steam
service capable of yielding the results just
named, the national interest in the matter
would thereby be most effectually served ; but
as probably not more than one or two of them
can be at all prepared—if indeed there be any
-—to pledge themselves to the very considerable
disbursements that would be requisite in addi-
tion to existing obligations (which are, more-
over, almost certain to be supplemented at no
distant date by those for a fortnightly Suez
mail), the best course appears to be that of
laying the foundation of such services by one
combined national organisation, to facilitate
with the strictest impartiality immigration of all
classes to each of the Australasian colonies.
Owing to the great isolation of the Cape
route from all centres of population, it is at best
of only secondary importance for mail purposes.
Its one great claim to our attention lies in the
serious fact that it is the only way by which we
can hope to attract any considerable portion
of the great stream of European emigration.
Should the colonial public, at the outset of its
endeavours at improvement, advisedly or inad-
vertently commit itself to the perpetuation of


either of the two evils already pointed out, by
subsidizing a line of steamships in which either
prevails, the Cape route will thereby be render-
ed as utterly valueless for immigration purposes
as are the other two, and the colonies will, in
fact, have excluded themselves from any share
in the invigorating influences for which all
other new countries are now so eagerly com-
peting.
If it were only a line of ordinary steamships
that is wanted, and if a bond fide demand for it
really existed, no doubt ordinary commercial
enterprise would promptly supply that demand.
It is not, however, in this case simply a line of
steamships that is necessary, but such an appli-
cation of steam power as shall insure to all
comers short voyages at moderate cost to any
colony in Australasia. Steam power properly
applied would do this; the combined colonies
are well able to afford it the opportunity, and it
rests with the colonists alone to say whether it
shall be done.
The owners of the Great Eastern have been
communicated with on this matter. It was not
intended to bring it forward until their views
had been ascertained; but as that vessel is now
known to be engaged to lay another transat-
lantic telegraph, the question has thereby as-


sumed a different aspect, and under the altered
circumstances, it is thought best to submit
these proposals for consideration with those
which have for some time been before the
public, leaving the possible employment of the
Great Eastern as one of the vessels of the line,
to be dealt with when the requisite information
arrives.
The author is under considerable obligations
to those gentlemen who have kindly consented
to co-operate in the capacities to be mentioned,
and to those who have privately assisted or
given valuable practical information and advice,
all of whom are entitled to his sincere acknow-
ledgments, which are hereby tendered to them;
and the project is left to the discriminating
judgment of the Australasian public, whose
active assistance is respectfully solicited.
Melbourne,
10 th October, 1868.


PROPOSALS
FOE ESTABLISHING A
■gritislj Association.
Possibly there never has heen a period since
the foundation of the Australasian colonies, in
which the colonists did not wish for more rapid,
more frequent, and more economical means of
communication with the mother country ; and it
is scarcely probable, notwithstanding the great
improvements in this direction which the future
will certainly produce, that that desire will
soon he completely satisfied. The following
mode of dealing with the question is submitted
for public consideration, as promised in the
“ Letter to the Legislators and Ruling Classes
of Australasia,” recently circulated, a copy of
which is appended hereto. Probably much that
has already been advanced will be found re-
peated ; but if there had remained no opening
for the introduction of new practical proposi-


tions, the repetitions in this instance would
certainly have had to await another opportunity.
In the first place it may he advisable to refer
to certain other arrangements which have been
spoken of or brought forward with a view to
provide direct steam communication on the
Cape route, because, whatever their respective
merits may he, no one of them is calculated to
deal with all the branches of the subject in an
effective and satisfactory manner. One of these
has been only heard of by indistinct rumours,
and seems to have come to a premature end.
It was said that the fleet of the General Screw
Steam Navigation Company was being refitted,
by a new proprietary, for service as a monthly
line of auxiliary screw steamers on the Austra-
lian route, via the Cape of Good Hope and Cape
Horn, to commence running at an early date.
Supposing this rumour to be correct, none of
these ships can he expected to make shorter
average passages than the Great Britain; they
will, therefore, neither supply a direct ocean
mail service, nor afford to passengers the
advantages derivable from high speed, for which
a mail subsidy to suitable ships would provide.


As such vessels will merely supplant a propor-
tional amount of sailing tonnage, retaining tlie
old liigli passenger fares, or increasing them,
any movement of this character must he looked
upon rather as a healthy indication that steam-
power is about to assert its supremacy in the
Australian carrying trade than as a satisfactory
answer to the all-important question —How can
a mail subsidy he applied and secured to the
Cape route so as most effectually to promote
unassisted immigration to Australasia?
Two other proposals which have recently
been made to the Victorian Government are
not less faulty in their mode of dealing with
this weighty matter. One of them offers to do
the work on such absurdly low terms that the
very highest fares must he insisted upon and
obtained to keep the vessels running. The
other proposes to employ ships of a size that
has been found to he too small on the com-
paratively short passages across the Atlantic,
to maintain the same high speed which any
efficient mail service will in this case require,
if it is to retain an adequate mail subsidy. As,
therefore, all three of these arrangements are


obviously imperfect and unsatisfactory, inas-
much as they either do not contemplate com-
bining low fares with high speed, on the attain-
ment of which the rapid growth of these colo-
nies must depend, or they propose to provide
them by inadequate means which cannot suc-
ceed, it is still open to the colonists, as it will
also be greatly to the advantage of the colonies,
to proceed to form a really efficient service for
themselves. If there is sufficient public spirit
in Australians to take a determined initiative
in the matter, there is no ground to apprehend
that English capitalists will refuse such reason-
able assistance as may be necessary, or that
there will be any lack of remunerative employ-
ment for such vessels as they are herein invited
to build, should it be determined to construct
them in the gradual manner proposed.
There are absolutely no limits to the capabi-
lities of the ocean route. It is true there are
peculiar difficulties connected with it which
must be dealt with in an appropriate manner ;
but there are no difficulties which would not
disappear before a moderate amount of enter-
prising determination; and there are no sound


reasons why such determination should not he
evinced. There is a large passenger traffic,
which may he induced to grow larger from year
to year ; there will for many years, it is reason-
able to suppose, be more immigration business
than one line of ships can manage; and there
will always be freight on remunerative terms,
increasing in quantity with the development of
the colonies ; consequently, whatever the con-
siderations may be, which tend to limit the size
and speed of vessels on this route, they do not
attach to, or spring from, the route itself;
which offers nothing but facilities and encour-
agement, to test its latent capabilities, to what-
ever extent may be considered necessary. No
finer opportunity than the one offered by the
existing, and immediately prospective state of
the European mail question, can ever be ex-
pected for easily, gradually, and safely, effecting
that object, and all experience in such matters
tends to strengthen the opinion that within
moderate limits, such as those herein proposed
for gradually developing this undertaking, more
than a sufficiency of new traffic will be created
as the work progresses, to compensate to exist-


ing shipping interests for whatever trifling pre-
judicial influence it may have upon them.
The course suggested in the following pages
will he found well calculated to render the Cape
route a valuable contributor to the growth of
each of the Australasian colonies. Additional
arrangements to those herein detailed are, how-
ever, in contemplation, hut it would be prema-
ture to discuss them until the maritime part of
the project is somewhat advanced. They will
he independent of, yet decidedly auxiliary to,
the maritime enterprises ; and of such a nature
as to merit the concurrence of the Colonial
Governments. The objects of those arrange-
ments will be to attract the attention of emi-
grants from all parts of Europe; to encourage
and enable such of those emigrants as wish to
do so, to settle on the lands of the various
colonies without vexatious delays ; and gene-
rally so to care for the welfare of such settlers
that Australasia shall, by their reports, become
favourably known to the European emigrating
world. Should this proposal to establish an
expansible system of safe, speedy, and inexpen-
sive passenger communication between these


colonies and Europe, and thereby to urge for-
ward the work of colonization, succeed, the
writer’s object will be gained; as be does not
desire that any special consideration should be
accorded to himself in the matter.
The first point which presents itself for con-
sideration in approaching this subject is, the
reasons why this extension of our mail services
is required, and now advisable ; many of which
have been set forth at various times, and one
of which must again be stated.
As is no doubt well known to most Austra-
lians, many thousands of our fellow-countrymen
annually emigrate from the British islands, and
other parts of Europe. Of all these thousands
the Australian colonies fail to secure more than
about as many hundreds, although they possess
immense tracts of fertile lands awaiting cultiva-
tion, rich gold-fields, healthy climates, and, in
short, almost every possible advantage to be
secured or expected from emigration. The rea-
son is not far to seek. Eor a very few pounds the
British emigrant is now transferred in a few days
from the eastern to the western shores of the
Atlantic, in steamships of great size and speed ;


but if his predilections for British institutions
induce him to look towards Australia, he finds
a weary voyage of a quarter of a year, at a cost
sadly diminishing his scanty funds, meeting him
at the outset. If therefore these colonies are
seriously disposed to compete for these invalu-
able emigrants, they must do effectually and in
a liberal spirit what their competitors have
already done. Fortunately up to the present
date the Cape route is free from inefficient
vested interests calculated to interfere with any
suitable arrangements for the promotion of
immigration, but such freedom will not long
continue, and as some revision of the existing
mail service seems probable, the circumstances
are favorable for inviting Australian capitalists
and the public generally to take effective
measures for conserving their own interests
in this matter.
In the second place, it is to be observed,
that some possible ways of undertaking this
service, are undesirable, because they would be
inadequate ; that others, which would be per-
fectly adequate, are for the present impossible ;
and that real, and early success, can only result


from such arrangements as are both adequate
and possible.
The length of this voyage, may he safely taken,
in round numbers, not to exceed 12,500 knots.
From Liverpool to the Cape is rather over G,OOO
knots; from King George’s Sound to the Cape,
along the parallel of 40 deg., clear of all ice,
is 4,950 knots ; and from Melbourne to King
George’s Sound is 1,840 knots; the sum of
the three being 12,290 knots. It will scarcely
be denied then, that 12,000 knots is a mode-
rate estimate of the distance to be run. On
examination, it will appear that an average
speed of over 11 knots per hour will be required
to accomplish the distance in 45 days, exclusive
of stoppages. Three short outward voyages made
by the Simla, the European, and the Kaikoura,
are reported as 12,764, 12,620, and 11,874 knots,
in 50, 54, and 51 days, at 10 - 6, 9'9, and 9’7 knots
per hour respectively, all exclusive of stoppages.
It is an indisputable fact, that with the same
speed that has long been common on the North
Atlantic, all the English letters which arrive in
Australia by each P. and O. mail might be
delivered in less time via the Cape of Good


Hope. By this route, vessels of a suitable
class, specially constructed to meet the exigen-
cies of the service, could be depended upon, to
land our mails in 45 days or less, quite as cer-
tainly as any in the present service can now be
relied upon to deliver them in the contract time.
There can be no possible doubt on this point,
inasmuch as the well-known Cunard packets
have for years maintained the requisite speed on
passages of one-half the length, and by means of
a mail subsidy, equal speed might be maintained
by suitable vessels on this voyage. As no un-
employed full-power steamship has yet found or
sought occupation on this line, it may be inferred
that experienced owners of such steamers unani-
mously consider ordinary vessels to be quite
unsuitable for the long Cape route. Many im-
portant advantages would accrue from its effici-
ent occupation, but of incomparably greatest
moment is the fact that such an occupation would
render possible effective arrangements to pro-
mote a growing influx of population, that all
other available means together would not suffice
to establish. A mail subsidy would, however,
scarcely be retained except as a provision for a
really efficient mail service, for the mails might


certainly be conveyed more cheaply by an addi-
tion to the P. and 0. contract; so that as low
fares, resulting from short voyages, are impos-
sible without such a subsidy, whatever may be
done in this respect, must have the-effect of plac-
ing on the line vessels that may be relied upon to
deserve the subsidy by making passages not ex-
ceeding in average duration those of the overland
mail. This imperative stipulation will necessi-
tate the employment of ships bearing a reason-
able proportion in size and power to the unusual
distances which they will be required to traverse
in all weathers between points at which supplies
of fuel can be made available ; but in consequence
of the large size of the vessels it will be possible
to arrange for large numbers of passengers at
fares sufficiently low to remove all difficulty in
that respect from the path of the emigrant.
AYith small vessels running at the'same speed to
obtain the subsidy, this result could not be
secured, as they would require all available cargo
space for fuel, and if they ran at a lower speed
to save fuel they would lose the mail subsidy,
so that either the amount of that subsidy or
the freight of the cargo must be added to the
fares.


The physical conditions of this route are of
such a nature that, on both the eastward and
westward passages, it will most frequently be
necessary, and the vessels must always he pre-
pared, to steam 5,000 knots at speed against
head winds, seas, and currents. It is to the
actual performances of full power steam vessels,
and the laws which govern them, that we can
alone look for useful information and guidance,
in this part of any such undertaking; and with
respect to steamship performances, a compari-
son may he advantageously drawn between
some of the existing steam services.
On the Liverpool and New York direct mail
route, the Cunard packets have long been pre-
eminent for their speed and punctuality; the
minimum distance which has to he traversed each
way on one coaling is ahoutT2,Boo knots, viz.,
that between •Queenstown and New York, and
the ships now employed in that service exceed
2,800 tons 18. O. M., ranging up to 4,000 tons in
the Scotia, the fastest and finest vessel of the fleet.
The average speed maintained throughout the
year is 12 to 12i knots per hour, the proportional
nominal horse-power heiwg 1 to each 4 tons.


On the West Indian route, the Koyal Mail
Steam Packet Company employ ships varying
from 2,700 tons to 3,500, averaging about 3,000,
and 700 horse-power. The distance between
Southampton and St. Thomas, the nearest coal-
ing stations, is 3,650 knots, and this is worked
at an average speed of about 11 knots per hour.
The longest unbroken passage in the P. and
0. contracts occurs between Ceylon and King
George’s Sound. Vessels of about 1,350 tons,
and 260 horse-power, work the 3,330 knots at
about 10 knots per hour, which speed is about
half a knot more than that of the Panama
Company’s vessels, of 1,600 tons and 350 horse-
power, between Panama and Wellington, with
one intermediate coaling station in the 6,500
knots.
In each of these instances, the principle of
special adaptability to the intended service, is
fully recognised. The vessels have been con-
structed, not simply to attain the highest speed,
nor the greatest possible capacity; but to
combine the best attainable qualifications in
these, and other respects, with sufficient power
to traverse the various distances, under the pecu-


liar circumstances attaching to the respective
routes, of which the two principal distinguishing
features are, that on the two first named there
is an abundance of all kinds of traffic, while on
the two last there is almost none.
Admirably as most of the vessels referred to
are known to do the work on the lines for which
they were constructed, that fact by no means
justifies the assumption that any such vessel
could he successfully employed for combined
mail and immigration purposes on the Cape
route, where at least 5,000 knots will always
have to he crossed on. a single coaling ; unless,
indeed, it is to he supposed that the two great and
eminently successful companies first mentioned
have grievously mistaken the size ot vessel it
would be most to their advantage to employ on
their 3,000 knot voyages. At present, however,
this supposition is altogether inadmissible, and
consequently it cannot be advisable to enter
upon this undertaking with means which are by
such thoroughly competent judges only consi-
dered adequate for operations of so much less
extent.
There remains one remarkable vessel to illus-


trate the adequate but impossible side of this
argument. The Great Eastern class of vessel is,
for different reasons, quite as much too large as
the others are too small. The speed of that ship
is 13i knots, as calculated from eleven trips
across the Atlantic, between the 17th June, 1860,
and 27th August, 1862 —(total distance, 33,829
knots; total time between ports, 106 days 6
hours ; average speed, 13 - 2662 knots per hour. —
Vide Artizan, January, 1864) —which might per-
haps be maintained on the whole voyage without
a stoppage, giving a passage of 37 days 18 hours.
There is no room to suppose that steam-vessels
of this description would not do all that can be
wished; and if their enormous capabilities could
always be completely utilised, they would pro-
bably be as profitable without subsidies, as any
materially smaller ones ever can be with them.
There are, however, unfortunately very serious
obstacles to be surmounted before more than
one such vessel can be employed for the benefit
of these colonies ; of which the enormous cost
alone will amply suffice to sustain the assertion
that, in this case, means which would apparently
be adequate, are, for the present at least, with


the single existing exception named, altogether
beyond our reach.
Since existing vessels of 4,000 tons are, as we
have excellent reasons for believing, too small,
and others of 22,500 tons cannot be made avail-
able, the size best suited to this purpose must
lie between these two extremes.
Mr. J. Scott Bussell is reported to have
stated, in reference to this point, with respect
to high speed vessels, that “it was found by ex-
“ perience, that no steamship could be worked
“ profitably, which w T as of a less size than a ton
“ to a mile of the voyage she was to perform,
“ carrying her own coals. It was necessary.that
“ each ship should be adapted to its work. For
“ every length of voyage, there was an exact
“ kind of steamer that would pay, and a kind of
“ steamer that would not pay. A steamer might
“ be calculated to make its owner a fortune if
“ placed on the right station; but might ruin him
“if placed on another. The length of voyage, the
“ speed to be travelled, and the probable cargo
“ obtainable, were practical points to be kept in
“view. Very much depended on the intended
“ length of the voyage. If they wished to steam


“ 12,000 miles, they must have something like a
“ 12,000 tons ship; if 24,000 then 24,000 tons
#
“ would be necessary.”
It is a remarkable fact, well deserving of
notice at this point, that the whole ot the best
ships of all the great English, French, and
American fast mail steamship companies, aver-
age rather over than under a ton to a knot of
the distances between the ports at which sup-
plies of coal can be obtained on their respec-
tive stations.
That the practice is not being discarded one
most recent instance will suffice to prove.
A mongst all the companies just alluded to, the
Pacific Steam Navigation Company has long
held a position of the very highest character
for its especially economical and successful
management on the west coast of South Ame-
rica, resulting from a prompt but judicious
recognition and adoption of all real improve-
ments in ships and machinery. This company,
being better acquainted with the v/ork to be
done than perhaps any other, • has just con-
tracted to carry a monthly mail between Liver-
pool and Valparaiso, via the Straits of Magel-


lan, to commence in October, 1868; for which
purpose it is to have built ships of 2,700 tons
burthen, and 500 horse power; the widest tract
of open ocean to be crossed on the route being
that between St. Vincent’s and Bahia, of barely
2,000 knots, while stoppages occur at not less
than six intermediate ports on the 9,000 knots
voyage.
The application of this principle to the Aus-
tralian route, points to a 12,500 tons ship as the
most suitable, and there is reason to believe this
to be the truth of the matter; but even this size
is as yet decidedly too large for our partially-
developed resources.
Substituting for the distance between the ter-
mini, that between the midway coaling station
on the route and its nearest Australian port,
and still adhering to the rule, we find about
5,000 tons suggested as the smallest size suited
for the service; and, as the rule does not admit
of any further diminution, it is worthy of seri-
ous consideration, whether this class of vessel
will not fulfil the stipulated conditions of being
both adequate to meet our present wants, and
possible, with the means at our disposal.


Such a vessel of 800 horse power, would
carry coals for 27 days full steaming, 2,500
tons of cargo, and about 1,200 passengers, if
packed with the usual disregard to personal
convenience, hut about 900 as passengers ought
to be accommodated for so long a voyage.
A considerable amount of freight space should
he provided, or the consumption of fuel on a
stormy passage, against head winds, will render
the ship lighter than it ought to he to encounter
the very heavy weather which, at such seasons
prevails in the vicinity of every port upon the
route, and although this difficulty may he
surmounted by other means those means are
unprofitable ones. Against this contingency
the 5,000 tons ship will amply provide ; and
while the quantity of cargo required will not
he excessive, the amount and description of
passenger accommodation can scarcely he con-
sidered to he in any way unsuited to the
requirements of the case.
At this point, then, the rule appears to he
satisfactorily sustained; for we here find in
combination a fair amount of tonnage available
for freight, superior accommodation for a good


number of passengers, suitable speed, and ample
fuel to maintain it in any weather.
From the following estimate of the power that
would be required to propel a 5,000 tons ship
at the same speed, and under the same arrange-
ments, as those of the respective vessels named,
calculated as accurately as accessible data will
permit, according to the rules generally used in
such cases, it would appear that, for very large
vessels, the double system of the Great Eastern
is considerably more elfective than the others.
The Scotia and Atrato , on their different
routes, approximating most nearly in size to that
required, are most suitable for examination;
whereupon it will be found that if those two
vessels were each enlarged to 5,000 tons, they
should maintain their present speed with 1,150
and 1,020 horse-power respectively; whereas
the Great Eastern , reduced to 5,000 tons, should
be as efficient as at present with 954 horse-
power. Further ; reducing the three supposed
5,000 tons vessels to a uniform speed of 11 knots,
the various powers required would be — Atrato,
837 ; Scotia, 798 ; and Great Eastern, 546.
The differences between the two first examples


may be easily accounted for, and would most
probably disappear were sufficiently exact data
accessible ; but, taking tbe mean of these two,
we have 818 horse-power required to propel
5,000 tons at 11 knots, while the other ex-
ample shows that 546 horse-power ought to
produce the same result: the difference of 272
horse-power being equivalent to a saving of
27 tons of fuel per day, or a proportional in-
crease in speed. It probably is of little conse-
quence, in ships constructed for the respective
propellers, whether a given power is applied to
paddles alone, or to screw alone ; but in the
Great Eastern it appears, that by applying the
power at both points, a better result is obtained.
Considering the Great Eastern's hull as that of
a greatly enlarged Scotia, to propel it at the
speed of the latter vessel, using the power with
paddles only, or screw only, would require 3,136
horse-power, and to attain its own quoted
sjieed, under similar conditions, 3,803 horse-
power would be necessary ; so that, allow-
ing for possible minor favourable influences
(the various actual speeds of the vessel being
131 knots from screw and paddles, with 2,600


horse-power; 8-4- knots with paddles alone, 1,000
horse-power ; and something over 9 knots, hut
exactly how much appears not to he reported,
with the screw only of 1,600 horse-power),
there seems to he a gain of more than 1,000
horse-power resulting from the application of the
power at two points instead of one. The above
quoted performances of the ship fully justify the
preceding theoretical inferences ; for, supposing
the 3,803 horse-power to produce a speed of 13d
knots, 1,000 horse-power should give knots,
and 1,600 horse-power should give very nearly
10 knots, which are sufficiently close approxima-
tions to the facts to sustain the calculation that,
hy applying the power as it is applied in the
Great Eastern, a speed equal to that of the
Great Eastern would he obtained in a ship of
5,000 tons, and 954 horse-power. The prin-
cipal reasons for recommending the double
system of the Great Eastern in preference to
the single ones commonly employed, may he
summarised as follows: The required speed will
he attained hy a ship of the proposed size, with
considerably less power in the aggregate, cost-
ing less, occupying less tonnage, and consuming


less fuel in proportion. Instead of one engine
of the largest size, there will he two of moderate
dimensions; and the first cost per horse-power
should he less for such engines than for very large
ones. All the boilers, castings, and forgings will
be on a smaller scale, and more convenient to
work, as well as le;s difficult and expensive to
repair. There will be immensely less probabi-
lity of the steam-power ever becoming totally
disabled; and, by the adoption of twin screws,
this probability would be still further reduced.
The following remarks bearing on this part
of the subject occur in Bourne’s treatise on
the screw propeller. “ A vessel propelled by
“ paddle engines of 500 horse-power and by
“ screw engines of 500 horse-power, would be
“ more efficient when deep than the same vessel
“ propelled by 1,000 horse-power paddle em-
“ gines; and more efficient when set to encoun-
“ ter head winds than the same vessel propelled
“by screw engines of 1,000 horse-power. In
“ fact, by the proposed combination, a higher
“ average measure of efficiency would be at-
“ tained.” On the whole, then, it seems advis-
able to adopt the method of the Great Eadern on


a smaller scale to bring the cost into practicable
limits, which consideration may not prevent the
working of that ship itself as one of the vessels
of the line, owing to the extremely favorable
terms on which its present owners acquired
their proprietorship.
It now becomes necessary to advert to the
financial aspects of the question. The follow-
ing estimate of revenue and expenditure, per
double voyage, of 90 days, will afford a general
idea of the form which they may be expected to
assume. The figures are calculated on voyages
to and from Melbourne ; they would have to be
slightly modified for other Australian or New
Zealand ports, and it is to be understood that
the operations of the proposed association are
intended so to develope themselves as to
afford a fair and impartial share of the result-
ing advantages to every colony which offers
an adequate amount of support and accommo-
dation. Information received by recent mails
from firms of high standing in the British
shipbuilding trade, fully sustains the opinion
that, with the expenditure named, the work may
and ought to be satisfactorily accomplished.


ESTIMATED REVENUE.
Eastward passage.
60 first-class berths, at £35 each - - £2,100 0 0
90 second do. „ £2O „ - - 1,800 0 0
550 third do. „ £lO „ - - 5,500 0 0
2,500 tons cargo, at £4 - - - - 10,000 0 0
Westward passage.
60 first-class berths, at £45 each - - £2,700 0 0
90 second do. „ £3O
2,700 0 0
6,750 0 0
450 third do. „ £l5
2,000 tons cargo, at £2 - - - 4,000 0 0
Subsidies* 15,000 0 0
£51,550 0 0
ESTIMATED EXPENDITURE,
Wages, &c. £3,000 0 0
Provisions ------ 10,000 0 0
Coals, Engine-room Stores, &c. - - 12,000 0 0
5 months’ Interest on Capital - - 4,500 0 0
~ Depreciation and Repairs - 8,500 0 0
„ Insurance .... 7,500 0 0
Contingent expenses ... - 3,000 0 0
Balance 3,050 0 0
£51,550 0 0
* The Cape and Mauritius mails would probably con-
tribute to this item if suitable arrangements were made.


There will, of course, be accommodation for
twice the numbers of first and second class
passengers here quoted; and in the event of its
being filled, all the fares may be reduced ten or
twenty per cent. From a system of low fares
two decided advantages will accrue to the ship.
In the first place, a much larger proportional
number of persons can afford to pay them than
is the case with the higher ones; and, in the
second place, if the numbers at any time do not
fill the accommodation provided, the missing
fares will be of less importance. Low fares
may certainly be expected to pay best, as soon
as their hitherto unheard of influence on
the Australian route produces its legitimate
effects.
With a vessel of the proposed class the cabin
accommodation will, of course, be of a most
roomy and superior character; some of the
largest first and second class cabins may there-
fore each contain three berths, and the third
class four berths, which can be reserved for the
use of smaller numbers of passengers, on the
following terms: —


OUT. HOME.
£75 ...£lO5
First class cabin, the whole to 1 adult
Do. do. do.
2 adults (each) 45 ... 60
1 adult - 40 ... 70
Second class cabin do.
Do. do. do.
2 adults (each) 25 ... 40
1 adult - 22 ... 45
Third class cabin do.
Do. do. do.
2 adults (each) 14 ... 25
3 adults (each) 12 ... 19
Do. do. do.
In the first and second classes these rates
will be proportionally lower for such cabins as
have two berths only : say, first class, whole
cabin to one adult, £55 out, £75 home; and
second class ditto, £3O out, £5O home, the nett
result to the ship being the same in all cases.
The long delay that has taken place in
establishing direct first-class steam communica-
tion between Australia and England, has only
been partially caused by any uncertainty which
may exist in the minds of Australians and their
friends, as to its being a profitable or unprofit-
able undertaking. A prudent disinclination to
take any part in an enterprise, which, at the
outset, has always hitherto assumed proportions,
at once unusually extensive and indefinite, has
probably exercised a greater influence, in deter-
ring the colonial governments and people from


attempting to operate in this direction. This
difficulty will probably he most advantageously
surmounted at an early date hy a judicious
separate treatment of its component terms. The
“ extensive proportions,” which have been shown
to be inseparable from, and are indeed essential
to, complete success, may nevertheless, be held
in abeyance to a very great extent; and their
indefinite character may be entirely removed;
thereby converting what, under former condi-
tions might have amounted to imprudent spec-
ulation, into perfectly legitimate and sound
co-operative maritime investment.
The amount of capital required to carry this
project to a successful issue is in truth mode-
rate, and easily within our means. There are
many local institutions in these colonies with
much larger subscribed capitals ; and instances
are not wanting in which single colonies pos-
sess several such institutions, each having from
twice to five times the sum now wanted fully
paid iip.
It is proposed that the contemplated new ves-
sels (the size of which will, of course, depend on
the price demanded to a moderate extent), shall


not cost more than about £170,000 each, ship
and outfit complete for sea. In addition to this,
£IO,OOO will probably be required for stores. As
it would be quite impossible to obtain at once
sufficient traffic for a fleet of vessels, forming a
monthly line of this class, the immediate raising
of the capital for them would be unnecessary,
and it would certainly be a most difficult matter.
Nor would it be by any means less difficult, to
obtain from the governments concerned, that
substantial amount of support, without which
the enterprise cannot be commenced. The sub-
sidies at current rates, which a monthly service
by sucb vessels would fairly earn, would not be
much less than £200,000 per annum. It will
be a long time before any one colony can bear
sucb an expenditure, though it will be quite
possible to give to the whole ot the colonies
such material results as to justify them in
gradually raising their aggregate contributions
up to the point named. But on the ground
that a sufficiency of business, capital, and govern-
ment assistance, cannot be simultaneously made
at once available, it seems advisable to adopt a
policy of gradual development, and to proceed by


definite, progressive, and perfectly independent
steps, each one complete in itself, and unaffected
by the probability or improbability of others
following.
By adopting this principle, opportunities will
arise for the Association to enter into inde-
pendent negotiations with each of the Colonial
Governments, and so to bring the whole of their
influence and available means into active co-
operation, a result which would be totally
impossible by any more direct process in the
present state of intercolonial feeling. The
subsidy for each ship will be a moderate sum,
that each of the principal colonies can pay with
or without the aid of others, and as each agree-
ment will be a separate transaction, the form,
amount, and period of the subsidy may be varied
to suit the views, resources, and convenience of
the respective colonies. The progressive prin-
ciple will thus operate favorably for all parties,
and an apparently serious difficulty will be
effectually disposed of. It will, however, at all
times, be requisite for the Association to hold
itself entirely free from local bias, and to act
with most strict and unimpeachable impartiality,


so that it may be fairly entitled to the confi-
dence of all concerned.
For these reasons tins project contemplates
the co-operative union of any requisite number
of separate enterprises under one management,
without in any way amalgamating the respective
undertakings, under the style of the British Anti-
podean Association, the shareholders subjecting
themselves to suitable arrangements for effecting
an approximately equal distribution of profits.
The liability of shareholders to be in all cases
strictly limited to the amount of the share.
In the next place, we have to consider why
and to what extent, the assistance of the colo-
nial governments should be granted.
If this undertaking were absolutely and of
necessity, a purely commercial speculation ; or,
if only commercial considerations could be
entertained respecting it; or, if there were just
grounds for believing that within any moderate
period, ordinary commercial enterprise would
furnish a system of communication between
Great Britain and Australasia, accessible to the
general public ; calculated to facilitate and pro-
mote unassisted immigration ; and by means of


which, the members of these communities might
be conveyed to and fro, at moderate cost of time
and money, with the despatch and punctuality
which they purchase for their mails ; it might
not be right for the authorities to make any
special concessions, of the kind herein held to
be absolutely essential. But private and com-
mercial enterprise have been content to look at
these matters for nearly twenty years, in such a
manner, that unassisted immigration has been
completely stopped ; while the time which has
to be lost on one route, and the enormous
charges on the others, are almost as effectually
putting a stop to personal intercourse between
all but the wealthiest colonists and their home
friends. If classified passages for the double
voyage, in about 45 days each way, were obtain-
able at from £BO down to about £25, instead
of £2OO as at present, there is little doubt that
the ties which bind together the colonists and
their friends at home, would draw themselves
closer than they have hitherto been at liberty
to do; and thereby most powerful and whole-
some influences, now nearly dormant, would
be revived, to aid in promoting the best kiuds


of immigration Unless there is something
rery deceptive in this view of the question, the
colonial public will of necessity have a direct
interest in any arrangement that provides for
the attainment of such a result, this interest
being at least equal in importance and social
value to the purely pecuniary one of the share-
holders in the undertaking, and if it be thus
true that each of the two parties will derive
benefit from the contemplated enterprise, it is
but just that each should assume a share in
the risks and initiatory uncertainties attaching
thereto. A moment’s reflection will suffice to
show that it is only by the effective action of
the colonial governments that the colonial
public can discharge their equitable responsi-
bilities in the matter.
Yarious methods might be stated, by which
the colonial governments could contribute
the kind, and degree of support, that would
practically meet their obligations in the matter,
and without which the work cannot be satis-
factorily prosecuted ; but one of those methods
appears to be superior to all others, both as to
fitness and practicability. These colonies are


deeply interested in maintaining their popu-
larity as fields for both assisted and unas-
sisted immigration; some of them devote large
sums annually to effect the former in a variety
of ways; and a portion of these sums may he
very properly used to provide superior facilities
for immigration transit. It is proposed, there-
fore, to apply for an outward passenger guaran-
tee subsidy from immigration funds (or in some
cases for its equivalent in land), commencing at
£lO per berth, for 700 outward berths in the
first new ship, on condition that by that ship
no outward fares to the guaranteeing colonies
are ever to be raised except in time of war, and
that this subsidy is to be reduced five per cent,
for each outward voyage, until it is extin-
guished, making the average guarantee for 20
voyages £5 per berth.
• Under some arrangement of this character as
to the outward fares, the colonial public would
promote its own interests, while relieving the
shareholders from an uncertainty, which ought
not to rest upon them, as to the pecuniary re-
sults of the outward passages ; and on these or
other, equally satisfactory terms, with a mail


subsidy, on the scale about to be quoted, invest-
ment in this enterprise will be in most res-
pects, as good as in any other large public
undertakings in these colonies. But on no
less favorable terms, than those herein sug-
gested, would it be judicious at the outset to
construct one or more ships fitted in all parti-
culars for this service, although these terms
may perhaps be largely modified, when ex-
perience has shown in what directions such
modifications can be safely effected.
The Association will provide for each colony,
or group of colonies acting in concert, such
number of vessels as it may desire to employ,
and each vessel will (if required and fully occu-
pied) run direct to and from the colony or
group to which it may be under contract obliga-
tions. Upon this system a separate agreement
will have to be entered into w r ith the coiony, or
group of colonies, in whose service the stipulated
vessels are to be employed, and in this way all
the colonies may join in a great national under-
taking, while the contributions of each colony
will be expended for its own benefit under its
immediate supervision. The mail subsidies may


be based most satisfactorily for all parties on the
principle that payment ought to be made in pro-
portion to speed. The amount of the subsidy
will necessarily be matter of negotiation; and the
number of days to be allowed for each voyage
will vary with the Australasian port to or from
which it is to be made. Subject to these qua-
lifying considerations, it is proposed that the
subsidy should be for each antipodean mail con-
veyed to Australasia or Great Britain within—
41 days ... ' £5,000
42 „ 4,750
43 „ 4,500
44 „ 4,250
45 „ 4,000
46 „ 3,750
47 „ 3,500
48 „ 3,250
49 „ 3,000
50 „ 2,750
51 „ 2,500
52 „ 2,000
53 „ 1,500
54 „ 1,000
55 „ 500
Over 55 „ nil.


the time not to be counted during which the
safety of the ship may require it to lie to during
violent storms or fogs in dangerous localities.
Many persons will possibly, at first sight,
consider these terms too expensive, but that
conclusion should not be too hastily adopted.
Anything approaching to a failure when the
undertaking is once commenced will be a public
misfortune, so detrimental to public interests
that no mere liberal disbursement of public
funds can be weighed against it. Thoroughly
suitable ships may undoubtedly be thus pro-
vided ; and while no reasonable outlay can be
too great that reopens the Cape route to un-
assisted immigration, an unwise economy will
permanently close it for that purpose, by ne-
cessitating longer voyages and higher fares.
This project aims at embodying all those con-
ditions which science, experience, and the pe-
culiar circumstances of the case indicate as
essential to success ; it does not seek to under-
estimate or to evade any of the difficulties that
have to be encountered ; nor does it propose
either a cheap steam service, or such a service
as will only afford to wealthy travellers an


equally costly alternative with the two existing
mail lines. Its primary object is to place good
plain accommodation in suitably arranged
roomy, and substantial steamships within the
reach of all desirable classes of otherwise unas-
sisted European emigrants. If this work be
honestly undertaken it ought to receive an
amount of tangible encouragement that will, as
far as possible, secure complete success from
the commencement.
As this Association will rely almost entirely
on the Colonies for support, it should be, to a
considerable extent, a colonial institution, and
it should possess a sufficiently extensive local
proprietary to furnish an influential local su-
perintending body. Eor these reasons, and
also more especially with a view to place its
representatives in a suitable position to con-
duct the preliminary negotiations with the
colonial governments, as well as to assure
British capitalists of our lond Jides in the
matter, three-fourths of the shares in the first
new ship ought to be taken up in the colonies.
In succeeding vessels, or when the preliminary
difficulties have been surmounted, the relative


proportions of Colonial and English share-
holders might he greatly altered from those
above named, or even occasionally more than
reversed.
It is proposed to conduct the business of the
Association on the following method. The
shareholders of each ship will elect from their
number an Owners’ Committee of five members,
to have, if desired, sole charge and control over
all financial and mechanical matters relating to
the construction, maintenance, and insurance of
their vessel, machinery, and fittings, on the
understanding that a stipulated degree of com-
pleteness and efficiency is to be preserved. Each
Owners’ Committee will nominate so many of
its members as may be necessary to form a
Board of Directors of the Association, number-
ing not more than five, unless there shall be
more than five ships, when each committee
should be represented by one director. A
Colonial Board of Local Management corres-
ponding in number to that of the Directors can
be elected by all shareholders in the Association
resident in the colonies. The Directors will
arrange all matters connected with the station-


ing, working, and provisioning of the ships, and
their decision on any disputed point, should he
considered final, hy all members of the Associa-
tion. The Colonial Board should be the sole
medium of communication between the colonial
Governments and the Directors and be em-
powered to act on behalf of the Directors in the
colonies.
In organizing a series of distinct, terminating,
yet mutually interested undertakings of this
character it will be advisable to arrange for a
gradual refunding of capital to the shareholders,
proportional to the annual deterioration of their
vessel; and by means of the depreciation fund
such a provision is attainable. From this source
a partial repayment of the capital invested in
each ship may be made periodically at par, and the
result will be that by the time the ship becomes
unfit for any profitable employment, the share-
holders will have been fully reimbursed. Share-
holders, thus partially bought out of a ship,
may repurchase in the open market; or they
can have a preferent claim for re-investment in
a new vessel, one of which it will probably be
advisable to complete about every second year.


This being the case, the gradual extinction of
capital can, without injustice to any one, he
fully worked out, at such rate annually, in
each particular ship, as may be determined
upon in settling its deed of ownership, and
approved by the Directors of the Association;
power being reserved in each case for the re-
funding of the remaining capital in any ship at
any greater rate, whenever, from its age or other
causes, its longer retention in the service may
be inexpedient, or to re-issue shares whenever
additional capital may be required to supple-
ment the maintenance fund. With moderately
careful management there should be a surplus
much more frequently than otherwise, after re-
paying the original capital of the ship ; and
this surplus, from whatever source derived,
should be held on behalf of the Association,
to meet those cases in which, from any cause
whatever, the final realization may prove to be
of an insufficiently satisfactory character.
The distribution of profits can be equitably
effected on the following method. Separate
accounts will of course be kept for each ship.
Against its gross earnings should be charged,


working expenses and dues, insurance, repairs
depreciation, management, and dividend up to
6 per cent, per annum on the unextinguislied
capital of the ship. The surplus should he
carried to a Gleneral Fund, against which a first
charge, to make good all dividends on capital
in the Association to 6 per cent., should he
made, or pro rata as far as it might go; and any
remainder should he distributed annually as a
bonus per share, without regard to capital, or
in further reduction of the capital, as the direc-
tors may consider best for the interests of the
Association.
Having thus briefly stated the mam features
of this project, with the principal reasons for
its assuming the dimensions, and form, which
distinguish it, it will be convenient at this
point, to state what measures it is proposed
to adopt to test its practicability, and the order
in which those measures may he taken.
On behalf of the proposed new ship, no ex-
pense will he incurred, no meeting will be
called, and no negotiation will be opened with
any colonial government, until 2,500 of the Aus-
tralian shares are taken up. Each deposit, of


£5 per £SO share, will be lodged with the
hank as a fixed deposit for six months on
and from the day of receipt, and the hank
will issue to each subscriber a “ Deposit Certi-
ficate” on behalf of the Association, forwarding
the same by post in acknowledgment of remit-
tances. If within six months from the date of
the first certificate the requisite amount of
Australasian capital shall not have been sub-
scribed, and if there shall then be reason to
believe that English capitalists will not make
good any deficiency, all deposits will be re-
funded on and after the expiration of that term ;
and should this contingency arise, the fact will
be notified by advertisement in the principal
metropolitan newspaper of each colony. In
this case subscribers will draw cheques on the
bank for the amounts of their respective deposits,
with interest thereon, in full (the amount and
due date of which will be noted on each Deposit
Certificate when issued) and such cheques will be
paid on presentation as the Bank Fixed Deposit
Eeceipts mature, or earlier without interest if
required, but every cheque must be accompanied
by its corresponding “ Deposit Certificate ” for
cancellation.


So soon as the Australian portion of the capital
for the new ship has been subscribed, a general
meeting of the subscribers and their proxies
will be convened, at which a provisional com-
mittee of five will he chosen, and legal advisers
may he appointed. The committee will first
make such further investigations respecting the
advisability of proceeding with the project, as
they may deem necessary. If the result of that
investigation is unfavorable to the prosecution
of the enterprise, the deposit-money will he
returned, as the deposit receipts mature, less
only such expenses as the committee may have
incurred, of which due notification will be given.
If the result is favorable, the committee will
ascertain whether any one or more of the colo-
nial governments will he prepared to grant such
a measure of pecuniary assistance as the pro-
posed vessel will require. Should no such
arrangement be found practicable, then the
deposits will he returned, as previously stated.
Any miscarriage at this point ought still to
leave more than 95 per cent, of the deposit-
money to be returned. Supposing the need-
ful powers and public support to have been
duly granted, subscribers will be required


to execute the deed of ownership, when a
second general meeting will be convened, at
which the first call will be made, and succeed-
ing calls will be authorized. The meeting will
also elect an Owners’ Committee and will
direct them to enrol their enterprise as a part
of the Association, and to enter into the ne-
cessary covenants on that behalf. Immediately
on its election, the Owners’ Committee of the
new ship will take steps to place the English
portion of the shares at par, and to carry out
the enterprise in conjunction with the autho-
rities of the Association.
In order to ascertain how far the views set
forth in the preceding pages are in accordance
with those of the Australasian public, and more
especially to afford the public an opportunity
for considering the question, The Honorable
Henry Miller and Herbert James Hentt,
Esquire, have consented to, act as custodians
of deposits, and to receive applications, at
the Bank of Victoria, Melbourne, for 3,000*
shares of £5O each, in the first new ship of the
* Unless 2,500 shares are taken up all deposits will he
returned.


proposed Association; the ship to be called
the Antipodean. Applications, for which a form
is appended, may be forwarded direct to the
Bank, or through Messrs. J. B. Were & Son,
Share, Finance and Exchange Brokers, Mel-
bourne They should contain the usual signa-
ture, and also the name and address of the
applicant legibly written, and must in each case
be accompanied by a deposit of £5 per share.
These funds will be held by the gentlemen before
named, as joint trustees for the subscribers ; and
all amounts so subscribed will be deposited daily
with the Bank of Victoria, Melbourne, in their
names, on fixed deposit receipts for six months,
at the current rate of interest. The receipts
will also be retained in their custody, until the
subscription list is filled, or the receipts mature.
Should all the Australian shares be taken
up, the receipts will pass to the Owners’
Committee of the ship as soon as they are
elected; and if the full amount of such shares
should not be subscribed, the custodians of
deposits will instruct the bank to return the
deposits to the subscribei’s by the process
already described.


Mr. W. Westgabth, of 71 Cornhill, London,
E.C., who has kindly interested himself in this
matter, will be associated with other gentlemen
to receive applications for the British portion
of the shares as soon as the state of the Colonial
list justifies such a step, and in the meantime,
he will he advised monthly of the progress being
made, for the information of those persons in
London who may feel an interest therein.
In the event of the project being carried out,
calls not exceeding five pounds each, will be
made, two months notice being given in each
case; and most probably the whole will be re-
quired in eighteen months from the date on
which the first call is made payable.
Communications for the Author may he addressed to
Box 339, Melbourne Post Office.




BRITISH ANTIPODEAN ASSOCIATION.
APPLICATION FOR SHARES IN THE STEAMSHIP “ANTIPODEAN."
do
THE HONORABLE HENRY MILLER,
AND
f
HERBERT JAMES HENTY, ESQUIRE,
CARE OF
THE BAHR 01 VICTORIA, MELBOURNE.
Gentlemen,
%ereivith J beg to hand you the sum of
bounds as a deposit of dive pounds per
Share on Shares in the British Antipodean Association' s
first neiv Ship u Antipodean," which amount J will thank you to hold in my
name on behalf of the Association, on the terms set foylh in the for
establishing the Association ; and J hereby accept the Shares thus applied for
or any less number that may be allotted to me, subject to such conditions
as a majority of the Allottees or their duly authorised representatives may
determine to attach thereto.
j am, Q entlemen,
Jff : : Hours truly,
Usual Signature
■jfame
1 : ..:
Address )
1
186




Cbc Cape Iloutc Question,
A LETTER
TO THE
LEGISLATORS AND EDLING CLASSES
AUSTRALASIA.
gatgltf-Australian:.
SANDS & McDOUGALL, MELBOURNE.
Sydney: John Sands. Adelaide: James Williams.
Hobart Town : Walch & Sons. Brisbane : Theodhilus P. Pugh.
Wellington; W. Lyon,
mdccclxviii.




TO THE
Legislators and Hiding Classes
of Australasia.
Gentlemen,
If at the outset of an active life a variety of
fundamental matters demand prompt and deci-
sive consideration, which had previously either
escaped notice or been looked upon as remote
and improbable contingencies, the individual
concerned will probably discover that his career
has been materially affected by the kind and
degree of attention which he has been able and
disposed to accord to their respective importu-
nities. Just as such an individual so circum-
stanced will, sooner or later, have cause for
congratulation or regret, so may young com-
munities, like those of Australasia, while deal-
ing with their more immediately pressing con-
cerns, overlook, or attend to others, of minor
present importance perhaps, but quite capable
of entailing serious ultimate consequences.
These colonies may be said to occupy at the
present date a somewhat similar position to
the one described: being placed in the full
possession and control of their enormous terri-
tories, it is incumbent on them to deal there-


with as intelligent civilized offshoots of the old
British stock. Having assumed the rights
and advantages of proprietors, they cannot
judiciously forget that these rights and their
inseparable duties, these advantages and the
collateral interests which add so largely to
their worth, demand simultaneous care, and
will respectively flourish or languish together.
As it is the right, held too in high esteem, of
the Australasian colonies to deem themselves a
part of the British empire, it is also their duty
to evince a just appreciation of the privileges
of which they have been placed in possession,
as well as a disposition to recognise the claims
which the British nation, as a whole, conse-
quently has upon them. Separated as they are
by several thousand miles from every possible
foe, these colonies ought to be unassailable;
but so long as they are content to look upon
themselves and each other as mere isolated
dependencies, having no interests in common,
and no basis of mutual action but that of
nerveless reliance on the mother country, so
long will they be justly considered by all the
false friends and open haters of Old England to
be weak points in her system, at some one or
more of which a heavy blow may be dealt to
her. The inauguration of this state of things
was indeed unavoidable in bringing the colo-
nies to their present position, but it was not
to maintain any such condition for a length-
ened period that these fine territories were made
over in their entirety to the handful of occu-


pants which had scattered itself about them, nor
should the colonists consider themselves at
liberty to forget that their lands are, in fact, a
new part of the British empire, held as such in
trust to found and develope prosperous commu-
nities, and in so doing to add to, not to detract
from, British power. Other nations are vastly
increasing their strength; and Great Britain,
peaceful as her interests may dispose her to be,
cannot afford to “rest and be thankful” for
the position she has held among them. Those
nations are rapidly approaching the point at
which, every man being trained to arms, the
military strength of each will be only limited by
the numbers of its population, and not to grow
as they grow is, for us, to fall rapidly from
greatness to insignificance in the world’s coun-
cils, from strength to weakness, and to expose
ourselves to all the unpleasant contingencies
which such changes may involve.
The united, well developed, and properly di-
rected power of England and her great colonial
possessions—Canada, India, and Australasia—
should be well able to meet all demands that
may be made upon it; but to save Australasia
from the disgrace of being a drag upon her
friends in case of emergency, or to entitle her to
a share in the honor of preventing such emer-
gencies, she must set up a higher standard for
her guidance, and aim at greater things than
she has yet done. At the present time the
Australasian colonies have, in the interests of
the nation, to study the two former items only


of this programme, from which it should evi-
dently he their especial business, as also it
will certainly be to their special benefit, to
form and encourage the consolidation of a
sound general policy, and to develope their
combined strength by all available means,
with a view to mere speedy federalization.
The writer desires now to advocate the taking
of one step in these directions, by urging upon
all true patriots that even at some cost, if
necessary, they should at once endeavour to
increase the power of Australasia as the fourth
dominion of the empire, by securing as large
an immigration as possible from Europe, and
by doing this in such a way as to call forth our
national feeling, and to neutralize our local
differences, or to make them subservient to our
general well-being.
In the present stage and condition of the
national existence of the Australasian colonies,
there are no questions of greater moment or sur-
rounded with considerations of more weighty
import to them than that of placing their
means of communication with the mother
country on the most satisfactory footing; and
more especially is this the case with regard to
that portion thereof which may influence their
development by immigration. At various times
a kind of spasmodic though fruitless attention
has already been given to the subject; but as yet
the colonists have exhibited no such interest
therein as to induce a supposition that, in their
national capacity, they have an adequate appre-


ciation of its real merits, either as it affects
themselves or the empire at large. This appa-
rently apathetic disposition on the part of those
who should he most alive to the necessity for
adopting every means of promoting their na-
tional advancement, is much to he regretted;
although it is not altogether the result of indif-
ference, as other causes have no doubt exercised
a strongly deterrent influence.
The Cape route has for many years, and
for most satisfactory reasons, been known by
all those competent persons who have given
an impartial consideration to its merits, to
be the one by which alone a large immigra-
tion to Australasia can he induced or con-
ducted, and also to he better calculated than
any other to promote an extensive trade,
as well as to facilitate personal intercourse
between Great Britain and her antipodean
possessions. The isthmuses of Suez and Panama
prevent the routes on which they are situated
from being extensively used for either of these
purposes, and in addition to the physical ob-
structions offered by them, necessitating the
transhipment of passengers and merchandise,
which, it is true, are to some extent sur-
mounted for mails and a few travellers, they
are liable to the triple objection that they may
he completely stopped by any hostile power
that may hold them or the sea on either side.
As increasingly useful routes for general mail
services, it is admitted that Australasia cannot
dispense with either, even though the passage


should be closed to our European correspon-
dence, for our communications with south-
eastern Asia must he maintained, and the re-
lations of Great Britain with the United States
as well as our own dealings therewith, and
with other parts of both North and South
America, forbid the suspension of our direct
mail services to their shores. Seeing, however,
that they cannot be fully relied upon for the
transmission of our through mails in troubled
times, they may with advantage, even for mail
purposes alone, apart from other considerations,
be supplemented by some more satisfactory
arrangement.
Admitting that if this were the only reason
for advocating the organization of a third
Anglo-Australian mail service, several oppos-
ing ones might be adduced of considerable co-
gency, sufficing perhaps in these days of non-
intervention and concession, to justify almost
indefinite delay, the case assumes a far different
aspect upon remembering that such a service is
the only, or at least the best possible arrange-
ment by which a practically useful, unassisted
immigration can be induced. Eew persons will
be of opinion that ordinary government immi-
grants should generally be conveyed in expensive
mail steamers, although it might occasionally be
desirable; far more, and with better reasons,
would prefer to see emigration to Australia
popularized, so that in addition to those
brought here at our own expense, in sucii
manner as we may find expedient, a fair pro-


portion of self-reliant, independent emigrants,
possessed of moderate capital and practical skill,
who prefer not to accept government assist-
ance, may yet find their way to our shores at
something less than ruinous cost, and in many
cases as something better than third-class
passengers.
Ocean mail subsidies, on frequented routes,
are really, and almost entirely, payments for
speed and punctuality. The tonnage required
for the mails, is, in most cases, so exceedingly
moderate, that it could probably be obtained in
vessels of the highest class for little more than
a per-centage of the subsidy; and, in fact, if
there were no exclusive mail contracts, the mails
would be so dealt with at comparatively trifling
cost, but with more or less prejudice to their
regularity. The granting of a mail subsidy to a
line of steamers on the Cape route does not neces-
sarily imply that encouragement to passenger
transit, by means of low fares, is intended, or, if
intended, that it will be secured. We are all
well aware that high fares are the rule on board
mail steamers ; but if such fares are to prevail
on the Cape route, any subsidy to the vessels
demanding them, will be worse than a waste of
public money, since the only object to be gained
from it worth gaining, or which would justify
the granting of it, namely, a combination of
high speed and low fares, will then be hope-
lessly beyond our reach, buried by our own act
beneath a worthless vested interest of our own
creation. This is, in fact, the crucial point of


the whole subject; and on the course that may-
be taken with respect to it depends whether
these settlements shall flourish on the surplus
strength of Europe, or stagnate on their own
resources for want of population.
But in avoiding the danger just pointed out,
we must be careful not to rush into others
of a scarcely less serious character. As there
are strong grounds for believing that ordinary
vessels cannot satisfy both their owners and
the public in this service, so while suitable ones
might be fully equal to the work, a complete
monthly service, started together, or even
in too rapid succession, could not obtain suf-
ficient support, and must consequently fail or
fall into serious difficulties at the outset of the
enterprise, for it would be idle to expect that
an inclination to travel would be at once
aroused sufficient to occupy the capacities of
several such vessels, or to pay a moderate
return upon the capital invested. It would
therefore be a mistake to urge the immediate
complete organization of such a service, for if
it were accomplished, and if each of the vessels
were to obtain all the patronage it would
require, it is almost certain that that patronage
could only be gained by making a very serious
encroachment on existing interests. It is true
that those interests have no vested rights antago-
nistic to the desired improvement, but the
extent of their ramifications, their general uti-
lity, and their highly influential position, cannot
and ought not to be disregarded. By dealing


with the subject in an appropriate manner,
a vast amount of an entirely new class of busi-
ness is almost certain to be gradually created.
As the work goes on with the growth of trade
and population, the undertaking will prosper,
and the success of its operations, by increasing
the popularity of these colonies as a field lor
European emigration, will add also to the
prosperity, and necessitate the collateral growth
of all maritime interests in or connected with
Australasia.
It is more especially the business of this letter
to invite public attention to the matter, without
presuming to say what means should he em-
ployed ; hut remembering that the Great Bri-
tain, the Australian iioyal Mail Company with
a subsidy in possession, and the General Screw
Company, which might have had a subsidy had
it wished to undertake the work, remembering
that all these parties attempted to grapple with
the difficulty, by means of full steam power, and
that no one of them succeeded, and remember-
ing too, that these failures have operated most
prejudicially on all subsequent attempts in a
similar direction, their errors ought not to be
repeated to still further complicate the ques-
tion, and delay its satisfactory solution. With
all the very moderate performances, and total or
partial failures of past attempts at steam navi-
gation on the Cape route before us, though
attributable, as it is now known that the two
latter were to causes which might have been
avoided, it is not surprising that no great disposi-


lion has been evinced to enter upon any similar
undertaking. The unsuccessful companies at-
tempted what was, and still is, impracticable
with such instruments as they employed, yet
all these unsuccessful efforts, and all that has
been otherwise done in the matter, only confirm
the idea that the work is much too extensive and
too important to be dealt with in any off baud
manner, or to be undertaken successfully with-
out the liberal support and cordial co-operation,
accompanied probably, by the joint supervi-
sion of the Australasian Governments. But
it is certain that so much consideration will
only be shown to a thoroughly national scheme.
No colony can be expected to contribute to the
maintenance of a system from which it is not to
derive an equitable return ; and in order, there-
fore, to bring their united influence and means
into practical accord, it is essential that the
claims and interests of each should be fully
considered and fairly recognised. By thus com-
bining their energies, without sacrificing their
individuality, these colonies might gradually
organize a service of the utmost general utility,
the mere creation of which, under their joint
auspices, would raise them to a far more influ-
ential position than that which they now occupy
as separate provinces, while its steady prosecu-
tion would afford to themselves a ground of
common interest, and thereby tend to promote
a genuine national feeling between them. Every
one of these colonies needs additional popula-
tion ; each one of them can offer some peculiar


inducements to certain classes of immigrants ;
and no one of them is so completely isolated
that its increased prosperity, arising from an
influx of European settlers, will not he decidedly
beneficial to the whole. Our true policy, then,
must he to attract the attention of all classes
of European emigrants to the greatly varied
advantages that Australasia, inclusive of Tas-
mania and New Zealand, affords; to give them
the widest possible choice; and to lay well
defined and inexpensive ways before them by
which they may safely and speedily reach any
district which they may prefer.
Suggestions have been made that Victoria
-O . r* 1
should seize as much of the advantage of the
Cape route as she can contrive to grasp, regard-
less of all other considerations, excepting per-
haps, the possibility of extorting black mail
from her neighbours. It may be doubted
whether any special benefit would ultimately
accrue to Victoria from such a course. It
would certainly close the opening which now
exists for dealing satisfactorily with the question;
and it would almost as certainly induce a com-
petition that cannot fail to be prejudicial in the
early steps of such an undertaking. The
writer confesses that he would rather see Vic-
toria joining heartily with the other colonies
in the prosecution of great national enterprises,
forgetting all local distinctions, and content to
take such share of the honor and the profit as
may be justly hers (which coidd not in any
case be small), or even to forego a portion of


what she might be entitled to claim should
that he necessary in order to ensure a na-
tional success.
It would he far more honorable and appro-
priate that the principal colony for the time
being should lead the group with the consent
and hearty co-operation of the others for
the general good, than that it should inten-
sify existing provincial jealousies, by adopting
a selfishly independent policy with an avowed
intention to ignore their opinions, and to
subordinate their interests to her own. If
any leading colony elects to deal with this
and similar questions on such narrow pro-
vincial considerations, rather than on broad
national principles, declines in fact, to lead
towards truly national objects in a truly na-
tional spirit, it not only evades its duties and
forfeits all right to the honors and advantages
which would attach to their due discharge,
but it raises a most serious obstacle to that
union which all true colonists amongst ns are
anxious to promote.
No more grievous error could be perpe-
trated than that of wasting large public re-
sources in detail on petty lines of vessels that
will inevitably spring up if one comprehensive,
generally fostered, and therefore thoroughly
efficient service is not started. The former
cannot do more for the public than absorb the
several small subsidies with which they will
have to be content. The latter, under a single
effective and well organized management, acting


in concert with the whole of the colonial immi-
gration authorities both here and in Europe,
would, with the same or less funds, divert to
each of the Australasian settlements a steadily
increasing tide of invaluable European emigra-
tion, and ekert a variety of other influences of
a decidedly beneficial character.
It seems, however, scarcely necessary to per-
petuate the inadequate monthly mail system
until a completely efficient Cape service can be
established, and as the 13,I 3 , and 0. Company are
believed to he prepared to supply at once, a
fortnightly service via Suez on reasonable terms,
which could he made terminable at short notice,
the colonists might be put in possession of that
improvement immediately, without prejudice to
a national Cape line. The whole of our ocean
mail system greatly requires readjustment, on
equitable terms, to he settled from a full and
fair consideration of all the contingent circum-
stances.
In conclusion the writer would strongly re-
commend all those who take an interest in the
prosperity of the land we live in, or that of the
nation of which' some of us at least are proud
to form a part, to direct their careful and prac-
tical attention to the utilization of the Cape
route, to mark well the means employed to
w r ork shorter trans-oceanic services ; to shun a
repetition of past errors, hut to bring into full
operation, in the shortest possible time con-
sistent with the well doing of the work, at any
reasonable cost, a comprehensive and thorough-


ly national system of cheap and rapid com-
munication between Great Britain and the whole
of her important Australasian dependencies, for
by so doing they will accumulate matter for future
congratulation, they will add to the strength
and prosperity of the empire by nourishing
their own, while they can never have cause to
regret that this somewhat onerous hut obvious
duty has been creditably discharged.
None of the projects yet laid before the
public contemplate dealing with these subjects
on sufficiently comprehensive or equitable prin-
ciples, practical propositions will therefore
shortly be brought forward to give effect to
the views herein propounded. It is intended
to meet the requirements of each and all of
the colonies on terms within their respective
disposable means, and as soon as the arrange-
ments can be completed to place the capital
city of each existing colony in direct steam
communication with Europe, as frequently as
the business, accommodation, or other consider-
ations may warrant.
Eor the present the writer (who interests
himself in the subject solely on public grounds,
who may be addressed through his publishers,*
and who will be glad to hear from any parties
concurring in his views) begs respectfully to
subscribe himself an
Anglo-Australian.
Melbourne,
August, 1868.
* MINTED AND PUBLISHED BY SANDS AND MCDOUGALL,
COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE.




IbitLJO
p I^o7o
t
K) ccjQJi


■V


