

of any Stock
)earing^^their stamp.
Npf 338,7622 P966
PROSPECTUS
NEW
GIPPSLAND BOULDER MINE
No Liability
ERRINUNDRA, VICTORIA
CAPITAL:
£3,500 in 500 shares of £7 each of which 350 shares are offered
for public subscription at £l per share on application and £l per
share on allotment and the balance of £5 per share to be paid by
calls as and when required.
50 shares fully paid are to be allotted to the Vendors and /or their
owners in part payment of the purchase consideration hereinafter set out.
100 shares are to be held in reserve.
PROVINCIAL DIRECTORS:
William Herbert, M erchant, Noorinbee.
Angus Cameron, Mine Manager, Noorinbee,
Henry Wooliey, Butcher, Noorinbee.
(Two additional directors to be appointed at the first meeting of Shareholders.)
BANKERS:
Commercial Bank of Australia, Limited, Orbost.
SOLICITOR:
Rupert James Mosley. Orbost.
AUDITOR:
To be appointed at first meeting of Shareholders
LEGAL MANAGER (pro tem) AND REGISTERED OFFICE:
J. W. BIRD, Orbost.
BROKERAGE:
The usual brokerage per share will be paid to members
Exchange on Shares allotted pursuant to applications
V !f
Printed at the "Snowy River Mail" Office, Orbost /
at ui« - snowy Kiver Mail" umce, Orbost /
J ■ ■ //»..; '£*
*Amam


Mine Manager's Report.
The tunnel driven by the New Boulder Syndicate commences at a point due south of
the old workings and traversed the reef channel due north for 200 feet which is now within
50 feet of the intrusion of mullock on which the last gold was obtained in the eastern reef.
The lode in the new tunnel for the first 150 feet consists of quartz leaders and slate three
to four feet wide well mineralised.
The last 50 feet consisted of solid quartz 4 to 5 feet wide heavily mineralised and
assaying a trace of gold. No cross cutting has been done to ascertain the width of the reef
channel.
The rich gold in the Boulder Mine was obtained in the western rolls in fissures
crossing 35 degrees east of north the eastern roll being unpayable.
As the big reef in the new tunnel is now situated well to the east and gaining a
little east the next big roll should occur any time, therefore it is quite reasonable to expect
in a few feet a recurrence of the extra ordinary rich stone won from the higher levels.
Signed, ANGUS CAMERON
Mine Manager.
Applications for shares must be made on the form accompanying the Prospectus and
should be addressed to W. H. Herbert, Noorinbee. The full amount of application money
on the shares applied for must accompany applications.
Allotment will be made, as far as possible, strictly in accordance with the order of
receipt of applications and the directors may proceed to allot when 1 50 shares have been
applied for and they reserve the right at any time after the statutory number of shares have
been applied for to close the issue of shares.
If in any case the number of shares allotted to any applicant is less than the number
applied for the balance of the purchase money held will be applied in payment or part payment
of allotment moneys. Should no allotment take place, all moneys will be returned to applicants
without deductions.


Objects of the Company.
The Company is being formed for the purpose of acquiring from Angus Cameron and
others styling themselves The New Gippsland Boulder Mine Syndicate their right title and
interest in and to Gold Mining Lease No. 5137 situate at Errinundra and containing 30 acres
or thereabouts together with the Mine thereon known as tbe New Gippsland Boulder Mine
and all plant and improvements thereon including a ten head Thomson Battery Iron frame with
7 cwt. stamp complete with the exception of tatles and piping with a view to working and
developing the said mine.
Description of the Property
The property which is situate at Errinundra was previously worked by the Gippsland
Boulder Company and a large quantity of gold was won therefrom. Although the mine was
exceptionally rich down to about 120 feet no effort has been made to locate the gold below
the 120 feet level. This can be done by driving a new tunnel to test the reef at the 220
feet level The returns from the Mine as recoidtd by the Mines Department shows 3621 ozs.
of gold from 1877 tons.
Proposed Operations.
To drive a new tunnel to intersect the shute of gold 100 feet below the present
workings at an estimated cost for 500 feet at 30/- per foot £750.
The tunnel will serve a dual purpose as it will be driven in the reef channel
Should any new shutes of gold exist south of the present shute there will be every
chance of locating them in the tunnel. It may seem a big outlay in the first place, but once
the tunnel is driven, the mine can be worked very cheaply as the quartz will be trucked
direct to the battery and any water will be drained away. The western reef which is 60
feet west can be worked from the new tunnel,
General
The whole of the proceeds of the issue of shares now offered for subscription will be
placed to the credit of the Company after deduction of brokerage and floatation expenses.
All costs in connection with the formation and incorporation of the Company and the
issueing of its shares, stamp duty and costs
Company.
of agreements and transfers will be borne by the
Consideration
Purchase
The consideration to be paid to the
the property as set out herein is £350.
Vendors after incorporation of the Company for
The sum is to be satisfied by the issue to the Vendors and/or their nominees of 50
shares of £7 each fully paid.
Agreements.
An Agreement, dated the Third day of OctoLer, 1931, between the New Gippsland
Boulder Mine Syndicate of the one part and William Henry Herbert of the other part which
sets out the names of the members to the Syndicate,
Gold Mining Lease Volume 303 Folio 33681 and numbered 5137 Gippsland dated
the second day of February 1934 from the Crown to William Henry Herbert and Angus
Cameron who hold same for and on behalf of the said Syndicate.
Plan of the Boulder Mine can be seen at the Company's


this day of
1934.
3 1508 02114722 3 )
— A
APPLICATION FOR SHARES
NEW GIPPSLAND BOULDER MINE, NO LIABILITY.
(To be registered under Part I I of the Companies Act, 1928, Victoria).
CAPITAL: £3,500 IN 500 SHARES OF £7 EACH.
To The Directors.
New Gippsland Boulder Mine, No Liability.
NOORINBEE.
I hereby apply for ( ) Shares in New Gippsland Boulder Mine, No
Liability, in terms of Company's Prospectus and subject to the Rules of the Company and I enclose the
sum of £ being 20/- per share payable on application. I agree to pay 20/- per share
on allotment, and to accept the said Shares or any lesser number that may be allotted to
me, and I authorize you to place my name upon the Register of Shareholders in respect of
any Shares so allotted to me
I authorize the Chairman of the Meeting, if I should not be present at the Preliminary
Meeting of Shareholders, to represent me thereat or at any adjournment, or adjournments
thereof, and to vote and act on »all business which may be brought forward, and more
particularly to adopt Rules and Regulations, -by which I agree to be bound,
Dated at
NAME (in full)
ADDRESS
OCCUPATION
SIGNATURE
Note. — Cheques and Money Orders should be made payable to the Company's Order
and should be crossed "Not negotiable'"
