

EXPLORATION IN BRITISH NEW GUINEA.
In February last, Mr. PHILP (of Messrs. Burns, Philp Sf Vo.), offered
Mr. T. F. B E YAM, F.R. G. S.,* the use of s-s. “ Victory” for six weeks’ work.
An expedition (comprising (21 persons all told) was thereupon formed
under Mr. BEVAJV’S leadership, with 'the sanction and approval of Her
Majesty’s Special Commissioner, the lIOJV. JOHJV DOUGLAS.
In THIRTY-FOUR DAYS’ actual exploration
, /y /fl
PROSPECTUS. /
TWO ; NEW LARGE BIYERS,
emptying into the Gulf of Papua, were discovered, and in each case
ascended for a distance of ONE HUNDRED MILES.
Owing to imaginary difficulties the Aird River had been pi-eviously left totally unexplored since its
discovery by Captain Blackwood in 1840. It has now been proved by this last expedition that the so called Aird
is but one of numerous subdivisions in the delta of a larger river, which Mr. Bevan has named the Douglas.
Before the allotted time had expired, access was also found into an equally important and previously undiscovered
rivet, lying between Bald Head and Orokolo in the Gulf of Papua (named by Mr. Bevan the Jubilee River), and
at the point where the party turned back, nearly 100 miles by river course from the coast, it was still over
200 yards wide. With the exception of the Fly River, no other rivers offerin'' facilities for navigation were.
previously known to exist in British New Guinea, the coast line of which, however, had for many years been
fairly well known. The two new rivers have in each case this most important additional advantage over the
Fly River, that they have been proved to afford ready access to mountain ranges.
Considerable tracts of country in the deltas were covered with scrub that, in some places, could be easily
cleared, and which would then be suitable for tropical planting. A sample of tobacco obtained from natives on the
Douglas Raver has been tested, per favor of Mr. J. H. Maiden, of the Technological Museum, and pronounced to
be of an excellent cigar flavour. Mr. Maiden added—
“ It .shows that Kezv Guinea is suitable for the growth of cigar tobacco,”
In other places, dense forests of well-grown and varied timbers came down to the water’s edge; while these rivers,
navigable for deep-draughted vessels for great distances inland, offer unequalled facilities for floatation purposes.
The sago palm of commerce was also observed in considerable plenitude.
* Prior to his last expedition Mr. Bevan had spent the latter part of 1884, early months of 1885, also from September
1885, to July, 1886, in British New Guinea.


Eighty miles fi \,m 3 coast, on an alluvial island in the Bhilp River (a tributary of the Douglas),
specimens of metamorphk ‘..ate, quartz, together with black sand, the latter containing uniformly a few auriferous
indications, were found. Mr. C. S. Wilkinson, Government Geologist, reports that they were “probably brought
down from the primary formation forming the mountains, which may not be more than 20 or 30 miles distant.”
And adds :—“ We may therefore anticipate mineral discoveries being made in these mountains.” Mr. Wilkinson
continues ;—“ It is probable that where the ranges are composed of the slate and granite formations the vegetation
will not be so dense, for these rocks do not produce such rich soil as do the basaltic, dioritic, or limestone forma-
tions, and may therefore be easily explored.”
The country was found to be but very thinly inhabited beyond the coast line, and no natives or traces of
them were seen in the higher waters of either river. Friendly relations were entered into with four new tribes
living in or near the deltaic portion of the rivers. The temperature averaged (March-April, 1887) 86° in the
shade at noon and 72" at daybreak. Owing to the almost daily scouring of the rivers mosquitoes and malaria
were unknown.
Collections were made of zoological, botanical, and ethnological specimens, and an interesting series of
photographs illustrative of the natives, also river scenery, was taken. Baron Von Mueller, in describing two
plants new to science, which this expedition obtained, spoke in eulogistic terms of the exploring party, and added
that through then-
“ Skill and courage the regions of the Aird River system have now
become opened up to civilisation and commerce, with the additional
hopeful prospect of ready access to high and likely salubrious main
ranges for mining and rural enterprises.”—(See Proceedings Linnean
Society, July, 1887.)
The zoological collection was sent intact to the Australian Museum, and the few specimens new to its collections
were donated to that institution. That these discoveries and collections were the result of six ■weeks exploration
offers a hopeful prospect of further and enlarged results as following on more extended operations.
Her Majesty’s Special Commissioner, Hon. J. Douglas, in writing from Port Moresby, under date
13th May last, to Mr. Bevan, said :
1. “I beg to congratulate you on the important discoveries made by
the expedition under your leadership. 2. I hope that at some
future date you may be able to follow up your explorations among
th rivers running into the head of the Papuan Gulf. They
appv. r th be likely tc p wide ? 1 w} >-ray foi; cummer ct into the
interior of New Guinea.”
The firm, to whom he was almost entirely indebted for the mehns of carrying on his recent discoveries, wrote
as follows to an evening paper, under date sth August, 1887
NEW GUINEA EXPLORATION,
To the Editor.
Sir,— Our attention has been drawn by Mr. Theodore Bevan,
F.R.G.S., to a notice that appeared among your “Brevities” of
Monday, Ist instant, which stated that we deny that we have any-
thing whatever to do with the Bevan New Guinea Expedition. This
statement must have been printed under a misapprehension. We
not only have something to do with the expedition (our Mr. Philp
being one of the Committee appointed to forward Mr. Sevan’s views),
but the plan itself has our warmest sympathy and support. As
stated to your shipping reporter, the launch was not provided by
us, nor are we solely responsible for the fitting out of the proposed
exploring party, as we were almost entirely for the last one con-
ducted by Mr. Bevan. The public of this and the neighbouring
colonies, and the Government of New South Wales, fully recognise
the value of the discoveries made by Mr. Bevan, and the able man-
ner in which the expedition was conducted. Thanks to this, Mr.
Bevan is, to a great extent, independent of us on the present occasion,
and the help we are rendering him is of so unimportant a nature as
to be unworthy of mentioning alongside the great aid he is receiving
from an intelligent and interested body of scientists, mercantile
firms, &c. Only on this account is it, that we are not making our-
selves solely responsible for Mr. Be van's expedition, and if it were,
or yet becomes necessary, we shall be ready and willing to help him
to the fullest extent with something more than our mere countenance
and sympathy, and we much regret that anything we may have said
should have given rise to so thoroughly a mistaken view of our re-
lationship to Mr. Bevan’s forthcoming expedition. We remain, &c.,
BURNS, PHILP, and CO. (Ld.).
The true importance of adding to our knowledge of these new rivers may be rightly
estimated when it is realised that they drain 50,000 Square Miles of territory, or One-seventh of
the whole of New Guinea.




Eighty miles fr„p>
specimens of metamo?^ 1
indications, were fon
down from the prim
And adds :—“ We
continues : —“ It is j
will not be so dense,
tions, and may there:
The country i
them were seen in tli
living in or near tl
shade at noon and 7
were unknown.
Collections w
photographs illustrai
plants new to science
that through their—
The zoological collect
were donated to that
Ip River (a tributary of the Douglas),
;er containing uniformly a few auriferous
ports that they were “probably brought
t be more than 20 or 30 miles distant.”
,de in these mountains.” Mr. Wilkinson
ite and granite formations the vegetation
ie basaltic, dioritic, or limestone forma-
.he coast line, and no natives or traces of
were entered into with four new tribes
eraged (March- April, 1887) 86° in the
ag of the x’ivers mosquitoes and malaria
pecimens, and an interesting series of
Baron Von Mueller, in describing two
serins of the exploring party, and added
tem have now
the additional
ilubriona main
dings Linnean
the few specimens new to its collections
were the result of six 'weeks' exploration
offers a hopeful prospect of further and enlarged results as following on more extended operations,
Her Majesty’s Special Commissioner, Hon. J. Douglas, in writing from Port Moresby, under date
13th May last, to Mr. Bevan, said :
1. “I beg to congratulate you on the important discoveries made by
the expedition under your leadership. 2. I hope that at some
future date you may be able to follow up your explorations among
tb ■ fine rivers running into the head of the Papuan Gulf. They
appear to be likely tc p - wide-a foi; commerce into the
interior of New Guinea/’
The firm, to whom he was almost entirely indebted for the means of carrying on his recent discoveries, wrote
as follows to an evening paper, under date sth August, 1887
NEW GUINEA EXPLORATION,
To the Editor.
Sih, —Our attention has been drawn by Mr. Theodore Bevan,
F.R.G.S., to a notice that appeared among your “Brevities” of
Monday, Ist instant, which stated that we deny that we have any-
thing whatever to do with the Bevan New Guinea Expedition. This
statement must have been printed under a misapprehension. We
not only have something to do with the expedition (our Mr. Philp
being one of the Committee appointed to forward Mr. Sevan’s views),
but the plan itself has our warmest sympathy and support. As
stated to your shipping reporter, the launch was not provided by
us, nor are we solely responsible for the fitting out of the proposed
exploring party, as we were almost entirely for the last one con-
ducted by Mr. Bevan. The public of this and the neighbouring
colonies, and the Government of New South Wales, fully recognise
the value of the discoveries made by Mr. Bevan, and the able man-
ner in which the expedition was conducted. Thanks to this, Mr.
Bevan is, to a great extent, independent of us on the present occasion,
and the help we are rendering him is of so unimportant a nature as
to be unworthy of mentioning alongside the great aid he is receiving
from an intelligent and interested body of scientists, mercantile
firms, &c. Only on this account is it, that we are not making our-
selves solely responsible for Mr. Bevan's expedition, and if it were,
or yet becomes necessary, we shall be ready and willing to help him
to the fullest extent with something more than our mere countenance
and sympathy, and we much regret that anything we may have said
should have given rise to so thoroughly a mistaken view of our re-
lationship to Mr. Sevan’s forthcoming expedition. We remain, &c.,
BURNS, PHILP, and CO. (Ld.).
The true importance of adding to our knowledge of these new rivers may be rightly
estimated when it is realised that they drain 50,000 Square Miles of territory, or One-seventh of
the whole of New Guinea.


SIR ALFRED STEPHEN (Lieutenant Governor)
HON. WM. MACLEAY, M.L.C.
HTS WORSHIP THE MAYOR OF SYDNEY
w. McMillan, esq., m.l.a.
(ALBAN J. RILEY, ESQ)
ROBERT PHILP, ESQ.
SIR EDWARD STRICKLAND, K.C.B., F.R.G.S.,
RIC HARDJVYNNE^E^Qr-——• —"
(President Geographical Society)
CHARLES MOORE, ESQ., and
HON. S. A. JOSEPH, M.L.C. (President Chamber
DR. ANDREW GARRAN.
of Commerce)
Under these circumstances, Mr. Bevan is desirous of acting upon the Special Commissioner’s recom-
mendation of following up his discoveries, and hopes to recommence work in September-Octoher next. His
plan briefly is—
“ To endeavour to trace to their sources the main tributaries of the
Douglas (which has superseded the Aird), and the Jubilee rivers ;
also to determine, if possible, with respect to same, the exact
position of the German boundary. Should opportunity present
itself, he is also anxious to explore the at present unknown country
between the Douglas and fciae Fly rivers.’’
(For the sake of clearness it is well to state that the field of Mr. Bevan’s work is between 200 and 300
miles to the north-west of Port Moresby, and even a greater distance from the site of the explorations now
being carried out on the Owen Stanley range by the Victorian branch of the Royal Geographical Society.
For the purely scientific objects of the Victorian expedition the sum of £2OOO was recently collected in
Melbourne, including a grant of £lOOO from the Government).
His project has been rightly understood by the Press as being merely for purposes of discovery
and the dissemination, in the broadest of public interests, of more accurate information respecting
territories now almost unknown.
In recognition of Mr. Bevan’s past services, the New South Wales Government have placed at his disposal
a suitable steam launch, while the Queensland Government have allowed him the services of a thoroughly
competent surveyor, and have approved of their s.s. “Albatross ” towing the launch over to New Guinea waters.
With the object of helping to promote the necessary funds and giving the work their co-operation, a
Committee has been appointed, comprising, amongst others—
Together with the Council of the New South Wales Branch of the Royal Geographical Society,
J. T. CALDWELL, 70 Pitt-street, Secretary.
Over £250 has been already subscribed, including donations of £lOO from Messrs. Burns, Philp and Co.,
and £5O from Rt. Hon. Lord Brassey. It is hoped that at least £l,OOO will be easily raised.
With the view of enabling the Expedition to start in September before the rainy season commences, your
support and patronage are particularly solicited.
ALBAN J. RILEY
Signed and Approved on behalf of the Committee this 16th day EDWARD STRICKLAND
August, 1887. S. A. JOSEPH
, WILLIAM MACLEAY.
N.B.—Donations to the “ Bevan New Guinea Exploration Fund” should be made payable to the Hon.
Treasurer, His Worship the Mayor (Alban J. Riley, Esq.), Town Hall, Sydney, N.S.W.


