

PROSPECTUS
OK THE
EW CORNWALL TIN MINING COMPNY, Limited,
SITUATED NEAR
INVERELL, COUNTY OF GOUGH, IN THE COLONY OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
Capital £30,000, in 30,000 Shares £1 each,
OF WHICH
15,000 fully paid-up are allotted to the present Proprietors,
AND THE BALANCE
15,000 Shares are now offered to the Public on ihe following terms :
2s. Gd. per Share on application, and the remainder in Galls as may he made hy the Directors not exceeding 2s. Gd. per
Share at intervals of not less than Three Months between each Call.
PROVISIONAL DIRECTORS:
/■3<
The Hon. S. D. GORDON, M.L.C., Sydney
HENRY PRINCE, Esq., Sydney
JOHN SUTHERLAND, Esq., M.P., Sydney
A. H. C. MACAFIE, Esq., Sydney
JOHN MOORE, Esq., Armidale.
SOLICITORS :
Messrs. ALLEN, BOWDEN, AND ALLEN, Sydney.
JAMES HARVEY HINDMARSH, Esq., Inverell.
BANKERS:
THE COMMERCIAL BANKING COMPANY.
PROVISIONAL SECRETARY:
W. H. BARRACLOUGH, 362 George Street, Sydney.
This Company has been formed for the purpose of working the valuable deposits of Tin Ore lately discovered
in the neighbourhood of Inverell on the banks of the Macintyre River, County of Gough, on part of the Elsinore Estate.
The property consists of 6 blocks of Land, comprising 280 acres with a frontage of a mile -quarter,
more or less to the Macintyre River immediately opposite the rich Mine known as Barron and Austin’s.
The result of a few weeks’ work has shewn that the surface contains alluvial Tin in large quantities,
while under ground there are lodes of more or less value. One shaft has been sunk 50 feet, on a lode which was
carried down nearly from the surface—it has leaders intersecting it with every prospect of the lode increasing as it
goes down, both in extent and richness.
On the surface alone there is sufficient to employ any number of men when the necessary Machinery is
erected for raising the water in order to commence sluicing operations.
The Ore has been assayed by Professor Watt, whose certificate will be found annexed shewing 69 per cent,
in the alluvial Tin, and 48 per cent, in the lode stuff. The Mine has been examined by W. J. Jenkins,
Esq., a Mineralogist and Metallurgist, who was engaged in the Tin Mines in Cornwall, and also in Bolivia and
Germany, and is therefore an acknowledged authority in such matters. Mr. Jenkins’Report will be found attached
together with a letter from the Manager of the Commercial Bank at Inverell on the same subject.
It is impossible to estimate correctly what the profits of the Company are likely to be, as only manual
labour has been employed up to the present time, the result of that however, has been highly satisfactorily ; and we
have the evidence of other Tin producing countries to prove that Tin Companies are the most profitable Companies
in existence.
The original Proprietors are assured by competent judges, and believe that they have a most valuable Property,
and therefore they claim one-half of the Capital of the Company, find it is expressly understood that none of such
original Proprietors shall be at liberty to dispose of their shares or interest in the Company at a less value or price
than is now asked from subscribing shareholders, viz., (one pound) per share, or until the Mine has been so far
developed as to show a profit over working expenses.


When the Share list is closed a meeting will be called for the appointment of permanent Directors.
The Manager of the
January Bth, 1872.
New Cornwall Tin Mining Company.
Dear Sir,
The samples of Tin Ore received from you yielded as follows
FIRE ASSAYS—
“ No. 1, Load Stuff”
Tin ,> 48 percent.
“ No. 4, Alluvial Tin ”
Tin 69 per cent.
Yours faithfully,
CHARLES WATT,
TO THE PROPRIETORS OF THE
Inverell, 27th November, 1871
New Cornwall Tin Mining Company.
Gentlemen,
Trusting gentlemen that you may meet with all the success that your ground may reasonably lead you to expect.
I am, Your most obedient Servant,
W. J. JENKINS,
Mineralogist and Metallurgist.
Inverell, N.S. W, nth December, 1871.
William Swanson, Esq.,
Inverell.
OALp
EI6UO
■f 1 3,16x2. A/*.
I am, dear Sir, yours truly,
W. H. DRAKE,
Manager of Commercial Banking Company of Sydney.
Inverell.
j I K? oC
The Company will be formed with limited liability, and registered under the Limited Liability Act, so that no
shareholder will be liable for more than the value of the Shares he has allotted to him.
Samples of the Ores are now on view at the Sydney Exchange, and any further information can be obtained
on application to the Provisional Directors.
Application for Shares may be made in the accompanying form to the Brokers of the Company, or addressed to
the Provisional Secretary at the office of the Company, 362 George Street, and it will be optional with the Provisional
Directors to close the list as soon as applications are received for two-thirds of the Capital required.
It is not anticipated that more than one Call beyond the Deposit will be required, as the only machinery
necessary is an Engine with sufficient power to pump the water and crush the Ore.
After a careful examination of your Mining Property, I have much pleasure in expressing my gratification at what came
under my notice, and bearing testimony to its highly mineral character. In fact it is a perfect net work of Tin bearing Reefs and micacious
Granite Dykes, and will, I have every confidence, with the outlay of a comparatively small Capital, prove a highly productive mine.
The present workings as conducted by Mr. Kelly have been most judiciously carried out, and reflects great credit on that
gentleman’s judgment.
The main Shaft has been sunk about 30 feet, from which Tin-ore of rich quality has been obtained from the surface down. The
Lode is at present about 15 inches wide in the bottom and dipping West, good specimens are obtained from it, the matrix being the true Tin
bearing micacious Granite. There are also several other Leaders coming in and will probably junction at a further depth of 30 feet, when it
is highly probable it will form a rich Lode from the present most favorable indications.
There are other Lodes on your property well worth sinking on, particularly one that a Shaft has already been put down about
5 feet in depth on. Excellent specimens have been brought to light of the richest Ore in this partial trial.
The extent of the Alluvial ground is considerable, and will (when you are provided with the necessary plant for sluicing) prove
exceeding valuable, while at the same time you are conducting these operations, may expose to view other Lodes not now visible above the
Alluvial soil.
Should it be necessary to pump water from the Mclntyre River for sluicing, (the Shaft proving dry) an Engine fixed near the
Shaft will answer a double purpose of pumping and winding, as the Pumping Apparatus can be fixed on the River and connected with the
Engine by means of flat Rods. The elevation will not be much over 60 feet, conseque ly very great power is not required.
The Mine is admirably situated for water convenience, one side of the property being bounded by the Mclntyre River, from
which a never failing supply is obtainable.
A considerable quantity of Tin bearing Stone can be obtained from the surface at trifling cost when Stamping Mills are erected—
and when the ground has been costeened (trenched) to a greater extent I have little doubt other deposits will be discovered.
Dear Sir,
I am in receipt of your note of this day’s date, an’d in reply beg to state, that having inspected the “ New Cornwall Tin
Mine ” at Elsmore, and read Mr. Jenkins’ report of the same, I have much pleasure in stating from my knowledge of Mr. Jenkins and
his thorough acquaintance with Tin Mining, &c., that his report is correct. Having examined the ground myself I consider the prospects to
be most encouraging.
