

PROSPECTS AND CONSIDERATIONS
OP
&
FOR THE
AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.
A PAMPHLET.
BY
The Unknown
TASMANIA:
J. WALCH AND SONS, HOBART TOWN AND LAUNCESTON.
1865.




PROSPECTS AND CONSIDERATIONS
OF
&
FOR THE
AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.
A PAMPHLET.
BY
The Unknown.




Prospects and Considerations of a Future for the
Australian Colonies.
The rapid growth of nations, speaking the English lan-
guage, must be a subject of interest, if not to
every thoughtful person ; but when the destiny of those
nations comes under contemplation, and we lia\e recourse
to the maps of the earth to ascertain their position upon its
surface with respect to other nations, it requires no fertile
imagination to picture the probable influence these nations
will exercise in the economy of the world. Descended
from one common stock, speaking the same language,
exercising the same constitutional rights, copying the same
institutions, and enjoying the principles of the laws of their
original country and its pure freedom, these nations are
not ashamed to be called English, but are proud of their
descent, feeling confident that in after ages it will not
require a Niebuhr or a Robertson to determine theii oiigin.
In the North and the South, over vast territories is this
language spoken, and nations growing into manhood ; but
it is to the South we wish now particularly to direct atten-
tion, and if we open a chart of the world on Mercator s
projection, we see before us Australia, an island continent,
extending from to 43|° between the parallels of South
Latitude (including Tasmania), and from 113° to 153° in
the Meridians of E. Longitude. Throughout this vast
space the English language is spoken and English Institu-
tions have taken root. Trial by jury and the liberty of the
Press are as dearly prized as in England, and responsible
administration of Government is the basis of the several


parliaments which regulate the laws of the several colonies
planted within it. The laws of England are the laws of
these Colonies in all cases where they are applicable, and
the most recent dicta of the Judges of England have the
same weight in the Colonial Courts as in those of England,
and England’s Queen is yet their Queen. If this be so,
is not this Australia the England of the South ? and des-
tined to exercise an influence in the affairs of the world
equal, it may be, with that of England itself? With Africa
and the English possessions on that Continent on the left
hand, South America on the right, the Indian Ocean open
to the West, and the South Pacific with its numerous islands
on the East—these highways of the world—and Australia
the central point of the whole, the moral counterpart, and,
perhaps, counterpoise of England, wdiat horoscopy is requi-
site to predict its future ?
Having looked at its position, we may next look at the
climate and productions of Australia. In the North, sugar
and cotton can be well cultivated, and the Queensland
country has already turned attention to these products.
Its cotton has already been valued in England, and large
plantations are commenced on a large scale; so that in a
few years there can be little doubt that cotton and sugar
will be classed among the Exports of Australia. The
growth and manufacture of tobacco is accomplished, and
wine, such as was exhibited at the Great Exhibition at
Paris, has secured a name for the vineyards of Australia
second to none in Europe, and a demand, only to be met
by the increasing extension of her vineyards. Where the
orange, citron, pineapple, and banana luxuriate, the climate
must be adapted to the growth of all other plants congeni-
tal with these fruits. The corn of these colonies took the
prize in the Exhibition in the Crystal Palace.


If we regard the climate, there is none on the earth can
surpass that of the South, particularly in Tasmania, which
seems destined to be the Sanatorium not only of Australia,
but the East Indies—where the currant and raspberry, the
pear and the apple, the peach, the walnut, filbert, and hazel,
and all other fruits and vegetables known in England,
flourish in the open air with a luxuriance not known in
England,—we must conclude that there also is a climate
admirably suited to an English constitution and all the
wants of European diathesis. The cedar of Sydney is equal
to the mahogany of Honduras, and the gigantic gum tree of
Tasmania, for all shipbuilding purposes, surpasses in size and
endurance the oak of England. The forests ot these c un-
fortunately ’ called gum trees, are the growth of ages and
of unlimited extent. I say f unfortunately so called/ for if
they had been called Australian ‘teak/ they would now be
used for backing the armour-plated “Warriors” of Eng-
land, as they will, hereafter, those of Australia. Of such
value was this timber esteemed by the late excellent Sir
John Franklin that he recommended to the English Govern-
ment not only the establishment of a dockyard in Van
Diemen’s Land, but the Export of the timber to the royal
dockyards in England.
Coal of various quality abounds in all the known portions
of .Australia, and iron in the purest state and greatest
quantities, is known to exist in Tasmania and other parts;
and thus these two sinews of mechanical industry, to which
the mother Country owes in great measure her supremacy
in mechanism and commerce, only await the call of capital
to start from inactive slumber to the energies of trade and
power. Copper is already a great export from the South,
with lead rich in silver ; and the discovery of gold in Aus-
tralia in the year 1852, has produced results which call in


question and seem to negative the justness of the expression
of Horace —
a Aururn inrepertum, et sic melius situm .”
Yet, granting with other writers upon this subject, that the
discovery of the precious metals in other countries has been
the cause of their ruin, we must remember that those
countries were not inhabited by Englishmen, nor were the
enlightened views of trade and commerce, now appreciated
and understood, then even contemplated.
Of the great value of this discovery to England, an
estimate may be made from the following table of the trade
of these colonies of Australia. I have taken the year 1862,
not as an exceptional period, but as the last in which I have
been able to procure the evidence of parliamentary record.*
In that year England imported from Australia, exclusive of
gold, £6,498,364 worth of produce, and Australia imported
£11,482,390 worth of manufactured and other goods of all
sorts, thus making the total of trade £17,980,754. The
following table of the gold exported from Australia to
England (exclusive of her trade above-mentioned) is as
follows :
In 1858 £9,066,289 In 1859 £8,627,854
„ 1860 £6,719,857 „ 1861 £6,331,828
In 1862 £6,705,036,
a total of gold in five years of £37,450,864; to which may
be added for the years 1863 and 1864 not less than
£13,410,072; and for the general trade between England
and Australia, a sum of not less than £36,000,000 of Im-
ports and Exports. The value of the Australias to Eng-
land may be in some degree appreciated by what I have
now stated, and their rising wealth and power will, in a
* The Annual Statement of Trade and Navigation made to Parliament.


few years, vindicate a claim of greater consideration than
England, has for the last few years, condescended to bestow
upon these Colonies, and their best interests. Some evi-
dence of this consideration may be drawn from the fact,
that every soldier has been withdrawn from the most
exposed parts of these Colonies, and at the time I am now
writing, the Ordnance Department is recalled from Tasmania,
and the magnificent Harbour of the Derwent, capable of
holding all the fleets of Europe, is rarely visited even by
the smallest vessel of war. Thoughtful men consider this
neglect to this particular colony of Australia with ideas
which suggest anything but attachment to the Mother
Country, and a total disregard of its safety; more especially
when it is evident that this harbour, in the possession of an
enemy, could become the rendezvous of his fleets for the
destruction of the commerce of the Australian colonies;
and that, to prevent such a possibility, not a single measure
of any worth has been adopted by the English Govern-
ment.
If we are to consider the probable destiny of the Colonies
of Australia, their growth and origin will be a necessary
element in the calculation, and it will surprise many who
have taken little or no interest upon this subject, to see how
rapidly colony after colony has sprung into existence; the
influence they have acquired in the world, as a whole, and
the importance of their connexion with England. The first
settlement in Australia was made in New South Wales in
the year 1788 at Sydney on the East coast; and this colony
has planted the great off-slioot of Queensland within the
last few years, now a colony of vast extent and equal im-
portance.
In the year 1803, the first settlement was made in Van
Diemen’s Land (now called Tasmania), and in 1801,


Hobart Town became the seat of its Government. These two
first settlements in Australia were originally convict settle-
ments, for reception of the transported criminals of Great
Britain; and from Tasmania emanated that spirit of adven-
ture which colonized (in 1835) Port Philip, now called
Victoria, as yet the most important of the Australian
Colonies.
In the year 1834, tlie Colony of South Australia was
commenced, and its status as a Colony confirmed in 1836.
Western Australia, the last place in the Australian Conti-
nent to which the convicts of Great Britain have been sent,
and still maintained as a convict colony, to the peril of the
loyalty and attachment of all the other Australian Colonies
to the Crown of England, and especially those who have
thrown off the stigma of convictism, was settled in 1829,
and has been known by the name of Swan River, Perth
being the Capital.
Thus we may say, that within the short space of forty-
eight years, the Colonies of Australia have been planted ;
and now, in the year 1865, their boundaries reach from the
Gulf of Carpentaria to the Southern extremity of Tasmania.
For this vast extension of boundary northward, the colonist
is indebted to the heroic Burke* and his no less heroic
companions, and the inland sea and great oasis, supposed
at one time to occupy the centre of Australia, is now trod-
den by the vanguard of population, and the mirage of the
desert faints away before the flocks and herds of actual
settlement.
In taking a last look at tlie Chart, may we not pause and
ask ourselves the question —are the Isles of Torres Strait,
and to the North-west of Australia, even to Sumatra, ever
* Burke’s Exploring Expedition of 18G0.


to owe allegiance to Australia? Are tlic Straits oi Sunda,
Bally Lombock and Timor ever to pay tribute to Australia
of the China trade passing through them to Europe ? It
may seem visionary to ask such questions now, but when
that vast Island-Continent has started forth in such gigantic
Colonial proportions in so short a period of time, who shall
put the limit to its growth in wealth and power, and
sa ythus far slialt thou go and no further.” Even its
present importance to England, in the opinion of foreigners,
may be estimated from the intention of Russia to attack it,
in case England had taken part with the Poles. “ Out of
sight, out of mind ”is an old English saying; and it is to
be feared that this saying has been too largely followed as
a maxim by the Government of England, with regard to
these Colonies. When we read some of the Speeches of
the Members of Parliament which have been made in the
House of Commons upon colonial affairs, colonists are struck
with the apathy evinced upon that head, and are apt to
conclude that in some Napoleonic phrontistery they must
have learned the principles of colonial economy. Strip
England of her Colonies was the idea of the Great Napo-
leon, in order to divest her of dominion of the seas, and of
her navigation and trade; and thus these persons nowadays
say — ic let the Colonies take care of themselves,” and pro-
voke the nemesis of their ignorance and folly. It is not
many years since it was thought in high places in England,
that a high road ran between Sydney and Hobart Town,
and within the last forty-eight hours, in other official quar-
ters, an ignorance seemed to prevail whether Hobart Town
was in Victoria, New South Wales, or Tasmania.
u Tauten molts erat Romanam condere gentem ! ”
If this be so, and contradiction is defied, to what is this
ignorance, this nonchalance of England with respect to hci


Southern Colonies, this laissez faire system to be attributed ?
I would here pause and wait for the answer of the reader
who thinks of results before he answers; or ask another
question—does he think it impossible or improbable that
the Envoy of the President of the United States of Australia
may present his credentials at the door of the Prime Minister
of England, on or before the year 1888, the centenary of
its primal settlement by the English, or 1883, that of the
separation of the American Colonies from the Crown of
England ? Should a war arise between the great States of
Europe with England, the Amoor could send down the
fleets of Russia in as many weeks’ sail to the great harbours
of Australia as it would take months to send a fleet from
England. Should France again quarrel with England,
there is their Settlement of New Caledonia and their other
isles of the South, which could send frigates down to the same
harbours almost as soon as (if not sooner) than the News of
War could reach the shores of Australia. Must not Aus-
tralia, to secure herself, her trade and commerce, be com-
pelled in such events to declare her independence of Great
Britain, and establish for herself the right of nationality ?
Again, in the case of war, could England, with all her
resources, defend these possessions from foreign attack or
subjugation ? Speaking for myself, I think she could not;
and the modern doctrine of — a Let the Colonies take care
themselves ” would find more advocates amongst the tax-
paying people of England and their representatives, than an
opposite system could produce.
I have touched upon these considerations with a single
view of determining the worth of these Colonies to the
Mother Country; for, should they be lost to that country,
their value would be feelingly ascertained by the diffusion
of their trade into other countries, and the rapid extinction


of that affection which binds the offspring to the sire. If in
a commercial point of view only, the Colonies in general,
and these of which I now treat, are deemed valuable to the
Mother Country, I would not trust my pen to give expres-
sion to the indignation raised by that sordid sentiment, or
point to the withering sarcasm which might be launched
against a country which hitherto boasts, and has a right to
boast, that her flag has ever been carried in the vanguard of
civilization and liberty; and, that while ruined thrones and
desecrated altars have disfigured the moral and social history
of other countries, she has exhibited the stern unshaken
attachments of loyalty to that form of Government, based
upon principles which are an honor to herself, an example
to the world, and have made her a refuge of the oppressed,
the exile, and politically denounced of other countries: of
these principles it may be sufficient to say—-
« Ilis ego nec metas rerum nec tempora pono
Imperium sine fine dedi
Tliere is in every true-hearted Englishman a voice to
give indignant denial to a sentiment so sordid : he feels an
innate pride when he reads in his own language those
works of science which distinguish the American juriscon-
sult, the discoverer, and astronomer; and he compares
with satisfaction, the philosophy of the American literati
with that of his own country ; and revels in the pleasure
he derives from their works of fiction, whether novel or
romance \ he reads their history, written by their own his-
torian with a pang, conscious that the misgovernment of
the Mother Country separated him from his brother—but
blood is thicker than water, he feels he is his brother yet.
Now if this pride he just, must he not look upon his


younger Brother the Australian, not yet separated from
him, with the same feelings, and glory in the fact that,
through his instrumentality, the dominion of his language,
and the type of his liberty, his own Constitution, may be
transmitted through ages yet to come, to the ultima Thule
of this hemisphere? And has not that younger brother
a claim, if not a right, upon his elder brother—not only to
protect but to help, instruct, and urge him forward in the
attainment of the full enjoyment of that Constitution of
which he boasts ?—more especially so, if that Constitution
contains the essence of the principles before alluded to, and
that Constitution be his birthright ?
What grander idea could be entertained than that of
conferring upon the Colonies of the South the same form of
Government in every respect as that enjoyed by England
herself? The time must come when these Colonies must
separate from the Mother Country; and, were the same
political institutions and form of Government established
in these Colonies as in England, what an arm of strength
would they become to England, and to how late a period
might that separation be deferred ? That separation would
not be like in its effects to the separation of the American
Colonies from England, but would rather represent the
separation of the scion from the parent tree engrafted on
the young and vigorous stock, to bring forth the same fruit
and exhibit the same virtues as its parent.
If such a Constitutional Government as that I have
alluded to, were formed throughout these Colonies, it would
be proof against the world, though not against itself. We
see the Canadas rising into independent Government with
all the attachment to England of a son to a father, and we
see the Australian Colonies, with similar attachment, rising


into manhood, and entrusted, under the Act of Parliament
(13 & 14 Yic. c. 59), with self Government and the forma-
tion of their own parliaments. It may be argued that,
in this point of view, England has negatived the maxim—
let the Colonies take care of themselves”; —but some
will say that the pigeon-holes in the office of the Secretary
of State for the Colonies broke down under the pressure of
Colonial papers, and that the Colonies assisted that High
Officer in arranging the confusion, by taking upon them-
selves their own Government, and making his deputies, the
Governors of the several Colonies, the passive vehicle of
Her Majesty’s pleasure. Has England in so doing fulfilled
her destiny ? Has she comprehended the destiny of her
Colonies, or has she gently yielded to the pressure, as it
increased, of Colonial force, admitting elements into the
Constitutions of these Colonial Governments, which she
considers destructive of her own polity ?
Laissez le la, say those statesmen who take no interest
above the lowest, in the welfare of the progeny of England;
but there are others who seem to have higher opinions and
nobler anticipations of the future of these Colonies; to
these it belongs to fit the keystone in that arch of strength
which the Australian Colonies, united in themselves and
with England, shall exhibit to the world. There are three
Estates in England, if I may be permitted to say so,
blended into one in a manner so wonderful, that the world
has never seen such a system of Government; and I believe
that Cicero is the only man who ever contemplated the
possibility of its existence, till time gave birth to that
system of Government in England. Three Estates harmo-
niously working together for the honor of the people, their
liberty, and independence, their moral and social welfare,
—monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy combined in the


English form of Government —well deserve that eulogium
which the American patriot Hamilton passed upon it.*
And why should not the Australian Colonies be permitted
to inherit the rights of their Ancestors, and take by descent
that form of Government of which all Englishmen have a
right to be proud and to enjoy, and which the world cannot
but admire ? Is this law of descent to be annulled as to these
Colonies, and the Parliament of Great Britain and Ireland
to take no interest in their constitutional career, and to
leave them without help, without check in their early stages
of self Government, as if it mattered not whether they
adopted the democratic element only as their system of
Government ? Such, however, seems very likely to be the
case, if we look to the 18 & 19 Yic. c. 54, which gives a
Constitution to New South Wales, and the 18 & 19 Victoria
c. 55, which gives a Constitution to Victoria, and consider
the subsequent laws made by these Colonies, which have
been assented to by the Crown, whereby the qualifications
for the electors of the Lower House of Parliament have
been in each case reduced to nothing in these Colonies
beyond manhood suffrage. Democracy is unquestionably
in the ascendant; and, without the counterpoise of aristoc-
racy, and the influence of Constitutional Monarchy, its
effects must and will be the same here as in the United
States of America; amongst which I particularly notice
the deterring the best men from entering the Legislature,
and a repetition of the same scenes which we, to say the
least, must regret to have witnessed there. Let a few more
* John Adams, speaking of the English Constitution, said—“ purge it of
its corruption, and give to its popular branch equality of representation,
and it would be the most perfect Constitution ever devised by the wit of
man to which Hamilton replied—“ purge it of its corruption, a,nd give
to the popular branch equality of representation, and it would become an
impracticable Government ; as it stands at present, with all its supposed
defects, it is the most perfect Government which ever existed.”


years pass away, and the present system he continued, its
effects will consolidate into a cancer, and by its virus
pollute the whole constitution of our Governments; and
the youthful population, as they grow up into Citizens,
will find that they have inherited the disease, and that the
actual cautery is ineffectual to its eradication. “ Vestigia
nulla retrorsum ” is true only of those who have entered
the den. We have not yet entered that den of social
discord and wild mob fanaticism; but we are'upon the
confines. I have endeavoured to exhibit m measured and
somewhat subdued tone the value of these Colonies to Eng-
land, their rapid growth, their probable expansion and
ultimate influence and power. I have not hesitated to
point out the evils of their systems of Government, in
order, if possible, to attract the attention, the thoughtful
attention, of those who have the power to counteract by their
wisdom, the growth of these evils. The slightest inspec-
tion of the several Acts of the Colonial Parliaments of
Victoria and New South Wales will shew to how great an
extent these Colonies have departed from the first principles
of their legislative constitution, and the positive democracy
introduced in its place. As a remedy and prevention of
the evils of bad Government, we have the example of the
Mother Country before us : to follow that example in these
Colonies is no less our duty than our interest; but it belongs
to her to inaugurate the likeness of herself amongst us, and
say to her offspring—
« Exegi monumentum cere perennius
Regalique situ pyramidum altius
Quod non imber edax non acquilo impotens
Possit diruere aut innumerabilis
Annorutn series et fuga temporum


If that monument were once erected, then would Aus-
tralia be the England of the South indeed. The curse of
progress is hesitation, in that spirit men will always be
found to say how can this be done ? and cui bono the attempt ?
I notice the last objection first, and say —Suppose it was
done ? the status and tone of society would be elevated, and
a new era w r ould brighten the horizon of these Colonies,
attracting to their shores an immigration of a larger and
better class than at present; the manufacturer, merchant,
and man of science would be more willing to make his
home with us, and this is the direct good it would immedi-
ately do to the Colonist: the result is obvious. But hesita-
tion still says how can this be done ? To this objection I
answer. Open the Fountain of Honor in these Colonies as
it is in England, and deny not to the Colonist the right to
drink of it in the Colonies; ennoble his aspirations, and,
by doing so, you create the true patriot, the statesman, and
him who desires to transmit to posterity the honor of his
name, and you evoke in that posterity that laudable pride
which is ever watchful to maintain and ready to increase the
honor of his House and country by firm loyalty and devotion
to the Government of his Country, and fixed attachment to
the Country itself. lice tibi erunt artes , say we to England,
whilst we look at the picture the Colonies now present.
Here we see men of Ducal estates and Lordly possessions
slumbering upon their wealth without stimulus to exertion,
save the mere love of getting more, and the enjoyment of
that worship which a degraded state of society pays to the
moneyed man ; and his wealthy offspring drinks in with his
mother’s milk no ennobling sentiment but that of fat sheep,
broad acres, and bovine herds. In the advancement of his
country why should he trouble himself ? Public Virtue is
unknown to him, private interest is the only interest by


which he is actuated, because there is no honor to be
acquired in any other way in these Colonies. The fountain
of Honor is closed to him.
What is here said of the great proprietors, may also be
said of the other classes of society in their degree. The
spirit which animated the sons* of the Hoastman of New-
castle-upon-Tyne and the son of the jeweller’s apprentice in
London,f and carried them to the highest pitch of Honour
in England and respect in Europe, could not exist here 5
there is nothing for such a spirit to feed upon. The enno-
bled merchants of England, whose examples stand forth to
the world as models of princely honor and integrity, could
not find a type in the Colonies where the fountain of Honor
is closed, and the interest tables are the boundary of their
calculations. I repeat the assertion—“the curse of pro-
gress is hesitation.” Let England hesitate no longer,
unless it be her object to make Sydney a Washington, and
Melbourne a New York.
I say tlie movement must begin with England, and not
with the Colonies, and I fully admit that the consolidation
of an Empire must be the work of time; and am persuaded
that the Australias are destined to become an Empire at no
very distant period. But what that Empire shall be, de-
pends upon England to decide. Let Her Majesty commence
this movement by creating orders of rank hereditary, in
these Colonies as the first step, the efficient check to that
democratic ascendancy which i observe, has at last forced
itself upon the notice of the English Journals. The next
step to be taken is the appointment of a Vice-Hoy of Aus-
tralia, as Representative of Her Majesty, with powers of
creating certain honors such as Her Majesty may depute to.
* Lords Eldon and Stowell. f Sir Samuel Romilly.


him; and let there be one Parliament for the whole conti-
nent of Australia, under one head, and that Head the Vice-
Roy. Let the ennobled of the Colonies form the Upper
House as the Lords in England, and the several Colonies
then (become provinces) elect a given number each accord-
ing to population, as their Representatives in this Commons
House of Parliament of Australia; or continue the same
number of Representatives for each district in each Colony,
as are now returned to serve in the present Parliaments ;
and where that Parliament should be held, whether in a
new city to be established on the banks of the Murray, or
other central position, or in one of those already existing,
should be left to the choice of the Colonies to determine.
For each of the provinces where Governors now reside,
Lieutenants of the Viceroy would be required as Lords
Lieutenant of those provinces; and let each of those pro-
vinces have its own local parliament for the management of
its own peculiar affairs. If jealousy arises amongst the
Colonies, the example of the Canadas and a spirit of concil-
iation may prevent its evil effects; and when that example
is calmly considered, it would assist us in forming our
judgments, and enable us to review the case of the United
States as represented by De Tocqueville upon the subject,
when the one party desired to unite the inhabitants of the
American Colonies in one sole nation, and to establish a
Government to act as sole Representative of the nation,
and the other party desired to form a league of independent
States or Congress; and whilst we consider this question,
we shall be able to form from the events of the last four
years which have taken place between the Northern and
Southern States, a tolerably correct opinion of the probable
results of these systems, if either be adopted here. I here
quote his words:—


a The question was whether a League was to be estab-
“ lished instead of a National Government; whether the
a majority of the States instead of the inhabitants of the
*< Union was to give the Law, for every State the small as
a W ell as the great then retained their character of an
a independent power, and entered the Union upon a footing
“of perfect equality. If, on the contrary, the inhabitants
“ of the United States come to be considered as belonging
a to one and the same nation, it was natural-that the
“ majority of the citizens of the Union should prescribe
a t | ie Law. Of course the lesser States could not subscribe
a to the application of this doctrine, without in fact abdica-
u ting their existence in relation to the Sovereignty of the
a Confederation; since they would have passed from the
a condition of a coequal and colegislative authority to that
a o f an insignificant fraction of a Great people. The former
a system would have invested them with an excessive
a authority, the latter would have annulled their existence
it altogether. Under these circumstances the result was,
a that the strict rules of logic were evaded, as is usually
a the case where interests are opposed to arguments. A
a middle course was hit upon by the Legislators which
u brought together by force, two systems theoretically
u irreconcileable.”
In this passage, quoted as above, let us read Colonies for
States, and avoid these two irreconcileable systems by that
union of interest and conciliation of spirit, which will con-
solidate into one powerful Empire, the whole of the Aus-
tralian Colonies. If something is not done to bring about
speedily that consolidation, we may well anticipate what
the condition of these Colonies will be in a few years, from
facts which have occurred in the last year; of these facts,
the one most prominent is the collection of Duties on the


River Murray, where the one bank of that River is th»
Boundary of the Colony of New South Wales, and the
other bank the Boundary of Victoria, which led to an
embroglio between the two Colonies not yet arranged, and
actually threatened violence on one side or the other. Let
any one consider the state of affairs which must result, if a
great navigable River, such as the Thames, were owned by
different people on its opposite banks, each having different
tariffs, though the navigation were open to both. So it is
with the borders of the adjoining Colonies; and until all
the Australian Colonies are united under one Government,
these difficulties will be perpetually increasing till a rupture
takes place between some, or all of them. When we consider
what is also going on in different parts of the Australian
Colonies, with respect to their systems of trade, some
endeavouring to introduce protective duties, and others free
trade, the confusion which threatens the future becomes
confounded, and there seems to be a probability of the
adoption of those systems, u theoretically and practically
irreconcileable/’ unless that system of consolidating into
one body or Empire which is suggested be adopted.
Under this system, also, there should be one Court of
Appeal, to which all cases disputed in the Judgments of the
several Courts, should be referred for final determination,
instead of the tedious and expensive process of appeal to the
Privy Council.
That there must be a Confederation of the Australian
Colonies, no thoughtful mind can reasonably deny : when
that Confederation is to take place, must depend upon
circumstances over which the Colonies have but little con-
troul. War with England might precipitate the event;,
jealousy and civil discord between the Colonies protract it;
if adopted at an early period, time would speedily confirm


it, and the political machine would be found to work with
smoothness and power sufficent to resist, and overcome
whatsoever force might be employed to retard its progress,
before the time when its energies would be evoked by the
hostility of circumstances, or the lust of power.
I have not written this pamphlet with any other view
than to draw attention to a subject of the greatest import-
ance to the Australian Colonies. lam aware of the ridicule
which has been thrown upon the idea of ennobling the
Colonist, and the sarcasm which has been employed upon
this subject against the Colonists in general; but ridicule
and sarcasm are neither an answer to the question or proof
of its unsoundness. They have been employed too often as
the opponents of principles and of men, but have ultimately
yielded to the truth, though they have delayed its advantages
in the cause of science and interest of mankind.
©alftc.






