

PROSPECTUS
OF THE
LAND LEAGUE.
ti'itO
The question of alienating the Crown Lands of the Colony, having
lately large share of public attention, and having been dis-
cussed in the local press and that of the neighboring colonies, the
Committee named at the Meeting held at Rockhampton on the twenty-
fourth day of October, 1865, have determined to adopt the following
Resolutions as a basis on which to form a permanent Land League ;
and they hereby invite all those who believe that the future welfare
of the Colony depends on the wise alienation of the Crown Lands, to
join them in effecting that object.
Ist.—That the future prosperity of Queensland depends upon the
alienation of the Crown Lands, at such a price, and in such areas, as
will enable the buyers to earn a fair return on the purchase money.
2nd. —That in Agricultural Reserves the areas ought to vary from
40 to 640 acres.
3rd.—That in Pastoral Districts the areas ought not to be less than
2000 acres.
4th. —That Coast Lands fitted for the cultivation of Sugar, Cotton,
&c., ought to be reserved for these purposes.
sth. —That in all cases of purchase Fencing ought to be imperative.
6th. —That in reviewing what has been published in the pamphlet of
31st January, 1866, as the basis of a law for effecting the alienation
of Crown Lands, the Members of the Land League bind themselves
merely to the principle of alienation there laid down, reserving the
right of opposing and altering the details.
For the purpose of effecting the necessary changes in the Land
Law, they invite the enrolment of names on their list, and subscrip-
tions. _ ,
Although the Committee are themselves firmly convinced of the
benefits that will result to Queensland from the alienation of the Crown
Lands, they are anxious to shew that in all the alterations they have
proposed inthe Land Laws, they are supported by the opinions of the
best authorities on Political Economy and Colonization. The following
extracts will prove the truth ot this.
Adam Smith’s “ Sources of Public Revenue,” McCulloch’s Edition,
p. 370, will shew that in his opinion, the public benefit demands the
alienation of the Crown Lands: —
“ But if the lands of Great Britain, in the present state of their
cultivation, do not afford a rent of more than twenty millions a-year,
they could not well afford the half, most probably not a quarter, if they


all belonged to a single proprietor, and were put under tlie negligent,
expensive, and oppressive management of his factors and agents. The
Crown Lands of Great Britain do not at present afford the fourth part
of the rent which could probably be drawn from them if they were the
property of private persons. If the Crown Lands were more extensive
it is probable they would be still worse managed.
“ The Revenue which the great body of the people derives from land
is in proportion not to the rent but to the produce of the land. The
whole annual produce of the land, except seed, is either annually con-
sumed by the great body of the people, or exchanged for something else
that is consumed by them. Whatever keeps down the produce of the
land below what it would otherwise rise to, keeps down the revenue of
the great body of the people still more than it does that of the proprie-
tor of the land. . , If the land which in one state of cultivation,
affords a rent of ten millions a year, would in another afford a rent of
twenty millions, the rent being in both cases supposed a third part of
the produce ; the revenue of the proprietor would be less than it other-
wise might be by only ten millions, but the revenue of the great body
of the people would be less than it otherwise might be by thirty mil-
lions a year. The population of the country would be less by the num-
ber that thirty millions a year could maintain.
“ Though there is not at present in Europe any civilized State of
any kind which derives the greatest part of its public revenue from the
rent of lands which are the property of the State —yet in all the
monarchies of Europe there are still large tracts of land which belong
to the Crown. They are generally ‘ forest,’ and sometimes forest where,
after travelling several miles, you will scarce find a single tree—a mere
waste and loss of country in respect both of produce and population.
In every great monarchy of Europe the sale of Crown Lands would
produce a very large sum of money, which if applied to the payment
of the public' debts, would deliver from mortgage a much greater re-
venue, than any which those lands have ever afforded to the Crown.
In countries, wdiere lands improved and cultivated very highly, and
yielding at the time of sale as great a rent as can easily be got from
them, commonly sell at thirty years purchase ; the unimproved, uncul-
tivated, and low rented Crown Lands might well be expected to sell at
forty, fifty, and sixty years purchase. The Crown might immediately
enjoy the revenue which their great price would redeem from mortgage.
In the course of a few years it would probably enjoy another revenue.
Where the Crown Lands had become private property, they would in a
low years become well improved and well culivated. The increase of
their produce would increase the population of the country by augment-
ing the revenue and consumption of the people.
“ The revenue which in any civilized country the Crown derives from
Crown lands, though it appears to cost nothing to individuals, in reality
costs more to society, than perhaps any other equal revenue which the
Crown enjoys. It would in all cases be for the interests of society to
replace this revenue to the Crown by some other equal revenue, and
to divide the lands among the people, which could not well be done
better than by exposing them to public sale.”


And further, in vol. v., p. 376 :
“ The attention of the Sovereign can he, at best, but a very general
and vague consideration of what is likely to contribute to the better
cultivation of the greater part of his dominions. The attention ot the
landlord is a minute and particular consideration of what is likely to
be the most advantageous application of every inch of ground upon his
estate. The principal attention of the Sovereign ought to be to en-
courage, by every means in his power, the attention both of the landlord
and of the farmer, by allowing both to pursue their own interests in
their own way, and according to their own judgment, by giving to both
the most perfect security that they shall enjoy the full recompense ol
their industry —and by procuring to both the most extensive market
for every part of their produce, in consequence of establishing the
safest and easiest communications both by land and by water through
every part of his dominions, as well as the most unbounded freedom of
exportation to the dominions of all other princes.”
The following extract is from President Jackson’s Fourth Annual
Message, “ Statesman’s Manual,” vol. ii., p. 787 :
“ It seems to me to be our true policy that the public lands should
cease, as soon as practicable, to be a source of revenue, and that they
should be sold in limited parcels to settlers, on snch terms, as barely to
reimburse the United States the expense of the present system, and
the cost arising under our Indian compacts.”
And further on, after some remarks which are merely applicable to
the State matters of the Union, the President proceeds to say ■
“To avert the consequences which may be apprehended from this
course, to put an end for ever to all partial and interested legislation on
this subject, and to ensure to every American citizen of enterprise the
opportunity of securing an independent freehold, it seems to me there-
fore best to abandon the idea of raising a future revenue out of the
public lands.
“ In former Messages I have expressed my conviction that the Con-
stitution does not warrant the application of the funds of the General
Government to objects of internal improvement, which are not national
in their character; and as a means of putting an end to a course of
legislation calculated to destroy the purity of the Government, have
urged the necessity of reducing the whole subject to some fixed and
certain rule.
Besides the danger to which it exposes the Congress of making hasty
appropriations to works, of the character of which they may be fre-
quently ignorant, it promotes a mischievous and corrupting influence
on the elections, by holding out to the people the fallacious hope that
the success of a certain candidate will make navigable their neigh-
boring creek or river, and bring communication to their doors, and in-
crease the value of their property. It thus favors combinations to
squander the treasure of the country upon a multitude of local objects,
as fatal to just legislation as to the purity of public men.”
The following is from a speech by the great Edmund Burke on
Economical Eeform, vol. i., p. 272 :
“ As to the Crown reversions or titles upon the property of the
people, it is proposed to convert them from a snare to their inde-


pendence, into relief from their burdens, to sell unprofitable estates,
and to turn the tenant right into a fee on such moderate terms as will
be better for the Slate than its present right, and which it is impos-
sible for any rational tenant to refuse —of changing revenue more vexa-
tious than productive into ready money. A landed estate is certainly
the very worst which the Crown can possess. Possessions which require
a constant personal attendance, are of a nature more proper for private
management than public administration. They are fitter for the care
of a frugal land steward than of an office in the State.
“ If it be objected that these lands would sell at a low market,
this is answered by shewing that money is at a high price. The one
balances the other. Land sells at the current rate, and nothing can.
sell for more —but be the pidce what it may, a great object is always
answered whenever any property is transferred from hands that are
not fit for that property, to those that are. The buyer and seller must
mutually profit by such a bargain—and what rarely happens in the
matter of revenue, the relief of the subject will go hand in hand with
the profit of the Exchequer.
“ The revenue to be obtained from the sale of forest lands will not
be so considerable I believe as many have imagined; and I conceive it
would be unwise to screw it uj) to the utmost, or even to suffer bidders
to enhance according to their eagerness, the purchase of objects wherein
the expense of that purchase may weaken the capital to be employed
in their cultivation. This lam well aware might give room for par-
tiality in the disposal. In rayopinion it would be the lesser evil of the
two. Put I really conceive that ( a rule of fair preference be
established, which would take away all sort of unjust and corrupt par-
tiality. The principal revenue which I propose to draw from these
uncultivated wastes, is to spring from the population and improve-
ment of the kingdom, which neier can happen without producing
an improvement more advantageous to the revenues of the Crown, than
the rents of the best landed estate which it can hold.
“By means of this part of the reform will fall the expensive office
of Survey or-General., with all the influence that attends it. 1 have
now disposed of the unprofitable landed estates of the Crown, and
thrown them into the mass of private property, by which they will
come by the course of circulation, and through the political secretions
of the State, into our better understood and our better ordered re-
venues.”
The following is McCulloch’s opinion on the alienation of Crown
Lands in the Colonies, “ Colonial Policy,” p. 601. The first part ap-
plies to the old Crown reserves—
“ These large reserves by interrupting the communication between
different parts of the colony, and increasing the difficulty and cost of
conveyance, have proved frequently not a little injurious to its in-
terests, but there are various ways in which an abuse of this sort
might be obviated, and perhaps the best would be to apportion the
land according to the available capital of the settlers, it being stipu-
lated that no individual should receive above a certain number of
acres, and that it should revert back to the public unless certain im-
provements were effected upon it within a specified time after the
grant was made.”


Again, in p. 612 —
“ Instead of concentrating the population, and providing for the
proper subdivison of employments, this system has had a precisely op-
posite effect, and while it has dispersed it over a comparatively wide
surface, it has improperly congregated it in a few localities. In
Australia, where the system has been carried to the greatest extent,
very little land has been sold since the price was raised to twenty shil-
lings an acre. The capitalists who emigrate to that continent, or who
carry on speculations in -it, no longer think of becoming proprietors and
cultivators, but become squatters or lessees of vast tracts which they
devote to pasturage. Hence the rural population is spread over an
immense surface, and while there is little demand in the country except
for shepherds and herdsmen, the towns are swelled to a disproportionate
size by the forced residence of those who, under a rational system, would
have been distributed over the colony as laborers and artizans.
“ Such are some of the consequences of this new colonisation
scheme, and despite the undeserved support it has met with, we incline
to think the reader will have little difficulty in concluding with us, that
it has not a single redeeming quality, and that it is throughout, a tissue
of delusions and contradictions.”
Bentham’s opinion on the alienation of lands, “ Principles of Civil
Code,” vol. i., p. 333 :
“ Besides the general reasons in favor of alienation, there arc par-
ticular reasons in favor of the power of alienating land. He who seeks
to get rid of his lands, shows plainly that it does not suit him to keep
them. He cannot or will not employ anything in improving them.
Often, indeed, he cannot restrain himself from lowering their future
value, in order to satisfy a present want. On the contrary, he who
seeks to acquire them, has certainly not the intention of deteriorating
them, and it is probable that he intends to increase their value.
“ It is true that the same amount of capital that would be employed
in the amelioration of land might be employed in trade; but though the
benefit of these two employments might be the same for the individual,
it is not the same for the State. The portion of wealth applied to
agriculture is more fixed —that which is applied to trade is more fugi-
tive —the first is immoveable, the latter may be carried away at the
will of the proprietor.
“ By pledging an immoveable, a productive capital may be pi’ocured.
Then one part of the value of an estate may be employed in ameliorat-
ing another, which without this resource could not be done. To hinder
the alienation of lands is therefore to diminish productive capital nearly
to the amount of their selling value, since in order that an article may
serve as a pledge, it is necessary that it be capable of alienation.”
With such high authority for their views, the Committee do not
hesitate to offer the Scheme for the considex’ation of their fellow-colo-
nists, in the hope that it will receive their cordial support.
The Secretary is instructed to enroll those who wish to join as
Members of the Land League, and to receive subscriptions of not
less than ss. to defray necessary expenses. It is understood that no
member shall be liable for the debts contracted by the Committee.
(Signed) E. P. LIYEBMOEE,
Chairman.


Form of Letter to Secretary from intending Members.
Secretary Land League,
Rockhampton,
Sir—
I request that you will enter my name as a Member of
the Land League, and I herewith enclose my subscription.




