

AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED
REGISTERED UNDER THE COMPANIES ACT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
PROSPECTUS




Prospectus oj
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA
LIMITED
(Registered under the Companies Act. 1899,
of New South Wales and Incorporated on the
Fourth day of October, 1935)
•
CAPITAL: .£1,000,000




THE MONOSPAR ’PLANE.
The Monospar S.T. 18 10-passengcr machine is a low wing semi-cantilever monoplane incor-
porating the safety devices and improvements of aircraft operating on the big air mail and pas-
senger lines abroad. This machine has a high ratio of pay load due to the Monospar structure
system, and a high speed range due to clean design, retractable undercarriage and controllable
pitch airscrews.
There is seating accommodation for ten passengers in a large cabin, the dimensions of which
are 13 ft. 6 in. in length and 5 ft. 9 in. in height. The cabin is ventilated and heated and is
equipped with large windows running the full length. The fittings include fabric panels,
carpet, comfortable leather adjustable chairs, light luggage racks and storage for thermos flasks,
decanters and glasses. At the rear of the cabin is an Elsan lavatory, complete with water tank
and fittings.
The system of construction is based upon the use of a few very massive structural members,
well adapted to go for long periods without attention or maintenance. The wing is constructed
with a wire-braced duralumin girder on the well-known patented Monospar principle with
closely spaced metal ribs.
The engines are Pratt and Whitney Wasp Junior type S.B. moderately supercharged to 5,000
feet. These engines, constructed to incorporate the variable pitch propeller, have been selected
as they have already accomplished many years of service under the strenuous operating con-
ditions of the American coast-to-coast air routes. Two engines, either of which alone will main-
tain height, arc fitted to each machine. The safety advantage of this is apparent.
The makers, General Aircraft Limited, guarantee a maximum speed of 187 miles per hour
and a cruising speed of 170 miles per hour. At this speed the machine has a range of 880 miles
without refuelling, while at 160 miles per hour the range is 1,000 miles.
Whereas the time occupied at present on the Sydney-Brisbanc flight is five hours, the Mono-
spar S.T. 18 should accomplish the journey in three hours under normal flying conditions. The
trip to Melbourne should take about the same time, while from Melbourne to Adelaide the
time occupied would be somewhat less.
The Monospar three-passenger ’plane has achieved a high reputation in Great Britain and
elsewhere in the Empire, and won the King’s Cup in 1934. Its main features are high speed,
combined with low operating costs, and it will be used by the Company for feeder services to
the main lines and for charters, etc. Three of these on arrival in Sydney recently for New
England Airways Limited were engaged for special work amounting to approximately 1,000,
which has already been completed with highly satisfactory results.
General Aircraft Limited claims that it has succeeded with the “Monospar” in constructing a
’plane that is, if anything, somewhat ahead of the times, yet it conforms to the most exacting
requirements in respect of the safety and comfort of passengers. Prospective shareholders in
Airlines of Australia Limited may rest assured that the “Monospar” ’planes fulfil all the require-
ments of safe and rapid passenger traffic, and, when the 10-passcngcr ’planes are shortly intro-
duced into this country, will open up a new era in Australian aviation.


DEVELOPMENT OF COMMERCIAL AVIATION
The development of commercial aviation abroad is one of the most striking
features of the past decade. On the Continent of Europe and in America air liners
fly regularly in large numbers between the cities, providing safe and rapid transport
for thousands of passengers daily. Those who have not been abroad during the past
five years can scarcely visualise the enormous strides made in aviation. In Australia,
several air lines have been opened up and are being conducted successfully, an out-
standing example being New England Airways Ltd., which has built up a sound
and profitable business with a remarkable record of regularity and safety.
It is recognised that aviation is entering a new era, due to improved engine
efficiency, increased speed and economy of operation, and it is anticipated that the
plans being laid for its development in Australia by Airlines of Australia Ltd. will
lead to great expansion in the near future.
The British Pacific Trust Limited is closely affiliated with some of the most
important overseas organisations highly experienced in aviation in all its phases,
vide page 15. Owing to its connection with the British Pacific Trust Limited, this
Company will derive much direct benefit from these affiliations.
Already through the good offices of the British Pacific Trust Limited, the General
Aircraft Company Limited has manufactured and is manufacturing a number of
machines with equipment specially designed for the needs of Airlines of Australia
Ltd.
In the initial stages of this Company’s development, British Pacific Trust Limited
will provide technical and scientific advice.
The great advantage of this enterprise lies in the fact that it is taking over a
going concern which has clearly demonstrated its profit-earning capacity. More-
over, with its equipment of hangars, aerodromes and servicing facilities, which can
be expanded wherever deemed advisable, the Company is in a position to offer
exceptional facilities to the travelling public. The Company will have a valuable
asset in the experienced personnel of pilots and mechanics who are ready to con-
duct the extended services contemplated; it is thus in a position to undertake all its
operations on a most economic basis, and meet any competition that may arise in
the future, apart from the fact that it has British capital behind it.
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED


CAPITAL: ;£ 1,000,000 Divided into
995.000 Ordinary Shares of ,£l each ,£995,000
5.000 Deferred Shares of j£l each .. , 5,000
1,000,000 £ 1,000,000
75,000 Ordinary Shares arc now offered for subscription, payable 5/- on applica-
tion and 5/- on allotment; the balance in four calls of 2/6 each at intervals
of not less than one month, the first of such calls to be made not less two
months from the date of allotment.
16,795 Ordinary Shares arc to be allotted as fully paid to New England Airways
Limited, Lismorc, New South Wales, or its nominees, as part considera-
tion for the transfer of the Goodwill and Assets of that Company, as
hereinafter mentioned.
4.000 Ordinary Shares arc to be allotted as fully paid to Mr. G. A. Robinson,
of 14 Martin Place, Sydney, for the transfer of certain assets of the
Larkin Aircraft Supply Company Limited in Liquidation, as hereinafter
mentioned.
899,205 Ordinary Shares arc to be held in reserve for future issue at the discretion
of the Directors of the Company. Of these Shares, 100,000 arc placed
under option to British Pacific Trust Limited, as mentioned hereafter.
995.000
3,710 Deferred Shares arc to be allotted as fully paid to the British Pacific Trust
Limited, or its nominees, as consideration for the transfer of its option
over the assets of New England Airways Limited and. the Larkin Aircraft
Supply Company Limited in Liq.
1,290 Deferred Shares arc to be allotted as fully paid to New England Airways
Limited, as part consideration for the transfer of Goodwill referred to
hereafter.
1,000,000
A copy of this Prospectus has been delivered for registration with the Registrar of
Companies as required by Section 366 of the Companies Act of 1931 of Queensland.
A copy hast also been filed with the Registrar 0} Companies as required by Section
366 of the Companies Act of 1934 (South Australia).
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED
(Registered under the Companies Act, 1899, of New South Wales and Incorporated on the
Fourth day of October, 1935)
The British Pacific Trust Limited has undertaken to apply and pay for 25,000 Ordinary
Shares of this issue, and if the issuej is not fully subscribed for, it has also undertaken
to apply and pay for the remainder of the Ordinary Shares not subscribed for, so that
the. whole issue of 75,000 Ordinary Shares is assured.
No cash consideration is being paid, but a sum of £2,000 is to be paid to Mr. G. A.
Robinson, Managing Director of New England Airways Limited, to refund him certain
personal expenses which are referred to hereafter under "Preliminary Expenses.”
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED


DIRECTORS:
THE LORD SEMPILL, Director, Marine Airways Ltd., and other Companies,
Sardinia House, Kingsway, London, W.C.
W. S. STEPHENSON, Managing Director, British Pacific Trust Ltd., 4 Cleveland
Square, St. James, London, W.
G. A. ROBINSON, Managing Director, New England Airways Ltd., 14 Martin
Place, Sydney.
E. B. WAREHAM, Company Director, 48 Milson Road, Cremornc, Sydney; late
Manager, Adelaide Steamship Co. Ltd.
H. C. ARMSTRONG, Company Director and Australian Representative of British
Pacific Trust Ltd., 350 George Street, Sydney.
A. D. W. ALLEN, Solicitor, Messrs. Allen, Allen & Hemsley, 19 Castlercagh Street,
Sydney.
ANDREW MACDOUGALL, Director of Macdougalls Limited, 131 Pitt .Street,
Sydney.
E. D. ARMSTRONG, Chartered Accountant (Aust.), and Consulting Accountant
to New England Airways Limited, Lismore, N.S.W.
Solicitors:
Messrs. ALLEN, ALLEN & HEMSLEY, 19 Castlercagh Street, Sydney.
Auditors:
Messrs. DAVID FELL & CO., Chartered Accountants (Aust.),
350 George Street, Sydney.
Bankers:
THE ENGLISH, SCOTTISH & AUSTRALIAN BANK LTD.,
King Street, Sydney.
THE NATIONAL BANK OF AUSTRALASIA LTD., Brisbane and Lismore.
Registered Office (pro tem.):
c/o. NEW ENGLAND AIRWAYS LIMITED, 14 Martin Place, Sydney.
(The Company has not yet established a place of business in South Australia
or Queensland.)
Organising Brokers:
Messrs. PHILIP PRING & CO., Queensland National Bank Chambers, Sydney.
Queensland Brokers: Victorian Brokers:
Messrs. CHARLTON ELLIOTT & SONS, Messrs. JOHN MAY & SONS,
356 Queen Street, Brisbane, Q. 90 Queen Street, Melbourne, Vic.
South Australian Brokers:
Messrs. H. W. HODGETTS & CO., 23 Grenfell Street, Adelaide, S.A.
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED


RIGHTS OF ORDINARY AND DEFERRED
SHAREHOLDERS
Profits which it may be decided to distribute shall be applied in the following
manner:
First in payment of a non-cumulative dividend on the Ordinary Shares up
to 7i% P er annum.
»
Of the balance, one-half shall be paid to the Ordinary Shareholders in pro-
portion to their respective shareholdings, and the other one-half to the
holders of the Deferred Shares in proportion to their respective share-
holdings.
In the event of a winding up, the assets of the Company available for distribution
amongst the members as such shall be applied firstly in repayment of the amounts
paid up or credited as paid up on the Ordinary Shares, and then in repayment of
the amounts paid up or credited as paid up on the Deferred Shares. Thereafter,
should any surplus remain, such surplus shall be divided as to one-half amongst the
Ordinary Shareholders and as to the other half amongst the Deferred Shareholders,
and then returned to the Shareholders of each class of Share in proportion to the
amount paid up or credited as paid up on their respective shareholdings.
In all other respects the rights of the Ordinary Shares and Deferred Shares shall
be the same, including the right to vote at all meetings of the Company.
GOODWILL
The amount of the Share consideration to be paid to New England Airways
Limited for the transfer of goodwill and assets comprises ,£4,790 for goodwill;
this is made up of ,£3,000, being the amount paid by New England Airways Limited
to the original vendors for goodwill on its incorporation in 1931, ,£5OO being the
amount of goodwill paid by the same Company on the purchase by it at a later date
of the Sydney-Ncwcastle service, and ,£1,290 representing goodwill created by New
England Airways Limited.
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED


PRIMARY OBJECTS
The Company has been formed for the purpose, inter alia, of acquiring the main
assets and goodwill of New England Airways Limited, together with the whole of
the plant, equipment and aeroplanes at present owned and operated by that Com-
pany, and the right, title and interest of that Company in the aerodromes used by
it; also of acquiring the whole of the manufacturing plant, hangar (erected on land
held under lease) and aerodrome (held under permissive occupancy) of the Larkin
Aircraft Supply Company Limited in Liq., Coodc Island, Melbourne, Victoria, which
are at present owned by Mr. G. A. Robinson, of New England Airways Limited.
The Company contemplates extending to Melbourne and other centres the aerial
services now being conducted by New England Airways Limited between Sydney
and Brisbane, Sydney and Newcastle, Brisbane and Toowoomba and Brisbane and
Townsville.
Four new “Monospar” 10-passengcrs ’planes arc to be purchased for use on the
above services, in addition to the aeroplanes at present being used by New England
Airways Limited and to be taken over from that Company.
A full statement of the objects of the Company appears in the copy of the
Memorandum of Association which accompanies and forms part of this Prospectus.
The present intention of the Directors is to pursue the policy outlined in this
Prospectus, but as aviation is advancing with such remarkable rapidity it may, in
the interests of the Shareholders, be considered advisable by the Directors after con-
sulting British Pacific Trust Limited, with its wide experience, to modify or amplify
this policy.
NEW ENGLAND AIRWAYS LIMITED
This Company’s business in future will be incorporated with Airlines of Aus-
tralia Ltd. The whole of the purchase price of the assets transferred, amounting to
/24,857, will be satisfied by die issue of 16,795 fully paid Ordinary Shares in this
Company and by this Company taking over the liability of New England Airways
Limited to General Aircraft Limited for being the purchase price of three
“Monospar” ’planes mentioned hereafter. In addition, 1,290 fully paid Deferred
Shares are to be issued to New England Airways Limited on account of goodwill as
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED


hereinbefore mentioned. The assets to be transferred by New England Airways
Limited to Airlines of Australia Ltd. include three (3) 10-passenger 3-engmc Avro
machines (Fokker type), three (3) 3-passenger 2-engine “Monospar” machines, one
(1) Ryan 4-passenger machine, one (1) Moth and spares and equipment for same,
together with hangars at Sydney, Brisbane and Townsville.
The Avro machines, on the arrival of the new 10-passenger “Monospar” ’planes,
will be superseded on the main services and* will be used in conjunction with the
three-passenger “Monospars” for feeder services which the Company will develop
gradually as opportunity offers.
For more than three and a half years New England Airways Limited, under the
management of Mr. G. A. Robinson, has successfully conducted a daily service each
way between Sydney and Brisbane, and more recently (Sundays excepted) between
Newcastle and Sydney, Brisbane and Toowoomba; and twice weekly between
Brisbane and Townsville.
Mr. Robinson, with a life-long experience in transport, has proved to be a capable
manager, and the fact that the services have operated with regularity and safety has
attracted the attention of the travelling public, whose patronage shows a steady
increase in volume. The Company’s record of punctuality and freedom from acci-
dent is an enviable one, and shows what can be accomplished by competent pilots
flying reliable machines supported by an efficient technical organisation.
New England Airways Limited has developed the Sydney-Brisbane and other
services to a point that has conferred upon that Company a considerable goodwill,
which will be acquired by Airlines of Australia Ltd. The profit-earning capacity
of New England Airways Limited has already been demonstrated, and with speedy
and economical new machines the services at present being operated by New Eng-
land Airways Limited will, apart from other sources of revenue, offer profitable
employment for the Company’s capital.
Below is set out in full a letter from Mr. G. A. Robinson, Managing Director of
New England Airways Limited, relating the history of that Company and review-
ing his estimates, which arc incorporated in this Prospectus.
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED


NEW ENGLAND AIRWAYS LIMITED
Sydney and Lismore, N.S.W.
14 Martin Place,
H. C. Armstrong, Esq., Sydney,
Representative in Australia, 27th September, 1935.
The British Pacific Trust Ltd.,
Sydney.
Dear Sir,
Following your request, I have pleasure in briefly tracing the development of New England
Airways Ltd., from its inauguration in January, 1931, to the present time.
As you are no doubt aware. New England Airways Ltd. really had its origin in New England
Motor Company, a road transport organisation of which I have been proprietor since 1918,
having previously pioneered other successful services between Newcastle and Grafton, prior to
the construction of the North Coast Railway. New England Motor Company operates exten-
tively between Lismore, Tentcrfield, Grafton, Ballina, Murwillumbah, Tweed Heads, Coolan-
gatta, Southport, and Brisbane. Daily services on these routes cover approximately half a million
miles per annum.
The experience gained in the various services I have controlled for the past quarter of a century
has given me a knowledge of transport which Has been invaluable in directing the operations of
New England Airways Limited.
Realising that commercial air transport would soon become accepted in the same way as road
motor transport has been, I decided to establish an air service, and in January, 1931, commenced
operations between Lismore and Brisbane, using a single-engined Monoplane with a capacity
for four passengers. Soon it was found necessary to add a two-seater machine, and in July, 1931,
the service was extended to Sydney.
Three trips weekly each way were flown, and an arrangement was entered into with the Postal
Department to carry mails on a poundage basis. In December, 1931, two Avro Tens (10-seaters)
were purchased, together with much equipment, spare engines, and a hangar at Townsville.
The advantage of the latter is now apparent in view of the Company’s extension of its opera-
tions to the progressive coastal towns north of Brisbane. The Avro Tens took up the running
between Brisbane and Sydney, and in September, 1932, a daily service (Sundays excluded) was
inaugurated, which, since then, has been operated regularly with the two Avros and a third
similar machine which was subsequently purchased. The service now includes the Sunday
running.
A large hangar at Mascot, Sydney, was acquired and one erected at Brisbane.
Since the inception of the Company I have been in control as Managing Director, and am
therefore familiar with every phase of its development.
New England Airways has been singularly free from accident, and I think this, together with
strict adherence to schedules, has inspired a growing public confidence in the service, a fact
which is revealed in the following figures:
GROSS REVENUE
For the year ended 31st August, 1932 /12,57 a
For the year ended 31st August, 1933 23.338
For the year ended 31st August, 1934 29,787
For the year ended 31st August, 1935 35,983
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED


Some little time ago my Company decided to establish additional services, the first of these
being from Sydney to Newcasde. This was taken over from Northern Airliners Ltd., in Decem-
ber, 1934. Two trips daily each way are flown, and the indications are that with the introduc-
tion of ten-passenger machines or the more frequent running of small Monospars on this route,
the business will increase rapidly, becoming a highly profitable adjunct to the Company’s main
line services. The Brisbanc-Towoomba service was commenced in February of this year and
is really an extension of the Sydney-Brisbane service, the same machines being used. The
Brisbane-Townsville service was inaugurated on June 16th, 1935, one trip each way per week
being flown. An Avro X Machine is being used with highly satisfactory results, and indications
are that a second service will be necessary almost immediately.
The Sydney-Melbourne service naturally is the piost important development to be under-
taken in the near future. On this route it is proposed to use 10-passenger “Monospar” ’planes
capable of covering the journey in approximately three hours, which will be the same time as
that occupied with similar ’planes on the journey to and from Brisbane and Sydney.
Immediately upon the formation of the new Company, ground work organisation on the
Sydney-Melbourne route will be put in hand, so that upon the arrival of the machines the ser-
vice will commence as soon as possible thereafter.
I have every reason to believe that when this service is established revenue will not be less
than that of the Brisbane-Sydncy service, and that actually both services should benefit greatly
from the contributions each will make to the other, plus the feeder services contemplated.
I have recently flown over the route from Townsville to Adelaide in company with my Chief
Pilot, and find that this offers no problems which cannot be overcome with the up-to-date
equipment which will be put into the services of the new Company, and my opinions as to the
possibilities for considerable development have been strengthened as a result of these
investigations.
I have carefully reviewed the estimates of revenue and expenditure included in this Pros-
pectus, and, basing my opinion upon the experience gained with the existing equipment, would
say that the figures given are conservative. The new machines will introduce a factor of
economy in operation that will be highly advantageous to the Company, and I am confident
that the estimated revenue from the various services will be achieved in a comparatively short
time.
In regard to the estimated revenue from special flights and charters, I expect this section of
the Company’s activities to develop into an important and profitable business. In confirmation
of my expectations, I would mention that since the arrival of the three three-passenger “Mono-
spar” ’planes New England Airways Ltd. have completed charters aggregating approximately
£l,OOO in revenue.
Aviation is developing so rapidly that I consider it imperative for the success of any operating
aerial company in Australia to be directly in touch with leaders in aviation abroad. After
extensive world-wide investigations I concluded that the British Pacific Trust Ltd. and General
Aircraft Limited would provide a channel of communication that would be of the utmost
service to the new Company, and it is for the purpose of securing the backing of these influential
and progressive organisations that New England Airways Ltd. has consented to give British
Pacific Trust Ltd., or its assigns, the option of purchasing its assets as specified in the agreement
referred to in this Prospectus.
Yours faithfully,
(Sgd.) GEO. A. ROBINSON,
Managing Director.
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED


Profit.
Loss.
3ist August, 1932
■ £12,572
I
3
£ 6 43 *4 7
£6,605
0
0
31st August, 1933
23,337
15
II
£1,208 17
II
6,967
10
0
31st August, 1934
29,786
10
3
1,429 8
3
13,151
0
0
31st August, 1935
35,983
8
0
6,530 11
5
13,181
0
0
CERTIFICATE OF AUDITOR TO NEW ENGLAND
AIRWAYS LIMITED
50 Molesworth Street,
Lismorc, N.S.W.,
21st September, 1935.
H. C. Armstrong, Esq.,
Representative in Australia for the British Pacific Trust Ltd.,
350 George Street, Sydney.
Dear Sir,
re NEW ENGLAND AIRWAYS LIMITED.
In response to your request, we desire to report that we have audited the books of account of
New England Airways Ltd. during the period of four years ended 31st August, 1935, and have
pleasure in certifying to the correctness of the undermentioned figures relating to the operations,
capital and profit of New England Airways Limited during that period.
Gross Revenue Net Profit or Loss
Year Ended from all (after providing for Depreciation Paid-Up
Operations. but not for Taxation). Capital.
(Depreciation Charges were /2,685 f° r 1 92 2 > £ 2 A 2 % for i933> /2,372 for 1934 and
£1,828/16/8 for 1935.)
The Company earned an average gross income (passenger, mail and freight) on the Sydncy-
Brisbane service of ,£43/11/10 per trip during the year ended 31st August, 1934, using Avro X
(10-seater) ’planes, whilst for the year ended 31st August, 1935, the ten-seater planes averaged
£ 43/5/8 per trip, and a few trips by Monospar three-seater ’planes averaged 14/5/8 per trip.
Yours faithfully,
(Sgd.) A. C. JOUBERT & CO.,
Chartered Accountants (Australia).
The above revenue of New England Airways Ltd. has been earned without the
aid of any subsidy from Governments, although payments are made by the Com-
monwealth Government on a poundage basis for the carriage of mails.
ESTIMATED PROFITS OF AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED
The advent of new and safer machines has materially encouraged elsewhere
abroad the adoption of passenger transport by air, and the operations of New
England Airways Limited furnish a sound basis for estimating earnings and out-
goings of the services to be taken over by Airlines of Australia Limited from New
England Airways Limited and the extended services contemplated.
Below are set out the estimates of Mr. G. A. Robinson, Managing Director of New
England Airways Limited, since the incorporation of that Company in 1931.
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED


ESTIMATED EARNINGS
Mr. Robinson has taken as a guide to his estimated gross earnings the actual
results of New England Airways Limited Sydney-Brisbane service, which has been
in full operation for three years ended 31st August, 1935.
The audited figures of New England Airways Limited, stated above, show that
on the Sydney-Brisbane service the Company earned an average gross income (pas-
senger, mail and freight) per trip of ,£43/11/10 during the year ended 31st August,
1934, and £43/5/8 per trip for the year ended 31st August, 1935. It is equivalent
to a little more than 60% of the full passenger earning capacity of a 10-passcngcr
’plane carrying passengers @ £7 per trip; £7 being the present fare Sydney to
Brisbane.
Mr. Robinson has assumed that, with the advent of the new 10-passenger ’planes
and the general tendency towards air travel, an increase in the average number of
passengers and the amount of freight, i.e., an increase in the gross income per trip,
might be expected from all services; conscquendy, he considers that a basis of 66f%
of the full earning passenger capacity of ’planes might be regarded as a reasonably
sound one to adopt for the purpose of estimating average gross earnings (passengers,
mail and freight) per trip from all services. The increase in recent months of all
services of New England Airways Limited has very largely justified Mr. Robinson’s
assumption.
On the above basis, his estimated gross earnings per annum by Airlines of Aus-
tralia Limited, when all services arc in full operation, are as follows:
SYDNEY-BRISBANE SERVICE.
510 Miles, taking Three Hours. One Ten-Passenger 'Plane each way daily —
Say 700 Trips per annum.
Full Passenger Earning Capacity per trip @ £7 fare £7O
Estimated Earnings: 66f% of £7O £46/13/4 per trip; for 700 trips £32,667 per annum.
SYDNEY-MELBOURNE SERVICE.
500 Miles, taking Three Hours. One Ten-Passenger 'Plane each way daily —
Say 700 Trips per annum.
For the purpose of this estimate, it is assumed that the traffic between the two largest cities
in the Commonwealth will not be less than that between Sydney and Brisbane. Actually, how-
ever, it is expected that the inauguration of the Sydncy-Melbourne service will lead to greater
traffic on the Sydney-Brisbane run, both services being complementary to each other. This
service covers a similar flying time to the Sydney-Brisbane service, and conscquendy a fare of
£7 per trip has been assumed.
Full Passenger Earning Capacity per trip @ £7 fare £7O
Estimated Earnings; 66f% of £7O £46/13/4 per trip; for 700 trips -= £32,667 per annum.
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED


Sydney-Brisbanc
• • ■ • £32,667
Sydney-Newcastlc
4,5°°
Brisbane-Toowoomba
4,5°°
Brisbane-Townsville
6,000
Pleasure Trips and Charters
4,000
Sydney-Melbourne
32,667
Per Annum
£84,334
SYDNEY-NEWCASTLE SERVICE.
80 Miles, taking Fifty Minutes. One Ten-Passenger ’Plane each way six days a wee\ —
Say 600 Trips per annum.
Full Passenger Earning Capacity per trip @ £l/2/6 fare £ll/5/-
Estimated Earnings: 66f% of £ll/5/- £7/10/- per trip; for 600 trips = £4,500 per annum.
BRISBANE-TOOWOOMBA SERVICE.
70 Miles, taking Three-quarters of an Hour. One Ten-Passenger ’Plane each way six days a
wee\ —Say 600 Trips per annum.
Full Passenger Earning Capacity per trip @ £l/2/6 fare £ll/5/-
Estimatcd Earnings; 66|% of £ll/5/- = £7/10/- per trip; for 600 trips = £4,500 per annum.
BRISBANE-TOWNSVILLE SERVICE,
800 Miles, taking Six Hours. Three Three-Passenger 'Planes each way per wee\ —
Say 300 Trips per annum.
Full Passenger Earning Capacity per trip @ £lO fare £3O
Estimated Earnings: 66§% of £3O -= £2O per trip; for 300 trips = £6,000 per annum.
SUMMARY OF ESTIMATED RECEIPTS.
The earnings of New England Airways Limited have been increasing each
month, and for the months of July and August, 1935, the gross earnings on the first
five of the above services were £4,021 and £4,224 respectively, which, if main-
tained throughout twelve months, will provide a gross income of over £49,000 per
annum; this would be only slightly less than the estimated annual receipts
(£51,667) of Airlines of Australia Limited from the same services under the im-
proved conditions contemplated in this Prospectus.
The receipts of New England Airways Limited from special trips and charters
during the year ended 31st August, 1935, amounted to £3,283.
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED


Sydney-Brisbanc Estimated on basis of hours’ flying, which is
Sydncy-Mclbournc 2 hour longer than schedule time for the new
Monospar ’Planes
Sydney-Newcastlc
Brisbanc-Toowoomba
Brisbanc-Townsville
£12,005
12,005
2,866
2,293
3,795
1,000
Pleasure Trips and Charters
Add Pilots’ Salaries
6,000
Depreciation
13,100
Total Operating Charges, excluding Overhead
£53, o6 4
Add Overhead, including Insurance of ’Planes, Office, Management,
Directors and Auditors, Advertising, Agency Commissions, Trans-
port and General Expenses, etc., estimated at
18,232
£7^96
Estimated Annual Revenue, as above
£84,334
Estimated Annual Expenditure, as above
71,296
Estimated Annual Net Profit (without providing for Taxation)
£13,038
ESTIMATED EXPENDITURE
The experience of New England Airways Limited again affords a sound guide
in estimating operating charges on the services to be taken over from New England
Airways Limited by Airlines of Australia and those contemplated. Mr. Robinson’s
estimates are based on actual performances of the machines of New England Air-
ways Limited, together with specification performances of the new Monospar
machines to be put into service. These latter estimates have been obtained from
General Aircraft Limited, the makers of the .Monospar ’plane. The three three-
passenger Monospar machines now in use, and being taken over from New Eng-
land Airways Limited, have already borne out their specification performances.
The undermentioned operating charges allow for an extra half-hour in travel-
ling time on both the Sydney-Brisbane and Sydncy-Melbourne Services:
SUMMARY OF ESTIMATED OPERATING EXPENSES
PER ANNUM
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED


It will be noted in the above estimates Mr. Robinson has based his passenger
receipts upon fares which, from the results of actual experience, have been found
to be a proper charge. This the Directors regard as a sound basis. Moreover, they
feel that aviation is complementary to, rather than competitive with, railway trans-
port, and that it would be unsound to attempt to base estimated passenger fares on
railway or other aviation charges instead of on actual results of several years’ opera-
tions which have proved sound in practice. It will also be noted that Mr. Robinson
has allowed in the operating costs for an extra half-hour’s time per trip on the
Sydney-Brisbane and Sydney-Mclbournc services as a contingency. This the Direc-
tors also regard as a sound provision, as any reduction in flying time means a con-
siderable saving in operating costs.
With the additional fleet available, special attention will be given to the develop-
ment of charter and supplementary work, for which a rapidly increasing demand
exists, evidence of which is given in the letter from Mr. G. A. Robinson, dated
27th September, 1935, set out herein.
A review of the new routes has already been conducted by Mr. Robinson in
company with the Chief Pilot of New England Airways Limited, and the Brisbanc-
Townville service has already been inaugurated. Arrangements have been made
to carry freight; this should produce revenue totalling more than half of the receipts
set down in the above estimates for this service. These arrangements necessitate
the use of one of the large machines, from which much more substantial results
may be expected. The Company will acquire the right, title and interest of the
vendors in suitable hangars at Townsville, Brisbane, Sydney and Melbourne. In
addition to the hangar at Melbourne, the Company will acquire permissive occu-
pancy of the landing ground formerly controlled by the Larkin Aircraft Supply
Company Limited in Liq. Landing facilities and hangar accommodation thus
extend from Townsville to Melbourne, with servicing equipment at the chief centres.
The way has thus been prepared thoroughly for the early operation of the aviation
services indicated in this Prospectus. The extensions to the existing services can be
put in hand soon after the arrival in Sydney of the new 10-passcngcr Monospar
’planes, which arc expected at an early date.
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED


AEROPLANE MANUFACTURE
By the acquisition of the works of the Larkin Aircraft Supply Company Limited
in Liq. at Coode Island, Melbourne, which are erected on land held under lease, the
Company will have a modern aviation engineering plant which, with some addi-
tions, will be suitable for the manufacture of aeroplanes (apart from engines) and
spare parts. It is hoped that the Company, with the support of the British Pacific
Trust, will rapidly develop this important branch of the business, for which there
should be ample scope. As it appears to be the policy of the Government to encour-
age aviation in Australia, together with the local manufacture of aeroplanes, it may
be decided at a future date to separate the Coode Island factory from the transport
branch, placing it under the control of a subsidiary company.
The Larkin Aircraft Works were purchased from the Liquidator in the first place
for cash by Mr. G. A. Robinson, who has agreed to transfer same in return for
4,000 fully paid Ordinary Shares in Airlines of Australia Ltd.
BRITISH PACIFIC TRUST LIMITED
British Pacific Trust Ltd., of 4 Cleveland Square, St. James, London, W., the
promoter of this Company, is an English company engaged in the finance and large
scale development of a number of substantial enterprises in Great Britain, Canada,
India and elsewhere.
One side of the Trust’s activities is specifically devoted to the development of
aviation. Practical men of high reputation and experience in aviation are at the
head of affairs, and considerable achievement can be credited to them in the develop-
ment of British aircraft manufacture and operation.
Hanworth Aerodrome was acquired by the Trust last year at a large cost, and it
was mainly responsible for the formation of General Aircraft Limited, the makers
of the “Monospar” aeroplane.
The Trust has recently acquired the Douglas Motor Engineering Works, one of
the largest of its kind in Great Britain, where construction of aero engines on a
large scale will shortly be commenced.
The Trust has also acquired the British Empire rights of the Hispano Suiza aero
engine, which is used very largely in modern aircraft. This engine will also be
manufactured at the Douglas works.
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED


The Trust’s latest subsidiary aviation organisation is Marine Airways Ltd., of
which The Lord Sempill is a Director. Marine Airways Ltd. has been formed to
control an Empire and international flying boat service. In connection with this
it has been reported recendy that the Trust has secured control of the output of
British-made Sikorsky flying boats. The Sikorsky flying boat has achieved great
reputation in its performances for a number of years on commercial ocean services.
It is at present used by Pan-American Airways on the services to South America,
and it is reported is to be used on the contemplated extensions of American oversea
services. It is also used for daily services between the Islands of Hawaii. British
Pacific Trust Ltd. have already invited suggestions as to what services in Australasia
could be undertaken by Airlines of Australia Ltd. with Sikorsky flying boats.
Having determined on entering the Australian field by enlarging the operation
of New England Airways Limited, the excellent reputation of which attracted their
attention, the Directors of the British Pacific Trust have been proceeding at con-
siderable expense for the past year with preparations for the formation of Airlines
of Australia Limited and the extensions indicated in this Prospectus.
Three Monospars for feeder services have already been delivered by them and arc
now in use by New England Airways Ltd., and four 10-passengcr line ’planes are
reaching completion, having been specially built on their instructions to meet Aus-
tralian requirements. Others will follow as needed.
Realising the inevitable demand for aeroplane manufacture in Australia, British
Pacific Trust Ltd. agreed to the purchase of the plant, etc., of the Larkin Aircraft
Supply Company Ltd. in Liq. by Mr. G. A. Robinson, in contemplation of its pur-
chase by Airlines of Australia Limited. These steps taken by the Trust will do
much to hasten the realisation of the Company’s expectations.
Experts, where considered advisable, will be sent out by the Trust, and, further,
the Company will have the benefit of the advice of The Lord Sempill and Mr.
W. S. Stephenson, both of whom are acknowledged to be most active personalities
in the development of Empire aviation. The recent solo flight of the former from
England, and over many parts of Australia, is well known.
British Pacific Trust Ltd,, as guarantors of this issue of 75,000 Ordinary Shares,
and as promoters of the Company, will be entitled to apply for 50,000 of the Ordi-
nary Shares in reserve at a premium of 1/- per Share at any time during a period of
twelve (12) months from the date of the Prospectus, and a further 50,000 Ordinary
Shares at a premium of 2/- per Share at any time during the period of the next
succeeding twelve (12) months.
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED


The minimum amount which, in the opinion of the Directors, must be raised
out of the proceeds of this issue is .£75,000 to provide for the following expenditure:
1. The liability to General Aircraft Ltd., to be taken over from New
England Airways Ltd., being the price of three Monospar ’planes
as hereinbefore mentioned £8,062
2. New ’Planes to be acquired for the extension of services con-
templated
50,000
3. Preliminary Expenses (including £2,000 to be refunded Mr.
G. A. Robinson) and brokerage as hereinafter set out
6,500
4. Working Capital
10,438
£75,ooo
ALLOTMENT
No working capital has been provided for operating the plant formerly belonging
to Larkin Aircraft Supply Co. Ltd. in Liq., as the Directors have not yet determined
whether this asset will be operated by Airlines of Australia Ltd., or transferred to a
separate company for that purpose. In the former event fresh Shares will be issued
for subscription out of the Shares held in reserve.
The British Pacific Trust Ltd. have guaranteed this issue of 75,000 Shares; any
Shares up to the number of 75,000 which have not been applied for within one
(1) month of the date of publication of the first advertisement of this Prospectus
will be allotted to British Pacific Trust Limited in accordance with its guarantee.
The Directors reserve the right to close the application list at any time before the
expiration of the said one month.
In the event of the issue being over-subscribed, the Directors reserve the right to
allot, in full, such of the applications as they deem fit, and the balance (if any) on
a pro rata basis on Shares applied for.
In case a lesser number of Shares is allotted than is applied for, the excess of the
application money will be applied in or towards payment of the allotment money
and the balance (if any) returned to the applicant.
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED


MEMORANDUM AND ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION
The constitution of the Company is defined by the Memorandum and Articles
of Association. A copy of the Company’s Memorandum of Association accompanies
and forms part of this Prospectus, and a copy of the Articles of Association may be
inspected at the following offices:
The Registered Office of the Company (pro tem.).
The Solicitors to the Company in Sydney.
Messrs. Fisher, Powers, Jeffries & Brebner, Solicitors, Epworth Building,
Piric Street, Adelaide, S.A.
Messrs. Feez, Ruthning & Co., Solicitors, T. & G. Building, Queen Street,
Brisbane, Q.
The Articles of Association have been drawn up so as to comply with the require-
ments of the Sydney Stock Exchange, and it is intended to make application in due
course to list the Ordinary Shares on other Australian Stock Exchanges.
CERTIFICATE FROM THE COMPANY’S AUDITORS
National Mutual Building,
The Directors, 35° George Street, Sydney,
Airlines of Australia Ltd,, October 29th, 1935.
Sydney.
Gentlemen,
As Auditors to Airlines of Australia Limited, we report that the Company was incorporated
on the fourth day of October, 1935, that no accounts have been made up and that no dividends
have been paid. No remuneration of Directors has been fixed, as, under the Articles of Asso-
ciation, the same has to be determined by the Shareholders in General Meeting.
Yours faithfully,
(Sgd.) DAVID FELL & CO.,
Chartered Accountants (Aust.).
DIRECTORS’ SHARE QUALIFICATION
The qualification of a Director shall be the holding of at least 250 Shares, Ordi-
nary or Deferred or bodi, in the Company.
BROKERAGE
Brokerage of 6d. per Share will be paid by the Company to all brokers who arc
members of any recognised Stock Exchange on all Shares allotted in response to
applications identified as coming through them. An over-riding commission of id.
per Share will also be paid to the Company’s Organizing Brokers on all Shares
allotted in respect of applications received through such Brokers.
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED


PRELIMINARY EXPENSES
It is estimated that preliminary expenses will not exceed £6, 500, and they will
comprise;
(a) A sum of £ 2,000 to be paid to Mr. G. A. Robinson to refund him per-
sonal expenses incurred in travelling to Great Britain and elsewhere
abroad to study improved methods of commercial aviation and to discuss
matters with the British Pacific Trust Limited in preparation for the
formation of Airlines of Australia Ltd.
(J?) Brokerage, Stamp Duty, Registration Fees, printing, advertising and
circulating this Prospectus, and all legal and other expenses incidental to
the formation of the Company.
CONTRACTS
The only Contracts affecting the Company arc the following:
Copies of the Contracts mentioned in
the Prospectus may be inspected during
business hours at the offices of Messrs.
Allen, Allen & Hemsley, Solicitors, 19
Castlereagh Street, Sydney, New South
Wales, Messrs. Fisher, Powers, Jeffries &
Brebner, Solicitors, Epworth Building,
Pirie Street, Adelaide, South Australia,
and Messrs. Feez, Ruthning & Co., Solici-
tors, T. & G. Building, Queen Street, Bris-
bane, Queensland.
1935, BETWEEN NEW ENGLAND
LBERT ROBINSON of the 2nd part
i 3rd part, being an Option Agreement
brgc Albert Robinson respectively place
is hereinbefore stated in this Prospectus
set out in this Prospectus.
935, BETWEEN BRITISH PACIFIC
> OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED of the
ustralia Limited for 3,710 fully paid-up
iptions granted to British Pacific Trust
this Agreement British Pacific Trust
Shares of Airlines of Australia Limited
| 1935, BETWEEN AIRLINES OF
3E ALBERT ROBINSON of the other
cd Managing Director of the Company
|
935, BETWEEN BRITISH PACIFIC
TD. WHEREBY British Pacific Trust
s and agrees to apply for 25,000 Shares
FWEEN GEORGE ALBERT ROBIN-
!A LIMITED of the other part, being a
1 belonging to the said George Albert
mentioned in the contract first above-
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED


PRELIMINARY EXPENSES
It is estimated that preliminary expenses will not exceed £6, 500, and they will
comprise:
(a) A sum of £ 2,000 to be paid to Mr. G. A. Robinson to refund him per-
sonal expenses incurred in travelling to Great Britain and elsewhere
abroad to study improved methods of commercial aviation and to discuss
matters with the British Pacific Trust Limited in preparation for the
formation of Airlines of Australia Ltd.
(b) Brokerage, Stamp Duty, Registration Fees, printing, advertising and
circulating this Prospectus, and all legal and other expenses incidental to
the formation of the Company.
CONTRACTS
The only Contracts affecting the Company arc the following:
AGREEMENT made the 28th day of October, 1935, BETWEEN NEW ENGLAND
AIRWAYS LIMITED of the Ist part, GEORGE ALBERT ROBINSON of the 2nd part
AND BRITISH PACIFIC TRUST LIMITED of the 3rd part, being an Option Agreement
WHEREBY New England Airways Limited and George Albert Robinson respectively place
under offer to British Pacific Trust Limited the assets hereinbefore stated in this Prospectus
to be acquired by this Company for the consideration set out in this Prospectus.
AGREEMENT made the 28th day of October, 1935, BETWEEN BRITISH PACIFIC
TRUST LIMITED of the one part and AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED of the
other part, being a Contract to sell to Airlines of Australia Limited for 3,710 fully paid-up
Deferred Shares of £1 each of that Company the options granted to British Pacific Trust
Limited by the first mentioned Agreement. Under this Agreement British Pacific Trust
Limited has the option to take up 100,000 Ordinary Shares of Airlines of Australia Limited
as mentioned in this Prospectus.
AGREEMENT made the 28th day of October, i935> BETWEEN AIRLINES OF
AUSTRALIA LIMITED of the one part and GEORGE ALBERT ROBINSON of the other
part WHEREBY George Albert Robinson is appointed Managing Director of the Company
for a period of five years.
AGREEMENT made the 28th day of October, 1935, BETWEEN BRITISH PACIFIC
TRUST LTD. and AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LTD, WHEREBY British Pacific Trust
Ltd. guarantees the cash subscription of 75,000 Shares and agrees to apply for 25,000 Shares
at par.
FORM OF LICENSE (undated and unsigned) BETWEEN GEORGE ALBERT ROBIN-
SON of the one part and AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED of the other part, being a
license to use as an aerodrome part of Allotment 21 belonging to the said George Albert
Robinson at Lismore and being the form of license mentioned in the contract first above-
mentioned.
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED


APPLICATION FOR SHARES
Application for Ordinary Shares should be made through any member of a
recognised Stock Exchange on the form accompanying this Prospectus and then
lodged with the Company’s Brokers, together with the amount required to be paid
with application Applications may also be lodged at the Registered Office of the
Company (pro tem.), c/o. New England Airways Ltd., 14 Martin Place, Sydney,
together with the amount required to be paid with applications.
WE, the undersigned, being the ACTING CHAIRMAN OF DIRECTORS
and two other DIRECTORS of AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED, DO
HEREBY CERTIFY that the above Prospectus has been duly approved by Reso-
lution of the Board of Directors of the said Company on the Twenty-eighth day of
October, 1935.
SIGNED by the said Acting Chairman
of Directors and two other Directors in H. C. ARMSTRONG,
the presence of: Acting Chairman.
E. D. ARMSTRONG, GEO. A. ROBINSON,
Acting Secretary. A. DENIS ALLEN,
Directors.
Dated at Sydney this sth day of November, 1935.


FORM OF APPLICATION FOR SHARES
IN
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED
To The Directors,
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED.
Gentlemen,
I hereby make application for Ordinary Shares in
Airlines of Australia Limited, and I enclose herewith cheque for £ : ;
representing 5/- per Share application money.
I request you to allot me that number of Shares, and I agree to accept the same
or any smaller number that may be allotted to me and to pay a further sum of 5/-
per Share on allotment and the balance of 10/- per Share in terms of the Com-
pany’s Prospectus dated sth November, 1935.
I hereby authorise you to place my name on the Register of Members in respect
of the number of Shares allotted to me, and I agree to be bound by the Memor-
andum and Articles of Association of the Company.
(Signature)
(Date)
Name (in full)
(please use block letters)
Address
Occupation




THE COMPANIES ACT 1899.
COMPANY LIMITED BY SHARES.
MEMORANDUM OF ASSOCIATION
OF
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED
. I. THE name of the Company is “Airlines of Australia Limited.”
11. THE registered office of the Company will be situate at Sydney in the State of N.S.W. or in such other
place in the said State as the Directors may from time to time determine.
111. THE objects for which the Company is established are:—
(i) To purchase construct build take on lease or otherwise acquire and use sell hire let or otherwise dispose
of fit out and repair and deal in or with aeroplanes seaplanes airships aircraft automobiles motor
cars motor trucks motor lorries motor engines aeroplane engines steam engines internal combustion
engines boats motor boats launches ships motor ships steamships railway lines engines carriages coaches
and other vehicles of any description whatsoever.
(а) To maintain and work aeroplanes seaplanes airships aircraft automobiles motor cars motor trucks
motor lorries motor engines aeroplane engines steam engines internal combustion engines boats motor
boats launches ships motor ships steamships railway lines engines carriages coaches and other vehicles
of any description whatsoever and horses chattels and things appropriate for the carriage of pas-
sengers mails and goods or used for any of the above purposes or for any purposes conducive to the
interests of the Company and to carry on the businesses of aeroplane seaplane and aircraft proprietors
aerial service proprietors motor car proprietors motor service proprietors and carriers of passengers
mails and goods by sea land and/or air in any part of the world.
(3) To carry on the business of carriers by air road land sea river canal railway or otherwise.
(4) To establish carry on and maintain lines or regular services of aircraft vessels vehicles or conveyances
of any kind or description whatsoever with power to enter into contracts for the carriage of mails
passengers and goods by any means whatsoever and either by its own aircraft vessels vehicles or
conveyances or by or through the aircraft vessels vehicles or conveyances of others.
(5) To establish maintain and work lines of aerial conveyances between such places within or outside
the Commonwealth of Australia as may be from time to rime selected by the Company.
(б) To contract with any person or persons company or corporation as to interchange of traffic running
powers or otherwise and/or as to the joint working of the aircraft vessels vehicles and conveyances
of the Company with any other aircraft vessels vehicles or conveyances or as to through or joint
traffic or as to acquiring running powers rights or casements over any railway tramway or other
property or as to any other matters with the view of increasing or facilitating any business of the
Company.
(7) To arrange publish advertise exhibit and distribute timetables schedules of prices and fares advertise-
ments photographs booklets pamphlets and literature and generally to do all things necessary advisable
or appropriate to give publicity to the operations of the Company and to organise conduct and carry
on tours and travels in the Commonwealth of Australia or any part of the world.
(8) To carry on the business of wholesale and retail traders in aeroplanes seaplanes airships aircraft auto-
mobiles motor cars motor trucks motor lorries motor engines aeroplane engines steam engines internal
combustion engines boats motor boats launches ships motor ships steamships railway lines engines
carriages coaches and other vehicles of any description whatsoever and motor marine and aircraft
accessories and goods used in connection therewith and the component parts thereof and to buy or
sell manufacture refine manipulate import export and deal in either by wholesale or retail all sub-
stances apparatus and things capable of being used in any such businesses as aforesaid or required
by any customers of or persons having dealings with the Company.
(9) To carry on the business of hangar and aerodrome proprietors and storers of aeroplanes seaplanes
airships aircraft automobiles and other goods wares and merchandise of every kind and description
whatsoever.
(10) To buy and sell merchandise for freighting the aircraft vessels vehicles and conveyances of the
Company.
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED


(n) To carry on the businesses of general engineers and manufacturers vendors of repairers of and
dealers in aeroplanes seaplanes airships aircraft automobiles motor cars motor trucks motor lorries
motor engines aeroplane engines steam engines internal combustion engines boats motor boats
launches ships motor ships steamships engines carriages coaches and other vehicles of any description
whatsoever and to manufacture buy sell and deal in accessories and appliances therefor and parts
thereof and benzine petrol gas oil lubricants and fuel.
(12) To acquire and use aerodromes landing-grounds garages wharves factories hangars stores and work-
shops with suitable plant engines and machinery and accommodation with a view to receiving berthing
manufacturing and repairing fuelling purchasing selling or otherwise dealing in or storing or
berthing or receiving aeroplanes seaplanes airships aircraft automobiles motor cars motor trucks
motor lorries motor engines aeroplane engines steam engines internal combustion engines boats
motor boats launches ships motor ships steamships engines carriages coaches and accessories and
appliances therefor and parts thereof and other machinery of any description whatsoever.
(13) To act as agents on commission or otherwise for makers of and dealers in aeroplanes seaplanes air-
ships aircraft automobiles motor cars motor trucks motor lorries motor engines aeroplane engines
steam engines internal combustion engines boats motor boats launches ships motor ships steamships
engines carriages coaches and accessories and appliances therefor and parts thereof and other machinery
or vehicles of any description whatsoever.
(14) To carry on the business of the transport or carriage of passengers goods freight or mails and/or to
act as agents on commission or for any other return or remuneration for any person or persons firm
or firms company or companies carrying on any business this Company is authorised to carry on.
(15) To acquire licenses to work and use any invention which the Company is authorised to acquire.
(16) To manufacture work develop exercise and promote the use of any inventions in which the Company
is interested whether as owner licensee or otherwise and in particular by carrying on any business
which may be conducive thereto.
(17) Generally to acquire take over and carry on any other trade or business (transport manufacturing or
otherwise) which may seem to the Company capable of being conveniently carried on in connection
with the objects of the Company or subsidiary thereto or otherwise calculated directly or indirectly to
enhance the value of any of the Company’s property and rights for the time being.
(18) To amalgamate with any other Company in New South Wales or any other State of the Common-
wealth of Australia or elsewhere whose objects are or include objects similar to those of this Company
or any of them whether by sale or purchase of the undertaking subject to the liabilities, of this or any
such other Company as aforesaid with or without winding up or by sale or purchase of all the shares
or stock of this or any other company as aforesaid or by partnership or any arrangement of the
nature of partnership or in any other manner.
(19) To acquire and undertake all or any part of the business property and assets and assume all or any
of the liabilities of any firm person or company carrying on or proposing to carry on any business
which this Company is authorised to carry on or possessed of property suitable for the purposes of
this Company and to amalgamate with or make any arrangement for sharing profits with any such
person firm or company.
(20) To acquire by purchase lease or otherwise for cash or shares or partly for cash and partly for shares
or in any other manner and deal with—
(a) The whole or any part of the business property and liabilities of any firm person or company
carrying on any business within the objects of this Company.
(£) Lands buildings easements and other rights or interests in or over real or leasehold estates.
(c) Plant machinery goods and other personal estate and effects.
(d) Patents patent rights or inventions copyrights designs trade marks or secret processes.
(e) Shares stock or securities of or in any other company or companies in any part of the world
having objects altogether or in part similar to the objects of this Company or carrying on or
intending to carry on any business which this Company may think capable of being carried on
so as directly or indirectly to benefit this Company.
(21) To pay all the costs charges and expenses of the promotion flotation (including brokerage') and
establishment of the Company and to remunerate any person or company by brokerage or otherwise
for services rendered or to be rendered in placing any shares or securities of the Company.
(22) To sell let dispose of or grant rights over all or any property and assets of the Company for cash or
for shares or otherwise and upon any terms and conditions thought desirable.
(25) To erect buildings factories plant and machinery for the purposes of the Company.
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED


(24) To make experiments in connection with any business of the Company and to protect any inventions
of the Company by Letters Patent or otherwise.
(25) To grant licenses to use patents copyrights designs or secret processes of the Company.
(26) To manufacture plant machinery tools goods and things for any of the purposes or businesses of
the Company.
(27) To draw make accept endorse discount and negotiate bills of exchange promissory notes and other
negotiable instruments.
(28) To underwrite the shares stock or securities of any other company and to pay underwriting com-
mission and brokerage on any shares stocks or securities issued by this Company so far as the law
for the time being permits such payments.
(29) To borrow money or to receive money on deposit either without security or secured by debentures
debenture-stock (perpetual or terminable) mortgage or other security charged on the undertaking or
all or any of the assets of the Company including uncalled capital.
(30) To lend money with or without security and to invest money of the Company in such manner as
the Directors think fit and to guarantee the contracts or liabilities of any person firm or company
with or without security.
(31) To undertake the whole or any part of the liabilities of and to enter into any arrangement for
sharing profits union of interests co-operation joint adventure reciprocal concession or otherwise with
any person firm association or company carrying on any business which this Company is authorised
to carry on or possessed of property which this Company may think suitable or convenient for any
purpose of its business.
(32) To promote companies for any purposes whatsoever.
(33) To remunerate any person or company for services rendered or which may be rendered to the
Company in cash or shares or in any other manner.
(34) To sell the undertaking and all or any of the property and assets of the Company for cash or for
shares or securities of any other Company or for any other consideration.
(35) To obtain any Act or Acts of Parliament for any of the purposes of the Company.
(36) To enter into any arrangements or contracts with any Government Municipal or other authority or
body for any of the purposes of the Company.
(37) To grant pensions gratuities donations and emoluments to any person in the employment of this
Company or engaged in any business acquired by this Company or employed by or acting as a
director of any company some of the shares of which are held or arc intended to be acquired by this
Company and the wives widows families and dependents of any such person and to support and
subscribe to any person or mutual benefit fund school hospital dispensaries dining-rooms baths places
of recreation and any educational scientific literary religious or charitable institutions or objects or
trade societies whether carried on by this Company or any other company in which this Company
may hold shares and any clubs or other establishments calculated to advance the interests of this
Company or any such other company as aforesaid or of the persons employed by this Company or
any such other company as aforesaid.
(38) To subscribe to or otherwise aid benevolent charitable national or other institutions or objects of a
public character or which in the opinion of the Directors have any moral or other claims to support
or aid by the Company by reason of the locality of its operations or otherwise.
(39) To distribute in specie assets of the Company property distributable amongst its members.
(40) To do all or any of the things hereinbefore authorised in any part of the world either alone or in
conjunction with or as factors trustees or agents for others or by or through factors trustees or agents.
(41} To do such other things as the Directors think incidental or conducive to the attainment of the
above objects or any of them.
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED


Names, Addresses and Descriptions
of Subscribers.
No. of Shares
taken by each
Subscriber.
Witness.
ALFRED MACARTNEY HEMSLEY,
ONE
19 Castlereagh Street, Sydney,
Solicitor.
ARTHUR DENIS WIGRAM ALLEN.
ONE
19 Castlereagh Street, Sydney,
Solicitor.
GEORGE ALBERT ROBINSON.
ONE
14 Martin Place, Sydney,
I
Company Director.
cC
JS
i
HENRY CHARLES ARMSTRONG,
350 George Street, Sydney,
ONE
t
5
D
«
0
la
JU
(A
a
Sydney,
0
Company Director.
0a
X
0 ■
JOHN DYNELEY FELL,
ONE
Chartered Accountant (Aust.),
350 George Street, Sydney.
ERIC FURN1VAL GRIFFIN,
ONE
Journalist,
27 Hunter Street, Sydney.
PHILIP PRING,
ONE
Sharebroker,
27 Hunter Street, Sydney.
AND IT IS HEREBY DECLARED that the objects specified in each paragraph of this Clause 3 shall be regarded
as independent objects and (except where otherwise expressed in such paragraph) shall be in no wise limited
or restricted by reference to or inference from the terms of any other paragraph or paragraphs.
IV. THE liability of the members is limited.
V. THE capital of the Company is H 1,000,000 divided into 995,000 ordinary shares of £ 1 each and 5,000
deferred shares of £ 1 each. Holders of the ordinary shares will be entided to receive out of the profits avail-
able for distribution and which it is decided to distribute a non-cumulative dividend up to £7/10/- per cent,
per annum on the capital paid up or credited as paid up on their respective shares and to receive one-half of
the remaining distributable profits of the Company which it is determined to distribute. The holders of the
deferred shares will be entitled to the other one-half remaining distributable profits of the Company which it is
determined to distribute. In the event of the winding up of the Company the surplus assets of the Company
shall be applied firstly to the repayment to the holders of the ordinary shares of the amounts paid up or
credited as paid up thereon, and secondly to the repayment to the holders of the deferred shares of the amounts
paid up or credited as paid up thereon, and any surplus remaining shall be divided so that one-half thereof is
distributed amongst the holders of the ordinary shares in proportion to the amounts paid up or credited as paid
up thereon and the other one-half is distributed amongst the holders of the deferred shares in proportion to the
amounts paid up or credited as paid up thereon.
WE, the several persons whose names addresses and descriptions are subscribed hereto are desirous of being
formed into a Company in pursuance of this Memorandum of Association and we respectively agree to take the
number of shares in the capital of the Company set opposite our respective names.
DATED this Fourth day of October, 1935.
PRINTED BY
GREEN PRESS LTD
SYDNEY
IV
AIRLINES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED
