

PROSPECTUS
OF THE
WALLERAWANG
IRON AND COAL MINES.
With Eepoets.
GIBBS, SHALLARD, & CO., GENERAL LETTERPRESS PRINTERS,
PITT STREET NORTH, NEXT THE UNION BANK.




PROSPECTUS
OF THE
Wallerawang Iron and Coal Mines.
The Wallerawang Iron and Coal Mines and Limestone Pro-
perty are situated in the district of Wallerawang, County of
Cook, New South Wales, about four miles from Wallerawang,
a railway station on the Great Western Line, one hundred
and five (105) miles distant from Sydney.
This estate consists of one thousand four hundred and
sixty (1460) acres of land held under Mineral Conditional
Purchase, ten (10s.) shillings per acre having been paid to
the Crown, and sundry improvements made. On expenditure
of two ( £2 ) pounds per acre in mining operations within
three (3) years, and payment of an additional thirty (305.)
shillings per acre, the property will become a freehold with
title direct from the Crown. Should such expenditure be
incurred within a less period title can be at once obtained
on payment of the balance of the purchase money.


Besides the abovenamed conditional purchases the
proprietors have selected three hundred (30()) acres as site
for a Township. Two (2) of these acres, Mr. Winter, the
original discoverer of the property, has the privilege of se-
lecting for his own benefit and free of cost to him, such
selection to be in one block.
Coal of superior quality and suitable for smelting
purposes underlies most, if not all, of one thousand (1000)
acres of the estate. This can be worked by tunnels run into
the side of the mountain, and delivered by gravitation to the
site proposed for erection of blast furnaces.
The deposits of Magnetite and Hsematite Iron
are situate about four miles from the coal mines and pro-
posed furnace site.
The Clay Hand Ores lie above the Coal Seams.
The liimestone Quarries are situate rather less than
two (2) miles from the Coal Mines, between them and the
Magnetite and Haematite Iron Mines, and consist of practi-
cally an illimitable supply of the finest Marble ILianc-
stone.
Fire Clay of a quality similar to that in use by the
Copper Smelting Works at Bowenfels, also Building
Stone, ISricls Barth, and Hardwood Timber
in abundant extent, are likewise to be found on the estate.


The quality and quantity of the several minerals are so
fully described in the Reports by Professor Liversidge (of the
Sydney University and Associate of the Royal School of
Mines, London), and by James B. Winship, Esq. (Colliery
Viewer to the Australian Agricultural Company), as to render
further reference to them in this place quite unnecessary.
It may, however, be well to bring prominently under notice
the following features of special interest as connected with
this property, viz.:
1. In addition to the Water Supply before mentioned, the
position of the estate is such as will admit of enor-
mous quantities of water being stored at small expense
and without risk, on the table-land above the Coal
Seams, and made to descend by gravitation to supply
the works. ( Vide Mr. Winship’s report).
2. J hat the whole of the minerals necessary for the manu-
facture of Iron are comprised within a compass of
four (4) miles.
3. That the Coal lies at a moderate height above the
intended furnaces, the Limestone rather higher, and
the Iron Ores still higher, as will be seen on reference
to the Reports by Mr. Winship, and Mr. Licensed
Surveyor Shoobert.
4. That the proposed site for the blast furnaces is in the
Valley near to running water, and distant only about


four hundred (400) yards from the mouth of the adit
into the Coal mine.
5. That the necessary tramroad for connecting the whole
will he hut little over three (3) miles in length, and
its construction, it is stated by the surveyors, will
present no engineering difficulties whatever.
In view of these unusual natural facilities for economical
working, it cannot well he doubted that the cost of mining
the Ores, &c., will compare favourably with that incurred at
any similar works in Great Britain, practical men having
already given it as their opinion that this will average for
the Ores and Limestone under three (35.) shillings, and for
the Coal under four (45.) shillings per ton.
Hence it is estimated that Pig Iron can he produced on
the works for less than fifty (505.) shillings per ton. the quality
of which the proprietors have good grounds for believing
will be found especially suitable for the manufacture of
Bessemer Steel.
The demand for railway bars in New South Wales,
Victoria, Queensland, South Australia, New Zealand, and
Tasmania, is at present considerable, and taking into account
the extensive area in each colony over which railways have
yet to be constructed, cannot fail to be much more so in the
future.


A large and steady inquiry may also fairly be anticipated
for pig IroD, merchant bars, castings, &c., as well from New
South Wales as the neighbouring colonies.
The supplying of this demand (and possibly by-and-bye,
a similar one from California and other important markets,
of which our nearer proximity than Great Britain will in
time give us the command), must inevitably furnish an
almost unlimited field for the profitable employment of
capital invested in the manufacture of iron for many years to
come.
Although, however, such manufacture may certainly be
expected to afford the most remunerative outturn, it must
not be overlooked that, —owing to the admirable situation of
the Wallerawang property, as respects its connection by rail-
way with Sydney on the one hand, and prospectively at no
distant date, with the important towns of Bathurst, Mudgee,
Orange, Wellington, &c., and the copper producing districts
'i
of the Western interior on the other—the supplying of Coal
itself may eventually become a source of considerable profit.
It should here be mentioned that, as the Government
intend shortly to construct a railway from Wallerawang to
Mudgee, which must pass up the valley through this estate,
the necessity for any expenditure by the proprietors in laying
down a line to connect the works with the Wallerawang
station will thus be obviated.


It now only remains to add, that so important in a
national point of view is the property described in the fore-
going - remarks considered, that a paper respecting it was
recently read before the Royal Society of New South Wales.
A careful reference to that document, as well as to the before-
mentioned Reports of Professor Riversidge, Messrs. Wbnship
and Shoobert, all of which are appended to this statement,
is respectfully solicited.
Sydney , New South Wales,
January, 1875.


REPORT
ON THE
Wallerawang Iron & coal Co.'s Estate
BY
PROFESSOR LIVERSIDGE
Professor of Geology in the Sydney University, and Associate of
the Royal School of Mines, London.
Sydney, October 15th, 1874.
Gentlemen,
I have the honour to inform you that,
in accordance with your request, I have examined the Iron
and Coal deposits on your property, at Wallerawang, and
now beg to hyy before you the results of my observations.
The deposits of iron ores are very extensive and consist
of three varieties, viz.:—
1. Brown Hcematite , the hydrated oxide of iron.
2. Magnetite, or the magnetic oxide of iron.


3. A Clay Band: this is not what is usually known as a
Clay Iron Ore in England—that is, an impure Carbonate
of iron, generally containing about 30 per cent, of
metallic iron—this, on the contrary, is a variety of brown
haematite and is consequently, as will be seen from the
accompanying analyses, much richer.
A highly ferruginous variety of Garnet , accompanies the
magnetite, which will probably be found profitable to treat
as an ore of iron.
1. Brown Haematite.
The general direction of the outcrop of the deposit of
this ore is coloured red on the accompanying plan.
Along this line of outcrop the ore is seen scattered ever
the ground in blocks and nodules, either completely exposed
or but partially embedded, and for a width of from 12 and
18 feet in parts, to as much as 50 or 60 feet in others.
The thickness of the deposit below the surface lias not
yet been fully ascertained, but the shaft B (9 feet by 6 feet)
was put down in the solid lode itself to a depth of 43 feet,
when a level was driven, which proved it to be good for 18
feet to 20 feet, and as there are no appearances of the boun-
daries of the lode having been cut, except on the N.E. side,
it will probably be found to be much thicker than the above.
It will be seen that the outcrops run through large por-
tions of the two sixty acre blocks, 155 and 156, and the
eighty acre block 157, and are present in the forty acre block
152 ; and although the outcrops in 152 were not seen to be
connected with those in the other blocks, yet there is great


probability of their being so connected beneath the surface,
in which case, the total length of the deposit, as far as at
present traced, cannot be much less than one mile.
As far as can be inferred from the outcrops and other in-
dications, I am inclined to regard the deposit as a true vein,
or lode, and, therefore, that its depth may be looked upon as
unlimited.
The stuff already raised in sinking the shaft and in
driving the level, affords a very good criterion of the average
quality of the ore yielded by this lode.
It is made up of nodules of mammillated, fibrous, and
massive brown haematite mixed with less pure haematite and
a little pipe-clay, and on descending the shaft it is at once
seen to maintain the same character on all sides, and from
top to bottom, excepting in one place where there is a small
“ horse” of pipe-clay, but of no moment.
A sample of this ore taken from the heap at the shaft’s
mouth, just as it was raised in sinking and without having
been subjected to any dressing process, yielded, on analysis,
37*84 per cent of metallic iron. (See Analysis No. 3).
The nodules of solid ore, average 51*52 per cent,
metallic iron.
If for any special purpose a richer and purer ore be re-
quired, these nodules can be readily separated from the loose
ore before it is sent to the surface.
As will be seen from the accompanying analyses, the
amount of sulphur and phosphorus present in this ore is very
small. (Vide Analyses Nos. 2 and 3.)
Probably it will be found feasible and economical to
work much of this deposit as a quarry in stopes, as it is


favourably situated on the bill side, and thus dispense with
expensive shafts and galleries.
2. Magnetite.
The vein of magnetic iron ore is coloured blue on the
accompanying plan, and runs about N.E. by S.W.
This vein was cut across by a trench and there found to
be not less than 24 feet wide ; an average of its yield across
the width was obtained by taking samples from different
parts of this trench and crushing the whole together, when
the per-centage was found to be 4089 of metallic iron.
Two shafts have been sunk on this vein. The shaft
marked C on the plan is 10 feet deep, and that marked D is
23 feet deep.
At these depths the quality of the ore is about the same
as at the surface ; but as certain portions of the vein are much
richer than others, and would yield a return much higher
than the above, there is no reason why it should not prove to
be much richer in depth ; the true capabilities' of the vein
have not been fully tested.
The magnetite is associated with a silicious gangue or
vein stuff, and in parts with a highly ferruginous garnet rock
which contains some 21 per cent of metallic iron.
It will probably be found advantageous to mix and smelt
this garnet rock with the other iron ores, not only for the
s ike of the iron which it contains, but also for the sake of
the additional fluidity which these compound silicates impart
to the blast furnace cinder or slag.


3. Clay Bands.
There are three principal seams of this ore; they are all
interstratified with the coal measures, and are situated above
the 6 feet 6 inches coal bed, and, in common with the coal
seams, they are found beneath the greater portion of the pro-
prietors’ coal selection of one thousand acres, all round
which their outcrops are seen jutting out more or less con-
tinuously, both on this and on the western side of the
dividing range.
As is usually the case with such deposits, they vary
somewhat in thickness, from 8 or 9 inches in parts to as
much as 18 inches in others, the average thickness of the two
lower seams may perhaps be taken at 10 inches each, and the
upper seam at about 12 inches, these dimensions are judged
from the outcrops of the seams; for as they have not yet been
opened out, and present no clean sections, minute measure-
ments could not be taken.
The lowest of these clay bands is situated some 12 feet
above the 4 feet 6 inches or No. 3 coal seam, and Nos. 2 and
3 clay bands a little above the first.
As will be seen from the analysis appended, they are all
three much richer than the English Clay Iron Ores, and they
contain but very small quantities of sulphur and phosphorus.
Coal.
The three following seams of coal on the property have
been opened out: —
No. I—The lowest seam, is 17 feet 6 inches thick.
No. 2 —The middle seam, is 6 feet 6 inches thick.


No. 3—The top seam is 4 feet 6 inches thick, and in
addition to these, there are other seams of minor importance
which have not yet been touched in any way.
Seam No. 1.
The outcrop of this bed of coal is seen in Coal Creek, on
the western side of the range.
A trial shaft has there been sunk through it, which has
proved it to be 17 feet 6 inches in thickness, divided by a
parting of fire-clay 8 inches in thickness.
I was unable to descend this shaft on account of the
water in it, but by looking down I could see some 9 or 10
feet of the seam, and I also examined the partial section
shewn of it in the Creek banks.
The quality of the coal is very good, it is hard and com-
pact, and therefore well adapted for use in the blast furnace.
It has a specific gravity of 1*333.
Seam No. 2.
The outcrop of this bed is seen in Coal Gully, not far
from the proposed furnace site, where an exploratory level has
been driven into it to a distance of 60 feet.
At the mouth of this level the seam is seen to be about
6 feet 10 inches in thickness with a parting of fire-clay,
having a thickness of but 2 inches, but this is seen to be
gradually pinched out as you proceed inwards and finally dis-
appears altogether.
The roof is a splendid hard sandstone and will require
but little support.
The bed of coal has a dip of about 2° to the N.E.


In quality, the coal is almost identical with the last,
being hard and compact, but, as will be seen from the analy-
sis appended, it contains rather more combustible matter and
less ash.
Its specific gravity is P 398.
Both are very free from sulphur and they each yield a
very white ash, which, of course, alone is sufficient proof of
the absence of sulphur in the form of Iron Pyrites but not
in other combinations.
Seam No. 3.
This seam of coal has a thickness of 4 feet 9 inches with
a parting of 3 inches, leaving 4 feet 6 inches of coal. It is
rather a brighter and more tender coal than the others and
will probably be found well adapted for household puiposes.
No chemical examination was made of this coal, as it is con-
sidered by the proprietors that there will be no immediate
use for it in the face of the large supplies which can be ob-
tained from the other two seams, but an exploratory drive
has been put in for about 20 feet.
This bed, in common with seams Nos. 1 and 2, is approxi-
mately horizontal, only having a dip of 2° to the N.E., which
is not much more than is required for drainage purposes.
The coal underlies nearly the whole of the 1000 acres of
coal and iron land taken up by the proprietors, and one of the
seams crops out on the Mudgee Road, some miles distant.
Limestone.
There is little can be said about the Limestone selec-
tions ; they comprise 100 acres of a very solid, compact,


crystalline Limestone of the best quality, in fact it is a slate-
coloured marble veined with white, and appears to be of far
too good a quality to be merely used as a blast furnace flux.
It has already been opened and some 10 tons have been
taken from the spot marked “ Limestone Outcrop” on the
plan.
Along the creek it is free from covering, but as you re-
cede from the creek banks it becomes more or less capped
with a soft slate.
As will be seen from the accompanying plan prepared by
the Government Surveyor, the deposits of Coal, Iron Ores, and
Limestone are all conveniently situated within a circle of
about 4 miles diameter, and the elevations are such that they
can all be easily and cheaply connected together at the fur-
nace site by tramways and by a branch line with the railway.
I have the honour to be,
Gentlemen,
Your obedient servant,
ARCHIBALD LIVERSIDGE.


Analyses of Iron Ores and Doals
FROM
WALLERAWANG IRON AND COAL MINES.
I.—MAGNETIC IRON ORE.
Silica and insoluble portion ... ... 18‘70
Metallic Iron ... ... ... ... 4089
Phosphorus ... ... ... ... traces.
Sulphur ... ... ... ... ... traces.
Both Sulphur and Phosphorus are virtually absent.
lI.—BROWN HAEMATITE (NODULES).
Water hygroscopic ... ... ... D2B
„ combined ... ... ... ... 12*04
Silica and insoluble portion ... ... 12'19
*Sesquioxide of Iron ... ... ... 73*60
Phosphorus ... ... ... *l2
Sulphur ... ... ... ... ... 'O6
■[Undetermined ... ... ... ... 0.71
100*00
* Equal to 51-52 per cent. Metallic Iron,
f The Undetermined portions consist principally of manganese,
alumina, and magnesia.


lII.—BROWN HAEMATITE FROM THE HEAP AT THE
SHAFT’S MOUTH.
Water hygroscopic... ... ... ... 2*74
~ combined ... ... ... ... 9*70
Silica and insoluble matter ... ... 25*33
*Sesquioxide of Iron ... ... ... 54*23
Phosphorus... ... ... ... ... *27
Sulphur ... ... ... ... ... *l2
fUndetermined ... ... ... ... 7*61
100*00
* Equivalent to 37 - 84 per cent. Metallic Iron.
IV.—CLAY BAND No. 1.
Water hygroscopic... ... ... ... I*2B
„ combined ... ... ... ... 3*54
Silica and insoluble matter ... ... 4*60
*Sesquioxide of Iron ... '-... ... 80*00
Phosphorus... ... ... ... ... ‘49
Sulphur ... ... ... ... ... *ll
fUndetermined ... ... ... ... 9*98
100*00
* Equivalent to 56 per cent. Metallic Iron.
f The Undetermined portions consist principally of manganese,
alumina, and magnesia.
It is highly probable from the unusual richness of this
sample, and from the small quantity of combined water
present, that it has been subjected to a bush fire, and answers
therefore, more or less, to roasted ore. When this seam of
Clay Band is properly opened out, it will probably run about
50 per cent, metallic iron.


V.-CLAY BAND No. 2
Contains 53*31 per cent. Metallic Iron.
Vl. CLAY BAND No. 3
Contains 49-28 per cent. Metallic Iron.
VII.— GARNET VEIN
Contains 21 -05 per cent. Metallic Iron.
VIII. —COAL FROM SEAM No. 1. (17 feet 6 inches thick.)
Moisture ... ... ... ... ... I*sl
Volatile Hydrocarbons ... ... ... 3324
Fixed Carbon ... ... ... ... 55*74
Ash, white ... ... ... ... ... 9-50
99-99
Specific Gravity... ... 1*333
IX. COAL FROM SEAM No 2. (6 feet 6 inches thick.)
Moisture ... ... ... ... ... 1*95
Volatile Hydrocarbons ... ... ... 27*25
Fixed Carbon ... ... ... ... 61*86
Ash, white ... ... ... ... ... 8 - 94
100-00
Specific Gravity ... ... L 398
(Signed,)
ARCHD. LIVERSIDGE.




REPORT
ON THE
Wallerawang Iron & coal Co.'s Estate
BY
JAMES B. WINS HIP, ESQ.,
Colliery Viewer of the Australian Agricultural Company’s Collieries?,
Newcastle, New South Wales.
Newcastle, New South Wales,
January 4th, 1875.
To J. W. Watkin, Esq., Secretary,
Wallerawang Iron and Coal Company, Sydney.
Sir,
In compliance with the request contained in
your letter of the 4th of September last I have visited and
examined the Iron, Limestone, and Coal-bearing lands which
your Company has taken up and had surveyed in the Western
District, and, by permission of Mr. Merewetber, our General
Superintendent, now submit the following Report for the
information of your Board.


For convenience of reference I have prepared a Plan of
the several blocks comprised in the property on a scale of
10 chains to the inch, with a vertical section on a scale of
80 feet to the inch, and which you will receive herewith.
The property is situated in the Parishes of Falnash, Cox,
and Roxburgh, in the County of Cook. It consists of—•
Eight blocks of Iron-bearing land together containing
360 acres
Two blocks of Limestone-bearing land, together con-
taining 100 acres
Fifteen contiguous blocks of Coal and Iron-bearing land,
containing 900 acres
One separate block of Coal-bearing land, containing 100 acres
Three blocks containing 300 acres which have been taken
up for a Township, or say in all 1760 acres
The separate block of Coal-bearing land lies about one
mile to the north of blocks Nos. 260, 261, and 262; it is
shewn on my plan, and is that which contains the 17 feet
6 inch seam of coal.
The property lies to the north and north-west of the
Railway Station at Wallerawang, from which the proposed
site of the smelting furnaces is distant about 3 miles in a
straight line, and by the route which a tram or railroad
would have to follow about 4 miles.
Judging from what I saw in riding over the ground, I
should say that there will be few if any engineering difficulties
in the way of laying a tramroad from the blocks containing
the Magnetic and Brown Efematite Iron-ores and the Lime-
stone to the furnaces, and there will be none in the way of


laying a tramroad from the tunnels which have been opened
out in the hill about a quarter of a mile to the north of the
furnaces to prove the two seams of Coal of which I shall
speak hereafter.
It will not I fancy be quite such an easy matter to con-
nect the thick seam on the 100 acres with the furnaces, as a
high and steep hill intervenes; but a route for a tramway
will no doubt be found when the ground is surveyed and
levelled with that view.
I may add, however, there is no present necessity for
undertaking such a survey nor for connecting the thick seam
with the furnaces, as both of the other seams will, I am sure,
be found to be suitable for smelting purposes and will supply
the works with fuel for the next 50 or even 100 years. .
I will now turn to the mineral deposits which your pro-
perty contains, and will first report on the Iron ores,
beginning with the Brown Haematite.
Brown Heematite.
This ore is found in blocks, Nos. 152, 155, 156, and
157, and is coloured red on the plan to which I would refer
you for the general lay of the deposit or lode.
I travelled along the line of outcrop, and saw the ore
lying about in blocks of different sizes, some wholly exposed
to view and others partially covered. The width of the
lode varies considerably, being in some places from 15 to 20
feet and in others twice as thick.


This was at the outcrop, but what the thickness may be
below the surface I cannot say, as the deposit has not yet
been fully proved by borings or shafts.
Two shafts have been put down in the lode, one of which I
went down, and found it to be 43 feet deep. A level has
been driven from the bottom of this shaft for 18 feet, and, like
the shaft itself, was still in the lode when it was stopped.
So far as I eould judge by riding along it, the lode
extends for a good mile in blocks Nos. 155, 156, and 157,
and consists, I think, of more than one, as whilst a portion
of it lies north-east and south-west, another portion lies
nearly at right angles,—viz., north-west and south-east. This
latter also appears to be the strike of the deposit outcrop-
ping in block No. 152.
I carefully examined the sides of the shaft both as I
went down and ascended, and also the drift throughout. The
deposit seemed to be of the same character as seen in the
shaft; it is a hard, compact ore, containing small nodules,
which appear to the eye to be nearly all iron.
The ore brought to the surface in sinking the shaft and
driving the level affords a very good idea of the average
quality, and I should say that it would yield a high per-
centage of metallic Iron all round ; judging from what I
have seen in England, I should say that the nodules
undoubtedly would, and as is frequently done there, they
might be picked out and smelted separately.
Although the depth and thickness have not yet been
fully proved, I have little doubt that it will be found to be a
true and extensive deposit of highly valuable iron ore.


I think that the best and most economical way of work-
ing it would be by open quarry, as the ground is high and
rising, and generally well adapted for it, and the ore could
be worked in lifts of from 20 to 30 feet at a time. To sink
shafts and drive levels through such hard material would be
more expensive, and you would besides have to provide costly
steam engines to raise the ore to the surface.
Magnetic Iron-ore.
This ore is found outcropping in blocks Nos. 155 and
156, and has been proved in blocks Nos. 150 and 151 by two
shafts put down to the depths of 10 and 23 feet respectively
on the line of strike.
The vein is coloured blue on the plan, and as you will
see runs in a north-east and south-west direction. In one
place a trench has been cut across it, and shews a thickness
of 24 feet.
The ore seemed to vary a little in quality, but all
appeared to me to be very rich, much richer than any I have
ever before seen, either here or in England.
I am not aware whether it has ever been tested, but I
have no doubt that it will yield a much larger per-centage
of metallic iron than the Brown Haematite. Some of these very
rich ores are not, I believe, very tractable in the furnace, but
they smelt well when mixed with other and poorer ores, and
as you have the Haematite and the Clay Band ores on your
property, with plenty of Limestone you will probably have
little or no difficulty in turning it to account.


Clay Band Ore.
Three beds of this ore are to be seen cropping out in blocks
Nos. 260, 261, 262, and as they are also to be seen out-crop-
ping on the other side of the range, I have little doubt they
will be found underlying all the fifteen blocks (900 acres)
which comprise your Company’s Coal selections.
Judging by the eye the lowest of the beds lies about
12 feet above the uppermost or 4 feet 6 inch seam of Coal,
and the other two a few feet higher. None of them had
been opened out or otherwise proved, when I inspected them,
and it is difficult, therefore, to speak as to their
but I should say that they vary from 8 or 9 inches to nearly
double that thickness.
The two lower beds may, I think, be safely estimated to
average 10 inches, and the upper bed an inch or two more.
It is very probable that they will be found to thicken as the
cover increases.
The ore differs in appearance from any clay bands I
have seen in England, and it is, I think, much richer.
Coal.
Several seams of coal are known to exist in the blocks
of land which your Company has selected for that mineral;
but so far as I am aware only three of them have been proved
to any extent.
Two of these out-crop in block No. 106 on the hill side
about a quarter of a mile from the proposed site of the fur-


naces, and the third in the separate 100 acre block, which
I have spoken of at the commencement of this report.
On referring to the-section given on the plan, yon will
find that the uppermost seam is 76 feet above the middle
seam, which again is 119 feet above the lowest seam. I will
take them in the descending order, and will number them
1,2, and 3.
No. 1; or Uppermost Seam.
This seam of Coal is one of those that crops out in Block
No. 106, near the proposed site for the furnaces, and an
exploring drift 6 feet wide has been put in about 60 feet.
The seam is 4 feet 9 inches thick, with a band of 3 inches,
leaving 4 feet 6 inches of clean Coal.
It is a bright hard Coal, and seems to get brighter as
the cover over it increases. The roof is hard Sandstone, and
will require little or no timber when it is worked. The seam
lies very flat, and does not appear to make much water.
The dip is to the north-east, and I should say, is not more
than two degrees.
From its hardness and bright appearance I should say
that this coal would make a very good Coal for general
purposes.
No. 2 ; or Middle Seam.
This seam outcrops in what is called Coal Grully, a
short distance from and above the proposed site for the
furnaces.


In this case also a tunnel has been driven into" the hill
for a distance of about 110 feet to prove the Coal. At the
entrance of the drift I measured the seam and found it to be
6 feet 10 inches thick, with a band of Fire-clay 2 inches in
thickness ; but this band gets thinner as it goes into the hill?
and at the face there was only just the appearance of a parting.
The roof is hard rock, and will require very little timber in
the workings. This seam also makes very little water, and
has the same dip as seam No. 1. It is, if anything, a harder
coal than that proved in No. 1., and will, I think, keep its
size well, and be found to be well suited for smelting and
steam purposes.
No. 3; or Lowest Seam.
This seam of Coal is that which is found outcropping in
the separate block lying to the north of Blocks Nos. 260,
261, and 262. It crops out in a creek known as Coal
Creek, and a trial shaft has been put down to and through it a
short distance back from the Creek, so as to get a clean section.
The shaft was full of water when I arrived, but it was
got out by means of large buckets and a jack roll and I was
enabled to measure the seam. It is 17 feet 6 inches in
thickness with 8 inches of Fire-clay 6 feet from the top, leav-
ing 16 feet 10 inches of clean Coal. A drift has been put in
a few feet from the bottom of the shaft, and in both that
and the shaft the Coal appeared very hard and strong.
It is the thickest seam I ever saw, and will, I should say,
prove to be a good steam and smelting Coal.
Mr. Winters, the Overseer in charge of your property,
made a large fire with the Coal; it lighted readily and burnt


freely, leaving a white ash. This seam also lies very flat,
and appears to have the same dip as the other two. flhe
roof is of rock and will put you to little expense for timber.
Like the others it can be worked for many years by
open tunnels, and, as it lies so flat, it matters little whethei
you work it to the rise or the dip. My opinion is that this
seam will be found to underlie nearly if not the whole of
your Coal selections, say 1000 acres.
These three seams contain in the aggregate nearly 28
feet of clean Coal, and after making a liberal allowance for
loss and waste in getting, and for faults and bad Coal, they
ought to yield 1000 tons of best Coal per foot per acre, and
20 per cent, of small Coal.
Taking this as the basis of my calculations they would
yield as follows :
No. 1 Seam.
Thickness.
Yield
per acre.
Acres.
Best CoaL
Small Coal.
Best and Small
Coal.
Ft. In.
4 6
Toub.
4,500
750
Tons.
3,375,000
Tons.
675,000
Total Tons.
4,051,000
6 6
| 6,500
No. 2 Seam.
| 800 | 5,200,000
| 1,040,000
6,240,000
16 10
| 16,750
No. 3 Seam.
j 900 | 15,075,000
| 3,015,000
18,090,000
27 10
1 27,750
| 2,450
| 23,650,000
| 4,730,000
| 28,381,000
And with a vend or consumption of 100,000 tons in the year,
the three seams would last over 230 years; this consumption
does not include the Small Coal in any way, neither have I


taken into account of other seams of Coal which may be
found and opened out.
Limestone.
This Limestone is found in Blocks No. 153 and 154, and
appears to run all through them, and to be of first-class
quality. I examined it in various places, and could see no
material difference in it; all the same marble-like appear-
ance, and there is enough of it to supply your works for
generations to come.
It can be easily worked by open quarry, as there is
little cover over it; and as above said there will be no
difficulty in getting it to the site fixed on for the blast
furnaces.
Proposed Site for Furnaces.
As regards this, I may say that in my opinion the site
appears to be admirably suited in all respects for the
purpose, and to have been selected with very great judgment.
It is centrally situated as regards the Iron, Lime, and Coal,
and commands a good supply of permanent water for the
works and boilers; it is also very conveniently situated for
establishing a connection with the Grreat Western Railway.
On reference to the section you will see that the Iron-
ores, Limestone, and No. 1 and No. 2 seams of Coal lie at a
considerable height above the level of the proposed site for


the works, and it will, therefore, be an easy matter for your
engineer to arrange the gradients of your tramways in such
a way that the minerals can be delivered at the level of the
top of the furnaces or at a lower level as may be required.
This is of course a very material advantage and will
enable you to work much more economically than you could
if you had to use machinery for lifting the minerals. It may
be as well to mention that beside the permanent water in the
creek beds there are several places in the hills to the north
of the proposed furnace site where large bodies of water may
be stored and be made available for the supply of the works
by gravitation.
Township.
The Blocks selected for this purpose are Nos. 110, 167,
and 168, they are centrally situated, and well suited for the
purpose. There are two small creeks running through them
which are said to be always running, and will afford a full
supply of good water for the use of your workmen and tenants.
Several large reservoirs could be made by constructing
dams across the gullies, and would not cost much money ;
they would hold several million gallons of water.
I consider the whole of the 300 acres would sell readily
and would realise from £25 to £IOO per acre if the land was
cut up into quarter-acre allotments.
There is abundance of good, hardwood timber on your
property, which will be available for the erection of the
necessary buildings required for your works, and I have little


doubt that some of the Sandstone rocks in the Coal measures
could be used for foundations, or even the construction of
your engine houses and other important buildings.
I trust that this Report, with the Plan and Sections,
will prove satisfactory to you, and help to carry out the ends
you have in view.
It will be seen from them that you possess a large pro-
perty containing within a radius of not more than four miles
an almost unlimited supply of all the minerals required for
establishment of the Iron industry which may be said to have
made England what she is at this day, and I have not the
slightest doubt that whenever you see fit to develope its
resources you will be amply rewarded for the judgment and
energy you have displayed in the conception and carrying out
of your enterprise.
Before I conclude, I must apologise for having this
Report so long in hand, but I have been very busy during
the last six months.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
JAMES B. WINSHIP
Colliery Viewer,
To the Australian Agricultural Company.
