

PROSEPECTUS
OF THE
AUSTRAL GARDENS
Company, Limited.
To he Registered under the Companies' Statute, 1864.
Capital, £45,000, in 45,000 of £1 Each.
Payable by Deposit of 5s. per Share on Application, and 5s. per Share on Allotment.
Balance by Calls of 2s. 6d. when necessary, but no Call to be made
within One Month of previous Call.
Provisional Directors
GEO. ANTHONESS, Esq.
G. H. BENNETT, Esq., Mayor of Richmond.
G. C. CLAUSCEN, Esq., Mayor of Fitzroy.
D. GAUNSON, Esq., M.L.A.
MORGAN HOPKINS, Esq.
L. KONG MENG, Esq.
G. MAYGER, Esq.
JAMES MOORE, Esq., J.P.
J. R. NEEDHAM Esq.
C. S. PATERSON, Esq.
G. M. PICKLES, Esq.
COUNCILLOR W, SMITH.
C. F. TAYLOR, Esq., B.A.
ARTHUR WALSTAB, Esq.
Hankers:
BANK OF AUSTRALASIA.
Joint:
Messes. REED, HENDERSON & SMART,
and Mb. WM. PITT.
Artists:
Messrs. GRIST & LITTLE.
Solicitors:
Messes. TAYLOR & RUSSELL.
Pyrotechnist :
Me. WM. PRESCOTT (late of Cremoene.)
prober:
Me. T. H. LEMPRIERE.
(Offices: 54 Queen Street, Melbourne.
Cook, Duree & Co., Printers, 129 Russell Street, Melbourne.


Estimated Expenditure of Capital ...
Purchase of Land
Erection of Fences, Buildings, Landing Stages, &e., as
shown in plan, Improvements and Laying out of
Grounds, &c.
Brokerage and Preliminary’Expenses
£45,000 0 0
£17,000 0 0
25,500 0 0
2,500 0 0
car; non n n


STT SYNDICATE, comprising many prominent citizens of Melbourne and Suburbs, having purchased that spacious and
/J~- — beautifully-situated area of ground known as the Murphy Estate (see plan other side) have decided upon utilising it
for the purposes of popular Pleasure Gardens, and now offer the public shares in the undertaking as on frontispiece.
The love of Australians generally, and Victorians in particular, for out-door recreations, is acknowledged on all sides.
.It is the natural outcome of a genial climate, second—whatever prejudiced detractors may assert—to none in the world ; with
a mean temperature of about 60 degrees throughout the year and but a moderate rainfall few indeed are the days from January to
December, when fresh air may not be enjoyed, even by those with the most delicate constitutions.
The enormous attendances at the Racecourses near the city, at Cricket, Football, and Bicycle matches, and more recently
at Firework displays (those given by Mr. Pain averaging upwards of 13,000 visitors at 2s. and Is. per head), all serve to show
how completely Victorians enjoy such al fresco gatherings.
The great want of Melbourne is, however, a permanent place of recreation, where at any time the citizen who has a little
leisure on his hands, may seek rational amusement to the benefit of both body and mind. This is well pointed out in the Rev.
Charles Strong’s letter to the editor of the Age, from which we print an extract on another page. It has been further
brought before the public, by the speech recently made by the Mayor of Sydney, when waited upon by the Managers
of the local theatres, with a request that he would decline to allow Mr. Pain to give firework displays in the Sydney
Domain. The Mayor very justly pointed out that the public were themselves the best judges of the matter, and
concluded by advising the Managers to combine, and open Pleasure Gardens for the people.
A somewhat similar reception, it will be remembered, was accorded a deputation which waited upon the Melbourne
authorities. The wishes of the public clearly point to the need of some open-air resort where a moderate sum will
ensure a liberal return in the shape of amusement. The main object of the Austral Gardens Company is to meet this
want by supplying not only a beautifully-situated and elegantly laid-out pleasaunce, but a great variety of additional
attractions grateful alike to ear and eye.
The Austral Gardens are situated on the banks of the Yarra in a sheltered locality, with lovely surroundings.
They are easy of access, alike by road, river, or rail—
1. —BY ROAD —A threepenny cab drive along the north bank of the Yarra will bring the visitor to the
new footbridge across the river, leading direct to the garden gates.
2. —BY RIVER—A pleasant row from Prince’s Bridge to the Gardens. A landing stage 200 feet long,
with all needful steps, &c., will be provided for the accommodation of boats.
3. —BY RAlL—Visitors entering the grounds by the lower gates will alight at Richmmd Station —five
minutes walk from the Gardens, first-class return fare 3d. Visitors entering by the upper gates
will alight at South Yarra Station, 3 minutes walk from the Gardens; first-class return fare, 4Jd.
4. —BY TRAM or ’BUS—Darling Street, 2 minutes walk from the Gardens; fare 34,
5. —BY STEAMER—Arrangements are being made by the Company to run Steamer from Princes Bridge
to the Gardens at intervals of a quarter of an hour.
The AUSTRAL GARDENS will be open during the day, and again at night, at the uniform charge of One
Shilling (except on special occasions.)
Amongst the numerous attractions offered to visitors will be the following, viz.:—The Nightly Illumination of the
Grounds with coloured lanterns, and of the numerous Fountains, Cascades, &c., by means of the Electric Light.
GRAND PYROTECHNIC AL DISPLAYS given on and near a fine ornamental sheet of water, backed by a
huge scenic representation. N.B.—The noble terraces and slopes of the Gardens will afford ample accommodation for
many thousands of spectators, each one of whom will have an uninterrupted view of the Firework displays in their
minutest details.
THE MUSIC provided, both daring the displays and throughout the afternoon and evening, will be of the
choicest description—performed by an orchestra comprised of the best available talent.
DRAMATIC ENTERTAINMENTS AND CONCERTS of the best character will be given in a Spacious Pavilion
fitted with stage, auditorium, etc., the floor of which will be laid so as to be used for a Skating Rink.
The Company further propose to negotiate for any novelty suitable for the Gardens, that may arrive from America
.
or Europe, and prior to the opening of the Grounds a Manager will be despatched thither to a.range for a continued
series of novelties.
A GIGANTIC PRO lENADE PLATFORM of 450 feet in circumference will be ected. This will be
raised some distance above the ground, and have in the centre a Grand Orchestra Rotunda. Benenth the platform will be
a series of picturesque grottoes, where visitors can obtain refreshments while listening to the music. A profusion of
growing ferns and plants, interspersed with brilliantly-illuminated cascades of real water, will lend coolness and enchantment
to the scene.
A FINE HALL, built of brick, and containing Dining and Bauquetting Rooms, Lavafnies, etc., will also be
provided tor the convenience of patrons.
A Splendid Bicycle and Running Track will be laid down.
Amongst the many other features of the Austral Gardens may be briefly enumerated the follow Hg, viz. :—Gymnasium,
Rifle Gallery, Archery Ground, Tennis Lawn, Bowling Green for American Bowls, etc., etc.
The grounds will be laid out under the supervision of a competent director.


Takings per week for entrance
£900
Lessees of Minor Amusements
10
Lessee of Hall and Caterer to Grounds
Anticipated Expenditure ;
50
£960
fireworks
... £150
Dramatic Company
50
Drchestra
100
[lighting
100
Advertising
50
Servants Salaries ...
50
Repairs ..
20
£560
Prospects of the Company,
babble results from the formation of the Company may he estimated as follows: —
Anticipated Income ;
Leaving a profit of £4OO per week, or £10,400 for 6 months. This shows a probable annual return of about 25 per cent..
on the invested capital.
The proximity of the grounds to the railway will cause them to he always their own best advertisement, especially
when illuminated.
By referring to the plan intending shareholders will see that they not only secure the freehold of this noble
Estate (daily rising in value), together with the substantial buildings to be erected thereon, but also two other blocks of
land adjacent to the grounds, and affording facilities for still further extension of approaches, etc.
Extract from Leading Article in the “Age.”
There is not much fear of Australians ever becoming as absorbed in daily drudgery as the kinsmen in America. Our blue skies
offer a protest against it. As holidays go now, there is many a hard-working father or mother of a family to whom they only bring
a change of occupation. This is in itself valuable, but it is not recreation, The aspect presented by pleasure-seekers on one of
our steaming Australian summer days—parents hampered with the care of a posse of children dragged about to places which fail to
interest them —cannot be viewed with complete satisfaction. It is easy to picture holiday enjoyment of a vastly superior kind. On
the Continent of Europe, especially in the Sunny South, artisans and peasants in the painting expeditions, and in their social
gatherings, manifest none of that weariness so commonly perceptible among our excursionists. Family cares sit more lightly upon
them. What is wanted for our workers is to remove some of these cares. . . . Where is the charitable organisation which will
immortalise itself by establishing an airy, cheerful and attractive creche in Melbourne?
Recreation for the People.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE AGE.
Sir, —I have read with mterest your article on Saturday last on recreation for our working classes. The subject is one well worthy of
attention. Would it not be well if something corresponding to the German Bier Garten were adopted he:* 1 Those who have lived in Germany
can appreciate the Bier Jarten institution. In some modified form it might, perhaps, with advantage be introduced here. The great obstacle is
the difficulty of obtainin' a suitable place for a Bier Garten, where, of an evening or afternoon, paterfam lias and his household might spend a
pleasant hour or two, lisb ning at intervals to good music. In our public gardens there is a difficulty in he way of charging entrance money
without which a Bier wkten cannot be maintained very well ; and land being, unfortunately, perhaps, inline hands of private speculators, not
a foot is to be had for sus: public purposes, except at a large price. If some philanthropic, and at the jsme time wealthy, citizen would take
the matter up, I think hit would confer a great boon on many who are compelled to live in the city, and who really have no place of resort with
their families on a hot afftruoon or evening, unless they trudge off to Brighton or St, Ivilda, to broil for a 1-. v hours on the beach, at considerable
expense if there is a family.
A’ours truly,
CHARLES STRONG,
(Extract from Lette.of Rev. Charles Strong).
FORM OF APPLICATION FOR SHARES .
To the ProvisioLu. Directors of
The iztxa.l Gardens Company, Imited.
I hereby apply for sfares in The Austeal
Gardens CoxTany, Limited, and I herewith pay the si:::: of..- *
being 4 - If -
Name in fi:\ Occupation.... - -
(Present post m, address : _ * ,
4 'hated at this day of. 4 188
