

Geelong Church of England Grammar School
CORIO, VICTORIA
Prospectus 1914-15
[?]




The Main Entrance.


The New School Buildings
The New School Buildings and land consisting of 268 acres are situated on Corio and Limeburners’ Bay,
near Corio Railway Station, six miles to the north of Geelong. The foundation stone was laid by His
Excellency Lord Denman, the Governor-General of Australia, on the 3rd of April, 1913, and the school
moved into the new buildings in February, 1914.
The new buildings, which have been erected at a cost of £75,000, consist of the Central Block and
Perry House, Manifold House, Cuthbertson House, the Chapel, Science Block, Laundry Block, and
Electric Power House, with Baths, Boat Sheds, and Wharf on Limeburners’ Bay. An additional expen-
diture of £20,000 has been incurred in the purchase of land, furniture, and the laying out of the grounds.
About thirty acres have been levelled for playing grounds, and ten cricket pitches have been
prepared.
Four Tennis, a Racquet, and two Fives Courts have been built, and the Boat Sheds on the Bar-
won at the foot of Moorabool Street, and at Barwon Heads, with a fleet of boats, have been retained for
river excursions on Saturdays.


View from Corio Bay.


A Sanatorium specially designed by the School Architects, whose plans have been approved by the
Central Board of Health, has been built.
Several buildings from the old School have been removed to the new site. Among these are the
Bracebridgc W ilson Hall, the Carpenters’ Shop, the Caretaker’s Cottage at the Cricket Ground, the
Physical Science 800m —now the School Cale —and the Rifle Shed.
The Boarders live under the House System, and at the beginning of the School’s life in its new
home there arc three separate houses —Manifold, Perry and Cuthbertson. There is also a separate house
for Junior Boys. These houses provide comfortable accommodation for 170 boarders.
The day scholars of the School make up another 1 louse, which has been called “ Geelong House.”
'['here arc sleeping-out balconies for boj-’s whose parents wish them to sleep in the open air, and
ample provision has been made for Hot and Cold Baths and Lavatories.
Electric light has been installed throughout, and all the buildings are sewered.
The climate of the district is excellent, and has the reputation of being one of the healthiest in
Australia.
A full account of the School Development Scheme, with plans and description of the new buildings,
will be found in the latter half of this Prospectus.


Manifold House
Central Block
Cuthbertson House
View from the North-East.
View from Limeburners’ Bay.


Geelong
Church of england Grammar School
Corio, Victoria
Council:
HIS GRACE THE ARCHBISHOP OF MELBOURNE.
W. T. MANIFOLD, ESQ. (Chairman).
THE REV. H. STANLEY HOLLOW.
E. A. AUSTIN, ESQ.
H. A. AUSTIN, ESQ.
T. E. BOSTOCK, ESQ.
CAPT. J. P. CHIRNSIDE, C.M.G.
H. P. DOUGLASS, ESQ.
TPIE HON. D. MACKINNON, M.L.A.
JOHN TURNBULL, ESQ. (junr.)
W. F. VOLUM, ESQ.
A. G. WHITE, ESQ.
Secretary:
LIEUT.-COL. A. F. GARRARD, V.D.


The Old School Buildings.


Teachings Staff
Head Master:
REV. F. E. BROWN, M.A., late Open Mathematical Scholar of Hertford College, Oxford.
C. H. BREWER, M.A., Clare College, Cambridge.
E. V. BUTLER, 8.A., Trinity College, Melbourne ; late Head Master of Camperdown Grammar School; (Senior History
Master and House Master of Cuthbertson House).
B. G. DAVEY, Melbourne University.
C. R. FRANKLIN, 8.A., late Open Mathematical Scholar of Pembroke College, Cambridge; (Senior Mathematical Master
and House Tutor of Manifold House).
H. L. HARVEY, 8.A., Oriel College, Oxford; late Rhodes Scholar; (Senior Science Master).
R. G. JENNINGS, (House Master of the Junior House).
REV. C. H. LEA, M.A., Oxford; late Vice-Principal Meerut College, India, and Examiner at Allahabad University ; (Assistant
Chaplain and Senior Modern Languages Master).
A. MORRIS, M.A., Melbourne University: (Senior English Master).
E. T. WILLIAMS, 8.A., Melbourne University: late Lecturer Trinity College, Melbourne ; (Senior Classical Master and
House Master of Perry House).
Miss M. ROBERTSON, (Assistant in the Junior School).
Visiting Staff:
Miss Robson ... ... ... Elocution.
A. E. Anderson ... ... ... Drawing.
G. W. Steedman ... ... ... Music.
C. H. Cotton ... ... ... Music.
Miss M. Moore ... ... ... Music.
P. Bibron ... ... ... Dancing.
Captain J. Webb ... Gymnastics , Boxing, and Fencing.
W. Batterham ... ... ... Carpentry.


From the Tower, looking towards Geelong.


School Fees
NOTE.—The school year is divided into three terms of about thirteen weeks each.
Senior School.
Boarders ‘ .. 90 Guineas per annum.
Day Boys . . 12 „ „
Junior School (under 12 years).
Boarders . . . . 75 Guineas per annum.
Day Boys . . 10 „ „
(A reduction of 10 per cent, in the School Fees is made for two or more boarders of the same family).
FIXED CHARGES.
The following fixed charges are made in the case of all Boarders :
Senior School.
Laundry . . .. £1 10 0 per term
Library .. .. 0 3 6 „
Stationery . . .. 0 7 0 „
Athletic Sports .. .. 0 15 0 „
Boat Club .. .. 0 10 0 „
Mending .. .. 0 5 0 „
Cadet Corps .. .. 0 3 6 „
Sea Baths (Ist and 3rd terms only) 0 7 6 „
Junior School.
Laundry ~ .. £0 IS 0 per term
Library .. .. 0 3 6 „
Stationery .. .. 0 3 6 „
Athletic Sports . . .. 0 IS 0 „
Mending .. .. 0 5 0 „
Sea Baths (Ist and 3rd terms only) 0 7 6 „
EXTRA SUBJECTS
(Optional)
Boxing .. £1 10 0 per term
Carpentry .. . . 1 10 0
Dancing .. 1 IS 0
Drawing ~ .. 1 10 0
Gymnastics .. .. £1 5 0 per term'
Elocution .. .. 1 10 0 „
Music .. .. 3 10 0 „
Practical Science —U. VI. 10/- ; L. VI. 7/6 ; V. & IV. S/- ; 111. 3/- per term.


Dining Hall
Central Block
Head Master’s House
Manifold House
A Group of Buildings.


Business Notices
A reduction of 10 per cent, in the School Fees is made for two or more Boarders of the same family.
The School Fees, Fixed Charges, and Charges for Extra Subjects, are payable in advance.
A Tenths Notice, or the payment of a Half-Term’s Fees, is required on the removal of a Pupil ; notice to
be sent in wonting to the Head Master.
Boarders on entering the School must bring wnth them Four Sheets, Four Pillow Cases, Six Bath Towels,
and Six Table Napkins. (A list of clothing considered necessary by the School authorities will be posted on
application.)
It is particularly requested that every article of clothing belonging to a boarder should be clearly marked
with his name and initials, and an accurate list placed in his box.
Scholarships and Exhibitions
The following SCHOLARSHIPS, for which boys of the School, as well as others, may compete, are offered
annually by the Council :—Two Open Resident Scholarships of the value of 45 Guineas per annum ; one Resident
Scholarship (limited to the sons of Clergymen of the Church of England) of the value of 90 Guineas per annum.
Some RESIDENT EXHIBITIONS of the value of 20 Guineas per annum may be awarded on the result of
the Scholarship Examination.
These Scholarships and Exhibitions are open to boys under 14 years of age, and are tenable for four years,
subject to good behaviour and satisfactory progress.
LEAVING SCHOLARSHIPS.—A Scholarship from the School to Trinity College, Melbourne, founded by
Mrs. F. W. Armytage, and named the Mary Armytage Scholarship,” is open for competition once in three
years ; value about £4O per annum, and tenable for three years.
A Scholarship from the School to Melbourne University, founded by the late Mr. J. L. Cuthbertson, is open
for competition once in three years : value £4O per annum, and tenable for three years.


From the Tower, looking East over “Avalon.”


Geelong Church of England Grammar School
CORIO, VICTORIA
FOUNDATION AND HISTORY.
The School is one of the Associated Public Schools of Victoria. The foundation-stone of the Old School
Buildings was laid on June 24th, 1857, by the Governor of the Colony, Sir Henry Barkly, and the School
was officially opened on June 24th, 1858, by Bishop Perry, the first Bishop of Victoria. The Foundation
Stone of the New Buildings were laid by His Excellency Lord Denman, the Governor-General of Australia,
on April 3rd, 1913. The official opening of the new buildings has not yet taken place.
The first Head Master was the Rev. G. O. Vance, D.D., of Lincoln College, Oxford ; late Dean of
Melbourne.
He was succeeded in 1863 by Mr. J. Bracebridge Wilson, M.A., of St. John’s College, Cambridge,
under whose successful management the School remained for thirty-three years, attaining to a very promi-
nent position among the Public Schools of Victoria.
Upon his death in 1895, the School was entrusted to the charge of Mr. L. H. Lindon, M.A., of Jesus
College, Cambridge.
He was succeeded in 1912 by the Rev. Francis E. Brown, M.A., of Hertford College, Oxford ; late
Head Master of Preston Grammar School, England.


School XVIII., 1914.


COURSE OF INSTRUCTION:
Boys arc prepared at this School for either Professional or Commercial Life. In the higher Forms the
subjects taught, and the books used, arc selected with reference to the requirements of the Universities.
Boys are for Oxford, Cambridge, and Edinburgh, as well as for the Universities of Melbourne and
Sydney.
Special attention is given to candidates for admission to the Royal Military College at Duntroon, and
to the Royal Naval College.
Parents who wish their boys to be prepared for special examinations should inform the Head Master
as early as possible.
Efficiency 7 in instruction is ensured by frequent revision of the work of the whole School, conducted
by the Head Master, with the assistance of the Senior Masters on the staff.
The teaching staff of the school is unusually large (11 masters being engaged in teaching about two
hundred boy r s), thus securing good classification, small forms, and ample individual attention.
The subjects of instruction include Divinity, English, Latin, Greek, French, German, Arithmetic,
Mathematics, Mechanics, History, Geography, Science (including practical work), Writing, Book-keeping,
Drawing, Gymnastics, Vocal and Instrumental Music, Typewriting, etc.
Commercial work receives special attention, and boy r s are prepared in separate classes for every form
of business career.
Science is taught throughout the School, and even the smallest boys do experimental work or have
object lessons in the laboratories. The New Laboratories (Chemical and Physical) are well provided with
apparatus for experimental work in these subjects.


A Section of the Dining Hall.


SCHOOL TERMS, VACATIONS, Etc.
The School Year is divided into three Terms of about thirteen weeks each. There are Vacations of
about two and a half weeks each at the end of May and the beginning of September, and one of about eight
weeks at Midsummer. Boys are expected to return punctually at the time prescribed, unless they are pre-
vented by illness.
JUNIOR SCHOOL.
The Junior School has an organisation of its own, and provides an education specially adapted to the
needs of boys between the ages of eight and twelve. Some of the School hours are given to Physical
Drill. All the advantages of the Senior School of instruction in extra subjects, such as Carpentry, Drawing,
Gymnastics, etc., are open to boys of the Junior School. Boys who pass from it to the Senior School have
the great advantage of being educated under one continuous system through a number of years.
JUNIOR HOUSE.
Boarders below the age of about 13 years reside in the Junior House, under the charge of a master
who has had special experience in the training of young boys.
Each day opens with either swimming, running exercises, deep breathing or bat drill, followed by
House Prayers and Inspection.
Boys change into flannels each afternoon for organised games, which form an important part of the
School training.
Each boy has a vegetable garden.
It is the general rule to have half an hour’s reading each day.
The Time Table is adjusted to the strength of the boys.
The Matron is a trained nurse.


School Cricket Fields.


PLAYGROUNDS AND GAMES.
The School is well equipped with extensive Playgrounds. Ten practice wickets for cricket have
been laid out in the School grounds, and special grounds have been prepared for juniors. These
playing fields are probably unequalled in Australia.
On the Limeburners’ Bay frontage is a Boatshcd, stocked with a large number of valuable
boats, includfng eights, fours, pairs and pleasure boats. The numerous successes of the School in rowing
are well known, and its oars have distinguished themselves at the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge,
as well as on Australian waters. No boy is allowed to join the Boat Club until he has passed a swimming
test, which consists of swimming eighty yards in boating dress. The School also has Boatshcds on the
Barwon, at the foot of Moorabool Street, and at Barwon Heads. The Sheds on the Barwon are stocked
with eights and fours, and at Barwon Heads there are two pleasure boats. The waters of Limeburners'
Bay offer splendid facilities for week-day rowing, and the boats on the Barwon are always available for
Saturday parties.
Each House has its own Tennis Court, and a Racquet Court as well as two Fives Courts are
available for use of members of the School Tennis Club.
LIBRARY.
There is a large and well-selected Library containing many useful books of reference. It is under
the management of a Master and three Librarians. The School Library is supplemented by Libraries in
every house.
CADET CORPS.
The Cadet Corps has attained a high degree of proficiency, and offers valuable training in drill and
shooting. For the use of the Cadet Corps a Drill Hall has been erected within the School grounds ;it has
been named the Bracebridge Wilson Hall, in memory of a former Head Master of the School. Ihe main
hall is surrounded by a number of rooms, which are used as dressing rooms in connection with the Cadet
Corps and the School Games.
A site on the School grounds for a rifle range up to 000 yards has been selected and approved by the
Military Authorities, and the range will shortly be built.


Carpentry Class.


GYMNASIUM
The Bracebridge Wilson Hall is also used for Gymnastic Classes, which are under the efficient in-
struction of Captain J. Webb, late of the 60th Rifles. For this purpose it has been fitted with the most
modern gymnastic apparatus.
*
CARPENTRY.
There is a large and well-equipped Carpentry Room, where boys are instructed in Carpentry, Join-
ing, Turning, and Cabinet-making, by a highly qualified instructor.
BATHING.
The facilities for Bathing in the Baths on Limeburners’ Bay are exceptional, and already sea bathing
has become a feature of life at the school. During the summer months, before breakfast and after games,
the baths are in constant use. There is a large enclosure, 50 yards by 25 yards, for those who are good
swimmers, and a smaller enclosure in which the water is always shallow, is reserved for boys who have not
passed the boat club swimming test.
HEALTH.
The general health arrangements are in charge of the Medical Officer, and there is a competent
Matron resident in each House. There is a Cottage Hospital entirely detached from the other buildings of
the School, and there is a sick-room in each House for non-infectious ailments. A Health Certificate filled
up and signed by the Parent or Guardian (not earlier than the day before that on which the boy returns to
school) must be delivered by the boy to his House-master on the first day of every term, and (when re-
quired) by any pupil after any temporary absence. If a boy has been exposed to infection, information
should at once be given to the Head Master ; and the boy shall not return to school without previously
obtaining the consent of the Head Master.


Boat Sheds on the Barwon, and part of the School Fleet.


The following Old Boys have consented to act as
Honorary Correspondents and Referees
for the School in their respective Districts :
Queensland.
F. W. DeLITTLE, Esq., New Zealand Loan and Mer-
cantile Agency Co., Brisbane.
W. W. HOOD, Esq., Musgrave Wharf, South Brisbane.
DR. E. SANDFORD JACKSON, Glen Olive, Toowong,
Brisbane.
The Hon. A. H. WHITTINGHAM, M.L.C., Queensland
Club, Brisbane.
New South Wales.
The Right Rev. J. F. STRETCH, D.D., Bishop of New-
castle.
F. B. FALKINER, Esq., Tuppal, Tocumwal.
DR. R. NORMAN SCOTT GOOD, Young.
A. W. TURNBULL, Esq., Meriden, Bellevue Hill, Sydney
A. W. WHITNEY, Esq., Waugoola, Mt. McDonald Road,
Woodstock.
Western Australia.
FELIX C. COWLE, Esq., Hannan’s Club, Kalgoorlie.
The Hon. C. SOMMERS, M.L.C., The Perth Club.
South Australia.
C. L. JESSOP, Esq., Messrs. Jessop & Duncan Hughes,
National Mutual Buildings, King William Street,
Adelaide.
Tasmania.
The Right Rev. R. STEPHEN, D.D., Bishop of Tasmania,
J. S, AGNEW, Esq., Waverly, Oatlands.
DR. FRANCIS COLE, Deloraine.
Melbourne.
JOHN TURNBULL, Esq., 120 William Street.


The Chapel.
(In course of construction).


APPLICATION FOR ADMISSION.
Application for Admission into the School should be made to the Head Master. Candidates for
admission must be not less than eight years of age. In every case (unless boys have been educated at
home) a testimonial from the previous school or tutor will be required.
Further particulars may be obtained from the Head Master or the Secretary of the Council.


A Gymnastic Class in the Bracebridge Wilson Hall.


APPLICATION FOR ADMISSION
TO THE
Geelong Church of England Grammar School, Corio.
Name of Applicant (in full) - -
Date of Birth
Proposed Date of Entry
Name of Parent or Guardian
Address „ ~
Profession or Occupation of Parent or Guardian
Name of Present School
Have you decided what career the boy is to be prepared for: University , Professional, Commercial, etc.?
If any particular House is preferred, ]
please indicate the preference here. f Alternative
(For list of Houses see over). )
I agree to abide by the Regulations that may be made from time to time for the conduct of the School.
Signed
Dated 191


HOUSE. HOUSE MASTER.
Manifold The Head Master
Guthbertson E. V. Butler, B.A,
Perry (temporarily located in the Central Block) E, T. Williams, B.A.
Junior House R. G. Jennings
Admission to any particular House cannot be guaranteed, but the Head Master will as far as
possible carry out parents’ wishes.


School VIII., 1914.


Baths on Limeburners’ Bay.


Baths, Boat Shed, Wharf, and Motor Boat.


Athletic Sports, October 23rd, 1914.


Athletic Sports, October 23rd, 1914.


Shooting Team.
1913


Running Team.
1914


School XI., 1914.


The Rebuilding or the School


Quadrangle and Cloisters.


History of the School Development Scheme
From the School “Quarterly,” (1910 and 1911).
The scheme for the development of the School can be traced to two important steps taken towards the
close of 1908 by the .Committee of the Old Geelong' Grammarians’ Association. The first was a project for
the re-construction of the School Council and its enlargement by the appointment of representatives from
the Association. The second was a project to raise a large sum of money for the development of the
School.
The re-construction of the School Council was carried into effect by an Act of the Church Synod (in
December, 1908), and four representatives from the Association were nominated in February, 1909. Mean-
while a sum of more than £SOOO had been contributed for the development of the School by sixty Old Boys.
(This fund has since reached a total of £38,100, and an additional amount of £lßl7 has been promised. A
sum of £21,850 has also been subscribed in debentures).
The original scheme of the Association for which the fund was collected was to purchase six acres of
ground adjacent to and overlooking the School Cricket Ground, and by erecting two or more School Houses
(as they were required) to provide additional accommodation for boarders. The rest of the money was to
be expended on the present School buildings, in adding to them and bringing them up to modern require-
ments.
The new Council justified the confidence placed in it. It took a large view of its responsibilities. It
had to spend the contributors’ money to the best advantage, and the future of the School was in its hands.


From the Tower, looking West, and Showing Part of the School Farm.


The question it had to decide was this ; Could the School develop hereafter, and fulfil its natural destiny, on
its present restricted site ? It needed very little imagination to sec that, if so restricted, it could not expand
in such a way as to maintain a foremost position among the Public Schools of the future.
In cases like this there is no standing still : if a foundation docs not progress, it must with absolute
certainty sooner or later decline. The present site is too cramped to allow of future expansion. On the
other hand/the Association’s scheme to retain the present school buildings, and at the same time to erect
additional houses a mile distant, would have created a fatal division. Under such conditions (with separate
kitchens, laundries, and staffs of servants, for houses widely removed) a large boarding-school cannot be
economically, and therefore cannot be successfully administered. For boys to be lodged in separate houses
and to prepare their lessons in smaller units under separate supervision, is entirely good. But here division
should end. If the boys are to form one community, to be imbued with a common spirit, and to profit by
public-school life, must be united in games and during play-hours, and not be broken up into separate
colonics. We have already suffered too long from the inconvenience and waste of time involved in having
our playing fields divided from the school. The Council saw all this, and saw that if the School was to de-
velop as it ought, it must move, and that, if it was to be moved at all, it must move at once-—while land for
a new site was still attainable. They took the bold course, they resolved to move at once, and sought and
obtained the contributors’ consent to the change of plan.
Having arrived at this decision, the Council’s first care was to secure land. Thirty acres were
bought on a commanding site at Belmont, to which M W. T. Manifold very munificently contributed the
sum of £3OOO.
The next step was to secure from the proper authorities powers to sell or dispose of the present site.
This delicate matter also by the energy of the Council was accomplished. On the 10th of May, 1910, a
statement of Trusts was submitted by the Church authorities and was allowed by the Governor-in-Council,
powers being at the same time granted to sell, lease, mortgage, or exchange the land of the School, “the
proceeds of such disposition to be applied to such purposes in connection with the School as may be agreed
upon by (1) the Geelong Grammar School Council, and (2) the Archbishop in Council.”


Part of Electric Plant; Engine, Dynamo, and Switch Board


Now, the two chief objects in moving the School were —to obtain more space and to escape from the
too congested environments of the town. But when the Council looked closely into the new scheme and the
disposition of the buildings, it became clear that as the School expanded the thirty acres at Belmont would
be quite insufficient, and that a very much larger area would be necessary to accommodate the numbers for
which in the future they hope to provide.
#
All efforts however to secure more land at Belmont were frustrated. The spirit of speculation had
been aroused, and exorbitant prices were asked for the only adjoining block of land available. The climax
came when the owner sold thirty-seven acres of this block to a syndicate, who proceeded to subdivide it
into 201 pocket-handkerchief allotments (with frontages varying from 34 to 60 feet) and advertised these for
sale by auction, on the 19th August, as the “ Belmont Hill Estate.” One of the inducements offered by the
vendors to buyers was that the Grammar School was going to Belmont. Before the sale took place the
School Council gave notice (in the press and otherwise) that, if the promoters persisted, the School would
have to seriously re-consider its position. One of the chief reasons for moving the School was to escape
from the congestion of the city, and if the blocks were subdivided as the promoters proposed, the new
school would be surrounded by a colony of small tenements. The Land Syndicate, however, persisted,
confident in the belief that the School Council were only indulging in “ bluff.”
The Council, however, proved to be very much in earnest. They could not get the land they wanted.
And that was not by any means their only trouble. The land sale fortunately proved a salutary warning. It
showed the Council the danger of moving to a site so close to the town. In fifty, if not in twenty, years
time the new school might be more closely hemmed in by settlement than is the present school to-day.
The School Council therefore, finding their two main objects defeated at Belmont, looked about for a
new site, and were fortunate enough to secure 268 acres in a splendid position at Limeburners’ Bay on the
southern bluff or headland of “ The Lagoon,” and opposite Avalon. It is about six miles distant from
Geelong by rail (or five by water), and half-a-mile from the Cowie Railway Station. To this situation the
Council have unanimously resolved to remove the School.


Central Block- Ground Floor Plan.


The new site is quite an ideal one. Among the advantages it offers are these : —(1) There is abund-
ant space ; (2) Situated on a promontory of its own it seems, to the best of all human calculations, secure
from all chance of close settlement ; (3) Though secure from intrusion it is yet easily accessible both from
Geelong and Melbourne ; (4) The fine stretch of sheltered water on the Lagoon for rowing ; (5) Sea-
bathing at its f?et ; (6) Rifle butts can easily and safely be established ; (7) Connection with the main
Geelong water supply.
On the new site it is proposed to build the School, and to adopt the modern House system, or, to be
accurate, what in English public schools is called the Hostel system. That is to say, the boys will be
lodged in separate houses, but will get their commons in a central dining hall attached to the main building.
With one dining hall, one set of kitchens, one laundry, and one staff of servants (lodged in the central build-
ing), and with one sanatorium, the utmost economy can be practised.
By this arrangement the resources of the School can be husbanded to the best advantage, and at the
same time the chief recommendations of the House system are secured. The School is divided into houses
of about forty-five boys. Each house has its own pupil-room where preparation of lessons can be super-
vised by the House Master, who as tutor stands to his boys in hen tarentis , and is responsible for their
welfare and behaviour. The House system too is more satisfactory from the point of view of health, more
economical, and at the same time more efficient from the educational standpoint. Again, with the houses
grouped round large playing fields school sports can he carried on to the best advantage, and with the
least waste of energy ; and the rivalry of house matches, which forms such a feature in the English public
schools, will be introduced into our social life.
One of the chief recommendations of the new scheme is that it allows of future expansion. If
necessary' the ground can accommodate ten houses, sufficient to lodge four hundred and fifty boy's.


A School House-Ground Floor Plan.


Among the buildings to be erected at the new school is a School Chapel, the gift of five brothers, the
Messrs Falkiner, old boys of the School, who very generously placed a sum of £SOOO at the disposal of the
Council for this purpose. This splendid donation has enabled the school architects to design a very
handsome chapel.
*
Of course, the change of site has not failed to provoke criticism (just as did the first proposal to go
to Belmont). The well-wishers of the School in their first surprise were often ingenious in discovering
objections. But the new site has stood fire very well. And among the objections offered there are only two
which seem to require either explanation or comment.
The first objection that occurs not unnaturally to most of the friends of the School is that the dis-
tance of the new site from the River Barwon cuts the School off from its old water-ways. But as a set-off
to this the boys will have a fine course of their own, a mile and a half long, at the very door, on the shel-
tered Lagoon. This offers capital water (in nearly all weather) for school rowing and for school regattas.
On the other hand the Barwon (which will be only half-an-hour’s journey) will still be accessible when the
crews are training and for long days down river on Saturdays as of old.
Besides we must look ahead. Everything points to the probability that in fifty years’ time the Bar-
won Common will be subdivided, and the banks of the river crowded with factories, and with the closer
settlement that must accompany them.
The second and only other objection deserving notice is the distance of the new site from Geelong.
It is urged that it may sever the School from its day-boy connection ; but six miles is not a long way to go
to school. In Melbourne boys travel longer distances to school every day. Besides the Council are very


A School House-First Floor Plan.


emphatic in their promise to do everything in their power to encourage day-boys, and to put facilities in
their way for travelling to and from the School. Already the morning train leaving Geelong, and the
afternoon train leaving Melbourne, would suit admirably, and no doubt special concessions will be made by
the Railway Department. The Council have even suggested that possibly water transit, which would
shorten the distance, might be arranged.
Again, it must not be forgotten in this connection that the Council have not only the interests of the
day boys to consider, but also the interests of the boarders entrusted to their care, and it is of the utmost
importance therefore to remove the School from the immediate neighbourhood of the city and its distrac-
tions. The new site just meets the case. The School will be outside the city limits, but it will at the same
time be easily accessible for day boys by a short train journey of fifteen minutes. A school established at
Brighton or Kew is still a Melbourne school, although further from the city than is Cowie from Geelong.
It may be added, in conclusion, that the Council intend to provide a septic tank for the sewerage, to
instal a plant to generate electric light, and also to establish a farm for the supply of butter, milk, eggs, and
vegetables. The School will thus be largely independent ; a little community in itself.
Weighing then the advantages of the new site against disadvantages, real or alleged, an enormous
preponderance of advantages becomes evident.
We may therefore congratulate the School on having a Council who are determined to secure its
best interests. Resolved to be satisfied only with the best conditions, they have secured for the new
School—Ample space ; security from the intrusion of close settlement ; accessibility ; a healthy climate ; a
charming and picturesque situation ; and, above all, the sea. What more could the most exacting re-
quire ?
(Note. —' IV Since the above articles were published in the “ Quarterly,’’ the name of “Cowie’’ has been changed by the Victorian Govern-
ment to “Cork).’ ’ (2) A daily Motor Boat service for the conveyance of the day scholars to and from the School has been established
and has proved a great success).


The Science Buildings.


Extract from an Article, written by “ Old Boy,” published in the “ Australasian ” of Saturday, Bth
June, 1912.
GEELONG GRAMMAR SCHOOL.
REBUILDING SCHEME:
I he Geelong Grammar School authorities are getting on with the preparations for the rebuilding of the
School at Cowic, and the Council is anxiously waiting to open the tenders, which are due in a few days.
On Saturday morning, June Ist, Mr T. E. Bostock drove me out to the new site on the cliffs of Lime-
burners’ Bay, at the north end of Corio Bay. The Rev. F. E. Brown, the Geelong Grammar School
Head Master, and Lieut.-Colonel A. F. Garrard, who is now Bursar of the School, were with us, and we
spent a most enjoyable morning. The five-miles motor drive in the sharp morning air was soon accom-
plished, and as we swung along the edge of the bank sloping down to the shore of the bay we noticed a fire
burning behind a bush near the water’s edge. It had been lit by four Grammar School boys, who had
come out for a day’s camp. They doffed their caps to the Head Master, and soon after, having enjoyed a
late breakfast, they produced a football and were kicking it about on the site of what will be the sports oval.
They were only little chaps, and perhaps some of them will be at school when the grounds are open and
the first public school game is played there.
The idea of moving from the old site right in the city has grown in the minds of those most in-
terested, and though one does not readily agree with anything that interferes with history and with
tradition, there is not a shadow of doubt that the move is right. The old ivy-clad grey school on the hill
near Geelong has served its day. The cricket field is some distance away, and altogether the men who
had to arrange saw that expansion was essential to tn e development of the School.


The School Council has purchased 250 acres, which are situated near the Cowie railway station. The
ground slopes gently from its highest point to the cliffs or high banks of the bay, which are 25ft. above
water level. Six miles away the You Yangs stand out boldly, and to the boys the birds’ nesting and other
delights of this rugged place will be the more accessible. There is a large Government reserve there, and
not far away are the Anakics, another favourite haunt of those w 7 ho wear the light blue caps. At the foot
of the cliffs is a long lagoon, wTcre a two-mile stretch of smooth water can be obtained for rowing. It was
blowing steadily from the west, and in the motor we were glad of the protection of the wind-shield, but the
water of the lagoon was almost unruffled, so well is it protected by the high banks. It is not nearly so
exposed as the Albert Park Lake, and has the advantage of being much deeper. Boat-sheds are to be
erected just below the school buildings and there is an admirable site for swimming baths. The playing
fields run almost to the edge of the cliff, and there will be no better outlook anywhere.
Wc walked all over the grounds, and were much interested in the preparations for tree planting. Mr
S. F. Mann, known to all old Geelong Grammarians, and in fact to all other public school men, as “Barney "
Mann, is a keen student of forestry, and has made a special study of gum and other Australian trees, and
he is taking on the whole supervision of the planting of suitable trees.
As I stood on the bank overlooking the bay, and across the waters of Corio to Geelong on a neigh-
bouring hill, the thought was uppermost, what an ideal site for a boarding school. The Barwon River will
be easily reached by motor-boat, or train to Geelong, thence by electric tram, and none of the old associa-
tions will be broken. The first idea of regret at leaving the old buildings around which so many and fond
memories cling, is dispelled as one looks over it all. The first idea of moving to Belmont served its pur-
pose, and those who at the outset would have none of the new proposal, are now its warmest adherents.
I would have liked to join the boys in their camp, but it could not be, and so we had to return to
Geelong, satisfied that we had looked over the ground on which so much money is to be spent, and for
which the School is to risk so much. Old Geelong Grammarians need have no fear. They ought to con-
gratulate themselves on possessing as members of their School Council men with the foresight, enthusiasm,
and enterprise to take on such a splendid scheme.
MERCER a CO.. PRINTERS GEELONG,


A General View of the School when completed.
