

Prospectus and Specimen Pages of
A Bibliography of Australasia
and Polynesia
mXi polgnetfta
Compiler of “ The York Gate Catalogue : an Index to the Literature of Geography , Maritime and
Inland Discovery, Commerce and Colonization Member of the Library Association of the
United Kingdom, F.R.G.S., F.L.S., &=c., &>c.
By EDWARD AUGUSTUS PETHERICK
In One Volume, Imperial Octavo, 900 or icoo pages.
Price, about £3 10s.
long-promised Contribution to NATIONAL BIBLIOGRAPHY is
S founded upon an extensive private library of several thousand volumes,
pamphlets, newspapers, &c., collected by the Compiler during a period of
more than thirty years, and upon original researches made in the
Australian Colonies, as well as in British and Continental libraries.
The Work will contain titles and references to all known publications, articles in
periodicals, and papers in transactions —in any language—relating to Australia,
Tasmania, New Zealand, and other Island Groups of the Pacific Ocean, since the
beginning of the 16th Century, including publications issued in the Southern Colonies
An examination of early and later files of Australasian newspapers and other periodical
publications, has resulted in the discovery of the names of many writers who have long
been forgotten, and of a mass of Colonial literature —political, religious, poetical,
scientific, biographic, and critical —literature which, if not recorded and indexed, and
thus, in a manner, made accessible, might soon have been lost beyond recovery.
The Titles —over thirty thousand —are fully given (with place of publication, date,
pagination, illustrations, maps, and translations), arranged in chronological order and
grouped under the subjects, colonies, islands, dialects, &c., to which they refer —
cross references being made to voyages and explorations and other comprehensive
treatises catalogued in general sections. The work is thus adapted and rendered
useful for literary and historical purposes —to the journalist, the statesman, the
statistician, the man of science, the scholar and the student, as well as to the librarian,
the bibliographer, and the bookseller.
[Continued next page,
[Price One Shilling.]




BIBLIOGRAPHY OF AUSTRALASIA
NEW SOUTH WALES
HISTORICAL, STATISTICAL, DESCRIPTIVE
(.Reprinted from The Torch)
PROPOSALS MADE TO THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT TO COLONIZE THE SOUTHERN
CONTINENT, IN THE SIXTEENTH AND SEVENTEENTH CENTURIES.
As early as the fifteenth year of Elizabeth, papers
were laid before Her Majesty representing the advan-
tages which would be likely to accrue to her kingdom
and people from the discovery and settling of lands
not already taken possession of by the Portuguese,
Spaniards or French, and especially of those countries
lying beyond the equator. These countries, though
only to be reached by crossing the torrid zone, were
believed to possess a climate like to their own.* A
later project in Secretary Walsingham’s handwriting,
for establishing a Company to trade beyond the Equi-
noctial line —Drake to be Governor for life —is still in
existence in the Record Office, London. This was
prepared in 1580, just after Drake’s return home from
his voyage round the world.
The Terra Australis, touched at by Portuguese and
Spanish voyagers, and known to lie within and with-
out the Tropic of Capricorn, was supposed to extend
round the South Pole. It is thus delineated on old
globes and mappemondes (1530-69), and it is so de-
scribed in Beste’s account of Frobisher’s First Voyage
(1578); parts already known being those lying over
against Capo d’Buona Speranza [i.e. Western Aus-
tralia], whither the Portuguese in their voyages to
India had been driven out of their direct course by
storms. The survivors of Magellan’s expedition had
* “The discoverie, traffique, and enioyenge for the Queens
Majestie and her subiectes of all or anie landes, islandes and
countries southewards beyonde the or when the
Pole Antartik hathe anie elevation above the Horison, and which
landes, islandes and countries be not alredie possessed or sub-
dued by or to the vse of anie Christian Prince in Europe as by
the charts and descriptions shall appere.” Landsdowne
MS., C. folio. 142-146.
This Manuscript, which is endorsed by Lord Burleigh : A
Discovery of Lands beyond the Equinoctial, 1573, has been
printed after the Introduction to the Hakluyt Society’s edition
of Frobisher’s Voyages, London, 1867, pp. 4-8.
seen the North-West and Western coasts in their
homeward voyage in February and March, 1522.
The only English Colonies settled or attempted in
the reigns of Elizabeth and her successor were those
in North America and Guiana.
In the meantime, Pedro Fernandez de Quiros having
discovered what he believed to be portions of the
Terra Australis in the South Sea [i.e. Santa Cruz
and the New Hebrides] had petitioned Philip the
Third of Spain to Colonize that part lest it should be
taken possession of by the English. All the known
Memorials of Quiros have been recently published
(Madrid, 1877-82) together with narratives of his
voyages in 1595 and 1606, and the preceding voyage
of Menclana to the Solomon Islands in 1567.+ One of
Quiros’ Memorials falling into the hands of Gresley,
Secretary to the English Embassy at the Spanish
Court, it was by him forwarded to his government
(1610). J
Raleigh’s First Colony in North America (1587)
had not succeeded ; but other Settlements in Virginia
and New England despite Spanish protests were now
being planted with some measure of success. Sir
James Lancaster, who had made voyages to the
t The Bibliography of Mendana’s and Quiros’, and of
other proposals to Colonize the Southern parts of the world on
behalf of Spain, will be found in the Section “ Voyages” and
the works of Bishop Hall, Jacques Sadeur [Gabriel Foigny]
&c., among “Imaginary Voyages.” In the English
translation of Sadeur (1693) the names “Australia” for the
country and “ Australians ” for its inhabitants are used through-
out the work.
I An English translation was printed in London, 1617 ; re-
printed [1723?]. To his discovery Quiros had given the name
Australia del Espiritu Santo , in honour of Philip the Third,
as head of the Rouse of Austria, and because formal possession
of it had been taken upon his Majesty’s birthday, the Festival of
the Holy Spirit. In printing a corrected English translation,
Purchas in His Pilgrimes (IV. p. 1423), called it “Australia
Incognita,” using that name probably for the first time (1625).


While the chronological plan is adopted for the arrangement of the titles—all
of which will be numbered —the ordinary method of cataloguing under Authors will
not be ignored. An Alphabetical List of Authors with their separate works, articles,
and papers, will be added to the Catalogue proper, as well as a copious and
exhaustive Index of Subjects. The following tentative “ Table of Contents ” will
indicate more clearly the complete and comprehensive character of the work.
Table of Contents.
PREFATORY MATTER.
INDEX OF SUBJECTS.
CATALOGUE.
I. CYCLOPAEDIAS AND COLLECTIONS.
11. HISTORY AND CARTOGRAPHY OF MARITIME DISCOVERY
IN SOUTHERN SEAS.
111. VOYAGES TO AUSTRALASIA AND THE PACIFIC, INCLUDING
CIRCUMNAVIGATIONS, i6th to iqth CENTURY.
IV. GEOGRAPHY AND EXPLORATION OF AUSTRALIA.
V. NATURAL SCIENCES, INCLUDING PAPERS IN TRANSACTIONS
OF SOCIETIES.
1. General.
2. Botany.
3. Zoology.
4. Entomology.
5. Astronomy.
6. Meteorology and Climate.
7. Medical Sciences.
VI. THE ABORIGINES AND NATIVE RACES; ANTHROPOLOGY
AND HISTORY, INCLUDING CHRISTIAN MISSIONS.
x. The Australian Aborigines.
2. The Tasmanian Aborigines.
3. Papuans : Dutch, English, German New
Guinea.
4. Melanesians : British Western Pacific
Protectorate: Solomon Islands,
Santa Cruz, &c.
5. The Fiji Islands.
6. The Maories of New Zealand ; Auckland,
Campbell, Bounty, and Antipodes
Islands.
7. Polynesians, British Protectorates :
Samoa, Tonga, Rarotonga, Tucopia,
Rotuma, Suwarrow, Penrhyn, Manaiki,
Easter, Pitcairn, Norfolk and Lord
Howe Islands, &c.
8. Polynesians ; French Protectorates :
Marquesan, Gambier, Austral,
Tuamota, Tahiti, New Caledonia,
Loyalty and New, Hebrides Groups.
9. Micronesians : New Britain, New Ireland,
Admiralty Islands, Marshall, Gil-
bert, Caroline, and North Pacific
Groups.
VII. THE ABORIGINES; PHILOLOGY AND BOOKS IN NATIVE
DIALECTS (CLASSIFIED).
[Continued page 3 of Wrapper.




East Indies, frequently proposed to have a ship sent
through the Strait of Magellan to the Solomon
Islands ; but without result. The policy of James the
First, too deferential towards that of Spain, did not
favour colonization.
In the last year of his reign, however, an eminent
London merchant —probably the most enterprising
English merchant of his time —Sir William Courteen,
desiring to extend his trade to the Terra Australis,
petitioned the King for the privilege of erecting
Colonies therein. Sir William, who was joint-owner
of more than twenty ships of burden, employing four
or five thousand seamen, already carried on an exten-
sive trade on his own account to Portugal, Spain,
Guinea, and the West Indies. The following is a
copy of his petition, not printed before :
To the Kings most Excellent Ma lie
The humble peticon of S r William Conrten Kn t
Most humbly sheweth vnto your Ma tie
That all the lands in y e South parts of y e world called Terra Australis incognita
extending Eastwards 6° Westwards from ye Straights of Le Maire together with all ye adjacente
Islands. &=c. y are yet undiscovered or being, discovered are not yet traded unto by any of your
Ma ties subjects And your petitioner being very willing att his, owne charges which
wilb ver\ greate, to indeavour y* discovery thereof 6° settle Collonies and a plantation there
u hich he hopeth will tend to ye glory of God , ye reducing of Infidells to Christianity, ye honour
of your Ma tie ye inlargend of your Mat s Territories and Dominions , ye increase of your Ma ties
Customes 6° revenue 6° ye Navigation and imployment of your Ma Hes subjects.
Your pet r therefore humbly desireth y r Ma tie to bee pleased to grante to him his
0
heires 6° assignes all ye said lands islands 6° Territories with power to discover ye same
to erecte Colonies 6° a plantation there &= Courts of Justice officers arid Ministers
for ye setting and governinge of ye said Colonies and plantations those which are
or shall Inhabit or be there 6° power to administer Justice and to execute Marshall
law by land and sea and for your pet r and those whome hee shall imploy to
defend themselves and offend such others as shall oppugne or hinder the said
discovery or plantation of your pet rs shippes in going or returning. And with
such other grantes and landes and privileges as in Cases of discozrery or setlinge
of Colonies or plantations is usuall or shall be fitt. And to directe your Ma ties
Attorney generall to prepare a grante accordingly fitt for your Ma ties Royal
Signature. And your pet r (as in duty bound) shall ever pray for your
Ma ties long and happie raigne.
Having lent large sums of money to the King, Sir
William Courteen had some claim upon His Majesty’s
consideration. But it does not appear that “ All ye
said islands and territories ” were granted to him.
He appears to have been satisfied with a bad title to
the island of Barbados, where he sent (1626) fifty
settlers, who built a fort (1627) and remained there
till it was taken from them (1628). He then sent
eighty men to the island and re-took it in the name of
the Earl of Pembroke. Sir William died in 1636.
His son’s claim to the title was not deemed a good
one, and was disallowed in 1660.
EIGHTEENTH CENTURY,
The geographers of the early part of the eighteenth
century continued to describe the Terra Australis
after the manner of their predecessors, adding from
time to time the names given to new discoveries,
chiefly those of the Dutch. Occasionally the philoso-
phers discussed the subject.
Dissertatio Physica de TERRA AUSTRALI,
qaam inclvtse Facvltatis Philosophies; consensv ervdi-
torvm disqvisitioni svbiicit d. iv. Aprilis mdccxvi.
M. Johannes avgvstvs rivinvs, lips. Respon-
dente friderico wilelmo prevsero, Nebra Thuring.
s. s. Theol. Stvd. Lipsiae. pp. 24.


The next item has relation to one of the numerous
projects of the time of George the First. As I know
of one copy only of the original—in the Bibliotheque
Nationale, Paris —I give it in full in the original
spelling. In the light of present knowledge this
document is of great interest: both from the truth of
the promoter’s conjecture as to the Southern Country’s
richness in the precious metals and from his use of
the name “New Wales,” fifty years before Cook’s
discovery and naming of New South Wales.
Captain John IVelbe s
PROPOSALS
FOR
Establishing a Company by the name of the London
Adventurers for carrying on a Trade to (and settling
Colonies in) Terra Australis , and Working and Improving
the Gold and Silver Mines which there abound.
WHEREAS ’tis well known that there is no nation that do Trade from the South
Seas to the East Indies but the Spaniards, whose India trade is from Aca-pulco
(on the Coast of Mexico,. in the South Seas) to the Philippine Islands in the
East Indies, which ships, in going, keep always in the North East Trade Wind ;
and in coming back they run to 40 or 45 Degrees North, to meet with a Westerly Wind, to
run them to the Eastward, for which Reason those Southern parts are not yet fully discover’d,
nor any part of them settled by any European whatsoever, they lying out of the way of all
Trading Ships.
If we look back and trace the Course of those European Ships Voyages that have
sailed round the Globe, it may be easily seen how far they were from making any Discoveries
in those Southern Parts, the Course of their Voyages not giving them any Opportunity for
so doing.
Magellanus, the Discoverer of the Sereights, called after his Name, the first that sail’d
West from the South Seas to the East Indies, sailed along the Coasts of Peru and Mexico,
till he came to California , and thence took his Departure for I?idia , keeping in the North
East Trade Wind.
Sir Francis Drake said to be the first Commander that sail’d round the Globe ( Magellanus
being kill’d by the Indians at Mindano Island) kept the Coast of Peru and Mexico on board,
and sail’d West for India , in the North East Trade Wind.
Sir Thomas Cavendish the same.
Captain Swann, one of the Buccaneers of America, with whom Captain Dampier sail’d
the first time round the Globe, kept in the North-East Trade Wind from California to India,
and was kill’d at Mindano , as Magellanus was.
Captain Rogers in the Duke and Dutchess, with the Acapulco Ship, kept likewise in the
North-East Trade Wind.
It is here to be observ’d that from the Coast of Peui West, to the East Indies, is upwards
of 2,500 Leagues, which to the Southward of the Line is undiscover’d to any European,
(Captain Welbe excepted) who, in the course of his Voyage round the World with Captain
Dampier, in the Year 1703, 1704, 1705, and 1706, having many extraordinary Opportunities
of satisfying and informing himself what Discoveries had been made, by Order of the
Viceroys of Peru, for 150 Years past: Was thereby well assured, that the islands, named (by
the said Captain Welbe) St. George's Islands and New Wales, and some other Islands there-
abouts, which abound with Mines of Gold and Silver, belong to no European Prince or State,
and are therefore free for the first Discoverer to take Possession of, which Mines the Under-
taker doubts not to prove, will enrich the British Nation upwards of 50,000,000 Sterling, if
taken Possession of, and Colonies settled, which is not half what the Kingdom of Peru has
produc’d to the Spaniards since their first Settlement there, under Francisco Pizaro, the
first Viceroy.


It is therefore propos’d that a Joint Stock, not exceeding 2,500,000 be raised to fit out
Ships, and settle Colonies forthwith, that the Improvement and Advantages of such Valuable
Discoveries may not be lost. And in order thereto, the said Captain Welbe is now ready to
grant Permits to such Persons who are willing to be Proprietors and Adventurers in this said
Undertaking. On Grant of which Permits, the Proprietors are to pay in is. on every Share,
viz., iot. for 1,000/. to enable the Undertaker to apply for, and obtain a Patent, and defray
other charges; and no more is to be paid in until at a General Meeting of, and by the
Proprietors, Directors, and Treasurers be chosen; and then no more on each Share than
what the Directors, at such Meeting, shall agree on, and find necessary for carrying on
effectually so valuable and advantagious a Trade.
N. B.— The proposer has no sinister Ends, nor Self-Interest, In View, and expects no Pay,
nor any Reward, but such Part of the neat Produce of Profits, as the Directors
themselves shall think fit, and agree, to allow him.
Among the Sloan MSS. (British Museum) is an
earlier proposal by Capt. Welbe to the British Govern-
ment for a full discovery of the Terra Australis. But
none of his proposals or his petitions appear to have had
any result. His long-waiting, however, brought him
to distress and a debtors’ prison. Two years later
the following memorials—advising the settlement of
colonies in South Africa and South Australia —were
published in Amsterdam :
AANMERKINGEN ; Betreffende de Kust der
KAFFERS, En het Landt van PIETER NUYTS :
Ten opzigte van de nuttigheit, die de Oostin-
dische Compagnie, van dezelve voor haaren-
Koophandel zoude konnen trekken [emblem, with
motto, “ Terae dum Prosim ”] iBmo, pp. 114.
t’ Amsterdam, By R. en G. Wetstein, 1718.
Tweede AANMERKINGEN; Betreffende de
Kust der KAFFERS, en het Landt van PIETER
NUYTS : Dienende tot opheldering der Voorstel-
lingen in de eerste gedaan, ten nutte van de Oostin-
dische Compagnie [emblem] iBmo, pp. 116.
t’Amsterdam, By R. en G. Wetstein, 1718.
Coincidently the work was issued in French :
MEMOIRE sur le Pais des Cafres, et la Terre de
Nuyts. Par raport a utilite que la Compagnie des
Indes Orientales en pourroit retirer pour son Com-
merce. iBmo, pp. 83. Amsterdam. 1718.
Second MEMOIRE sur le Pais des Cafres, et
La Terre de Nuyts, Servant d’eclaircissement aux
propositions faites dans le premier, pour l’utilite de la
Compagnie des Indes Orientales, iBmo. pp. 77.
Amsterdam. 1718.
The first Memoire was originally addressed by “ Jean Pierre
Purry” “A Batavia, le 20, de Mai, 1717,” to “S. E. Mons
Christophel van Swol, Gouverneur Generale des Indes Orientales
des Pais Bas.” It is here printed in the author’s mother tongue,
and addressed “A Amsterdam ce 23 Juillet 1718,” to Messeig-
neurs les Deputez a l’Assemblee des Dix-Sept., Representant
la Compagnie Generale des Indes Orientales, des Pais Bas.
The Second Memoire is dated 1 September, 1718, and also
addressed to the Company.
In the British Museum there are two other tracts
by the same Author :
(1) MEMORIAL OF JEAN PIERRE PURRY
of Neuchatel in Behalf of the Colonization of South
Carolina. 4to. pp. 12. London. 18th July, 1724.
[Reprinted in Carroll’s Historical Collections,
Vol. 11., 1836; in Force’s Tracts, Vol. 11., 1836;
and separately in 4to, Augusta, Georgia. 1880.]
(2) A METHOD FOR DETERMINING THE
BEST CLIMATE OF THE EARTH, on a Prin-
ciple to which all Geographers and Historians have
been hitherto Strangers. In a Memorial presented to
the Governors of the East India Company in Holland,
for which the Author was obliged to leave that
Country. By John Peter Purry. Translated from
the French. i2mo. pp. 4, 60. London. 1744.
Collation: Title, Advertisement [Sketch of Authors’
Life], Address to my Lords the Deputies to the
Assembly of Seventeen Representatives of the General
Company of the East Indies of the Low Countries,
Method, &c.
The ‘‘ Advertisement ” is as follows :
John Peter Purry, the Author of the following Memorial,
was born at Neufchatel in Switzerland, about the year lxx of
the last century, who, having engaged for some time in the wine
trade, and meeting with misfortunes in it, contracted himself
to the Chamber of A msterdam for the East Indies in Batavia
about the beginning of 1713; where by his Plantations and by
being Reader to the Reform’d Church in that City, having pretty
well repair’d his Fortune, in the Year 1717, he presented to the
Governor-:General of the East India Company, a proposal for
settling a Colony in the Land of Nights, not far from the Isle
of Java, which not having the good Fortune to be Approv’d of,
he obtained leave to return to Europe.
In doubling the Cape of Good Hope, he was so taken with
the admirable Colonies he found there, that he was more and
more confirm’d in the Thought of immortalizing his Name with
some settlement in the 33rd Degree, either of Northern or
Southern Latitude. Arriving at Amsterdam in 17x8, he pre-
sented there in French the Memorial we now give thr Reader
in English, to the Lords the Directors of the Dtitch East India
Company, who determine all matters relating to it. Neither
this Memorial, nor another which accompanied it, were well
receiv’d, insomuch that a Friend of his told him privately he
had best get out of the Way, for that some Things had been
observed in both Papers which ought not to be made public. He
took the advice, and went into France ; from whence he made a
Tour into his own Country. But returning to Paris in that fatal
year 1720, he lost in the Mississippi Company, what he had
got in the East Indies. Here his former scheme reviv’d and
having modell’d it to the French settlements, he presented it
to some of the Prime Ministers, who referr’d it to the Royal
Academy of Sciences. Mons. Fontenelle return’d this cautious
Answer, that they could not pass a Judgment on a Country
which they had never seen, and that therefore it would not
be advisable to make expensive settlements in Places they were
unacqtiainted with. This was all the Determination that could
be got frcm him. The Journal des Scavans, however, took
notice of he Proposal, and gave a fair Representation of it.
Rejected a Se :ond Time, Mr. Furry came into England, and
printed his Proposal here for establishing a Colony on the
English coast of A merica, Southward enough for his favourite
Degree. It was presented to the Duke of New Castle as he was
walking with the King at Kensington in 1721. But neither here
could his Scheme boast of the expected Approbation. I remember
however that Sir Isaac Newton, to whom I communicated it,
agreed in general to the principles of it, with a Proviso that the
Nature of each Country and Soil should be first examin’d before
settlements were attempted.
But about this time Georgia beginning to be talk’d of, Mr.
Purry at the request of some Merchants, who wanted to know
the condition of that Country, went thither. At his Arrival, he
first took a general Survey of it, then pass’d into Switzerland,
and brought from thence enough of his Countrymen to establish
a small Colony, at the extremity of Carolina, just upon the River
which divides it from Georgia, where he died about ten years
since, in an advanced age; having first built a Town as a
Monument to himself, which still bears the name of Purisburg.
Of this period is a tract in the British Museum : —•
TERRA AUSTRALIS INCOGNITA Pos-
ter ttati Relicta Vestigtis IX. Monstratis. Bpp.
■ folio. Hehnstadii. 1741.


At this time the learned and accomplished Monsieur
de Maupertuis having accepted an invitation from
Frederic the Great to settle in Berlin, he there ad-
dressed his Letter to the King of Prussia on the Progress
of the Sciences. Among the sciences whose improve-
ment stood in need of the support of a sovereign were
foreign discoveries, and first of all, that of the Terra
Australis.
In the Terra Australis , the eminent savant believed there
would be found species different from what are contained in any
other parts of the world, for they never could have gone out of
their own continent. Near the same were islands in which
“navigators assure us they have seen savages, men covered with
hair, having tails; a middle species, between a monkey and a
man. I would rather,” he writes, “ have an hour’s conversation
with one of these than with the greatest wit in Europe.” —See
English translation in Appendix to ’'The Schemer; or, Universal
Satirist, by that great philosopher Helter van Scelter,” London,
1763) PP- 2 49 et sel-
- De Brosses, President of the Parliament of
Dijon, also collected in two quarto volumes (Paris,
1756) the accounts of all the Voyages which had been
made to Terres Australes. De Brosses divided his
work into three sections, viz.: Austral-Asia, Poly-
nesia, and Magellanica.
The subject is also treated in Harris’s Voyages
(2 vols., folio, London, 1744-48), Vol. I. sect. 22,
by Dr. John Campbell (?) and again in
Terra Australis ; or, A History of the Southern
Continent. [Book XIV., Chap. XII., of Universal
History] being Vol. XI. of Modern History, pp.
2 73-553- London. 1759.
The writer (probably Harris’s editor) suggested that the
African Company should be invested with the exclusive right of
making discoveries and settlements in the Southern Continent.
If neither the African nor the East India Companies should think
it expedient or consistent with their interests to establish such
settlements/he thought the duty should then devolve upon the
South Sea Company, who by their charter had the power to
do so.
An English translation of De Brosses, with addi-
tions, was printed in three volumes, Bvo. (Edinburgh,
1766-68). At the end of the third volume (pp. 715-745)
the editor, John Callander, added a chapter:—
“ Of the Method of Forming Colonies in the Terra
Australis, and the Advantages that may be expected
to result to Great Britain from Such Establishments
in that Hemisphere.”
The writer, following De Brosses, advises the Settlement of
New Britain, in Australasia, as being in the most advantageous
situation with respect to the Countries where commerce was
already established. “Another advantage,” he adds, “that
distinguishes it, is the climate, as lying not far from the Equator,
where (according to Dampier) we may always expect to find
more materials for commerce, than in higher latitudes; Van
Diemen's Land and New Zealand lie far to the South and are
little known. The coasts of New Holland are of very difficult
access, and the parts that lie next the South Sea, absolutely
naked and barren. Carpentaria labours under the same dis-
advantage. None of these places ever appear fit for the first
attempts, though they may be settled afterwards, and perhaps to
advantage. . . . Both Roggewein and Dampier agree in giving
preference to New. Britain. _ De Brosses ( Terres Australes,
tome 11., p. 385) thinks there is no place so proper as this to fix
on. He proposes to settle it by sending three ships from
Pondicherry ” (pp. 742-43).
From this time forward voyages were made for the
sake of science rather than plunder. In 1764-68 three
expeditions—including vessels under the command of
Byron, Wallis, Carteret, and Cook —were sent to the
South Seas under the patronage of King George the
Third. Alexander Dalrymple, who had been in the
East India Company’s Service, and had returned
home to advocate Southern Discoveries, hoped to have
received the command of the Expedition sent out
under Cook the object of which was primarily to
observe the transit of Venus in the Island of Tahiti.
He published
An Account of the Discoveries made in the
South Pacifick Ocean previous to 1764. Part I.
Bvo. pp. xxxi. 103 with charts. London. 1767.
Not being chosen —a Naval Officer being indispensable
Dalrymple subsequently continued his researches
and produced:—
Historical Collection of the Several Voyages
and Discoveries in the South Pacific Ocean.
With maps. 2 vols. 4to. London. 1770-71.
To the three Divisions of De Brasses, Dalrymple pro-
posed to add a fourth — Australia, thus reviving a
name used before, but which had lapsed for nearly a
century. *
The advantages to that Power which should secure
a footing in the Southern part of the world foretold
by Quiros —long since forgotten, but more recently re-
vived by De Brosses and Dalrymple —were made
manifest upon Cook’s return. He had discovered the
insularity of New Zealand and sailed all along the
East Coast of New Holland, which he named New
South Wales. + These advantages which had now
been secured for Great Britain were emphasized in :
Political Essays concerning the Present State of
the British Empire. 4to. London, 1 77 2 - PP- 3>
463, 464.
This may be considered the last word of the pre-
colonial advocates of Australian Colonization, for in
1776 the Declaration of Independence by the Thirteen
Colonies of North America stopped the transportation
of English Criminals there. And “loyal” Colonists
were seeking new settlements : some removed to
Canada and Nova Scotia : others thought of emigra-
ting to the Southern Continent. James Maria Matra,
dating from Frame, Somersetshire, August 1783,
proposed to the Home Government that New South
Wales should be set apart for their reception, where
they might repair their broken fortunes.
Capt. Sir George Yonge, R.N., submitted another
plan (Jan. 1785) which was printed J :
The Following is a Rough Outline of the Many
Advantages that may result to this Nation, from a
Settlement made on the Coast of New South
Wales, folio, pp. 4. [London. 1785.]
These schemes § were duly considered, and resulted
in the determination on the part of the Govern-
ment to utilize New South Wales as a Penal Settlement,
a decision arrived at during 1786. The subject was
debated in and out of Parliament. John Howard
considered the “Botany Bay Scheme” as “expen-
sive, dangerous, and destructive.” Others advised the
establishment of Penal Colonies nearer home or in
smaller islands in mid-ocean, such as that of Tristan
d’Acunha. With these writers, the Bibliography of
New South Wales and Australian Colonization
properly begins.
DALRYMPLE. A Serious Admonition to the
Publick on the Intended Thief-Colony at Botany Bay.
[By Alex. Dalrymple, Hydrographer to the Admiralty.]
Bvo. pp. 52. London. 1786.
Dalrymple recommended the Island of Tristan d’Acunha as
more suitable for a Penal Colony than Botany Bay. The pam-
phlet (written in September and October. 1786) includes a letter
(dated July, 1785) addressed by the Author to the Directors of
East India Company, advising them against a project for settling
Norfolk Island, which was then within the limits of the Com-
pany’s Charter.
* See footnote to p. i.
t The bibliography relating to these discoveries will be found
in the section “Voyages.”
I A reprint has been published in Sydney since this matter
was in type.
§ Mr. Bonwick has given extracts from all these proposals
in his Hundred Years’ History of N. S. Wales in Gordon &
Gotch’s Handbook for 1888, p. 135.


An Historical Narrative of the Discovery of
New Holland and New South Wales, containing an
Account of the Inhabitants, Soil, Animals, and other
Productions of those Countries ; and including a Par-
ticular Description of Botany Bay. With chart.
Bvo. pp. 54. London. [Nov., 1786]
Another edition. 4to. pp. 36.
Proposals for Employing Convicts within this
Kingdom, instead of sending them to Botany Bay, &c.
By G R . Bvo. pp. iii. Jo. London. 1787.
Copious Remarks on the Discovery of New
South Wales ; with a Circumstantial Description of
Botany Bay, and the Islands, Bays, Harbours, &c.,
lying near it : with Enlarged Observations on the
Natural Productions, and Face of the Country. To
which are added, Prefatory Observations [By the Right
Hon. Wm. Eden.] on Transportation, &c. Bvo.
pp. iv. 52. London. 1787.
The History of New Holland, from its Dis-
covery in 1616, to the Present Time, with a particular
Account of its Produce and its Inhabitants, with a
Vocabulary and a Description of Botany Bay ; also a
List of the Naval, Marine, Military, and Civil Estab-
lishment. To which is prefixed an Introductory Dis-
course on Banishment. By the Right Hon. William
Eden [First Baron Auckland.] With two Charts.
Bvo. pp. xxiv., 254. London. 1787.
Second Edition (re-written and enlarged). Bvo.
pp. xxxv., 254. London. 1787.
An Abridged Edition is added to the Second
and Third Editions of Phillip’s Voyage.
Twenty years afterwards this work was issued with a new
title-page :
The History of New Plolland, &c With
a Discourse on Banishment. By the Right Hon.
William Eden.
By GEO. BARRINGTON.
The second edition. Illustrated with MAPS.
London: Printed for John Stockdale, Piccadilly. Price 6/-. 1808.
Entered at Stationers' Hall.
Barrington had no more to do with this than with other works
bearing h.s name, see p. 9.
The History of Botany Bay in New Holland.
Containing a Full Account of the Inhabitants, De-
scription of the Soil, and Produce of the Bay—Of the
Animals, Fish and Fowl—To which is added the
Number and Equipment of the Fleet sailed There,
and the Nature of the Establishment, with which it is
to Commence, and the Regular Government of the
Colony. Likewise the names of the respective
Governors, &c. Names of the Ships, and Number of
Convicts embark’d on board each Ship. i2mo. pp. 24.
Printed....by L. Naylor Bristol [1787].
Geschichte oder Beschreibung cler Botany Bay,
und der Einwohner von Sudwallis. With seven
coloured, and one large, engraving.
Der I-lincken de Bott. 4to. [1788.]
An Authentic Journal of the Expedition under
Commodore Phillips to Botany Bay, with an Account
of the Settlement made at Port Jackson ; and a De-
scription of the Inhabitants, &c. With copies of
Letters from Capt. Tench and others, and a List of
the Civil and Military Establishment. To which is
added an Historical Narrative of the Discovery of
New Plolland, or New South Wales. By an Officer. |
With Chart. Bvo. pp. 40 and [An Historical Narra- j
tive, &c. See above] pp. 54. London. 1789. j
-TENCH. A Narrative of the Expedition to
Botany Bay ; with an Account of New South Wales,
its Productions, Inhabitants, &c. To which is sub-
joined a List of the Civil and Military Establishments
at Port Jackson. By Capt. Watkin Tench, of the
Marines. Bvo. pp. xii. 146. London. 1789.
Second Edit. Bvo. pp. xii. 146. London. 1789.
Another Edit. Bvo. pp. xii. 146. Dublin. 1789.
Third Edition. With Postscript (dated Sydney
Cove, Ist Oct., 1788). pp. xii. 148. London. 1789.
Dutch Translation. Beschrijving van den
Togt naar Botany-Baaij; van de oprechting der
Engelsche Volkplanting aan Port-Jackson
Bvo. pp. x. 212. Amsterdam. 1789.
French Translation. Voyage ala Baie
Botanique Par le Capitaine Watkin Tench
a laquelle on a ajoute le recit historique de la
Decouverte de la Nouvelle Hollande &des differens
Voyages qui y ont ete faits par les Europeens.
i2mo. pp. viii. 266. Paris. 1789.
Another French Edition Voyages ala Baie
Botanique, a la Nouvelle-Hollande, et au nouveau
pays de Galles Meridional, traduit de I’ Anglais.
i2mo. pp. ix. 154. Maestricht. 1791.
Another French Edit. i2mo. pp. x. 155.
Leyden. 1791.
Swedish Translation. See Hunter, p. 7.
An Authentic and Interesting Narrative of the
late Expedition to Botany Bay, as performed by Com-
modore Phillips, and the Fleet of the Seven Trans-
port Ships under his Command : Containing a
Circumstantial Account of their Perillous Voyage,
Dissentions on Board, and Safe Arrival on the Goast
of New Holland: with Particular Descriptions of
Jackson’s Bay and Lord Howe’s Island, the Recep-
tion they met with from the Natives, their .Customs
and Manners ; Progress of the Settlement, and Laws
and Government established for their Further Improve-
ment. Written by an Officer just returned in the
Prince of Wales Transport, who visited that Spot
with Capt. Cook and Dr. Solander, in their Cele-
brated Voyages Round the World. Bvo. pp. 43 and
plate —“ The ‘ Sirius’ and ‘ Supply’ in Jackson’s Bay.”
Price Sixpence. London. 1789.
Another Edition. i2mo. pp. vi. 32.
London. 1789.
CALLAM. A Letter from Mr. James Callam,
surgeon of his Majesty’s ship “Supply,” to his
Brother, Mr. Alexander Callam, of East Smithfield,
London ; containing an Account of a Voyage from
the Cape of Good Hope to Botany Bay, &c. With
a short Description of the Inhabitants, and Settlement
of the Colony. Bvo. pp. 21. London. 1789.
PHILLIP. The Voyage of Governor Phillip to
Botany Bay, with an Account of the Establishment
of the Colonies of Port Jackson and Norfolk Island,
compiled from Authentic Papers, which have been
obtained from the several Departments. To which
are added the Journals of Lieutenants Shortland,
Watts, Ball, and Captain Marshall, with an Account
of their New Discoveries. With 55 plates. 4to.
pp. xl. 298, lxxiv. London. 1789.
The work contains 20 plates of birds, 10 of animals, 4 of
fishes, 2 of natives, 1 of plants, 1 of weapons; also 8 maps
and charts, 1 vignette, 5 views, and 3 portraits. Some copies
have the plates of Natural History colovired.
Second Edition, corrected and re-arranged.
With an Abridgment of “The History of New
Holland” and Lord Auckland’s “Discourse on
Banishment ” (see above). 4to. pp. xxiv. 258, clxxv.
and plates. London. 1790.
Third Edition, with 20 plates, royal Bvo.
pp. xxiv. 520. London. 1790.
Another Edition. Bvo. pp. xiv. viii. 3152, lxxiv;
Dublin. 1790.


Phillip’s Voyage [continued)-. —
Another Edition. The Voyage of Governor
Phillip to Botany Bay, with an Account of the
Establishment of the Colonies of Port Jackson and
Norfolk Island.—-Appendix to Cook’s Voyages,
Newcastle edit. (2 vols. 1790), pp. 871-976.
Another Edition. Pelham’s Voyages.—See
Collections.
Another Edition [abridged]: “The Pocket
Navigator” Series. ißmo. pp. 58 and plate.
London. [1807.]
French Translation. Voyage du Gouver-
neur Phillip a Botany Bay, avec une Description
de l’Etablissement des Colonies du Port Jackson et
de l’ile Norfolk, &c. Bvo. pp. 443. Paris. 1791.
German Translation (abridged). Kommodore
Phillip’s Reise nach der Botany-Bai auf Neu-hol-
land. i2mo. pp. 86. Stuttgart. 1789.
German Translation. Arthur Phillip’s Reise
nach der Botany-Bay ausdem Englischen
von M. E. Sprengel. Bvo.
pp. xiv. 264, map and illus. Hamburg. 1791.
Another German Translation. Phillip’s
Reise nach Neu-Sud-Wales Shortland, Watts,
Marshall, Gilbert 2 vols. i2mo.
pp. xvi. 224; vi. 194. Nurnberg. 1791.
Abbildung einiger Landschaften von Neu-Siid-
Wales nebst verschiedenen seiner Landesbewohner-
und ihrem jezigen Beherrscher [Eight plates,
from Phillip’s Voyage with descriptions.]
oblong. 4to. Nurnberg. 1791.
Another German Edition. —See Hunter’s
“Journal.” Berlin. 1794.
WHITE. Journal of a Voyage to New South
Wales. By John White, M.D. Surgeon-General to
the Settlement. With 65 plates. 4to. Title, pp. xvi.
[Subscribers, dedication, &c.] pp. 299; Diary of the
Voyage. pp. 36. London. 1790.
Some copies have the plates of Natural History colotired.
French Translation. Voyage ala Nouvelle-
Galles du Sud, a Botany-Bay, au Port Jackson, en
1 787-89, par John White traduit avec des
notes, critique et philosophiques, sur l’histoire
naturelle et les moeurs par Charles Pougens.
Bvo. pp. xii. 208 ; (Notes) 260. Paris. 1795.
RIOU. Journal of the Proceedings on Board
H.M.S. “Guardian,” Commanded by Lieut. Riou,
Bound to Botany Bay, from Dec. 22, 1789, to 15th
Jan. 179°. With copies of Lieut. Riou’s Letters,
Bvo. pp. 45. London. 1790.
PHILLIP. Extracts of Letters from Arthur
Phillip, Esq., Governor of N. S. W. to Lord Sydney ;
to which is annexed, a Description of Norfolk Island,
by Philip Gidley King, Esq. An Account of Ex-
penses incurred in transporting Convicts to N. S. W.
4 to - PP- 26. London. 1790.
PHILLIP. Copies and Extracts from Letters from
Governor Phillip, giving an Account of the Nature
and Fertility of the Land in and adjoining to any
Settlement in N. S. W. ; and of the Probability of
raising any, and what Provision thereon ; and of the
Behaviour and Employment of the Convicts sent
there ; and which have been received since the last
account was laid before the House of Commons : to
which are Prefixed Copies and Extracts of Letters
from the office of Secretary of State for the Home
Department bearing date since the last accounts
relative to the Transportation of Convicts to N S W
and providing for the same.
4to. pp. iv. 127. London. [1792.]
Trials of Muir, Palmer, Skirving, and Gerrald, the
Scotch Radicals. —See “ Legal Section.”
Johnson (Rev. Richard) Address to the Inhabi-
tants of New South Wales and Norfolk Island, 1792.
—See Religious History.
Smith (Sir J. E.) Botany of New Holland, 1793.
—See Natural History.
HUNTER. An Historical Journal of the Trans-
actions at Port Jackson and Norfolk Island, with the
Discoveries made in N. S. W., and the Southern
Ocean since the Publication of Phillip’s Voyage;
including the Journals of Governors Phillip and King,
and of Lieut. Ball ; and the Voyages from the First
Sailing of the “Sirius,” in 1787, to the Return of
that Ship’s Company to England, in 1792. By John
Hunter, Esq., Post Captain, R.N. 4to. pp. xvi.
583, and 17 maps, views, &c. London. Jan. 1. 1793.
Another Edition. Abridged. Bvo.
pp. xxiv. 17-525. London. 1793.
German Translation. John Hunter’s Reise
nach Neu-Siidwallis ; Arthur Phillip’s Tagebuch
wahrend eines Ausenthaltes eben daselbst ; und
Lieutenant King’s Nachrichten von der Norfolk-
Insel. Mit Anmerkungen von Prof. J. R. Forster.
Bvo. pp. 328, and maps. (Magazin von Reisebe-
schreibungen, Vol. XI.) Berlin. 1794.
Hunter’s Voyage occupies pp. 1-166.
Another German Translation. Hunter’s
Historische Nachrichten von den Merkwurdigsten
Ereigniszen auf Port-Jackson und der Norfolk’s
Insel .... Bvo. 2 vols. pp. xxiv. 480; xxiv. 576,
maps and plates. Nurnberg. 1794.
Abbildung einiger Landschaften von Neu-Sud-
Wales, nebst Verschiedenen seiner Bewohner ....
[nine plates, from Captain Hunter’s Journal, with
descriptions] obi. 4to. Nurnberg. 1794.
Swedish Translation. Johan Hunters
Resa til Nya Sodra Wallis, uren, 1787 . . . . af
Capit. Tench och King, samt Cap. Edvards
Resa, I79°> 1 79 L 1 79 2 - Sammandrag.
i2mo. pp. iv. 283. Stockholm. 1797.
TENCH. A Complete Account of the Settlement
at Port Jackson, in N. S. W. Including an Accurate
Description of the Situation of the Colony; of the
Natives ; and of its Natural Productions. Taken on
the spot by Captain Watkin Tench, of the Marines.
4to. pp. xvi. 212. London. 1793.
German Translation. Capitain Watkin Tench.
Geschichte von Port Jackson in New Holland, von
1788 bis 1792. Nebst einer Beschreibung der
Insel Norfolk mit ihrem Unbane in eben diesem
Zeitraume. Aus dem Englischen.
Bvo. pp. vi. 244. map. Hamburg. 1794.
Shaw (Dr. George) Zoology of New Holland,
1794. —See Natural History.
In this work the names “Australia” and “Australasia”
are used synonymously with New Holland.
WATLING. Letters from an Exile at Botany-
Bay to his Aunt in Dumfries ; giving a Particular
Account of the Settlement of New South Wales, with
the Manners and Customs of the Inhabitants. By
Thomas Watling. i2mo.
pp. iv. 128. Penrith, printed by Ann Bell. [1794.]
The writer who styles himself “Principal Limner in New
South Wales” was extremely anxious to deserve better of his
country, and proposed with due deference under the patronage
of an Impartial Public, the execution ofa Picturesque Description
of that Colony in a highly finished set of Drawings, done faith-
fully upon the spots in Mezzo, Aqua-tinta, or Water Colours.


THOMPSON. Slavery and Famine, Punishments
for Sedition ; or, An Account of the Miseries and
Starvation at Botany Bay from the Journal of George
Thompson, who sailed in the “ Royal Admiral,”
May, 1792. With some Preliminary Remarks by
George Dyer, B.A. Bvo. viii. 48 and 23. Lon. 1794.
Second Edition. Slavery and Famine, Punish-
ments for Sedition ; or, An Account of New South
Wales and of the Miserable State of the Convicts.
By George Thompson and a Sketch of the
Character of Thomas Fysche Palmer Bvo.
pp. viii. 48, 23. London. 1794.
PARKER. A Voyage [to Sydney and] Round
the World in the “Gorgon,” Captain John Parker,
performed and written by his Widow [Mary Ann
Parker], Bvo. pp. xxxii. 149. London. 1795-
The “Gorgon ” carried Gapt. Gidley King and family, Major
Grose, Mr. Grimes, and others to Port Jackson, in 1791.
BARRINGTON. A Voyage to New South
Wales; with a Description of the Country; the
Manners, Customs, Religion, &c., of the Natives in
the Vicinity of Botany Bay. By George Barrington,
now Superintendent of the Convicts at Paramatta. Bvo.
Title, dedication “ To Mr.* * * *,” dated “ Paramatta,
1793.” Contents 4pp., and pp. 13-140. London. 1795-
Second and Third Editions. London. 1796.
Another Edition, roy. Bvo.
pp. 32. London. [Preston.] 1795-
Another Edition (a few paragraphs omitted at
the end), cr. Bvo. pp. 48. Manchester. [1795.]
Another Edition. With Barrington’s Life and
Trial. i2mo. pp. 120. London [1795-J
French Translation. Voyage a Botany-Bay,
avec une Description du Pays, des Moeurs, des
Coutumes et de la Religion des Natifs. Par le
celebre George Barrington. Traduit de I’Anglais,
sur la troisieme edition. Bvo.
pp. xvi. 192. Paris, An VI. [1798.]
A compilation from Phillip and Tench. For later editions,
with Life of Barrington, see 1802.
A New and Correct History of New Holland ;
with a Description of that Part of It called Botany
Bay, and Particularly Port Jackson, where the Con-
victs from this Country are Sent, and the British
Settlement formed. Together with An Account of
the Manners and Customs of the Inhabitants, and also
of the Climate and Soil of that Country. Collected
from Authentic Authors and Original Papers. By a
Society of Gentlemen. iBmo.
pp. 72 and frontispiece. Glasgow. 1796.
New Holland— ENCY. BRIT., 3rd edit.
VIII. pp. 612-623. Edinburgh. 1797.
PALMER. A Narrative of the Sufferings of T. F.
Palmer and W. Skirving during a Voyage to New
South Wales, 1794, on board the “ Surprise” Trans-
port. By the Rev. Thomas Fyshe Palmer, late of
Queen’s College, Cambridge. Bvo.
pp. 74. Cambridge. 1797.
Second Edition. [With Copy of Letters to
Gov. Hunter, dated Oct. 14, 1795.] Bvo.
pp. 79. Cambridge. 1797.
Messrs. Palmer and Skirving, with Thomas Muir, were trans-
ported for sedition. A conspiracy to seize the ship was said to
have been discovered on the voyage, and they were charged
unjustly with having been the chief instigators in the plot.
Disappointed in their appeal for an investigation into all the cir-
cumstances, their statements were published in this Pamphlet.
Muir afterwards escaped from Sydney to America. See 1798.
PALMER. [Letter from Thomas Fyshe Palmer].
Sydney, New South Wales. June 13, 1795* Folio
one page. [No place or date.]
KING. MS. \ Journal of Commander Philip Gidley
King, R.N., Lieut.-Governor of Norfolk Island] from
1791-96. Neatly Copied, with Marginal Notes and
Additions by the Governor’s Own Hand. 4to. pp. 311
The Journals of the First Period of [Lieut.] King’s Govern-
ment during 1788-90, and of his Voyage to England are printed
as Supplements to Hunter’s “Journal.” (See above) Chaps.
X.-XV., pp. 287-448. 4to. London. 1793.
PALMER. [Letter from Thomas Fyshe Palmer],
Sydney, August 14, 1797- Folio.
pp. 2. [No place or date.]
MUIR. Histoire de la Tyrannie du Gouvernement
Anglais exercee envers le celebre Thomas Muir, Ecos-
sais ; sa Deportation a Botany Bay, son Sejour dans
cette lie, son Evasion, son Sejour a Bordeaux, son
Arrivee a Paris ; avec une Description de Botany Bay,
des Renseignemens acquis par Thomas Muirsurla Fin
Tragique du Voyage de La Peyrouse, et une Notice
sur le Continent appele Pays de Galles Meridional.
iBmo. pp. 60. Paris. 1798.
The Life of Thomas Muir.... who was Tried for
Sedition.... and Sentenced to Transportation for
Fourteen Years; with a Full Report of his Trial.
By Peter Mackenzie.
Bvo. pp. xliv. 64, Glasgow, 1837.
Lists of Convicts and the Ships by which they
arrived were at one time in existence in the Colony.
It is doubtful if they are now extant. Phillip’s
“ Voyage” gives a long list of those who were sent
out in the “first fleet,” but as a large number died
before leaving England and during the voyage, it
cannot be called a list of “ Arrivals.”
COLLINS. An Account of the English Colony-
in New South Wales : With Remarks on the Dispo-
sitions, Customs, Manners, &c., of the Native In-
habitants, with some Particulars of New Zealand
from the MSS. of Lieut.-Gov. King. By David
Collins, Esq., late Judge Advocate and Secretary of
the Colony. Illust. by engravings. 4to. pp. xx.
xxxviii. 619, two charts, and 22 plates. Lond. 1798.
A few copies of this edition were printed on fine paper. —See
Vol. 11., 1802, p. 97. For abridged edition, see 1804.
Of the plates eleven are views of Sydney Cove, and other
Settlements at Parramatta, &c. These were engraved after
water-colour drawings made by Edward Dayes from a series of
rough sketches brought home from the Colony. Dayes’ draw-
ings are now in the possession of Mr. William Silver, York
Gate, Regent’s Park, London.
BARRINGTON. A Sequel to Barrington’s
Voyage to New South Wales, comprising an Interest-
ing Narrative of the Transactions and Behaviour of
the Convicts; the Progress of the Colony, an Official
Register of the Crimes, Trials, Sentences, and Execu-
tions that have Taken Place : Likewise Authentic
Anecdotes of the most Distinguished Characters
and Notorious Convicts. By the Celebrated George
Barrington, Principal Superintendent of the Convicts.
Bvo. pp. 116. London. 1800.
Another Edit. i2mo. pp. viii. 94. Lond. 1801.
Not written by Barrington, see p. 9.
Bass’s Discovery of the Strait, 1797. —See Col-
lins, 1802, and 1804.
Pennant (Thomas) Account of New Holland,
1800.—-See Collections.
Peron (M. Fr.) Voyage to the Terres Australes. —•
See Voyages.
Flinders’s Terra Australis.—See Voyages.


Holland, New.—Oxford Encyclo. Vol. 111.
pp. 907-910. Oxford. 1828.
Threlkeld (L. E.) Mission to the Aborigines (1828).
—See Christian Missions.
Lang (Rev. Dr.) Narrative of the Settlement of
the Scots Church, Sydney, 1828.—See Religion.
Rambles in New South Wales [to Newcastle,
the River Hunter, Bathurst, &c.] By X.Y.Z. [Re-
printed from The Australian , Sydney, 1827]. In
Eleven Letters.— Colburn’s New Monthly. Vols.
XXII. and XXIII. London. 1828.
MACQUARIE. New South Wales. Return to
An Address of the House of Commons, 1 May, 1828 ;
for:
No. 1. —Copy of a Report, by the late Major-
General Macquarie, on the Colony of New South
Wales, to Earl Bathurst, in July, 1822.
No. 2.—Extract of a Letter from Major-General
Macquarie to Earl Bathurst, in October, 1823 ; in
Answer to Certain Part of the Report of Mr. Com-
missioner Bigge, on the State of the said Colony
Ordered by the House of Commons to be Printed,
25 June, 1828. Folio, pp. 70.
MARTIN. A Sketch of the Topography of New
South Wales. A Paper read at a Meeting of the
Medical and Physical Society of Calcutta, held at
Chowringhee, 4th Oct., 1828, by Mr. Martin.—
Edinburgh New Philos. Jour. No. XIII.
Extract from, in The Polar Star. Vol. I.
pp. 48-49. London. 1829.
WILLIAMS. The Narrative of a Convict,
Thomas Williams, and his Fight with Cody the Bush-
ranger, whom he secured and thus regained his Free-
dom.—London Mag. 3rd Ser. Vol. 11. pp. 457-
459. Nov. 1828.
DANGAR. Index and Directory to Map of the
Country bordering upon the River Hunter.... New
South Wales.... Also Notes upon the Tenure and
Principle of Granting Lands in the Colony since
1810.... With a View of the State of Agriculture in
the Colony, Price of Land, Advice to Settlers, &c.
By H. Dangar. Bvo. pp. viii. 128, and View of
King’s Town [Newcastle], London. 1828.
The South Asian Register , 1828. —See “Maga-
zines.”
New Holland. The Aboriginal Inhabitants;
the White Population, &c. — The South Asian
Register, January, April, &c., 1828.
The Australian Quarterly Journal. Vol. I. 1828.
See “Magazines.”
1829. Settlement of Swan River.—See Wes-
tern Australia.
Adventures, Memoirs, Former Trial, Transporta-
tion, and Escapes of that Notorious Fence, and
Receiver of Stolen Goods, Isaac Solomons ; better
known to the Public by the Cognomen of “ Ikey
Solomons together with the Apprehension, Trial,
and Subsequent Transportation of Mrs. Solomons, and
an Account of Her Husband’s Ultimate Re-Appre-
hension in New South Wales. By a Former Police
Officer. Bvo. pp. 36 and portrait. London. 1829.
WAKEFIELD. A Letter from Sydney, the
Principal Town of Australasia. [By Edward Gibbon
Wakefield.] Edited by Robert Gouger. Together
with the Outline of a System of Colonization. i2mo,
pp. x. 222, xxiv. and map. London. 1829.
Wales, New South, [in Continuation of the
article New Holland, 1819]. Wilkes’s Encyclo.
Londoniensis. Vol. XXIV. pp. 541-545. 1829.
MUDIE. The Picture of Australia: exhibiting
New Holland, Van Diemen’s Land, and all the
Settlements, from the First at Sydney to the Last at
Swan River. [By Robert Mudie.] i2mo. pp. x. 370.
London. 1829.
The Picture of Australia. [Review of
Mudie’s Work].— Oriental Herald, XXIII.
pp. 77-86. London. Oct. 1829.
MURRAY. Narrative of the Settlement and
Present State of V. D. Land, New Holland, and the
Coasts and Islands of Australia. By Hugh Murray.
Announced to form 2 vols. in Constable’s Miscellany
(1829), but never published.
DUMONT D’URVILLE (J.). Histoire de la
Colonie de la Nouvelle Galles de Sud.— Voyage de
l’Astrolabe (5 Vols.), Tome 11. Chap. ix.
Paris. 1830-33.
Dawson (Robert). Statement of his Services as
Chief Agent of the Australian Agricultural Company,
1829. —See Legal.
BURFORD. Description of a View of the Town
of Sydney, New South Wales ; the Harbour of Port
Jackson, and Surrounding Country ; now Exhibiting
in the Panorama, Leicester Square. Painted by the
Proprietor, Robert Burford. Bvo. pp. 12, with key
plan, folded. London. 1829.
Another Issue. London. 1830.
Aboriginal Natives of Australia.—Article from
Westminster Rev. Jan. 1830. —See Aborigines.
DAWSON. The Present State of Australia; a
Description of the Country, its Advantages and Pros-
pects with Reference to Emigration ; and a Particular
Account of the Manners, Customs, and Condition of
its Aboriginal Inhabitants. By Robert Dawson.
Bvo. pp. xx. 468. London. 1830.
Second Edition. Bvo. pp. xx. 468.
London. 1831.
EARLE. Illustrations of New South Wales. By
Augustus Earle, lithographed by Hullmandel. Oblong
4to. London. 1830.
An imperfect (?) copy in the British Museum, contains views
of: —
North Head, Port Jackson.
View of Point Piper.
Coming to an anchor off Sydney Cove.
Natives of New South Wales.
Bungaree, Native Chief.
Government House and Part of Sydney.
A Government Jail Gang.
Mrs. Macquarie’s Seat, Government Domain.
Gardiner (Capt. Allen F.) The Friend of Australia,
1830. —See Explorations.
Broughton (Archd.) and others, Plan for a College,
Sydney, 1830.—See “Education.”
Lang (Dr. J. D.) Steps taken with a view to the
Establishment of an Academical Institution in New
South Wales, 1831. —See “Education.”
Leigh (Rev. Samuel) Missionary to Australia, &c.,
1815-31. —See Life of Leigh, 1853.


THOMPSON. Slavery and Famine, Punishments
for Sedition ; or, An Account of the Miseries and
Starvation at Botany Bay from the Journal of George
Thompson, who sailed in the “ Royal Admiral,”
May, 1792. With some Preliminary Remarks by
George Dyer, B.A. Bvo. viii. 48 and 23. Lon. 1794.
Second Edition. Slavery and Famine, Punish-
ments for Sedition ; or, An Account of New South
Wales and of the Miserable State of the Convicts.
By George Thompson and a Sketch of the
Character of Thomas Fysche Palmer Bvo.
pp. viii. 48, 23. London. 1794-
PARKER. A Voyage [to Sydney and] Round
the World in the “Gorgon,” Captain John Parker,
performed and written by his Widow [Mary Ann
Parker], Bvo. pp. xxxii. 149. London. 1795-
The “Gorgon ” carried Gapt. Gidley King and family, Major
Grose, Mr. Grimes, and others to Port Jackson, in 1791.
BARRINGTON. A Voyage to New South
Wales; with a Description of the Country; the
Manners, Customs, Religion, &c., of the Natives in
the Vicinity of Botany Bay. By George Barrington,
now Superintendent of the Convicts at Paramatta. Bvo.
Title, dedication “ To Mr.* * * *,” dated “ Paramatta,
1 793.” Contents 4pp., and pp. 13-140. London. 1795-
Second and Third Editions. London. 1796.
Another Edition, roy. Bvo.
pp. 32. London. [Preston.] 1795*
Another Edition (a few paragraphs omitted at
the end), cr. Bvo. pp. 48. Manchester. [1795-1
Another Edition. With Barrington’s Life and
Trial. i2mo. pp. 120. London [1795.]
French Translation. Voyage a Botany-Bay,
avec une Description du Pays, des Moeurs, des
Coutumes et de la Religion des Natifs. Par le
celebre George Barrington. Traduit de I’Anglais,
sur la troisieme edition. Bvo.
pp. xvi. 192. Paris, An VI. [1798.]
A compilation from Phillip and Tench. For later editions,
with Life of Barrington, see 1802.
A New and Correct History of New Holland;
with a Description of that Part of It called Botany
Bay, and Particularly Port Jackson, where the Con-
victs from this Country are Sent, and the British
Settlement formed. Together with An Account of
the Manners and Customs of the Inhabitants, and also
of the Climate and Soil of that Country. Collected
from Authentic Authors and Original Papers. By a
Society of Gentlemen. iBmo.
pp. 72 and frontispiece. Glasgow. 1796.
New Holland —ENCY. BRIT., 3rd edit.
VIII. pp. 612-623. Edinburgh. 1797.
PALMER. A Narrative of the Sufferings of T. F.
Palmer and W. Skirving during a Voyage to New
South Wales, 1794, on board the “ Surprise” Trans-
port. By the Rev. Thomas Fyshe Palmer, late of
Queen’s College, Cambridge. Bvo.
pp. 74. Cambridge. 1797.
Second Edition. [With Copy of Letters to
Gov. Hunter, dated Oct. 14, 1795-1 B ™.
pp. 79. Cambridge. 1797.
Messrs. Palmer and Skirving, with Thomas Muir, were trans-
ported for sedition. A conspiracy to seize the ship was said to
have been discovered on the voyage, and they were charged
unjustly with having been the chief instigators in the plot.
Disappointed in their appeal for an investigation into all the cir-
cumstances, their statements were published in this Pamphlet.
Muir afterwards escaped from Sydney to America. See 1798.
PALMER. [Letter from Thomas Fyshe Palmer].
Sydney, New South Wales. June 13, 1795- Folio
one page. [No place or date.]
KING. MS. \ Journal of Commander Philip Gidley
King, R.N., Lieut.-Governor of Norfolk Island\from
1791-96. Neatly Copied, with Marginal Notes and
Additions by the Governor’s Own Hand. 4to. pp. 31 1
The Journals of the First Period of [Lieut.] King’s Govern-
ment during 1788-90, and of his Voyage to England are printed
as Supplements to Hunter’s “Journal.” (See above) Chaps.
X.-XV., pp. 287-448. 4to. London. 1793.
PALMER. [Letter from Thomas Fyshe Palmer],
Sydney, August 14, 1797* Folio.
pp. 2. [No place or date.]
MUIR. Histoire de la Tyrannie du Gouvernement
Anglais exercee envers le celebre Thomas Muir, Ecos-
sais ; sa Deportation a Botany Bay, son Sejour dans
cette lie, son Evasion, son Sejour a Bordeaux, son
Arrivee a Paris ; avec une Description de Botany Bay,
des Renseignemens acquis par Thomas Muirsurla Fin
Tragique du Voyage de La Peyrouse, et une Notice
sur le Continent appele Pays de Galles Meridional.
iBmo. pp. 60. Paris. 1798.
The Life of Thomas Muir.... who was Tried for
Sedition.... and Sentenced to Transportation for
Fourteen Years; with a Full Report of his Trial.
By Peter Mackenzie.
Bvo. pp. xliv. 64, Glasgow, 1837.
Lists of Convicts and the Ships by which they
arrived were at one time in existence in the Colony.
It is doubtful if they are now extant. Phillip’s
“Voyage” gives a long list of those who were sent
out in the “first fleet,” but as a large number died
before leaving England and during the voyage, it
cannot be called a list of “ Arrivals.”
COLLINS. An Account of the English Colony
in New South Wales : With Remarks on the Dispo-
sitions, Customs, Manners, &c., of the Native In-
habitants, with some Particulars of New Zealand
from the MSS. of Lieut.-Gov. King. By David
Collins, Esq., late Judge Advocate and Secretary of
the Colony. Ulust. by engravings. 4to. pp. xx.
xxxviii. 619, two charts, and 22 plates. Lond. 1798.
A few copies of this edition were printed on fine paper. —See
Vol. 11., 1802, p. 97. For abridged edition, see 1804.
Of the plates eleven are views of Sydney Cove, and other
Settlements at Parramatta, &c. These were engraved after
water-colour drawings made by Edward Dayes from a series of
rough sketches brought home from the Colony. Dayes’ draw-
ings are now in the possession of Mr. William Silver, York
Gate, Regent’s Park, London.
BARRINGTON. A Sequel to Barrington’s
Voyage to New South Wales, comprising an Interest-
ing Narrative of the Transactions and Behaviour of
the Convicts ; the Progress of the Colony, an Official
Register of the Crimes, Trials, Sentences, and Execu-
tions that have Taken Place : Likewise Authentic
Anecdotes of the most Distinguished Characters
and Notorious Convicts. By the Celebrated George
Barrington, Principal Superintendent of the Convicts.
Bvo. pp. 11 6. London. 1800,
Another Edit. i2mo. pp. viii. 94. Lond. 1801.
Not written by Barrington, see p. 9.
Bass’s Discovery of the Strait, 1797.—See Col-
lins, 1802, and 1804.
Pennant (Thomas) Account of New Holland,
1800. —See Collections.
Peron (M. Fr.) Voyage to the Terres Australes.—
See Voyages.
Flinders’s Terra Australis. —See Voyages.


Holland, New.— Oxford Encyclo. Vol. 111.
pp. 907-910. Oxford. 1828.
Threlkeld (L. E.) Mission to the Aborigines (1828).
See Christian Missions.
Lang (Rev. Dr.) Narrative of the Settlement of
the Scots Church, Sydney, 1828. —See Religion.
Rambles in New South Wales [to Newcastle,
the River Hunter, Bathurst, &c.] By X.Y.Z. [Re-
printed from The Australian, Sydney, 1827]. In
Eleven Letters.— Colburn’s New Monthly. Vols.
XXII. and XXIII. London. 1828.
MACQUARIE. New South Wales. Return to
An Address of the House of Commons, 1 May, 1828 ;
for:
No. 1. —Copy of a Report, by the late Major-
General Macquarie, on the Colony of New South
Wales, to Earl Bathurst, in July, 1822.
No. 2. —Extract of a Letter from Major-General
Macquarie to Earl Bathurst, in October, 1823 ; in
Answer to Certain Part of the Report of Mr. Com-
missioner Bigge, on the State of the said C010ny....
Ordered by the House of Commons to be Printed,
25 June, 1828. Folio, pp. 70.
MARTIN. A Sketch of the Topography of New
South Wales. A Paper read at a Meeting of the
Medical and Physical Society of Calcutta, held at
Chowringhee, 4th Oct., 1828, by Mr. Martin.—
Edinburgh New Philos. Jour. No. XIII.
Extract from, in The Polar Star. Vol. I.
pp. 48-49. London. 1829.
WILLIAMS. The Narrative of a Convict,
Thomas Williams, and his Fight with Cody the Bush-
ranger, whom he secured and thus regained his Free-
dom.—London Mag. 3rd Ser. Vol. 11. pp. 457-
459. Nov. 1828.
DANGAR. Index and Directory to Map of the
Country bordering upon the River Hunter.... New
South Wales Also Notes upon the Tenure and
Principle of Granting Lands in the Colony since
1810.... With a View of the State of Agriculture in
the Colony, Price of Land, Advice to Settlers, &c.
By H. Dangar. Bvo. pp. viii. 128, and View of
King’s Town [Newcastle]. London. 1828.
The South Asian Register, 1828. —See “Maga-
zines.”
New Holland. The Aboriginal Inhabitants;
the White Population, &c.—The South Asian
Register, January, April, &c., 1828.
The Australian Quarterly Journal. Vol. I. 1828.
See “Magazines.”
iB2g. Settlement of Swan River.— See Wes-
tern Australia.
Adventures, Memoirs, Former Trial, Transporta-
tion, and Escapes of that Notorious Fence, and
Receiver of Stolen Goods, Isaac Solomons ; better
known to the Public by the Cognomen of “ Ikey
Solomons;” together with the Apprehension, Trial,
and Subsequent Transportation of Mrs. Solomons, and
an Account of Her Husband’s Ultimate Re-Appre-
hension in New South Wales. By a Former Police
Officer. Bvo. pp. 36 and portrait. London. 1829.
WAKEFIELD. A Letter from Sydney, the
Principal Town of Australasia. [By Edward Gibbon
Wakefield.] Edited by Robert Gouger. Together
with the Outline of a System of Colonization. i2mo,
pp. x. 222, xxiv. and map. London. 1829.
Wales, New South, [in Continuation of the
article New Holland, 1819]. Wilkes’s Encyclo.
Londoniensis. Vol. XXIV. pp. 541-545. 1829.
MUDIE. The Picture of Australia: exhibiting
New Holland, Van Diemen’s Land, and all the
Settlements, from the First at Sydney to the Last at
Swan River. [By Robert Mudie.] i2mo. pp. x. 370.
London. 1829.
The Picture of Australia. [Review of
Mudie’s Work].—Oriental Herald, XXIII.
pp. 77-86. London. Oct. 1829.
MURRAY. Narrative of the Settlement and
Present State of V. D. Land, New Holland, and the
Coasts and Islands of Australia. By Hugh Murray.
Announced to form 2 vols. in Constable’s Miscellany
(1829), hut never published.
DUMONT D’URVILLE (J.). Histoire de la
Colonie de la Nouvelle Galles de Sud. —Voyage de
l’Astrolabe (5 Vols.), Tome 11. Chap. ix.
Paris. 1830-33.
Dawson (Robert). Statement of his Services as
Chief Agent of the Australian Agricultural Company,
1829. —See Legal.
BURFORD. Description of a View of the Town
of Sydney, New South Wales ; the Harbour of Port
Jackson, and Surrounding Country ; now Exhibiting
in the Panorama, Leicester Square. Painted by the
Proprietor, Robert Burford. Bvo. pp. 12, with key
plan, folded. London. 1829.
Another Issue. London. 1830.
Aboriginal Natives of Australia.—Article from
Westminster Rev. Jan. 1830. —See Aborigines.
DAWSON. The Present State of Australia; a
Description of the Country, its Advantages and Pros-
pects with Reference to Emigration ; and a Particular
Account of the Manners, Customs, and Condition of
its Aboriginal Inhabitants. By Robert Dawson.
Bvo. pp. xx. 468. London. 1830.
Second Edition. Bvo. pp. xx. 468.
London. 1831.
EARLE. Illustrations of New South Wales. By
Augustus Earle, lithographed by Hullmandel. Oblong
4to. London. 1830.
An imperfect (?) copy in the British Museum, contains views
of: —
North Head, Port Jackson.
View of Point Piper.
Coming to an anchor off Sydney Cove.
Natives of New South Wales.
Bungaree, Native Chief.
Government House and Part of Sydney.
A Government Jail Gang.
Mrs. Macquarie’s Seat, Government Domain.
Gardiner (Capt. Allen F.) The Friend of Australia,
1830.—See Explorations.
Broughton (Archcl.) and others, Plan for a College,
Sydney, 1830. —See “Education.”
Lang (Dr. J. D.) Steps taken with a view to the
Establishment of an Academical Institution in New
South Wales, 1831. —See “Education.”
Leigh (Rev. Samuel) Missionary to Australia, &c.,
1815-31. —See Life of Leigh, 1853.


Therry (Roger) Statement relative to the Deposi-
tion of Mrs. Baxter, 1831. —See “ Legal.”
Sturt (Capt. Charles) Expeditions into Australia,
1828-31.... with Observations on the Soil, Climate, and
Resources of New South Wales. —See “Explora-
tions.”
Petition of the Colonists to the King, 1831. —See
“ Politics.”
BUSBY. Advice to Emigrants newly arrived in
New South Wales. By James Busby.—
Sydney Almanac. 1831.
HALL. The State of New South Wales in
December, 1830; in a Letter by R. S. [Edward
Smith] Hall, Proprietor and Editor of The Sydney
Monitor. [With Remarks.] i2mo. pp. 24.
London. 1831.
Addressed to Robert Gouger, Sec. of the National Coloniza-
tion Society, aud containing 'Observations on (1) Diseases ; (2)
Climate ; (3) Soil; (4) Convict Labourers ; (5) Description of
Emigrants Wanted ; (6) Precautions to Emigrants ; (7) Com-
parison of N. S. Wales with other British Colonies ; (8) Require-
ments of N. S. Wales.
BANNISTER. On Emigration to Upper Canada.
By the late John William Bannister, Esq., Rice Lake,
Upper Canada. A new Edition : with additions on
Nova Scotia, the Cape of Good Hope, New South
Wales, Van Diemen’s Land, and the Swan River.
Bvo. pp. 76. [The Fourth Edition.] London. 1831.
Originally published in 1821.
Wales, New South.—
Oxford Encyclopaedia : Supplement, pp.
839-844. London. 1831.
New Holland. —
Journal of Agriculture. Vol. 111. p. 512.
Edinburgh. 1831.
BLOSSEVILLE. Histoire des Colonies Penales
de l’Angleterre dans l’Australie. Par M. Ernest
[Marquis] de Blosseville. Bvo. pp. 596. Paris. 1831.
New edition, continued to 1857. See 1859. This edition
contains a valuable Bibliography of Australia up to 1830.
Reports from Select Committee of House of Com-
mons on Secondary Punishments and Transportation
to New South Wales, &c., 1831-32. —See “Trans-
portation.”
Darling (General) and his Administration of the
Government (1826-31) ; including the cases of Sudds
and Thompson, Captain Robison, J. D. Shelley, &c
—See Legal.
Although these subjects properly form part of the history of
that period, it has not been thought advisable to burden the pre-
sent list with more than a reference ; more especially as a number
of the publications—twenty-four pamphlets, besides articles in
Reviews —have reference to Courts-Martial and Trials for
Libel.
Wimmer (G. A.) Neuvtes Gemalde von Australien, &c., 1832.
—See Collections.
Verreaux (Jules et Edouard) Description Geographique et
Historique...Nouvelle Hollande, &c. 1832. —See Collections.
Mitchell (Sir T. L.) Expeditions, 1831-32, 1833, and 1836. —
See Explorations.
BUSBY. Authentic Information Relative to New
South Wales and New Zealand. By James Busby,
Esq., formerly Member of the Land Board of N. S. W.,
now British Resident of New Zealand. Bvo. pp. vii.
72, Appendix, xxviii. London. 1832.
In this pamphlet is included a reprint of the Author’s “ Advice
to Emigrants,” 1831 “ Observations on the Alienation of
Lands from the Crown in the Colony of N.S. W.” Submitted to
Gov. Darling in Oct., 1829 ; a Brief Memoir Relative to N.Z.
&c.
The Emigrant’s Guide to New South Wales,
Van Diemen’s Land.... Canada, &c containing an
Enumeration of the Advantages which each Colony
offers ; with Regulations adopted by Government to
facilitate Male and Female Emigration.... Assistance
offered.... Copies of Official Forms to be transmitted to
the Colonial Department also Instructions for the
Guidance of Military Out-Pensioners of Chelsea Hos-
pital who may be desirous of Commuting their Pen-
sions, with a view to their becoming Settlers in the
British Colonies. Bvo. pp. 34. London. 1832.
Issued under the sanction of the Emigration Commissioners.
HENDERSON. Observations on the [Political
Economy, Natural History, &c. of the] Colonies of
New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Laud. By
John Henderson. Bvo. pp. xxv. 180. Calcutta. 1832.
Broughton (Dr.), Therry (Roger), Fulton (Rev. H.),
Ullathorne (Dr.), and McEncroe (Rev. J.) Roman
Catholic Controversy, 1832-33. —See Religion.
Bingle (John) Letter to the Secretary of State
respecting his Treatment of Assigned Servants. —See
Legal.
Whately (Archbp.), Ross (James), Arthur (Gov.),
Lang (J. D.), Bannister (Saxe), Maconochie (Capt.
Alex.), Ullathorne (Dr.) and others, on Transportation
(1832-40). —See Politics : “Transportation.”
LAPLACE. Aperqu de la Nouvelle-Hollande et
des Peuplades Sauvages qui l’Habitent; Quelques
Details sur les Commencements et l’Ktat present de
la Colonie fondee par les Anglais dans la Partie
Orientale de ce Continent. Description de Sidney et
de ses Environs, Aug.-Sept. 1831. —See Voyage de
la “Favorite” (4v015.) Vol. 111. Chap. xix. pp.
252-378 notes 479-510. Paris. 1835.
With plates (63 and 64) Sidney; Vooloo Moloo au Port
J ackson.
HOLMAN. Travels in China, New Zealand,
New South Wales, Van Diemen’s Land, Cape Horn,
&c. By James Holman, R.N., F.R.S. Bvo. pp. viii.
519, Smith, Elder & Co. London. 1835.
Second Edition [new title page only] George
Routledge. London. 1840.
The fourth and concluding volume of the Author’s Circum-
navigation of the World. Lieut. Holman [“The Blind
Traveller”] was in N. S. Wales for a period of eleven months,
from April, 1831 to March, 1832, and the account of his visit to
the different settlements occupies pp. 445-485.
Therry (Roger) Appeal on behalf of the Roman
Catholics of N. S. Wales, 1833. —See “Religion.”
WILTON. A Sketch of the Colony of New
South Wales ; or Australia. By the Rev. C. Pleydell
N. Wilton, M.A., &c. Chaplain of Newcastle. —
New South Wales Calendar, 1833.
pp. ix.—xxi. Sydney. 1833.
OSBORNE. Notes on the Present State and
Prospects of Society in New South Wales ; with
an....account of Manilla and Singapore. By Alick
Osborne. iBmo. pp. 96. London. 1833.
New Sc tith Wales Magazine , Vol. I. August to
December, 1833. —See “ Magazines.”
LANG. Emigration : Considered Chiefly in Re-
ference to the Practicability and Expediency of Im-
porting and Settling throughout the Territory of
N.S. Wales, a Numerous, Industrious, and Virtuous
Agricultural Population: a Lecture by J. D. Lang,
D.D. Bvo. pp. ii. 18. Sydney. 1833.
Reprinted, with a postscript, in the Author’s History o/N. S.
IVales {1834). Vol. 11. pp. 400-443.


BRETON. Excursions in New South Wales,
Western Australia and Van Diemen’s Land, during
the Years 1830-33. By Lieut. [H. W.] Breton, R.N.
Bvo. pp. xii. 476, and two plates. London. 1833.
Second Edit, revised, with Additions. Bvo.
pp. xii. 420. London. 1834.
LANG. An Historical and Statistical Account of
New South Wales, both as a Penal Settlement and as
a British Colony. By John Dunmore Lang, D.D.
2 vols. i2mo. pp. xiv. 401 ; iv. 443 and map.
London. 1834.
New Editions, re-written and continued, 1837 ; 1852 ; 1875.
British Emigrant Colonies : No. I. New
South Wales.— Tait’s Edinburgh Mag. N.S.
Vol. I. July, 1834. pp. 401-419 (double cols.).
Review of Lang’s N.S. W. With copious Extracts.
Letters from New South Wales to My Grandson.
No. I. Sydney, October 23rd, 1833. —N. S. Wales
Mag. Vol. I. pp. 310-320. Sydney, Dec. 1833.
Mudie (Janies) and Larnach (John) Vindication of
their Conduct relative to the Treatment of Convict
Servants, 1834.- —See Legal.
CARMICHAEL. Hints Relating to Emigrants
and Emigration; embracing Observations and Facts
intended to Display the Real Advantages of New
South Wales, as a Sphere for the Successful Exercise
of Industry: and Containing Information whereby
the Emigrant may Avoid the Risk of Failure in
Turning his Industry or Capital to Profitable Account.
By the Rev. Henry Carmichael, A.M—To which
are added Tables.... i2mo. pp. 48. London. 1834.
Third Edition. i2mo. London. 1840.
Reprinted from the New South Wales Calendar, 1834, pp.
ix.-xxxvi. See also N. S. Wales Mag. Vol. 11. pp 194-216,
March, 1834.
Counsel for Emigrants, and Interesting Infor-
mation from Numerous Sources ; with Original
Letters from Canada and the United States. i2mo.
pp. iv. 140, and map of B. N. America.
Aberdeen, 1834.
The “ Introduction” and “ Conclusion” contain a few remarks
on N. S. Wales.
Sequel to the Counsel for Emigrants....[with
later Information.] 121110. pp. 72. Aberdeen. 1834.
Counsel for Emigrants, &c.... Second edit.
i2mo. pp. 154. Aberdeen. 1835.
Third Edition, with Supplement.
i2mo. pp. xii. 246 map. Aberdeen. 1838.
Supplement (dated March, 1838) pp. 155-246
published separately.
Bennett (Dr. George) Wanderings in New South
Wales, Batavia, Pedir Coast, Singapore, China, &c.
1832-1834.—See “Natural History.”
Shipwreck of the “Charles Eaton,” 1834. See
Voyages.
Lhotsky (Dr. John) Journey from Sydney to the Australian
Alps, 1834. —See Explorations.
BACKHOUSE. Extracts from the Letters of
James Backhouse, now Engaged in a Religious Visit
to Van Diemen’s Land, New South Wales, and South
Africa. Accompanied by George Washington Walker.
[First Part relating to Van Diemen’s Land.]
Bvo, pp. 86. Lindfield. 1834.
Second Edition. Bvo. pp. 88. Lindfield. 1837.
Third Edition. Bvo. pp. 94. London. 1838.
Second Part [Visits to V. D. Land, N. S. Wales,
and Norfolk Island.] Bvo. pp. 78. London. 1837.
Second Edition. Bvo. pp. 78. London. 1838.
Backhouse’s Letters ( continued ) —
Third Part [Visits to New South Wales and More-
ton Bay.] Bvo. pp. 85. London. 1838.
Fourth Part [Visits to New South Wales and V.D.
Land.] Bvo. pp. 80. London. 1838 ; re-issue 1841.
Fifth Part [Visits to Melbourne, Adelaide, and
Swan River, including Letters to Governor Bourke,
and [Sir] Thomas Fowell Buxton.]
Bvo. pp. 58. London. 1839.
Sixth to Tenth Parts relate to Mauritius and South Africa.
The Complete Work. 2 vols. Bvo.
London. 1841-42.
Revised and Illustrated Edition. See 1843.
Reviewed in The Annual Monitor, No. 30, pp. 117-121.
York. 1842.
For Addresses by Backhouse and Walker, see <! Reli-
gious.” '
WHEELER. Extracts from the Letters and
Journal of Daniel Wheeler, now engaged in a
Religious Visit to the Inhabitants of some of the
Islands of the Pacific Ocean, Van Diemen’s Land,
and New South Wales. Accompanied by his Son,
Charles Wheeler. Bvo. [First Part], pp. 54.
Lindfield. 1835.
Second Edition. Bvo. London. 1838.
Parts Second, Third, and Fourth, relate to
the Society, Friendly, Hawaiian, and Tongan
Islands, and New Zealand.
Reprinted [one volume] Bvo. London. 1839.
See also :
Memoirs of the Life and Gospel Labours of the
Late Daniel Wheeler Bvo. pp. xxviii. 795, with
map. London. 1842.
Reprinted in The Friends’ Library. Bvo.
Philadelphia. 1843.
Another Edition. [Abridged.] i2mo.
London. 1852.
Another Edition. [Abridged.] i2mo.
Philadelphia. 1859.
WILSON. Narrative of a Voyage Round the
World ; comprehending an Account of the Wreck of
the Ship “ Governor Ready,” in Torres Straits; a
Description of the British Settlements on the Coasts
of New Holland, more particularly Raffles Bay,
Melville Island, Swan River, and King George’s
Sound ; also the Manners and Customs of the Abori-
ginal Tribes ; with an Appendix, containing Remarks
on Transportation, the Treatment of Convicts during
the Voyage, and Advice to Persons intending to
Emigrate to the Australian Colonies. By T. B.
Wilson, M.D. Surgeon R.N. Bvo. pp. xvi. 349,
map and three illustrations from sketches by Lieut.
Weston. London. 1835.
KENTISH. The Present State of New South
Wales Considered, chiefly in Reference to Immigra-
tion, Transportation, and Legislation ; being a
Lecture Delivered at the Royal Hotel, Sydney,
August 29, 1833, on the Occasion of his Departure
for England. By Nathaniel Lipscomb Kentish,
Land Surveyor and Civil Engineer, and Editor of the
Sydney Times , &c....4t0. pp. iv. 28, 22, 4; xii. 23.
Sydney. 1835.
Collation: Title-page, Dedication to the Hon. Francis Forbes,
Preface to the Colonial Reader, pp. 28, lithographed ; Lecture,
pp. 22 ; Prospectus of a Sunday Newspaper and Magazine, in-
cluding History of Australia and Poem. “ The Surveyor
General or General Surveyor....of all Public Institutions and
Public Characters, in particular of the Press, &C.... 4 pp. (dble.
col.) 4to prospectus, dated June 10, 1833; An Essay on
Christian Fortitude under Trials and Disappointments. By
N[athaniel] Lipscomb Kentish, Esq—4to. pp. xii. 23. Sydney.
1835. Practical Application of the Foregoing Essay on Christian
Fortitude, &c. [both in verse].


MARTIN. History of the British Colonies. By
R[obert] Montgomery Martin, F. S. S. In Five
Volumes. Bvo. London. 1834-35.
Vol. IV. Possessions in Africa and Australasia.
Bvo. pp. xiv. 624, appendix [pp. 56], and maps.
London. 1835.
New South Wales is treated of in Chapter 111. pp. 213-376,
and in the Appendix, viz. “A Letter to Lord Stanley on
Secondary Punishments, by Humanitas,” dated Sydney, 31st
March, 1834.
This work was re-written and continued by the Author. —See
1836 ; 1839 ; and 1853.
1835. Settlement of Port Phillip. —See “Vic-
toria.”
MARSDEN. A Letter to Mr. W. Crook, accom-
panied with a Few Observations published in the
Sydney “ Herald.” By Rev. Samuel Marsden.
Bvo. Sydney. 1835.
Lang (Dr. J. D.) Marshall (John) &c. —on Emigra-
tion (1834-35).—See Politics.
Illustrations of the Present State and Future
Prospects of New South Wales. By An Impartial
Observer [John Lhotsky, Ph.D.]
Bvo. pp. 70. Sydney. 1835.
Issued with New South Wales Literary , Political ,
and Commercial Advertiser, Nos. 1 to 4 pp. 49.
Emigration to New South Wales.— Chambers’s
Information for the People. No. 10. folio,
pp. 8 (triple cols.) with map. Edinburgh. 1835.
Australia ; Geography, Discovery, Inhabitants,
Botany, Geology, Zoology — Penny Cyclopedia.
111. pp. 117- 129 (double cols.) 4to. London. 1835.
1836. Foundation of South Australia.
SULLIVAN. Prospectus for the Formation of a
New Colony at Port Macquarie and Moreton Bay.
To the Nobility and Gentry of the British Empire
and its Colonies. By Major [Benjamin] Sullivan.
Printed (with an Article) in The Colonist. Vol. 11.
(pp. 1-3). Sydney, Jan. 7, 1836.
Portions reprinted in Russell’s Genesis of Queensland
(1888), pp. 66-69.
McARTIIUR. Observations on the Colony of
New South Wales, for the Use of Mechanics and
Labourers ; with Extracts from Minutes of Evidence
on the Subject of Emigration, before a Committee of
the Council, at Sydney ; the Report of the Chief
Justice to His Excellency Major Gen. Sir R. Bourke,
G.C.8., in 1835 ; and other Authentic Papers. [By
Major McArthur.] i2mo. pp. 81. London. 1836.
A Chapter on Bushranging. By R. — Tegg’s
Monthly Mag. Vol. I. pp. 241-251. Sydney. 1836.
PILORGERIE. Histoire de Botany-Bay, etat
present des Colonies Penales de l’Angleterre, dans
l’Australie ; ou, Examen des effets de la Deportation.
Par M. Jules de la Pilorgerie....Bvo. pp. xiv. 394 iv.
Paris. 1836.
Petition to House of Commons, from Inhabitants
of New South Wales, 1836. —See 1840.
Shipwreck of the “ Stirling Castle,” 1836. —See
“ Voyages.”
Sketches of New South Wales. Illustrated. By
W. R. G[ovett]. —Saturday Magazine, May to
Dec. 1836. London. 1836.
Ullathorne (Dr.) Catholic Mission in Australasia,
1836. —See Religious History.
MARTIN. History of Austral-Asia ; comprising
New South Wales, Van Diemen’s Land, Swan River,
South Australia, &c. By R. Montgomery Martin,
F. S.S. (Brit Col. Lib. Vol. II.)
i2mo. pp. 371. London. 1836.
Second Edit. i2mo. pp. 416. London. 1839.
The Slaughter-House; or, Camden in the
Olden Time. By 2.— Tegg’s Monthly Mag.
Vol. I. pp. 134-140; 252-256. Sydney. 1836^
Announced as “Preparing for Publication” in the Authors
work on New Zealand. London. 1836.
MARSHALL. Norfolk Island in 1834, or a
Page for the Penal History of New South Wales.
Including an Account of Convict Discipline in that
Island ; and An Appeal to the Church of Christ, and
to the British Government, on Behalf of the Prisoners
of the Crown, in the Penal Settlements of Great
Britain. By William Barrett Marshall, M.D., R.N.
To be followed by :
Visits of Mercy to Prisons and Prisoners in V. D.
Land and N. S. Wales.
Neither work was published.
Report from Select Committee on Aborigines,
including Evidence of Saxe Bannister, Rev. W.
Yate, Surgeon Marshall; and Letters from Back-
house, Dr. Lang, and Rev. S. Marsden, 1836-37.
See “ Aborigines.”
Darwin (Charles) Visit to Sydney, Journey over the Blue
Mountains to Bathurst, &c., January, 1836. —See Voyages.
A Serif.s of Lithographic Drawings of Sydney and
Its Environs. Coloured Bl —Plain 13L Each
sketch 9I in. by 5§ in. oblong 4to.
Sydney: J. G. Austin & Co., No. 12 Bridge Street.
1836.
South Head Light House (Port Jackson).
Catholic Chapel (Hyde Park).
Lower Lodge, Government Domain.
Old Windmill, ~ ~
Government House, Sydney.
La Perouse’s Monument, Botany Bay.
'Poll Gate and Benevolent Asylum, George Street, South.
St. James’ Church, Supreme Court House, He.
An additional water-colour sketch: “James Craig’s Hotel
and Magee’s Bookbindery” (8$ by 7f) is inserted in a copy
[imperfect?] in the possession of the Compiler.
Bingle (John) Letter to Lord Glenelg, 1837. —See “Legal.”
Bannister (Saxe) On Transportation, Reform of the Colonial
Office, &c. 1837.— See “Politics.”
MEINICKE. Das Festland Australien, eine Geo-
graphische Monographic. Nach den Quellen dar-
gestellt von C. E. Meinicke.
2 vols. Bvo. pp. viii. 354; iv. 316. Prenzlau. 1837
MUDIE. The Felonry of New South Wales :
being a Faithful Picture of the Real Romance of Life
in Botany Bay. With Anecdotes. By James Mudie,
Esq., late Magistrate, N.S.W.
Bvo. pp. 362, and plan of Sydney. London. 1837.
LANG. An Historical and Statistical Account of
New South Wales....By John Dunmore Lang, D.D.
....Second Edition, with numerous Additions, bring-
ing down the History of the Colony to the close of
1836. 2 vols. i2mo. pp. xii. 466 ; iv. 527, and
map. London. 1837*
German Translation. New - Siidwales....von
John Dunmore Lang....Aus dem Englischen, mit
Geschichte der Colonie bis ende 1836, von Dr. Le
Petit. 2 vols. Bvo. xvi. 416; 478. (Geschichte aus
Auzereuropaischen Staaten. Vols. XI. and XII.)
Quedlinburg und Leipzig. 1840.
MACARTHUR. New South Wales ; its Present
State and Future Prospects : being a Statement, with
Documentary Evidence submitted in Support of Peti-
tion to His Majesty and Parliament. [By James
Macarthur.] Bvo. pp. 296 ; Appendix pp. 344-
London. 1837.
For Petition, &c., see “ Politics.”
BOWIE. Notes on Australia, for the Information
of Intending Emigrants. By John Bowie, Writer to
the Signet. Bvo. pp. ii. 24. Edinburgh. 1837.


Burton (Judge) Broughton (Dr ) and Ullathorne (Dr.) on
Education in N.S.W. 1837-40. —See “Politics.”
McQueen, Lardner, Ross, Wheelwright, Wag horn, Bogue,
Earl, Boyd, and others, Steam Communication between Great
Britain, India, and Sydney, 1837-48. —See Commerce.
New South Wales. Examination of Mr. James
Macarthur’s Work, “ New South Wales ; its Present
State and Prospects.” Bvo. pp. iv. 48 [incomplete].
Sydney. 1838.
The writer issued this portion with a note that “the sequel
would be forwarded with as little delay as possible—when, very
probably, the name of the author will be disclosed.”
A Month in the Bush of Australia. A Journey....
to Port Phillip, 1838. —See “Victoria.”
1838. Military Depot Established, Port Es-
sington.—See North Australia.
The History of Samuel Terry, in Botany
Bay, who died lately, Leaving a Princely Fortune of
Nearly One Million Sterling. With an Appendix on
Emigration and Transportation to the Australian
Colonies. By A. L. F , late of N. S. W. (Ex-
tracts from “ the Botany Bay Rothschild” have been
given in the Times, Weekly Dispatch, Sun, Globe,
Morning Advertiser, &c.)
Bvo. pp. 16 and frontispiece. London. 1838.
WAUGH. Three Years’ Practical Experience of
a Settler in New South Wales ; [Mr. D. Waugh]
being Extracts from Letters to his Friends in Edin-
burgh, from 1834 to 1837. With a Preface by the
Editor [J. Waugh] and an Appendix containing Notes
and Information for all Classes of Intending Emi-
grants, from the latest authorities, and Public Docu-
ments. i2mo. pp. 74, and map. Edinburgh. 1838.
Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth
Editions. i2mo. pp. 72, and map.
Edinburgh. 1838.
PARLEY. Tales about America and Australia,
by Peter Parley. Edited by the Rev. T. Wilson.
iBmo. pp. iv. 192, wdth illust. and two maps.
Lond. [1838.3
New Edit, revised, 1862.
Mitchell (James) Dismissed Civil Servant, Case of
1838.—See “ Legal.
An Impartial Examination of all the Authors
on Australia; Official Documents and Reports of
Private Individuals as Evidences of the Advantages
of Emigration, and as a Guide to the Selection of the
Colony, best Calculated to Secure the Welfare of
Settlers. By An Intending Emigrant.
i2mo. pp. iv. 92. London. 1838.
Re-issued and Extended : “ Twenty Years’ Ex-
perience in Australia.” 1839.
Sydney Cove. Port Jackson. The steam boat
“Australian” accompanying with numerous friends
on farewell of the Missionary Brig “Camden,”
October 25th, 1838. Drawn by Charles Rodius,
Engraved by S. C. Hughes, 15! in. by 8f in. 1838.
The Picture of Sydney and Strangers’ Guide
in New South Wales for 1838 : embellished with
Forty-three [44] engravings of the Public Buildings
and Picturesque Land and Water Views in and near
Sydney.... i2mo. pp. viii. 188, map and 43 illust.
Sydney. 1838.
Re-issued with new title-page :
Maclehose’s Picture of Sydney; and Strangers’
Guide in New South Wales for 1839. Embellished
with Forty-four engravings, &c. [1839.]
Kentish (N. L.) Political Economy of N. S.
Wales, &c. 1838. —See “Politics.”
M’Leay (Alex.) Correspondence with Gov. Bourke,
1838. —See “Legal.”
Marsden (Rev. Samuel) Senior Chaplain, N. S.
Wales, 1794-1838.— See Short Account of, 1844 ;
Memoirs of, 1858.
DU PETIT-THOUARS. Port Jackson ; Sydney ;
son Aspect, sa population, son importance ; Les Con-
victs, leur Establishment, vices de l’organisation
primitive, resultats obtenus ; Les Gouverneurs, Progres
de la Colonie sous leur Administration ; Decouverte
de la Nouvelle Hollande; Statisque, Indigenes.
Nov.-Dee. 1838.)—See Voyage de la “Venus,”
ome 111. chap. XVIII. pp. 167-301 ; pi. 63-66.
Tableau. Extrait du Revenu de la Colonie de la
Nouvelle-Galles du Sud....ier Janvier 1824, au 31
Decembre, 1837. Budget, 1839.— Voyage de la
“Venus,” tome iv. pp. 147-173, and folding table.
MATTHEWS. Emigration Fields. North
America, the Cape, Australia, &c.... Describing these
Countries, and giving a Comparative View of the
Advantages they Present to British Settlers. By
Patrick Matthew.... i2mo. pp. xii. 237, and maps.
Edinburgh. 1839.
New South Wales is dealt with in Chap, vii., pp. 84-102.
Report of the Committee of Inquiry, appointed by
the Inhabitants of St. Andrews, on the subject of
Australian Emigration. Read at a Meeting held on
17th Dec., 1838. i2mo. pp. 31. St. Andrews. 1839.
Eastern Colonies : Australia [New South Wales].
—Dublin University Mag. Vol. XIII. pp. 88-95.
Jan. 1839.
A True Picture of Australia, its Merits and
Demerits. By a Friend to Truth. Bvo. pp. 80.
Glasgow. 1839.
Contents: Emigration, pp. 5-42 ; Log Book of Voyage and
Letters, by W. H„ pp. 43'53 ; Letters from Joseph McEwing,
and others, Description of V.D.L., Port Phillip, W.A., South
Australia.
MACKELLAR. Australian Emigrants’Guide. By
D. Mackellar. Edinburgh. 1839.
UDNEY. Australia as It Is. By J. Udney. Parti,
i2mo. London. April, 1839*
MARTIN. Statistics of the Colonies of the British
Empire, &c. ; comprising Area, Agriculture, Com-
merce, Manufactures, Shipping, &c., from Records
of the Colonial Office. By Robert Montgomery
Martin. Royal Bvo. pp. viii. 602 ; Appendix of
Official Documents, pp. 304 (dble cols.), maps and
seals of the different Colonies.
London, W. H. Allen & Co. 1839.
Reissued [new title page only]. London,
W. H. Allen & Co., and George Routledge. 1843.
Statistics of New South Wales occupy pp. 4i3'44> and Ap-
pendix pp. 173-222 ; 275, &c.
Twenty Years’ Experience in Australia ;
being the Evidence of Disinterested and Respectable
Residents and Travellers in those Colonies, as to
their Present State and Future Prospects ; the whole
Demonstrating the Superior and Extraordinary Ad-
vantages of Emigration to New South Wales, alike
to Men of Capital and the Labouring Classes. “In
the Multitude of Councillors there is Wisdom.” i2mo.
pp. viii. 136. London. 1839*
Third Edition [lsth thousand], with Facts
and Observations Showing the Present Circum-
stances and Prospects of New Zealand. J2mo.
pp 114 . London. 1840.
Enlarged Edition of An Impartial Examination. 1838.—See
above.


Wilkes (Charles) New South Wales, 1839—U.5. Expl.Exped.
Vol. IL pp. 165-294, and appendix, with plates, pp. 456-479.
R R . Australia, Van Diemen’s Land, and
New Zealand ; their History and Present State, with
their Prospects in Regard to Emigration, Impartially
Examined. [By R. R.] i2mo. pp. iv. 59.
London. 1839.
New Edition, pp. iv. 59. London. [1840.]
Another Issue, pp. iv. 60. London. 1840.
Scenes in the Bush of Australia. By a
Squatter. Published for the Benefit of the Famine
Relief Fund of the Highlands of Scotland. Oblong
4to. [London. 1839?]
Two Plates, viz:—The Squatters’ First Home, and An Ex-
ploring Party Looking for a Sheep Run.
BUTLER. The Hand Book for Australian
Emigrants, being a Descriptive History of Australia,
with Account of the Climate, Soils, and Natural
Productions, &c....8y Samuel Butler, Esq. 181110.
Map. pp. viii. 240. Glasgow. 1839.
Several editions aggregating ten thousand copies issued during
1839.
MANN. Six Years’ Residence in the Australian
Provinces ending in 1839: the History, Trade, Popu-
lation, Extent, Resources, &c. of N.S.W., V.D.L.,
S. Aust. and Port Phillip, with an Account of New
Zealand. By William Mann. i2mo. pp. vi. 360.
London. 1839.
DAVIDSON. Trade and Travel in the Far East ;
or, Recollections of Twenty-One Years passed in
Java, Singapore, Australia, and China. By G. F.
Davidson. i2mo. pp. x. 312. London. 1846.
The author spent three years in N.S.W., 1836-1839, chiefly on
the banks of the Paterson, see pp. 117-215.
A Voice from the Bush in Australia; showing
its Present State, Advantages, and Capabilities, in a
Series of Letters from an Irish Settler and others in
N. S. W. With Appendices, and Abstract Table of the
Revenue of the Colony, 1824-1837. i2mo. pp. 108.
Dublin. 1839.
Davis (Mrs.) Visits to Sydney, in the “Denmark Hill,”
1830-40. —See Autobiography of Elizabeth Davis, 1857.
JOHNSON. Plain Truths told by a Traveller,
regarding our Various Settlements in Australia and
N.Z. Showing Things as they are and as they Ought
to Be, particularly in Sydney, Perth, Parramatta,
Freemantle, the Swan River, the Canning, the
Murray, the Darling, King George’s Sound, and in
Van Diemen’s Land....By J. Pitts Johnson. i2mo.
pp. 80. London. 1840.
RUSSELL. A Tour through the Australian
Colonies in 1839, with Notes and Incidents of a
Voyage Round the Globe, calling at New Zealand,
and South America. By Andrew Russell. i2mo.
pp. viii. 332. Glasgow. 1840; second edit. 1840.
Neave (Samuel) Australia; or, Which is the Best Colony for
the Emigrant ?—See Western Australia.
Australia, as It Is. i2mo. pp. 48, and plan of
Melbourne. Bristol. 1840.
Bristol. 1840.
Macarthur (Major Edward) Colonial Policy of 1840-41. —See
Politics.
MACQUEEN. Australia as She Is and As She
May Be. By T. Potter Macqueen. Bvo. pp. 60.
London. 1840.
Tyers (C. J.) Expedition to Fix Boundary between N.S. Wales
and S. Australia, 1840.— See “ Explorations.”
BURTON. The State of Religion and Education
in New South Wales. By [Sir] William Westbrooke
Burton, one of the Judges of the Supreme Court ol
that Colony. Bvo. pp. x. 321 ; Appendix, cxxxvi.
and map. London. 1840.
The Appendix contains Charter and Instructions respecting
the Church and School Corporation and Corporation Lands,
Various Petitions and Reports, Letters, Speeches, Newspaper
Extracts, &c. bearing upon the Condition of the Colony.
A Second Volume by Judge Burton, to include the items next
following, was announced but never issued.
BURTON. Observations on the Constitution of the
Government of N.S. Wales during Six Years’
Residence in that Colony. By Mr. Justice Burton. —
[Fisher’s] Colonial Mag. Vol. I. pp. 33 2 "359- State
of Society and of Crime in N. S.W. By Mr. Justice
Burton.— lbid. pp. 421-440; Vol. 11. pp. 34'54-
London. 1840.
MACINTYRE. [MS.] Observations on the Austra-
lian Colonies. By James J. Macintyre. Lend. 1840.
The author resided in N.S. Wales for fuur years. During his
voyage back and after his return he prepared his “ Observa-
tions, ” intending to publish them, but the dry nature of part of
the subject and the opinions he held being opposed to so many
interests, he decided to address himself to Joseph Hume, Esq.,
M.P., to whom the MS. was transmitted. In a letter to Hume
(vide Appendix to the Author’s “ Thoughts on Population and
Starvation,” Lond. 1841) which accompanied the MS. he
summarized its contents, viz. : Sections 1 and 2 (pp. 1-62) On
the Absence of any remains of a Civilized people in Australia,
and the Aborigines; Sect. 3. Outline of a new _ political
division and nomenclature of the C untry, with descriptions of
its physical characteristics (pp. 63-155); Sect.. 4. History and
Colonization of New South Wales or “Guelphia” down to 1840
(pp. 159-216): Sect. 5. Statistical details and calculations re-
specting Land and Labour, &c. (pp. 217-276); Sect. 6. On the
value of ground in Sydney (pp. 276-295) ; Sect. 7. On the land
price system and trade (pp. 297-342); Sect 8. The Australian
Agricultural Company proved to be a failure, should be dissolved
and its million acres revert to the public (pp. 343-357): Sect. 9.
Plan for re-division of the pastoral lands (pp. 358-41 r) ; Sect. 10.
Observations on the experimental Colony of South Australia, or
“ Flindersland” (pp. 374-402, 413-433, and 1125-1169) ; Sect. n.
Observations on New Zealand, the rights of the natives, and the
interests of future generations in the waste lands (pp. 434-465) ;
Sect. 12. Colonization in Relation to Steam.
Leslie (Patrick) Russell (Henry and Sydenham) Journeys to
Darling Downs. Hodgkinson (Clement) Port Macquarie to
Moreton Bay (1840-41).—See Explorations.
Australian Patriotic Association; Proceedings, Letters to
Charles Buller, Esq., M.P. 1840-50. —See Politics.
Petitions. &c. for Separation cf Port Phillip from New South
Wales, 1840-51. —See “ Politics ” and “Victoria-”
Gipps (Sir George) Progress of Discovery in N.S. Wales to
1841.— See Explorations.
Lang (Dr. J. D.) Is this Colony to he Transformed into a
Province of Popedom? (1841). —See Politics.
Carpenter (W.) Emigration and the Australian Colonies, 1841
—See South Australia.
The Resources of Australia, and the Pros-
pects and Capabilities of the New Settlements, with
a Special Notice of Port Philip, and Remarks on the
Internal Government of N.S. Wales....the Results of
Fourteen Years’ Experience of An Australian Colonist.
i2mo. pp. iv. 120. London. 1841.
ANLEY. The Prisoners of Australia. A Narra-
tive. By the Author of “Miriam,” “Influence,”
&c. [Charlotte Anley]. i2mo. pp. viii. 192.
Lond. 1841.
Miss Anley carried letter of introduction from Mrs. Fry to
Gov. Bourke, and was the guest of the Colonial Secretary and of
the Chaplain, Rev. Samuel Marsden. She visited the prisons
and factories, and describes the condition of the female convicts
at Parramatta, Port Stephens, &c.


Present State of Sydney, N. S. Wales. By
E. P. N.— [Fisher’s] Col. Mag. Vol. V. pp. 291-
298. London. 1841.
Reflections on Australia. —[Fisher’s] Col.
Mag. Vol. VI. pp. 210-220. London. 1841.
Progressive Prosperity of N. S. Wales. —
[Fisher’s] Col. Mag. Vol. VI. pp. 273-280.
London. 1841.
CUNNINGHAM. Hints for Australian Emigrants,
with Engravings and Descriptions of Water-Raising
Wheels and Modes of Irrigation. By Peter Cunning-
ham, Surgeon R.N. Bvo. pp. xii. 119. London. 1841,
L’Australie, Consideree sous le rapport des
avantages qu’elle offre au commerce de la France,
aux capitalistes et aux emigrans de toutes les nations
d’apres toutes les navigations fransaises, indiquant les
moyens de se faire une fortune brilliante meme sans
capitaux. 4to. Paris. 1841.
Another Edition, i2mo. pp. 48. Paris. 1841.
MANSFIELD. Analytical View of the Census
'of New South Wales for the Year 1841 ; with Tables
showing the Progress of the Population during the
previous Twenty Years. By Ralph Mansfield.
Originally written for the Sydney Herald and now
presented to its Subscribers gratis. Bvo. pp. viii. 59.
Sydney. 1841.
Analytical View of the Census of N. S. Wales
for the Year 1841. — [Fisher’s] Col. Mag. Vol. I.
[IX.] pp. 456-463, 579-586. London. 1842.
Articles : Australasia, signed M. [Samuel Moss-
man] ; Wales, New South, signed F. — Ency-
clopaedia Britannica, 7th edit. Vol. IV. pp. 203-
218 ; Vol. XXL pp. 711-722. Edinburgh. 1842.
JAMESON. New Zealand, South Australia, and
New South Wales; a Record of Recent Travels in
these Colonies, with especial Reference to Emigration
and the advantageous employment of Labour and
Capital. By R. G. Jameson, late Surgeon Superin-
tendent of Emigrants to South Australia. i2mo. pp.
xii. 372. Map and two plates. London. [1842.]
BUTLER. The Emigrant’s Handbook of Facts,
concerning Canada, New Zealand, Australia, Cape of
Good Hope, &c. ; with the relative advantages each
of the Colonies offers for Emigration, and Practical
Advice to intending Emigrants. By Samuel Butler.
iBmo. pp. xii. 240 and maps. Glasgow. 1843.
ST ANGER. A Journey from Sydney Over the
Blue Mountains to Bathurst, Forty Years Ago. [By
Mrs. Sophia Stanger.] i2mo. pp. 31. Bathurst. 1882.
Broughton, Duncan, Polding, Allwood, Fry, &c., on Papal
Claim of Jurisdiction in Australia, 1843. —See Religious
History.
Wales, New South; its Geography, Explora-
tion, Products, Aborigines, Settlements, Trade,
History, &c.— Penny Cyclopaedia. Vol. XXVII.
pp. 4-24 (dble. cols.) 4to. London. 1843.
BLACK. A Few Words on Interesting Matters
Relating to the Colony. By J. Black.
Sydney. 1843.
Colonial [i.e. N. S. Wales] Statistics, 1822-1842.
Extracted from a Paper printed by order. — Arden’s
Sydney Mag. pp. 90 et seq. Oct. 1843.
PROUT. Original Sketches (44) of Scenery in
New South Wales, Van Diemen’s Land, &c. 1843-47.
By J. Skinner Prout. In pencil, crayon, and water
colours :
Norton’s Basin, Cow Pasture River, Mulgoa, Jan.
10, 1843 by 7 1
Above the Waterfall, near the Weatherboard, Bathurst
Road 10J ~ 7
Police Station from the Weatherboard Inn, on the
Bathurst Road, Jan. 12, 1843 .......... 10J ~ 7
On the Bathurst Road, Jan. 13, 1843 .10 ~7
The Cove in which the Coves enjoyed Themselves,
March 23, 1843 . . 9i ~ 6 \
On Fairy Creek, Looking towards [ . . ] Dec. 30,1843. 10J ~
Illawarra Lake, Jan. 5. 1844 I2f ~
The Northern Beach, Wollongong, Jan. 9, 1844 . . 12 ~ 7I
Fern Tree Valley, Feb. 1844 9} » 7
The Ouse Bridge, V.D.L., March 25. 1844 .... 10J ~ 7!
From the Brickfields, Sandy Bay, Hobarton, April 8 io| ~ 7
Proctor’s Quarry, Hobarton, May 9, 1844 7 ~ 10
On the Macquarie Creek, Hobarton, May 9, 1844 . 10J „ 7
Juncti n of the Yarra Yarra ni ~ Q
Launceston, V.D.L., from the Westbury Road, Jan.
23, 1845 1 3l >»
Fall in the Black Gully, Native Tier, V.D.L., Feb. 4 10J ~ 7
On Lake St. Clair, V.D.L., Feb. 6 ioj ~ 7
Ti Trees, Lake St. Clair, Feb. 7, 1845 ....... 137 ~ 9
Mount Ida, from Comfort Cove, Lake St. Clair . . io* ~ 7
Our Tent, Comfort Cove, Lake St. Clair, Feb. 10, 1845 roj ~ 7
Outlet of Lake St. Clair, Feb. 12, 184 s 101 ~ 7s
On Board the “Alexander”; Goose Island and
Lighthouse, with Flinders Island, in the Distance,
Feb. 24, 1845 ........ _. 10J „ 7
From Our Tent, Mosquito Point, Lake St. Clair,
Feb. 27, 1845 _ ioj ~ 7
Our Tent at Mosquito Point, Lake St. Clair .... 10J ~ 7
Near Wybellinna, Flinders, March 5, 1845 13-J ~ 9J
Shepherd’s Hut, Wybellinna, Flinders, March, 1845. roj ~ 7]
Fall in Simcoe’s Gully, Bagdad, April 8, 1843 ... 9J „ 6J
Settlement at Port Arthur 13 ~ 8]
Port Arthur, from the Commandant’s Residence,
May 20, 1845 i2f „ 8J
The odd Mill, Macquarie Creek, Hobarton, Sept. 26,
1845 i°J 6£
Part of Schouten Island, Jan. 1, 1846 13! „ 9
The Bishop’s Crag, Schoutens, Jan. 2, 1846 .... 9I „ 6f
The Schoutens, from Nine Mile Beach, Swanport . 135 ~ 7J
Ben Lomond, from Boa Vista, Avoca, V.D.L.
Jan. 10, 1846 9§ „
Avoca, V.D.L., Jan. 17 1846 9! ~ 6?
The Derwent Crags, with Accompaniments, Dec. 5 ~ 13
In the Valley of Nile, Hobarton ioj „
The Penitentiary, Hobarton, Sept. 24, 1847 .... 13! ~ 8f
Tomb of the Constable who was shot in the Streets of
Hobarton, Aug. 29, 1843, by Martin Cash, the
Bush-Ranger, St. David’s Cemetery, Hobart
down, Dec. 21, 1847 8J ~ 11
Five additional Sketches (unnamed).
The above (at present in the possession of the compiler) repre-
sent but a few only of the Sketches which Skinner Prout made
while in the Colony. Many more were reproduced in the Colony
and by Virtue & Co., &c. See next page, also Australia,
by E. Carton Booth, 1874-76, and Tasmania, 1847.
BACKHOUSE. A Narrative of a Visit to the
Australian Colonies. By James Backhouse, with
maps and wood engravings. Bvo. pp. xviii. 560,
Appendices cxliv. London. 1843.
Some copies have India Proofs of Illustrations.
For earlier edition, see under 1834. For Memoir of Back-
house, see 1870.
CASWALL. Hints from the Journal of an
Australian Squatter [a near Relative of the Editor]
late in the Service of the Hon. East India Company.
Compiled for the Use of Emigrants ; and edited, with
an Introduction and Appendix, by Alfred Caswall,
i2mo. pp. iv. 64 and sketch map. London. 1843.
LITCHFIELD. N. S. Wales in 1843. By Dr.
Litchfield, late Inspector of Hospitals, &c., in South
Australia. [Fisher’s] Col. Mag. Vol. IV. [XII.]
pp. 470-479. London. 1843.
BARTLETT. New Holland; its Colonization,
Productions and Resources, with Observations on
the Relations Subsisting with Great Britain. By
Thomas Bartlett, Assist. Surg. 51st Light Infantry,
i2mo. pp. x. 312. London. 1843.


Michelena y Rojas (Francisco) Australia, 1843. —See Voy-
ages.
Broughton (Dr.) Visitation Journals, 1843-46. —See Religious
History.
HOOD. Australia and the East ; being a Journal
Narrative of a Voyage to New South Wales in an
Emigrant Ship : with a Residence of Some Months
in Sydney and the Bush, and the Route Home by
way of India and Egypt in 1841 and 1842. By John
Hood. Bvo. pp. xiv. 465. London. 1843.
A presentation copy from the Author to his Son, with addi-
tional matter and numerous sketches, is now in the possession
of Prof. Liversidge, Sydney.
PRIDDEN. Australia, its History and Present
Condition ; Containing an Account Both of the Bush
and of the Colonies with their Respective Inhabitants.
By Rev. W. Pridden, of Broxted, Essex, with wood-
cuts. i2mo. pp. xiv. 363 and map. London. 1843.
Second edition, 1845.
JUKES. Letters and Extracts from the Addresses
and Occasional Writings of J[oseph] Beete Jukes,
M.A....Edited with Connecting Memorial Notes, by
his Sister [C. A. Browne]. i2mo. pp. xx. 596 and
portrait. Lond. 1871.
Contains Letters from the Author to his Friends, written
during the Surveying Voyage of the “ Fly” to Torres Straits,
and Visits to New South Wales and Tasmania, 1842-44; also a
Chronological List of his Works and Publications.
MARSDEN. A Short Account of the Character
and Labours of the Rev. Samuel Marsden, formerly
Principal Chaplain of the Church of England, in New
South Wales; written for the express purpose of
Raising Funds towards the Erection of a Church in
the Parish of Mansfield, Parramatta. [By the Rev.
Wm. Woolls.] i2mo. pp. 84.
B. Isaacs, Parramatta. 1844.
“It is rather singular that this little work respecting Mr.
Marsden, should have been printed at the very Press which that
Rev. Gentleman introduced into New Zealand. The Press (in
conse ]uence of the arrival of others better adapted for the
Church Mission) was sold by the Society to Mr. Isaacs, who
brought it with him to Parramatta.” (Note on p. 84.)
MEREDITH. Notes and Sketches of New South
Wales, during a Residence from 1839 to 1844. By
Mrs. Charles (Louisa Anne) Meredith, cr. Bvo.
pp. xi. 164. London. 1844.
New South Wales. [From Mrs. Meredith’s
“Sketches.”] — Chambers’s Journal, N.S. Vol. 11.
No. 46. Edinburgh. 1844.
Statistics of New South Wales.— Simmonds’s
Colonial Mag. Vol. I. pp. 214-218. Lond. 1844.
PROUT. Journal of a Voyage from Plymouth to
Sydney....with a Short Description of Sydney. By
J. S. Prout, Artist, to which is added a Brief Account
of Port Phillip. Bvo. pp. 23. Lond. 1844.
PROUT. Sydney Illustrated. By John Skinner
Prout, with letterpress Description, by John Rae.
oblong 4to. Sydney. 1844.
PORTER. Australia : Past, Present, and Future.
With a Few Practical Hints for Intending Emigrants
and Capitalists, combined with a Review of the Policy
pursued by the Home Government towards her.
Jotted down on board the good ship “ Rajah,” on her
Passage from Port Phillip to London, in the Year
1844. By J. Porter.
Simmonds’s Colonial Mag. Vol. 111. 358-363,
375-399; IV- 29-48, 167-190. London. 1844-45.
BALFOUR. A Sketch of New South Wales.
By J. O. Balfour, Esq. for Six Years a Settler in the
Bathurst District. i2mo. pp. vi. 136. Lond. 1845.
BAKER. Sydney and Melbourne ; with Remarks
on the Present State and Future Prospects of New
South Wales, and Practical Advice to Emigrants.
By Charles John Baker. i2mo. pp. xii. 237.
London. 1845.
MACKENZIE. The Emigrant’s Guide ; or, Ten
Years’ Practical Experience in Australia. By Rev.
David Mackenzie, M.A....i8m0. pp. viii. 280.
London. 1845.
New Editions, 1848, 1852, &c.
LAGENEVAIS. Histoire d’une Deportee a Botany
Bay. Par F. de Lagenevais.— Revue des Deux
Mondes. sme serie, Tome XI. pp. 682-705.
Paris. 15 A out, 1845.
A Review of Cobbold’s Margaret Catchpole. —See Fiction.
The Causes of the Former Prosperity and Present
State of the Colony of New South Wales. Bvo. pp. 12.
Sydney. [1845 ?]
HOWITT. Australia; Historical, Descriptive,
and Statistic.... Notes of a Voyage, and Australian
Poems, &c. By Richard Howitt. i2mo. pp. xiv. 362.
London. 1845.
The author’s “ Impressions of Australia Felix,” with new
titlepage only.—See Victoria.
Henrici (M. Casimir) Histoire de I' Australasie, &c., 1845. —
See Collections.
Lang (Dr.) On Railroad from Sydney to Port Phillip, 1845. -
See Public Wonks.
Strzelecki (Count Paul E. de) Physical Description of New
South Wales, &c. (1845).—See Natural History.
BRAIM. A History of New South Wales, from
its Settlement to the Close of the Year 1844. By
Thomas Henry Braim, Principal of Sydney College,
N.S. W. 2 vols. i2mo. pp. 320, 344. Lond. 1846.
Art. “Australia.”— North British Review
Vol. IV. pp. 281-312. Edinburgh. Feb. 1846.
Census of the Population of New South Wales,
on 2nd March 1846. Folio, pp. iv. 48, and two maps.
Col.-Secretary’s Office, Sydney. 4th Nov. 1846.
Life and Adventures of Jas. F. O’Connell, the
Tattooed Man, during a residence of eleven years in
New Holland and the Caroline Islands. Bvo. pp. 30.
[ ] 1846.
Earl (G. W.) Enterprise in Tropical Australia. —See North
Australia.
Davidson (G. F.) Trade and Travel in the Far East.... Au-
stralia. 1825-46. See under 1839.
RITCHIE. The British World in the East: a
Guide, Historical, Moral, and Commercial, to India,
China, Australia, South Africa, and the other
Possessions or Connexions of Great Britain in the
Eastern or Southern Seas. By Leitch Ritchie. 2 vols.
Bvo. pp. xvi. 500; xii. 512. London. 1846.
The first vol. Books i. to v., relates wholly to India ; Vol. 11.
Book vi. Countries adjoining India; Books vii. and viii, T he
Chinese Empire and Japan ; Book ix. ch. 1. The Islands of the
Pacific (pp. 403-417) ; ch. n. New Zealand (pp. 418-434) ; ch. in.
New South Wales and Tasmania (pp. 435-452) ; ch. iv. Western
Australia, Southern Australia, Northern Australia (pp. 453-466);
Book x. Southern Africa and the Islands of the Indian and South
Atlantic Oceans.


LINGARD. A Narrative of the Journey to and
from New South Wales, including a Seven Years’
Residence in that Country. By Joseph Lingard.
i2mo. pp. Chapel-en-le-Frith. [1846]
New South Wales, as It Was, as It Is, and as It
Will Be ; or, Colonial Dreams.
“ Lay on, Macduff,
And damn’d be him who first cries, ‘ Hold, enough.’ ”
Also, Three Letters on the Bank of New South
Wales, signed “Nobody,” originally published in The
Sydney Morning Herald (Nov. & Dec. 1844). By the
Hermit in Australia. Bvo. pp. 36. Carnarvon. 1846.
HODGSON. Reminiscences of Australia. With
Hints on the Squatter’s Life. By Christopher Pem-
berton Hodgson. i2mo. pp. vii. 367. Lond. 1846.
On pp. 256-365 the Author gives an account of an Exploration
North-West from Jimbour in the Tracks of Leichhardt.
Remarks on the Moral State of New South Wales.
By E. H. — Simmonds’s Col. Mag. Vol. VIL pp.
399-402. London. 1846.
M‘COMBIE. Australian Sketches: IV. The
Scenery and Society of N. S. Wales. VIL Dis-
tinguished Convicts. By Thomas M'Combie.—Sim-
monds’s Col. Mag. Vol. VII. pp. 326-346; VIII.
365-369. London. 1846.
Mitchell (Sir T.) Expedition into Tropical Australia, 1846. —
See Explorations.
DELESSERT. Souvenirs d’un Voyage a Sydney
(Nouvelle Hollande) fait pendant l’annee 1845. Par
M. Eugene Delessert, clu Havre. i2mo. pp. vi. 240.
Paris. 1847.
AUDIGANNE. L’Australie et la Societe Austra-
lienne. Par A. Audiganne.— Revue des Deux
Mondes. sme ser. Tome XVII. pp. 638-672.
Paris, 15 Fevrier 1847.
MANSFIELD. Analytical View of the Census
of N.S. Wales for 1846; with Tables, showing the
Progress of the Population during the previous 25
years. By Ralph Mansfield. Originally written for
The Sydney Morning Herald, corrected and enlarged.
Bvo. pp. viii. 144. Sydney. 1847.
NEISON. Analysis of the Census of New South
Wales. By F. G. P. Neison. Read before the
Statistical Section of the British Association at Oxford,
28 June, 1847. Bvo. pp. 19.
Reprinted : Jour. Statistical Soc. Vol. XI.
pp. 38-54. London. March 1848.
M'COMBIE. Australian Sketches. By Thomas
M'Combie, Author of “ Arabin,” &c. Second edition.
Bvo. pp. iv. 243, [24]. Melbourne. 1847.
The Settler, The Bushranger, My Neighbourhood,
Jackey Jackey, The Overlander, Mountain Worship,
Transportation and Crime, Stations, Colonial Ser-
vants, The Merchant’s Bride, Melbourne, Australia,
Transportation and Emigration.
POWER (Sir Wm. Tyrone). Visit to Sydney in
1846—see Voyages, 1853.
Lowe (Right Hon. Robert, Lord Sherbrooke) and others, The
Impending Crisis, 1847. —See Politics ; Land Question.
HARRIS. Settlers and Convicts ; or, Recollections
of Sixteen Years’ Labour in the Australian Back-
woods. By An Emigrant Mechanic [Alexander
Harris]. iBmo. [Knight’s Monthly Volumes
XII. and XIII.] pp. xii. 5-435. London. 1847.
Kennedy (E. B.) Expeditions 1847-48. —See Explorations
M'COMBIE. Australian Sketches. —VIII. The
Convict, a History. By Thomas M‘Combie.
Simmonds’s Col.Mag., Vol. X. pp. 165-183, 298-312.
London. 1847.
M‘COMBIE. Australia and its Characteristics. By
Thomas M‘Combie. — Simmonds’s Col. Mag., Vol.
XI. pp. 37-41, XII. 184-188. London. 1847
SIDNEY. A Voice from the Far Interior of
Australia. By a Bushman [Addressed to the Magis-
trates and Country Gentlemen of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, by John Sidney]. i2mo. pp. 79.
London. 1847.
Written by Samuel Sidney for his brother, “ who was a close
observer, but no writer.”— Sidney's Three Colonies of Aust.
1853 edit., pref. p. ii.
MARJORIBANKS. Travels in New South Wales.
By Alexander Marjoribanks. i2mo. pp. viii. 267.
London. 1847.
COZENS. Adventures of a Guardsman. By
Charles Cozens. i2mo. pp. viii. 272. London. 1848.
The author after boysterous school and college experiences,
entered the Royal Horse Guards (Blues). Having “threatened”
one of his superior officers when intoxicated, he was tried by
court-martial, and sentenced to transportation for seven years.
He was in N.S. Wales from 1840 to 1846. He gives a very in-
teresting account of society in the Colony at that time.
ATKINS. The Wanderings of the Clerical
Eulysses ; Described in a Narrative of Ten Years’
Residence in Tasmania and New South Wales ; at
Norfolk Island and Moreton Bay; in Calcutta, Madras,
and Cape Town [1836-47]. By the Rev. T. Atkins.
i2mo. pp. xvi. 252. Author, Greenwich. 1859.
Dedicated to Lord Glenelg from Blackheath Hill, sth Dec.
T 859. Reissued in 1869, under new title, with additions :
Reminiscences of Twelve Years’ Residence in Tas-
mania and New South Wales, Norfolk Island and
Moreton Bay; Calcutta, Madras, and Cape Town
[1836-47]; the United States of America ; and the
Canadas [lB6l]. By the Rev. Thomas Atkins. [New
Edition.] i2mo. pp. xii. 292. Malvern. 1869.
“ What is a Pound?” or Waste Lands versus the
Australian Settler. Showing whether the Fear of
Overpopulating those Settlements is well or ill-
grounded. Bvo. pp. 20. London. 1848.
BYRNE. Twelve Years’ Wanderings in the British
Colonies, from 1835 to 1847. ByJ. C. Byrne. 2vols.
Bvo. pp. vii. 431 ; vii. 411, and two maps.
London. 1848.
Vol. T. New Zealand, New South Wales, Australia Felix or
Port Phillip. 11. Van Diemen’s Land or Tasmania, South
Australia, Western Australia, with Chapters on Emigration.
BYRNE. Emigrant’s Guide to New South Wales
Proper, Australia Felix, and South Australia. By J.
C. Byrne.... iBmo. pp. iv. 128, and map. Lond. 1848.
Eleven editions issued in this and following year, 1849.
HAYGARTH. Recollections of Bush Life in
Australia during a Residence of Eight Years. By
Henry William Haygarth. cr. Bvo. pp. vi. 162.
London. 1848.
Emigration Circular, No. i. Hand Book and
Guide to Australia. Bvo. pp. London. 1848.
■ Scott (Francis, M.P.) Competence in a Colony Contrasted
with Poverty at Home, 1848.—See Politics: Emigration.
Broughton (Bishop) and his Labours in Australia —
Memoir of Joshua Watson by Archdeacon
Churton. 2 vols. i2mo. Chap. xxii. Oxford. 1861.


SIDNEY’S Australian Hand Book. How to Settle
and Succeed in Australia.... By a Bushman [John
Sidney], Seven editions. i2mo. pp. 123. Lond. 1848.
Eighth anti Ninth Editions : with New Preface and
Chapter of Evidence on the Land Question and Fallacies of the
Wakefield Theories, iemo. pp. 126. London. 1849.
SIDNEY. Life in the Bush ; or, Plain Directions
for the Australian Emigrant. By a Bushman [John
Sidney],—Nine Papers in [Samuel] Sidney’s Emi-
grant’s Journal. Oct.-Dec. 1848.
CHISHOLM. Emigration and Transportation
Relatively Considered. In a Letter dedicated, by
permission, to Earl Grey. By Mrs. Chisholm. Bvo.
ij. London. 1848.
Cheap edit'on for gratuitous distribution at 15.5. per 100.
CHISHOLM. Comfort for the Poor. Meat Three
Times a Day ! Voluntary Information from the
People of N.S. Wales, Collected in the Colony by
Mrs. Chisholm in 1845 and 1846. London. 1848.
WELLS. A Geographical Dictionary ; or Gazet-
teer of the Australian Colonies : their Physical and
Political Geography, together with a brief Notice of
all the Capitals, Principal Towns, and Villages : also
of Rivers, Bays, Gulfs, Mountains, Population and
General Statistics. By William Henry Wells. Bvo.
pp. xvi. 438; Advertisements pp. 16. Sydney. 1848.
After the Discovery of Gold this work was issued with new
title-page :
“A Geographical Dictionary, &c....together with
a Brief Notice 0f....a150 of Mines , Rivers, Bays,” &c.
London. 1851.
Australia and New Zealand. Viewed as to their
Eligibility for British Emigration. Giving Ample
Details to meet the Inquiries of all Classes. By an
Englishman (No. 11. of the Series “Information
for Emigrants”). i2mo. pp. 52. London. 1848.
FOWLES. Sydney in 1848. Illustrated by Copper-
plate Engravings of its Principal Streets, Public Build-
ings, Churches, Chapels, etc., from Drawings by
Joseph Fowles. 4to. pp. 88 and 40 plates.
Sydney. [1848.]
Reprinted. Sydney. 1880.
In addition to Views of the principal Public Buildings it
contains views and elevations of shops, &c. in the leading
streets.
WESTMACOTT. Sketches in Australia. From
Drawings by Captain R. M. Westmacott, late 4th
King’s Own Regiment. Drawn on Stone by W.
Spreat. Issued in three parts, each containing six
views, royal 4to. Exeter. [1848.]
List of the Sketches :
1. North Head and Quarantine Ground.
2. Sydney Harbour, from Government Domain.
3. Sydney Cove, Government House, &c.
4. Sydney from above Vaucluse.
5. Botany Bay from New Town.
6. Natives (1. Armed. 2. In deep Mourning).
7. The liggama River, near Pambula.
8. R ad and Bridge, Emu Plains to Bathurst.
9. Blow Hole, Kiama, Illawarra.
10. Valley of Jamberroo, Illawarra.
11. Mountain Pass, from Jamberroo to Bong Bong.
12. Natives.
13. Johnstone Plains and Five Islands.
14. Monument to La Perouse, Botany Bay.
15. Condons Creek, Illawarra.
16. Wooranora River.
17 ■ vis Bay
18 Warragi. aba R.ver, near the Cowpastures.
Woman’s Mission in Australia. London. 1849.
[A Tract addressed to Female Emigrants.]
Sketch of the Colonial Life of Mrs. Chisholm. —
Sidney’s Emigrant’s Jour. 2nd ser. pp. 267-286.
Pictures of Emigrants [from a Pamphlet by Mrs.
Chisholm] — Ibid. pp. 21-26 ; 192-195. Lond. 1849.
HODGSON. Emigration to the Australian Set-
tlements ; being the Substance of Lectures delivered
in the Spring of 1849, at Walsall, Witwick, Ashby
de la Zouch, Leicester, Ware, Biggleswade, and St.
Neots. By [Sir] Arthur Hodgson, Esq., one of the
Committee of the Colonization Society, and for
Nine Years a Magistrate of the Colony of N.S.W.
i2mo. second edit. pp. iv. 43. London. 1849.
PATTISON. New South Wales : its Past, Present,
and Future Condition. With Notes upon its Re-
sources and Capabilities. By a Resident of Twelve
Years’ Experience [John Pattison], i2mo. pp. 140.
London. [Edinburgh] 1849.
BUTLER. The Australian Emigrant’s Complete
Guide : containing a Descriptive History of Australia,
an Account of the Climate, Soil, and Natural Pro-
ductions of Western Australia, South Australia, and
the Swan River Settlement. By Samuel Butler, Esq.
new edit. iBmo. [ll2 pp.] and map. Glasgow. 1849.
Perils, Pastimes, and Pleasures of an Emigrant in
Australia, Vancouver’s Island and California. [Edited
by J. W.] i2mo. pp. 404. London. 1849.
CHISHOLM. Suggestions for the Formation of
a Family Colonization Loan Society by Mrs. Chis-
holm.—Sidney’s Emigrant’s Jour. 2nd ser. pp.
99-105. London. 1849.
HARRIS. A Guide to Port Stephens in N.S.W.,
the Colony of the Australian Agricultural Company.
By Alexander Harris.... i6mo. pp. iv. 223 and map.
London. 1849.
SMITH. Whether to go, and Whither? or, the
Cape and the Great South Land. Being a Practice
View of the whole Southern Lands of Settlement,
with full Information for intending Emigrants. By
Sidney Smith.... i2mo. pp. xxvi. 105. Lond. 1849.
Harris (Alex ) Sixteen Years in Australia by an Emigrant
Mechanic, 1849. Reissue of “ Settlers and Convicts,”
1847.
HASSKARL. Australien und seine Kolonien
Siid-Australien, Australia Felix, &c.... Wilkinson,
Westgarth, Wyld, &c. Ein Handbuch fiir Deutsche
Auswanderer von J. R. Hasskarl. i2mo. pp. xvi.
404 and map. Elberfeld. 1849.
Kohler (A. H.) Australien und Oceanien, 1849. —See Col-
lections.
New South Wales, and the Crisis of 1844.
From the Calcutta Review. No. XXII. Bvo. pp. 37.
[ ] [1849.
The article is headed by the titles of several books : Mit-
chell Backhouse, Sturt (1849). Bvrne, Pkidden, Earl
(1846), and Burton, but it is written with little or no reference
to their contents.
TOWNSEND. Rambles and Observations in
N. S. Wales, with Sketches of Men and Manners,
Notices of the Aborigines, Glimpses of Scenery and
Some Hints to Emigrants. By Joseph Phipps
Townsend. i2mo. pp. vii. 312. London. 1849.
Life in New South Wales. [From Townsend’s
“ Observations.”] — Chambers’s Journal, Vol. XI.
(N.S.) pp. 331, 332. Edinburgh. 1849.


Bland (Dr. W.) Letters to Charles Buller,iB49. —See Politics.
Lowe, Lang, Dickinson, Stephen, Monteagle, Lyttelton, and
others, on New Constitution for New South Wales, 1849-53. —
See Politics.
MARTENS. Sketches in the Environs of Sydney;
being Part of a Series of sketches intended to Illustrate
the Scenery of New South Wales. Drawn on stone
and tinted by Conrad Martens. Printed by J. Allan.
Oblong 4to, wrapper. Sydney, January, 1850.
1. Statue of Sir Richard Bourke.
2. Government House and Macquarie Fort.
3. Trees “ Banksia serrata,” on the right of the road to
Mrs. Darling’s Point.
4. Rocks, called Mrs. Macquarie’s Chair.
PROUT. Diorama of Australia, Now open....
Leicester Square, London. Scenes from Paintings
made on the Spot, by J. Skinner Prout; including
Views of Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide, and Hobart
Town, Bush Scenes in the Interior, Bivouac of Emi-
grants, and Emigrant’s Residence, Sheep and Cattle
Stations in the Port Phillip District, Haunts of the
Bushrangers, Encampment of Aborigines, the Penal
Settlements, &c. [Exhibited by means of the magic
lantern.] The Diorama is accompanied by appropri-
ate Music, and by a Lecture Descriptive of the
Australian Colonies. Open Daily at Three and Eight,
Admission One Shilling, Reserved Seats, 2 5., Chil-
dren and Schools, Half-price. London. 1850.
KIRCHNER. Australien und Seine Vortheile
fiir Auswanderer von Wilhelm Kircher. Bvo. pp.
viii. 168. Frankfurt a M. 1850.
The author was resident nine years in N. S. W., and Consul
for Hamburg in Sydney.
The Australian Colonies: New South Wales.
By S. With two coloured maps. —The Anglo-
Saxon, Vol. 11. pp. 277-290. London. 1850.
PECK. Recollections of Sydney, the Capital of
N. S. Wales, By B. C. Peck. i2mo. pp. vi. 153,
and plan of Sydney. London. 1850.
The author spent a few months in the Colony, during 1848-49.
WOOLLEY. Reminiscences of the Life of a
Bushman ; or, How to Make Happiness, Abundance,
and Profit, the Results of Emigrating to Australia.
By Thomas Woolley....who has “run the gauntlet”
through thick and thin, and experienced every state
and stage of fortune in several of the Colonies of that
Vast Continent i2mo. pp. iv. 40. London. 1850.
Chambers’s Papers for the People, No. 45. Aus-
tralia, and Van Diemen’s Land (Tasmania). Bvo.
pp. 32. Edinburgh. [1850.]
Reprinted, with additions, pp. 32. [1879.]
MANN’S Emigrant’s Complete Guide to Port
Stephens, etc. i2mo. London. 1850.
Progress of Emigration, and Contrast of New
Colonies with Old. July 1848 (Signed T. F. E.)
with Postscript, Jan. 29, 1850. Bvo. pp. 24.
London, Privately Printed. [1850.]
Remarks on the Australian Colonies, New Zealand, Emigra-
tion, and on some General Doctrines about Colonization.
Emigrants’ Letters, being Recent Communica-
tions from Settlers in the British Colonies [Chiefly
Australia and New Zealand]. i2mo. pp. viii. 132
and map. London. 1850.
Published for the Committee of the Emigrants’ School Fund.
BURTON. The Emigrant’s Manual. [By John
Hill Burton.] i2mo. pp. 137 and map.
Chambers, Edinburgh. 1850.
New edition. —See 1851.
1851. Separation of Victoria from New South
Wales.
GERSTAECKER (Frederick) Visit to Sydney and
Journey Overland to Adelaide in 1851. —See Voy-
ages.
PERKINS. A Glimpse of Australia. Memoir
and Writings of James H. Perkins. Edited by Wm. H.
Chambers. Vol. 11. pp. 462-500. Cr. Bvo.
Cincinnati, 1851.
Containing notes from Sturt, Lang, Strzelecki, Stokes,
Leichhardt, Mitchell, &c.
LEE. Adventures in Australia; or, the Wander-
ings of Captain Spencer in the Bush and Wilds.
Containing Accurate Descriptions of the Habits of
the Natives and the Natural Productions and Features
of the Country. By Mrs. R. Lee (Formerly Mrs.
T. E. Bowdich), author of “The African Wanderers,”
with four illustrations by J. S. Prout. J2mo. pp. xii.
364. London. 1851.
MELVILLE. The Present State of Australasia ;
including N. S. Wales, W. A., S. A., Victoria, and
N. Z., with Practical Hints on Emigration; also
Remarks on Prison Discipline and Transportation ; to
which are added Land Regulations and Description
of the Aborigines. By Henry Melville, a Twenty
Years’Resident. i2mo., pp. xiv. 392. London. 1851.
GRUBE. Bilder und Scenen aus dem Natur und
Menschenleben in den Fiinf Haupttheilen der Erde.
Nach vorziigl. Reisebeschreibungen fur die reisere
Jugend ausgewahlt und bearb. Auguste Wilhelm
Grube. (4 vols.)
Vol. I. Asien und Australien. pp. viii. 235.
Stuttgart. 1851.
Third Edition. Bvo. pp. 276. Stuttgart, iB6O.
Dutch Transl. Schetsen en tafereelen uit
Amerika, Azie, en Australia. 2 vols. Bvo.
Sneek. 1861.
New South Wales Census, taken Ist March,
1851. Supplement to N. S. W. Government
Gazette, folio, pp. 47. Sydney, 7 Nov. 1851.
Morrison (Robert) What Should the Government do for
Australia? London 1851. —See Politics.
The Bushrangers.—
Chambers’s 134-138; 285-288.
Edinburgh. 1851.
Rapport sur l’Australie et sur les relations even-
tuelles de commerce que la Belgique pourrait ouvrir
avec les differentes lies de I’Oceanie —Execution des
depeches du Ministre de l’lnterieur du 8 Oct. 1849 et
du Ministre des Affaires etrangeres du 18 Aout 1849,
par Edouard Wyrekens, Consul de Belgique a Sydney,
royal Bvo. Brussels. 1851.
CASINO. Rathgeber fur Auswanderer nach Aus-
tralien, mit einer Geographischen, und Statistischen
Beschreibung dieses Landes.... Von Carl Casino,
pp. iv. 60. i6mo. Quedlinburg. 1851.
Recollections of a Ramble from Sydney to Southampton, via
South America, Panama, the West Indies, &c. 1851. —See
Voyages, 1851.
First Impressions of Australia. By a New
Comer, Adelaide— Ham’s Australian Mag. Vol.
11. pp. 169-183 ; Melbourne, pp. 204-219 ; Sydney,
pp. 295-306. Melbourne. 1851.


SHAW. Golden Dreams and Waking Realities ;
being the Adventures of a Gold Seeker in California
and the Pacific Islands. By William Shaw. i2mo.
pp. xii. 316. London. 1851.
The author left Australia for California just before the Dis-
covery of Gold in Australia.
May 1851. Discovery of Goldin Australia.*
Earliest Gold Discoveries—see Parliamentary Papers (1852,
&c.), Hargraves (1855), Campbell (1856), Rudder (1861),
Sutherland (i38o), and others.
Beit, Stutchbury, Clarke, Jukes, Hopkins and others on Gold
and Gold Fields—see Geology and Mining.
The Bathurst Diggings —
Chambers’s Journal, XVI. 291-294.
Edinburgh. 1851.
CHAMBERS’S Emigrant’s'Manual to Australia,
New Zealand, &c., with a Dissertation by John Hill
Burton. i2mo. Edinburgh, 1851.
Dissertation on Emigration, pp. 93; Australia, pp. Jv. 113,
[Gold Discovery, pp. 114-128], New Zealand, South Africa, &c.,
pp. iv. 122 ; Canada and the United States, pp. vi. 135. Articles
on Australia and New Zealand reprinted separately.
CHAMBERS. The Emigrant’s Manual. Austra-
lia. [New Edition.] With Brief Account of Gold
Discovery at Ophir, Bathurst, May, 1851.
l2mo. pp. iv. 134. Edinburgh. 1851.
MARTENS. Sketches Illustrative of the Scenery
of New South Wales, from Nature and on Stone,
by Conrad Martens ; printed by J. Allan. Oblong
4to. Wrapper. Sydney, July, 1851.
Sydney Cove. Botanic Garden.
Entrance to the Government House. Double Bay.
Domain, Sydney. The Lighthouse.
ERSKINE. A Short Account of the late Dis-
coveries of Gold in Australia; with Notes of a Visit
to the Gold District. By John Elphinstone Erskine,
Captain R.N. Bvo. pp. 101 and map. Lond. 1851.
Second Edition. Bvo. pp. 101 and map.
London. 1852.
HENDERSON. Excursions and Adventures in
N. S. W. with Pictures of Squatting and Bush
Life ; an Account of the Climate, Production, and
Natural History of the Colony, Manners and Customs
of the Natives, with Advice to Emigrants. By Lieut.
John Henderson. 2 Vols. i2mo. pp. xii. 314,
viii. 294. London. 1851.
Reissued, 1854.
Un Jeune Suisse en Australie suite des Soirees
de Famille et des Lettres d’une Famille Suisse. Par
l’auteur de “La Vie d’Elisabeth Fry,” &c. i2mo.
pp. 204, map, and nine illustrations. Geneve. 1852.
A Compilation descriptive of New South Wales ; in the form
of letters from “Daniel Viret ” to his Parents, 1849-51.
MORTIMER. Far Off [Part I.]; or, Asia and
Australia Described. With Anecdotes and numerous
illustrations. By the Author of “ The Peep of Day”
[Mrs. Favell Lee Mortimer],
12mo. xvi. 316, and map. London. 1852.
Often reprinted. In the later editions the Australian section
is transferred to Part 11. “Australia, Africa and America
Described.”
* See also on this subject the Colony of Victoria, 1851 and
onward.
PICKERING. Gold Pen and Pencil Sketches;
or, the Adventures of Mr. John Slasher at the Turon
Diggings. By G. F. P. [George Ferrers Pickering],
with Illustrations by T. Balcombe.
roy. Bvo. Sydney. 1852.
The Harvest of Gold—
Dickens’s Household Words. Lond. 1852.
Correspondence Relative to the Recent Dis-
covery of Gold in Australia. Presented to both
Houses of Parliament by command of Her Majesty,
February 3, 1852. folio, pp. iv. 76. London. 1852.
Includes letters from Governors C. A. Fitzroy, C. J. Latrobe,
Letters and Reports of S. Stutchbury, W. B. Clarke, Extracts
from Newspapers, Proclamations, &c.
Reprinted. —Correspondence Relative to the
Recent Discovery of Gold in Australia. Presented
to both Houses of Parliament, February 3, 1852.
Bvo. 32 pp. London. E. Wilson. 1852.
MUNDY. Our Antipodes; or, Residence and
Rambles in the Australasian Colonies. With a
Glimpse of the Gold Fields. By Lt.-Col. Godfrey
Charles Mundy. In 3 vols. Bvo. pp. xii. 17-410;
405 ; 431, and 15 litho-illustrations. London. 1852.
Second Edition, revised. 3 vols. Bvo. pp.
xii. 17-410; 405; 431. Illust. London. 1852.
Third Edition, i vol. Bvo. pp. viii. 637,
and 8 illust. London. 1855.
Fourth and Fifth Editions. i2mo. pp.
iv. 282. London. 1857.
German Translation. Wanderimgen in Aus-
tralien und Vandiemensland. Nach G. C. Mundy.
Deutsch bearbeitet von Friederich Gerstiicker.
i2mo. pp. xii. 271. Leipzig. 1856.
Re-issued [new cover only] 1874.
The California of the South. A Visit to the Turon
Diggings by a Clergyman in 1851. — Col. Ch. Chron.
v. pp. 300-302, 428. London. 1852.
MOSSMAN. The Gold Regions of Australia : a
Descriptive Account of New South Wales, Victoria,
and South Australia; with Particulars of the Recent
Gold Discoveries. i2mo. pp. 104, map. Lond. 1852.
Second and Third Editions [with additions].
i2mo. pp. 128, and map. London. 1852.
EARP. The Gold Colonies of Australia; their
History, territorial Divisions, Produce and Capa-
bilities ; also Ample Notice of the Gold Mines and
How to Get to Them. By G[eorge] Butler Earp.
i2mo. pp. viii. 216 and map. [First Edition of
10,000 copies.] London. [June] 1852.
Enlarged and Corrected Edition [of six
thousand copies]. i2mo. pp. viii. 248 and map.
London. 1852.
Enlarged and Corrected Edition [l6th to
30th thousand]. London. 1852.
Thirty-fifth Thousand. —See 1853.
The Author was editor of The Australian and New Zealand
Gazette.
Further Papers Relative to the Recent Dis-
covery of Gold in Australia Presented to Both
Houses of Parliament.... June 14, 1852.
Folio pp. viii. 131. London. 1852.
Report of S. Stutchbury and Letters from Governors of
Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania on the Effect of the
Discoveries in their respective Colonies, &c.


MACKENZIE. Memoirs of Mrs. Caroline Chis-
holm, with an account of her Philanthropic Labours
in India, Australia, and England ; to which is added
a Plistory of the Family Colonization Loan Society ;
also the Question, Who ought to Emigrate ? Answered.
By Eneas Mackenzie. i2mo. pp. xii. 187 and
portrait. London. 1852.
Second Edition, pp. xii. 187. London. 1852.
Third, or Emigrants’ and Railway edition.
i2mo. pp. xvi. 197. London. 1852.
MACKENZIE. Ten Years in Australia ; being
the Results of his Experience as a Settler during that
Period. By Rev. David Mackenzie, M.A. Third
edition, with an Introductory Chapter containing the
Latest Information regarding the Colony. i2mo. pp.
vi. 152 and map. London. 1852.
Fourth Edition, including .table and index.
i2mo. pp. viii. 143 and map. London. 1852.
First edition; “The Emigrant’s Guide,” 1845; second
edition, 1848.
MACKENZIE. The Gold Digger ; a Visit to the
Gold Fields of Australia in February, 1852; together
with much useful Information for intending Emi-
grants. By Rev. David Mackenzie, M.A. i2mo.
pp. 86 and map. London. 1852.
CASSELL. Emigrant’s Hand-Book ;to which is
added, a Guide to the Gold Fields of Australia. By
John Cassell. i2mo. London. 1852.
The Guide to Australia and the Gold Regions,
containing the Most Recent and Complete Accounts
of the Gold Fields, together with Advice to Intending
Emigrants. By a Liverpool Merchant. With map.
i2mo. pp. viii. 108. London and Liverpool. 1852,
JUKES. Australia and its Gold Regions. [By
J. Beete Jukes.] (Chambers’s Repository of Tracts.)
i2mo. pp. 32. [Edinburgh. September, 1852.]
CAPPER. The Emigrants’ Guide to Australia,
containing the fullest particulars Relating to the
Recently Discovered Gold-Fields, the Government
Regulations for Gold Seeking, &c. With a new
map. By John Capper, late Editor of the “ Emi-
grants’ Journal.” i2mo. pp. viii, 84.
Philip, Liverpool. 1852.
Reissue : Philips’ Emigrants’ Guide to Australia,
containing the Fullest Particulars relating to the
Recently-Discovered Gold-Fields. By John Cap-
per. i2mo. pp. 90 and map. Liverpool. 1852.
Second edition, 1853 ; Third edition, 1855.
MURRAY’S Guide to the Gold Diggings. The
Australian Gold Diggings : Where they are and How
to get at them, with Letters from Settlers and Diggers
telling how to work them. i2mo. pp. iv. 100.
Stewart & Murray, London. 1852.
MATHESON. Facts from the Australian Gold
Diggings. With a Few Practical Hints to Intending
Emigrants. By M. Matheson, just returned from
the Colonies and who was at the Mines in February
last. i2mo. pp. 24. London. 1852.
The Four Colonies of Australia; their
Geography, Climate, Agriculture, and Commerce ; an
Account of the Discovery of Gold ; Discovery of the
Gold Country; How Gold is obtained; and the
Consequences of the Discovery. With advice to
Emigrants. i2mo. pp. 64. London. [1852].
CHAMBERS’S Miscellany of Instructive and
Entertaining Tracts. No. 51 —Gold and Gold
Diggers. i2mo. pp. Edinburgh. [1852].
Re-written. i2mo. pp. 32. Edinburgh. 1869.
SIDNEY. The Three Colonies of Australia:
N.S.W., Victoria, and S. Australia; their Pastures,
Copper-Mines, and Gold-fields. By Samuel Sidney,
with engravings. Bvo. pp. 427. London. 1852.
Second Edition, revised [abridged, and re-
arranged]. Bvo. pp. 412, map by Wyld. Lond. 1853.
American Edition [From the Second London
edition] with ten illustrations. i2mo. pp. 408.
Auburn : Buffalo : Cincinnati. 1854.
German Translation : Australien. Ge-
schichte und Beschreibung der drei Australischen
Kolonien.... Von Samuel Sidney. Nach der 2ten
Auflage des Englischen Originals iibersezt von C.
Volckhausen. Bvo. pp. vi. 416. Hamburg. 1854.
Australia : Who Should Go ; —How to Go ;
What to Do when There. With a Map and Latest
Information. i2mo. pp. viii. 40. Liverpool. [1852].
Australia and Her Treasures.
“ Whose mountains, pregnant by the beam
Of the warm sun, with diamonds teem ;
Whose rivulets are like rich brides,
Lovely, with gold beneath their tides.”
—Paradise and the Peri.
By Nugget. Bvo. pp. 32. London. 1852.
Third Edition, with additions. Bvo. pp. 38.
London. 1852.
The author acknowledges his indebtedness to the kindness and
personal assistance of Capt. Westmacott for the chief materials
relative to Australia.
PROUT. A Voyage to Australia, and a Visit to
the Gold Fields. Illustrated with six Engravings
from Sketches taken on the spot. [By J. Skinner
Prout.] i2mo. [pp. 30]. London. 1852.
See “ Journal of a Voyage.” 1844.
Gleanings from the Gold Fields. A Guide for
the Emigrant in Australia. By an Australian Jour-
nalist. With Illustrations by J. S. Prout, and four
maps. Bvo. pp. iv. 91. London. 1852.
ANGAS. Views of the Gold Regions of Aus-
tralia. Drawn on the Spot by G. F. Angas, 1851.
Imp. 4to. London [1852].
1. Frontispiece: Summerhill Creek.
2. Gold Washing at Summerhill Creek.
3. Gold Diggers’ Encampment.
4. Fitzroy Bar, junction of the Creeks.
5. General View of Ophir.
6. Gold Diggers at Bathurst on Way to Ophir.
JAMES. The Australian Emigrant’s Companion,
containing Practical Advice to Intending Emigrants,
Especially to those of the Working Classes. By Mrs.
Anne James, for several years a Resident in the Colony
of Australia [wife of Dr. Philip James, author of
“ The Family Physician”]. l2mo. pp. 48. Lond. 1852.
Gold Mines in Australia and in England. Advice
to Persons intending to Emigrate to Australia,
together with a Report of a Lecture by a Gentleman
[Mr. Shilling] who has recently returned from the
Australian Diggings ; and, also, the Discovery of a
Rich Gold Mine in England [at North Molton, on the
property of Lord Poltimore]. Price Two-Pence.
Bvo. pp. 20. Newcastle-on-Tyne. 1852.
Contains also a Letter from Hobson’s Bay, March 2, 1852.
written by H—— to Dear C , hoping that he had received
his last letters but had “ not acted upon them.”....
“ I have returned a third time from the diggings without
success, and worse than that, worn out and exhausted in body
and purse....hundreds have been totally ruined —scores have
made fortunes —hundreds have done pretty well—thousands
have done nothing—and many have found a grave—We all
conceived the opportunity had come for making a fortune, and
have endeavoured to embrace it, and have wished others to
share in it, but like a ‘will-o’-the-wisp’ it has receded as we
have endeavoured to grasp it; and it will ruin the whole country
unless the pastoral and agricultural interests can hold their
position as well as the gold. At present they are entirely
neglected, and we may look upon the country as already
105 t....”


HUW. Gwlad yr aur ; neu, Gydymaith yr ymfudwr
Cymreig i Australia.... Gan D. ap G. ap Pluw, Fed-
dyg. Hefyd, can yr ymfudwr, Gan Eben Fardd.
i2mo. pp. 52. Carnarvon P1852].
WILLIAMS. Awstralia a’r Cloddfeydd Aur. J.
Williams [Glanmor]. l2mo. pp. viii. 160, and Map.
Dinbych [Denbigh]. 1852.
FAIRFAX. The Colonies of Australia: their
Formation, Progress, and Present State; the Dis-
covery of the Gold Fields, with the Latest Intelligence
from the Diggings ; Advice to Emigrants ; &c. By
John Fairfax, Esq. Bvo. London. 1852.
Second Edit. Bvo. pp. 60. London. 1852.
HUGHES. The Australian Colonies; their
Origin and Present Condition. By William Hughes.
i2mo. pp. viii. 307. London. 1852.
Also in two parts : Travellers’ Library, Nos. 32 and 33.
Dutch Translation : Engelands Australische
Kolonien, in haar outstaan en tegenwoord. toestand.
Bvo. Dordrecht. 1854.
SHAW. A Tramp to the Diggings ; being Notes
of a Ramble in Australia and New Zealand. By John
Shaw, M.D. i2mo. pp. vii. 317. London. 1852.
Dr. Shaw refers to his ‘‘ Tramp” in a later work—see 1857.
JAMESON. Australia and her Gold Regions : a
Full Description of its Geology, Climate, Products,
Natives, Agriculture, Mineral Resources, Society,
and Principal Cities. With Map and Statistical
Tables, showing the Regulations and Results of
Mining Operations, Cost of Passage, Outfit, &c the
whole forming a Complete Guide-Book to the Gold
Mines. By R. G. Jameson, M.R.C.S.E., two years
Resident in, and late Medical Supt. under H.M.
Emigration Commissioners.
i2mo. pp. 154, and map. New York. 1852.
Second Edition, with additions, i2mo. pp.
viii. 6 —159. New York. 1852.
Dr. Jameson published a previous work on the Colony—see
1842.
Gold Discoveries [in California and in Australia]—
Quarterly Rev. Vol. XCI. pp. 504 —540.
London. Sept. 1852.
LANG. The Australian Emigrant’s Manual ; or,
A Guide to the Gold Colonies of New South Wales
and Port Phillip. By John Dunmore Lang, D.D....
i2mo. pp. xvi. 93. London. 1852.
German Translation. Handbuch fiir Aus-
wander nach Australien oder Der Fiihrer zti den
Gold-Colonien von Neu-Stid-Wales und Port-
Phillip. Herausgegeben von Dr. Justus Wohlge-
muth. 12mo. pp. viii. 106. Berlin. 1853.
LANG. An Historical and Statistical Account of
New South Wales, including a Visit to the Gold Re
gions and a Description of the Mines ; with an Esti-
mate of the Probable Result of the Great Discovery.
By John Dunmore Lang, D.D. ..Third Edition,
bringing down the History of the Colony to the First
of July, 1852. 2 vols. l2mo. pp. xvi. 494; xii.
591, and two maps. London. 1852.
Lang (Dr. J. D.) Freedom and Independence for Australia,
1852 —see Politics.
LANCELOTT. Australia as it Is ; its Settle-
ments, Farms, and Gold Fields. By F. Lancelott,
Esq. 2 vols. i2mo. pp. xii. 317; vi. 304, and two
plates. London. 1852.
Second Edit., revised. 2 vols. i2mo.
London. 1853.
PROUT. An Illustrated Handbook of the Voyage
to Australia, and a Visit to the Gold Fields. By J.
S. Prout ...Descriptive of the New Moving Panorama
Exhibiting Daily at 309 Regent Street.
Bvo. pp. 32. London [1852].
Australia; its Scenery, Natural History, and
Resources: with a Glance at its Gold Fields.
iBmo pp. iv. 192. London [1852].
R.T. S. Monthly Volume, No. 93.
MACKENZIE’S Australian Emigrant’s Guide :
giving Faithful and Important Advice on the Choice
of a Ship, Outfit, Preservation of Health During the
Voyage, the Best Way to Proceed on Arrival at the
Destined Port; with an Account of the Colony and
the Gold Diggings, the Passenger’s Contract Ticket,
Our Government’s Offer of Land in Van Dieman’s
Island, and Particulars for a Free Passage. By
Eneas Mackenzie. Dedicated to Mrs. Chisholm.
Bvo. pp. 32. [London. 1852.]
MACKAY. The Great Gold-Field : a Pedestrian
Tour through the First Discovered District of N.S.
Wales, Oct. and Nov., 1852. By Angus Mackay.
Bvo. pp. 68. Sydney. 1853.
Practical Hints to Intending Emigrants. By a
Passenger in June, 1852. London. 1853.
MACKENZIE. The Emigrant’s Guide to Austra-
lia. With a Memoir of Mrs. Chisholm. l2mo.
pp. vi. 187, portrait and frontispiece. Lond. [1853].
Title and Contents, pp. vi. ; Memoir, pp. 3-32; Mackenzie’s
Australian Emigrant’s Guide, pp. 33-130; New Emigration Act,
pp. 131-187.
CARTER. A Descriptive Hand-Book to “The
Two Lands of Gold,” or, The Australian and Cali-
fornian Directory for 1853. Profusely Illustrated.
By Harry Lee Carter.... i2mo. pp. 40. Lond. 1853.
A Handbook to a Diorama painted by Charles S. James from
American Sketches by George Gatlin and William Kelly—those
of Australia were by Mr. Charles Robinson, a settler. There
were musical accompaniments by Henry Russell. Australian
Scenes : 1. Melbourne. 2. Geelong. 3. Mustering and Branding
of Cattle. 4. Emigrants Camping. 5. Dingoes attacking a
sheepfold by night. 6. Working at Ophir. 7. Government
House and Farm Cove, Sydney. 8. City of Sydney. 9. Kan-
garoo Hunting. 10. Return of the Dray from the Produce Mar-
ket. 11. Issuing Gold Licences. 12. The Turon Diggings.
13. Quartz Crushing. 14. Dinner Time.
Sherer (John) The Gold Finder of Australia, 1853 —see
Fiction.
NORTON. Essays and Reflections in Australia
by a Layman [James Norton, sen., of Elswick,
N.S.W.]. Bvo. pp. 106. Sydney. 1853.
In addition to papers on Religious Subjects, the writer includes
articles on England and her Colonies, the Genius of Australia,
Railway Communication, &c.
Reprinted, with add.tions, London, 1857.
JACKMAN. The Australian Captive : or, An
Authentic Narrative of Fifteen Years in the Life of
William Jackman ; in which, among various other
Adventures, is included a forced Residence of a year
and a half among the Cannibals of Nuyts’ Land, on
the Coast of the Great Australian Bight. Also in-
cluding, with other Appendices, Australia and its
Gold, from the latest and best authorities. With
various illustrations. Edited by Rev. I. Chamberlayne.
i2mo. pp. 392. London. 1853.
MOSSMAN. Australia Visited and Revisited : a
Narrative of Recent Travels and Old Experiences in
Victoria and New South Wales. By Samuel Moss-
man....and Thomas Banister.... 12mo. pp. xii. 323
and two maps. London. 1853.
BANISTER. Correspondence respecting the
Assumption by Mr. Mossman of the Sole Authorship
of “ Australia Visited and Revisited.” [By Thomas
Banister.] Bvo. pp. 24. London. 1853.


The Colonies of Great Britain. iBmo. pp. 95 and
two maps. London, National Soc. 1853.
Australia, Tasmania, New Zealand, Auckland Isles, &c.,
pp. 70-95, with Map.
CAPPER. The Emigrant’s Guide to Australia,
containing the Fullest Particulars relating to the
Recently Discovered Gold Fields, the Government
Regulations for Gold Seeking, &c. Second Edition
considerably enlarged with three new maps of the
Gold Fields, comprising the most Recent Discoveries
in the Northern and Southern Districts of N.S.W.,
and the Province of Victoria, together with an
Account of the New Diggings in South Australia.
By John Capper. i2mo. pp. viii. 254.
Liverpool, 1857. \i.e. 1853.]
First edition, 1832 ; third edition, 1855.
Emigrants’Letters from Australia [July 1852 —
Jan. 1853]. Selected with Critical and Explanatory
Remarks by Samuel Mossman.
i2mo. pp. viii. 104. London. 1853.
Albertonia, a New Colony about to be Estab-
lished in the Basin of the Murray, folio, pp. 2.
[Melbourne. 1853.]
See also “Aristides” — Politics. 1853.
Excursion in Search of Diggers [N.S.W.] by a
Gold Commissioner.
Referred to in Martin's Australia, 1853, p. 410.
WOHLGEMUTH —Die Deutschen in Australien.
J. A. Wohlgemuth. Bvo. Berlin. 1853.
FOG. En Reise til Guldminerne. En danf
Haandvserkers Breve. Udgisne af E. Fog.
121110. pp. 30. Holbeck [1853]
HEISING. Die Deutschen in Australien. Von
Dr. Albert Heising. Bvo. pp. iv. 78. Berlin. 1853
Reise und Lebensbilder aus Neuholland, Neu-
und California [von F. L. M. and E. M.].
Nach dem Tagebuche eines Verwandten heraus-
gegeben von W. Schulze.
Bvo. pp. iv. 167. Magdeburg. 1853.
Further Papers Relative to the Recent Discovery
of Gold in Australia. (In Continuation of Papers....
June 14, 1852.) Presented to Parliament.... February,
1853. folio, pp. xvi. 433. map, plans, and sections.
London. 1853.
Despatches and Reports from the Governors of New South
Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Van Diemen’s Land on
Establishment of Mints at Sydney and Melbourne, Geological
Surveys, Employment of the Clergy at the Gold Diggings,
Maintenance of Order, State of the Aborigines, Desertion of
Crews from Merchant Ships, Rewards to Mr. Hargraves and
ot tiers, Appropriation of Proceeds of Land Sales, Expenditure
consequent on the Gold Discoveries, Military Arrangements,
Police Force, Immigration, Administration of Justice, Opening
of Route between Adelaide and Mount Alexander, Gold Escort,
Cata'ogue of Specimens of Australian Rocks, &c.
UNGE WITTER. Der Welltheil Australien.
Von Dr. F. H. Ungewitter. Mit einem Vorworte
von Dr. Gotthilf Heinrich von Schubert.
royal Bvo. pp. viii. 516. Erlangen. 1853.
In Dutch : Australia en zijne bewoners. Uit
het Hoogd. 2 vols. Bvo. plates. Haarlem 1854-56.
EARP. The Gold Colonies of Australia, and
Gold Seeker’s Manual. A New Edition, with Illus-
trations of the Implements Required in the Search for
the Gold Ore, as well as the Progress of the Gold
Mining to the latest Peri ;d, and ample Notices of
Australian Gold Geology and Mineralogy ; with the
Chemical and Metallurgical Treatment of Gold Ore.
By G[eorge] Butler Earp.... with a map. Thirty-
filth thousand. 12mo. pp. viii. 248. London. 1853.
For earlier issues see 1852.
A Visit to Australia and Its Gold Regions. i2mo.
pp. iv. 202, map, and illust. S.P.C.K. Lond. 1853.
New Edition, with additions.
i2mo. pp. iv. 217. London [1859].
MARTIN. Australia, comprising New South
Wales, Victoria or Port Philip ; South Australia ;
and Western Australia ; their History, Topography,
Condition, Resources, Statistics, Gold Discoveries,
Mines of Copper, Lead, &c., &c., General Informa-
tion for Emigrants, Merchants, Manufacturers, and
Shipowners, imp. Bvo. pp. 576. portraits and maps.
London. [1853].
POWER. Recollections of a Three Years’ Resi-
dence in China; including Peregrinations in Spain,
Morocco, Egypt, India, Australia, and New Zealand.
By [Sir] W[illiam] Tyrone Power, D.A.C.G., &c.
i2mo. pp. xvi. 380. London. 1853.
Sir Wm. Power visited Sydney in the year 1846. His remarks
on the Colony and its prospects occupy pages 314-337.
CLACY. A Lady’s Visit to the Gold Diggings of
Australia, in 1852-53. Written on the Spot. By
Mrs. Charles Clacy. i2mo. pp. viii. 302 and frontis-
piece (Bendigo Creek). London. 1853.
Rusden (G. W.) National Education, 1853 —see Politics.
Further Papers Relative to the Recent Discovery
of Gold in Australia. (In Continuation of Papers
28th Feb., 1853.) Presented to....Parliament....Aug.
16, 1853. folio, pp. x. 222. London. 1853.
Reports of Geological Surveys. Correspondence of Sir R.
Murchison, Influx of Escaped Convicts, Harbour and Shipping,
Statistical Information by Mr. Westgarth, Desertion of Seamen
G ndition of the Aborigines. Police and Military Arrangements,
Gold Field at Echunga, S.A., the Australian Bullion Act, Dis-
covery of Gold at Coromandel Harbour, N.Z., &c.
Chevalier (M.), Stirling (P. J. ), Tengoborski (Dr. Carl), and
others, on the Gold Discoveries and their Probable Consequences,
1853 see Economics.
EARL. A Correspondence Relating to the Dis-
covery of Gold in Australia. [Between George
Windsor Earl and Lord Colchester.]
Bvo. pp. 16. London. 1853.
EARP. What We Did in Australia; being the
Practical Experience of Three Clerks in the Stock-
Yard and at the Gold Fields. Edited by George
B[utler] Earp. i2mo. pp. 192. London. 1853.
GOBLE. Australia the Ancient Ophir; or, the
Gold Mines of King Solomon, with other Australian
Incidences. By G[eorge] Frederick] Goble, Twenty-
five Years Resident in those Colonies. i2mo. pp, 28.
London. 1853.
GOBLE. Hints to Intended Gold Diggers and
Buyers, with other Useful Information to Bush Travel-
lers. By G. F. Goble, Many Years an Explorer in
Australia, &c. i2mo. pp. 36. London. 1853.
This and preceding pamphlet were issued together in wrapper
bear.ng the latter titlepage.
Caroline Chisholm ; a Memoir, prepared from
Original and Private Sources ; to which is added the
Emigrant’s Guide to the Australian Gold Fields, con-
taining, among other things, the Fullest Information
as to the Choice of a Ship, the Best Port for each
class of Emigrants, and general description of the
various Gold Fields and Agricultural Settlements.
Preface signed “M.” Birmingham, April 12, 1853.
12mo. pp. vi. 128. London. 1853.


STEWART. Popular Geographical Library. By
Robert Stewart, A. M. : Australasia ; with an Appendix
containing Authentic Documents illustrating the Pro-
gress and State of the Australasian Colonies to the
Latest Date. 121110. pp. 480, and map. London. 1853.
HOEHNE. Carl Traugott Hohne’s Auswander-
ung nach Australien und Rfickkehr in’s Vaterland von
ihm selbst erzahlt und mit sonstigen zuverlassigen
Nachrichte fiber Australien verknfipft.
i2mo. pp. 96. Bautzen [1853].
Mereweather (Rev. J. D.) Diary in Australia, 1850-53 —see
READ. What I Heard, Saw, and Did at the
Australian Gold Fields. By C. Rudston Read, late
Crown Land Commissioner, &c Victoria. Bvo. pp.
viii. 327, map, and four coloured plates. Lond. 1853.
Leigh (Samuel) Missionary to Australia —see Religious
History.
JONES. Adventures in Australia in 1852 and
1853. By Rev. H. Berkeley Jones, M.A., late Curate
of Belgrave Chapel. i2mo. pp. xii. 311. Lond. 1853.
Malone (R. Edmond) Account of New South Wales, 1852-53
—see Voyages, 1854.
SAUNDERS. Our Australian Colonies. Notes
of What I Saw, Heard, or Thought, during a Visit
to Australia, Van Diemen’s Land, and New Zealand,
during the years 1852-3. By Edward Saunders, of
Bath. l2mo. pp. iv. and 52. Bristol. [1853].
ROCHFORT. The Adventures of a Surveyor in
New Zealand and the Australian Gold Diggings. By
John Rochfort, late Government Surveyor, N. Z.
i2mo. pp. 74. litho title and folding plate. Lond. 1853.
ARTHUR. Our Australian Possessions. [By
Rev. William Arthur.] —
London Quarterly Rev. Dec. 1853.
NIVIftRE. Manuel de l’Emigrant aux Mines d’or
de l’Australie ; contenant, des renseignements curieux
sur les travaux qui s’y font en ce moment ; par un
Mineur. Traduit de I’ Anglais par Felix Niviere.
Bvo. Paris. 1854.
Clacy (Mrs. Charles) Lights and Shadows of Australian Life,
1854 —see Fiction.
Doings at the Diggings. 1851-1854. Being a
Series of Emigrants’ Letters, &c. [Cuttings], Ar-
ranged from the Press. By James Slate. Royal Bvo.
In possession of the Compiler of this Catalogue.
Further Papers Relative to the Discovery of
Gold in Australia. (In Continuation of Papers pre-
sented 16th August, 1853.) Presented to.... Parli-
ament, Feb. 14, 1854. folio, pp. viii. 205. Lond. 1854.
Reports by Messrs. Hargraves, W. B. Clarke and others,
Desertion of Seamen, Construction of Sydney Mint, Police
Regulations, State of Gold Fields, Opposition to Licence Fee,
Discovery of Tin Ore, Financial Condition of Victoria, Echunga
Gold Fields, General Prosperity of New South Wales, &c.
SALVADO. Memoires Historiques sur l’Australie,
par Mgr. Rudesindo Salvado, Religieux Benedictin,
Eveque de Port-Victoria, traduit de l’ltalien par
I’AbSe Falcimagne avec des Notes et une Histoire de
la Decouverte de l’Or, redigees par le Traducteur.
Bvo. pp. xii. 443. Paris. 1854.
For the original work see Western Australia, 1851 ; see
also 1861 below.
WEGWEISER nach und in Australien.
Bvo. pp. viii. 112 map and plate. Potsdam. 1854.
Seereise-Tagebuch von Hamburg nach Sydney in Australien
in Jahre 1852, mit dem Schiffe C/ESAR Godeffroy (Capt.
Heinrich Behn) with plate “ Crossing the Line.” (pp. vm.
1-34). Praktischer Rathgeber und Reisehandbuch fur Deutsche
Auswander nach Australien, insbesondere nach den Goldminen
.-■(PP- 35~ 112 )- _
Veiledende Bemerkninger for dem, der agte
at emigrere til Australien Samt nogle Ord our Emi-
grationen til America. Udgivet en Normand, der
har opholdt fig i Australiens Guldminer i guo Ma-
aneder, indtil Juli Maaned 1853. Bvo. pp. 26, and
View of Golden Point, Mt. Alexander.
Frederickshald, 1854.
Scattered through these 26 pp. of old style German type are
the following expressions in roman letters
Shepherds—the Hills—the Gold Fields—goen to the gold-
diggings—Columbine River—Frier’s Creek, Camble’s Creek,
Lodden River, Forrest Creek—Golden Point, Barker’s Creek—
Shep-station Bendigo Hills Flats Gulleys Red Hill
Whit Hill—Adelaide Flat, Wattel Flat—Golden Gulley—the
Diggers —Mac Ivor River —Stores - Mount Alexander the
Drivers—the Washinstof—here is nothing to do—Ounses—Tub
—Pick —Showel —-Washing-dish—Riddle —Rope —Bucket pro-
specte—Rocker— Cradle— Long-tom—Claim—Commissioners—
Station—License —Windles—Pipe-Clay— Slate-Stone—Props—
Quartz Hills—Camp-oven—Public-houses—Adelaide Hill
Forest Creek-Carting—Mess. Wigram shipowners—the Warf—
Flinders-Lane, West—Colin-street—Bourk-street— Anhang om
America.
FERNOW. Australien, seine Goldfelder und
seine Heerden. Mit besonderer Rucksichtsnahme auf
die Deutsche Auswanderung, nach dem Englischen
von Ludwig Fernow. Bvo. pp. iv. 116, and plate.
Erfurt. [1854].
England und die Anglo- Sachsische Staatenbild
ung in America, Westindien und Australien. Bvo.
Berlin. 1854.
ELDERSHAW. Australia as it Really Is, in its
Life, Scenery, and Adventure: with the Character,
Habits and Customs of its Aboriginal Inhabitants,
and the Prospects and Extent of its Gold f ields.
By F. Eldershaw, a Resident and an Eye Witness of
the Facts Recorded.
“ Born to no party, of no sect am I.
1 can’t be silent, and I will not lie ! M
i2mo. pp. 270. London. 1854.
The author was Secretary to the N.S.W. Parliament.
SHAW. The Land of Promise ; or My Impres-
sions of Australia. By the Author of “Golden
Dreams and Waking Realities ” [William Shaw].
i2mo. pp. xii. 343. Simpkin, London. 1854.
Reissue : [new titlepage only] “ The Land of
Promise,” &c. Partridge, London. 1855.
N.S.Wales, Victoria, South Australia, Climate, Productions,
Aborigines, Agriculture. Stock Holding, Gold Discoveries, &c.
The author’s “Golden Dreams” had reference to California
see 1851.
HENDERSON. Excursions and Adventures in
N. S. Wales ; with Pictures of Squatting and of Life
in the Bush ; an Account of the Climate, Productions
and Natural History of the Colony and of the
Manners and Customs of the Natives ; with Advice
to Emigrants, &c. ; together with a Prefatory Chapter
on the Gold Fields, comprising all the Information
Received up to the Autumn of 1854; accompanied
by plates, and a coloured map of the Gold Regions.
By Capt. Henderson, 78th Highlanders. Second
Edition, 2 vols. i2mo. pp. xxxii. (pref. chap.) vii.-xiv.
314 ; viii. 294, four plates and map. Lond. 1854.
First Edition, Dec., 1851.
CAPPER. Australia: as a Field for Capital,
Skill, and Labour: with Useful Information for Emi-
grants of all Classes. By John Capper. i2mo. pp.
iv. 122 and map. Stanford, London. 1854.


Table of Contents. —( Continued .)
VIII. AUSTRALIAN COLONIZATION; HISTORY AND GENERAL
STATISTICS.
1. New South Wales, and other Colonies.
[See Specimen, pages 1—32, attached.']
2. Tasmania.
3. Queensland.
4. Northern Settlements.
5. Western Australia.
6. Victoria.
7. South Australia.
IX. NEW ZEALAND; COLONIZATION, HISTORY, STATISTICS.
X. COLONIAL POLITICS AND ECONOMICS.
1. Constitutional, Federal, and General.
2. Transportation.
3. Emigration.
4. Land Systems.
5. Public Finances.
6. Public Works: Roads, Railways, Water
Works, Irrigation, Defences, &c.
7. Posts and Telegraphs.
8. Education.
g. State Aid to Religion.
10. Labour Question.
11. Free Trade and Protection.
12. Trade and Commerce.
13. Banking and Public Companies.
14. Friendly and Benevolent Societies.
&c., &c.
XI. COLONIAL LAW AND JURISPRUDENCE: STATUTES, CASES,
TRIALS, &c.
XII. INDUSTRIAL RESOURCES AND MANUFACTURES.
1. General, including Exhibition Catalogues
of Natural Products.
2. General Agriculture and Farming.
3. Forestry.
4. Horticulture and Gardening.
5. Fruit Culture.
6. The Vine and Wine Making.
7. Sugar.
8. Tobacco.
g. Silk.
10. Cotton, Flax, Hemp.
11. Horses and Cattle.
12. Veterinary Science.
13. Sheep and Wool.
14. Pigs, Poultry, and Domestic Pets.
15. Butter and Cheese.
16. Housewifery.
17. Preserved Meats and Fruits.
18. P'isheries.
ig. Mining and Metallurgy of Gold.
20. Silver, and other Precious Metals.
21. Coal, &c.
XIII. LITERARY, RELIGIOUS, AND MISCELLANEOUS.
1. Periodical Publications : Almanacs and
Year Books, Newspapers, Magazines,
etc.
2. Religious History and Controversy ;
Reports, Sermons, Addresses, and
Devotional Works.
3. Essays, Lectures, Criticism, &c.
4. Prose Fiction ; including Imaginary
Voyages, Novels and Tales.
5. Poetry and the Drama.
6. Music.
7. Fine Arts.
8. Catalogues and Reports of Literary
Societies, Libraries and Museums.
g. Scholastic: School and College Text-
Books.
10. Amusements: Games, Field Sports,
Yachting, &c.
INDEX OF AUTHORS
AND THEIR WRITINGS, WHETHER SEPARATE WORKS, ARTICLES
IN PERIODICALS, OR PAPERS IN TRANSACTIONS.
[Continued page 4.


From the preceding “ Table ” it will be seen that this scheme of classification is
sufficiently analytic for the specialist, and not too complex for the student or general
reader. It is a plan which will permit of the work being issued by instalments or in
sections, more or less complete in themselves, if arrangements cannot be made for the
printing and publication of the whole work in a single issue.
A. GEOGRAPHICAL SECTIONS; DISCOVERY AND VOYAGES, i6th to
19TH CENTURY; EXPLORATION OF AUSTRALIA.
B. SCIENTIFIC SECTIONS, INCLUDING TRANSACTIONS OF
SOCIETIES.
C. ANTHROPOLOGICAL SECTIONS, INCLUDING DESCRIPTIONS OF
ISLAND GROUPS OF THE PACIFIC, PHILOLOGY AND
BOOKS IN THE ABORIGINAL AND NATIVE DIALECTS.
D. AUSTRALIAN COLONIZATION.
E. NEW ZEALAND COLONIZATION.
F. COLONIAL POLITICS, ECONOMICS, LAW AND JURISPRUDENCE.
G. INDUSTRIAL RESOURCES AND MANUFACTURES.
H. LITERARY, RELIGIOUS, AND MISCELLANEOUS SECTIONS.
The Compiler solicits the co-operation of all librarians and booksellers in bringing
this prospectus under the notice of their committees and patrons. He has endeavoured
to produce a work of reference, both historical and bibliographical, which shall be
indispensable in every Australasian collection, and worthy of a position in every
important public library in the world.
Communications may be addressed to Mr. Petherick direct, or through Mr. Bernard
Quaritch, Messrs. Sampson Low & Co, Whitaker & Sons, Sotheran & Co.,
Henry Stevens, Son, & Stiles, or Simpkin & Co., London.
3, York Gate, London, N.W.,
10th June, 1897.
