

/PROTECTION
I
VERSUS
FREE TRADE,
SHOWING THE
FATAL EFFECTS OF FREE TRADE,
AND THE
NECESSITY FOR PROTECTION.
G. E. NIAS,
MEMBER OF THE VICTORIAN PROTECTION LEAGUE.
v Registered under the Copyright Act, 1860.
W *
Hldbournc:
MASON, FIRTH, & M'CUTCHEON, PUBLISHERS, FLINDERS LANE WEST
MDCCCLXXT.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.


DEDICATED TO
THE HON. J. G. FRANCIS, Tkeasuree,
AND TO
THE MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY
OF VICTORIA,
BY THEIR OBEDIENT SERVANT,
THE AUTHOR.


f f* l Q Jv 1
PEEPAGE
2~1 • f/ • *72-
These pages originated in a feeling of indignation at the false
doctrines and palpable misstatements constantly put forward by a
leading newspaper in the Free Trade interest; and from merely a
communication intended for the columns of a daily journal, as the
subject was entered upon, the impossibility of compressing the
necessary facts and explanations to make those facts intelligible
into the limited space requisite became apparent. The election
meetings, too, showed the want of correct information on this vital
subject in a country like Australia, and a wish to supply to some
extent that information led to further research, and the issue of
the present pamphlet. That it has many defects, and is very
imperfect, the author is too well aware ; but let any one attempt to
travel over the same ground, and then the difficulties of the under-
taking will be understood by him. The facts had to be sought for
from a variety of sources in the intervals after business hours, and
in the absence of many of the statistical works which would, in
(our great standard of comparison) London, have rendered such a
task one of comparative ease. Of course the work could hardly
have been accomplished at all but for our Public Library, an insti-
tution of which Victorians can hardly be too proud.
The thanks of the author are here tendered to Mr. B. Cowderoy,
the courteous secretary of the Chamber of Commerce, ibr per-
mission to consult books of reference and statistical documents;
and to many other gentlemen who have afforded similar assist-
ance. As a rule, figures have been avoided, for although it is a
prevalent idea that figures cannot lie, practical experience has
taught me that figures can always be made to tell on both sides of
a question. By leaving out a year here, by taking a year further
on, or going back a year, arguments for cither side of the question
a 2


THE
OF VICTORIA,
BY THEIR OBEDIENT SERVANT,
JEER,
ISSEMBLY
THE AUTHOR.


PREFACE
These pages originated in a feeling of indignation at the false
doctrines and palpable misstatements constantly put forward by a
leading newspaper in the Free Trade interest; and from merely a
communication intended for the columns of a daily journal, as the
subject was entered upon, the impossibility of compressing the
necessary facts and explanations to make those facts intelligible
into the limited space requisite became apparent. The election
meetings, too, showed the want of correct information on this vital
subject in a country like Australia, and a wish to supply to some
extent that information led to further research, and the issue of
the present pamphlet. That it has many defects, and is very
imperfect, the author is too well aware j but let any one attempt to
travel over the same ground, and then the difficulties of the under-
taking will be understood by him. The facts had to be sought for
from a variety of sources in the intervals after business hours, and
in the absence of many of the statistical works which would, in
(our great standard of comparison) London, have rendered such a
task one of comparative ease. Of course the work could hardly
have been accomplished at all but for our Public Library, an insti-
tution of which Victorians can hardly be too proud.
The thanks of the author are here tendered to Mr. B. Cowderoy,
the courteous secretary of the Chamber of Commerce, ibr per-
mission to consult books of reference and statistical documents;
and to many other gentlemen who have afforded similar assist-
ance. As a rule, figures have been avoided, for although it is a
prevalent idea that figures cannot lie, practical experience has
taught me that figures can always be made to tell on both sides of
a question. By leaving out a year here, by taking a year further
on, or going back a year, arguments for either side of the question
a 2


at pleasure can be produced; consequently, very few references to
figures will be found. But facts or figures wherever adduced have
invariably been verified by reference to two or three sources, when
obtainable, where the original authority could not be got at (as
was rarely the case).
To critics and Free Traders who may disagree with my views, I
quote our immortal bard, and say :
11 Nothing extenuate, nor set down aught in malice,
G. E. NIAS.


FREE TRADE AND PROTECTION.
Free Trade and Protection have had a fall and fair trial in
Europe. Their history is indelibly written in the abiding re-
sults; and history is philosophy teaching by example. If Free
Trade is to be judged only by the present results of the exports
and imports into the United Kingdom, then Tree Trade, by its
advocates and beneficiaires, will be pronounced a wonderful success;
but if it is to be judged by other standards, such a verdict must
be greatly qualified.
Although in 1831 Lord Sydenham made some alterations in the
English Tariff, it was not till 1842 that Protection was abandoned
as a policy by Sir Robert Peel. Free Trade in Grain was given
in 1846 ; the Sugar duties were reduced in 1847; and the Navi-
gation Laws repealed in 1849. In 1860 Mr. Gladstone still
further reduced the English Tariff, leaving only about forty
articles on the list. Let us see whether the results of Free Trade
bear out English Free views. In 1841, the last year of
Protection, English exports were £51,632,971. Eight years pre ■
viously, in 1833, they were £39,331,413: so that in eight years
they had increased £12,301,558, or more than 33 per cent. In
1849, after eight years of Free Trade, the exports had increased
to £63,596,025, being an increase of £11,963,054, or at the rate
of 25 per cent: so that England did better under Protection than
under Free Trade, especially when we take into consideration the
vast increase of population in the colonies, in India, and elsewhere,
which had taken place in that period.*
England possesses in her Colonial Empire alone, upwards of
200,000,000 of human beings to whom she stands in loco parentis.
Practically, she has the monopoly of the market for this mass ot
customers; and bv means ot the ramifications of her trade she
extends her operations to reach 200,000,000 more, at least one-
third the whole population of the world). She, from various
causes, commands a larger capital than any other nation in the
world. Her population is the richest in the world. Her popula-
tion is also the poorest in the world. One in every twenty of her
inhabitants is a pauper. Beside the richest nobility in the world,
and larger fortunes than any other nation at present can boast, has
* The increase in our Indian empire alone being more than equal to severa
kingdoms in Europe.


1859 1869
England and Wales ... 851,369 .... 1 039 549
Scotland 114,209 *128’,976
Ireland ... ... ... ... ...No return 74 743
grown up a pauperism which, steadily increasing at the enor-
mous rate of ten per cent, per annum, defies all attempts to
reduce it.* Lord Shaftesbury at a recent meeting declared that
unless some effective means can he devised to check the increase
of pauperism, the British Constitution is not worth 25 years' pur-
cliase.^
England has a larger debt than any other nation—hanging
like a millstone about her neck, requiring two-fifths to one-half
her revenue to pay the interest. Her Free Trade has not enabled
her to reduce it to any appreciable extent during 55 years' peace.
May we not ask, then, where are the results of Free Trade ? Are
her population better off than other nations ? No. Better edu-
cated ? No. The rich grow richer every-day, and the poor poorer.+
Englishmen have for generations been brought up to regard the
political system and laws of England as the most perfect in the
world. lam sorry to write it—but every advancing year there
appears to be moie reason to doubt the soundness of her pohcv on
several questions. Those writers who look below the surface" see
great occasion for doubt and fear—quite enough to make us pause
when required to adopt her present policy.
The following paragraph is only one of many that might be
quoted in support of these views:—“The well-being of a country
cannot be measured by its imports and exports; the true test is
to ascertain how many people there are in it who have made a
proper provision for inevitable contingencies, and are in a position
to discharge the responsibilities which they have assumed. It is
idle to congratulate ourselves upon vast national wealth, when we
know that as each winter recurs there are in the richest metropolis
in the world 150,000 paupers." In education Mr. Fawcett sees the
only cure for the evils under which we at present labour. Educa-
tion must be compulsory.—Mr. Fawcett in the ce Fortniahtlv
Review ." * *
The organs of the Free Traders, the Argus and the Ballarat
Star, are continually denouncing the statements of Protectionists
~ 11 P a f? es w ® r . e in Process of printing, a statement appeared in
the dree Trade organ which, as it conflicts with the above statement, it is
necessary to disprove. The Argus attempts to prove, by showing an increased
consumption of tea and sugar, an improvement in the condition of the wartime/
classes in England—an entirely false conclusion on the facts; and it goes on to
say that “ from 1839 • • to 1859 • • those had been a malted and fStifyhS
diminution in the number of persons receiving Poor Law relief ” Also falsp
why not go to 1869 ? It is a fair assumption that it iTSSe the contrSy is so
universally known as to late years that the misstatement would be too palpable.
N'icolls s History of the Poor Lam, 1859, gives the proportion of pauperism to
population as 7 7-10ths in 1840, and shows a steady increase to 10 8-10ths in 1848
Martin s Year-Booh gives the paupers in England and Wales as follows
Making a total in 1869 of 1,24.3 268. This is one of the facts of the great Free
Trade organ. And the rest are like unto it. b
f This was first uttered at a public meeting in England.


as mendacious. The address of the Protection League was no
sooner published than it was denounced as “ mendacious,” as a
lying document to deceive the people.
“ History shows that no nation ever became prosperous, free, and great, which
had not the shield of Legislative enactment thrown around the growing industries
of its people. England and the United States of America, in modern times, are
forcible illustrations of the truth of this ; and even in this colony, have we not
witnessed the stimulating effect on o.ur own industries produced by the small
modicum of Protection afforded by the short-lived tariff of 1865.”— Address of
Protection League.
I maintain this statement of the League to be strictly true, for
all the great and prosperous nations of the earth are not Free
Trade; they protect their own industries and their own people.
The Free Trade organ, on the other hand, put forth the fol-
lowing statement, which I denounce as utterly false; and as I
cannot but suppose the -writers to be men of education, I regret to
have to think it written for the purposes of deception.
“ The address of the Industrial Protection League to the Electors of Victoria is a
document which is worthy in every way of the cause it is intended to promote. It
is fit that a system of legalised robbery should appeal for its justification to per-
versions of _ historical fact. ‘ History,’ says this mendacious manifesto, ‘ shows
that no nation ever became prosperous, free, and great, which had not the shield of
legislative enactment thrown around the growing industries of its people. England
and the United States of America, in modern times, are forcible illustrations of the
truth of this.’ ”
_ “ We have already instanced the case of Switzerland as one which offers the most
direct and striking contradiction that could possibly be given to the first of these
assertions ; and it is notorious to every student of English and American history,
that both the manufacturing and agricultural industries of both these countries
have been crippled and retarded by Protection. Most people will be of opinion
that Pome and Greece could boast of greatness, freedom, and prosperity. Well-
informed men are familiar with the fact that the products of Athenian handicrafts-
men penetrated to every part of the then known world. But Protection was cer-
tainly never heard of in Rome or Greece. Carthage, Venice, Genoa, Portugal, and
the Hanse Towns became prosperous, free, and great, when commerce was unre-
stricted; and the history of France, from the administration of Colbert downwards,
and that of England, from the enactment of the Navigation to the repeal of the
Corn laws, is one unanswerable protest against the Wickedness and folly, the injus-
tice and the suicidal selfishness, of Protection.”— Argus, Feb. 23rd.
It is scarcely worth while to waste time and space by showing
that the commerce of Greece, Lome, and Carthage, was princi-
pally in food—corn, wine, and oil, spices, and silks of great value,
linen of Tyrian dye, and other valuable goods, in very small quan-
tities, In fact there were no manufactures properly so called.
The fame of the learning and wisdom of the Athenians penetrated
to all parts of the then known world. The wisdom of her states-
men, the eloquence of her orators, the learning of her schools,
the magnificence of her temples, the beauty of her cities, these
made the Athenians famous. But the arts of Greece were archi-
tecture, sculpture, and painting; and how in the then state of
travel, when years were occupied compassing a space now traversed
in a few weeks, could manfactures as we understand them be ex-
ported ?
Mechanics in Greece were slaves, and no mechanic could be a
citizen and take any part in the government by his vote. Free
Trade in ancient times is an absurdity put forward to make a
sounding article.


They quote Yenice and Genoa, and may add Florence and Pisa,
for all these communities rose to wealth and power under the
severest restrictive laws.
In the middle ages travel was too dangerous to allow much
traffic, except in common articles of food, or very valuable mer-
chandise in very small quantities; and commerce or trade in
manufactured goods there was none, except between closely
neighbouring countries, and then to a very limited extent. As to
Free Trade in Venice, why, the good old despotic Republic would
notallow a foreign merchant to sell the value of a ducat, and the
introduction of manufactured goods into the territories of the Re-
public was forbidden under the severest penalties. All traffic had
to be done through a native merchant under the like penalties.
Hence the power and importance of Venetian and Italian mer-
chant princes. No dealer in silk could sell spices, or wool, or
precious stones, nor could he of the spices sell aught but spice.
The Jews alone excepted were allowed to deal in gold and other
precious metals and stones. Neither were the merchants of
Venice allowed to employ foreign workmen. Every workman
must be a citizen.* And Genoa was something like Venice. Not
protected ! Yes, they were protected with a vengeance. These
are historical facts, and yet our Free Trade organ claims them as
examples of Free Trade, and stigmatises its opponents as men-
dacious by the claim.
The Hanse Towns! in the thirteenth century were communities
of merchants, who collected the merchandise (produce) of the
Fast and the Mediterranean, and distributed it over northern
Europe. They protected their own merchants, and their navi-
gation laws served Cromwell as a model for his English law.
They had no manufactures, but their shipping was enormous com-
pared to their population.
Portugal had Free Trade, and flourished exceedingly, until other
countries took Protectionist notions, and then she had to succumb
to the superior Protectionist policy of England. But she had no
manufactures to export.
For particulars as to the Free Trade of Switzerland, see page 18.
As a Protectionist, I assert that every country that has embraced
Free Trade doctrines has withered away under them. Not a
nation on the globe holds its rank—not a nation has even a high
position—but lias firmly maintained a Protective policy.
Let us now trace in part England’s policy in two of her favourite
manufactures—Woollen Cloth and Iron.
England’s earliest efforts at Protection were in favour of her
woollen trade, said upon doubtful authority to have been intro-
duced by the Romans.
* These facts are only adduced to show how unreliable are the facts, and how
unscrupulous are the attacks, of the Argus.
f The Hanse Towns were Lubec, Bremen, Hamburg, and some 85 cities of im-
portance on the Elbe, Weser, Ehine, and Scheld, and adjoining coasts, subsequently
increased to 125 considerable cities.


The earliest authentic notice of it is in William the Conqueror’s
time, when a vast inundation of the sea drove some Flemings to
take refuge in England and seek the patronage of the Queen, who
was a native of their country. This was about 1070.
Henry 11. protected the cloth merchants, and granted a place
for a fair to be held, at a place still known as Cloth Fair^— a.d.
1180.
In the fourteenth century, during Edward lll.’s reign, weavers
from Ghent were invited to settle in England to make fine cloths,
and were first established in Kent and Essex, and afterwards at
Gloucester, near the wool-growing counties; and measures were
adopted to foster and encourage, or protect, the manufacture, which
throve accordingly, forbidding the exportation of wool, or the
importation of cloth, for that end. Flanders was then making cloth
superior to the English cloth.
In the fifteenth century Henry YL, at the request of the manu-
facturers, prohibited the exportation of the long-woolled sheep,
the wool being already prohibited, because the climate of England
at that time produced a finer and better wool than could be
obtained from any part of the Continent of Europe, and the
Flemings could not make such good cloth without the long wool
of English sheep.
In the same century Edward IY. sent as a royal present a
flock of Cotswold rams to Henry of Castile, and another flock to
John of Arragon —so valuable had the breed become under the
fostering influence of Protection, and their being forbidden to be
exported. These are said to have originated the celebrated Merino
breed of Spain.
Under Elizabeth, in the latter part of the sixteenth century, the
exportation of wool and sheep was strictly prohibited. In her reign
large numbers of the inhabitants of the Netherlands were driven
out by the cruelty of the Spaniards, under the sanguinary Duke of
Alva; many came to England, and they greatly increased and
improved the woollen manufacture, which had fallen into decay
during the long wars of the Houses of York and Lancaster, and
the undyed cloth was sent to Flanders to be dyed and dressed,
the art of dyeing having been lost. Laws of prohibition were
again passed to encourage the trade.
In 1667 a dyer from the Netherlands, under the patronage of
the Government, instructed English manufacturers in his art; and,
as the exportation of wool and of the long-woolled sheep, whose
fleece was then required to make fine cloths, was strictly prohi-
bited, the manufacture improved and increased exceedingly, and
throughout the seventeenth century the manufacture steadily pro-
gressed. From 1660 to 1835 the exportation of English wool
was strictly prohibited, but in 1825, other nations having suc-
ceeded in raising as fine, or finer, quality of wool than England,
it was unnecessary to continue the prohibition.
In 1685 the revocation of the Edict of Nantes, in France,
drove upwards of 50,000 Protestants to take refuge in England.


They brought many useful arts with them, improved the manufac-
ture of cloth, and introduced the silk trade.
About the beginning of the eighteenth century the exports of
woollen goods to Portugal and Holland were considerable; France,
Germany, and Belgium, principally making their own.
In 1720 the sale of Indian manufactured cotton and silks was
prohibited in England, although brought there in British ships by
British merchants. These goods were only allowed to be sold to
foreign countries, that they might not interfere with the then
rising cotton and silk manufactories of England.
Further still, in the English colonies of North America, where
rich iron ore had been discovered, it was necessary to get a special
permission from the respective Governors to open a smithy, or
common blacksmith's shop; and its continuance was only licensed
on condition that it never extended its operations beyond common
repairing work, that it might not interfere with the sale of plough-
shares, axes, and other necessary tools, in that new country.
Previous to 1750 iron furnaces had been erected in New York,
New Jersey, and Maryland; while yet the English• furnaces pro-
duced in 1740 only 17,350 tons, and in 1788 68,500 tons. And
it was not till 1760 that bellows were worked by water-power in
England, the colonies first introducing that method; and coal was
not as yet used in smelting iron ore.
But in 1750 an act was passed permitting the import into
London, duty free, of pig and bar iron from the colonies, but pro-
hibiting the erection or continuance of any mill or engine for
slitting or rolling iron, or any plating forge to work with a tilt
hammer, or any furnace for making steel in the colonies.
Most wonderful has been the advance of the iron trade in Eng-
land. At the beginning of the eighteenth century we imported
hardware. In the middle of the nineteenth (1856) the exports of
hardware alone amounted to £3,750,000 sterling. In that
time the cost of production decreased, on an extensive list of
articles, from 40 to 80 and even 85 per cent.; and this was under
Protection of the strictest character be it remembered.
In 1745, to assist the linen trade against a linen manufacture
springing up in the American colonies, Parliament passed an act
giving an additional bounty of one halfpenny per yard on such as
was valued at sd. to Is. per yard, and of l|d. on linen valued at
Is. to Is. 6d. per yard.
A £5 penalty was at the same time imposed on the wearers of
French cambrics.
Such is a short and imperfect account of the Protective system,
which England has pursued for centuries on two only of her
staple manufactures.
It is well for England to cry —Away with Protection. Assist-
ance from Customs' duties, I don't want you. On the pedestal of
Free Trade I take my stand, and rule the world by my liberality,
while the capital of the world is at the disposal of my merchants
in consequence.


The Protectionist system of England was not abandoned until
1842; when Sir Robert Peel took off the duties on 750 articles of
importation, but still retained upwards of 200 on the Customs list.
In 1849 the Navigation Laws were repealed, having been in
force for 160 years, when it was estimated that England possessed
3,876,433 tons of merchant shipping, having risen to this amount
from 40 or 50 small ships, which would probably be over-estimated
at 10,000 tons.
It is no wonder that with such unscrupulous measures England
achieved an unexampled supremacy in almost all industrial pur-
suits; but the wonder is, that with such experience—such results
—our modern school of Eree Traders will dare to assert —“ That
England would have grown equally strong, or even stronger and
faster, without such Protection; and that she reached her high
position, not in consequence, but in spite of these legislative
enactments,” Vain sophistry ! As well argue that the nursling
requires no nursing, because it proves itself strong at maturity.
The proof of right treatment is success; and England succeeded.
Let us now see how other nations have progressed who have
either had Eree Trade forced upon them, or been seduced by
specious theories or sounding aphorisms into its fatal policy.
Turkey.
Some three centuries ago Turkey possessed numerous and
flourishing manufactures.
In an evil hour the Sultan declared Free Trade—levying a bare
five per cent, as a port charge on imports. She was then wealthy
and powerful, and Turkish skill and experience was more than a
match for the rude industries of Western Europe under the old
time system.
The Ottoman race had not time to introduce and profit by the
invention of the steam engine, the spinning jenny, or the power
loom before they were deluged with English goods, and their
industries struck down.
At the beginning of the present century Turkish goods were to
be bought in all the marts of Europe and America. Turkish
muslins, ginghams, handkerchiefs, grograms, camlets, carpets, &c.
were held in high esteem, but the extraordinary importation of
English goods has utterly destroyed Turkish manufactures.
Even in 1813 the small town of Scutari could boast of 600
looms. In 1831 only 40 remained. Of 3000 weaving establish-
ments at Tournovo in 1812, only 200 remained in 1831—under
the destructive influence of Eree Trade her manufactures have
gradually decayed. Turkey has fallen from her pre-eminence,
and now helplessly awaits the fatal embrace of the Russian bear to
terminate her career. Here the pretended “ robbery of the many
for the benefit of the few” has not taken place. Are they any the
better for it ?


India.
George Thompson, in a speech delivered in the House of Commons
some years ago, described the condition of the cotton manufacture
in India and the results of Tree Trade in that country :—“ At the
close of the last century cotton manufactures abounded, and to so
great an extent was the labour of men, women, and children
applied to the manufacture of cloth, that even with their imperfect
machinery they not only supplied the home demand for the beau-
tiful tissue called Dacca, and the coarser products of Western India,
but they exported to other parts of the world 200 million of pieces
per annum.”
But in 1812 Tree Trade was let loose upon India, with the usual
restrictions upon the import of machinery and immigration of
artisans. At the end of twenty years scarcely a loom remained in
operation; all demand for skilled labour was at an end; men,
women, and children were driven forth from the workshops to the
fields, to raise rice, sugar, indigo, cotton, and opium.
Here, again, was the “robbery of the many for the benefit of the
few” done away with. What were the results? I cannot do
better than let George Thompson speak for himself;—“ Some of
the finest tracts of land have been forsaken and given up to the
wild beasts of the jungle. The motives to industry have been de-
stroyed. Go with me to the north-western provinces of the Bengal
Presidency, and I will show you the bleaching skeletons of 500,000
human beings who perished by famine in the space of a few short
months. Yes, of hunger, in what has been justly called the
granary of the world. Tamines have continued to increase in
extent and frequency under our sway for more than half a cen-
tury.” And since George time famines have not
ceased in India, but are of periodical occurrence, and so dreadful
were the results of the late famine in Orissa that the public prints
feared to publish the full particulars. Thus a people who possessed
almost magical skill in arts and manufactures for centuries, who
have perhaps the richest country in the world—a country from
whence all nations have drawn their wealth for near two thousand
years—have been driven to destitution and destruction by the
direct action of English Tree Trade.
Parliamentary reports of forty years back are filled with evidence
of the extreme misery which has been brought on the native
manufacturers of Hindostan by the free importation of goods, in
which English political economists so much and so freely exult.
But what is this to Capital? “The laws of trade are inexorable,”
says Tree Trade; “and if people are so foolish as to take to
manufacture when they should take to agriculture and gold-digging,
why iPs nothing to Capital. I want to buy in the cheapest
market, and sell in the dearest. Human ties have nothing to do
with it. What! are the woes and sufferings of humanity—are the
miseries of the human family to interfere with the pet theories of
political economists?” Monstrous doctrine! And can theorists
suppose communities or empires can flourish under it.


Ireland.
Ireland was not long ago in possession of a considerable amount
of manufacturing industry. In the latter part of the last century
woollen, linen, and cottpn fabrics of Irish make were common in
all the markets of the world, and books printed in Dublin at that
time are still prized by collectors for their beauty and accuracy.
But the Union with England took place in 1801, and by the
terms of the Union the defences against the overpowering compe-
tition of the kingdom that had swallowed her up were effaced.
The Irish sold their independence, but refused to sell their protec-
tive laws. The almost prohibitory duties on English calicoes and
muslins were to expire in 1808, those on woollen goods in 1821.
What have been the results? In 1800, one year before the Union,
5000 hands were employed in Dublin in woollen manufactures. In
1840 the 5000 had diminished to 600.
Again, in 1800, 700 hands were employed in the manufacture of
carpets in Dublin; in 1840, none —the manufacture had died out.
Now, here was the “robbery of the many for the benefit of the
few” done away with? Did the many benefit by it? Is Dublin,
is Ireland, any richer for the alteration? This is exactly a case
in point—exactly what our Free Traders require. Here is a
people who gave up their industries and took to the spade—culti-
vated potatoes until the potatoes and the soil were sick of the
bondman’s sigh, and famine and pestilence came and relieved 25
per cent, of her population of their misery,
Erom this we judge that Free Trade means that the world was
only made for capital, that labour has no rights. We shall see
by-and-by. The theories of Free Trade and the laws of Provi-
dence do not seem to agree.
Portugal.
In Portugal, we have the instance of a country very like Aus-
tralia in climate and productions, sacrificing its manufacturing in-
dustry with the view of favouring the export of its agricultural
products, and those products—identical with our own —wine and
wool. The very doctrine our Free Traders preach. Let us see
how “robbery of the many for the benefit of the few” worked there.
In 1681 Count Ereceira came into power. He conceived the
idea that, by inducing manufacturers of woollen cloth to come from
England, he might establish that business in Portugal, with the
intent to use the wool wdiich Portugal then produced in large
quantities, and this idea proved so successful that, at the end of
three years (1684), he was able to prohibit the importation of
foreign cloth. Until the end of the century Portugal continued
to increase in wealth and power, her commerce with the Indies
by the newly-discovered route round the Cape of Good Hope
helping her home manufactures wonderfully.
But in 1703, Portugal, so lately the leading commercial nation of
the globe, made a treaty with England, by which British goods


were to be admitted at twenty-three per cent, duty* in considera-
tion of the tax upon her wines being made one-third less than
the duty upon French wines—the well-known Methuen Treaty.
Mr. McCulloch reports the inevitable result. “ Formerly Lisbon
had about 400 ships,, of from 500 to 600 tons burthen,, employed
in the trade with South America, but at present (1851) there are
not above 50 ships engaged in foreign trade, and of these the
average burthen does not exceed 153 tons. The produce of For-
tugal sent to foreign countries is almost entirely conveyed in fo-
reign ships.” Here was another “robbery of the many for the benefit
of the few ” prevented.
The present tariff of Portugal is highly Protective.
Russia.
At the conclusion of the long European war, in 1815, when all
the nations in Europe had been overrun by Napoleon, and their
manufactories had either been destroyed or neglected, England
proposed Free Trade to them, and most of them accepted the offer;
but it only took a few years to convince them of their error.
Russia was one of the first to perceive her mistake. Her keen-
eyed statesmen were not to be blinded by the specious theories
of Free Trade. They saw that Free Trade would build up one
vast central Power at the expense of all the other nations who
entered into the plan, and that although that Power might be
dependent upon them for food, besides most raw materials,
yet her vast manufacturing capability would subordinate all
others to her in time of war, making them dependent upon
her for all kinds of arms and warlike implements and
materials, besides checking any talent for invention and
improvement in their own populations. Such considerations were
not to be compensated by a diminished price of cloth; and suppose
her cloth and her ironware did cost more than if she imported
them from England, her own population do the work, and her
people do not starve in the streets; so four years afterwards she
abandoned Free Trade, and put high Protective duties on all such
articles as she could produce herself, although she still continues
to import large quantities of yarn, and other part-manufactured
goods. In 1831, in an official circular, Count Nesselrode, one of
the most profound statesmen Russia ever produced, addressing
the English Foreign Secretary, said—' “ that Russia is compelled
by circumstances to recur to a system of independent commerce;
that the manufacturing products of the nation found no markets
abroad; the manufacturers of Russia were ruined, or upon the verge
of ruin; that the money of the country was being carried off into
foreign parts; and that the most solid commercial establishments
* “ The English were adepts then in the art of undervaluing goods, and did not
pay more than one-half of the duty imposed by the tariff." — Anderson's History of
Commerce.


were at the brink of destruction; ” and Russia, rejecting the
specious theories of English Free Traders, abandoned the system.
The salutary effects of the Protective system adopted by Russia
aided not less by the disastrous consequences of Free Trade to
discredit the doctrines and assertions of mere theorists; capital,
talent and labour flowed in from all the civilised countries, especi-
ally from England and Germany, attracted by the advantages
offered to domestic manufactures. The nobility profited largely
by the Imperial policy. The demand for fine wool occasioned by the
woollen manufactures had the effect of rapidly improving her sheep
husbandry . Commerce at large increased, instead of diminishing
under the policy. Commercial revulsions came to an end, and it
is only requisite to peruse the latest reports of the Department of
Commerce in Russia to be convinced that Russia owes to that
system her high degree of prosperity, and that she is advancing in
gigantic strides in a career of wealth and power.
It is stated that the ordinary cloths of Russia are better than
those of France, and not more expensive.
The present Tariff of Russia, passed in 1857, imposes duties
equal to 30 to 50 per cent, ad valorem on most of England’s
staples, but levied on textile fabrics by weight, to prevent fraud by
undervaluation.
Germany
Long remained open to the incursions of the manufacturers of
France and England, nor was it until 1833 that the Zoll Yerein
fully established a Protective policy over nearly the whole of Ger-
many. Its effects have been powerfully and beneficially felt on
the industrial pursuits of the different States constituting the
Empire. And Germany is another instance of a full measure of
Protection having been persisted in and proving successful in a
great country. For surely Germany is great and powerful. She
is not a poor, decayed, or fallen country, like those instanced as
the victims of Free Trade. The various States of Germany, soon
after the French war ending in 1815, began in groups to co-
operate to protect native industries : —Hesse Darmstadt, in 1820;
Wurtemburg, 1827; Prussia and Hesse Cassel, 1828; in the same
year a Mittal Verein was formed between Hesse Cassel, Saxony,
Hanover, Brunswick, Hamburg, Saxe Weimar, Frankfort and
Bremen, and some other minor States. But in 1834 Prussia
succeeded in uniting most of the other States of Germany under
one league, called the Zoll Verein . Oldenburg, Mecklenburg-
Schwerin, Brunswick, and Hanover, with the towns of Hamburg
and Bremen, were left out; but have been since included, whose
history it is not necessary I should go into in this pamphlet.
The Zoll Verein adopted Protection for the manufactures of its
constituent States, and they are fast rising in wealth and im-
portance.
The States of Germany, and most of the smaller Powers of


Europe found that Free Trade might do exceedingly well for
England, but would not do for them, and they abandoned it.
Since 1834 we can speak of Germany as collectively all the
States—and there Protection has not increased the price of the
protected articles.
In Saxony, from 1837 to 1856, the cotton manufacture had
doubled its former production; cotton stockings can be exported
at 3s. per dozen pair; cotton gloves at 9d. per dozen, and other
goods in proportion.
Now this is the labour Free Traders wish us to compete with.
This is what they raise the cry of “ robbery of the many for the
benefit of the few ” for.
The ZollYerein duties are very high on all manufactured goods;
the coarser the goods the higher the duty; coarse shirting, 4d. per
yard; on cotton valued at Is. per yard, 32j per cent.; at Is. 6d.,
15f per cent.; and 8f per cent, on finer goods.
France.
France commenced her Protective system under her great
minister Colbert, and with a short but instructive interval, has
adhered to a Protective policy to the present time. Colbert
devoted large sums from the public revenue to the introduction of
skilled workmen, and purchasing the secrets of various manufac-
tures, and procured improved machinery from wherever it was to
be had best. “He equalised the burthen of taxation,” and at his
death fifty thousand looms produced woollen cloth alone, while
silk to the value of fifty million of francs was manufactured,
France had then an increasing commerce, flourishing fisheries,
and a powerful navy. Shortly before the revolution France tried
Free Trade with England in return for a twelve per cent, duty on
French wine and brandy. But French wines did not suit English
palates : the increase in consumption was almost nil. Not so the
manufactures of England; they undersold and beat the French
manufactures out of the field, and very shortly brought them to
the verge of destruction—another fatal example of the ease with
which a flourishing industry may be ruined. It is not difficult to
see what the result would have been had not the revolution
stopped English importations.
The greatest man of modern times, the great Napoleon, saw
Free Trade doctrines in their true light. He is reported to have
thus expressed himself at a meeting of his cabinet —“ That their
(Free Trade) doctrines, though perhaps sound in one or more
instances, would grind an empire into dust, even if it were made
of adamant.” And while in exile. Las Casas records his remarks
on Free Trade as follows : —“ He opposed the principles of the
economists, which he said were correct in theory, though erro-
neous in their application. The political and social constitution of
different States,” continued he, tf must under these principles be
defective; local circumstances continually call for deviations from


their uniformity. “ Duties,” he said, “for example, in commercial
legislation which were so severely condemned by political econo-
mists, should not, it is true, be an object of the treasury; they
should be the shield and guarantee of a nation, and should corre-
spond with the nature and the objects of its trade, Holland, which
is unprepared for productions and manufactures, and which has a
trade only of transit and commission, should be free of all fetters
and barriers. France, on the contrary, which is rich in every sort
of production and in capacities for manufactures, should inces-
santly guard against the importations of a rival, who might still
continue superior to her; and also against the cupidity, egotism,
and indifference of mere brokers. I have not fallen into the error
of modern systematises,” said the Emperor, “ who imagine that
all the wisdom of nations is centered in themselves. Experience is
the true wisdom of nations , and what does all the reasoning of the
economist amount to ?”
It is a favourite reproach with Free Traders that the business of
silk weaving never prospered in England, notwithstanding the Pro-
tection afforded it. A reason for this may be found in the fact
it was not a Native Industry.
England did not produce the raw material, and France did.
The sunny valleys of the south of France are very favourable to
the growth of the mulberry and the raising of silkworms, and
the neighbouring shores of Italy produce raw silk in great abun-
dance. It was a native industry in France, and it flourished
under Protection. It was not a native industry to England, and
Protection could not make it flourish.
The Free Trade treaty negociated by Mr, Cobden with France
stipulated that not more than 30 per cent, ad valorem should be
levied on all the principal articles of import from England. This
includes iron, cotton, and woollen goods. But the duties on the
two latter are by weight, to prevent fraudulent invoices. Fine
cutlery, 15 per cent.
We have here, in those nations who have received English Free
Trade, a sufficient variety of character to set aside the plea that
differences of religious faith and of national character are the
causes of the different destinies of races. They may have some
effect, indeed, but not sufficient to account for the uniformly dis-
astrous results,
Denmark, Sweden, and Norway
Have enjoyed Free Trade, and consequently have no manufactories.
Sweden produces a very valuable quality of iron, but it is mostly
exported in an unmanufactured state.
Switzerland.
Switzerland alone among the nations of Europe holds her posi-
tion under Free Trade. But her position is in itself so exceptional
that, but for the undue prominence and dishonest duplicity of our


Free Trade organ in holding her up as a great Free Trade country,
she might be passed over altogether.
Whether we consider the size of the country (15,000 English
square miles, about one-sixth the size of Victoria), or her popu-
lation 2,510,494 —(about two-thirds the population of London),
the absurdity of putting forward such an example only becomes
more apparent. She has besides the cheapest government in the
world, and therefore less taxes to pay, and there are no nobles and
few landlords in Switzerland • her highest paid officer is the Pre-
sident of the Federal Council, who receives £4OO per annum.
These are concisely the mighty results of Free Trade in Switzer-
land, so vaunted in our Free Trade organ; and while highly creditable
to her small population, are quite insignificant in their total amount.
Nowhere are the statistics of Switzerland valued so highly as in
Victoria, for they are not to be found in the usual statistical works.
Such returns as are given are by weight, and we have to guess at
her exports by the value of her manufactures taken annually, viz.:
—silk ribbons, £1,400,000; silk stuffs, £1,600,000; gold and
silver watches, &c., £1,800,000; embroidery, £400,000; printing
and dyeing, £6,000; cotton goods not stated. If we allow
£1,500,000 for these, we have a total of £6,700,000, which com-
pared with the exports of France for the same year—£127,978,140,
or of England—£lßß,9l7,s36, is insignificant.
Besides, her muslin and cotton manufactures, which the Argus
would have Free Traders believe are exported in vast quantities to
every clime, were established by M. Escher, under the protection
afforded by the famous Berlin and Milan decrees of the First Na-
poleon, in 1806 and 1807, closing the ports of the Continent against
British goods and British shipping.* For seven years, while all the
rest of Europe was involved in war, Switzerland escaped compara-
tively free. She procures, or did procure, her machinery from Eng-
land, and, now, after fifty trial, her total export is about equal
to the produce of one large mill in Derbyshire or Lancashire.
The tariff of Switzerland is a very low one on most articles, and
levied by weight. Iron pays 2s. 6d. per cwt., or about 33 per
cent, on its present price in bars. The Government monopolise
the sale of salt, selling it at 100 per cent, profit, and drawing a
* The Argus says the blockade established by Napoleon’s Berlin decrees was
nominal only, and relates the anecdote of Josephine supplying herself with British
fabrics in spite of her husband’s decree. Why, the anecdote is proof itself of the
efficiency of the decree, or it would have not been worth the recording! The fact
is, what the French Emperor could not, or did not do, the English Orders in
Council did—caused the most dire distress among the manufacturers and working-
classes in England. In 1811 the state of distress among the trading classes was so
great, that a Select Committee of the House of Commons directed the issue .of
exchequer] bills to the amount of six millions to the merchants. But effectual
relief was not obtained until the tide of success turned against Napoleon, and the
Continental nations leaguered together in alliance with England against him.
(See Portals Progress, pages 377-78-79-80 and 381).
Note.—English Free Traders assert that no Custom Houses exist in Switzerland.
Customs duties were established in 1848—the duties arc collected by weight.


revenue of 2,000,000 of francs annually from its sale, although.
Switzerland contains valuable salt mines of her own.
In 1868 the customs duties produced 9,051,399 francs, or
£362,056 sterling, being more than one-third the total revenue,
£854,505 sterling.
America.
The policy pursued by England towards her American colonies
was just what Free Traders would employ towards Australia. (See
ante, page 10.) The English Government endeavoured to restrict
the colonists to agriculture and the production of raw materials,
and to force them to purchase of the mother-country all manufac-
tured goods.
In 1699 Parliament prohibited the exportation of wool, woollen
fabrics, and yarn, even coastwise, from one colony to another.
In 1719 Parliament objected to the colonies erecting manu-
factories.
In 1731 the Board of Trade were instructed to inquire into
colonial laws made to encourage manufactures; and in 1732 the
Board reported that Massachusetts had passed laws to encourage
manufactures; that New York, Rhode Island, and Maryland had
taken to manufacture woollen and linen for the use of their own
families, and flax and hemp in coarse bags and halters, all of
which interfered with the rights and profits of British merchants
and manufacturers, and advised a stop to be put to it, or they
would be extended.
The same year Parliament prohibited the export of hats from
the colonies, or trading them from one colony to another by ships,
carts, or horses.
Iron mills for slitting, rolling, and plating forges were pro-
hibited under penalty of £5OO. This system of prohibition con-
tinued to increase as the people showed ability to supply their
own wants.
The great Lord Chatham said “ he would not have the colonists
make a hobnail;” and another noble lord added —“ nor a razor to
shave their beards.”
“ During the War of Independence manufactures of every kind
had received a remarkable impulse, and agriculture was deriving
from them such benefits that the value of the soil, as well as the
wages of labour, were largely increased in spite of the public taxes
and the ravages of war.”
On the establishment of peace they had a taste of Free Trade.
They “ bought where they could purchase cheapest,” and were
soon inundated by foreign commodities. English goods were sold
at lower rates than in Liverpool or London. The manufacturers
were ruined; the merchants, who had hoped to enrich themselves
by importations, became bankrupt; and all these causes had such
a depressing influence on agriculture that a general depression of
real estate followed, and failure became general among proprietors.
b 2


This state of things was not temporary—it lasted from the Peace
of Paris to the adoption of a Federal Constitution. From every
State Congress was beset by petitions for Protection to home in-
dustry, and in 1789 the first American Tariff was imposed. fC The
duties were light/* but its results were so happy that in two years
(1791) Washington in his message congratulated the nation on
the flourishing state of its manufactures, its agriculture, and its
commerce.
When in 1806 Napoleon’s celebrated Berlin decrees declared all
articles of British produce or manufacture seizable wherever found,
the United States carried on most of our trade. But the “ orders
in Council” issued by England in 1807 destroyed this American
trade, and that Government in consequence prohibited trade with
either party, and in 1811 war ensued between the United States
and England, Numerous manufactures sprang up during the war,
and at its close the manufacturers called for Protection against
English goods, which flooded the market.
In 1830 they tried Free Trade again; but the limits of this
pamphlet are insufficient to point out the disasters of the next ten
years, and in 1840 a Protective Tariff was re-enacted.
Again, in 1842, a Free Trade policy was tried until 1846, and
from that time Protection has prevailed.
But it would be as difficult as it is unnecessary to follow all the
changes that have taken place. From 1861 to 1869 there were
thirteen changes in the Tariff, of more or less value, on different
articles.
Let us take the case of iron, as Melbourne Free Traders have
selected that article to expend their fiercest attacks upon.
The demand for railroad iron in the United States has always
been in excess of the supply. In 1861 the duty was 24 per cent.;
and the quantity imported, 1,496,580 cwt. The rate was raised
to 40 cents per cwt. (say 34 per cent.) and the import fell to
124,716 cwt. But the demand still exceeded the supply, and in
1863 397,866 cwt. were imported. Again the duty was raised to
671* cents per cwt., and in 1868 rails to the value of £1,987,128
sterling were admitted.
Now for the cause. For years the mileage of railway yearly
constructed in the States has been enormous, far exceeding the
ability of ironmasters there to supply. In 1867 3914 additional
miles of railway were constructed, and in 1868 3450 miles more;
making in all 42,272 miles of railway in operation up to that date.
If the incomplete lines be added, it gives a total of 62,917
miles; and 2500 miles of city railroads, worked by horse power,
will give a total in excess of all Europe, where only 56,660 miles
existed at same period.
Free Traders say demand and supply regulate prices everywhere.
But when in the United States the demand exceeds the supply,
then they say that combinations of manufacturers rob the public.
This is intended as a prohibitive duty, not protective only.


Bar Iron
Boiler Plates ..
Sheet Iron ....
.. From 190 to 200 dols.per ton... 100 dols >83 dols.
350 dols. per ton HO dols
18 dols. per cwt 8 dols. 50 cents... 5 dols. 12J cents.
Axes
. . 24 dols. per dozen 12 dols
If this is so, why blame Protection ? At any rate we are not
likely to have population crowding in upon us at the rate of 1000
per day, and making demand exceed supply. I fancy our Land
System will not settle up our lands so much ahead of our railroads
that it will pay to build them at any cost. And as we do not at
present want to protect railroad or any unmanufactured iron; we
need not embrace Free Trade to prevent iron-makers from robbing
US; if such is the case in the States.
So vast is the capital that has been devoted; and so great is the
the skill that is exercised, in the produce of iron in England; that
almost all nations are tributary to her for that metal. Even
Russia in 1868 took iron from England to the value of £1,347,987;
£800;000 of this was railroad iron.
To show that the law of competition reducing prices operates as
usual under Protection; the following table; taken from a pamphlet
by Mr. J. Lippmaii; is subjoineed ;
Prices of Ironwares in the United States before and after the
Protective Tariff.
Years 1818,1819, 1820. November, 1831. In 1870.
Duties under the last tariff run from 30 to 35 per cent, on the
great majority of articles. To 50 and 55 on some. Duties on textile
fabrics are levied by weight to prevent fraudulent invoices.
There are several reasons for the present depression in the ship-
building trade in the United States. One is the enormous tem-
porary demand for shipping created by the discovery of gold in
California; and the subsequent rapid population of the vast
territory known under the general name of California; that for
some years drew all its supplies through San Francisco. It has a
coast line of 2000 miles on the Pacific, comprising Alta and Lower
California, Oregon, Washington Territory, Nevada, Utah, Idaho,
Montana, Dacotah, Colorado, &c., and a population of about a
million souls. From 1849 to 1854 or 1855 every thing required
excepting fresh beef and lumber had to be brought to San Fran-
cisco by sea.
In 1857 California was manufacturing largely. In 1859 the
wants of that large and wealthy population were largely supplied
from other sources. From producing nothing but beef in 1849,
most of the necessaries of life were produced in 1859, and the
shipping trade fell off. The completion of the railroad, and
improvement in other internal communications have seriously
decreased the demand for shipping, on a voyage that averaged
over one hundred days outwards.
The following statement shows the amount of tonnage built in


In
1849 ...
Tons.
251,577
In
1854 ...
Tons.
535,000
1850 ...
272,000
JJ
1855 ...
383,000
1851 ...
298,GOO-
1856 ...
469,000
1852 ...
351,000
1857 ...
378,000
„
1853 ...
425,000
1858 ...
242,000
the United States in the ten years succeeding the discovery of
gold:-
Again, since 1857 the number of steamers running between
Europe and ports in America has constantly been increasing, and
in 1868 there were 17 lines of steamers, making 1322 voyages per
annum between Europe and America. Many of these are owned
in France, Germany, and the Hanse Towns, having displaced
American sailing tonnage to three times the amount.
These are merely mentioned in addition to other causes, as not
being so generally known as the increased use of iron in ship-
building, &c., &c.
Lowell.
Numerous are the travellers who have been delighted and
astonished at the evidences of the wonderful wealth and prosperity
of America, where Protection has been the rule, and Free Trade the
exception —where, when Free Trade for short periods has obtained
a trial, wide-spread ruin and misery has compelled a return to
Protection.
Let any one read Dickens’s description of Lowell, the principal
seat of the cotton manufacture of the United States, and contrast
it with the wretched troops of squalid, care-worn, half-starved,
poorly-clad if not ragged creatures issuing from the factories in
England’s manufacturing districts. “ The girls Avere all well
dressed, and that phrase necessarily includes extreme cleanliness.
They had serviceable bonnets, good warm cloaks, and shaAvls. * *
They were healthy in appearance, many remarkably so; and had
the manners and deportment of young women—not of degraded
brutes of burthen. * * Not like the careless, ;f moping, slat-
ternly, degraded, dull creatures I have seen issuing'from English
factories.” Another traveller testifies —“ In these manufacturing-
populations there was neither misery, nor coarseness, nor vice, in
any degree to demand notice; amongst the numerous labourers
of both sexes prevails the most severe morality, cleanliness, and
even elegance in dress; in libraries founded for their own use were
seen books of the most instructive character; their labour neither
exhausted their strength nor their cheerfulness; their food w r as
abundant and wholesome; and the most part of these young girls
are able to lay up a marriage portion.”
Will not Free Traders allow this state of factory operations is
preferable to that in England, however caused ? The work-girls of
Melbourne, as a body, are a credit to the town, although no such
glowing picture can be drawn of their condition, many of them
earning a pittance only which they cannot live decently upon.
What their fate under Free Trade would be, it is fearful to contem-
plate.


England.
Let us now see what Free Trade has done for England.
By means of Protection, for at least two centuries British manu-
facturing arts had acquired a perfection and strength which it
was thought no other nation could rival. Mr. McCulloch says:
“ Our establishments for spinning, weaving, printing, bleaching, &c., are infinitely
more complete and perfect than any that exist elsewhere. The workmen are trained
from infancy to industrious habits, and have attained that peculiar dexterity and
sleight of hand which only long employment at the same task can give. Why,
then, shall we not keep the start we have already gained ? New beginners must be
driven out of every market, and nothing but the aid derived fiom restrictive refju ta-
tions and prohibitions will be effectual to prevent the total destruction of their
establishments in the countries where they are set up.”
And first let us bear in mind that for more than 220 years
England has not seen a hostile encampment on her shores. With
the exception of the outbreaks in 1715 and 1745, which were
entirely local, peace has prevailed within her borders, while almost
every nation on the Continent has had its territories devastated by
war —not once or twice only, but for years.
Europe has had fifty years of peace since 1815, and in 1867 Mr.
B. Samuelson, M.P., was specially instructed by Lord Palmerston
to report to the Government on the Industries and Manufactures
of the Continent that were pressing the British manufactures,
either in price or, quality, sometimes in both particulars. He
says “ that in many, almost all, branches of manufacture in
which complicated machinery and the latest scientific appliances
are required, the workmen of the Continent are taking the lead.
One result he gives as “ the spinners and manufacturers of Bel-
gium are exporting woollen yarns and cloths valued at nearly two
millions annually to this (England) country/
“The Nottingham trade is rapidly being transferred to France,
and unemployed lace machines have been bought by manufacturers
from Calais, and are now in full operation in that toAvn.
In Iron he found “ that the iron tires or hoops for the Avheels
of locomotive engines made at the Great Yorkshire Works ranged
in price from £ll ss. to £l9 65., and the corresponding ones
made in France cost only £6 3s. to £l3 4s. The Terre Noire
Company are supplying a great I rench Railway Company Avith
20,000 tons of steel rails at a price beloAV their prime cost in Eng-
land.” . , „
“At Krupps 5 celebrated works the coals are raised from pits
Avithin the works, at a cost of only ss. per ton. There they are
making forged crank axles for large steameis being built at
Greenock for Messrs. Caird.” Eight thousand men are employed
at these works, and do an immense amount of work for England,
while thousands of English engineers are out of work*
* Only a few weeks back a letter from the Secretary of the Engineers’
Society in England appeared in the Argus, inquiring whether one thousand engi-
neers, who had been out of work for years, could not be received here.


A great deal of work is now being done in Belgium and Ger-
many for the Clyde, both heavy and light. Messrs. Beyer and
Peacock, formerly of Manchester, principally locomotive manu-
facturers, moved their factory to Belgium about three years ago,
and have since supplied great numbers of engines to the English
railways, as also some to the railways of Victoria. They employ
from 1200 to 1800 men.
This is quite right, according to Free Traders; but there is a
reverse side to the picture. The men who make these machines
are not available for the defence of England, nor does the capital
embarked in their manufacture pay any taxes towards England's
National Debt or Government expenses.
Recently some iron girders, rolled and riveted, were required
in the construction of a mansion between Leeds and Bradford, and
a number of English and Belgian ironfounders were requested to
supply tenders, according to specification, as to the price at which
they would furnish the girders required. The highest tender
received was from a Bradford ironfounder, and was £120; and the
lowest, which included the delivery of the girders on the site, was
from a Belgian ironfounder, and was £63. The latter was accepted.
Not only in the iron trade is the pressure becoming felt. At a
recent meeting of the watchmakers in Clerkeuwell, the chairman
stated that 24,380 gold watches and 95,371 silver watches were
imported into England in 1867 from France alone, while the
exports were only 11,454 clocks and 9040 watches.
When recently St. Thomas's Hospital was being rebuilt, several
thousand doors and window-frames were required for it; and they
were obtained ready-made from Sweden, and an immense quantity
of iron-work from Belgium.
Lately, when a large building was required in the neighbourhood
of London (the purpose and name of which I cannot find), some
thirty Belgian masons were imported from the continent, and
after being employed some months to complete their work, they
returned to their wives and families. They did not come to teach
English workmen anything new; nor did they stay to add to the
population and wealth of the country.
If the claim of Capital to be allowed to buy in the cheapest
market is allowed with respect to labour, and labour from foreign
countries be introduced, it will dissolve the bonds of society. What
becomes of the “ sound constitutional doctrine that every man is
bound to give his personal service for the defence of the State,
when his service is required ?" He cannot be required to defend
that capital which prefers foreign workmen to labour for it. “The
confusing Free Trade with the abolition of Customs' Duties is a
blunder in the so-called science."*
I have said before that to differences of religion and the
origin of races are ascribed the different destiny of nations.
They may have some effect; but here is a fair statement of
* Speech of Mr. Hubbard, M.P., at Leeds, recently.


modem Free Trade. Stripped of its false aphorisms, its deceitful
proverbs, and unsound theories, it appears a gaunt, devastating,
insatiable spectre, seeking to devour the whole world—a wolf in
sheep’s clothing. In the circle of the sufferers we have so wide a
difference of nationality and religious faith, that to no one cause
can we ascribe their common fate. The Turks are Caucasian, and
their capacity in arts and arms was amply proved up to the inven-
tion of the steam-engine and the spinning-jenny. We see pagan-
ism, Mahommedanism, and Catholicism, the Greek Church of
Russia, and Protestant and Catholic Germany and France, either
succumbing in the strife, or shielding themselves by Protection.
These have resolutely and persistently defended their domestic
industry from destructive foreign competition, and secured their
national welfare. No nation under the rule of Free Trade, whether
unwisely adopted or tyrannically imposed, but has lost rank,
wealth, and independence, and declined towards extinction.
Navigation Laws.
While considering the subject of Free Trade and Protection, to
pass over the Navigation Laws would be too great an omission.
It is to Cromwell we look as the real founder of English com-
merce, for commerce may be said to have then commenced ; and
it is essential to bear in mind the distinction between commerce
and manufactures, for a large commerce was carried on in the
products of Africa and India and other parts of Asia, as well as
America, while the manufactures of Europe were quite insig-
nificant, comparatively. The wars and disturbances in England
having retarded her progress previously to, and during the Com-
monwealth, the merchant navy of England amounted to only some
40 or 50 ships of small size, and England was supplied with the
products of Africa, Asia, and America principally by the Dutch.
There ivas Free Trade, then, and a very profitable trade the Dutch
made it, without Protection. For while three pints of new milk
sold for one halfpenny, pepper was Bd. per pound, an enormous
price even for those days; and other articles of Eastern produce
bore proportionately high prices.
When Cromwell wielded the power of England, and peace at
home enabled him to turn his attention to foreign policy, the
Dutch had almost the entire carrying trade of Europe in their
hands, and it is recorded that upwards of 30,000 vessels * left
ports in Holland for various parts of Europe yearly.!
The Portugese also, with the Dutch, almost monopolised the
* Meaning probably 30,000 voyages, although Sir Walter Raleigh states that
in A.D. 1600 the Dutch had as many ships as any eleven nations of Europe
put together, and that they annually built about 1000 tons.
f It was a practice with vessels from the Mediterranean, and also of the Por-
tuguese, having merchandise for ports north of Amsterdam, to leave their cargoes
at that port for the Dutch to take to their destination, as they did not like the
perils and dangers of the Northern seas, and the slow navigation of those days did
not allow them to make the trip in one season, if they ventured into the Baltic,
The passage of the Round, too, had its objectionable features.


trade of the East. But Cromwell succeeded in taking their trade
away from them and securing it to England. He made Treaties
with Spain, the United Provinces of the Netherlands, Denmark,
Sweden, Portugal, and others. From Spain he obtained the
privilege for English vessels to trade with her South American
and West India colonies—an immense advantage at that time.
That with Portugal was scarcely less advantageous, and they all
tended to exclude the Dutch, and put the English in their
place.
That this was one of the concurrent causes of England’s extra-
ordinary and rapid rise in power and wealth, cannot be denied.
Because the system was abandoned after it had served its purpose,
and when other circumstances and other conditions of civilisation
required an alteration, is not only no argument against their
original institution, but a proof of how admirably adapted the
means was for the end desired. The outcry and opposition of the
nations who were excluded from benefits by the Navigation Laws
is a convincing proof of their wisdom, if not of their justice.
In the succeeding 160 years, during which Cromwell’s policy
was in force, England’s mercantile marine had increased from 50
ships to the enormous amount of 3,876,433 tons. Although but
a little spot on the world’s map, the blazing scroll of fame will
assign to her the head of the list from Cromwell’s time to the
Battle of Navarino, at any rate, and history will admit that for so
small a nation she achieved greater results than were ever achieved
before. I fear we want another Cromwell in England to enable
us to retrieve our position, which, with all deference to the
pride of my countrymen, I cannot but consider as second-rate
only for some years past. It has lately been advanced in a local
paper, that had Cromwell established Free Trade in shipping he
would have done better, and put English shipping interests on a
firmer foundation. Any attempt to undervalue the great repub-
lican ruler of England only betrays ignorance or prejudice.*
John Stuart Mill —the most original thinker of our day, and
the purest logician of all political economists —exposes the mon-
strosity of applying universal rules and regulations to the economy
of all nations, differing widely in their conditions, their resources,
their interests, and their aspirations. He says: —“There* is,
indeed, no hope that these laws (laws of the economists), though
our knowledge of them were as certain and as corap] ete as it is of
astronomy, would enable us to produce the history of society, like
that of the celestial appearances, for thousands of years to come.
But the difference of certainty is not in the laws themselves; it is
in the data to which those laws are to be applied. In astronomy
the causes influencing the results are few, and change little, and
that little according to known laws; we can ascertain what they
* M. Guizot says of Cromwell, that in less than nine months after he was
made Protector, eighty-two ordinances, bearing upon almost every part of the
social organisation of the country, bore witness to the intelligent activity and, to
the character, at once conservative and reformatory, of the Government.


are now, and thence determine what they will be at any epoch of
a distant future. The data therefore in astronomy are as certain
as the laws themselves. The circumstances, on the contrary,
which influence the condition and progress of society are innumer-
able, and perpetually changing; and though they all change in
obedience to causes, and therefore to laws, the multitude of the
causes is so great as to defy our limited powers of calculation.”
Therefore it is madness to adopt the theory and principles of
Free Trade for all countries and under all circumstances. It is
the cupidity of the few seeking to impose on the credulity of the
many, for selfish purposes.
Nor does Mill stand alone in his opinion; for it is remarkable
that for many years some of the greatest statesmen of England
derided the doctrines so persistently preached by Free Traders to
other countries.
If Mr, J. E. McCulloch’s reasons of the perfection 200 years
of Protection had brought her machinery and manufacturing-
powers to are not sufficient, another most forcible exposition of
the real objects of British Free Trade we gain from an eminent,
able, and frank member of the British House of Commons.
During a debate upon the subject, he said;—“lt is idle for us
to endeavour to persuade other nations to join with us in adopt-
ing the principles of what was commonly called Free Trade.
Other nations knew as well as the noble lord opposite, and those
who act with him, that what we meant by Free Trade was
nothing more nor less than by means of the great advan-
tages we enjoyed to get a monopoly of all their markets for our
own manufactures, and to prevent them, one and all, from becom-
ing industrial and manufacturing nations themselves.”
And as well known and important were the words deliberately
expressed in the House of Lords by the great Lord Brougham,
and endorsed by the sagacious Joseph Hume, “That it would pay
the British manufacturers to lose millions by underselling, sooner
than allow other nations, their customers, to become manufacturers
themselves.”
You will admit that Australia finds itself in a similar con-
dition with that of America and other nations before they suc-
ceeded in establishing industries. Like them, we are poor, much
poorer than we need be; and even our agriculture, like theirs at
one time (and were it ever to become as vast and as extensive as
our unlimited ranges of fertile lands will allow), would of necessity
languish and sicken, for its products would find no consumers and
customers; for where there is no manufacturing industry you will
find no purchasing population—without population, no markets,
and without markets, no value even for the richest and the most
plentiful harvests. Merchants, surrounded by an employed, indus-
trious, and manufacturing population, w r ould find more lucrative
fields for their energy, their enterprise, and their capital. Capitalists,
land and householders, would see the value of their possessions in-
crease; lands and houses would be sought for and occupied where


now they stand waste and useless. But above all, you sons oi labour,
beware of the fate your adversaries are preparing for you, and for
your children, by the policy of Free Trade. Starve, you cannot ;
steal, you must not; nothing, therefore, will be left for you but to
compete with the pauperised labour of Europe.
That we should not for generations attempt to protect the manu-
facture of printed muslins or pig iron I admit, nor the silks,
velvets, embroidery, ribbons, and the thousand and one like things
that fill our soft goods houses, nor put an export duty on old iron,
because the Chinese outbid our local rolling-mill in the price of
that raw material. There are many other manufactures it would
be equally impolitic to tax.
But it does not follow that all other clothing material should be
admitted on the same terms, or that our iron factories should not
be protected.
English hardware was protected, until from importing, in the
beginning of the 18th century, she exported 3,750,000 pounds
sterling in 1856.
English Eree Traders would have us, a colony of manufactur-
ing Englishmen, in such a country as Australia, become a nation
of husbandmen and gold-diggers, as if gold-digging was an abiding
industry; or, as if Englishmen, bred up in all the multifarious
branches of her manufacturing interests could by merely taking a
voyage round the Cape become farmers or farm labourers. If
the colony was to be only a pastoral or agricultural colony the
Eree Traders should have begun earlier, and prevented that indis-
criminate immigration which poured in its thousands every month
by means of State aid.
If Free Trade was to be the policy of this colony, then the lands
should have been thrown open at an early date, at a low price, to
actual cultivators and residents on the land, and an agricultural
population secured who would perhaps have embraced Free Trade
doctrines and cheap government, instead of squandering the land
of the colony to make the fortunes of a few hundreds of people, who
neither laboured with their hands nor with their brains; but who
had riches heaped upon their heads, poured into their laps—for
what? Merely, in the majority of cases, to squander again. They
did not improve the land. They dug no wells, they built no water-
courses. They planted no trees. They built few, or no houses.
They took all they could get from the country, and they returned
nothing. But they unanimously agreed to keep the poor man off
the land. A very needless precaution —for a man must have some
money to commence life as occupier of new land in a new country
—and so they heaped one regulation upon another, all tending to
increase uselessly the price and difficulty of obtaining land.
If we are to have Free Trade in manufactures, let us have Free
Trade in government also, and as Swiss Free Trade is held up to
us as a pattern, let us have a Swiss republican form of government,
with a President of Council at £4OO a year, instead of a Governor
at £lO,OOO per annum, and other expenses in proportion.


There is a stage in the history of a nation when Free Trade is
an advantage. Alison says:—“Experience in all ages and all
times tells us that as long as a nation is in a state of barbarism, an
entirely Free Trade that carries off the products of its hunting-
grounds, its pastures, its forests, and its fields—its raw materials
of every kind—and brings in return better clothing, furniture,
and more perfect tools and weapons, and a supply of the grand
instrument of exchange, the precious metals, confers innu-
merable advantages.” Some portions of Australia may still be in
this barbarian stage; we in Victoria have certainly advanced
beyond it; we are congregated in cities, entered upon the manu-
facturing stage of progress, and require Protection to our indus-
tries to prevent their being crushed by the deadly embrace of Free
1 rade, and to prevent the country reverting to a vast sheep-run.
Then, again, what will it avail our industrial classes to have an
eight hours’ system of labour—almost an essential under the ener-
vating effects of this climate—if labour is to be subjected to com-
petition with the unlimited hours of Europe, where, as in Saxony,
a man, his wife, and children, working 12 to 16 hours per day,
can only earn 3s. or 4s. per week.
A nation has no interests more precious than its own, and when
we shall arrive at a stage to develope a feeling of Australian
nationality—to look upon ourselves as Australians, then we shall
be on the road to prosperity and power, and, consequently, wealth.
What is the cause of almost all the countries in Europe taking
up Protection, and which Free Traders affect to think so inex-
plicable ? It is Self-preservation.
Free Traders are trying to oppose a law of nature, instituted
for the dispersion of our race over the surface of the globe. If
Free Trade was paramount, we should have all peoples crowding to
one great centre, where manufactures were cheapest.
And to suppose that if Free Trade is to prevail that our manu-
facturing -population could turn agriculturists is a cruel fallacy. It
has been said that the three great subjects that claim attention
from a national Legislature are the interests of agriculture,
commerce, and manufactures. Are agriculture and manufactures
promoted by Free Trade? We promote agriculture by railroads,
built at the expense of all, whether manufacturers or agricultur-
ists. Should we not also protect manufactures in their inception
•—in their infancy ? Do agriculturists suppose that they wmuld
realise as high a price for their produce by sending it to England
as they would by selling it to a manfacturing population here ?
And where would be the market for agricultural produce if our
manufacturing population were compelled to turn agriculturists,
perished, or were driven away ? Better to pay a little more to a
ploughmaker here than drive him away to pay less for one from
England and get less for your crops in return.
I maintain, instead of the Free Trade dogmas our English
importers would force upon us, that the following formula is better
suited to express our circumstances and condition:—


That, inasmuch as the productions and climates of different
countries vary, so do the circumstances and requirements
of their people : therefore, while it may be true philosophy
to admit the natural productions of all countries free,
to admit the manufactures of all countries free would
tend to lower the wages of all to the level of the
lowest—irrespective of the peculiar circumstances and
conditions of the people—and thereby degrade and
debase labor, instead of raising it.
As considerable variety of opinion prevails as to the amount of
protection that should be given to our manufactures, I may
express my opinion to be that from 20 to 30 per cent on a proper
valuation would be ample protection for present purposes. Our
policy should be not to prohibit any goods, especially if they are
superior or improved in quality or pattern to our own. We should
rather seek to keep our manufactures up to the standard of excel-
lence presented by older countries, and to this end partial impor-
tations would be beneficial. The argument that Providence
intended England for a great manufacturing nation, by giving her
vast stores of coal and iron, and intended Australia for a pastoral
country, by giving her this and not giving her the other, is absurd;
for when our population has increased enough to call for the
working of the bed of splendid iron ore that underlies the districts
around Melbourne, and coal shall have been discovered convenient
enough to it to work it, Providence will have intended Victoria to
improve her gifts, just as England has improved hers; and when
Macaulay’s New Zealander on London Bridge surveys the ruins of
London, Victoria may be preaching Free Trade to Australian and
Polynesian peoples yet unknown to fame.
When the Government of this colony shall decide upon adopt-
ing Protection as a policy of the country, it is to be hoped that a
mere Tariff will not only be adopted, but that a properly constituted
department, similar to the English Board of Trade, will be or-
ganised as a medium of communication between the Ministry and
the manufacturers, so that no alterations or improvement may be
made without consulting the trade interests.
Board or Trade.
The Board of Trade, which now takes such an important part in
English Legislature on all matters connected with manufacturing
industry, was first instituted by Cromwell, who appointed a Com-
mittee of merchants for the purpose of developing the resources of
British trade. The first meeting was in the Painted Chamber,
Whitehall, on the 27th November, 1655, and they continued their
labours until the day of his death. Under a President and Vice-
President it exercises all the duties performed in other countries
by a Minister of Commerce. All matters affecting mercantile or
manufacturing interests must receive the sanction of the Board
before they are acted upon by the Ministry, and the raanufactur-


ing interest in question is invariably consulted by tbe Board pre-
vious to any alteration taking place. The statistical department of
the Board collects and publishes classified returns on all subjects
affecting revenue, population, commerce, &c. Practically, the high
functionaries who constitute the Board, except the President and
Vice-President do not take any part in its deliberations.
When there shall arise a Minister honest enough, strong enough,
and wise enough to propose and carry a fair Property Tax, then the
first stone will belaid of a permanent and prosperous financial
Policy for Australia. Then our policy should be to make living in
every respect as cheap as possible in Victoria. All the necessaries
of life should be free of duty. All building materials—lumber
especially—should come in free, and all partially-manufactured
articles which we cannot produce here, required in making up a
perfect article.
To induce all the colonies to join in intercolonial Free Trade
would perhaps, next to a judicious system of Protection, be the
greatest boon that could be bestowed on Australia. Their circum-
stances are all so nearly similar, that no one could overreach the
the others ; and if either South Australia or New South Wales
could be induced to join Victoria, the others must come in. The
statesman who shall set himself this task, and accomplish it, will
hand down his name to posterity, and deserve the highest honors
a grateful people can bestow.
To reduce our Colonial debt, which has reached an excessive
amount (say £l6* per head of population), should certainly be the
policy of a Constitutional Ministry; as, under the present system,
our railways and telegraph, supposed to be reproductive works, are
an annual charge on the colony; railroads to the extent of about
one-third the fare of every passenger, and one-third the freight of
every bale of goods carried on the line; telegraphs, to about one-
fourth the cost of every message sent. Under tliis system we pay
every seventeen years the principal of the debt, yet have the debt
still to pay. This, although it may be correct after Mr. Ricardo’s
theory, is self-evidently wrong.
We have the Free Trade that Adam Smith inculcated—ships of
all nations bring the produce of all nations to our shores free—
free of discriminating duties. This does not suit them. The
Freetraders’ Free Trade means gluts and deluges of damaged,
cheap, or inferior goods at one time, stagnation, depression and
Angh pnces at another. If Melbourne Free Traders are true to
their principles, and not actuated merely by a selfish instinct
to guide trade in such channels as will fill their coffers, why
have they not proposed Free Trade in the necessaries of life ?
Why not advocate the admission of tea, sugar, and coffee free,
which would so materially tend to cheapen the cost of living
* Taking our debt at £10,018,100 (although, it is something more now)
and our population at 600,000, the debt averages £l6 13s. 4d. per head, while the
annual interest reaches 19s. per head—an enormous amount, equal to that of the
highest-taxed countries in the world.


here? If they wish to see Melbourne the first port in Aus-
tralia, why not abolish pilotage and tonnage duties? Tea
sugar, and coffee, only produce about 50170,000 per annum,
pilotage 5016,000, and tonnage duty £16,000; or, say, £200,000
in the total. The immense impetus which trade would receive
from the abolition of these imposts would repay threefold the
cost of taxation in another direction. No; Melbourne Free
Trade and equality of taxation mean that every man shall pay his
equal share of taxation, irrespective of his means; and the corre-
sponding measure, to tax every man according to his means, has
been left out of all the financial schemes brought before the House.
Hence, constant discontent and distress. Very unreasonably, says
Capital; the working class are much better off here than they were
at home. Precisely: is not that just what they came for? But
only some are better off than they would be at home. And are
not all the other classes better off than they would be at home,
other circumstances being equal? Hoes not capital get higher
interest all round than at home? Ho not merchants aim at higher
profits? Ho not doctors, lawyers, and barristers, according to
their merits, get better incomes than at home? And is it not the
case with alt classes?
Europe is but a vast prison-house for labour, where it is forced
to toil for a bare subsistance.
There is no doubt that the effect of low wages is to demoralise,
debase, and degrade man, and that in a country of white men
low wages means low profits for every one.
Free Trade means fortunes to the few, serfdom and poverty to
the many. It will enable a few score men in Australia to grow
wealthy at the expense of thousands.
MASON, FIRTTT, AND M'CUTCHEON. GENERAL PRINTERS, MELBOURNE
