

Protection and the
Worker.
SHORT ADDRESSES BY
MR. S. G. HARRIS and MR. J. DREW.
Messrs. Harris and Drew lectured on the above topic
at the Temperance Hall on the evening of Monday, the
28th August, being introduced as two enthusiastic
workers in the cause of Protection by Mr.W. D, Beazley,
M.L.A., who occupied the chair.
Mr. Harris, who first took the platform, said that the
paramount question for the worker was, What policy
would give him the most regular work at the highest
rate of wages, and enable him to live under the most
favorable conditions. The country which had the great-
est proportion of its citizens regularly employed at
remunerative rates, and working under favourable
conditions, was the country which was the most prosper-
ous. He would show conclusively that Protection was
the only policy which would give all these benefits with-
out increasing to any appreciable extent the cost of living,
while in very many instances it decreased that cost. In
order to do this he would have to examine both the
Protectionist and Freetrade sides of the fiscal question,
and compare them. The Right Hon. G. H. Reid,
speaking at an A.N.A. meeting at Heidelberg some
three years ago, said that he “ would take the ring-bark
off the tree of industry, and allow it to expand.” Now,
he (the lecturer) asked his hearers if they ever heard any
sane man speak of taking the ring-bark off any tree to
allow it to expand ? They had all seen, when travelling
in the country, large areas of land with nothing but dead
timber—gaunt, white, bare trees, spreading their leafless
arms over the fields, spectres of a one-time fragrant and
flourishing forest. These trees had been ring-barked;
just the operation that Mr. Reid would apply to the
industries of the State, Yet the bark was the tree’s only
protection from death. Flourishing industries formed the
trunk of the industrial tree, whose branches were a
minimum rate of wage, a limited number of hours of
labour, a Factories Act, an Arbitration and Conciliation
Act. What Protection did in the first place was to erect
a guard or fence around the trunk of the tree in the form


of duties. Thirty-five years ago, when the gold yield fell
off, and the vast population that had been attracted
became to a very large extent unemployed, because they
were no longer able to gain their livelihood on the gold
fields, Victoria was faced with the problem, What should
be done with the unemployed ? Were they to be allowed
to go back to the countries whence they came, or were
we, by a protective policy, to endeavour to build up
industries within the confines of our own State, and save
the population that had been gained during the goldfield
boom ? Our legislators of that day wisely adopted a
Protectionist policy ; they built up flourishing industries,
and people, instead of leaving the Colony, were saved to
the State, and to-day we had in our midst those varying
MR. S. G. HARRIS.
industries as the result of this fostering care of a pro-
tective tariff. But the tree was only a trunk—was
incomplete—and, while able to compete successfully
under a protective policy, it was found that the workers
were not getting that shares of the benefits accruing to
which they were entitled, and then the tree began to put
forth its branches, the first of them being the eight hours
day, followed by the Factories Act, minimum wage, and
other benefits, and the new plank in the Protectionist
platform was, Protection for the workers.
It was useless, the lecturer argued, to enact that an
employer shall pay a minimum wage if the product of his
factory had to come into competition with the produce of
some other country where there was no restriction on the


smallness of the wage, or, worse still, with the unrestricted
competition of goods dumped on our markets at less than
cost price. It was equally useless reducing the hours of
labour to eight if the product of such labour had to
compete with the labout of other lands where
the hours were sixteen, eighteen, or even twenty.
In the tailoring trade in England, a tailoress only
earned is. 2d. for twelve hours work, and, deducting
3d. for fuel to heat the iron, and 2d. which she
paid to a girl to carry the work to and from the shop, she
reaped a nett profit of gd. for twelve hours very hard
work. There are 30,000 tailoresses in the east end of
London, ten per cent, of whom were always out of employ-
ment, while sixty to seventy per cent, earned less than
MR. J. DREW.
Bs. per week. Turning to Victoria, the tailoresses’
minimum wage was 20s. per week, or an average in 1901
of 225. 6d. Take the jam making trade. We were told
by Mr. Sydney Webb, in 1902, of the conditions of
things then, “ at the beginning of the twentieth century,”
in the majority of the British jam factories during the
summer months—the scenes of overcrowding, damp and
disorder, the discomfort, the standing in wet boots, the
bad sanitary arrangements, women and girls kept con-
tinuously at work for many hours at a stretch. Whereas
in the jam making trade in Victoria the hours are limited
to forty-eight per week, and the rate of wages was 14s.
for those over sixteen years of age. What was the use
of having a minimum rate of wages Act, and limiting the


number of hours, if the products of this sweated labour
were allowed to come into Victoria free ? The Act would
be inoperative, because the employers of labour—the
owners of the industries—would be unable to compete
against such unrestricted competition and pay the wages
which we deem it necessary shall be paid that people may
live in anything like comfort. The Alien Immigration
Restriction Act prohibited the importation of cheap
labour from outside countries; but without a duty on
the product of that labour, it would be betler that these
aliens should be allowed to come here, because they
could be made to conform to a limited extent to the
customs of this country, whereas, so long as they
remained outside, we had no control over them at all.
The worker who was a Freetrader was blind to his own
interests, and the Freetrade member of Parliament who
in one breath voted for the abolition of Protection, and in
another for minimum wage, limited hours of labour, alien
immigration restriction, arbitration and conciliation, etc.,
was an anomaly. Without Protection the trunk of the tree
of industry dies,and its branches become so many fruitless,
leafless, dead limbs. The Freetrader has always been
an advocate of freedom of contract, for the ruling of the
labour market by the law of supply and demand, and
unrestricted competition. John Bright, Cobden’s
lieutenant in the Freetrade campaign in England, was
wholly opposed to trades unionism, and fought bitterly
against factory legislation. Then again, could anything
be more heartless than Mr. Reid’s statement,
to the eftect that when the millions of this
country became tens of millions, and the crop of misery
was equal to that of older countries—when we had pauper
labour of our own—then we should be able to settle the
question of establishing industries. So that Mr. Reid
would like to see the people of Australia working under
similar conditions as in the old countries, that we might
compete against them on an equal level.
Another great cry of the Freetraders was that every
duty imposed for the purpose of Protection must be paid
by the consumer. The question was, Did Protection
increase the cost of living ? The Protectionists say
emphatically, no ; and so did the Freetraders when they
were not on the platform or the floor of the House. Let
the statement be examined. If we had no local industry
established within the confines of our own State, we
would be absolutely at the mercy of the importer.
Experience showed this, and a number of instances
could be quoted where, having no local industry
established, the importers had been able to levy what
prices they liked, and we had had to pay them. If, on
the other hand, under a protective policy, we established
within our own State an industry, it immediately came
into competition with the industry of the foreign country,


which of necessity reduced the price of the article to the
lowest possible level consistent with a profit. Then
again, inquiries made on the spot as to the prices of
different articles in New South Wales showed that prices
had been actually lower since the imposition of duties,
and Sydney people testified to the fact that the tariff
had made living no dearer. Sir William McMillan,
at one time deputy leader of the Freetrade Party,
had stated in the House that if a duty of twelve
and a half, fifteen, or twenty per cent, were levied on
wearing apparel, it would fall upon the purchaser of the
article. But the firm of importers in Sydney—McArthur
and Co.—of whom Sir William McMillan was the head,
in their business pamphlet issued after the Federal tariff
had been confirmed, said, “In future it is our intention
to manufacture locally all woollens that can be made here
to advantage, thus saving the heavy import duties on
apparel.” In the same pamphlet it stated, “ Owing to
the very large increase in this branch of our business, we
have been compelled to add two new stories to our
factory.” It was evident, therefore, that Protection
provided labour in New South Wales, and enabled
McArthur and Co. to put two additional stories to their
factory, and employ a larger number of hands in the
making of apparel that had previously been imported ;
in fact, the workers gained both ways—they paid no
more for the goods they required, and they got the work
of making the goods. The pamphlet went on to say,
“ Our shirt factory has been established, and engaged in
making up goods ; thus the shirts will escape the
twenty-two and a half per cent, duty on imported lines.”
They also offered “flannels made in their own mills, and
guaranteed to be equal to anything imported, and which
also escaped the duty, and were sold at less than they
were under Freetrade.”
We were often told by Freetraders, continued the
lecturer, that the locally-made article was not equal to
the imported article ; but now we had this striking
testimony as to the efficiency of our workmen and their
work coming from a firm whose head was Sir William
McMillan, the Freetrade advocate, and formerly Mr.
Reid’s lieutenant in the House of Representatives.
(Applause.)
Mr. J. Drew then took the platform, and said he was
of opinion that if the working men and women of Aus-
tralia did not take up this question of Protection
earnestly and quickly, they would find it was too late,
and that they had been building without a foundation.
He was a workingman, and claimed to be a Protectionist
—but not through the Custom House only, not for any
one industry or any one class alone, not for the manu-
facturers alone, and not for the workers alone, but a real,
all-round Protectionist; for he held that if a country was


benefiting by Protection, then all in that country, who
desire it, should participate in its benefits. Those who
wanted Protection for themselves should be willing to
give it to others, and help them to get it to
its fullest extent; that was, to have the whole
of our own markets for the producers and manu-
facturers of our own country; and it had been shown
that there was very little that was consumed in this
country that could not be produced there if Parliament
would only assist. Unfortunately we found employers
and employees fighting against one another at election
times, and while that was the case, we would never have
a thorough system of Protection. The manufacturers
wanted Protection through the Custom House; the
workers wanted it by means of factory legislation, wages
boards, and arbitration acts. We all desired to make
this country our home, and to make it a comfortable
home, and to that end constant employment was
necessary, to attain which we must be a manufacturing
as well as a producing community. We talked of a
White Australia, but he could see no difference between
having to compete with the black and tan aliens here,
and competing with the goods which were manufactured
by them and sent here. He believed that a thorough
system of Protection would solve the unemployed
difficulty ; it would entice those people who were com-
pelled to leave our shores to look for work elsewhere
back to their homes again ; it would cause money to be
in the hands of the many instead of the few; and he
ventured to say that, if put into practice for twelve
months, there would not be one man in Australia game
to go upon a public platform asking for votes in the name
of Freetrade. He believed a very large majority of the
workers claimed to be Protectionists, but the delicate
question with them was, Who should get it first; the
employers or the employees ? We were all desirous of
building up Australia to a high standard in every respect,
and the question was, “Which end should we start
—from the top of it, or from the foundation ? All would
agree that it must be from the foundation, and he, as a
worker, held that the bedrock of success was constant
employment—of course, with good conditions, a fair living
wage, and reasonable hours ; and with a fair employer
we would get all that, but we wanted it by Act of
Parliament, so that all employers of labour should
be on the same footing, otherwise the fair employers
would be at a disadvantage with their sweating brethren.
The fair-minded employers, therefore, should help the
workers to get Protection by Act of Parliament, and the
workers must help employers to get Protection through
the Custom House. (Applause.) He believed that
that must be the first consideration—Protection through
the Custom House. There were thousands of people


who had worked in protected industries under the
Victorian tariff who had lost their means, of livelihood
since the Commonwealth tariff came into operation.
Their employers lost the protection through the Custom
House, with the result that they lost their work. Some
years ago he was on a committee that visited a number
of factories to find out how the alteration in the tariff
affected them. Amongst others, they visited the
distillery at Port Melbourne, which then gave constant
employment to eighty-five or ninety hands, besides a lot
of outside work ; 3000 tons of coal a year were used up
from our own mines, also about 130,000 bushels of
grain grown by our own farmers ; whereas for the last
two years they had only averaged about eight or nine
hands. A number of other industries were treated in a
similar way by the Commonwealth Parliament, and if we
continued to lose little by little our protection like this,
we would soon be asking ourselves the question, What
shall we do with our children ? What trade can we put
them to with any certainty that it is going to last ? The
Freetrader will say, “Go on the land.” That sounded
very nice, but the Freetrader that tells us to go on the
land does so because he wishes us to be at the mercy of
the exporter with our produce, and then at the mercy of
the importer for the manufactured articles, when they
come again into this country.
In conclusion, he believed in Protection both from the
workers’ standpoint and the manufacturers’ standpoint,
because he felt that it was useless to work for Protection
by Act of Parliament unless manufacturers were first
protected through the Custom House. Protection
through the Custom House would give more work;
Protection to the workers would give more wages;
more money would give more bread, more clothing,
more comforts, more happiness. (Cheers.)
A vote of thanks was moved by Mr. S. Mauger, M.P.,
who pointed out that there was a large number of
working men who, not being engaged in manufacturing
industries, thought that they had no occasion for
Protection, and that Freetrade did not affect them—such
as public servants, postmen, also carpenters and builders,
who had absolutely a monopoly of the market so far as
their trade was concerned, and did not suffer from
imported competition. Every working man who knew
what unbridled competition was, ought to be on the side
of the workers. In some of the States, too, there was
no Factories Act, but he thought that factory legislation
should be universal. He agreed that Protection, to be
effective, should be both for the manufacturers and the
workers, and the same Parliament should bring about both.
Mr. W. J. Lormer seconded, and commented on the
fact that the men who were principally to blame for
the present unsatisfactory tariff were in the ranks of the


Labour Party, which included some of the bitterest
opponents of protective duties. He was unable to
understand how a Labour member could consistently
support Freetrade and free imports.
The motion was supported from the audience by
Mr. Henderson, and also by a visitor from New South/
Wales, Mr. Armfield, President of the Trades Hajl
Council in S>dney, who said that as a worker he held
exactly the same views as those expressed by the
lecturers. He also believed that until the Labour Party
adopted Protection as one of their planks they would do
no good either to the manufacturer or the worker. He
admitted that had it not been for New South Wales we
would have had a tariff more like the Victorian, but
trusted that by the next general election the workers of
that State would view the matter differently. He had
fought for Protection since he was sixteen years of age,
and took part in demonstrations as far back as 1877, and
was instrumental in assisting to obtain higher duties in
connection with his own trade, which resulted in
immense benefit to it. Since the Federal tariff had come
into existence, he saw in Melbourne importing houses
stocking imported vehicles, and machinery shops stocking
imported machinery, and every vehicle and every
machine that came into the Commonwealth deprived
men here of employment. The Iron Bonus Bill was now
before Parliament, and some there were doing all they
could to throw it out; but if passed it would mean
employment to thousands. A statement had been made
in the Senate the other evening that the cost of living in
New South Wales had risen twenty per cent, since the
tariff. That was a deliberate falsehood, because things
were more reasonable, and Sydney more prosperous, than
before the tariff. We heard a good deal about the
unemployed, but if it had not been for the tariff we would
have had a great many more unemployed, and if the
tariff were put up higher, in a very short time there
would be no unemployed. He would be satisfied with
the Victorian tariff, although he was a Protectionist in
regard to articles that could be manufactured here. He
was attending a conference the other evening of
employers and employees in the trade to which he
belonged, when a committee was appointed to give
evidence before the Tariff Commission, and he could see
that some of the employers, while ready to accept all the
protection they could get through the Customs, were not
prepared to afford protection to the workers, but they
would find that that was a mistake, and the manufacturers
must make up their minds to give the workers a fair
share of the benefits to be obtained.
Issued by the Protectionist Association of Victoria,
66 Bourke Street, Melbourne, and printed by Green & Fargher.
