

PROTECTION
VERSUS
FREE TRADE
GOLD NOT NATIONAL WEALTH.
VICTORIA:
AS SHE WAS, AS SHE IS, AS SITE SHOULD BE.
BY A COLONIST,
PRICE, OftVr ,
MELBO U E N E;
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED FOR THE AUTHOR BY
WALKER, MAY & CO., PRINTERS, 99 BOURKE STREET WEST.
*
SOLD BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1800,




PROTECTION, &c.
n uss/fss/?
>6 s rr
An important era in the history of our adopted
country has arrived, when it becomes the duty of every well-
wisher to its prosperity, calmly, and without prejudice, to inquire
into the causes of the present unexampled depression in every
branch of industry, and to endeavour to point out some mode of
affording 1 a remedy.
With the view to facilitate this object, it has occurred to the
writer, that a plain and ungarnished statement of the real position
in which the colony is placed, may assist his readers in forming an
opinion as to the urgent necessity for the adoption of immediate
measures to foster the industrial interests of the colony, both agricul-
tural and manufacturing, ere it is too late.
Prior to the discovery of the gold-fields ,in this colony, in 1851,
the population numbered about 00,000 souls. These were then entirely
dependent on the progress of the squatting interest; the rates of wages
were low in comparison with the present, but all necessaries and
comforts of life could be procured at a corresponding rate; in fact,
the small amount of those days could be turned to much better
account than the larger amount now-a-days. The progress which the
colony made from 1812 to 1851 was slow, but rested on a much
sounder basis than formerly, when entirely under the sister colony of
New South Wales. A steady demand for labour was created, which
was supplied by a constant flow of immigrants from Great Britain,
under the system in force of assisted immigration out of the Land
Fund. At this period great complaints were made by the colonists
to the Home Government of the bad selection of immigrants.
Mr. King was appointed to act as agent for the colony of Vic-
toria in the selection of immigrants from Great' Britain, and by
that means a much better class was introduced. Mr, King
also directed the attention of small capitalists to the advantages
and attractions the colony then possessed over the home country.
Land in those days was very cheap, and could easily be obtained
without any difficulty, although farming was then, as now,'
rather an unprofitable speculation, as Hour was only £lO per ton.
Up to 1851, our exports consisted principally of wool and tallow,
hides, &c., and commanded the highest price in the home market,
leaving a large margin in favour of the colonial producer. The


people then were contented with the progress they were making,
asd the yearly profits derived from the squatting interest left large
balances for investment in the colony in this or other undertaking's.
Every section of the community appeared prosperous and happy; that
instability which characterises our present condition was then
unknown. Our exports at this period exceeded our imports to the
extent of £300,000, and to have kept up the same prosperity until
now, our exports should hear a similar proportion.
In the year 1851 the discovery of gold in Victoria was announced
to the world. It was the dawn of a new era in our history; and
was the magnet by which thousands were attracted from the neigh-
bouring' colonies, and all parts ot the world, to our shores ; and
great was the excitement and attraction, that the daily arrivals of
people numbered thousands, and, I believe, in one day alone—in
December, 1852—as many as the large number of five thousand
landed in Melbourne.
The result of the discovery was fully established by the yield of
gold amounting to tons per week, and gold mining was the all-
absorbing topic of public attention, and every other interest was lost
sight of by the people and the Government.
This influx of people for a moment entirely disorganised our social
arrangements, and although the greater proportion ot them at once
betook themselves to the mines, the superabundance of money put
into circulation through the great success of the miners, and also
the large amount brought in by immigrants from all parts of the
world (even estimating the latter amount at the low average of
£lO per head), caused an inflation in the demand for imported
goods and real property, and speculation to an enormous extent
set in. The fortunate possessors of such were thus unexpec-
tedly enabled to realise a large amount for that which had cost
them very little, and retired to Europe or elsewhere with splendid
fortunes, the proceeds entirely of good luck, and not the accumu-
lations of years ol industry. This was not an unusual occurrence;
and the writer was acquainted with several who, returned in the
same ship in which they came out, having, in the space of a few
weeks realised an independency.
This very favourable and prosperous state of things continued
(perhaps, however, with some slight falling off), until the spring of
1854, when the symptoms of an approaching change were apparent.
Gold mining having become less attractive, from the fact that the
shallow alluvial g-round originally discovered was nearly worked
out, and the diggings were becoming every day more of a practical
operation, suited to skilled miners, and those who had capital
sufficient to undertake deep sinking operations. In consequence
of this, large numbers, who could find no lucrative employment in
the colony for the capital acquired by gold mining, left us alto-
gether, but would gladly have remained and settled down, if some
branches of industry to which they had been suited, had presented
themselves at that period; and to the Government of that day, is


chargeable the loss of so much valuable capital and labour, which
it is now impossible to replace. At this juncture, a liberal Land
Bill, with a Protective Tariff, similar to that of Great Britain, would
have secured us from the loss sustained, and formed the basis of
powerful interests, and, possibly, averted the crisis through which
the colony is passing.
A reference to the annexed table, shewing the population, im-
ports and exports, of the colony, from 1852 up to the present date,
exhibits at a glance our altered position at this time. The year
1852 shewed an excess of exports over imports, to the amount of
£24 per head, or a gain to the colony of this amount; the years
1853 and 1854, on the contrary, an excess of imports over exports
to the amounts of £23 18s. 6d. and £23 19s. Od., respectively;
setting down our powers of consumption at the value of our ex-
ports, there must have been an abstraction of capital from the
colony by the import of foreign goods to the extent of the differ-
ence, less of course the amount unpaid by the various insolvent
estates. The numerous insolvencies of the latter year have the
effects of the changes thus pointed out, and with the slight check
given by the losses entailed in this year, to the imports of 1855
and 1856, the features of 1854 have continued up to the present
period, and our position is daily getting worse. In the face of
these facts, it is astonishing that any person depending upon our
prosperity, can be found advocating the continuance of a system
productive of such ruinous results, as it must be evident to any
one who really notices the tendency of current events, that the
converse of such a policy must check our downward tendency; and,
in fact, a Prohibitory Tariff on foreign imports would not have the
same paralysing effect on the vitality of our country’s prosperity,
as the w'orking of our present system is doing.


EXPOET AND IMPORT TABLE,
From 1S52 to May 1830.
YEAK.
Population.
Total
Imports.
Imports
per Head.
Total
Exports.
Exports
per Head.
Surplus of
Exports
over Imports,
per Head.
Surplus
of
Imports
over Exports,
per Head.
£
£
s.
d.
£
£
s.
d.
£ s. d.
£
1852
140,000
4.069.742
29
1
0
7.149,549
53
5
0
24 4 0
1853
200.000
15,842.637
79
4
0
11,061,543
55
6
0
23 18 0
1854
. 240,000
17.744.998
73
2
0
11.787,226
49
3
0
23 19 0
1855
300.000
11,568,908
38
12
0
13.469,094
44
18
0
6 6 0
1856
338.000
14.962,269
44
0
0
15.489,760
45
10
0
1 10 0
1857
407.000
17,256.209
42
6
0
15,079,512
37
0
0
5 6 0
1858
484,000
15,108.249
31
4
0
13,989.209
28
16
0
2 8 0
1859
520,000
15,600,185
30
0
0
13,800,473
26
11
0
3 9 0
1860 )
T 11
10
o 1
r s
4
o *1
to • \
May 12 1
520,000
5,994,578
33 2 0 }
per annum. J
4,146,711
22 8 0 >
per annum. J
10 14 0
118,147,775
106,073,077
32 0 0
69 14 0


When the motion of the lion, member for Castlemaine respecting
the “ State of the Colony ” was brought before the Legislative
Assembly, the Chief Secretary in reply admitted that a general
depression had extended itself to every section of the community,
but quoted as an illustration of our sound condition the increasing
deposits in the various banks, as an indisputable reply to the
assertion, that our wealth was decreasing. In a young country like
this, I consider, that it is an unhealthy symptom, as it shews that
there must be an entire absence of fields for investment, if capitalists
can be content with the small rate of interest paid to them by
the banks, and which must eventually result in one way, the
withdrawal of this capital to other countries holding out better in-
ducements.
“ Excessive wealth,” says a graphic writer, u in the person of
individuals is no boon to the community; if it were not so concen-
trated it would still exist and probably, nay almost certainly, would
have been employed to better purpose.
This money in the hands of the banks can only be looked at, as
the aggregate of the savings of the community concentrated there,
if not so, it would, as the writer says, “ probably be employed to
better purpose.”
If Great Britain is to bo taken as a precedent, it is a known fact,
that she is never so prosperous, when her Bankers’ coffers are full
and money abundant and cheap, with interest at the rate of 2 to >J
per cent, per annum, and discountable securities not offering’, as when
money is I to 5 per cent., and discounts in great demand j then
her cotton, woollen, and other manufactories, employing large
numbers, are fully occupied, and the highest rate of wages pre-
vail. This well-known principle of political economy, to the
truth of which Great Britain bears testimony, docs not seem to
find favour in the eyes of our colonial economists, who have all
along contended that our want of prosperity was entirely owing to
our supposed high value of labour, and that we never could suc-
cessfullv supply our own wants, until labour was reduced to a much
lower point. If there is any truth in the doctrine, Ireland, with
her unequalled agricultural resources, immense population, and low
wages of (id. per day, should be the most prosperous people under
the sun, whereas every one knows, that their condition was quite
the reverse.
The increasing amount of deposits in the Banks proves that
there must be daily accumulating a large amount of capital, with-
drawn from circulation, which can find no profitable investment of
a reproductive nature.
The effect of this want of a field, if we except the bubble mining
companies, lately blown and now bursting, for the advantageous
employment of capital, is the sole cause of our present unsound and
unsatisfactory condition. Our skilled artizans, attracted hither by
the hopes of realizing a higher value for their labour than else-
where, finding that there is no demand for their industry, will fast be


leaving us. But if capitalists had any kind of security or protection
from being- ruined by excessive importations, they could at once
turn their attention with safety to the manufactory of goods of
daily consumption. By this means you secure a permanency for the
capitalist, as well as the skilled labourer, and would check the
exportation of the precious metal to a foreign country, for the em-
ployment of that, of which we have ourselves a superabundance,
viz., Labour; increase our own circulation, and infuse life into
every department of local industry.
Of late the Government has been supplementing this want by
the application of the funds voted by the Legislature, for the pur-
pose of constructing the National Bail ways and other Public
Works. It will be recollected that the principal object was to
relieve the pressure upon the over-stocked labour market some two
years since, but it must be borne in mind that all these under-
takings will be soon completed. At present, they are only a
temporary relief, and if the Government was to follow’ out the same
rule they would find themselves just where they started, so far as
the relief afforded is concerned ; nay more, according to the present
tendency of current events, they would bo placed in a worse posi-
tion than heretofore, as of necessity, the pressure will be increased
tenfold, from the altered position of the country, unless they bring
forward a proposition to the Legislature to carry the Murray line
on to the Gulf of Carpentaria, for which they might ask another
£10,000,000. Loans contracted by Government, in a purely com-
mercial colony likedhis, may be productive of consequences little
anticipated. In fact, it is futile, on the part of any Government,
let the resources of a country be ever so great, to expect the same to
continue in prosperity, under such unsound policy.
Any one familiar 'with the mining community, is aware, that a
large number of them are not miners through choice, but necessity,
and the average rate of wages earned on the mines is about 15s.
per week, which proves the unproductiveness of that class of labour,
a large number being physically unfitted for what it has now
become—an undertaking involving-great exertions ; and it is known
that large numbers scarcely earn a subsistence, and would gladly
exchange their present unfortunate position for steady employment
at the trades to which they had been apprenticed, and quit the
precarious life they and their families are living, for a more per-
manent position in society.
It would be an interesting calculation (if such could be made),
to ascertain the loss to the community by the large amount of
skilled labour now unproductive in the various mining districts,
which, if the same was directed into channels suited to their wants,
would become invaluable in turning our other resources to account.
Well directed enterprise begets enterprise, emulation rouses
emulation. A certain amount of capital is a necessary con-
dition of civilized life: it pervades all grades of society, from the
millionaire to the mere swag- which equips the labourer for


asking- a day’s work: it constitutes that portion of production saved
from consumption, and the more that is thus saved, the greater is the
fund which society at large have as security for future production,
and which, the labouring portion have as a security for permanent
employment. Large fortunes are certainly made by speculators,
but it is very questionable if the commercial system which admits
of fortunes so great as those of our speculators being made by indi-
viduals, is a healthy and sound one. The amount which the most
skilful and industrious men can realise by productive industry is
necessarily limited, but the amount which fortunate accident may
transfer from the stores which others have produced, is unlimited.
Of late a few large fortunes have been realised by the getting up
and gambling in unsound mining adventures, which may end in
ruin to many. These men do not make rich by production—by
increasing the comforts and luxuries of life—but by managing, that
which is produced by others shall pass to themselves. The un-
paralleled increase of insolvents in an infant State like this, is a proof
beyond contradiction, that most men with means have, under our
free-trade policy, led a life of wild perils ; min, even in the midst of
their greatness suspended over them by a thread—like the sword over
the Sicilian Parasite. This system, where so much depends on fortu-
nate accident, so little on probity, ability, and labour, cannot be
sound.
Whilst our population has increased from 140,000, in 1852, to
520,000 at the present date, our exports have decreased from £53
a-head per annum, in 1852, to £22 Bs. per head per annum.
Now, unless it can bo shown by the advocates of assisted im-
migration, that a further addition to the population, without
the possession of capital, will increase our exports from the
sum of £22 Bs. per head (at which rate per annum, for
1860, we have been exporting up to the present time), then,
such addition woidd clearly only become competitors in the
already over-stocked labour market for the employment afforded
in the production of the above amount. It is evident from
this, that the necessaries of life, clothing, house-rent, &c., absorb
the whole of this amount (about Bs. Bd. weekly), leaving no
surplus to the industrious beyond their absolute wants, to enable
them by their savings to become employers of labour, and there-
fore cannot create that sound and healthy demand for fresh labour
which should, in a young country like ours, spring up naturally
under wise and just legislation. These are the class who ought to
be calling out for assisted immigration, and not the members of the
Chamber of Commerce, who only want consumers for. the produce
with which their warehouses ard now over-stocked; the result of
our open ports having baffled even the calculation of these supposed
sagacious commercial prophets, as to our wants and powers of
consumption.
The greater our producing capabilities are maintained, so will
our want of importations be less, and these heavy stocks that depress


our market, and respecting- the disposal of which, the Chamber
is so much embarrassed, will not then accumulate. Our
present depression is produced and kept up from the very
fact of our circulating- and reproductive capital being- too
small for the present population, many articles we receive in return
for the precious metal are such as we could produce in the colony,
having- the raw material, skilled labour, See. ; and, after supplying-
our own wants, we may in time become the depot of the southern
hemisphere for the supply of Tasmania, New Zealand, the Islands
and the Pacific, etc.
If production in the form of the usual articles of commerce were
multiplied any number of times over, the colony would be by so
much richer, and the people who are scattered over its surface be
so much the nearer to opulence and comfort, and the farther re-
moved from the miseries which must await an unproductive and
unsettled people.
It is gratifying to a Government and satisfactory to a people,
when new fields are opened up, in which capital and labour can
co-operate in securing; a larger amount of available production,
they are the levers, by which the machine of society is kept in
gearing- and set in motion; and if we are desirous of adding- to our
number and becoming an independent, happy and prosperous people,
we must use the means to accomplish the end. Under our present
policy it would appear, that the great want of investments of a re-
productive nature, where labour can be with some degree of regu-
larity profitably employed, is the main source of our present
unsatisfactory position. In these views, I am borne out by an
article, which appeared in The Argus , December 21, 1859, on the
subject of “ Malt and Malt Liquors j” in quoting the imports
for the year 1858, the writer states that Malt and Malt Liquors to
the value of £663,643 have been imported from Great Britain for
consumption into this colony: he says u these figures represent so
much of the aggregate income of the colony absolutely extinguished
instead of having been converted into reproductive capital, and found
its way into the poch'els of colonial brewers, malsters, farmers and
their dependents, and if we add to the sum quoted the amount
expended upon imported barley and upon sugar consumed in
breweries, in the absence of adequate supplies of malt, it will be
found, that our annual outlay in malt liquors and their ingredients,
received from abroad, does not fall far short of £1,000,000 sterling-,
or at the rate of £2 per head upon our population.”
If this view be applicable to the production of one article of
consumption, where the “ income of the colony is absolutely
extinguished, lost, transferred to British brewers, malsters, farmers,
See., the same rule applies to every article imported, of which we
possess the raw materials, capital and labour necessary to its manu-
facture.


TARIFF OF VICTORIA.
Rate of
Import Duties.
Duty.
Ale, porter, spruce, and other beer, cider, and perry per
s.
d.
gallon
0
6
Cigars, per lb. ...
3
0
Coffee and chicory, per lb. * ...
0
2
Spirits, or strong waters, of any strength not exceeding the
strength of proof by Syke’s hydrometer, and so in proportion
for any greater or less strength than the strength of proof,
per gallon
10
0
Spirits, cordials, liqueurs, or strong waters, sweetened or mixed
with any article, so that the degree of strength cannot be
ascertained by Syke’s hydrometer, per gallon
10
0
Spirits perfumed, per gallon
10
0
Sugar, raw and refined, and sugarcandy, per cwt.
6
0
Molasses and treacle, per cwt.
3
0
Opium, per lb. ...
10
0
Tea, per lb.
Tobacco and snuff, per lb.
3
0
2
0
Wine, per gallon
2
0
All other goods and merchandise free.
Export Duty.
Gold—Manufactured and unmanufactured, and Foreign coins,
per oz.
o
6
ARTICLES.
Beer, &c., in bulk, per gallon
Duty,
s. d.
0 1
„ bottled, per gallon
0 2
Coffee and chicory, per lb.
0 2
Brandy and gin, Syke’s proof, per gallon ...
10 0
Old Tom, per gallon
' ... 10 0
Hum, whiskey, and other spirits, per gallon...
7 0
Sweetened liqueurs, per gallon
10 0
Sugar refined and candy, per cwt....
G 8
Sugar unrefined, per cwt.
Treacle and molasses
5 0
3 4
Tea, per lb.
0 3
Tobacco and snuff, per lb. ... ...
2 0
11
CUSTOMS DUTIES OF THE AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.
TARIFF ON EXPORTS BY THE MURRAY,
Proclamation fixing the subjoined tariff and drawback on goods
intended for consumption in Victoria or New South Wales, which
have been agreed upon by the Government of the said colonies.
The proclamation prescribes that the duties specified in the
schedule or tariff following shall be leviable from the date of
publication upon any goods imported into this province, intended
for consumption in either of the said colonies, or water-borne
upon the said River Murray for exportation into either of the said
colonies. And the drawbacks hereinafter specified shall be al-
lowed for any duties which may have been paid upon any such
goods in accordance with any tariff for the time being in force in
this province, which said drawbacks may be set off against any
duties leviable under this proclamation :
TARIFF.


Cigars, per lb. ...
3
0
Wine containing more than 25 per cent, of alcohol, of a specific
gravity of 825, at the temperature of 60° of Fahrenheit’s
thermometer, for every gallon in proportion to strength
10
0
Wine containing not more than 25 per cent, of alcohol, &c.,
per gallon ...
2
0
Colonial rum, from sugar, per gallon
6
5
Colonial rum, from grain, per gallon
7
0
DRAWBACK.
Refined sugar, per cwt. ...
6
8
Bastard sugar, per cwt. ...
6
0
TARIFF OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
Rate of
Import duties.
Duty.
O A
Whiskey and rum, in wood or bottle, per gallon
7
0
Do (colonial), distilled from sugar do.
6
5
Do. do. grain, do.
7
0
Spirits, cordials, liqueurs, or strong waters sweetened, or mixed
with any article, so that the degree of strength cannot be
ascertained by Syke’s hydrometer, do. ...
10
0
Perfumed spirits, &c., do.
7
0
Wine, not containing more than 25 per cent, of alcohol, do. ...
2
0
Do. do. do, in bottle, per dozen
2
0
Ale, porter, and beer of all sorts in wood, per gallon...
0
1
Do. do. do, in bottle, per dozen
Cider, perry, and spruce, per gallon
0
3
0
3
Tea, per lb.
0
3
Sugar, refined and candy, per cwt.
6
8
Do. raw, do. ...
5
0
Treacle and molasses, do,...
3
2
Coffee and chicory, per lb.
0
4
Cigars, do.
3
0
Tobacco and snuff, do.
2
0
Opium, do.
10
0
Export Duty.
Gold, per oz.
2
3
Drawbacks.
Refined sugar, per cwt. ...
6
0
Bastard do. do. ... ... ... ... ... 5 0
The South Australian Tariff levies a duty of £5 per cent ad valorem
upon every article of foreign growth or manufacture, excepting the following,
which are free—on animals living, baggage of passengers, books (printed),
bullion and coin, coals and coke and other fuel, plants and trees, seeds and
roots, garden specimens illustrative of natural history, pictures and prints,
works of art, wool, tallow', skins and hides, hair, bark, gum, bales for wool,
ore bags, wheat, flour, cornsacks, manures, field seeds. Beer, fruit, wines,
spirits, tea, sugar, tobacco, wood are subjected to various duties.
The Tariff of Victoria.-—This appears the most liberal tariff
in existence, as will he observed. We tax ourselves for the very
articles we cannot produce, and admit free produce and manufacture s
which we are in a position to supply for home consumption; at least,
among’st the latter may be included paper, manufactured leather,
cottons and woollens, made-up clothing 1 , wood-work of all descrip-
tions, soap and candles, and many others, which would ultimately
spring- up.
The British Tariff*.—Much has been said and written by
a section of the press about a portion of this community being
desirous of retrograding from the spirit of the age, and imposing’
* British Tariff for 1856: Edwin Beedell, Customs, London.


upon Victoria taxes long- since abandoned by the great champion
of Free Trade—Great Britain; but, on looking- into the matter,
it will be found that they deceive themselves and others ; that,
in reality, Free Trade does not exist in those articles of commerce
which Great Britain has a special interest in protecting- and de-
veloping-. To enumerate such, upon the following- articles is levied
veloping-. To enumerate
a duty, viz.:—On
Beer, ale, &c., per barrel, 32 gals. 20s.
Biscuits, per cwt,, 4£d.
Books, per cwt., 30s.
Brass, manufactured, per cwt., 10s.
Bronze do. do., 10s.
Butter, foreign, per cwt., ss.
Butter, British produce, per cwt. 2s. 6d
Candles, Sperm, per cwt., 2s. 4d.
Do., stearine, do., 3s. 6d.
Do., tallow, do., 2s. 4d.
Do., wax, do., 2s. 4d.
Cheese, foreign, per cwt., 2s. 6d.
Cheese, British produce, do., Is. 6d,
Chinaware, per cwt., 10s.
Clocks, from 4s. to 10s per dozen, ac-
cording to value.
Cloves, per lb., 2d.
Coffee, raw, per lb.. 3d.
Corks, ready made, per lb., 6d.
Do., squared for rounding, per cwt. Bs.
Cottons, made up, not otherwise
charged, 5 per cent.
Boot fronts, Is, 9d. to 2s, 9d. per doz.
Boot backs, Is 6d,
Cut into shapes, 10s. per cwt.
Linen manufactures, all linen or linen
and cotton, 5 per cent.
Gloves, from 2s. Cd. to 4s. Gd., accord-
ing to size.
Pianofortes, 40s. to 60s. each.
Musical instruments, 10 per cent.
Paper, per lb. 2|d.
Do., Printed or stained, per lb., 3d.
Pasteboard, per lb., 2id.
Perfumery, 2d, per lb 7
Pewter, 2s. per cwt.*
Pimento, ss. per cwt,
Eice, 4|d. per cwt.
Silk hats or bonnets, 7s. each.
Silk dresses, 30s. each.
Silk manufactured, not otherwise
charged with duty, 15 per cent,
foreign.
Ditto, 5 per cent. British possessions.
Wheat-meal and flour, barleymeal, Silk velvet, per lb., 3s.
oatmeal, groats, ryemeal, peameal, Silk ribbons, from 6s. to 10s.
)rn- Gauze or crape, 14s.
per Soap, hard, Bd.
Soap, soft, Bd.
Soap, Naples, Bd.
Soap, scented, sd.
Spirits, foreign, per gallon, 15s.
Spirits, British poss., per gal. Bs. 2d.
Sugar, refined, 13s. 4d. per cwt.
„ white clayed, lls. Bd. per cwt.
„ yellow muscavado, 10s. Gd. do.
„ brown, 9s. Gd. per cwt.
beanmeal, maize or India corn
meal, and buckwheat meal, pe:
cwt. 4£d.
Earthenware, per cwt., 10s.
Embroidery, 15 per cent.
Silk net, figured, 10s. per lb.
Cotton net, Bs. per lb.
Swiss curtains, Is, per lb.
All other embroidery, 10 per cent.
Feathers, dressed, 3s. per lb.
Figs, 15s. per cwt.
Glass, 10s. per cwt. Molasses, 3s. 9cl. per cwt.
Hats—felt, hair, avool and silk, Is. each Tallow, foreign, Is, Cd. per cwt.
Chip or straw, 2s. per lb. British possessions. Id,
Hops, 455. per cwt.
Iron and steel manufactures,
Machinery, wrought, castings, tools,
cutlery, 2s. Gd. per cwt.
Fancy and ornamental, 15s. per cwt.
Japanned & lacquer ware, 20s. pr, cwt.
Jewels, per £lOO, 10 per cent.
Lace, thread, cotton or pillow, other
than Brussels,
Not exceeding 1 inch wide, per lb. 20s
Exceeding 1 inch wide, per lb. 40s.
Brussels lace, per lb. 10 per cent.
Lead, manufactured, 2s. per cwt.
Boots and shoes, from 4s. Gd. to 14s.
per doz. pair, according to size, |
„ British possessions, Id. pr cwt
Tea, Is. per lb.
Tin ware, 10s. per cwt.
Tobacco, manufactured, 9s. perlb.
„ unmanufactured, 3s. „
Turnery, per cubic foot, 4d.
Vinegar, per gallon, 4}d.
Watches, 3s. Gd. to 20s. each, accord-
ing to value.
Wine, foreign, ss. Gd. per gallon.
„ British possession, 2s. 9d. pr gal.
Woollens, manufactured, 5 percent.
Goods not described and not prohibit-
ed, 10 per cent., ad valorem.


Malt liquors, Is. per gallon.
Coffee and chicory, free.
Spirits (foreign), 15s. per gallon.
Do. (colonial distilled), 2s, Gd. per gallon.
Sugar (raw), free.
Do. (refined), 10s. per cwt.
Molasses, free.
Opium, 10s. per lb.
Tea, free.
Tobacco, 3s. per lb.
Unmanufactured do., free.
Wine, per gallon, 5s.
Soap and candles, 40s. per cwt.
Boots and shoes, from 12s. per dozen to 48s., according to size.
Woollens (made-up), cottons do., silks do., 30 per cent, ad valorem.
Abolish the gold export duty.
Impose a property tax of 1 per cent, on lands, houses, shares in
insurance companies, banks, &c.
The proposed Colonial Produce Sliding Scale Tariff
Flour, foreign, under £25 per ton, .. £5 per ton.
Do., do., at £26 under £30,.. £4 „
Do., do,, at £32, .. .. Free.
Wheat, do., .. .. .. 2s. Gd. per bushel.
Oats, do., .. .. .. Is. Gd. „
Barley, do., .. .. .. 2s. Gd. „
Maize and Gram, .. .. .. Free.
A great variety of other articles are subject to import duties.
From the above it will he seen that a protective duty is levied
upon all those articles which could come into competition with the
British manufacturer, whilst on some the duty is almost prohibitory.
If Great Britain, with her perfect machinery, skilled labour, and
low wages, requires such protection to enable her different manu-
facturers to maintain their ground, it surely must he more requisite,
in a young country like ours, for industry to have similar
fostering aid. The tariff, which would suit our immediate wants,
should he on the following scale
We still import about £3,000,000 worth of Colonial produce-
flour, wheat, oats, Ac.— although we have good agricultural land
from which we can produce a supply of more than our wants. The
only obstacle in the way of farming becoming more generally
followed up at present by those who would do so, is the uncertain
rates which rule for produce, and the extremely fluctuating nature
of the markets, it being impossible to foresee the probable range
of prices for any particular article. The present free tariff leaves
it at the mercy and capriciousness of local speculators and foreign
consignors.
To impose the duties given in the above proposed scale, would


regulate the market, and equalize the price during 1 the year; and
give the farmer a basis upon which he could ground his calculations.
For instance, a farmer commences operations immediately "succeeding
a year in which high prices have ruled for produce, anticipating*
approximate value for his own crops; hut what is the result
under the present circumstances ? Why, the high prices have
induced shipments, Colonial and foreign, of the particular articles
which ho grows; and the effect is, that at about the same time, that
his produce comes to market prices are forced down to a nominal
rate, by the glut caused by the arrival oi the above shipments, at
which our agriculturist is compelled to sell; and, as the first year
is that in which his outlay is greatest—say, for grubbing and
cleaning, about £l2 per acre; fencing, £3 lOs. per acre; besides
the first cost, say 30s. per acre; the result is, that the man is, at
the very outset of his undertaking, either compelled to mortgage
his property to enable him to continue his uncertain occupation and
unprofitable enterprise, until he is at last completely ruined. This
proves incontestably the necessity which does exists, if we are to
encourage farming in Victoria, that some protection should be
afforded, as proposed by the above scale, to all who would settle on
the land, against the ruinous fluctuations of our markets, which
render farming a perfectly hazardous operation.
i’he advocates of Free Trade and assisted immigration do not
object to the Treasury being called upon to pay the passages of
poor labourers to the tune of £50,000; but inconsistently object to
tax the community to a similar amount to confer a benefit upon all,
by opening up fresh fields for labour, and thus creating (the great
want of Victoria at the present moment) an attraction for the un-
assisted immigrants of every class from all parts of the world.
Taking the number of miners at present on the mines at 200,000,
and the product of gold at £8,000,000, the average earnings of
each miner appears to be about £4O per annum ; if by the removal
of the skilled workmen from this branch of industry to the trades
in which they are versed, you thus enable them to add to the value
of their labour by the production from the raw material the colony
possesses within herself, of articles of general consumption—the
colony would be equally a gainer with the labourer, and would be
well able to bear any demands upon it for assisted immigration, to
fill up the vacancies in the ranks of the labourers or miners. This
appears to be the most rational way of adding to our numbers, by
first creating the, want, and then supplying it out of the public purse,
provided the attraction afforded by the more favourable position the
colony would assume were not sufficient.
The state of Victoria at the present moment is not unlike that
of Ireland some few years since, when her large rent-roll was
spent in foreign countries by her absentee landlords-her own
people amongst whom it should have circulated deriving* no benefit
therefrom. Bo in our case the united industry of our people affords


employment to foreign manufacturers, instead of remaining* with
us to form the nucleus of a capital, which would give employment
to our naturally increasing* population. In the history of the
world, there was never a more favourable opportunity than the
present, for those who have their country’s interest at heart, to
further all those measures, which her altered position now demands,
and are urgently required, to check her downward tendency, and lay
the basis of those permanent and powerful interests widen are the
only guarantees for her future prosperity.
It is clear that if we continue to export the whole produce of
the miner’s labour, £8,000,000 per annum, in exchange for manu-
factures and necessaries of life, the whole benefit derived by the
colony is simply the per centage retained by the few in the shape
of a commission for their labour in procuring the supply from other
countries—the average earnings of the miner being only barely
sufficient to supply his actual wants, he can have no surplus, by
which the capital stock of the country may be augmented. Ad-
mitting, that the imposition of duties upon imported goods, which
we ourselves are in a position to manufacture, and also upon produce
which we can grow, would act as a tax upon the community to bene-
fit certain permanent interests, yet it is evident that the general pros-
perity would be by so much enhanced, that instead of being felt as
a burden, would be hailed as a blessing. The miner, on whom an
unfair amount of taxation at present presses, in the shape of 2s. 6d,
per ounce gold duty, would be thus relieved, and well able to bear
an indirect tax, which would have the effect of promoting industrial
interests, to which he could look with some degree of certainty for
employment in time of need. He would have a choice of employ-
ment ; and, were his labour transferred to the production of colonial
manufactures out of the raw material at our command, it is certain
that it would be beneficial to himself and the community at large.
The probable exodus in the spring from Victoria of large num-
bers of our people to a neighbouring colony, in consequence of the
recent discoveries, has induced the Government to send out prospect-
ing parties to Gipps Land, and other localities, to check the efflux.
Presuming, that their hopes of finding payable gold-fields in our
own colony are realised, and the fortunate holders of claims are en-
riched thereby, the colony after all will only, under its present
Free Trade Policy, derive a limited amount of benefit; the effects
will be, that property is reduced in value in one place, and increased
in another; and the earnings of the miners will only add to the de-
mand for foreign imports, and his savings, as has hitherto been the
case during the whole period of the existence of the gold-fields, gra -
dually transferred for investment to other countries, unless we can in
the meantime tempt him by colonial undertakings, properly protected
from foreign competition, to retain the capital in the colony thus
obtained. It will, doubtless, be said, that the new Land Bill will
provide for this want; but as farming at present is not such a
lucrative occupation, it certainly is not likely to be more so under


increased competition, or hold out any greater inducement than at
present, unless adequate protection he afforded.
Experience of the history of the colony shews, that with an
increased population our exports have diminished more than one-half;
and yet we are told, that a system under which such a state of
things exists, is sound political economy, and best adapted to our
position : tins is a monstrous delusion, which the facts I have placed
before you fully prove.
It is a rational, as well as a beautiful and elevating' view of
hitman nature, to think that man, not only collectively but inch—
vidually, was placed here rather to increase, than to consume, the
objects of human desire that he sees around him; rather to leave
maiks of his God-like and creative faculties, by manifest produc-
tion, than of his more animal propentities by consumption. Apart
fiom the high and sometimes selfish ambition of those who strive
to be remembered among- their fellow-mortals by great deeds it
is substantial evidence of a well-spent life, on which a man may
look back with as he is about to part with his labours
that he has left behind him, among 1 his fellow-creatures, some relic
of his services in increasing, to however small an extent, the posses-
sions of the human race, and making the earth by so much the
less barren, amd hard, and hopeless, to those who are to follow.
v 16 indulges in the hope that by placing these few remarks
beioie his the public mind will be aroused to the imperative
necessity of making Victoria, not the temporary sojourn of an
unsettled population, but the home of thousands, who, by the
encouragement afforded to their toils and labours, may be the
means of drawing to her shores the enterprising and industrious
from all corners of the earth.




THE LAND QUESTION.
SUGGESTIONS
POE ITS EFFECTUAL SETTLEMENT.


PEEFACE.
In the present juncture of political affairs, in connexion with the
present land scheme now before the Legislative Council, and the
small chance it has of becoming law under its present form; and
being, as it is, very questionable, whether the benefits to be derived
by the community at large, would be so great as it is anticipated
by the originators and supporters of the bill, at any rate, in practice
it would be found to give no extra facility or inducement to parties
desirous of becoming land owners. The great objections to this
scheme are, that it is by far too complicated, and that the com-
pulsory clauses for improvement and occupation should be expunged,
as speculation has ceased; it appears extraordinary, that each
successive Ministry should find so much difficulty in dealing
with the puolic estate, as the more the question is discussed,
and the greater the light that is thrown on the subject, the more
does it seem to become involved in mystery. So much so,
that the majority of the people who at one time were anxious
about the matter have now become thoroughly disgnsted With
the subject. One would imagine, that a simple and effective
scheme might be conceived, as suited to the wants of ail parties,
and at the same time not to sacrifice the interests now connected
with the soil. The public lands of the colony appear to have
been the stumbling’ block to the past as well as present Minis-
tries, and to any one who has studied this branch of legislative con-
troversy, the question seems to be so much political capital, upon
which each Ministry trades for a period, until it breaks up, when
the same business is carried on by their former adversaries, until
some little turning of the political tables takes place,- but the loss
to the present community cannot be estimated, as this question is one
that should have been settled seven years ago, when the population
was increasing and people were coming into the country, not when
the population is decreasing, and in view of the anticipated
which will in all probability be very great. The inducements of
that period for persons to settle on the land do not now exist-
capital for the purpose is scarce and certainly not in the hands
of those who would wish to become agriculturists. Tire only at-
traction would be a land scheme of the most simple and liberal
nature.
The annexed form of a Land Bill prepared some two years since,
founded upon considerable experience with the evil working of the
present system, the writer believes would be well suited to the
wants of the country and be endorsed by every agricultural settler
in the colony.


THE COLONISTS’ LAND BILL.
Settlers’ Euns or Grazing Lands.— Grazing- lands to be
reserved for that purpose, and for yielding- a certain yearly revenue
to the State. At present it is considered that these runs are too
large. It is proposed that they should be re-surveyed, and sub-
divided into smaller areas ; say from ten square miles, according to
the grazing capabilities of the land and access to market, Ac. All
settlers’ runs to be assessed at per acre, according to quality.
Independent of this acreage assessment, the settlers to have leases
for seven or fourteen years rent, payable annually. The leases for
seven years to apply to the settled districts; those for fourteen
years, to the unsettled districts—runs in the latter to possess the
largest areas. Surveys to be carefully made, so that none of
the grass lands allotted may be unfit for occupation If any of
these grazing lands shall be required by the Government, the
settlers shall give up possession of the whole, or any portion of
them, the Government agreeing to give one year’s notice for any
portion; and two years’ notice for the whole of any run, excepting
when gold is found; in this case no notice can be given by the
Government, but an allowance will be made to the settler, accord-
ing to the area of auriferous land occupied by the miners. If the
settler wish to secure, say 040 acres, around his homestead, he
can apply for the same to be surveyed and valued in the same
manner as the agricultural lands : the payment in this case to be in
cash.
Agricultural Lands.—lt is proposed to sub-divide agricul-
tural land into two classes, viz., first and second: they shall
be classed by the Surveyors, according to the quality of the
soil, and without reference to situation. That the -first-class
land of the colony shall be surveyed and subdivided into 100 to
320 acre sections, as is required, but the supply to be always in
excess of the demand ; and the second-class land to be subdivided
into larger areas ; say from 150 to 450 acre allotments. These lands
shall be valued by competent judges at so much per acre, and pro-
claimed open for selection for two years or more; and, if not all taken
up at the end of that period, the remaining- lots will be offered by
auction at an upset price. For first-class, twenty shillings per acre—
and second-class, ten shillings per acre —and should no offer be
made by auction for these allotments or sections left unselected
under the free selection clause, they shall be proclaimed open for
selection at the upset price, and at the expiration of five years


from the date of proclamation, if still unsold, the Government will sell
the same by tender or dispose of them by auction, as the case may
be, and as the requirements of the district may warrant. It is pro-
posed, that all the Agricultural Districts shall have large reserves
for grazing- purposes and that the balance of land left, not being fit
for agricultural purposes shall form these reserves, and shall be
known as the Farmer’s Grazing Runs reserved by the Government
for that purpose. In the districts or counties when the area of
arable land is small, the reserves by this reason would be increased,
and purchasers of land in these districts will have greater advantages
for grazing purposes; until fresh surveys are made it is impossible
to set down the probable area of the Farmer’s Grazing Lands, it
is desirable, that these reserves should be of sufficient area so as to
depasture ten head of cattle, for each purchaser of One Hundred
Acres of arable land. By this means the very pick of the lands
will be set aside for agricultural purposes and the balance for
grazing purposes, that the farmers of each district shall- be
entitled to take out a grazing right to the runs reserved, at the
rate of not less than one head for every ten acres of purchased land, for
which he shall pay to the State ten shillings per head per annum
in advance. For example, if a county contains say ] 5,000 acres,
and only 6,000 could be classed as arable land, the purchasers of
this arable land would have the advantage of depasturing 30 head
of cattle to every one hundred acres they may have purchased, as
it is estimated that 10,000 acres, with plenty of water, would carry
1,500 head of cattle, which is the given number in the above
example; this may be considered the maximum number, and 10
head the minimum to every one hundred acres of agricultural land
purchased: that each purchaser shall, on getting notice from the
Government, fence in with a good three-rail fence the side lines of
his land, and the Government will complete the open lines, such as
roadsides of the farmers’ squatting* runs, but none of the side lines
bordering upon purchased land. The management of these
reserves shall be vested in a Board, called the Farmers’ and Set-
tlers’ Road Boai-d. It is recommended, and in many districts im-
perative, that water reserves should be made in creeks, where artifi-
cial dams could be constructed by the inhabitants at a small cost,
with roads leading thereto, and, in all agricultural districts river
frontages, to be reserved, say four chains at each side. It is pro-
posed to make reserves of 100 to 200 acres in each parish of the
heaviest timbered land, for the purpose of supplying fencing and
firewood.
That all purchasers of arable land shall be compelled to pay for
their grazing- rights, whether they may occupy the land they may
have purchased or not, or whether they may send cattle to the
farmers’ grazing run or otherwise."
That the value of all agricultural land shall be ascertained by
valuation; competent judges shall be appointed by the Government,
from amongst the agriculturists of known respectability in each


district, who shall visit each section, in company with the surveyor,
and decide upon the value at per acre of each allotment, having due
regard to quality of soil, open and timbered land and lands bordering*
on railways or macadamized roads, distance from a max*ket for their
produce, <&c., &c. ; these advantages are merely noticed, not for the
purpose of putting an extreme or fictitious price on the land, hut
in justice to other buyers of land not having these advantages at
present. The valuators shall decide upon their present value,
without any reference to prices formerly obtained for country lands;
the first applicants shall, without any reserve, be first sup-
plied ; this will be free selection after survey, according to
the value of the land. Each purchaser shall immediately after he
makes his selection of one or more lots, (not to exceed One Thou-
sand Acres in each District), pay to the Government one-
fourth cash, and the balance at three years with six per cent,
interest added, but it shall be optional for him to pay the whole of
the purchase money at any time during that period, but should he
fail to complete his purchase at the end of three years, the Govern-
ment will give to such defaulters one year’s grace, provided he shall
have paid three-fourths of the purchase money, but should he have
failed to comply with either of these conditions, the defaulters shall
have a portion of the land equal to the amount paid to the Govern-
ment, and shall be permitted either to sell or remove his improve-
ments if it is not situated upon the portion of the land he shall get,
for the amount he has already paid. It shall be compulsory for all
parties buying Agricultural Land that they fence in the whole of
the land by the expiration of two years if residing on the land,
but, if non-residents, it must be fenced in by the expiration of six
months from the day of purchase.
Village Deserves.— lt is proposed to do away with the
present system of cutting up township reserves in agricultural
districts, like patch-work, their areas not being sufficient for a man
to have a respectable garden, it is desirable to supplant these with
village reserves: the allotments varying in size from two to live
acres. The village and town allotments to be sold by auction:
village upset price, 40s. per acre.
It is proposed that the AuriferousLands be reserved for mining
purposes as at present, with reserves for grazing in their immediate
neighbourhoods : it is recommended that a Bill' be introduced,
having for its object the granting* of much larger claims to
individual miners, both alluvial and quartz, so that the mining-
population may become settled down on the auriferous lands of the
country : it is proposed to grant to each miner holding a license,
a claim having- a width of ten yards, running across the gully
twenty yards. Shepherding to be held as a misdemeanor. Pos-
session of the Crown Lands, without the w'orking of the claims,
to be held prejudicial to the interests of the miners generally, and,
therefore, to be discontinued, and any infi-ingement of this regu-
lation to be visited with a penalty not exceeding £5. By this
means the whole of the mining- population would ultimately
become stationary, and the returns would be increased ten-fold.


Eoads. —It is also suggested, that in order to give greater-
facilities for driving live stock from the interior to the various
markets, that road reserves should be fixed at five chains wide instead
as at present. When the whole ot the Agricultural Districts
become populated, and the lands fenced, it will be found almost
impossible to deliver fat cattle or sheep lor the want of grass and
water on the various roads, if this plan is not adopted.
Suppose that a sub division of the Crown Lands was made among
the people on the most liberal terms by the Legislature, this would
not assist one iota in staying the downfal _ of our prosperity until
the fundamental and all-important work is commenced and com-
pleted 5 viz., a thorough revision of the r I ariff, so that our ready
money market may be balanced in favour ol ourselves, and present
a certain fair profit to those who will embark in developing the
resources of the country arising from the consumption created by a
fixed and prosperous population. These permanent interests, agri-
cultural and manufacturing, would form the connecting link between
the colony and its gold, and thus the interests of the industrial classes
would be identified with those of the capitalist, as all wealth is
the production of labour. Some readers will be apt to say, that to
impose a duty on colonial produce, the staff ot life would be raised
to a famine price. The sliding scale would prevent this, together with
the unlimited quantity of agricultural land we possess, and which
would be brought under cultivation. The effect of this import duty
would result in equalising- the market throughout the year, bj
increasing competition within ourselves —add to production, and
decrease importation—thus saving to the colony, according to
what we are importing, in the shape ot grain and hour, a)tout
£3,000,000 sterling, which would add to the circulating capital of
the colony, and thus act beneficially upon all classes.
June I, iB6O.
