

PROTESTANT TRUTH
HOBAET TOWN:
Published Sy George Eolwegan, 67, Collins-st,, Hobart Town ;
AND
Sold by Waloh and Sons, Hobart Town and Launceston.
Printed at the 11 Mercury" Steam Press Office.
1865.
SUPPLEMENT TO THE “TASMANIAN MESSENGER.”




AtBSSS I F|
'4-7-
PROTESTANT TRUTH ASSERTED,
Sfc., Sfc., 6fe.
A Letter has made its appearance in the City, bearing
to be addressed to myself, although, for some reason or
other, it has never been sent to me. Haying, however,
had my attention directed to said Letter, I feel myself
called upon to take some notice of it. And, as Ido not
require to send out of the Colony, either for authority to
publish, or for assistance in framing my reply, I proceed
at once to deal with that document, as its character may
seem to require.
It would have been no discredit to the Author of this
Letter,had he exhibited as decent a share of good manners,
as to have finished it in the same civil and temperate
terms in which he had commenced it. The use of harsh
and hasty expressions, indicating and involving a viola-
tion of the law of love, can never further a righteous
cause, and are only calculated to bring suspicion and
dishonor upon any cause, in the service of which they are
employed. Such expressions as u gross calumny” and
u malicious calumny” can neither give elegance to a sen-
tence, nor force to an argument; and, moreover, I take
leave to tell Dr. Hall, and the “ Catholic Layman,” under
whose wing he takes shelter, that in the present instance,
such charges are unwarranted and untrue, as I shall show
before I conclude. I am not conscious of having u set
down aught in malice,” nor do I seek to accomplish any
other object than the vindication of truth.
The Letter now before me seems to haye been issued,


as a sort of reply to my remarks upon Dr. Hall’s Pastoral.
Now, it is just saying about the least that can be said of
it, to say that it is no answer to my remarks at all. In
those remarks I felt it to be my duty to expose, what I
considered, and still consider, the unsound and unscrip-
tural character of certain statements put forth in that
Pastoral. I showed that Dr. Hall had made an un-
warrantable use of certain texts of Holy Scripture, by
quoting them to prove, what they manifestly do not prove,
and what they make no mention of whatever. Now it is
curious enough that this Letter passes quietly over all the
points wherein I demonstrated the unscriptural teaching
of said Pastoral, and seizes upon a single statement in my
Tract, to the effect that u the blessed Saviour and His
infinite merits are kept in the background, in the teaching
of the Church of Rome.” Here let it be noted, that by
the teaching of the Church of Rome, we do not refer
exclusively, nor mainly, to what may be written in her
theological books and formularies, but also to what is
taught to her people, in her ordinary ministrations, and at
the bedsides of the sick and dying. Now, on this point I
happen to be in possession of some facts, as to the teaching
of Romanism in this very City, which furnish striking
evidence in support of my statement. These facts I
shall meanwhile reserve, upon the principle of not expend-
ing more of my ammunition than is required. They may
be of use on a future occasion, should any occasion for
further evidence arise. For the present I shall find
enough for my purpose in the Letter itself,now under con-
sideration. Let us see,then, how the u Catholic Layman,”
or whoever he may be made to speak for, sets about
disproving my statement. And here it must be acknow*-
ledged, there is presented to us a rather adroit attempt to
accomplish two things : — -First, to lead the mind of the
reader away from the main points of the controversy ; and
Secondly, to leave upon the mind of the reader an impres-
sion of the wondrously evangelical character of Roman
Catholic teaching. For, observe, he strings together a


number of quotations from the Decrees of the Council of
Trent, and Catechisms of the Roman Catholic Church,
showing that in these documents, the work of the Saviour
is recognized, and salvation through Him asserted. Now
such quotations might have been appropriate enough,had
the Roman Catholic Church been accused of not teaching
Christ and His finished work at all. In that case,it might
have been enough for the refutation of such a charge, to
quote from books, proving that in these books there is a
frill recognition of the Saviour. But no such accusation
lias been made. My statement was, not that salvation
through Jesus is not taught at all, but that it is kept in
the back ground, and to that statement I adhere. Nor
has a “ Catholic Layman” produced one particle of
evidence to disprove it. He proves, indeed, that the
doctrine of salvation through Jesus occupies a place in
the teaching of the Church of Rome, but the question now
under consideration is, what place ? Is its place in the
foreground or the background ? Does this great and
glorious doctrine of salvation through Jesus alone,occupy
that prominent place, and exercise that all-pervading
influence in the teaching of the Church of Rome, which
it ought to occupy, and ought to exercise ? Or, does it
occupy such a subordinate place, as to warrant the state-
ment that it is kept in the background ? This is the
question, and neither Dr. Hall, nor any one who may
consent to be his mouthpiece, must think to beguile me
away from the real question by any lengthened quota-
tions, either from the Decrees of the Council of Trent, or
from any other authority. But as we have been so
liberally treated with examples of the teaching of the
Council of Trent, I can also quote from that Council; and
if a “ Catholic Layman” thinks he can find a testimony
in the Council of Trent which condemns my statement,
while I can find a testimony in that same Council which
plainly and emphatically justifies it, then I shall leave
Roman Catholics to settle among themselves whether my
statement, or a “Catholic Layman’s” pretended refutation


of it, derives most countenance from the Council of Trent.
Mark what follows,then: —“ If any one shall say that the
good works of a justified man are the gift of God in such
a sense that they are not also the good merits of the
justified man himself, or that a justified man, by the good
works which are done by him, through the grace of God
and the merits of Christ, of whom he is a living member,
does not truly deserve increase of grace, eternal life, and
the actual possession of eternal life if he die in grace,
and also an increase of glory, let him be ANATHEMA.”
These are the words of the thirty-second canon
of the sixth session of the Council of Trent. Will
any man read these words, and then deny that
Jesus only comes in for a share of the merit by
which heaven is secured to the believer ? Jumbled and
lumbersome as the sentence is, the following things aia
most distinctly and unequivocally taught in it; First,
that the works of a justified man have a merit in them,
which is to be ascribed to the man himself, and is not
derived from the gift of God. Secondly, that this merit
of the justified man deserves eternal life, and an increase
of glory. And thirdly , that if any man shall deny this, he
is cursed. Such is the plain teaching of the Church of
Rome. The justified man deserves eternal life, and an
increase of glory, for his own merits. Will any man,
after this, say that the infinite merits of the Lord Jesus
Christ, are - not pushed aside to make room for the merit
of man ? If the merit of man’s works deserves eternal
life, I ask Dr. Hall and his Layman to tell us, how much
the man who deserves eternal life for his own merits, owes to
Christ ? If, in this case, Jesus and his finished work be
not in the background , then where are they ? Is it come
to this that we dare not lift up our testimony on behalf
of God’s truth, and for the vindication of the honor of
Jesus as having alone merited heaven for guilty sinners,
without being branded as gross calumniators, and that
too, by those who unblushingly teach, to the dishonor
of Jesus, that man may deserve u eternal life” and “an


increase of glory” by the merit of his own works. If
language lias a meaning this is undeniably the teaching
of the Church of Rome. It is surely, then, high time
that Roman Catholics either revise their own standards,
and purge out the absurdities with which they abound,
or cease to repudiate the charge of keeping Jesus and
His merits in the background.
But, further, we want to know, not only what is written
in the Records of Councils, but what is the actual teaching
which the people are in the habit of receiving from their
spiritual guides. It was with special reference to this
actual teaching that my statement was made ; for, it was
called forth by the specimen of that teaching that was
then lying before me, in the Pastoral letter of the Vicar-
Greneral. Well, then, I ask, did that specimen warrant
my statement, or did it not ? Pray, what is the place
which the doctrine of salvation through Jesus holds in
that Pastoral ? Will any man, of common honesty and
truthfulness, say that it is not kept in the background ?
Throughout the whole seven pages of that Pastoral, the
merits of the Saviour are not once referred to, except in
one solitary instance. And in that instance, it is not in
the way of directing the sinner to put his trust in Jesus,
but as a mere supplementary clause, in the tail of a sen-
tence, wherein the guilt and eternal punishment of sin is said
to be remitted by the Sacrament of Penance. There is not a
single sentence in the Whole Letter, pointing the sinner’s
way to Jesus for the remission of his sins ; while Penance
—Fasting on Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday —visiting
a Church or Chapel twice during three weeks—and alms-
giving, are formally prescribed as means of obtaining
remission of the punishment of sin. Nay, more; the
Vicar-General says :— u Prayers , Mortifications and Alms-
deeds are substituted by the Church for the temporal punishment
decreedby the Almighty Only think of this, u substituted
by the Church for the temporal punishment decreed by the
Almighty ! /” Now, who authorises the Church to substitute
anything for what the Almighty has decreed? Really I have


no desire at all, to say an nnkind thing of, or to, any
Roman Catholic, but I must be permitted to say that
there is something in such an assumption of power, that
strongly reminds me of one, of whom it is said, that he
“ opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called
God, or that is worshipped, so that he as God, sitteth in
the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God.” If
the Church of Rome can thus set aside the decrees of the
Almighty, with reference to the punishment due to sin,
what may she not do ? Were she to assume to herself
the power to arrest the sun in his course, or to blot out
the stars from the vault of heaven, she could plead the
same authority for it, as for pardoning sin, or for substi-
tuting something else in the room of punishments decreed
by the Almighty. Her own high authority stands her in stead
in every emergency, so that she does not require, like the
humble Protestant Church, to seek the authority of her
Lord and Master for what she ought to do.
It is here necessary to consider, further, what it is that
the Church of Rome “ substitutes ” for the temporal
punishment of sin. Hear the Yicar General, then, on
this point : — u Prayers, mortifications, and alms-deeds.”
We, Protestants, are accustomed to consider prayer as one
of our most precious privileges. It seems, however, that
the Church of Rome clothes this blessed privilege with the
repulsive aspect of a penalty. It is classed with mortifi-
cation, as something painful, that must be submitted to
and endured, as a substitute for punishment. Really our
Roman Catholic brethren must bear with us, while we
declare our utter repudiation of such teaching—so heart-
less and heathenish in its aspect. Our Father in heaven
invites us to draw near to him with holy confidence, and
in the name of Jesus, spread our wants before the
mercy seat. We are encouraged in this by the promise,
that, if we seek we shall find, if we knock it shall be
opened unto us ; and the confiding children of God feel
it to be a very previous privilege, thus to go to the throne
of grace, and tell all their wants. They do not feel,


while enjoying this privilege, that they are doing any-
thing that is imposed upon them as a task, or that this
liberty of pouring forth their desires to their Father, is
a substitute for punishment. They believe that the guilt
and punishment of sin are taken away, not by bargaming
or bartering, but fully and freely for Jesu’s sake, accord-
ing to the teaching of the divine word. The right-
eousness of Christ possesses merit enough to justify the
sinner, without needing to be supplemented by man’s
merit; and His blood has efficacy enough to cleanse us
from all sin,' without either penance or purgatory, of
which the word of God says nothing. Seeing then, that
in the gospel way of salvation, Jesus is all, and in all;
and that in Dr. Hall’s Pastoral, salvation through Jesus
is scarcely at all referred to, where is the ground for “a
Catholic Layman’s ” astonishment, that I should have
asserted, as I now again assert, that the great and blessed
work of Jesus is kept in the back ground ?
The u Catholic Layman,” or Dr. Hall, under cover of
the same, professes great astonishment also, that I should
have penned the passage wherein I say : — a Who could
ever have imagined, that a Minister of religion could have
written and printed an address to his people, with the
avowed and expressed object of teaching them how to be
released from the punishment of sin, without a single
sentence about the only ground of a sinneds hope of salvation
which the Scriptures reveal. ” The latter part of this sentence is
italicised by u a Catholic Layman,” as calling for special
notice. I thank him for this, and beg also to ask special
attention to the clause in italics. Now then, thus having
our attention specially directed to this clause, I have to
request the u Catholic Layman” to point out a single sen-
tence in all the Pastoral, about the only ground of a sinner's
hope of salvation , which the Scriptures reveal. There is no
such sentence. He is pleased to say : — u Surely, Rev.
Sir, you read the paragraph at the top of page 5 of Dr.
Hall’s Pastoral ?” Yes, I did read that paragraph, and
have well considered it too. But I fail to find in it any


such sentence as I have indicated. I have already said
that there is a clause of a sentence referring to Christ, and this
clause is the solitary reference to the merits of Christ which
the Pastoral contains. The sentence in which this refer-
ence occurs, is a sentence about penance, rather than
about the work of Christ. And seeing that, in this same
sentence, Dr. Hall speaks of the temporal punishment of
sin being released by an indulgence, and the eternal pun -
ishment being remitted “by the sacrament of penance,”
it is surely fair to demand of him an explanation of what
part Christ has in the matter. I call upon Dr. Hall,then,
to come out with his explanation. In justice to the cause
of truth, let this subject be made clear, and stripped of
all vagueness and of all uncertainty. I apprehend it may
be affirmed with all safety, that there are thousands and
tens of thousands belonging to the Roman Catholic Church,
who can give no intelligent account of the efficacy for re-
mission of sins, ascribed respectively to indulgences, and
penances, and the merits of Christ; and I confess I very
much desire to see what Dr. Hall himself has to say upon
this point. lam well assured of this, that if he explains
in a sound, scriptural sense, what Jesus has done for the
remission of sin, he will leave little room for his indul-
gences and his penances. Sin is either forgiven solely
and entirely through Christ, or it is not. If it be, then
in what sense can it be said to be forgiven by the sacra-
ment of penance ? And if it be not, then what is the
reason of this ? Has Christ not done enough to procure
complete forgiveness ? Was His death not a sufficient
atonement for sin ? Does His righteousness not serve to
justify the believer ? I wait for Dr. Hall’s answer to
these questions; and meanwhile must still express my
astonishment, that a minister of religion could pen and
print an address to his people, on a subject so serious as
the obtaining release from the punishment of sin, so man-
ifestly leaving the work of Christ in the background.
In the vain and futile attempt to refute my statement,
a passage is quoted from page 12 of the Vicar-General’s


pamphlet. It is enough for me to say in reference to-
this, that such quotation is totally irrelevant to the sub-
ject. Page 12 is in the Bishop of Clifton’s remarks on
the Pope’s Encyclical letter, with which I have at present
nothing to do. Dr. Hall’s Pastoral, to which I confined
my observations, consists of only 7 pages, and I have
overlooked none of them. I have taken no notice of the
Bishop of Clifton’s remarks, nor expressed any opinion
upon them; nor have I any intention of doing so, until I
settle accounts with the Vicar-General.
It seems natural here to ask the question, what can
have been the object of producing such an array of ex-
tracts upon the one topic, seeing all the other points, re-
garding which I shewed the unscriptural character of Dr.
Hall’s Pastoral, are left untouched ? Why such an
elaborate effort to prove what nobody is dis-
puting, while the matters really in dispute,are entirely
passed over ? I have no doubt, Roman Catholics are
sharp-sighted enough, to perceive the effect that this would
be likely to have, upon many simple-minded, and merely
nominal Protestants. There is proof enough in our day,
of the senseless infatuation which has got possession of
many so-called Protestants on this subject. There is a
simpering sentimentalism, becoming wonderfully fashion-
able in these latter days, and which is grievously mis-
named Christian liberality. This feeble and facile con-
dition of mind is ill fitted for making a firm stand for
principle, and is often found shrinking from, and even
repudiating everything like a faithful and unflinching
defence of the truth. Now, to such kindly and accom-
modating spirits, this exhibition of passages, referring to
the Saviour, will be very likely to convey an impression,
wondrously favorable to the evangelical character of
Romish teaching. May we not regard it as a very
natural presumption, that some such effect was adroitly
calculated on, when so rich a display of extracts on the
one subject of the Grace of Christ is presented to us,
while not a syllable is uttered, that at all invalidates a


single statement I had made ? Accordingly, as I said
at an earlier part of this paper, this device is well
calculated to leave upon the mind of the reader, an
impression of the evangelical character of Roman Catholic
teaching. And it is, indeed, something, to see a publica-
tion from a Roman Catholic pen, so fully occupied with
the name and work of the Saviour. Verily it would be
a consummation devoutly to be wished, that Roman
Catholics would relinquish for ever, all those inventions
of men which tend to turn away the thoughts of the
sinner from the simplicity of the Giospel, and to fill his
mind with ideas of human merit. Would that a spirit of
light were given them, that they and we might see, eye
to eye, and stand together for the defence and propaga-
tion of the truth as it is in Jesus. But we cannot join
with them in their penances, and their purgatory, and
masses for the dead, which we find no account of in the
Word of God. We cannot join them in praying to the
Virgin Mary, which is idolatry, and just another item in
the indictment of keeping Jesus in the background. It
is by these and other human devices that the Church of
Rome obscures, and practically, as it were, pushes into a
corner, the work of the Saviour. I have already made
manifest, how strikingly this has been done in the
Pastoral Letter which has been under review. But in
point of fact, u A Catholic Layman” himself, produces no
inconsiderable amount of proof, in support of my state-
ment. Let it be observed, that the charge against Roman
Catholics, is, not that they altogether exclude the true
doctrine of the Bible, but that they have, on mere human
authority, so multiplied dogmas and observances, not
taught in Scripure at all, as practically to supersede, in a
great degree, its authority among their people, and as to
divert their attention from its precious and divine teach-
ing. Of this, “ A Catholic Layman,” gives ample proof
and illustration, for he tells us, that, in the teaching of
his Church there are crossings , processions , abstaining from
flesh on certain days , a pious exercise called u The Stations


the rosary or heads , pictorial representations , and so on. Now
will “ A Catholic Layman” have the goodness to tell us,
what is his authority for these things ? Will he point
out to us where, and when the Saviour enjoined these
things ? When he does this, then I shall be prepared to
show that they are positively forbidden in the divine
Word, and have no place whatever in the divinely insti-
tuted worship of God. This, then, is what all sound-
hearted Protestants condemn and deplore in the Roman
Catholic Church—that she will not be satisfied with the
teaching of our blessed Lord and His Apostles, but must
be heaping up ceremonies and observances of her own
devising. And not only so, but holding all as under the
ban of perdition, who refuse to submit to the grievous
thraldom of her usurped authority. How are we to
account for such a fearful departure from the simplicity
of the Gospel ? What can it be that impels mankind, to
insist upon having their own way, in the very face of
reason and revelation ? Has the Divine Redeemer not
given us sufficient instruction as to the service he requires
of us ? Has He left us an inspired record of His life and
teaching, so defective, that the very sinners whom He
came to save, must themselves supply the deficiency, by
enjoining a multitude of bodily services, and pompous
ceremonials, for which we seek in vain for warrant or
authority, anywhere else, than in the imagination of the
heart of man ? Strange, that a class of men calling them-
selves the servants of the most High God, and professing
to be the only true guides, to shew sinners into the way
of peace, should, at the same time, hold all those as guilty
and rebellious whose chief crime is, their firm determi-
nation to frame their beliefs and their observances simply
according to the mind of Christ. Yet such is the phe-
nomenon that now presents itself to our observation, in the
religious world. Yes, we, as Protestants, take our stand
upon this principle —the Bible, and the Bible alone, is our
authority. We there seek the mind of Christ, and by
His mind, as therein declared, we desire to be guided, in


all our worship, and in all our duties. And for this, we
are branded as heretics; and by whom ? Why, by those
who, themselves adhere to a system, which is positively
unequalled in all Christendom, for its human devices, and
unscriptural superstitions. Nay, ye adherents of the
Church of Rome, mistake us not. If we condemn your
system, it is because we can prove it to be un-
scriptural, and therefore sinful. If we would rejoice
to see you emancipated from the fearful bondage of that
system, it is because we believe you to be under a sad
delusion, and strangers to the liberty wherewith Christ
has made His people free. And are we uncharitable in
this? Is it unkind in us to be earnestly desirous of
seeing your fetters broken, and your faith resting upon
the same foundation, on which we ourselves find safety
and peace. If this be uncharitableness, then we must be
content to bear its reproach, for we avow it unreservedly,
that we would greatly rejoice to see, as we often pray for,
your return to the plain teaching of Him who spake as
never man spake.
But again, ye adherents of the Church of Rome, do
you really imagine that the safety of your souls would be
endangered, by your renouncing the unauthorized com-
mandments of men, and returning to the Fountain of
Truth ? Are you safer in the hands of men, than in the
hands of Christ ? Are your Priests wiser than Jesus ?
Does not Jesus himself require you to search the Scrip-
tures ? Are you doing it ? If not, you are disobeying
Christ. And if you do search tire Scriptures, then I call
upon you to answer the following questions:—Do the
Scriptures teach you to pray to the Virgin Mary ? Do
they teach you to count beads ? Do they teach you to
abstain from flesh on Friday ?Do they teach you to cross
yourselves ? Do they tell you that there is a purgatory,
and that you must pay money to your Priests to get them
to pray you out of it ? Pray tell me the chapter in the
Bible where this is taught you ? Do the Scriptures teach
you, that you must get your sins forgiven by the


Sacrament of Penance? Do the Scriptures teach you
that the Church has the power of substituting prayers and
alms-deeds, in the place of the judgments which the
Almighty has decreed ? I call upon you to answer these
questions as in the sight of God, and if these things are
not found in the word of God, then don’t tell me, that
yours is a scriptural religion. No wonder that the Bible
should be a forbidden book in Roman Catholic countries,
for assuredly, Popery and the Bible cannot well stand
together.
It does not occur to me, that anything further requires
to be stated, in disposing of the very harmless production
of u a Catholic Layman.” Before concluding, however,
I may, in a few words, state how the matter in dispute
now stands. Dr. Hall publishes a Pastoral letter, telling
his people how to obtain the Pope’s indulgence, and
explaining what an indulgence is, for the special benefit
of u Separated Brethren.” This Pastoral letter I carefully
read, and feeling myself called on to testify against its
teaching, I proved the following things :
Ist. That Dr. Hall had quoted scripture, to prove
dogmas which are neither taught nor referred to in scrip-
ture at all.
2nd. That Dr. Hall teaches, that the guilt and eternal
punishment of sin are remitted u hy the sacrament of
penance although no such sacrament was instituted by
Christ, nor is even referred to in the Bible.
3rd. That there is no authority, in the word of God,for
the assumption, on the part of the Church of Rome, of a
power to substitute Prayers, Mortifications and alms-
deeds for the judgments decreed by the Almighty.
4th. That the forgiving of sins, on the part of the
Church of Rome, is altogether unwarrantable and un-
scriptural.
These were the principal points, to which I felt called
on to advert, in my remarks upon the said Pastoral Letter.
And now a Letter, neither correctly addressed, nor sent
to me, appears, purporting to be a reply, to what I have


stated in my review of the Pastoral Letter. In this
iteply, however, not one of the foregoing points are touched
upon, so that my statements with regard to them remain
unimpeached. The only portion of my remarks, there-
fore, that the author, or authors of this reply, have ventured
to assail, is where I lament, that the teaching of the
Church of Rome, keeps the Saviour and his work in the
back ground. Although, however, the attempt to dis-
prove my statement, is a thorough failure, yet, the way
the attempt has been made, is well fitted, if not intended,
to mislead, and to divert the attention of simple minds,
from the real questions in dispute. lam not, however,
to be so diverted. And however Dr. Hall may attempt
to escape, by making a scapegoat of another, I must
hold him convicted of unscriptural teaching, until he
produce better authority for that teaching, than he has
yet done.
I have only, in conclusion, to express my obligations
to u a Catholic Layman” and his friends, for the evidence
he has furnished in proof of my statement, and to assure
him that, should he be inclined to favor me with any
further specimens of the faith and practices of the Roman
Catholic Church, I shall not fail to give them my best
consideration.
Printed at the “ Mercury” Steam Press Office.
