

ROSS BROS., Bottle Makers, Erskineville, Sydney.
ROSS BROS.
are
Natives. Support your
Countrymen!




i /A


It will pay you
to always order
PARSON S’ ~L
Rolled Oats.
Pure Jams and Pickles.
Romeo. Cocoa.
D.S.F. Mustard.
Table Jellies.
Tomato & Worcester Sauce
Coffee Essence.
Pasha & Elephant Coffee
New Sweet Pickles.
They are the Best
Value
on the Market.
Parsons Bros.& Co.
General Manufacturers of Foods,
Kent Street, Sydney.




0- ■€■ H
nnimniu (do not remove prom
WUUrUII I IwIVC I THE PUBLICATION).
Specially Guaranteed by the
r\ry U A M accident & guarantee
\J\J CORPORATION, LIMITED. OF LONDON.
HEAD OFFICE FOR AUSTRALIA: 131 PITT ST., SYDNEY.
'(To whom notices of claims under the following conditions must be sent
within three days of the happening of the aceident).
Hl|||l»lxi.siu*a,xi.ce Ticke-t^iimn
(APPLICABLE TO NEW SOUTH WALES).
DNE HUNDRED POUNDS will be paid by the above Corporation to
the legal representative of any 'person hilled by an accident to
the train in which the deceased was an ordinary ticket-bearing
or paying passenger, and who at the time of such accident Had
Upon ’his or her person This Ticket, with his or her usual sig-
nature written on the space provided below, which is the
essence of this contract. Provided always that death results
from such accident within seven days from the happening
thereof. No person can recover on more than One Coupon
Ticket in respect of the same risk. This insurance is in force
until the 31st December, 1897.
Signature
Glass Bottle Manufacturers
BRAY ST., ERSKINEVILLE, SYDNEY.
.'MANUFACTURERS OF EVERY DESCRIPTION
OF GLASS BOTTLES AND JARS
-Sfr First Prize


Wholesale Grocers and
Wine and Spirit Merchants,
j Macquarie Place, Sydney.
Sole Agents for
WALLACES ARGYLE WHISKY,
LE ROY BRANDY,
ROYAL CLUB NECTAR,
ALPINE VINTAGE COLONIAL WINES,
IKA BREVA CIGARS,
ELKA CIGARS,
AMANDA CIGARS.
All Brands of WINES, SPIRITS and BEERS
kept, both in Bond and Duty Paid.
The many years we have now been in business, and our large experience
of all markets, enable us to supply goods of first-class
quality at very reasonable rates.
SAMPLES and QUOTATIONS forwarded to any part of the Colony
on application.


PROTECTION * *
STHONKTION ;
Wsieg ?
BY
E. W. O’SUfcfclVaj*, E* a ., M.P.
<Sgbnefi:
BEATTY, RICHARDSON & CO., PRINTERS,
paling’s BUILDINGS.


Ask for
Hardman’s ■
CELKBRATED
■ Biscuits
THE PUREST,
THE BEST,
THEREFORE the cheapest.
sss Milk Arrowroots
ARE RECOMMENDED BY THE MEDICAL FACULTY
AS THE
MOST WHOLESOME & NUTRITIOUS FOOD FOR CHILDREN


The question of Protection v, Freetrade is still the most
important issue before the people of New South Wales, and
it is likely to remain so, even if the federation of the Aus-
tralias should take place. In the local political arena a fair
test of the feeling of the people on the subject has never
yet been made, as the issue has generally been clouded
by sectarian cries, a demand for reform of the Upper
House, or some other side subject. The Freetrade press of
2Sew South Wales has also dealt somewhat unfairly with
the question of Protection, the most grotesque misrepre-
sentations being sometimes resorted to for the purpose of
misleading the people on the matter. Yet, strange to say,
while these Freetrade journals are loudly denouncing the
iniquity of assisting industries, they are themselves glad to
be assisted by the State railways, which carry their papers
free on all lines, at an enormous cost to the public.
To correct these misrepresentations of the Freetrade
press is one of the reasons for publishing this book. It will
serve also as an aid to those who speak and write upon
protection, but have not access to the latest arguments and
information upon the subject. Based as Protection is upon
the instinct of self-preservation, it is only a question of time
when that system will triumph in New South Wales, as it
has done in every other civilised land except Great Britain.
There is no teacher like experience, and our sad period
of Freetrade, with its fall in wages, scarcity of employment,
depression of business, frequent upheavals of the unemployed,
and the hopeless outlook for young people, cannot fail to have
its effect upon the multitude. The wealth of a nation
resides in the labour of its people, and the most important
and lucrative trade is that within our own borders. Pro-
tectionists seek to employ this labour and to foster this
home trade. Freetraders would abolish both in favour of
the foreigner. That is the difference between the two parties,
and sooner or later the people will recognise the vital issue
to them and their children which underlies that difference.
In the hope that it may assist them to a more speedy recog-
nition of the value of Protection to the general community—
but more particularly to the wage-earners, the producer, and
the manufacturer—this little book is now launched upon
the world.
Edgecliffe, near Sydney, July, 1897.


CONTENTS.
What is Meant by Protection
Definition of Freetrade
Protection Means Self-Preservation
National Considerations ...
Philosophers v. Practical Statesmen
Domestic v. Foreign Commerce
The Labour Aspect of the Question
The Rate of Wages Test ...
Protection is National Trade Unionism
The Promotion of Monopolies
Wages and Savings Bank Deposits
Freetrade and Wages
How Protection Benefits Industry
The Brotherhood of Man Argument
The Alleged Benefits of Competition
Collapse of Cobdenism
Our Farmers and the Competition of Indian and American
Wheat
Why Farming does not generally pay in N. S. Wales
The Freetrader and the Protectionist on the Farmers
The Teachings of History ...
Protection the Policy of Civilisation ...
Agriculture and Industry the Basis of Prosperity
Why Irishmen are Protectionists
Freetrade leaves Countries Helpless for Defence ..
Protection the Policy for the Grazier ...
Protection a Better Policy than Freetrade for Coal Mines
Protection offers Employment for the Young
Protection and the Civil Servants and Railway Men
“ What about Victoria ?” ...
The Lesson of McKinley’s Election
Protection the Policy of Labour


Should Imports exceed Exports
'Commerce may be purchased at too high a price
Freetrade and Protected England Contrasted
-Superiority of the Home Market
Opinions of Eminent Men...
Freetrade England and Protectionist France Compared
The Cost of a Change of Policy
Mr. Blaine’s Illustration of the Efficacy of Protection
The Creation of Wars and Distress ...
Freetrade a Captivating Delusion
The Unemployed in America
A Comparison of the Colonies
Has Protection Benefited the United States ?
How Protection Enriches the People ...
A Few Triumphs of Freetrade in N. S. Wales
The Drain of Gold to the United States
The Industries of Australasia
The Productive Powers of Victoria and N. S. Wales
Loss of the Riverina Trade
“ The Benefits of Freetrade ”
The Machinery Argument...
■“ The White Slaves of England ”
The Evidence before the Victorian Tariff Commission
•Career of Mr. E. W. O’Sullivan


Uncle Toby!
4(fc
w
The
Handsomest
Women and
Children in
A ustralia,
with cheeks of
peach and ivory,
are those who
are large and
continuous
users of
“ Uncle Toby.”
♦
|f
Graceful Girls,
Lovely Women,
Robust Boys,
Vigorous Men
with large
Brain powers,
are
the results
of
a generous
use of
“ Uncle Toby.”
UNCLE TOBY’S
fi
mim its
Are Absolutely Pure,
And the Makers guarantee that not a particle of sulphur has
been used for bleaching purposes.
CLIFFORD, LOVE & CO-, Agents


What is Meant by Protection?
As the Australian National Policy of Protection has
been grossly misrepresented by the Preetrade press of this
country, let us first inquire what the system really means.
A protective tariff is merely the levying of taxation upon all
such products and articles as can be profitably grown or
manufactured in our own country, and the admission duty
free of all others, save luxuries, which are taxed chiefly
for revenue purposes. This taxation is imposed with the
object of making imported products so expensive that they
cannot compete in our market with products of a like natuie
which are the outcome of the labour of the m< n and women
of our own country. Protection is thus a shield and safe-
guard to Australian capital and Australian labour.
Protection does not mean, as some Freetraders assert, the
taxation of every imported article. As a matter of fact,
under Protection, the free list would be an exceedingly large
one, and no article would be taxed (save luxuries) that we
could not produce ourselves. What may be called natural
Protection exists in the climate of the country, in the
superior soil, or from the superior skill of the inhabitants of
a country ; but where these are insufficient to shut out the
products of cheap labour countries legal Protection, in the
form of a tariff, is resorted to in order to be able to produce
at a fair rate of wages. Mr. W. McKinley, who recently
won the Presidential election in the United States under
such triumphant circumstances, and who is the recognised
leader of the Protectionist party in the United States, thus
defines what he means by Protection: —
“It is a tariff upon foreign imports, so adjusted as to
secure the necessary revenue, and judiciously imposed upon
those foreign products the like of which are produced at
jj ome Articles of common use, comfort and
necessity, which we cannot produce here, it sends to tho
people untaxed, and free from duty A pro-


tective tariff makes the foreign competing article carry the
burden, draw the load, and supply the revenue, and, in
performing this essential office, it encourages at the same
time our own industries, and protects our own people in
their chosen employments. That is the nature and purpose
•of a protective tariff.”
Senator G. F. Hoar, another eminent Protectionist in
the United States, says :
“Protection is the imposition of such duties on the
importation of foreign products as will prevent a domestic
producer of the same article from having his business
■destroyed by the competition of the foreign imports while
he establishes it; or will enable him to maintain the
production, without its being destroyed or rendered un-
profitable by the competition of the foreign article after it
is established, when he could not otherwise so establish or
maintain it; or the enabling him to pay larger wages in
such production than he could pay if he were subject to the
foreign competition.”
Protectionists fight for Australian industries and
Australian wages, as opposed to foreign industries and
•cheaper wages. The freetrader holds that cheapness is the
main consideration; and he contends that the foreigner
should be allowed to bring his goods here duty free, even
though the effect of this would be to destroy the industries
of our country, and lead to a reduction of wages.
The policy of Free trade is to regard labour merely as an
economic tool, to be utilised in the production of cheap
■commodities. Man is thus treated as a commodity for sale
in the cheapest market. The Protectionists regard man as
a “unit of society, a worker in business, and a citizen of
:State.” The private interests of the individual are looked
upon by Protectionists as insignificant when they conflict
with the public good, which is promoted by a protective
tariff. Henry P. Carey, the celebrated American writer,
says :
“ Protection is the science of the law which governs man
in his efforts to secure for himself the highest individuality
.and the greatest power of association.”


Man by himself can do but little, but a combination of
men may accomplish seeming impossibilities. As Mr. T B.
Reed, the Speaker of the House of Representatives in the
Congress of the United States, and an eminent Protectionist,,
puts it: —
“ Man derives his greatest power from association with,
other men—his union with his fellows—as proved by the
operation of trade unionism, ‘ One man alone may lift a
heavy plank, but a dozen may run away with it. The
single stick is easily snapped, but a bundle may resist a
giant.”
Protection gives this power of association, while Free-
trade leaves a man helpless in the struggle against organised
masses. Association or combination is the instinct of
humanity, which grows with its growth —first the family,,
then the tribe, and then the nation. The race will come
by and bye.
George B. Curtis, in his Protection and Prosperity ,.
observes :—“ The Protectionists are striving first to provide
for the welfare of their own people. They believe it to be
the first duty of the Government to promote the moral and
material welfare of the inhabitants within our borders.
They make war on no one. The protective barriers area means
of defence to maintain industrial peace and tranquility, to
prevent attacks of vicious combinations, and inequality, aud-
io justice. Our manufacturers cannot employ labour at
wages 100 per cent, higher than are paid in Europe and
produce articles as cheaply as similar articles are produced
there. The essence of Protection, then, is that by such
duties on imports capitalists are induced to invest their
money in the establishment of a greater variety of indus-
tries, which give employment to a large number of people,
at higher wages than would be paid otherwise, thereby
providing the masses of the people with greater incomes
and making it possible to sustain a large population, procure
a wider diversity of industries, a more perfect division of
labour and the attainment of a greater degree of industrial
development and prosperity than otherwise could be
secured. The agriculturist exchanges his product for home


manufactured goods, thus saving waste in transportation
and securing to domestic trade the full advantage of the ex-
change. The result attained by this policy is the greatest
triumph of political economy. By increasing the spendable
income of the people much wider fields of business are
opened, a more equal distribution of wealth is assured, and
the people, as a whole, in the end are enabled to accumulate
more property and receive greater returns for their exertions
than through the narrow and restricted developments of
-resources permissible under free competition.”
Definition of Freetrade.
The doctrinaires of the Freetrade party claim that their
policy is the most important truth in economic science.
Those who have tested that policy, or closely watched its
operation in other countries, hold a very different opinion,
as will be seen from the following definition of Freetrade
in the American edition of Chambers’s Encyclopaedia. It
is worth reading, for residents of this country will
recognise in the definition several features well known to
themselves :
“Freetrade is a dogma of modern growth, industriously
taught by British manufacturers and their commercial
agents. For many years certain political economists have
laboured to establish this theory upon a reliable basis, and
have asserted that the doctrine represents an im-
portant truth; but no nation has attained substantial
prosperity except by Protection to native industry, whether
avowed or disavowed. The doctrine had no foothold in the
policy of any country until put forth by Sir Robert Peel in
Great Britain in 1846. While it was to the interest of
Great Britain to protect industry, she imposed sufficient
■duties; and when by this means the producers of wealth
became strong, and able to compete with those of other
countries, protection yielded to reciprocity ; and even at
the present time the nations most clamorous for Freetrade
rely upon it in theory only—reciprocity in fact, and Protec-
tion in principle Even the most strenuous advocates of the


theory dare not put it to the test of experience in its fulness.
The teachers, therefor, remain self-deceived. The cloistered
sophists of their schools, and the propagandists of Freetrade,
are doubtless as learned as the sophists of any age—and
practically as useless. Freetrade expressions need Ameri-
canising (and Australianising), as they are utterly hostile to
our prosperity and subversive of scientific truth. When-
ever an advocate of this dogma, schooled in their errors, has
found devolving upon himself the responsibility of dealing
with practical questions, he finds their supposed cardinal
truths as groundless as the mythical Arcadias and Utopias
of romance. The sophistries of Freetrade are put forth to
lull the suspicions of the deluded purveyors to the wealth
of England, and are advocated most strenuously by agents
of British manufacturing houses and foreign residents in
our cities, whose chief aim is the accumulation of wealth by
extensive sales of foreign products, regardless of the injury
they may inflict upon American interests. ”
How true the foregoing is of the actions of our Free-
trade Government, who boast of their policy, yet practice
Protection on the sly by giving favored contracts to local
firms, and otherwise do their best to violate the truth of
their own doctrine. Do we not also recognise the correct-'
ness of the remarks with regard to the sophists and foreign
agents who occasionally misrepresent the cause of Protec-
tion in the press and on the platform ? The Freetrade
party are the same fiscal humbugs in all countries and in all
ages.
BEDDY & TODD
(Late with Messrs. Aleock & Co.),
siUiatb II JKanufectums,
IVORY TURNERS, ETC.,
255 AND 257 SUSSEX STREET, SYDNEY.


Protection means Self-Preservation.
Protection is based upon the instinct of self-preservation,,
that great natural influence which guides and controls man-
kind in all its actions. If we violate that natural law,
rely upon it that, sooner or later, we will pay dearly for it,
just as we are punished for the violation of other natural
laws. Governments are formed for protective purposes,
and, therefore, when they see the interests of their citizens
threatened by the competition of foreign products, they are
justified, on the ground of self-preservation, in protecting
their citizens from the danger by means of a tariff. Sup-
pose that an army of 50,000 Russians landed in New South
Wales, with the object of conquering this country, would
not every patriotic man, whether Freetrader or Protec-
tionist, assist in an effort to expel the invaders 1 Un-
doubtedly he would, and it would be a noble and patriotic
action on his part to do so. Well, if an invasion of foreign
produce or goods is likely to prove detrimental to the
interests of our people, by taking away their markets or
lowering wages, or driving them out of employment, are we
not also justified in resisting that invasion of foreign com-
modities by imposing a tariff against them 1 It seems to
me that the one action is just as noble and patriotic as the
other, and that both would be prompted by the great
natural instinct of self-preservation.
“A low tariff or no tariff,” says McKinley, “ has always
increased the importation of foreign goods until our money
ran out, multiplied our foreign obligations, produced a
balance of trade against the country, supplanted the do-
mestic producer and manufacturer, impaired the farmers’
home market abroad, undermined domestic prosperity,
decreased the industries of the nation, diminished the value
of nearly the whole of our property and investments, and
robbed labour of its just reward.” Then why should we not
protect ourselves against these dangers 1


Arnotfs •
• Biscuits
-S& FOR -se-
Q.TJ-A.LXT"^'.


The Fetish of Cheapness.
But we may be told that this invasion of foreign goods
might be beneficial to the people by giving them cheaper
necessaries of life. Our experience of the Reid Freetrade
tariff does not go to show that cheapness follows Freetrade,
because household necessaries are as dear as ever they were
under Protection. But supposing, for argument sake, that
Freetrade did induce cheapness, of what use are cheap goods
if you have not the money to buy them with, through being
thrown out of employment, or through having your wages
reduced 1 Supposing a penniless man sees a watch in a
window marked £l. That is apparently a cheap article;
but to the penniless man it is a dear one, beeause he has not
the money to purchase it with. Supposing twelve months
later that the same man, having had work in the meantime,
and saved £SO, sees in the same window a watch marked
£2, that watch would be cheaper to him than the other one,
because he then would have the money to spare to purchase
it with. It will thus be seen that there is something
of more importance than cheapness to the labouring classes,
and that is work and wages. Cheapness does not promote
the welfare of the working classes. For example :on the
banks of the Don, in Russia, wheat is so cheap and plentiful
that it is burned as fuel, yet the people at the same time
are in squalor and misery. In the West Indies goods for a
week’s consumption may be earned by two hours’ work, yet
the workers are not prosperous. On the contrary, they have
still to labour for a pittance. In a debate on the state of
the Navy in 1896, Sir Charles Dilke pointed out that in our
foreign-going sailing ships 44 per cent, of the men were
foreigners, and in our steamers 30’4 per cent. This is one
of the results of the abolition of the Protective Navigation
Laws, as will be shown later on. Thus, through this policy
of cheapness, thousands of British seamen are being driven
out of their calling by cheaper foreign or coloured sailors,
and the maritime supremacy of our races is endangered.
Take as a further illustration of the effect of cheapness
the item of boots. If we admit boots duty free, the only
way in which our bootmakers could compete with those


in cheaper countries would be to accept the rate of wages
paid to the latter. But the reduction would not be confined
to bootmakers. It would apply also to the tanners, curriers,
and all who are concerned in the production of leather.
Where, then is the benefit of cheap boots to these men, and
to all who depend upon them for existence. If the wages
are not reduced to the cheaper level, then these cheaper
bootmakers would make all our boots, and the colonial boot-
makers would be thrown out of employment. Apply this
policy of cheapness to all other trades and callings, as would
be the case under Freetrade, and it will be seen that cheap-
ness would rapidly destroy our industries and demoralise
our people. . Protection is the only safeguard against such
disasters. The celebrated Alexander Hamilton, the first
Secretary of the Treasury in the United States, observed,
“ Though it were true that the immediate and certain effect
of regulations controlling the competition with domestic
fabrics was an increase of price, it is universally true that
the contrary is the ultimate effect of every successful manu-
facture.” Adam Smith, the so-called “Father of Freetrade,”
admits this also when he says:—“ By means of regulations,
indeed, a manufacture may sometimes be acquired sooner
than it could have been otherwise, and after a certain time
may be made as cheap, or cheaper than in the foreign
countries.”
Which, then, is the policy most likely to work
and wages—Freetrade, which closes local workshops and
factories, or Protection, which fosters and establishes them ;
Freetrade, which allows of the free importation of agricul-
tural products, and thus dwarfs local farming; or Protec-
tion, which encourages more farming by giving our agricul-
turists and orchardists the possession of their own markets'!
Let common sense supply the answer.
National Considerations.
A well-known writer has told us that that country is most
independent which is possessed of the greatest supply of
things needful in peace and essential in war. Protection,
by developing the resources of a country, gives these. Free-


trade would leave a country dependent upon its imports for
them, and these imports might at any time be shut out by a
blockade. That policy is best which utilises in the highest
degree the widest range of a country’s resources, and deve-
lops the power of the human mind. Protection undoubtedly
does this better than Freetrade. So long as nations desire
to remain self-reliant and independent they will provide
themselves with all the essentials of existence, such as food,
clothing, defence equipment, etc. The nation that depends
upon other countries for these—as it must do under Free-
trade—will always be in danger of disaster. Protection has
the noble mission of multiplying the number of homes in the
country and providing work and wages for all. The estab-
lishment of a foundry or a factory in a country town has the
effect of enhancing the value of property for miles around
the scene. They bring more population to a town, and this
increase of population provides a better market for the
products of the farmer and grazier, while the storekeepers
and tradesmen have also an increased business. Every
calling in life, including the doctor, the lawyer, and the
newspaper proprietor feels the energising effect of new
industries. The celebrated Frederick List, the apostle of
Protection in Germany, says :
“ Protective duties act as a stimulant on all branches of
industry, the produce of which foreign countries can provide
better than the home country, but of the production of
which the foreign country is capable. They guarantee e
reward to the man of enterprise and to the workman for
acquiring new knowledge and skill, and offer to the inland
capitalist means for investing his capital fora definite time
in a specially remunerative manner.”
List further states :
“A nation which exchanges agricultural products for
foreign manufactured goods is an individual with one arm,
which is supported by a foreign arm. The support may be
useful to it, but not so useful as if it possessed two arms
itself—and this because its activity is dependent upon
the foreigners. In possession of a manufacturing power of
its own, it can produce as much provisions and raw material


as the home manufacturers can consume ; but if dependent
upon foreign manufactures it can merely produce as much
surplus as foreign nations do not care to produce for them-
selves, and which they are obliged to buy from another
country.”
Philosophers v. Practical Statesmen.
Economists and philosophers of the abstract and senti-
mental schools are usually Freetraders, but it is worthy of
note that nearly all the great practical statesmen of the
world—the master minds of the human race and the leaders
of men—have been protectionists. Here are a few of their
names;—Cromwell, Colbert, Frederick the Great, .Napoleon
Bonaparte, Bismarck, Cavour, Frederick List, Alex. Hamil-
ton, Washington, Benjamin Franklin, Henry Clay,
Abraham Lincoln, Andrew Jackson, Garfield, U. S. Grant,
Blaine, Thiers, Gambetta, Sir John A. Macdonald, Cecil
Bhodes, Crispi, Gustavus Adolphus, Nesselrode, Disraeli,
Chatham, Salisbury, Humboldt, nearly all the most pro-
minent statesmen in Australasia, and a host of other leaders
in Austria, Belgium, Italy, Sweden, Mexico, and South
America. Except Gladstone, Cobden, Bright, and a few
others, no statesmen of high calibre has ever advocated
Freetrade, What, then, is the value of the theories of
philosophers and economists when compared with the
successful practical achievements of the master minds of
civilisation 1
T. JOITES,
Way Street. .Marriekville,
3ST ear Sytiney
Manufacturer of Clothes Lines, Plough
Lines, Fishing Lines, Halters, Curled
Horse Hair, and Doe Hair.


Domestic v\ Foreign Commerce.
If we were to devote our attention merely to the raising
of wool, gold, minerals, coal, and other raw products, as some
Freetraders hold, we could not employ one-third of the
people that could be employed by a development of these
industries and agriculture and manufactures. That has been
well illustrated in the case of the United States, as well as
Australia. Gold and minerals and coal are good things in
their way, but they do not last for ever, and when they
have pettered out where are the avenues of employment
for the people, especially for the young 1 It is essential
to establish industries in order to find a diversity of
employment for the people. As to the outside trade,
it is wise to export our surplus products, and import
with the value we receive for them such articles as
we cannot produce ourselves. But where is the
sense of exporting raw products for the purpose of pur-
chasing wheat or maize, or the manufactured article which
we can produce ourselves 1 It is a loss of national wealth
to do this, because we prevent the development of our own
resources by such importations. Supposing, for example, a
farmer desired to purchase a plough, and he obtained one
from Germany at a cost of £7. When that plough came to
New South Wales we should have the value of the £7 in the
shape of the plough. That would be one capital under
Freetrade. Supposing, however, that instead of going to Ger-
many the farmer had the plough made in New fcouth Wales,
even at a cost of £9, New South Wales would then have
the plough and the money as well. That would be two
capitals under Protection as compared with one under F'ree-
trade, and the transaction would give employment to our
own people instead of to the Germans. Apply this rule to
everything which we can profitably grow or manufacture,
and it will soon be seen how much greater would be the
employment of the people and the development of our
natural wealth under Protection than under Freetrade. In
corroboration of this statement let us quote from Adam
Smith, the so-called “Father of Freetrade.” In the fifih
chapter of the second book of the “ Wealth of Nations,’ he


•says : —“ The capital which sends British goods to Portugal
■and brings back Portuguese goods to Great Britain replaces
by every such operation only one British capital. The other
is a Portuguese one. Though the returns, therefore, of the
foreign trade or consumption should be as quick as those of
the home trade, the capital employed in it will give but half
the encouragement to the industry or productive labour of
the country. A capital, therefore, employed in the home
trade will sometimes make twelve operations, or be sent out
and returned twelve times, before a capital employed in the
foieign trade of consumption has made one. If tbe capitals
are equal, therefore, the one will give four-and-twenty times
more encouragement and support to the industry of the
•country than the other.” This statement, from such a
source, ought to demonstrate the superiority of the home
market over the foreign market. We can never hope
to be anything more than a grazing and mining com-
munity under Freetrade (which means a limited
population) while under Protection we can be a grazing,
mining, agricultural, and industrial community, and
thus have a diversity of employments and a larger popu-
lation in full work at good wages. Which is the nobler
mission for a Nation, and which of the two policies is likely
to promote the prosperity of that nation best 1
The Labour Aspect of the' Question.
As we have observed, the Protectionists are the cham-
pions of Australian Labour and Australian Wages as
■opposed to Foreign Labour and Cheap Wages. Whether
the Freetrade supporters mean it or not, their actions in
favour of Freetrade have injured the workmen and pro-
ducers of New South Wales, and favoured the foreigners
and cheap-wage workmen. The superiority of Protection
over Freetrade, as a Labour Policy, has been demonstrated
in every civilised country. The Labour Party all over the
world, save in New South Wales and Great Britain (where
the fiscal question is settled for the present), have advocated
protective principles.


As workmen maintain their rights and actual comforts
better by trades unionism than they did when working
single-handed, so will they prosper better when they
combine their forces under a protective tariff to protect
their rights and their interests against foreigners.
For the artisan or labourer, more work means better
wages. The wages in the protected United States are 40
per cent, higher than those in Great Britain. A French
workman has well said ; —“ When two workmen run after
one master, wages will fall; but they rise, when two
masters run after one workman.” Therefore the more
openings there are for the workmen, the better will be the
remuneration of labour. As Protection gives more openings,
for labour than Freetrade, it follows that Protection is more
likely to keep up wages than Freetrade.
The Rate of Wages Test.
Here is another irrefutable proof of the superiority
of Protection over Freetrade as a working man’s
policy. It is taken from a work of reference called
the Economist and Statist, published yearly in San
Francisco, California, where, of course, a protective policy
prevails. The figures represent dollars and cents., and they
show beyond all question that the rate of pay is much
higher in the United States than in Great Britain. From
the book in question, I find that last year in Great Britain
bakers were paid 6 dols-. 50 cents. ; in New York, from 10
dols. to 13 dols.; in Chicago, from 10 dols. to 14 dols.; in
San Francisco, from 12 dols. to 15 dols. I find that
bootmakers in Great Britain were last year paid 7 dols. 35
cents.; in New York, from 12'dols. to 18 dols. ;in Chicago,,
from 9 dols. to 18 dols. ; in San Francisco, from 12 dols. to
18 dols. Butchers last year in Great Britain received from
4 dols. 75 cents, to 7 dols. 23 cents.; in New York, they
received from 8 dols. to 12 dols. ; in Chicago, from 12 dols.
to 18 dols; in San Francisco, from 12 dols. to 18 dols.
Carpenters received in Great Britain last year, 8 dols. ;in
New York, from 7 dols. to 14 dols.; in Chicago, from 7 dols.


50 cents, to 14 dols.; in San Francisco, from 12 dols. to 21
dols. Engineers received in Great Britain last year from
8 dols. 75 cents, to 9 dols. 22 cents.; in New York, from
14 dols. to 21 dols. ; in Chicago, from 15 dols. to 21 dols. ;
in San Francisco, from 60 dols. to 104 dols. Labourers in
Great Britain received last year from 4 dols. 50 cents, to
5 dols.; in New York, from 6 dols. to 9 dols. ; in Chicago,
from 5 dols. 50 cents, to 8 dols. ; in San Francisco, from
9 dols. to 12 dols. Miners received last year in Great
Britain from 4 dols. 75 cents, to 7 dols. ; and in San
Francisco, from 15 dols. to 24 dols. Printers in Great
Britain last year received from 7 dols. 52 cents, to 7 dols.
78 cents.; in New York, from 10 dols. to 18 dols.; in
Chicago, from 12 dols. to 18 dols, ; in San Francisco, from
15 dols. to 24 dols., and so on, with almost every trade and
calling.
Proteation is National Trade Unionism.
Protection is but National Trades-unionism, and ought,
therefore, to be the policy of Labour. You cannot estab-
lish an industry without benefitting Labour, because that
industry gives employment, and so does every new farm or
sugar plantation, etc. The restrictive laws against the
Chinese and other colored races are but another form of
Protection in favour of Labour. Every time a Freetrader
votes for these laws, he violates his doctrine of “ let things
alone.” A freetrader is an advocate of “unrestricted
competition” and free contracts in Labour. A Freetrader
is therefore logically opposed to trade unionism, which re-
stricts competition and forbids freedom of contract for
labour purposes. It thus is impossible for a genuine trade-
unionist to be anything else than a Protectionist, for what
is Protection but national trades-unionism 1 There is a close
affinity between the principles of Protection and trade-
unionism, while Freetrade and trade-unionism are directly
at variance. H. C. Carey, the eminent American Protec-
tionist, says : “Whenever there is in the market a surplus
of any commodity, whether that surplus be the effect of
natural or artificial causes, the price of the whole tends to


fall to that at which the last portion can be sold, and where
there is a deficiency the price of the whole tends to lie to
that point at which the last portion can be sold. Labour is
a commodity, the owner of which seeks to exchange with
■other persons. So long as there shall be a surplus of it any-
where, the price tends to fall to the lowest level. With the
diminution of it anywhere, the price will tend to rise to a
level with the highest.” Now, which is the most likely to
benefit Labour in this respect 1 Freetrade, which would
lessen the avenues of employment, or Protection, which
encourages the establishment of factories, farms, and
foundries 1
The Promotion of Monopolies.
It is a childish and incorrect remark of the Freetraders
that Protection leads to the establishment of monopolies.
As a matter of fact, monopolies are the outcome of brain
power and enterprise, rather than a fiscal policy. For
example, there are mercantile monopolists under Freetrade
in Great Britain. There are also great shipowners there,
and cotton kings, yet who thinks of attributing these wholly
to Freetrade 'I With reference to the so-called protective
monopolies in the United States, they are not the outcome
of Protection at all. The late Hon. J. G. Blaine, Secretary
of State in the United States, has pointed out that of fifty
millionaires in that country only one (Carnegie) made his
fortune out of manufactures. The rest were speculators in
railways, stocks, mines, oil ■ springs, etc. Monopolies will
grow up under any form of fiscal policy, simply because
they are the outcome of bold and sometimes unscrupulous
speculations. Under Freetrade we support the manu-
facturing and mercantile monopolists of Great Britain,
Germany, Belgium, and other countries. If, then, we have
to choose between the foreign monopolist and the local
monopolist, is it not better to have the latter ? Then at least
we would have in our midst large employers of labour, like
the Colonial Sugar Company, a so-called monopoly, which
largely employs labour and adds considerably to the
national wealth.


Wages and Savings Bank Deposits.
Mulhall, the great and accepted authority on statistics,
has published a calculation of the wages and expenditure on
food in Freetrade Great Britain and the Protectionist
United States. He asserts that the rate of wages in these
countries is as follows; —Wages; Great Britain, 31s. ; United
States, 48s. In England, the average wages were 31s. per
week ; in New York, 555. 6d. ; in Chicago, 48s. 4d. In the
Protectionist United States, speaking generally, the wages
are 40 per cent, higher than in Freetrade Great Britain,
while the cost of living per head in the States is only £22
45., and in Great Britain it is £3l 3d. In Protectionist
France, the cost of living per head is only £2l 75., and in
Protectionist Germany, but £lB per head per year.
A splendid test of the superiority of Protection over
Freetrade in the matter of the annual savings of the
working classes is given in the report of the Comptroller of
the United States Currency, He shows that the seven
States of New York, Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont,
Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut, with a
■combined population of 11,000,000, had in 1886 no less than
£138,000,000 (one hundred and thirty-eight million pounds)
invested in the savings banks, while the population of
Freetrade England, Ireland, and Scotland, amounting
to 38,000,000, putting aside building societies, co-operative
associations, and provident funds, etc., had only £36,000,000
(thirty-six million pounds), invested in the savings banks.
That is to say, one American workman can save as much as
twelve British workmen. It will thus be seen that
Protection, by giving regular employment and a higher rate
of wages, enables the workman to save much more than he
can under Freetrade.
Freetrade and Wages.
John Bright, the great apostle of freetrade, writing to a
gentleman in Nottingham on November 29, 1866, admitted
that the only way under Freetrade to shut out a distinctive


foreign competition, and to preserve English factories, was
by a reduction of wages. That is the vital point of the
controversy for working men, and they would do well to
consider the opinion of John Bright, the great Freetrader,
who was opposed to trade unionism and fought against the
Factory Act for the curtailment of the power of labour for
women and children. In corroboration of the statement by
John Bright, the following extract from the Journal of
Commerce and Commercial Bulletin of New York, a well-
known freetrade organ, is appended :
“An average reduction of 20 per cent, in wages is
demanded by the necessities of employers, and equally in
the interests of labour. With that we might expect a
general revival of business; if it be not quickly conceded,
we must wait until worse conditions compel the concession.'’
This was published on November 8, 1894, under the
semi-freetrade tariff’ of the second Cleveland Administration,
since happily repealed. Cheap goods eventually lead to
cheap wages everywhere.
How Protection Benefits Industry.
The Freetraders ask in what way does Protection benefit
industry. We will give the answer to that question in the
words of Frederick List, one of the founders of the German
Zolleverein, and the author of a celebrated work upon “ The
National System of Political Economy,” a book which had
a powerful influence in swaying the German people to adopt
a protective policy. List says, “ Protective duties act as
a stimulant on all branches of internal industry, the pro-
duce of which foreign countries can provide better than the
home country, but of the production of which the home
country is capable. They guarantee a reward to the man of
enterprise and to the workman for acquiring new knowledge
and skill, and offer to the inland (or local) capitalist means
for investing his capital for a definite time in a specially
remunerative manner.” That puts the matter in a signi-
ficant and telling way.”


The Brotherhood of Man Argument.
“ The idea of Protection appears to conflict with the
sublime aspiration of the brotherhood of man,” say the
Freetraders. No doubt it does, but the reply to their aspi-
ration is a very simple question, “ Would they marry their
sisters to Chinamen T If they object to do this they have
no right to talk about the brotherhood of man. If they
object to a Chinese relative, what becomes of their sublime
aspiration ? It is merely an idle dream, which can never be
realised till the whole of the races of the world live upon
the one plane with regard to wages, conditions of life, &c.
That is not likely to be the case for another century or
two, and in the meantime we would only be working for
our ruination as a civilised people if we were to attempt to
realise it.
The Alleged Benefits of Competition.
Freetraders contend that enormous benefits accrue to
people where there is competition between a foreign and
home-made article. That is but another of their many
delusions. Where the competition is between a strong and
long-established foreign industry and a weak colonial one,
the rivalry kills the weaker industry, and leaves the stronger
in the field, without an incentive to excellence, and a certain
return to higher prices. Professor Grunston, in his “ Prin-
ciples of Social Economics,” thus speaks on the point :
“If the higher-paid producer descends to the plane of the
lower, it will not be economical competition, because in that
case the low-wage products will be sure to undersell the
high-wage products, and thus enable the inferior to succeed
against the superior. In such a struggle there is nothing to
develop the best in the highest, but everything to repress it.”
This fact has been exemplified many times under Freetrade
in N. S. Wales, where foreign articles have been sold cheap
till the local competing article was killed, and then prices
were always raised. Under Protection the cheap labour
products can never undersell the local article, because the
tariff raises the price of the former, and thus our workmen
are assured employment as well as a fair rate of wages.


Mr. David Syme, of the Melbourne Age in his “Indus-
trial Science,” also refers to the matter : —“ It is quite
a mistake to suppose that competition invariably tends to
reduced prices. It is only when sellers compete that prices-
are lowered, for when buyers compete they are invariably
raised.”
Collapse of Cobdenism.
In 1844 Mr. Cobden, the apostle of Freetrade in Great
Britain, said : “ You have no right to doubt that in ten
years from the time when England inaugurated the glorious
era of commercial freedom, every civilised country will be
Freetrade to the backbone.” Since that time 51 years have
elapsed, and every country which made an effort at even
partial Freetrade has been compelled to abandon it, save
Turkey, Britain, and her off-shoot, New South Wales. The
signs of the times are that Great Britain herself will not
much longer hold on to the doctrines of Cobden in their
entirety, for her trade is going to pieces under them.
Joseph Chamberlain, the present Secretary of State for the
Colonies, once declared that Great Britain was a “paradise
for the rich and a purgatory for the poor.” According to
Hoyle, an accepted authority in England, there are in
Great Britain and Ireland 7,000,000 people, toeing the mark
of pauperism. General Booth has made a powerful appeal
on behalf of what he calls “ the submerged tenth ” of the
population of Great Britain, by which he means the
3,000,000 persons other than paupers, prostitutes, criminals,
homeless poor, who would be dead in a month if they
depended upon their own exertions, or those unable to
obtain the minimum allowance of food allowed for im-
prisoned criminals. Gladstone —after Freetrade had had
about 23 years’ trial—remarked that “ the rich had grown
richer and the poor poorer ” in Great Britain. If these are
the social triumphs upon which the Freetraders plume them-
selves, as the result of their system in the mother country,
they are welcome to them. Most people would be inclined
to regard them as glaring evidences of the failure of the
fiscal system introduced by Cobden and Bright.


Let us now turn to the industrial results of the Free-
trade policy of Great Britain as compared with those of
Germany and other Protectionist countries. We will take
the facts from Consular reports and that remarkable work,
Made in Germany. In 1888 Hamburg, a Protectionist
port, was credited with only 3,704,312 tons of shipping, and
Liverpool, a Freetrade centre, then had 4,278,881 tons.
In 1895, the shipping at Hamburg had increased to-
-6,256,000 tons, while that in Liverpool had only increased
to 5,965,959 tons. In other words Hamburg now leads
Liverpool by 290,041 tons. The Protectionist ports of
Rotterdam and Antwerp have also made greater progress
during the past ten years than Liverpool in the matter of
shipping, though for the present they are both behind her
in total tonnage. The stagnation of Liverpool and the
rapid progress of Hamburg, Rotterdam, Bremen, Antwerp,
New York and Marseilles, should once and for ever dispose
of the Freetrade assertion that Protection is ruinous to
shipping. In shipbuilding there has been a remarkable
activity in the German yards during the past five years,
while those of Great Britain have at times been almost idle.
The rate of increase in the German shipping in two years,
1893 and 1894, was from 8 to 9 per cent., while that of
Great Britain was but 3| per cent.
In 1890, Great Britain exported steam engines to the
value of £4,442,883 ; in 1895, the exports had fallen off to
£2,786,967. During the same period the exportation of
German locomotives and locomobiles had increased from
5,600,000 marks to 8,400,000 marks. In the cutlery trade
the Germans are playing havoc with English wares ail over
the world, and have driven them out of Russia, Servia,
South America, South Africa, Tunis, Japan, and other dis-
tant markets. There has been a tremendous falling off in
the exports of other British-made articles, such as silk
manufactures, alkali goods, paper, earthen and chinaware,,
woollen lines, cotton manufactures, etc. With regard to
iron and steel goods the German exports to Australasia rose
from 24,000 tons in 1893 to 42,000 tons in 1894. During
the same two years the exports of British iron and steel
goods decreased largely to all the Australasian provinces..


In 1894 Canada imported 50 per cent, more of German iron
and steel goods and 100 per cent, less of British. The same
alarming decreases are evident with regard to British exporta-
tion to India, China, and the East, in each of which coun-
tries there has been a rapid and largely increased sale of
German and Belgian products. These figures are taken
from consular reports, and may, therefore, be considered
reliable. The position of Great Britain to-day is thus
summed up by Mr, Ernest Williams : —“ln 1872 the total
declared value of British and Irish produce exported from
the United Kingdom was £256,257,347 ; in 1895 it had
sunk to £226,169,174, and in the meantime the population
of Great Britain and Ireland had grown from 31,839,757 to
39,134,106. The market is bigger, the ability to supply the
market is but whereas the proportion per head
of exported produce was £8 Is. in 1872, it had sunk to £5
11s. 3d. in 1894, or a falling off of £2 9s. 9d. per head of the
population. Under circumstances like these, it is not sur-
prising that Mr. Chamberlain and other erstwhile Free-
traders are now anxious to establish an Imperial Customs
union, which will give Freetrade within the borders of the
Empire and Protection against all foreign countries.
Our Farmers and the Competition of Indian
and American Wheat
Now that Freetrade prevails in New South Wales we
are liable to the competition of Indian wheat. That is to say,
our Farmers will now have to compete in the market with
the ryots (farmers) of India, who use old-fashioned appli-
ances, wear scarcely any clothes, and can live up on two pence
per day. The Punjaub wheat is grown in the interior of
India, and is shipped at Kurrachee, after a run of 800 miles
from Lahore. The north-western wheat is carried from
Cawnpore to Bombay, a distance of 1000 miles, for less than
Is. per bushel. Freights then to Australia would be about
20s. per ton. This would give a farmer’s price of about Is.
6d. a bushel as against 2s. 3d. which is considered a very
low figure in Australia. The Indian ryot can afford to take


less than Is. 6d. per bushel, but the Australian farmer
would starve at the figure. So far, since the introduction of
Freetrade, the price for wheat has been good in New South
W ales, owing to the dry seasons ; but it is morally certain
that, in a fair season, the large importations of wheat and
flour from America, New Zealand and the other colonies, would
lower the price of wheat in New South Wales to an unpro-
fitable figure. The difference between the Freetrader and
the Protectionist with regard to the Farmer is this : The
Freetrader would leave the farmer at the mercy of importers,
who will assuredly bring down the price of wheat; the
Protectionists would keep the home market for the local
farmer, and thus assure him of a fair price for his products.
Maize, on December 22, was but Is. 7d. per bushel —a
ruinous figure for our river farmers. It is worthy of note
that though Victoria and South Australia have both suffered
from dry seasons, they have had to import but little wheat
and flour, the reason for this being that the surplus products
of these countries had been stored up. and were utilised
when the season of scarcity was on. On the other hand,
our farmers had little or no wheat stored up, and therefore,
when prices were high they had not been able to get the
benefit of them. It was the importers of American wheat
and flour who had chiefly benefitted by the high prices
which had prevailed.
Why Farming Does Not Generally Pay
in N.S. Wales.
There are three reasons for this :
1. Because our farmers have to compete against the
surplus produce of other countries, admitted free into our
markets, and which in some cases is grown by cheap coloured
labour at nominal wages.
2. Because most of our farmers have to send their pro-
duce long distances to market, and thus have to pay three
and four times as much for transportation as those farmers
in other countries who send their produce to Sydney by
steamer.


3. Because this outside grown produce is able to be
brought to Sydney ten times the distance by sea at a much
less rate than it can he brought by rail from any of our
agricultural centres, situated at comparatively short dis-
tances.
To place our farmers upon an equality with the outside
producers it is necessary, therefore, to place a tax upon all
such produce as can be profitably grown in New South
Wales. As Professor Thompson, of Pennsylvania, points
out: —Protection to industry gives the farmer an abundant
and steady market for his breadstuff, and creates a market
more remunerative than grain. The policy which increases
the number of those who are not engaged in farming, but
must live on its products, and pay for them, is that policy
which serves the farmer the best and steadiest remuneration.
Benjamin Franklin, the famous American philosopher, puts
the case thus : —Every manufacturer engaged in a country
makes part of a market for provisions within ourselves, and
saves so much money to the country as must otherwise be
exported to pay for the manufacture of the supplies.
The Freetrader and the Protectionist on
the Farmers.
The difference between the freetrader and the pro-
tectionist, with regard to the farmer, is this : —The free-
trader urges that the foreign market is the farmer’s heaven.
The protectionist advocates the nearer and home market as
the better one, for these reasons :
1. It is nearer and costs less for transportation both in
sending what he sells and in receiving what he buys.
2, Because it is a steadier, more reliable market, our
own people are here, and depend upon our own farmers for
their food.
3. Because our farmers buy what they use from the non-
farmer class, and the latter buys his food from the farmer.
As showing the difference between a local (or home)
market and a distant market for the farmer and producer,


List, the great German apostle of protection, says:—“Let
us compare the condition of agriculture in the vicinity of a
populous town with its condition when carried on in distant
provinces. In the latter case the farmer can only cultivate
for sale those products which can bear a long transport, and
which cannot be supplied at cheaper prices and in better
•qualityfrom districts lying nearer to those who purchase
them. A large portion of his profits will be absorbed by the
cost of transport. . . . On the other hand, in the
proximity of the town, the farmer is in a position to use
every patch of land for those crops which best suit the
character of the soil. He will produce the greatest variety
of things to the best advantage. Garden produce, poultry,
eggs, milk, butter, fruit, and especially articles which the
farmer residing at a distance considers insignificant and
secondary things, will bring to the farmer near to town
considerable profit.”
As protection establishes centres of industry all over the
country it will establish local markets for the farmer, and is,
therefore, a better policy in this respect than freetrade.
The Teachings of History.
Protection Advances, Freetrade Vanishes.
Three words should inspire and guide the protectionists
at this juncture—educate, agitate and organise. Thousands
•of our freetrade friends are sadly deficient with regard to
that commendable motto, auoti alteram partem , and as a
result they are in a state of profound ignorance in reference
to the cause which they have espoused with such mistaken
fidelity and tenacity. Let it be our aim to lay the truth
before them. W. E. H. Lecky, the famous historian, in his
recent work, entitled, “ Democracy and Liberty,” makes
the following remarks :—“ No fact is more conspicuous in
the nineteenth century than the strength of the reaction
that has taken place against the Freetrade (or laissez faire)
principles, which within the memory of men still living
were almost completely dominant in the more advanced


economical teaching of the world, and which seemed likely
in a few years to control all the more civilised legislation.
Whether we look to the despotic monarchies, or to the
democratic republics; whether we consider the crowded
populations of Europe, or the thinly-scattered inhabitants of
Australia, or New Zealand, the same lesson may be learned.
Nearly everywhere the old Freetrade doctrine is a vanquished
or declining creed, and the chief disputes now relate to the
form which protection should take, to the degrees to which
it may be wisely carried, to the advantage of establishing
preferential treatments in favour of different parts of the
Empire.” Yet, though this fact is well-known to every
student of history, it would appear that those of our
population who take their fiscal information from Freetrade
journals every morning, like pap, are kept profoundly
ignorant of
The Great Revolution
which has been going on in the world during the past few
generations with regard to fiscal matters. They apparently
imagine that most of the civilised nations of the earth are
practising the principles of Cobden and Bright, and that the
Protectionists are merely a factious minority in New South
Wales, and occasionally get the upper hand in Germany
and the United States. In the hope that the eyes of some
of these well meaning but credulous and deluded enthusiasts
may be opened by it, the following information concerning
the rise and progress of Protection is supplied to them. It
was a well understood maxim with ancient rulers that
The Food Supply op a Nation
should be raised within its borders, and that trade and
industry should be encouraged so as to render the people of
that community independent in time of war. To rely upon
treacherous allies, or upon neutrals who might find them-
selves attacked, was to jeopardise the very existence of a
nation. It was a sound policy, which led to the development
of agriculture and manufactures among the ancients to a
considerable degree. It was only when nations became
powerful through conquest, or an overplus of wealth, that
they relied upon slave labour or importations of food and


manufactures from abroad—and then it was that the
stamina of their people began to decline, and they
gradually tottered to their fall. The proof of this will be
seen by a reference to a history of many of the nations of
antiquity.
The Trade of the Ancients.
From Curtis’s Protection and Prosperity, and other
authorities to which the writer is largely indebted for the
information in these pages, we learn that the earliest
records of trade are to be found upon the sculptured rocks
of Egypt. They show that at a period 2,500 years before
Christ, the Egyptians sent trading expeditions to the east
coast of Africa. The Chaldeans traded with China, India,
and the Far East, and King Solomon also did business with
distant countries, including the regions of the mysterious
Queen of Sheba, supposed to be what we now call Rhodesia
in South Africa. The principal carriers in those days upon
land were the Arabs, the Edomites, and the Medianites,
whose ownership of the camel (the chief beast of burden in
the East) caused them to undertake the occupation of
carrying the productions of the fertile countries around
them. The foreign trade of Babylonia was extensive, owing
to its many industries, such as weaving, pottery, &c.
Ancient India also did a considerable trade with the
countries to the north and west. The Phoenicians were the
first great maritime people. They carried on a brisk trade
all around the Mediterranean Sea, and planned colonies at
Carthage, Sicily, Sardinia, and Spain, and they worked the
tin mines of Britain, as well as the silver mines of Spain.
Their cities of Sidon, Tyre and Carthage became marts of
great commercial importance. The ancient Greeks also
engaged largely in commerce. Athens and Corinth both
became great entrepots of foreign trade. The Greeks
established colonies all around the Mediterranean and the
Black Sea, especially upon the islands of the former. The
Grecian industries remained, but Grecian commerce fell
when Athens and Corinth succumbed.
The Danger of Relying upon Importations Illustrated.
Then followed the rise, progress, decline, and fall of the
marvellous Roman power. As Curtis points out, Rome


furnishes to the world the greatest lesson in economics-
of all the ancient civilisations. The merits of the policies
of Protection and Freetrade were tested, and the advantages
of a country being self-reliant and independent of foreign
importations made manifest. “At first,” says Curtis, the
domestic resources of Italy were relied upon as the principal
source of her prosperity. Later on the cultivation of the
soil was abandoned, and the imperial city drew her food
supplies from foreign countries. In the early history of
Rome, in what was known as the Golden Age, the virtue,
industry, and patriotism of those citizens who cultivated
the soil were the strength and greatness of the Republic.
Rome was most fortunately situated in the heart of one of
the most fertile and productive regions of Europe. She
held within herself the resources by which an ambitious,
enterprising, and industrious people could acquire greatness
and material wealth. During the palmy days of the Roman
Republic the cultivation of the soil and various pursuits of
industry were regarded as honourable and dignified
occupations. Cincinnatus, one of the greatest patriots of
the age, left his plough to take the reins of government. It
was this age that gave to Rome Cato, Scipio, and those
statesmen and soldiers who are particularly distinguished for
their patriotism and courage in the defence of their country..
But the policy of self-reliance was abandoned. The loyal,,
hardy yeomen were supplanted, and from Naples to Gaul
Italy became cultivated by slaves. Wheat and cattle were
brought from Egypt, the island of Britain, and other
provinces. The people of Rome were fed upon the products
of other countries. They neglected not only agriculture,
but manufacturing. Their clothing and implements and
other wares were brought from the East. All the wealth
brought from foreign countries to the imperial city did not
compensate her for the loss sustained by her failing to
develop her own resources. She made the fatal mistake of
neglecting domestic productions, and attempting to live by
foreign commerce. In the best days of the Republic, when
it was invaded by Hannibal, the most consummate general
of the time, Rome was saved by her sturdy people, imbued
with a love of country, who were ready to defend the


city at the sacrifice of their treasure and their lives.
At this time Rome meant something to her own people,
After the domestic resources of the country had been
destroyed, her sturdy and patriotic citizens wiped out and
replaced by slaves, she was weak and defenceless, although
her nobles and senators had become rich from the spoils and
profits of foreign conquest and trade.” It was then that
Rome began to totter to her fall.
Rise of Industrialism.
When the Roman Empire fell there followed that period
known in history as the Dark Ages, when a condition of
barbarism prevailed throughout the northern and western
portion of Europe. About the end of the eleventh
century, however, as Curtis shows, “Italy, Flanders,
and portions oi Germany started to display indus-
trial activity, and trade began to develop between
various countries. Later on Venice, Florence, Genoa, Pisa,
and other Italian cities began to control the Mediterranean
and Eastern trade. The Venetians were the most poweriul
and progressive of all these mercantile and industrial people,
and when their city became the chief point of departure for
the hosts of armed men that went to the Crusades Venice
rapidly developed her maritime ascendancy, and the greater
portion of the Eastern trade fell into her hands. The
Venetians also did a considerable trade with Flanders,
France, England, and the rest of Westerfi Europe. The
Venetians and Italians also became great manufacturers,
imitating the productious of the East to perfection, and they
gradually became large exporters of silks, cottons, woollens,
leather, ironwork, glassware, dyes, &c., &c. Venice built up
her industries by the aid of
A Rigid Protective System.
So stern and rigid was it that if a Venetian carried his skill
and art to a foreign country he was ordered to return; if
he did not obey his relatives were imprisoned; if he still
continued to work abroad an emissary was despatched to
kill him, and after his death his relatives were set at liberty.
The discovery of a new route to India, via the Cape of Good


Hope, diverted a considerable portion of the Eastern trade
from Venice, but prior to that she was on the wane, owing
to the attacks of other Powers, particularly Genoa and Pisa.
So great was the jealousy of Venice that a combination of
nations called the League of Cambray was formed to over-
throw her, and partition out the Venetian territories. In
the meantime Venice was also engaged in a death struggle
with the Turks, who had captured Constantinople and
controlled the territories and the Black Sea and the eastern
end of the Mediterranean. Compelled to live upon the
defensive, the Venetians began to lose their commercial
supremacy, and their power gradually passed away. Upon
the fall of Constantinople art, science, and literature were
scattered all around the Mediterranean countries, owing to
the exodus of thousands of learned and skilful Greeks and
Byzantines. Then began to arise the free cities of Europe,
owing to a system of municipal government und protective
laws. Diversified industries were soon established in central
and northern Europe, and the guilds and trade associations—
all strong protective bodies —with their apprentices and
journeymen, soon began to flourish. Thus arose the famous
Hanse Towns of Germany, which had for several centuries
before been gradually evolving from mere trading depots
into great centres of commerce and industry. They formed
a league for mutual protection in 1261, and in this combi-
nation there were no less than 85 towns, including places
like Lubeck, Hamburg, Amsterdam, Cologne, and Frank-
fort. For a considerable period the Hanseatic League
almost monopolised the trade of northern Europe, but the
league was eventually abandoned, and its various towns
absorbed by surrounding nations.
A Progressive Protectionist Country.
At this time Flanders (now Belgium) had been making
enormous progress as a commercial and industrial centre.
Her chief cities, Bruges, Ghent, Libia, and Ypres, had each
40,000 looms at work, mostly supplied with wool from
England. In the year 1400 Ghent alone had 80,000 men
capable of bearing arms. Thanks to her protective guilds,
Antwerp also rose into prominence, and in the first half of


the sixteenth century she became the seat of money-changers
-and bankers, and the commercial centre of Western Europe.
The chief sources of the wealth of the Flemings were their
great domestic industries, which were also largely created
through protection. Owing to the prolonged war with the
Spaniards under Philip 11. the industries of Flanders were
almost ruined, and thousands of the Flemings migrated to
England and other countries, taking their skill and handi-
crafts with them. Flanders never recovered from this blow
till, under the name of Belgium, she established a protective
tariff. The Dutch were forced into becoming a trading
people owing to the adverse conditions by which they were
surrounded. Wholly dependent on other countries for raw
material they had to go abroad and exchange their fish and
other local productions. After becoming great sailors they
started to reclaim the lands bordering upon the ocean. They
gradually converted their marshy and slimy soil into
beautiful gardens and fields, and cultivated their limited
arable lands to the highest capacity. Importing timber,
they started shipbuilding, and in course of time also
established manufactories of all kinds. Between 1580 and
1658 the Dutch Republic was the dominating commercial
and maritime power of Western Europe, and remained so
till the protective Navigation Daws of England enabled that
Power to establish a mercantile marine and naval supremacy
which overthrew that of IJolland. The Dutch now practice
partial protection. Spain for a time rose to eminence owing
to the enormous quantity of precious metals which she drew
from the New World, but her neglect of industry and the
loss of the more enterprising and hardy of her population,
caused her eventually to decline. Portugal for a consider-
able period was a commercial power of importance, but the
loss of her Asiatic and American colonies crippled her, and
she, like Holland, was overshadowed by England.
British Industry and Commerce Built up by
Protection.
The rise of England as an industrial, commercial, and
naval power is one of the most instructive lessons in the
Bistory of civilisation, and demonstrates in a remarkable


manner the efficacy of the principle of protection. At the-
close of the 14th century England was merely an agricul-
tural and grazing country, and her trade and Commerce
were almost monopolised by the Flemings and other
foreigners. In those days the Freetraders held that it was
the truest policy for England to export her wool and other
preductions abroad, and let other people do the manufactu-
ring for the English. Fortunately, however, a far-seeing
monarch, Edward 111., came to the throne. He reigned
for 50 years—from 1327 to 1377—and though the spirit of
chivalry was then at its zenith, and military achievements
the highest ambition of kings, he initiated a commercial and
industrial policy which laid the foundation of England’s
future greatness. Up to that time English wool had been,
as Curtis points out, sent to Flanders, and there manufac-
tured into cloth and resold to the English. King Edward
111. absolutely prohibited the export of wool from England,
and invited Flemish weavers to come to his country and
work their industries there. Of course, according to the
Freetrade theory, this ought to have ruined England, but it
certainly did not. On the contrary, the policy of Edward
set woollen and other industries going actively within his
dominions, and the money thus kept within the country was
better employed than paying foreigners. His son, Richard
11. extended the protective policy, even to the extent of
prohibiting the importation of wheat when the price did not
exceed 6s. Bd. per quarter.
Contradiction of Freetrade Theories.
Such a proceeding, according to the Freetrade policy,
ought to have crushed the English by making bread dear,
but nothing of the kind happened. Agriculture was stimu-
lated, and the farmers, knowing that they could always be
sure of a fair price for their product, gave more employment to
the people. Edward IY., prohibited the importation of other
articles, such as ironware, saddlery, cutlery, &c., and these
were soon manufactured on a large scale in England. Queen
Mary sanctioned another law which was the means of giving
special advantages to English merchants and artizans. By
this time a revolution had been wrought in the industrial


life of the Euglish people, and they were new virtually inde-
pendent of foreigners, except with regard to shipping.
Under Elizabeth there was a still further extension of the
protective system, by the encouragement of agriculture,
manufacturing, mining and shipping. The importation of
certain goods was prohibited, and the exportation of un-
manufactured products which might be worked up by
Englishmen was restricted. Elizabeth also provided that a
cow should be kept for every 60 sheep. She also exempted
fishermen from serving as soldiers, and she encouraged
foreign artizans to come to England. Elizabeth also encou-
raged companies to trade with the East Indies, the Levant,
the Baltic, Russia, and other countries, and in many other
ways she assisted to establish a British mercantile marine.
All these actions, according to Freetraders, ought to have
been disastrous to England, yet Elizabeth’s reign was one
of the most glorious in our annals, from a commercial and
industrial, as well as from a political point of view.
Overthrow of Dutch Maritime Supremacy.
In the middle of the 17th century came the struggle for
supremacy between the English and the Dutch, already
referred to. The clash came in 1651, when the famous
Navigation Laws were passed by the Parliament of the
Commonwealth. These laws confined the carrying trade of
England to British and Colonial ships ; no foreign commo-
dity could be sent to a British colony unless it was laden at
a British port in a British ship; and the British ships were
to have British captains, while three-fourths of their crews
were also to be British seamen. The Dutch attempted to
resist these laws in a naval war, but they were badly beaten,
and from that day we may date the rise of the British
mercantile and naval supremacy, as well as the extension of
the British Empire in every part of the world. Ihus the
very power and existence of Great Britain is owing to
Protection. Then followed the rapid development of
British industries, and with it the growth of the population.
Prior to 1751, as Curtis shows, the increase had only been
3 per cent, during any period of 10 years-, but it rapidly
rose to 6,9, 14 and 21 per cent, notwithstanding the


terrible war which had taken place in the meantime. Man-
chester, Birmingham, Liverpool, Bristol, Glasgow, Leeds,
and Sheffield grew into cities of first-class importance, and
there was a marvellous development of trade and industry.
Yet during the whole of this period of unparalleled success,
and right down to the Freetrade era in 1846, the exports of
Great Britain were only on four occasions exceeded by her
imports—a fact which goes far to upset the Freetrade
theory that imports should always exceed exports in a
nation that is commercially prosperous. Great Britain
started Freetrade 51 years ago, but is now showing unmis-
takeable signs of a desire to modify that policy.
Rise of Protection in the United States.
Protection in various forms has been the policy of the
United States since the inception of that great republic.
The second enactment signed by Washington in 1789 was
to establish protective duties; and with but a few brief
intervals, Protection has remained the policy of that country
ever since. Several times the people of the United States
were induced by specious arguments, or driven by the domina-
tion of the old slave-owners, to adopt a partially Freetrade
policy, and on every occasion the hard and bitter experience
engendered by financial panic and distress compelled them
to return to protection, with the never-failing result of pros-
perity. Within the past four years we have witnessed
several striking illustrations of the truth of this statement.
President Cleveland and the semi-freetrade Democratic
party won the election of 1892 the tariff was again
modified, and a widespread distress once more set in. The
people grew alarmed, and within two years elected a
majority in the House of Representatives in favour of a
return to protection. At the last Presidential election in
1896, they also triumphantly elected Major McKinley, the
leader of the Protectionists, and once more prosperity reigns
in the United States.
Experience of Other Countries.
France made wonderful progress iu the establishment of
manufactures and the promotion of agriculture under the


protective laws of Colbert, and that fiscal policy remained
till about 1856, when, led away by the teachings of Cobden,,
the Government of Napoleon 111. attempted to work a
partial Freetrade treaty with Great Britain. The effort,
however, had such a detrimental effect upon the industries
of France, that this treaty was abandoned by the Republic
which succeeded, and a rigid protective policy was adopted.
It is asserted that this treaty cost France no less a sum
than twenty thousand million francs. Freetrade was one
of the most potent factors in the ruination of the industries
of Ireland, and the migration of millions of her people to
other lands. After achieving her independence in 1839,
Belgium adopted a protective tariff. Under the Zollverein
for Customs Union, nearly all the estates in what is now
the Germanic Empire worked a protective system. When
the German Empire was established a protective policy was
created, and has since remained. Speaking of the operation
of the Zollverein, Frederick List, the apostle of Protection in
that country, says :—“ Germany in the course of ten years
has advanced a century in prosperity, national self-respect,
and power.” Russia, under Alexander 1. adopted a Free-
trade policy, and the ruin of her manufactories followed,
and distress became general. In 1821, Count Nesselrode,
the Chancellor, caused Russia to return to Protection, and
every year since that time great advances have been made
in industry and material prosperity. After Sweden adopted
a protective tariff her manufactories than trebled in
30 years, and her agriculture made great strides, though a
temporary victory has since been obtained by the tariff
revision party. Spain adopted Protection in 1845, and has
likewise made great strides in agriculture and industry.
Portugal was induced to enter into a Freetrade treaty Avilh
Great Britain in 1703, and her industries soon began to
crumble away, and a drain of silver and gold set in, thus
disproving the assertion of the Freetraders that goods are
always paid for by goods. To use the words of Cobden, the
country became “ a sucked orange.” Protection was
adopted in 1837, and the balance of trade with England
was soon turned, and prosperity was restored. The pitiful
condition of Turkey to-day is partly owing to her efforts to


work Freetrade. Her once famous muslin looms are nearly
all destroyed, her carpets have been driven out of her own
markets, and even her trade in raw silk and cotton is gone.
Poland was overthrown and dismembered, mainly because
she had no industries to create a middle class. Switzerland
is a Protective country, and it is the land where poverty is
the rarest, and where wealth is fairly distributed. In India
every time the cotton manufacturies have given evidence of
vitality, they have been obstructed or retarded by the
lowering of import duties on such articles at the dictation of
the Lancashire cotton interests of Great Britain. Canada
was brought to the verge of insolvency by Freetrade, and
hundreds of thousands of her citizens were compelled to
migrate to the United States to earn a livelihood. The
National Protection Policy of Sir John A. Macdonald
restored her to a sound condition, and she made extra-
ordinary strides under his rule. The tariff revision party,
under Sir Wifred Laurier, obtained a victory at the last
general election in the Dominion, but they have not
ventured to go very far in the direction of Ireetrade,
except in a matter of a preferential treatment for countries
which admit Canadian goods free. The Cape of Good
Hope works a Protective policy, and so do the Boer
Republics of the Orange Free State and the Transvaal. All
the Australasian provinces, except New South Wales, now
work Protective policies, and it seems only a question of a
few months till this country will once more the
fallacy of attempting to realise the ideal of Cobden. When
the Federal Commonwealth is established, nothing is more
certain than that Protection will be the policy of United
Australia.
Protection the Policy of Civilisation.
In fact, to sum the foregoing up, all the civilised
world, except Great Britain, Turkey, and New South
Wales, has discarded Freetrade, and works a fiscal policy
based upon either rigid or partial Protection. That is to
say fully four hundred millions of the white races of the
earth are Protectionists, and only about fifty-one millions


•are Freetraders. Upon which side, then, lies the wisdom of
the world, and that accurate knowledge of fiscal affairs
which can only be gained by a hard and bitter experience of
the false system before the adoption of the true one is forced
upon a people. The following figures will corroborate the
assertion just made. The populations have been brought
up to date :
Protectionist Countries.
Russia, population 110,000,000; United States, 70,000,000;
Germany, 41,000,000; Austro-Hungary, 42,000,000;
France, 38,000,000; Italy, 31,000,000; Spain, 18,000,00;
Belgium, 6,000,000; Portugal, 5,000,000; Denmark,
2.000. Sweden and Norway, 6,000,000: Switzerland,
3.000. Greece, 2,000,000; Holland, 5,000,000; Servia,
Roumania, and Bulgaria, 8,000,000; Canada, 7,000,000;
Victoria 1,250,000; New Zealand, 650,000; Queensland,
400,000; South Australia, 350,000; Tasmania, 150,000;
Cape of Good Hope, Natal, and South Africa, 1,000,000;
total of Protectionists in civilised countries, 406,800,000.
To the above might also be added the populations of
Mexico, Peru, Chili, Brazil, the Argentine Republic, and
other semi-civilised nations of South America, as well as
China and Japan, giving an increase of 500,000,000 more of
population, making a total of 906,000,000, but I have pre-
ferred to let the comparison be made with highly civilised
communities.
Freetradb Countries.
Great Britain, population, 39,000,000; New South
Wales, 1,330,000; Turkey in Europe, about 12,000,000;
total 52,330,000,
Will our Freetrade friends explain how it is that so
large a preponderance of the civilised races of the world are
Protectionists, after the so-called beneficent policy of Free-
trade has had 51 years’ trial in Great Britain.
The true reply is a simple one, if they are not too preju-
diced to admit it. It is this—the instinct of self-
preservation has prompted most of the nations indicated to


change a fiscal policy, which has brought ruin and distress-
in its* train, and adopt a system which shields them from the
unfair competition of other countries, and developes their
resources in such a manner as to make them prosperous and
self-reliant communities.
Agriculture and Industry the Basis of
Prosperity.
Napoleon Bonaparte once remarked : “ Agriculture is
the soul, the basis of the Empire \ secondly, industry the
comfort and happiness of the people. Thirdly, trade, its
proper application to the surplus of agriculture and
industry.” The Freetraders, however, always place trade
first, thus putting the apex of our industrial pyramid where
the base ought to be. Protection, on the other hand,
places agriculture and industry before trade. It is neces-
sary to create articles before you can carry them or tialfic
in them. Protection is the safeguard of agriculture and
industry, from which all human happiness and prosperity
spring. Point to a country where the industries are
flourishing, you will show a country where the working
classes are in receipt of good wages, and are happy and
prosperous. they prosper all other classes prosper
with them. Protection means all this, and it mean, further,
the utilisation of the raw material of a country and the
development of natural wealth, which, under Freetrade,
might lie idle for generations.
NOT MADE IN GERMANY
BUT IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
_ . |.« WVWVVVVVVV'
Palm Prasßms. mgk
age°nts- John Barlow & Co., Sydney


Why Irishmen are Protectionists.
People who are not well versed in Irish history ask the
question, “ Why is it that most of the Irishmen are Protec-
tionists ? ” The answer is a very simple one. The Irish are
Protectionists because most of their carpet, flannel, cotton,
linens, agricultural, grazing, and other industries have been
ruined by Freetrade, or unfair laws passed in the interests
of English producers and manufacturers. The evil conse-
quences of this policy began to manifest themselves years
ago, but they were intensified by the freetrade policy
adopted in 1846. Indeed, various unfair laws and Freetrade,
have been among the most potent causes of the immigration
and the discontent of the Irish people. Many of the most
illustrious patriots of the land saw these causes of the
trouble of the Irish people, and endeavoured to remove them,
notably Grattan and other Irish leaders in 1782, when they
fought, not for freetrade as is sometimes supposed, but for
freedom to trade. Parnell was also a pronounced Protec-
tionist, though Michael Davitt, captivated by the single-tax
or land nationalization theories, has been an advocate for
freetrade. Mr. A. K. Holden has unearthed from Mr. John
Lucas’ pamphlet some startling figures on the topic, which
are well worth the attention of those who so frequent y
expose their ignorance by alleging that Protection is allied
with the religious ideas of the majority of the Irish people.
“ In 1825 all duties in Ireland ceased, and to judge from
figures her commercial prosperity ceased also within a very
J. T. MAC MAHON,
SAIL AND TARPAULIN MAKER,
Huddart Parker’s Wharf, Margaret St., Sydney,
And at BUR WOOD ROAD, CANTERBURY.
Manufacturer of Sail Awnings, Screens, and all other Ships’ Work.
Dray and Waggon Tarpaulins, Railway and Stack Covers, Tilt Covers,
and Covers of every description (dressed patent and undressed).
Coke, Coal, and Ore Bags. All Brands of Canvas kept in stock.
Tarpaulins of all descriptions let out on hire.


few years. I give the depreciation in most of Ireland’s most
valuable industries at the end of ten years’ of perfect Free-
trade. In Dublin and Cork there were :
After 10 years’
Under Protection. Free trade.
731 Carpet Manufacturers ... ... Nil.
2509 Silk Weavers ... ... ... 213
1034 Braid Weavers ... ... ... 42
5109 Woollen Manufacturers ... ... 622
2171 Worsted Weavers ... ... ... 90
707 Hosiers ... ... ... ... 20
714 Wool-combers ... ... ... 127
2723 Cotton Weavers ... ... ... 218
571 Linen Check Weavers ... ... Nil.
3265 Blanket Manufacturers in Kilkenny ... 924
2075 Cotton looms in full work in Balbriggan 225
1094 Flannel looms in full work in Wicklow Nil.
The area under flax in Ireland has decreased from
305,000 in 1863 to 67,487 acres in 1893.
Further comment on these figures is unnecessary.
Freetrade Leaves Countries Helpless fo
Defence.
So long as we are dependent upon outside countries for
weapons and munitions of war we are at the mercy of any
power that could blockade our coast. If that blockade
could be enforced, as we stand at present, we would soon
have to surrender to the foe, for the simple reason that we
have not ammunition enough to fight him with. Under
Protection we could soon learn to make our own weapons,
build and equip our own ships, make our own ammunition,
fortify our coasts and harbours, and prove ourselves able to
withstand any blockade by showing that we were a self-
reliant country.


JERILDERIE] 30 Years’ Practical Milling Experience. [NARANDERA
RIVERINA DISTRICT.
WISE BROTHERS,
MILLERS.
Celebrated XXX & PYRAMID BRANDS
Steel Roller Flour-
138 Sussex Street, Sydney,
Telephone No. 1073.
POPE, MAHER & COY.,
Darlington Iron Works, Sydney.
ENGINEERS, BRIDGE BUILDERS,
IRON AND BRASS FOUNDERS.
Estimates given for all classes of Ironwork,
Waterworks—HYDßAULlC ENGlNEERS—lrrigation Plant
Cast Iron Pipes and Fittings, Valves, &c., always instock.
REFRIGERATING MACHINERY.
(Kyle’s Ammonia System.)
WORKS OF ANY SIZE DESIGNED AND ERECTED
in any part of the country.
Telephone No. 923.
City Office : 80 Pitt Street, Sydney.




Protection the Policy for the Grazier.
If our graziers desire to know why it is that the prices
for stock have been so low of late years in New South
Wales, they will find that a potential factor in keeping down
these prices has been the competition of Queensland stock.
Sheep and cattle are driven into New South Wales along
our stock routes, eating the grass and drinking the water
provided for our own stock, and they are sold in the Mait-
land, Goulburn, Albury, Sydney, and other markets, at low
figures, thus bringing down the prices of our stock. These
Queensland cattle and sheep are admitted duty free into
New South Wales, while all our manufactures and produce are
taxed in Queensland. Federation will, no doubt, tend to
minimise this anomaly, but in the meantime it would be a
common sense proceeding to protect our graziers by taxing
Queensland stock. Graziers should, therefore, be pro-
tectionists.
Protection a Better Policy than Freetrade
for Coal Mines.
The policy which establishes workshops and factories
using steam power is the one which should be preferred by
coal miners, for the simple reason that that policy causes
more coal to be consumed, and therefore creates more
employment for them. Protection is the policy which
establishes forges, foundries, and factories ; freetrade is the
policy which drives them out of existence in New South
Wales. Thus protection is the best policy for the coal
miners. Let them reflect for a moment upon the enormous
development of coal-mining in the United States, and
they will see at once the force of these remarks from a
San Francisco paper:—“ln 1888 there were 550,000
persons engaged in mining in the United States; in
1870 there were only 60,000. The annual increase of


persons engaged in American mining was 17,142 under
protection; under freetrade it was only 2,500. The
miners increased from 234,000 to 550,000 between 1880 and
1888; the number of persons engaged in British mines
decreased 61,000 during the same period. In 1860 we pro-
duced 15,000,000 tons of coal; in 1888 our production was
142,000,000 tons.” Japanese coal is now being sold in the
markets of the east; if we continue freetrade in New South
Wales it could be sold at a profit here. Supposing that were
to take place, where would be the occupation of some coal
miners 1 In due course, when the industries are established,
gold and silver miners will receive their candles, rope, and
machinery cheaper than they do to-day. In the meantime
their patriotism and regard for the welfare of their children
should induce them to support the policy which opens up
fresh avenues of employment for both young and old.
Protection Offers Employment for the
Young.
Does it ever occur to our Freetraders to ask themselves-
this question : —“ Where is employment to be found
for the thousands of boys and girls who annually leave our
public and private schools 1” They cannot all get into
the civil service, or go into the shops or warehouses. These
are already overcrowded, and it is really pitiable to see boys
and girls, month after month, fretting their lives out in the
vain hope of getting something to do by which they may
earn an honest living. They cannot be all miners or graziers.
Do their parents desire to see these young lads grow up in
idleness, or lead aimless and shiftless lives, as waiters, as
helpers, porters, billiard-markers, and perhaps even become
“ sundowners 1 ” Certainly the parents do not wish to see
their lads drift into these occupations, but assuredly thou-
sands of these bright and educated boys will drift into com-
paratively useless callings unless there are trades and occupa-
tions opened up for them. Freetrade cannot offer them


hope, because it leaves our market open to the competition
of the world, and thus prevents the establishment of indus-
tries. Protection is the only policy that holds out a chance
to these lads, because it will establish skilled trades which
they may learn, or promote agriculture, which they may
follow with happiness and profit. This is a question for the
mothers as well as the fathers, and they should both see that
their children get a fair start in the world by supporting
protectionist candidates.
Protection and the Civil Servants and
Railway Men.
As a rule the Civil Servants of the country are Free-
traders, because they imagine that a policy of cheapness
suits them best. Yet in this they are wofully mistaken, as
freetrade has inflicted on them a drastic retrenchment,
and they have to pay an income tax as well. Freetrade
eventually means a lower rate of wages for the workers out-
side, because they will then be subject to the competition
of articles from cheap labour countries. Now, if that
decrease in the rate of wages takes place, it will assuredly
result in another decrease in the rate of pay to Civil Servants,
because the community will not stand a high rate of pay
for them while their own wages are low. Therefore, it is to
the interest of the Civil Servant and the railway workman
to support Protection as a buttress for their present rate of
pay. Again, when the revenue begins to fall off, as it
assuredly will under freetrade, there will be another cry for
rigid retrenchment, and the Civil Servants may again suffer.
Here again, Protection will serve as a bulwark for them,
because the revenue at the Customs is always a more certain
one than that for land and income. The railway men, in
particular, should bear in mind that, if freetrade prevails,
produce will come from abroad, and there will, therefore, be
less produce to carry on the railways. Less produce in
New South Wales means a fall in the revenue for the
railways, and that fall will induce the Commissioners to


either reduce wages, or lessen the number of hands em-
ployed on the railways in order to keep up their yearly
profits.
“What About Victoria?”
Is a question sometimes asked at Protectionist meetings by
Freetraders, who find that they are not able to reply to the
arguments of the speakers. Well, let us see now what
there is about Victoria to justify the contention of the
Freetrade press that Protection has been the cause of
the depression in that province. That idea has been
industriously circulated by a German writer named Max
Hirsch, who for some time was actively publishing a
number of ingenious misrepresentations with regard to
Victoria. Ler it be understood, at the outset, that
Victoria is a country which has but little more than one-
fourth of the area of New South Wales—the figures being
respectively 80,884 square miles and 309,173 square miles—
and with not a title of the resources of the latter country.
If Victoria had remained a Freetrade country, when her
gold yield began to decline, it is certain that she would
not have had a population of more than 700,000 to-
day. The fact that she has a population almost equal to
that of New South Wales—about 1,300,000—is due entirely
to her protective policy, which developed agriculture,
fostered dairying, encouraged fruit production, and, indeed
manufacturing industries of all kinds. That cannot be de-
nied, and therefore it is clear that Protection has benefited
Victoria instead of injuring her, The people of Victoria
show that they appreciate that fact by voting for Protection
at every general election. The Freetrade papers of New
South Wales have been prophesying for the last eight years
that Victoria was going to abolish Protection, but the result
of every appeal to the people in that country falsifies these
predictions. That Victoria has been in distress for a
number of years past is a fact, but that distress arose from
causes altogether apart from Protection. After the last
Exhibition in Melbourne there was a large introduction of


British and foreign capital to Victoria, and this led to a
"wild and unreasonable “ land boom ” in Melbourne and
other cities. Things went splendidly for a few years, but
the “boom” suddenly burst, and caused hundreds of
persons to become bankrupt. A depression then set in, and
building operations, formerly so brisk, suddenly stopped,
throwing thousands of artizans and labourers out of work.
Some of the workshops and factories, suffering through this
;sudden depression, were compelled temporarily to curtail
the number of their hands, thus causing more unemployed
to come into existence. Then followed the fall in the price
of silver, which further injured Melbourne, owing to the
large number of persons there who held shares in the Broken
Hill mines. Thirdly came the failure of the banks and
building societies causing more trouble and more unemployed.
These three causes were the real creators of the distress in
Victoria. But during the whole of that sorrowful period, it
was noticeable that the protected industries of "V ictoria were
kept going, and eventually dragged Victoria out of her
trouble. Now Victoria is improving rapidly, and New
South Wales having given her another market by adopting
Freetrade, she bids fair to revive her old prosperity.
Victoria has more than twice the area of wheat that New
■South Wales has, nine times the acreage of oats, twice the
acreage of potatoes, and twice the acreage of hay. The
public revenue of Victoria is less than N ew South Vales,
but the debt is also less, the taxation is less, and the ex-
penditure per head is less. These statements are taken
from the reports of the Government Statist of Victoria, and
are therefore reliable. As Mr. Benjamin Hoare recently
pointed out in the columns of the Australian Star , head per
head of her population Victoria has outstripped all her
Australian competitors. Were it not for the large wool
yield of New South Wales, that province would not be
within cooee of Victoria in the matter of value of exporta-
tions. Those large and valuable wool returns —about
£12,000,000 per year—are the outcome of the larger area
.and better grazing country possessed by New South Wales,
and are therefore not to be credited to Freetrade. Coghlan,
in his “ Seven Colonies of Australasia,” says that Victorian


land is put to more profitable use than that of the mother
colony. Victoria has an average primary production of
£226 Is. 4d. per square mile; New South Wales has only
£B7 11s. 4d. There were 135,000 persons living on the
land in Victoria in 1893, and of these 120,000 lived on
35,000 distinct farms. The industries of Victoria are still
flourishing, notwithstanding all that Max Hirsch may say
against them. On the other hand, our Statiscian shows that
there are 4,000 less persons employed in New South Wales
in industries now than was the case in 1891, while there
has been a reduction of wages in many walks of life. In
the face of these facts, of what value are the misrepresenta-
tions of Freetrade writers with regard to the effect of
Protection in Victoria. The Tariff Commission of Victoria,,
which inquired exhaustively into the condition of the
industries of that country, reported strongly in favour of
the retention of the protective tariff, with a very proper
revision, and that document and the fact that the Victorians
at every election vote for Protection, and Victoria is on the
high way to prosperity, once more, are sufficient answers to
the misiepresentations of the writer in the Daily Telegraph
already referred to. That writer has cunningly illustrated
his contention by reference to the five years following the
collapse of the land boom in Victoria, and endeavoured to
show that the evil results of that collapse were caused by
Protection. Such a trick is worthy of the exponents of
Freetrade, and quite in keeping with the tactics of the
Foreign-trade party all over the world, but it will not
deceive the workers of New South Wales.
The Lesson of McKinley’s Election.
The triumphant election of Mr. McKinley, the champion
of Protection, as President of the United States, is a
striking refutation of the statements that the working men
of that country have lost faith in Protection. It is true
that the gold standard played an important part in the
contest, but McKinley would never have been chosen as a


candidate if he had not been popular with the workers as a
Protectionist leader. In all the States where the industrial
and agricultural operatives are in the majority, McKinley
was in the ascendant. In all the old slave States, where
cheap labour prevails ? his opponent, a semi-Freetrader,
headed the poll. It is noteworthy that as soon as the result
of the polling was known, workshops and factories were re-
opened, and 100,000 more operatives were put into employ-
ment. The American people have had a severe lesson for
their temporary admiration for partial Freetrade, but it is
not the only lesson they have received. Every time they
have reduced the tariff, or made an approach to Freetrade,
they have suffered keen distress, as will be shown
later on. To sum up, the effect of the two policies,
Freetrade has always brought trouble and distress to the
people of the United States, and Protection has always re-
stored prosperity to them. It is no marvel, then, that the
American people have once more shown their preference for
the policy which has always brought them comfort and
independence, and made their nation the richest upon earth.
Protection, the Policy of Labour.
Though the Labour Party of New South Wales profess
to “ sink the fiscal issue,” they have always shown a
preference for the Freetrade policy, and they deliberately
voted to repeal the semi-protective tariff of the Dibbs
Administration. In doing this, they are out of touch not
only with the Labour parties in Victoria, South Australia,
New Zealand, and Queensland, but they are opposing the
ideas of the democratic parties and working classes of
Europe and America. In France, the Radicals and working
men’s representatives, like most of the others of the
Deputies, are strong Protectionists. In Germany, the
Social Democrats and other Radical members hold the same
views. It is the same in Belgium, Italy, and Austria, and
other countries. How comes it then, that our Labour Party
should be the only one in the world which upholds a Free-


trade policy 1 That is a question which the workers should
put to themselve at next election. It is no argument in
reply to these statements to say that the Labour Party had
to sacrifice Protection in order to obtain a land-tax. That
land-tax has not benefitted those who were driven out of
■employment, or had their wages reduced. The Labour Party
have merely played the game of the foreign trade agents
of Sydney by their votes, for the prices of household
necessaries have not been reduced since Freetrade came into
vogue. The work of the foreigner may have been made
more profitable, but the working classes have received no
benefit by the abolition of the protective duties. On the
other hand, they have been deprived of work, or have had
to submit to a reduction of wages. These two disadvantages
are the outcome of the votes of those who repealed the tariff,
and the workers should, therefore, be on their guard in
future to vote only for those who uphold the rights of
Australian labour and a fair rate of wages by supporting a
protective tariff.
Should Imports Exceed Exports.
Freetraders lay down the doctrine that a country must
retrograde if its exports exceeds its imports. This idea has
apparently been accepted as an economic truth as fixed and
immutable as the law of gravitation by disciples of the
Cobden school, and those who venture to question the
dogma are attacked for their lack of knowledge of economics
and a misapprehension of the methods by which countries
are paid for their products. No doubt economists of a
certain school can be quoted in favour of this doctrine, and
the illustrations of Great Britain, Germany, France, and
other manufacturing countries support the contention.
Yet it is wrong to dogmatise upon this point, for the
practice which may suit large manufacturing countries like
Great Britain, Germany, and France, which have to import
enormous quantities of raw material in order to manufacture
cheaply, may be altogether unsuited to countries which


WATSON & CRANE,
BRASS FOUNDERS,
And Nickel Silver and Gold Platers.
WORN ELECTRO PLATE WARE, CRUETS, SPOONS
AND FORKS, &c., RE-SILYERED EQUAL TO
NEW
At Moderate Prices.
ADDRESS—
375 Pitt Street, Sydney.
Trophies, Medals, &c., made with Cheapness and Despatch.
RICHARD J. H. JENKINS,
GOLD & SILVER BULLION BOUGHT & SOLD,
Assayer «Sc Refiirer,
Valuator of Jewellery, Plate, and Precious Stones,
&c., in Deceased Estates,
Manufacturing Jeweller and Goldsmith*
PRACTICAL WATCH & CLOCK MAKER,
108 Market Street, Sydney,
Diamond, Ruby, and Pearl Setter. Gilder and Electroplates
Repairs executed under personal supervision.
Meerschaum Pipes Mounted and Repaired.


Thomas Fanning,
210 ROSE ST., DARLINGTON,
and. 6 KING ST., SYDNEY.
sSfesSlfe
Builder and Contractor
Contractor for the New Australian Fair Buildings ,
in the Cathedral Grounds.
MR. THOS. FANNING has carried out many large
and important Buildings in the City, and for some seven years
was Clerk of Works on all the large ecclesiastical buildings in
Sydney, viz. :
The Franciscan Monastery, Waverley.
Federation Hall Building*.
St. Patrick Convent.
ic Hunter s Hill Church,
Manly Church.
Bowral Church.
And numerous other building’s.


foave abundance of raw material to export, and do but little
manufacturing for themselves. Take for example the case
of Austro-Hungary, which is a fairly prosperous and well-
governed country. Its imports in 1894 amounted to
700,000,000 florins, and its exports to 795,000,000 florins,
Russia, like Austria, is a large exporter of raw material, and
in 1893 its imports amounted to 463,546,017 roubles, while
its exports amounted to 613,732,409 roubles. Yet Russia
is so far from being insolvent that, after being able to
borrow very largely, she was recently in the market for
<£20,000,000 more. Take also the United States, which is
a gigantic producer of raw material, and one of the wealthiest
and & most progressive countries in the world. In 1895 the
imported merchandise in that country amounted to
731,969,965 dob, while the value of the domestic exports
was 793.392,599 dols., yet 1895 was one of the most pros-
perous years ever known in the United States. This
■certainly does not look as if the doctrine that imports
should exceed exports is as fixed a truth as the law of gravi-
tation, as as freetraders would have us believe. If we take the
Argentine Republic, another large producer of raw material,
we find that in 1894 the official values in thousands of pesos
gold of the imports and exports (exclusive of coin and
bullion) was as follows ; —lmports, 92,724 ) exports, 101,249.
Yet the Argentine Republic is looked upon as one of the
most prosperous countries in the world, notwithstanding the
recent derangement of finance that took place there through
excessive “ booming.” In Chili, another- producer of raw
material, the imports were, in 1894, to the value of
54,483,716 pesos, and the exports 72,040,420 pesos. Strange
to say, Chili is also regarded as one of the most powerful,
prosperous, and progressive of the South American Re-
publics, though recently troubled with revolution. In
Brazil, another prosperous country, in 1890, the imports
were valued at 260,100,000 milreis, and the exports at
317,822,000 milreis. According to freetraders this flourish-
ing country of Brazil ought to be in a state of insolvency.
What, then, is the value of this doctrine as applied to Russia,
the United States, Australia, Chili, and other raw-producing
countries quoted 1


It is just the same if we examine the commercial returns
of the Australasian colonies noted for raw products.
Here are the figures for 1894, which, like the foregoing,,
were taken from the Statesman’s Year Book :
Imports. Exports.
New South Wales ... £15,801,941 £20,577,673
New Zealand
Queensland
6,788,020 9,231,047
4,337,400 8,795,559
Later returns show that the same state of things exist.
Yet who can assert that any one of these colonies is in a
state of insolvency, or on the high road to ruin, simply
because their exports exceed their imports ? Like many
other dogmas, experience is teaching that the long-accepted
doctrine that “ imports should exceed exports ” is in many
cases a delusion. Teachers are now rising in the world who
venture to hold a different opinion to that of certain anti-
quated authorities on political economy, and they even
boldly challenge the doctrine that imports should exceed
exports as applied to the older countries of Europe. For
instance, a writer in the Quarterly Review last year states :
“ Whereas our exports bring us in nearly millions
sterling less than we received twenty years ago, our imports
cost us more by nearly 38| millions. The balance of trade?
against us in 1b94 was over 134 millions. According to a
certain school of economists this balance is advantageous to
us, and should not be described as against us. It is a proof
of our wealth, no doubt, but only because none but a very
wealthy country could stand such a drain upon her re-
sources. To maintain that a balance of imports over
exports is an advantage is pure fanaticism. If a business,
firm acted upon such an idea its bankruptcy would only be
a question of time. It will only be a question of time with
us as a nation if the adverse balance goes on increasing,
although the time may be long.”
On the same point a writer in the Fortnightly Review
for June, 1896, says:—“The simple truth is that in a
business sense freetrade Britain does not pay her way. The
country is saved from bankruptcy by the interest on savings


largely accumulated in the days of protection, by the influx
of millions into British pockets from gold discoveries in the
colonies, and by outside earnings, such as those of the
British mercantile marine, which in the past has been the
world’s carrier, but which in the future will have to contend
with competitors who are yearly strenthening their position.
Nor should we forget that we are the creditor Power of the
world, and that every sovereign we lent twenty years ago
commands double or more than double, the amount of com-
modities it represented then.”
Commerce may be Purchased at too
High a Price.
The Freetraders occasionally endeavour to show that a
country which has an excess of imports over exports must
be in a safe and prosperous condition. This is one of those
shallow delusions which appear to take possession of the
minds of Cobdenite writers and speakers, causing them to
exhibit an utter ignorance of the history of civilised nations,
as well as the practical affairs of life. If this argument of
the foreign trader is true, then the fact that a country s
exports exceed its imports is an infallible indication that
such a community is on the road to ruin. Xet, as we have
shown, some of the most prosperous countries in the world
—such as the United States, the Argentine Kepublic, Brazil,
Chili, Austria, and most of the Australasian colonies—have
a great excess over imports. And if we examine the
history of Great Britain herself—that erstwhile shining
example of the success of Cobdenism —we find that from
1697 to 1793 the imports of that country only twice ex-
ceeded the exports, yet during the period she was so rich
and powerful that she triumphed in a series of gigantic
wars, extended her sway over India, Canada, and the West
Indies, and founded her dominion in Australia. Later on,
until after the Freetrade era, the exports still exceeded
the imports in Great Britain, when, thanks to her naviga-


tion laws and other protective enactments, she was so self-
reliant and self-contained a country —so powerful and so
prosperous—that she was enabled to withstand the long-
continued strain upon her finances occasioned by the
Napoleonic wars, while she at the same time lent to other
European countries over 65 million pounds between 1793 and
1815, to say nothing of the other tangible assistance which
she gave her allies against the French. It surely cannot be
contended that an excess of exports over imports was a
sign of weakness in Great Britain in those days of trial
and danger.
The illustrations which the Freetraders give from the
nations of antiquity are most unfortunate for their argu-
ment. It is true that Carthage prospered for a while by
means of large importations, but when she came into con-
tact with a nation which then practised industry, and
therefore did not depend upon trade alone, as she did,.
Carthage succumbed. The same fate befel her progenitor,
Phonecia, whose vast storehouses at Sidon and Tyre and
widespread trade did not aid her in the death struggle with
Alexander. Had Carthage been an active industrial
as well as a commercial state, she might have stood
the strain of a prolonged conflict, as Great Britain did
in her protective days. In the golden age of Rome, the
virtue, industry, and patriotism of the men who cultiva-
ted the soil were the strength and greatness of the Republic,
but when these hardy yeomanry were driven out of their
occupations, and the food supplies were obtained from
abroad, Rome began to decline, and ultimately fell. The
case of Venice also illustrates the folly of depending largely
upon commerce. Her trade did not save her from the effect
of the operations of the League of Cambray and the
discovery of a new route to India via the Cape of Good
Hope. Holland was also a commercial state, whose imports
exceeded exports, but she speedily sued for peace when her
trade was injured by the fleets of England under the
Commonwealth. Her trade was all that Holland had to
depend upon, and that being endangered, she was paralysed
for a considerable period. It is clear from these illustra-
tions that the fact that a nation’s imports exceed her ex-


ports is no safe criterion as to her stamina and power.
Thei-e is something of far greater importance than commerce.
When the crisis of conflict arrives it is the self-contained
nation which generally has the victory over the one which
has to depend chiefly upon imports for an existence. It
would be reassuring to many well-wishers of Britain to-day
if they could learn that she is as well equipped for a pro-
longed conflict under Freetrade as she was when, under
Protection, she overthrew Napoleon, after emerging from a
series of some of the greatest wars in history ; but when
we see our mercantile marine largely manned by Scandina-
vians, Dutchmen, Germans, Coolies and Lascars, and when
we see the peasantry of Great Britain driven out of their
calling by Freetrade, we begin to think that we may yet
pay too dear a price for our commercial supremacy.
Should a prolonged war be the outcome of the evident
intention of the Powers of Europe to isolate Great Britain
—a repetition of the League of Cambray—we may have
the money to start that w*ar with, but we certainly have not
left among us many of those sturdy British seamen and
stubborn British peasanty who carried the flag of their
country to victory on sea and land in the great wars of the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Freetrade more
than anything else is responsible for this paucity of de-
fenders, and it may yet, therefore, land Great Britain in a
sea of troubles before many years have passed over our
heads.
Freetrade and Protected England
Contrasted.
Notwithstanding the temporary success achieved by the
mother country under Freetrade, it is now becoming clear
to all careful enquirers that her Freetrade policy is a failure.
Germany, France, Belgium and Austria, and the United
States are making serious inroads upon the trade of Great
Britain, which in exports alone has fallen £3 per head of
her population in 24 years—a fact which shows clearly that


the tide is ebbing, and suggests the reason why Mr. Cham-
berlain is now so anxious for the establishment of an
Imperial Zollverein. Contrast the ominous condition of
affairs in England now with the following statement made
by Allison, the historian, when writing a review of the
period of English history between 1815 and 1845, when
a protective policy prevailed :
“Considered in one point of view there never was a nation
which, in an equal space of time, had made so extraordinary
a progress. Its population had advanced from 20,600,000
in 1819 to 28,000,000 in 1844; its imports had increased
from ,£30,000,000 in the former period to £70,000,000 in
the latter; its exports had advanced during the same period
from £44,000,000 to £130,000,000; its shipping from
2,650,000 tons to 3,900,000 tons. There never, perhaps,
was such a growth in these the great limbs of industry in so
short a period in any other state. Nor had agriculture been
behind the other staple branches of national industry.”
Mr. Montgredien, a Freetrade authority of some note,
said :—“ In 1845 the country (Great Britain) was flourish-
ing, trade was prosperous, and the revenue showed a surplus,
railways were being constructed with an enormous rapidity,
and the working classes were fully and remuneratively
employed.” In 1836 Mr. Cobden said :—“ At no period
were the peasantry of this country enjoying so great an
amount of comfort as they possess at this time.” Yet
this is the period when the Cobden Club romancers would
have us believe things were so bad in Great Britain that it
became absolutely necessary, to adopt free imports, a policy
which is now allowing other nations to wrest our trade from
us, which has driven thousands of British seamen out of
their natural vocation, which has almost destroyed the
peasantry who formerly fought the battles of Great Britain.
Superiority of the Home Market.
Adam Smith says in the 2nd book of “ The Wealth of
Nations” :—“The capital which is employed in purchasing
in one part of the country in order to sell in another the


Cable Address—Hoskins.
Telephone 1357
G. & C. HOSKINS,
ENGINE BUILDERS,
IRONFOUNDERS,
Cast Iron Steal Pipe makers
MINING & GENERAL ENGINEERS.
Sydney Works, Wattle St.
neiinni! wonts, Bing st„ rain Bant


GRAMMAR
Nature’s Cure for, and
Preventative of, . . .
Dyspepsia, Indigestion
and Constipation. , .
“A Special Wheat Meal."
“ I never knew a case of Indigestion or Dyspepsia, no matter
of how long standing and constant use of aperient medicines, that
did not soon yield to a strict diet of it. It is the model food for
children and youth, the food of growth, purity, beauty, intellect
—in one word, of Health.”—Dr. T. L. Nicholls, in the “ Herald
of Health,” page 64.
“ It contains every element composing the human system, and
in the exact proportion ; it is therefore a perfect food—the food
by which we value all other foods.”—A. J. Bellows, M.D.,
Professor of Chemistry, Physiology, and Hygiene.
“ It is the best fitted to supply the place of animal food, in
fact it is the only food that can be relied on to do so.”—
Dr. Sydney Gibbons, F.C.S., F.R.M.S., Melbourne.
Srantinna
Means Health.
HEALTH MEANS HAPPINESS—At least there can be
none without it.
ALL GROCERS. Wholesale—
James Inglis & Co., Sydney.


produce of the industry of that country generally replaces
by that operation two distinct capitals that had both been
employed in the agriculture or manufacture of that country,
and thereby enables them to continue that employment.
When both are the produce of domestic industry it neces-
sarily replaces by every such operation two distinct capitals
which had both been employed in supporting productive
labour, and thereby enables them to continue their support.
The capital employed in purchasing foreign goods for home
consumption, when the purchase is made with the produce of
domestic industry, replaces, too, by every such operation two
distinct capitals, but one of them only is employed in sup-
porting domestic industry The capital which sends British
goods to Portugal and brings back Portuguese goods to
Great Britain replaces by every such operation only one
British capital. The other is a Portuguese one. Though
the returns, therefore, of the foreign trade of consumption
should be as great as those of the home trade, the capital
employed in it will give but half the encouragement to the
industry or productive labour of the country.”
Adam Smith has further remarked:—“lt niust some-
times be a matter of deliberation how far it is proper to
■continue the importation of foreign goods when some foreign
nations restrain by high duties the importation of some of
our manufactures in their countries.”
The same great freetrade authority also wrote the follow-
ing ;—“Whatever tends to diminish in any country the num-
ber of artifices and manufactures tends to diminish the home
market—the most important of all markets for the rude
produce of the land.”
Alexander Hamilton, Secretary of State under President
Washington, said :—“ To secure an extensive market there
is no other expedient than to promote manufacturing
establishments. Manufacturers, who constitute the most
numerous class after the cultivators of the land, are for that
reason the principal consumers of the surplus of their labour.
The idea of an extensive domestic market for the surplus
products of the soil is the first consequence. It is, of all
things, that which most effectually conduces to a flourishing
state of agriculture.”


Slightly altering the words of an American exponent of
Protection, let us say : —“But we are told by the Freetrade
orator that our producers ought to work for the markets of
the world. To hear them talk, one would imagine that the
markets of the world were a vast vacuum, waiting for
Australian goods. Will your goods go to Germany, Austria,
Russia, or France? Have not all these countries Pro-
tection? What market would you give up for this mirage t
Why, the very best market in the world—that market
where the people have the most money to spend. Why,
here in Australia. The history of this delusion was told
2,400 years ago by -Esop the fablist. Once there was a dog
who was walking across a plank that lay over a stream.
The dog had a nice bit of meat in his mouth, but as he
walked over the plank, he saw the markets of the world
and dived for them. A moment after, he was scrambling
up the plank, the sickest, the wettest, the most disgusted
and the most meatless dog that ever swam ashore.”
Let us explain the benefit of the home market
by another illustration which amplifies the plough
argument. Supposing farming implements to the value of
£lO,OOO are made in Sydney, and these are sold in Riverina
for £lO,OOO worth of wheat. This would be a spendable-
income of £lO,OOO for each of these places, or a total of
£2©,000. Now, supposing that instead of bringing the
farming implements from Sydney, the people of Riverina
bought them in England, and sent there £lO,OOO worth of
wheat. England would thus gain what had lost,
but there would only be £lO,OOO of spendable income in
New South Wales, instead of £20,000. But there are the
other disadvantages of the Riverina people having to pay
for the transportation of this wheat to England, as well as
to receive a lower price per bushel there than they would
have got in Sydney. Apply this rule to all transactions,
and it will be seen how much bftter it is to buy and sell in
the home market than in a foreign market, where possible.
How much greater, then, must be the national wealth under
Protection than under Freetrade ?
As Abraham Lincoln, the great President of the United
States said : —“ When an American paid twenty dollars for


steel rails to an English- manufacturer, America had the
steel and England had the twenty dollars. But when he
paid twenty dollars for the steel to an American manu-
facturer, America had both the steel and the twenty
dollars.”
“ Buying in the cheapest markets and selling in the
dearest” is a fascinating doctrine with freetraders ; but, if
we buy cheap we must sell cheap eventually, because we
have to compete with nations where lower wages or more
favourable conditions prevail, and we must go down to the
cheap prices or we cannot sell at all. It is, therefore, a
wiser plan to preserve our home market for ourselves, for
then good prices prevail and we have not to pay for trans-
portation to distant countries. It is only with our surplus
products that we should be compelled to sell in cheap
markets.
Opinions of Eminent Men.
The German Parliament, led by Bismark, passed a
revised tariff on July 7, 1879. This tariff provided for a
fair amount of Protection. Two years later, Bismarck said,
“ In the development of the tariff I am determined to oppose
any modification in the direction of Freetrade, and to use
my influence in favour of greater Protection and higher
frontier duties.” On May 14, 18d2, he said,' “ The success
of the United States in national development is the most
illustrious of modern times.” After showing that they had
fought the most gigantic and expensive war in history, and
settled millions of people upon the soil, by the aid of Pro-
tection, Bismark said, “Because it is my deliberate judgment
that the prosperity of the United States is maiidy due to
the system of protective laws, I urge that Germany has now
reached that point when it is necessary to imitate the tariff
system of the United States.” Three years after that
declaration (December 1, 1884) Bismarck told the Parlia-
ment that his protective policy had “ freed the country from
its poverty of blood,” and that the prosperity of trade and
industry was on the increase.


Karl Marx in his work on capital, written in 1873,
speaks of the fearful increase in death from starvation in
Great Britain during the past ten years. The reports of the
Registrar-General corroborate the assertion. Marx also
points out that in the hardware manufactures of Birmingham
and the neighbourhood there were employed, mostly in very
heavy work, 30,000 children and young persons, besides
10,000 women. He dilates also upon the hard and dangerous
calling of the thousands of rag-sorters, and the like expe-
rience of the female tile-makers, who worked from 5 in the
morning till 8 in the evening, and often from 4 a.m. till 9
p.m. He shows further that the rate of consumption among
the female lace-makers had risen from 1 in 48 in 1852 to 1
in 8 in 1860, and says, “This progress in the rate of con-
sumption ought to satisfy the most optimistic of progressists,
and the biggest hawkers of lies among the freetrade bag-
men of Germany.”
The eminent economist and jurist, Sir John Barnard
Byles, remarks : —“ A nation, whether it consumes its own
products or with them purchases from abroad, can have
no more value than it produces. The supreme policy of
every nation, therefore, is to develope the producing forces
of its own country. What are they 1 The working man,
the land, the mines, the machinery, the water powers, etc.”
Mr. Chauncey M. Depew, the well-known American
orator, in a speech at Buffalo, in November, 1895, thus
describes a triumph for the protective United States:—
“ The whole of the tonnage on the ocean of the world last
year was about 140,000,000 tons. There are 400,000 miles
of railways in the world, of which 180,000 are in
the United States. Of the 1,400,000 tons carried 100 miles
lastyearontherailwaysof the world, 800,000,000 were carried
on the railways of the United States. You take the
600.000. tons carried 100 miles from the railways of the
world, outside cf the United States, and then you add to it
140.000. tons carried on the ocean in the commerce of
the world, upon the sea, and we will still have in the
800.000. tons carried on the railways of the United
States 60,000,000 more than all the railways of the world
outside of the United States and in all the ocean commerce
of the world put together.”


Mulhall, in his Fifty Years of National Progress, thus
speaks of the English farmers under Freetrade : —“ The
combined value of grain and wheat produced yearly is now
(1887) less than it was 40 years ago, but rent and taxes
have increased 36 per cent., thus causing the margin in
favour of the farmers to diminish to an alarming degree.
The farmer’s margin is now only half what it was in the
earlier years of the present reign, being reduced to eleven
shillings per acre, as against twenty-five shillings in
1837-40.”
As Lord Bacon truly observed, “ Home trade is the
foundation of foreign trade.”
John Stuart Mill, one of the champions of the Freetrade
cause, when referring to the establishment of new manufac-
tures, said:—“A Protective duty continued for a reasonable
time, will sometimes be the least inconvenient mode in
which a country can tax itself for the safeguard of such an
experiment.” And again, John Stuart Mill remarked in
his Principles of Political Economy, page 525 : —“ Protec-
tive duties may be defensible when they are imposed
temporarily (especially in a young and rising nation) in the
hope of naturalising a foreign industry, in itself perfectly
suitable to the circumstances of the country.” hen asked
by Mr. G. W. Smalley, of the New York Tribune, if
he still adhered to that statement. Mr. Mill replied,
“ Certainly, 1 have never affirmed anything to the contrary.
I do not presume to say that the United States may not
find Protection expedient in their present state of develop-
ment. I do not even say that if I were an American I
should not be a Protectionist.”
Blanqui, the famous French Freetrader, makes the
following admission :—“ Experience has taught us that a
people ought never to deliver over to the chances of foreign
trade the fate of its manufactures.”
Thomas Carlyle declared a few years ago that “ British
industrial existence seems fast becoming one huge poison
swamp of reeking pestilence—physical and moral—a hideous
living Golgotha of souls and bodies buried alive. Thirty
thousand outcast needlewomen working themselves swiftly
to death; three million paupers rolling in forced idleness;


and these are but items in the sad ledger of despair,”
What a picture for Australian workmen to contemplate.
What a feast the Freetrade advocates invite them to !
Matthew Arnold, a very keen observer, writes of the
United States in the Nineteenth Century for April, 1888 :
“For this immense class (the great bulk of the people)
things in America are favourable. Society is organised for
their benefit. Luxuries, we have said, are very dear, above
all, European luxuries, but the working man’s clothing ia
nearly as cheap as in England, and plain living is, on the
whole, cheaper. Even luxuries of a certain kind are within
the working man’s easy reach.” That should be borne in
mind with the fact that wages are fully 40 per cent, higher
in the United States than they are in Great Britain.
S. T. Coleridge, the great thinker and poet of England,
wrote : —“ You talk about making this article cheaper by
reducing its price in the market from Bd. to 6d. But
suppose in so doing you have rendered your country weaker
against a foreign foe; suppose you have demoralised
thousands of your fellow-countrymen, and have sown dis-
content between one class of society and another, your
article is tolerably dear, I take it after all. Is not its real
price enhanced to every Christian and patriot a hundred
fold ? ”
Sir Henry Parkes, in 1860—when he was in the prime
of his intellect, said : —“ If we did not adopt protective
duties we could not establish manufactures. We would
continue in our present backward state for unknown ages
we would continue to go on raising raw material for older
countries. And as to our population, it would be ex-
ceedingly difficult to employ the rising generation.”
Cardinal Manning in the Nineteenth Century for
December, 1890, wrote as follows of Freetrade Great Britain :
“ Freetrade has created two things—the irresponsible
wealth which stagnates and the starvation wages of the
labour market. The cheapest market is the market of the
Lacklands—the pennyless and helpless. In four Western
Counties, wages are so low that men come to London by
thousands every year, and being here, crowd the dock gates
and underbid the permanent workmen, who have already


John Kirkpatrick,
JMitcol,
IDS Pitt Street, Spinep


ESTABLISHED 1881. TELEPHONE NO. 1744.
B. W.
The Largest Cask Factory
IN THE SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE,
181 to 199 Abattoirs Road, Pyrmont.
HENRY DOSE,
STEAM MACHINE COOPER AND VAT MAKER.
Wine Casks and Vats made to order on shortest notice.
SPIRITS, BEEF, AND BUTTER WORKS.
Ships’ Buckets, Tallow Casks, &c., always on hand.


had reason not to be content with their hire. We have
these two worlds always and openly face to face—the world
of wealth and the world of want; the world of wealth say-
ing in its heart, “I sit as queen over all toilers and traders,”
and the world of want, not knowing what may be on the
morrow. Every city and town has its unemployed.
Millions are in poverty. Agriculture languishes, land is
going out of cultivation, trades are going down, mills and
furnaces are working half time, strikes run through every
industry.”
The Hon. T. B. Reed, of the United States Congress :
‘ To-day half of England’s capital is invested, not in Eng-
land, but in lands which have resisted England and shunned
her recent example,” Speaking of the effects of Cleveland
semi-freetrade tariff, Mr. Reed also said: “We have had
three years of delicious cheapness, but labour has also become
cheap Nor is this all. There are fewer sales
and less purchases. That means less work : less work means
more idle men ; idle men cannot create wealth, they only
consume it.” Times like these are great educators. How
very fine used to be the sneer about lifting one’s self by the
boot-straps. How clear used to be the demonstration that
taxes could create nothing. Like the Spanish Grandee in
the cemetery, we were well; we took medicine and here
we are.
Freetrade England and Protectionist
France Compared.
Sir Edward Sullivan, the famous author of “ Freetrade
“Bubbles,” in an article in the London Post, writes as
follows : —“ Under freetrade the masses get poorer because
they get less employment.”
A well-known statistical writer gives a comparison of
the national progress of France under Protection, and Eng-
land under freetrade. The figures ought to startle us from
our freetrade dream. The comparison is based upon the
returns of legacy duty.
In 1826 England under Protection was 10s. a head,
richer than France.


In 1850, when freetrade had only been in operation a
few years, England was 19s. a head richer than France.
In 1877, when England had tried freetrade for 33 years,
England was ss. a head poorer than France.
France has 57 per cent, of her land under tillage, and it
is increasing every day.
The United Kingdom has 30 per cent, of land under
tillage, and it is diminishing every year, but the population
of England increases more rapidly than that of France.
The commerce of England has increased 21 per cent, in
ten years.
The commerce of France has increased 39 per cent, in
ten years.
The commerce of the United States has increased 68 per
cent, in ten years.
The commerce of the world has increased 26 per cent, in
ten years.
So much for the blasting effects of freetrade.
BO RTH WICK’S^-*-
Gold Medal Varnishes
ARE USED BY ALL THE
LEADING DECORATORS
IN SYDNEY
Samples Freely Submitted.
OFFICE AND WORKS—
Botany Road, Alexandria.


Twenty-eight months since democratic success
Dols.
in 1892, deficiency
115,000,000
Twenty-eight months prior to democratic suc-
cess in 1892, surplus
62,000,000
First two years of Cleveland’s administration,
deficiency...
107,000,000
Last two years of Harrison’s administration,
surplus
13,000,000
First two years of Harrison’s administration,
surplus
201,000,000
Cleveland’s average annual deficiency
53,000,000
Harrison’s average annual surplus ...
53,000,000
Average annual addition to the public debt
by Cleveland
'81,000,000
Average annual reduction of the public debt
by Harrison
58,000,000
The Cost of a Change of Policy.
This is how the Cleveland Leader , a prominent news-
paper in Ohio, sums up the losses to the people of the
United States, which took place through their folly in
electing a Semi-Freetrade Administration :
The full cost of the change from Protection to semi-
freetrade will never be known. Every household has felt it.
Every line of business and industry has staggered under the
blow.
For the convenience of all who desire to inform them-
selves upon the financial operations of the Government, the
results are hereby presented in tabular form ;
Average monthly receipts under democratic
tariff law... ... ... ... ... 22,000,000
Average monthly receipts under M'Kinley
tariff law... ... ... ... ... 29,000,000
The correctness of these figures may be depended upon.
They are the conclusions of a careful analysis of the financial
record of two administrations by Major Clark, the old
and reliable correspondent of the New York Tribune in
Washington, a man who is thoroughly familiar with the
workings of the Treasury, and all the other departments of
the Government.


Mr. Blaine’s Illustration of the Efficacy
of Protection.
The late James G. Blaine, one of the ablest men who
ever took part in public life in the United States, said in his
great controversy with Gladstone in the North American
Review , on the question of Freetrade v. Protection . —“ In
1860 the population of the United States was in round
numbers 31,000,000, at the same time the population of the
United Kingdom was in round numbers 29,000,000. The
wealth of the United States at that time was fourteen
thousand million dollars, the wealth of the United Kingdom
was twenty-nine thousand million dollars. The United
Kingdom had, therefore, nearly the same population, but
more than double the wealth of the United States, with
machinery for manufacturing four-fold greater than that of
the United States. At the end of 20 years (1880) it ap-
peared that the United States had added thirty thousand
million dollars to her wealth, while the United Kingdom
had added nearly fifteen thousand million dollars, or about
one-half. During this 20 years the United States had
incurred the enormous loss of nine thousand millions of
dollars by internal war, while the United Kingdom was at
peace, enjoyed exceptional prosperity 5 and made a far greater
gain than in any twenty years of her history, a gain which,
during four years, was largely due to the calamity that had
befallen the United States.
The Creation of Wars and Distress.
Henry Clay, the American apostle of Protection, ob-
served —“ Foreign commerce is the great source of foreign
wars. The eagerness with which we contend for every
branch of it, the temptation which it offers, operating alike
upon us and our foreign competitors, produce constant colli-
sions.” Is that statement not a truth 1 ? Was not Carthage,
a commercial state, generally at war 1 In medieval times


•was not Venice a belligerent power 1 ? What caused the
recent wars of England with Egypt, China, and Burmah,
and with many other nations, but trade and commerce.
Freetrade a Captivating Delusion.
Freetrade is a captivating but misleading doctrine, which
its advocates do not closely examine. How is it possible to
work universal Freetrade, or even an approach to it, when
there is such a marked difference between the climates, the
conditions of life, and the circumstances of nations ? Foi
illustration, how can the workmen of Australia compete
with the workmen of India, who can live upon 2d. per day,
or even with the workmen of Great Britain and European
countries, where industries have been long established, and
where a much lower rate of wages prevails than is the case
in Australia 1 It is the same with our farmers, who would
have to compete under Freetrade with wheat grown in India
and maize grown in New Caledonia and Fiji in each case
by the aid of coloured labour. Yet if we are to perpetually
adopt Freetrade, we must be prepared to compete with these
cheaper workmen and cheaper productions by inferior races.
The only safeguard against such an unfair competition is the
imposition of a tariff in the interest of Australian farmers,
workmen, and manufacturers.
The Unemployed in America.
Freetraders are very prone to point to the unemployed
and tramps of the United States as a proof of the failure of
Protection in that country. The number of these unfor-
tunate people has been grossly over-stated by the Free-
traders for party purposes. In a country which has to
absorb fully 500,000 poor immigrants every year, there must


of necessity be a number of unemployed and tramps, but
that number is by no means as large as the army of destitute
people in Great Britain. Tramps are the natural product
of a new country, with an extensive area, as witness the
“ sundowners” of Australia, owing to the distance which
men have to travel to obtain employment. According to
Andrew Carnegie, a Scotchman, and the author of
Triumphant Democracy , there are six paupers in Great
Britain to one in the United States. As a matter of fact,
the workmen of the United States are now in a pros-
perous condition, while the distress among the people of
Great Britain has become chronic, and is rather increasing
than diminishing.
A Comparison of the Colonies.
Those who imagine that Victoria is still labouring under
a depression, should read the following remarks published in
the Melbourne Age of September 28, 1895 : —The Assistant
Government Statist (Mr. J. J. Fenton) has issued the pre-
liminary return of Australasian statistics for 1894, and
they are published in last night’s Government Gazette. The
facts disclosed by the figures are greatly in favour of
Victoria. In natural production, notwithstanding our
small erea, we are a long way ahead. The area of Victoria,
for instance, is only 87,884 square miles, while New South
Wales is 309,173 miles; yet the land under cultivation in
the former colony amounts t 0.2,980,299 acres, and in New
South Wales 1,669,999. We have more than twice the
area under wheat, about nine times the acreage of oats,
nearly twice the acreage of potatoes and twice the acreage
of hay. Our yield of oats is more than five times greater
than any other colony, and we produce more potatoes than
all the purely Australian colonies put together. New South
Wales and Queensland beat us in horses, cattle and sheep,,
an advantage which is due solely to the immense area of
those colonies, and not the enterprise of the people. The
public revenue of Victoria is less, the debt is less, the taxa-
tion is less and the expenditure is less per head than in any'


Bakewell Bros.,
Erskineville,
MANUFACTURERS OF
White and Brown Glazed Wall Tiles, Skirt-
ings, Dado, and Strips.
Red, Black and Buff Flooring Tiles.
White, Brown and Colored Enamelled
Bricks.
Sanitary Ware of all kinds
Fire Clay & Vitrified enamelled stoneware
goods.
Architectural Terra Cotta
Sewer Pipes and Fittings of all kinds
Double Pressed Plain and Moulded Bricks
Fire, Face, and Common Bricks always in Stock.
TELEPHONE 19 N.
Near Sydney.


Wholesale Grocers and
Wine and Spirit Merchants,
5 Macquarie Place, Sydney.
Sole Agents for
WALLACE’S ARGYLE WHISKY,
LE ROY BRANDY,
ROYAL CLUB NECTAR,
ALPINE VINTAGE COLONIAL WINES,
IKA BREYA CIGARS,
ELKA CIGARS,
AMANDA CIGARS.
All Brands of WINES, SPIRITS and BEERS
kept, both in Bond and Duty Paid.
The many years we have now been in business, and our large experience
of all markets, enable us to supply goods of first-class
quality at very reasonable rates.
SAMPLES and QUOTATIONS forwarded to any part of the Colonjr
on application.


other colony ; and from the point of view of the taxpayer,
Victoria is the most favoured of the group. The figures,
which are then given in detail in tabular form, bear out
every word of the foregoing.
Has Protection Benefited the United
States.
The press partizans of the Freetrade cause are continually
endeavouring to misrepresent the effects of Protection in
the United States, and to make their readers believe that
the American people are weary of the system. But what
are the historical facts of the case 1 Mr. J. G. Blaine, one
of the ablest men of his time in the United States, who was
Secretary of State, and was once a candidate for the presi-
dency, had a most interesting controversy upon the subject
of Freetrade v. Protection, with the Right Hon. W. E.
Gladstone, in the columns of the North American Review in
the year 1890. In that controversy, Mr. Blaine showed
clearly and unmistakeably that every time the United
States made an attempt to revert to Freetrade, the people of
that country suffered distress and disaster. Here are
several illustrations of this ; On the eve of the war of 1812,
Congress guarded the national strength by a highly pro-
tective tariff. After the war had concluded- an attempt
was made to reduce these duties, and the business of the
entire country was very soon prostrated. Colonel Benton,
a prominent American at the time, said of that period of
destitution, “No price for property, no sales except those
of the sheriff and the marshal, no employment for industry,
no demand for labour, no sale for the products of the farmer,
no sound of the hammer except that of the auctioneer
knocking down property. Distress was the universal cry of
the people, relief the universal demand.” Relief came at
last with the enactment of the protective tariff of 1824.
That act, supplemented by the Act of 1828, brought
genuine prosperity to the country. Sectional jealousy and
partizan zeal could not endure the great development of


manufactures in the north, and the southern states, led by
J. C. Calhoun, demanded Freetrade, and threatened to take
South Carolina out of the Union. To avert this danger.
President Andrew Jackson accepted the compromise tariff
drawn up by Henry Clay. For a time it worked all right,
but before the fourth year of the compromise tariff had
ended a paralysis of trade set in, and the great panic of
1837 ensued, business being rapidly devastated. There was
no tangible relief till the protective tariff of 1842 was
enacted, and then the beneficial experience of 1824 was
repeated. The Democratic Party, however, came into
power soon afterwards, and led by President Polk and
Treasurer Walker, both strong Southerners. A partially
Freetrade tariff was again adopted. A more favourable
opportunity for working a Freetrade tariff could not have
been selected, for the famine in Ireland and the gold
discoveries, California had caused a great demand for all
American products. Notwithstanding all this, another
paralysis of business and another panic set in, and practically
continued till the institution of the ninth protective tariff
of 1861-2. Speaking of this distressful period, President
Buchanan (who had been one of Polk’s cabinet which
brought in freetrade) said:—“With unsurpassed plenty in
all the elements of national wealth, our manufactories have
suspended, our public works are retarded, our private
enterprises of different kinds are abandoned, and thousands
of useful labourers are thrown out of employment.” Since
Mr. Blaine’s death, there has been another illustration of
the truth of his contention, namely, that of 1894, when
the attempt to modify the protective tariff and the talk
about Freetrade once more paralysed industry, and drove
the American people to the polls in November last to return
the Protectionists to power. The twin sisters of evil in the
United States were slavery and Freetrade. They caused
more trouble and injury to that great country than all
others. It is worthy of note that the descendants of the
old slaveowners—the “ Solid South,” and the advocates of
cheap labour —are still the backbone of the Freetrade party
in the United States.


How Protection Enriches the People.
In further corroboration of the statements contained in
the foregoing paragraphs, let any unbiassed person read the
following facts (carefully ignored by the Freetrade press of
:Sydney) taken from the latest American records, and then
say whether it would not be wiser for us to follow the policy
which has brought about such marvellous results than to
cling to Freetrade—a policy which has impoverished every
nation that tried it:—
In less than a hundred years the United States, a com-
munity of farmers and wood-cutters, has become the
greatest, the wealthiest, and the most powerful nation in
the world. The strong arms of its men and women, aided
by horse-power, steam-power, electricity, hydraulics, and
every mechanical agency which human ingenuity can con-
trive, have so enriched and developed the natural capabili-
ties of the country that each average individual produces
more, receives more, and enjoys more, than he can in any
community under the sun. The United States possesses a
population estimated at 68,000,000, but its working power,
that is the sum of all the powers just mentioned added
together, is almost equal to that of Great Britain, France
and Germany combined. The total of working power is, in
the United States, equal to 129,306 millions of foot tons
•daily. That of Great Britain is less than half, being
56,110 millions, that of Germany is 45,550 mililons, and
that of France 34,580 millions. So that the three leading
European States, with their total population of about 140,000
millions, have but a daily working power of 136,270 millions
of foot tons as compared with 129,306 foot tons of half
their number in the Great American Republic.
What This Power Produces.
None of the power is wasted, but all econnmically used,
so economically indeed that the story of its achievements
reads like, and is, a fairy tale of science. It is the history
•of the magic of indurstry, of the miracles of enterprise, of
the work of the genii that turns everything into gold.
Above all it is the history of what wise and provident legis-
lation can do to prevent industry from being spent in vain,


to save enterprise being baffled, and to enable the genius of
the people to labour in peace. In one word it is the history
of PROTECTION, which allows no foreign interference
with the rights of labour and the free employment of
capital, but lets them work out their destiny unchecked by
the aggression of subjugated or inferior races. Under a
Protective policy, which assures the vast markets of the
great continent to its own people rather than to strangers,
the skill and strength of every worker is utilised to the
fullest extent. He is not the slave of the machinery he-
uses ; on the contrary, its costliest appliances are placed at
his service in the certainty that no pauper labour can be
brought into unfair competition with him or it.
Wonderful Agricultural Statistics.
In the United States there are 4,565,000 farmers, and.
with their hands the vdio’e number of persons engaged in
agriculture is 9,070,000. The 4,565,000 farmers own farms,
cattle and implements of the aggregate value of
15,092,000,000d01., giving to each an average possession of
3,505d01., whilst most of them began on a capital of a couple
of hundred dollar s.
Extraordinary Increase in Wages.
In 20 years, since 1870, the wages paid to the American
operatives have risen in total amount from 620,000,000d01.
to 2,283,000,000d01. And, as in 1870, there were 2,064,000’
operatives, while in 1890 there were 4,713,000, the division
gave an average of 302d01. per operative in the tirst-named
year and of 485d01. in the last. That is to say that the
average earnings in the United States of every operative
male or female, youth or old man was in 1890 a fraction
over £lOO. Can the world show the like? It is not
wonderful that such progress is considered by Mr. Mulhall,
assuredly one of the greatest living authorities, to justify
him in the assertion, which he supports by convincing
tables, that the wealth accumulated by the United States in
the single generation between 1860 and I fe9o was no less
than forty-nine milliards of dollars, or about two hundred
and five thousand millions sterling, which he reckons at
eight thousand millions sterling more than the total wealth
of Great Britain,


A Few Triumphs of Freetrade in New
South Wales.
There was a period in New South Wales when those
who spoke in favour of Protection were referred to the
wonderful success of Hudson Brothers’ gigantic establish-
ment, near Sydney, as an instance of the success of an
industry without the aid of Protection. This was the time
when a number of large and favored Government contracts
kept that establishment and its 1,500 men in full swing.
But that happy time did not last, and now Hudson Brothers
and their industry have a hard struggle to keep going
with about 300 hands, even with the aid of Government
contracts. Their share list a little while ago was referred
to in this manner by the Sydney Morning Herald , a Free-
trade journal: —“Capital paid up £150,000, amount of
shares 10s., amount paid up 10s., last div. nil , last sale nil ,
buyer nil , seller nil.” As a matter of fact it is some years
Sydney Smelting* Works, White Metals and Phosphor
Bronze Foundry,
Botany Road, Alexandria.
O. ICKE CO.
Smelters & Refiners & Metal Merchants,
Have in Stock
STAR ANTIMONY, PIG LEAD,
INGOT ZINC, TYPE, and
PATENT ANTIFRICTION METAL,
SOLDER, and LEAD WASHERS
Prices quoted on Application.


since Hudson Brothers, Limited, paid a dividend, and for a
long time the shares were quoted at 2d. Of late there has
been a reduction of wages at Hudson’s, and the men have
been on strike, but peace reigns again—while the Govern-
ment contracts are being carried out. No one even whispers
now about Hudson’s being a wonderful triumph of Free-
trade.
The Sydney Soap and Candle Works were once a very
flourishing industry, and the works at Waratah, near
Newcastle, employed over 300 persons. Freetrade has,
however, done the Company so much harm that they have
had to reduce wages, and even with that unpalatable resort
they suffer a severe competition from Belgian and Dutch
candles. At a dinner recently given by the Company, Mr.
Gillies, the chairman, said : —For a great many years there
had been Id. per lb. duty on candles under Freetrade tariffs,
and it was under such tariffs that that industry had been
established. Having entered into a large investment with
THE ORIGINAL LINEN GLOSS AND ONLY GENUINE
See that the two niggers are on the label, without which it is a fraud.
rIuINEN GtiGS'SC* m
FOR IMPARTING A BE AUTIFUL Mm
FINISH TO STARCHED LINEN
Directions for Use.— Take a teaspoonful of the
Linen Gloss and dissolve in a little hot water, then
mix thoroughly with a Pint of Cold Starch pre-
viously prepared. Any degree of stiffness can be
obtained by using a little more of the Gloss in
AND LABEL REGISTERED.
E> FROM THE ORIGINAL RECIPE BY
JBUTTERFIELDOitmist
Redfern. Sydney • ttec
Ask for and take no other bnt Madame De Nouvelles’ Parisian Linen Gloss
Unequalled for giving a Beautiful Finish to Starched Linen, and making Ironing Easy
rJ,M 1 and Pleasant. 3d. and Is.
There arc cheap and worthier imitations being offered for sale. Beware of and avoid the
tradesman who, for the sake of a little extra benefit, will push on you an
inferior article. Madame De Nouvelles’ is always the best.


all the most modern machinery, he felt that it was more
chan a cruel wrong—he would not use the term he would
like to express—to attempt to interfere with and in a great
measure destroy the industry by the removal of the small
duty which many years ago had been created by a Freetrade
Government. No less a sum than £73,000 had been ex-
pended on works and plant, and when the first portion of
the duty was removed—that portion which had been added
by another Government —he had been compelled for the first
time in his life to reduce the wages of the employees.”
Let us turn now to Mort’s Dock and Engineering Works,
Balmain, near Sydney, also once referred to by jubilant
Freetraders. Occasionally, owing to storms at sea, which
damage a few vessels and necessitate repairs at the dock,
there is a temporary rush of work at the repairing shop of
that establishment, but Captain Broomfield, one of the
directors, recently publicly stated that Mort’s Dock Com-
pany would never be in a position to manufacture locomo-
tives under a Freetrade policy. The company was, said
Captain Broomfield, actually living on the misfortunes of
others. He positively and emphatically denied the recovery
in commercial circles in Sydney. Again, the Captain said,
New South Wales, instead of placing her orders with her
own people, sent the work out of the colony, and as a con-
sequence the company would presently have to discharge
between 600 and 700 workmen, a circumstance that could
not exist if the Colonial Government got its work locally
done, and, concluded Captain Broomfield emphatically, “ I
have entirely lost faith in the Freetrade policy to restore
prosperity to the country.” Mr. Morb, the chairman of
Mort’s Dock Company, went even further than Captain
Broomfield in condemning Freetrade. Mr. Milne, then
Mayor of Balmain, who is a brass moulder ana engineer,
at the same gathering said while the Dibbs semi-Protective
tariff was on he was able to beat the importer, but under
Freetrade the importer beat him. The consequence was
that his workmen were now compelled to dig sand in the
Centennial Park, or work in some other avenue for their
living.
Amongst the struggling industries which go under
through freetrade is that of the hat manufacturing. The


factory had scarcely got upon its feet, so to speak, before it
was swept into liquidation, depriving, at least for the time
being, a number of men and women of employment, not only
in the hat manufacturing trade, but in another branch of
industry—paper box making. Another establishment in
the neighbourhood, employing some dozen hands in the
manufacture of vinegar and other oilmen’s stores, has closed,
and its employees now swell the number of the unemployed
To this list of fiscal slaughters must be added another, that
•of a large biscuit factory, the property belonging to which
has recently passed under the auctioneer’s hammer at a
price which must be regarded as anything but satisfactory.
Mr. J. H. Goodlet, of Goodlet and Smith, has hitherto
been a firm advocate of freetrade, probably because, like
many others, he did not understand what freetrade was
until Mr. Reid introduced it. At Granville, Mr. Goodlet
declared that “his eyes have been opened.” Freetrade is
not going to build up prosperity, but “ under freetrade
trade wages must come down. While goods come in free
they cannot be manufactured here.” In speaking thus he is
spokesman (says the Australian Star ) for a mighty army of
disenchanted freetraders, who have been forced to recast
their fiscal views by the crude economic barbarism of the
Reid programme. Mr. Goodlet speaks from experience, as
since freetrade came into vogue he has lost considerable
trade.
The Pottery Works at Lithgow, the Maizena Factory at
Dungog, some of our own foundries and engineering shops,
and other industries, have either closed, reduced wages, or
been otherwise injured by freetrade, The great sugar mills
and plantations in the Clarence and Richmond River dis-
tricts, which directly or indirectly support 25,000 persons,
have been absolutely imperilled by the foreign trade
policy. Indeed it has become a question with the Colonial
Sugar Company as to whether they will not shift their mills
to Fiji, and if they do a splendid industry will be utterly
destroyed in N. S. Wales by freetrade.
In the country districts matters are quite as bad. Since
the introduction of freetrade and land and income taxes,
there has been a reduction of wages or discharging of hands


upon most of the farms and sheep and cattle stations. The
price paid for shearing until recently was 20s. per hundred
sheep. In many cases it is now 18s., 175., and even as low
as 16s. per hundred. The surplus labour caused by
the discharging of hands, and the desire to retrench upon
the part of employers (owing to the new land and income
taxes), have been among the causes which brought about
this unfortunate state of things.
In addition to all this we have had in our midst an army
of “ workless workers,” still estimated at 5,000, though a
large number have already been provided for at forest
thinning, scrub-clearing, and sand-shifting, and other relief
works started. The reports from the Labour Bureau upon
this point do not by any means give the full number of un-
employed, for thousands of men who are out of work do not
register at that institution.
As to the state of distress, that may be gathered from a
report by the Sydney Benevolent Society, which states that
since that organisation came into existence, more than
seventy years ago, the year 1896 was the worst ever expe-
rienced in the matter for applications for relief. Similar
reports could be made by other charity organisations in
Sydney, as well as in the country districts.
The foregoing are but a few of the many disastrous
results of freetrade in New South Wales, but they are enough
to make men and women seriously consider whether we are
any wiser in our fiscal ideas than the fanatical Hindoo
is in his religious views, when he throws himself in front
of the Juggernaut car. Freetrade is utterly destructive of
the best interests of the country, and yet there are legislators
who appear to hail its ravages with a frenzied delight. Such
men should be ostracised for ever from the councils of the
country, for they are dangerous foes to the people of New
South Wales.
The Drain of Gold to the United States.
From the Ist of January to the 30th of June, 1896, we
imported from the United States into New South Wales,
articles amounting in value to £784,339, and during the


same period we exported to the United States articles,
amounting in value to only £117,130, the difference being
£667,299. It is thus clear that, as we did not borrow the-
goods (principally wheat) we paid for them in cash. Since
then there has been a proportionate quantity of goods im-
ported from and exported to the United States by Bew
South Wales, and though the total quantity of coin ex-
ported to the United States has not yet been published, it
is no flight of the imagination to say that fully £1,500,000
of gold has been exported from New South Wales to that
country to pay for wheat, flour, etc., obtained from there.
From the Ist of January to the 30th of September, 1896,
the amount was £901,122. Here, then, it is clear, that that
history is repeating itself. We are simply draining the-
country of its solid cash to pay for goods which, according
to the free traders, are always paid for in goods. In 1781,
the imports of the Dnitcd States, according to Channing’s
History, amounted in round numbers to £3,700,000 sterling.
The exports during the same year were estimated by the
same authority at £750,000. The balance of £3,000,000
was paid for in specie, and the country was drained of its
gold and silver to such an extent that a cry arose through-
out the land for inconvertible paper money. Up to the
end of the last century, also for a considerable period in the
nineteenth century, India, China, and other Asiatic countries
exported a good deal more to Europe than they imported
from that quarter. According to Baron Humboldt this
balance was paid for in gold and silver, and the practice
embarassed the commercial nations of Europe. Out of the
annual production of gold and silver by the American
miners, estimated at 43,500,000 dollars worth annually last
century, Humboldt states that no less than 23,000,000
dollars worth went to Asia to pay for goods imported from
there. Mr. Hugh J. Reid, an excellent authority, in
McCulloch’s Dictionary, states that from 1850 the drain of
bullion for the east set in with renewed force, and for seven
years the average was £10,000,000. The same writer states
that taking India and China together the imports from
them into Great Britain was greatly exceeded by their
exports, “leaving a heavy balance to be paid for in bullion.”


Here, then, are absolute proofs that goods are not always
paid for by goods, as the free traders keep on repeating,
and the history of the world in modern, medieval and
ancient days shows that a drain of money has always taken
place when countries have had no products to barter for those
they buy from other countries. If, then, the drain of
gold to the United States continues at the rate of at least
.£1,000,000 per year, owing to free trade compelling us to
buy our wheat and flour there, it is only a question of time
when we will be in the same sad plight as were the United
States in 1784, while, in the meantime, our farmers and
millers will be deprived of a market for £1,000,000 a year
of their wheat and flour. It is no reply to this to say that
gold is a product of New South Wales, and we might as
well export that product as any other. It is a product
which is soon exhausted, and we cannot replace it in the
country as we repeat the wool on the backs of our sheep or
the crops in the ground, When the gold is exhausted,
where would be our product to exchange for the wheat and
flour of America, if we depended on that mineral alone to
•carry on our commerce 1 ? It will thus be seen that this drain
of gold to the United States is likely to land us in serious
financial trouble if it long continues.
The Industries of Australasia.
Some very significant figures are published in the Vic-
torian Year Book , for 1894, edited by Mr. Fenton, the As-
sistant Statistician. Be it remembered that New South Wales
practised freetrade till 1891, and returned to it in 1894,
then let our readers study the comparison between the free-
trade province and the other provinces of Australasia,
which are protectionist:—
According to the census returns of the Australasian
colonies, the number of persons engaged in manufacturing in
Victoria are more numerous and bear a higher proportion
to the population than do the corresponding classes in any
•of the other colonies. Next to Victoria, the highest position


1. Victoria ...
91,710
8.48
2. New Zealand
42,893
6.90
3. New South Wales
74,559
6.55
4. Western Australia
2,769
5.64
5. Queensland
21,795
5.56
6. Tasmania ...
7,460
5.10
is occupied by New Zealand, and the ,'ext by New South
Wales, Tasmania being at the bottom of the list. The
number of persons employed, and proportion in each colony
were as follows :
Persons Engaged in Manufacturing in Six
Australasian Colonies, 1891.
Proportion
Colony. Number. pop^tfon.
Per cent.
Mr. Fenton, in a letter to the Melbourne Age on De-
cember 29th, 1895, makes some comments upon the fore-
going, which it is only fair should be published. He says,
“My opinion is that Mr. Coghlan takes account of more
than we do. He includes in his figures many establish-
ments as factories that we do not, and thereby swells the
number of hands. He seems to go on his own basis, and to
have his own ideas, without the least regard for uniformity.”
Mr. Coghlan, in his “ Seven Colonies,” makes this admis-
sion at page 268 : —“ The colony of Victoria is perhaps, of
all the colonies the possessor of the most varied classes of
industries.” Yet, as Mr. Hoare points out, we have manipu-
lators of figures and facts talking to Sydney audiences about
the “disastrous effects of protection.” The proofs are
abundant that shops and small factories are greatly more
numerous in Victoria than in the mother colony; therefore te
present statistics of industry which ignore these is either
fatuous or dishonest.”
The law which constitutes a factory in New South Wales
is not the same as that which constitutes a factory in Vic-
toria. The number of persons who find employment out-


side of factories in Victoria is 35,341, as will be seen by the
following table in the Year Book :
Persons employed in manufacturing and the annual re-
turns for 1890, 1891 :
Enumerated in 1891 ... ... 91,710
Hands employed in principal manufac-
tories, 1890, 1891 ... 56,369
Difference ... ... ••• ••• 35,341
Commenting on this remarkable discrepancy, the statist
(p. 775 Year Book , 1894) says:—
“ This is to be accounted for by the circumstances that
the census returns embrace every individual blacksmith,
tinsmith, saddler, cabinetmaker, tailor, dressmaker, baker,
and such like ; whereas the
Annual Returns
include, as already stated, only the workers employed in the
principal establishments. It should be pointed out more-
over, that the difference is really greater than shown ; for
there is no doubt that some of the manufacturers include as
“ hands employed ” clerks, accountants, salesmen, engineers,
and firemen, carters, labourers, and others, attached to their
establishments, who are not actually engaged in manufac-
turing ; whereas the census figures are restricted to manu-
facturers pure and simple.”
W. STARKEY’S
4 GINGER BEER.fr
158 a Phillip Street, City.


VICTORIAN
PRODUCTION.
Pastoral
Manufacturing
Agricultural ...
Mining
Dairying
Miscellaneous
... £5,128,000
... £9,061,000*
... £5,222,000
... £2,785,000
... £2,548,000
... £2,695,000
The Productive Powers of Victoria and
New South Wales.
Mr. Benjamin Hoare, who has rendered splendid service
to the cause of Protection in Victoria, thus compares the pro-
ductive powers of that province with New South Wales:—
We can now sum up the total productions of the two
colonies, deducing the totals for Victoria from the ‘Victorian
Year Book,’ 1894, pp. 732, 752, 773, 794, 795, and for New
South Wales from ‘ Wealth and Progress,’ p. 569 :
Total ... ... £27,439,000
* Making additions for estimates of work done outside
registered factories.
NEW SOUTH WALES PRODUCTION.
Manufacturing and allied processes ... £7,626,000
Agriculture ... ... ... £'■',395,000
Dairying and poultry farming ... £2,548,000
Pastoral ... ... .. ... £11,168,000
Mineral ... ' ... ... £4,85 1, 000
Forestry and Fisheries
£689 000
Total ... ... £30,283,000
Deduction for raw material twice in-
cluded ... ... ... £185,000
Total
... £30,098,000
As to the last table of figures, there is but one ex-
planation required. In the two colonies the dairying
returns do not embrace the same items, poultry farming


being included in the New South Wales dairying
returns. In Victoria the Statist includes it in miscel-
laneous. Victoria, therefore, beats New South Wales all
along the line, save for the mines and pasture lands, which
are, of course, independent of Protection.”
From the foregoing it will be perceived that New South
Wales obtains£6,ooo,ooo more from pastoral and £2,000,000
more from mineral than Victoria, and yet the latter is only
£3,000,000 behind her rival in total productive power.
Loss of the Riverina Trade.
Since Mr. Reid introduced his Freetrade policy, we have
almost completely lost our Riverina trade. The Riverina
Herald, a local newspaper, says ;—“ A representative of this
journal sought the opinion of a gentleman who has had a
large experience of the river trade, and he says ; 1 Under
Freetrade the Riverina customers can be supplied cheaper
from Melbourne than from Sydney, and it is but natural
that people should go to the cheapest market. Whatever may
be the ultimate effect of Freetrade in Sydney remains to be
seen, but that the immediate effect will be beneficial to Mel-
bourne, through Riverina, is undoubted.’ ”
A correspondent in Albury, writing to the author of
this book, says:—“ A few months ago the" Victorian
travellers to a man said Albury was about dead to them,
and that it did not pay to come here. At the present time
MORRIS BROS.,
SYDNEY ENGINEERING WORKS
Wattle Street, Ultimo.
ELECTRICAL AND GENERAL ENGINEERS.
IRON AND BRASS FOUNDERS,
BLACKSMITHS AND BOILERMAKERS.


every day you see commercials in full swing in every line,
not imported goods, but Victorian manufactures. People
who used to make certain kinds of goods are getting them
from Melbourne, as they say it is cheaper than manufactur-
ing them here. In consequence of this they have dismissed
several hands. On Saturday last I saw a couple of com-
mercials in Albury, and asked what they were doing in the
country on Saturday, and races on at Flemington, too. One
replied that he was going down to Young, Hay, and in fact
all round those districts, as now that the duty was off, his
firm expected to get the trade. The other endorsed this.
I was at Corowa the other day and noticed the same result.
One large storekeeper said he used to get a little from Vic-
toria, but was now going to get Victorian boots, hats, shirts,
etc., as they came cheaper.”
The Benefits of Freetrade.
The following lines from a poem published in the Aus-
tralian Star, well describe in a humorous manner the
outcome of the present Freetrade tariff in New South
Wales:—
The era cheap has come at last,
The dream of freetrade pride ;
For since the free-trade tariff" passed
We march with prouder stride.
We’re freer men than Britain’s sons,
Than even Swiss or Turk ;
Though smaller now are hot-cross buns,
And we are out of work.
Complaints in the Cobden press
Are rife that goods are higher,
And people, curse, instead of bless,
The economic liar.
But still the same old press explains
Unto the working classes
How Reid has raised with care and pains
The burdens off the masses.


The man who shovels sand must hear,
For free-trade writers harp it,
That if he pay the same for beer
There’s less for Brussels carpet.
Yes, he may spend his handsome pay—
In this free-trade surpasses —
By buying carpets all the day ;
That load is off the masses.
Anchovy paste is somewhat low,
This, too, you must remember;
Though luxuries like bread you know,
Have hardened since December ;
And boots at thirty-two and six
Have fallen several pennies ;
They’re worn by men who carry bricks
And spend their cash by guineas.
We call to mind how Reid once said
The tariff was oppressive,
Because the laundress, poor, had paid
For starch a price excessive ;
But now no longer ne: d she cry,
She'll reckon Reid is clever —
■Six-button gloves don’t come so high,
Though starch is stiff as ever.
Fruits from the California side,
Put up in tins exquisite,
Have shown a tendency to slide
Since free-trade paid its visit;
And caviare—the Russian kind
By draymen much affected—
We have no doubt in price has pined
Since Reid has been elected.
Tis true that moleskins are no less,
Nor bread and butter cheaper.
The cost of food, we must confess,
If anything, is steeper.


But silks and tapestries, most rare—
Fine studies for art classes—
Are all reduced (just by a hair),
These burdens on the masses.
Joy, joy, the day is come at last,
The worker’s overjoyed;
For since the free-trade law has passed
He’s joined the unemployed.
He’d live all day on dainty fare,
He’d pay no blooming tax ;
But now he’s got free-trade just where
The chicken got the axe.
The Machinery Argument.
It is a common retort with Freetraders, when they find'
themselves unable to explain away the scarcity of employ-
ment that prevails under their system, to assert that the
workless artizans have been driven out of their calling
by labour-saving machinery. No doubt labour-saving
machinery does throw a number of men out of work, there-
by causing distress, for a certain period at all events. This
occurs even under a Protective tariff. But let us look tho
matter straight in the face. Labour-saving machinery
under Protection is one cause of temporary distress, but
under Freetrade we have the competition of the foreigner
as well as labour-saving machinery to trouble our workmen.
It is bad enough to be thrown out of work by machinery,
but when to this trouble is added the fact that importations
from other countries prevent the workless artizans from
getting employment at other callings, it will be seen that
Freetrade is a second cause of distress, and therefore it is.
one that the workers ought to fight against.


“ The White Slaves of England.’’
Those who are so prone to point to England as a won-
derful illustration of the success of the Freetrade policy,
should read two books which have recently been published,
“ Merrie England ” and “ The White Slaves of England.”
They are revelations to all who are unacquainted with the
low rate of wages and the conditions under which many
English men and women, and even children, have to labour.
The expos 4 which Mr. R. H. Sherard has made of the
terrible dangers which surround those who work in the
alkali, whitelead, and wool-combing factories; the sweating
among the slipper-makers and tailors ; and the miserable
wages paid in these employments, as well as among the
nail-makers and chain-makers, entitle the author of “The
White Slaves of England ” to be considered a philan-
thropist, and they more than justify the remark of a
French paper that “a long cry of indignation is echoing
OCEAN
Accident Guarantee
CORPORATION, LTD., of London.
SUBSCRIBED CAPITAL. £263,720. RESERVE FUND .. .. £201,414.
PAID-UP CAPITAL .. £lOO,OOO. GROSS ASSETS .. .. £476,839..
DIRECTORS—W. M‘MILLAN, Esq., M,P. A. W. MEEKS, Esq., J.E
MANAGER FOR AUSTRALIA—J. J. ALLEN.
Administration Bonds.
Accident Insurance, including Railway, Shipwreck, &c. Special
Tickets for Voyages.
Combined World-wide Accident and Sickness Insur-
ance.
Fidelity Guarantees, with or without the knowledge of the staff.
Employers’ Liability and Workmen’s Insurance.
Public Risk Indemnity.
Burglary and Plate Glass Insurance.
*" I' T T 'C' T-T A NT is the Wealthiest and Most Pro*
A FI L WV/LillM gressive Institution in the Colonies-
transacting the above Classes of Business.


to-day through Europe ” in consequence of its publication,
q’he workers of Freetrade England must indeed be in a
sorry state if these gruesome revelations are anything like a
fair indication of the condition of many of their number.
The Evidence before the Victorian Tariff
Commission.
Three years ago a Commission was appointed in Victoria
to inquire into the working of the Protective tariff, and the
following is some of the evidence taken before that body.
Freetrade Means Low Wages to Farmers’ Workmen.
As the witness further on appeared to favour a policy of
•cheapness, he was asked if he got Freetrade would he cut
down the workmen’s wages % The reply was : “ The men
would rather work for low wages than leave the colony.
In this and other districts the desire of the farmers appears
to be for cheap money. Some of the settlers have taken up
Established 1881.
R. RAIN, COACH BUILDER.
763 HARRIS ST., ULTIMO (near Railway Station).
Awarded 20 First Prizes against all comers.
Silver and Bronze Medals, Royal Agricultural Show, Sydney, 1892.
Silver Medal for special excellence of Workmanship
in Carts and Sulkies, 1896.
Australian & Italian Marble Works.
ESTABLISHED 1835.
302 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.
Proprietors —PATTEN BROS.


laud in the mallee scrubs without much capital, and they
appear to be dissatisfied with the prospects. At Dimboola,
in the Wimmera district, Mr. William Meincke, a farmer
with 320 acres, and president of the Farmers’ Union, was in
favour of reducing, bnt not abolishing, the tariff. He
would tax all articles not necessaries of life. In reply to
an interrogation, he said, “ No, the farmers could not stand
a land tax.” He attributed the low price of wheat to over-
production all over the world, and recommended that all
articles affecting the farmers should be admitted duty free.
Protection Gives Cheaper and Better Implements
The further one gets away from the districts where
:special railway rates prevail, the better is the evidence for
Protection. Mr. Donald M‘Lean. a farmer and grazier at
Warracknabeal, who cultivates 200 acres out of hi&64o-acre
holding, stated that it was his impression that the duties did
not bear on the farmers, because they had a compensating
advantage in their being imposed. “ Nearly all our imple-
ments are locally made. I believe from what my neighbors
say that we get them cheaper and better than we can by
importing them. It is to our interest to use the Victorian
articles.” He also stated that he remembered the first im-
position of the duty on agricultural produce, and that it
had assisted the farmers to develop the country. Asked if
he upheld the fiscal policy of the country, he said he did,
most undoubtedly.
The Butter Industry.
Up till 18s7 Victoria scarcely produced butter enough to
supply her own markets. About that time experts were sent
to New South Wales to inquire into the manner in which
the separator and other dairying appliances were working
here. Our colony was, in fact, the tutor of Victoria in
these matters, but the pupil soon* outstepped the teacher.
In 1888, butter to the value of £7,000 was exported, and
the trade has gradually increased in dimensions till it
reached last year the enormous figure of £785,000, while in
New South South Wales the value of our butter exporta-
tion was only about £120,000. When asked the reason for


these wonderful strides in butter-making, the invariable
answer is “ the bonus' system.” All over the country
fanners devoted themselves to dairying, and the result we
see in the £785,000 worth of butter exported in 1894 from
Victoria. The Victorian Government has paid £10,730
as bonuses for the establishment of 42 butter factories, and
£19,535 for 124 creameries. Although no bonus is now
given, yet there is no falling off in exports, but, on the con-
trary, they are increasing, because Victorian butter now has
a good foothold in the London market, and, as none but the
best quality is allowed to be exported, it has a reputation
equal, if not superior, to the best Danish butter.
Since that report was published the production of Vic-
toiian butter has increased enormously.
When Read, please pass this Book on to a friend.
Send Your Printing to
SHITTY, SIGWSDN ft BO
to- General
1 Printers
Paling’s Buildings. Sydney.
Telephone 1615.


Career of Mr. E. W. O’Sullivan.
In the United States it is usual to give a short account
of each writer whose productions appear in the magazines.
The practice is a good and wholesome one, for the public by
that means can judge as to how much weight should be
attached to the opinion of the man whose article they have
been reading. In like manner when an author publishes a
Book—especially if it be upon controversial subjects like
Freetrade or Protection —it is but fair to the public that
they should be informed as to the career of that author.
Holding this view, I have thought it right to publish the
following ;
Mr. E. W. O’Sullivan, M.P., was born in Tasmania, and
at an early age became an apprentice to the printing trade
in the office of the Hobart Mercury. He migrated to
New South Wales in 1869, but after a two years’ stay here
he returned to Hobart, and established a daily evening
paper called the Tasmanian Tribune. After working this
journal for some time with success he sold out profitably
and settled in Melbourne in 1874. Here he started another
evening paper, also called the Tribune, on the co-operative
plan. Mr. E. W. O’Sullivan afterwards took the editorship
of the St. Arnaud Mercury, a country journal of considerable
repute. Here he remained four years, and then joined the
Melbourne Arqus in which office he became very popular,
being elected Chairman of their famous Social Club as well as
President of the Melbourne Typographical Society. He
returned to Sydney in 1880 to take a prominent
position on the Daily Telegraph. Having an ambition for
politics, he resigned this post, and became a contributor to
the Tribune (a weekly paper then published in connection
with the Telegraph), the Globe, and the Australian Star.
He was elected President of the Sydney Typographical
Society ; then he entered upon an active career in trade
union circles, becoming President of the Trade and Labor
Council, founder and President of the Wharf Laborer’s


Union, President of the Seamen’s Union, and of several 1
other organisations. He successfully agitated for the
abolition of state aid to immigration, the extension of the
eight hour system, higher wages for the wharf laborers, the-
abolition of Chinese manned steamers in the coastal trade,
technical education and many other boons now enjoyed by
the workers of New South Wales. He was a candidate for
Parliament in West Sydney in 1882 and for South Sydney
in 1885, but in each instance he was beaten by a small
majority. However, in 1885, he won a seat at Queanbeyan
and has held it ever since, against six attempts to dislodge
him. Prior to his election he had taken up the cause of
Protection in a very earnest, able, and persistent manner,
and had identified himself with the free selectors and
farmers of the country. When Mr. E. W. O’Sullivan entered
Parliament there were only three other Protectionists there,
but converts soon became numerous and the cause began to
flourish. He also took an active part in the debates and
began to be recognised as an authority upon Protection
land, industrial, military, and democratic matters. The late
Sir Henry Parkes on many occasions complimented Mr. E-
W. O’Sullivan upon the correct and extensive range of his
knowledge, and the latter has since become regarded as one
of the best read men who ever entered our Parliament.
Mr. E. W. O’Sullivan gave a strong opposition to all the
Freetrade Governments which have been in power since
he was a member of the Legislative Assembly ; but his
denunciations were never tinctured with rancour or person-
ality. As the Chairman of a Select Committee on Old Age
Pensions he assisted to draw up an able report upon that
subject, and he also took an active part in the preparation
of reports upon a National Bank and the abuses in the
shipping trade. He was for five years a Member of the
Public Works Committee, and is now Deputy Chairman of
Committees. He has held a position on the Committee
of Elections and Qualifications, and was several times
appointed to confer with members of the Legislative
Council on disputed measures. He was a Commissioner
for the Chicago Exhibition and rendered excellent service
on that occasion. Mr. E. W. O’Sullivan is the author of a


story called “ Esperanza,” a military work entitled “ The
Power of Mounted Riflemen,” a book on Trade Unions and
Social Organisations for the Chicago Exhibition a portion
of the history of “ Labor and Machinery (published in
New York), and he has been a frequent and acceptable con-
tributor to the press. It will thus be seen that Mr. E. W
O’Sullivan has had an active and public-spirited career and
that his experience and knowledge admirably fit him to act
as a teacher upon the question of Freetrade v. Protection.
A. Staines-MANDERS,
Publisher of this Work


6t6uO
. Australians Support your own Industries
live work to your own People First.
OUR
OUR ODORLESS
SOLE LEATHER
LEATHER BELTING
St., Sydney.
All goods bearing the above Trade Mark are Warranted
to give entire satisfaction, or may be returned at our expense
IsusedbyOOper cent. of the Industries has proved to be the Best wearing
of New South Wales. For Gripping Leather in the world, Fositively
power, strength, durability, and odorlous and 20 per cent, cheaper
economy it is unrivalled, All sizes than imported leather. Tons of Sole
in stock. and Scrap Leather always in stock
from 3d. to Is. per lb.
Our 40 years experience enables us to give you a thoroughly reliable
article at the lowest possible price. We ask you to give us a trial.
Whether your wants be greater small we appreciate your Order. A ton of
Leather or a lb. of Scrap, a mile of Belting or a foot—in either case we
solicit your custom.
m CI & SON, LIMITED,


iitrwPtittiustiMsioiwMlivtrOil
WITH HYPOPHOSPHITES,
Is tlie Modern and Most Successful Preparation yet introduced
for the Relief and Cure of
Incipient Consumption,
Poverty of Blood,
Anaemia, Rickets,
Chronic Rheumatism,
And all Diseases arising from
Impaired Nutrition and General
Weakness.
For Testimonials as to its efficacy
see daily papers.
MINERVA
TONIC
Altogether apart troni its Great Therapeutic Value is made-up from
Perfectly Pure and Fresh Materials more'costly to purchase, but
infinitely more effective in action than low-priced ingredients. This is
unquestionably the chief reason for the high estimation in which it is
held as a Tonic Alterative in all cases of
AN/EMIA, LASSITUDE, LOSS OF ENERGY & APPETITE,
DEFECTIVE MEMORY & EYESIGHT, HYSTERIA, MELAN-
CHOLIA, NEURALGIA CHLOROSIS, and All Affections arising
from PHYSICAL AND NERVOUS WEAKNESS.
It is also Invaluable as a Restorative after FEVERS, INFLUENZA, &c.
MINERVA EMULSION is sold at 3s. 6d. per bottle, and
MINERVA TONIC at 2s. 6d., by all Chemists aud Store-keepers.
MINERVA EALSEKI, a Pleasant and Highly-Curative Demulcent
Mixture for the speedy relief and cure of Coughs, Colds, Bronchitis,
&c., 2s. 6d. per bottle.
Wholesale from Elliott Bros., Australian Drug Company, S. Hoff-
nung&Co., Feldheim, Gotthelf & Co., Learmonth, Dickinson, & Co.,
John Connell & Co., Limited, J. Barlow & Co., E. Rich & Co., Limited,
C. and J. B. Watson, Myers & Solomon, D. Cohen & Co. (Sydney,
Newcastle, and Maitland), D. Mitchell & Co., and others.
Retail from all Chemists and Store-keepers.
Sole Proprietors THE MINERVA COY.,
MANUFACTURING CHEMISTS & FOOD SPECIALISTS,
LONDON, NEW YORK, MELBOURNE,
and 56 MARGARET STREET,'SYDNEY.


Visitors from the Country
Should not forget to call upon
HERR RASSMUSSEN,
THE CELEBRATED DANISH HERBALIST,
547 iIOSBI STREET, SYDNEY,
(Between Liverpool & Bathurst Streets;,
For his free Book—“THE NATURAL DOCTOR’’—which contains most
valuable information for all Blood, Skin, Nerve, & Liver Complaints
ALFALINE LIVER KIDNEY PILLS-BOXES, Is.
HERR RASSMUSSEN’S ALFALINE HERBAL REMEDIES
HAVE CURED THOUSANDS OF SUFFERERS,
Awarded two Gold Medals and Thousands of Testimonial
