





PROVISIONAL
WORKSHOP MANUAL
TANK
Australian Cruiser
Mk. I.
Issued March, 1943
NOT TO BE PUBLISHED
The information given in this document is not to be
communicated, either directly or indirectly, to the Press
or to any Person not holding an official position in
His Majesty's Service.
Prepared and Issued by
THE DIRECTORATE OF ARMOURED FIGHTING VEHICLES PRODUCTION
MINISTRY OF MUNITIONS


FOREWORD
This provisional workshop manual has been
prepared for the information and instruction of
workshop personnel concerned with the maintenance
and repair of Tanks A.C. Mark I.
Much of the information contained herein is
of a provisional nature and any amendments, or
supplementary information which is considered
necessary, will be included in the printed edit-
ion which should be available to Army workshops
before the end of June, 1943.
Many of the components and workshop opera-
tions dealt with in this manual are peculiar to
Tanks A.C. Mark I, and have, therefore, been
fully described and illustrated. Where work-
shop procedure has not been described in detail,
standard automotive practice should be followed.
The information in this manual has been
divided into sections and, for the convenience
of workshop personnel, each section commences
with an index printed- upon paper of a special
identifying colour.
To find any required operation, therefore,
refer to the general group index opposite. Find
the identifying colour. Run your finger down
the edge to that colour, and the operation
required will be listed in the index printed on
that page.
Printing difficulties have made it imposs-
ible to insert the illustrations next to the
text (except in one or two instances in the Fuel
System Section), therefore the illustrations have
been placed at the end of each section.


CONTENTS
Subject Index Colour Page No.
Forward 2
General Specification 4
Hull and Turret Pale Blue 6
Repair Welding 1 Brown - 17
Suspension Buff 50
Tracks Lemon 36
Brakes & Steering Green 45
Engines Gold 58
(Mechanical System)
Cooling System Blue 88
Fue 1 System pi nk 9 4
Lubrication System Orange 129
Electrical System pale Blue 137
6 volt ) u M : 445
12 volt ) - ,f ff 494
40 volt ) - - " " 200
Clutch Group Yellow 222
Tr an smi ssi on - - - —— Gr e 7 233
. Gear box )
Transfer box )
Front axle )
Differential )
Carden shafts )
IMP ORTANT
Throughout this provisional workshop manual tools have
been referred to by manufacturers catalogue number. The
corresponding Army number will be found in the list on
page 263.




GENERAL SPECIFICATIONS.
LfJiii.'-! jj : GAL D I MEN 8 XON S i
Length (Overall) _ 20 ft. 9 in.
height " -8 ft. 4| in.
«*«» " - 9 ft. | in.
’ idth of tracks centre to centre - 7 ft, in.
Ground clearance - 15-i. j_ nt>
Minimum turning circle - 50 ft.
Vifvllh cf trench spanned 8 ft,
height (unladen) - approx. 26 tons.
T,tul area of track (steel) in con- - 32 sq. ft.
cact with the ground
• ho^:e wheel loading - 43-1/3 cwt each.
G ~~und pressure - 13.4 rbs. per sq . in .
.1- EXIMin CRUISING SPEEDS:
Top gear -
!l I road speed - 24 m.p.h.
cross country - 20 ,f
third gear _ 14 n
jecond gear - 8 !r
dirst geai' - 3 if
n.sug y of Operation - 120/150 miles.
TXGXTE?
d laks - Cadillac ”75”
To had number of engines ~ Three
gx?.-aiigement - Clover leaf
To, of cylinders per engine - Eight
pning order . 1,8,7,3,6, 5,4,2.
voapressxon ratio _ 6.25 to 1
Compression pressure at cranking - no lbs. per sq.in.
synod
,; 'ots.:. combined B.H.P. _ 330 at 3,050 r.p.m.
lormal oil pressure _ 25 lbs. per sq.in.
-K le oil pressure - 13 lbs. per sq. in.
vacvess
- Mushroom hydraulically
operated.
/rgle - 45 degrees
/&lve clearance - 0.030 in. to 0.070 in.
C iihurottor i
- Stromberg A.A.V.26
■ L^-ne - Downdraft
AND DRIVE.
Transfer caso ratio - 1 to 1
Differential, pinion - 23 teeth
-U:.fferenbial crown wheel - 60 teeth
r c.r'-ivo pinion - 23 teeth
iQna -' spur wheel ' - 73 teeth
i■ vjvo sprockets: Rubber Steel
Track Track
Jo, of teeth ' - 13 ~22 —
, T , - 6 in. 4 in.
Ti-acxs:
ho, of links » qq 129
ccsr oox ratio overdrive - 0.77 to 1
4th gear - 1.02 to 1


Gear Box Ratio 3rd gear ' j
*r A m . 2nd gear “ L 0 :r*
?» >f if Ist gear " 7,b2 to 1
!t if *f reverse “ 0.3 to 1
Overall ratio low " 75 ,*d A t
» 11 high ' 7 ’ 72 to I
BLBCTRICAL:
IS 3vsteS : - Deloo Hemy
Distributor - £ el °° Relay
Ignition Coils “ b volt _
Distributor rotation “
Distributor points gap - 175 i;.
Spark plugs -
Soark plug gap ” u * n *
? : riZtli
iimin 0 before t.d.c
Generator: _ D
a f e - V Belt
rive _ Qpogjj-wise
Rotation
st Zir - Delo ° Rem y
ir dke • - Bendix
Dnve ..
Rotation . “ t 1 ,
clockwise
~ j_ _-i - Solenoid
Control ~ , ,
switch <jc
relay
Batteries; « +.
T ?P e " 17 plate
Total number of batteries “ lve
Automotive “ Thre^!
positive
* earthed
- Two in
tireless
series
Capac itie s . on -pm-p.
Combined radiators ”
gai s ■
Combined fuel tanks “ 130
gai s •
Transfer case -
Gear box ) pals
Differential ) L 1 b 1
Pinal Drive ) 3
Crankcase “ 4 b *


HULL AND TURRET.
Contents
gg&e
(a) Front Axle Housing 7
(b) Main body ~7
(c) Engine Cover 7
(d) Turret 7
1. Removing Turret and 8
Turret Basket,
(e) Turret Cupola .8
1. Servicing Cupola 8
(f) Turret Traverse Drive 8
1, Electric Drive 9
2, Manual Drive 9
3, Overhauling Turret Traverse 9
Drive
(g) Traverse Manual Control Unit 9
1. Electric Drive Control ; 9
2. Manual Drive Control 10
(h) Traverse Gear Box Oil Pump 10
1. Description 10
2. Operation 10
(i) Illustrations 11




HULL
The hull consists principally of three main cast-
ings of cast armour plate; the front axle housing,
main body, turret and an engine cover of armour plate.
(a) Front Axle Housing.
This is a separate casting which is bolted to
the machined face of the main body. It houses
the front axle drive assembly, final drive and
braking components.
(b) Main Body.
The main body is a large one piece casting to
which all the above smaller castings are fitted,
This main body may be divided for the purpose of
description, into three compartments;
1. Front Compartment which accomodates the
driver and forward gunner.
2. Centre compartment containing the trans-
fer box, master clutch, 40 watt generator,
air compressor, batteries and heavy ammun-
ition racks, etc.
3. Rear compartment which houses the power unit,
radiators, fuel tanks, fan etc.
(c) Engine Cover.
This forms the roof of the rear compartment of
the main body, and is bolted to the main body by
40 - 3/4 in. bolts.
Three doors are'located, one above each engine,
to provide access for refilling the radiators and
fuel tanks, and for adding engine oil.
(d) Turret.
The turret is an armour casting supported on
the hull by a ball race. See Figs. 7 & 8.
The bail race consists of an upper ring, a
lower ring, a rack and 120 - 1 in. diameter
steel balls fitted in a brass retainer.
Attachment of the turret and race to the
hull is made by 32 - 5/8 in. diameter studs
screwed into the rack. The internally cut
teeth of the rack mesh with the turret tra-
versing gear. Seals are fitted as shown in
Fig. 8 to prevent foreign matter from entering
the turret race, and to retain the lubricant.


Troubles likely to occur with the turret race
are cracked or chipped halls, damage to rings and
rack by gun fire.
The turret race may be checked by operating it
by hand throughout the 360° range, and noting the •
position where any tightness or roughness is
apparent.
1. Removing Turret and Turret Basket.
The turret and turret basket assembly is
removed as a unit in the following manner 0 .
Remove the turret electrical leads to the base
function connector terminal strip on the transfer
box. The terminal strip and leads are numbered.
Unfasten base junction connector assembly from the
transfer box. These parts will then come away
with the turret.
Remove the 32-5/8 S.A.E. nuts and spring washers
securing the turret rack to the hull.
Hook a four leg sling to the four lifting eyes on
the turret and with a suitable crane lift the
turret assembly clear of the hull. Refer
Pig. 7.
place the turret assembly on a stand similar to
that shown in Pig. 7.
(e) Turret Cupola
The commander's cupola is an armour casting
supported on three equally spaced ball bearing
rollers travelling in a grooved ring which is
bolted to the top of the turret. The cupola has
360 degrees range of traverse and is manually
operated.
1. Servicing the Cupola.
Damage to the cupola or mounting ring by gun-
fire is liable to make the rollers bind. This may
mean straightening the casting and ring or replace-
ment as required. The rollers should be replaced
if damaged and packed with lubricant. The cupola
must be free to rotate through its full range with
little effort.
(f) Turret Traverse
Drive
The turret may be traversed by either electric
or manual systems. Both systems operate through a
differential and gear box. A study of Pig. 9 in
conjunction with the following description will make
the function of the gear box understood.


1. Electric Drive.
Power from the traverse motor (1) is transmitted
through the worm (2) and worm wheel (3) to the
differential gear which drives the differential
pinions (5). This will of course tend to drive the
other differential gear (6) and worm wheel (7) in
the opposite direction, hut as the wheel (7) is
coupled to the manual control unit, and as this is
held stationary the shaft (8) and lower pinion (9)
will revolve, driving the countershaft (11) through
pinion (10). The drive is completed by the
pinion (12) on the lower end of the countershaft
engaging the teeth of the rack. The direction and
speed of the traverse motor are governed by the
controller, details of which are explained in the
electrical section of this manual.
2. Manual Drive.
Power from the manual control unit is applied
through a shaft, two gears to worm (E) thence to the
worm wheel (7) and differential gear (6). Any
tendency to drive the traverse motor (1) in the
opposite direction through the differential is over-
come by a solenoid operated brake which holds the
armature shaft of the traverse motor stationary
when the current is off. The drive is therefore
transmitted to the shaft (8), and to the rack in
the same manner as the electric drive.
Overhaul of Traverse Drive.
At overhaul periods the gear box and manual
control units should be inspected for worn or
damaged gears, bearings and oil seals. The gear
box should be flushed out and refilled with clean
oil. A drain plug is fitted to the bottom of the
gear box housing. '
The manual control unit should be cleaned
out and repacked with fresh lubricant.
(g) Traverse Manual
Control Unit.
The manual control unit Fig. 10 operates both
the controller for the electric traverse motor, and
the manual drive.
1. Electric Drive Control.
Pressing the latch (1) on the handle (2)
engages the clutch (3) which connects the handle
to the shaft (4) through the train of gears (5),
(6) and (7). The shaft (4) is free to turn in
shaft (10) and. carries on its other end sprocket
(8) which is connected by a roller chain to a
large sprocket on the controller.
Twisting the handle (2) either clockwise or
anti-clockwise operates the switches in the
controller by way of the clutch, gear train,
sprockets and chain.


2. Manual Drive Control.
With the latch (1) in the released position the
clutch Is disengaged and the handle (2) will rotate
Independent of the.-gear train. The handwheel (9)
is coupled by the shaft of (10) to the bevel gear (11)
whlch meshes with*bevel gear (12). When the hand-
wheel is rotated it will drive bevel gear (12) to
which is connected the drive shaft to the transverse
gear box.
The operation of the controller is described
in the electrical section of this manual.
(h) Traverse Gear Box
Oil Pump.
1. Descript!on.
The worm drive and differential gear are
housed in an oil tight casting, which is filled
through an outside combined filler cap and dip-
stick. See Pig. 9.
The oil in this reservoir lubricates the actual
gears and is also the source of supply for the
plunger pump situated in the base of the casting
immediately in line and in contact with the lower
end of the differential shaft.
This pump onsists of a hollow piston, the
head milled off at 15° to within l/8 in. from the
outer circumference. A spiral spring keeps the
head of the piston in contact with the differential
shaft, similarly milled at 15°. The piston is
prevented from rotating by a grub screw working
in a slot.
The differential shaft is drilled centrally,
and has a non-return ball valve. At points
needing lubrication, holes are drilled from the
outside of the shaft to communicate with the
centre oil supply.
2. Operation.
The action of the pump is as follows:
The differential shaft rotates, and when the
unmilled .1/6 port Jon coincides with the l/8 in.
portion of the piston a IT V” opening of 30° is
formed. At the lowest portion of this opening a
port communicates with the oil reservoir in the
casting. Oil now enters the "V n opening and as
the differential shaft rotates the 15° end slides
over the 15 top of the piston. The piston is
kept in contact with the end of the shaft by the
spring causing the h V n opening to diminish and
force the oil past the non return valve and up
the centre of the shaft to the points needing
lubrication, so that with every revolution of Lba
differential shaft the pump delivers a charge of
oil. The action of th- pump is in direct ratio
to the revolutions of the shaft and the delivery
pressure is determined by the strength of the
pump spring.


Fig. 1. Rear view of the A.C. Mk. 1 Tank
Fig. 2. Front and L.H. side view


Fig. 3. Central Compartment, looking backward
1. Voltage Regulators.
2. Commander’s Ignition Control Solenoid.
3. Starter Relays.
4. Fire Extinguisher Push Button.
5. Oil Gauges for Nos. 1, 2, and 3 Engines.
6. Air Pressure Gauge.
7. Heavy Ammunition Rack.
8. Earth Strap.
9. 12-volt Generator.
10. Junction Box.
11. Air Reservoir.
12. Master Clutch.
Fig. 4. Central Compartment, looking forward
1. Gunner’s Seat.
2. .303 Ammunition Boxes.
3. Driver’s Seat.
4. 40-volt Generator.
5. Master Clutch.
6. Air Compressor.
7. Batteries for Nos. 1, 2, and 3 Engines.
8. Transfer Box.
9. Turret Base Junction Connector.
10. Oil Radiator.


Fig. 5.
Gunner’s Compartment
1. M.G. water tank.
2. Machine gun.
3. M.G. water pump.
4. .303 ammunition box.
5. Differential filler.
6. Diaphragm air brake.
Fig. 6.
Driver’s Compartment
1. Tachometer.
2. Oil pressure gauge gear
box pump.
3. Speedometer.
4. Ignition switches.
5. Starter switches.
6. Emergency starter
switches.
7. Fire extinguisher push
button.
8. Starter push button.
9. 12-volt ammeter.
10. Red tell-tale lights oil
circulation.
11. Engine temperature.
12. 6-volt ammeter.
13. Gear box filler.
14. Speedometer drive.
15. Gear shift lever.
16. Clutch pedal.
17. Steering levers.
18. Air pressure gauges.


Fig. 7. Turret Assembly on stand
Fig. 8. Sectional view of Turret Race


Fig. 9. Turret Traverse Drive Gear Box


Fig. 10. Turret Traverse Drive Manual
Control Unit


REPAIR WELDING
The section dealing with the repair
welding of damaged armour (pages
18-29, fig. 18-28) has been deleted
from this provisional manual, as a
special publication dealing with this
subject will soon be made available.




SUSPENSION
Page.
(a) To Jack up the Hull. .1 - 31.
(b) Bogle or Suspension Unit. —3l
1. Description. 31
2. Removing and Replacing a Bogie 31
Wheel.
3. Overhauling a Bogie Wheel. 32
4. Straightening a Bogie Wheel. 32
5. Removing and Replacing a Fulcrum 32
Arm and Bogie Vi/heel Assembly.
6. Removing and Replacing a complete 33
Suspension Unit.
7. Removing and Replacing a Volute 33
Spring.
(c) Idler Wheel. —* 34
1. Removing and Replacing an Idler 34
Wheel.
2. Overhauling an Idler Wheel. 34
(d) Tensioning Wheel.- 34
1* Description. 34
2. Removing and Replacing a Tensioning 35
Wheel.
3. Removing and Replacing a Track 35
Tensioning Bracket.
(e) Illustrations. 36


SUSPENSION
The suspension system comprises the six
bogie or suspension assemblies each fitted with a
volute spring, the six idler wheel units and two
track tensioning wheels. See Fig. 29.
Bogie, track tensioning, and idler wheels are
fitted with ball bearings and hydraulic type
lubricators. These lubricators have a large
orfice to enable the wheels to be lubricated with
a low pressure high volume injector.
(a) To Jack up the Hull.
To jack up the hull use two jacks, and base-
plates. Place one jack near each end of the
hull on a solid section of the casting. Do not
jack against the floor plate.
(b) Bogie or Suspension Unit.
A bogie or suspension unit (See Fig.3o)
consists of a heavy bracket secured to the hull
by seven 1 in. bolts. Mounted to the lower end
of the bracket on fulcrum pins are two fulcrum
arms which carry the two bogie wheels.
The volute spring is supported in spherical
seats between the tops of the fulcrum arms. The
rod which passes through the volute spring and
fulcrum arms is a free fit through the assembly
and carries a recoil spring and spherical seat
on one end.
The track idler wheel is attached to the top
of the bogie bracket. .
1. Removing and Replacing a Bogie Wheel.
Break the track and allow it to lay loose.
Remove the split pins and nuts from both ends
of the wheel spindle with wrench No.l-11009
Fig. 31.
Remove the split pin, nut, washer and recoil
spring from the volute spring spindle. Slide
a 4 in. length of 2 in. water pipe over the
spindle in place of the recoil spring. Replace
the washer and nut. Screw the nut and washer
up against the pipe. This will prevent the
bogie spring from expanding when the weight is
relieved and eliminate unnecessary jacking.
Jack up the side of the Tank until the bogie
wheel is just free.
Remove the washers from the wheel spindle.
These washers fit into a recess in the fulcrum
arm, and are provided with two ■§• B.S.W. tapped
holes to facilitate removal.


Jack up the hull until the spindle is clear
of the slots in the fulcrum arm. The wheel
can then he lifted out.
Replace in reverse order.
2• Overhauling a Bogie Wheel.
Remove the locating bush from each end of the
wheel spindle. See Pig# 30.
Push the spindle out of the wheel.
Slide the bearing spacer to one side. The side
bearing and oil seal on one side can then be
pushed out.
Lift out the spacer, and push out the other side
bearing and oil seal.
Clean out all old lubricant from the wheel hub.
Wash all parts.
Inspect the bearings and oil seals, replace if
necessary.
Inspect relief valve and lubricator, replace if
damaged.
Examine the rubber tyre, replace the wheel if the
tyre is unserviceable.
Test the bogie wheel for true running. Replace or
straighten if bent.
Assemble in reverse order.
3. Straightening a Bogie Wheel.
With the bearings removed place the wheel on the
spindle of the wheel straightener, tool No.
824/84 (Pig. 32). Spin the wheel and mark the
hygh spot. Line the high spot up with a stud in
tfce tool.
Clamp the wheel on to the tool with the adaptor
plate in position, by screwing up the large nut
on the a? indie of the tool.
Place the five clamps over the studs of the tool
with their inner ends under the adaptor plate.
Straighten the wheel by tightening the clamps on
the high side of the wheel.
Test the wheel by removing the clamps, loosening
the spindle nut, and spinning the wheel.
•4. Removing and Replacing a Fulcrum Arm and Bogie
'a he el' Assembly/
Remove the volute spring as directed on page 33.
Remove the split pin and nut from the fulcrum
pin with wrench No. 1-11008 Fig. 33.


Drive out the fulcrum pin. The fulcrum arm
assembly can then be lifted out.
Clean out old lubricant from the fulcrum pin
bushes and tube, clean the pin.
Inspect for wear, and renew’the''pin and bushes
if necessary.
Examine the fulcrum pin lubricator, renew if
damaged. Special wrench No. 1-11012 will remove
the lubricator.
Assemble, in reverse order.
5. Removing and Replacing a Complete Suspension
' Unit.
Break the track and pull the top portion clear
of the suspension unit.
Remove the idler wheel as directed on page 34.
Jack up the side of the Tank until the weight
is off the suspension unit.
With wrench No. 1-11010 (Fig. 34) remove the
three securing nuts at the top of the bogie
bracket.
With wrench No. 1-11008 (Fig.3s) remove the two
securing nuts at each side of the bogie bracket.
The assembly can then be lifted away from the
hull.
Replace in reverse order.
6, Removing and Replacing a Volute Spring.
Break the track and allow it to lie slack.
Remove the split pin and nut from the spring rod
and draw out the rod, recoil spring and seat.
Jack up the side of the Tank until the fulcrum
arms fall away far enough to release the volute
spring.
Remove the spring complete with its cover and
spherical seats.
Remove the spring and seats from the spring cover.
Check the inner and outer spring seats for wear or
damage. Replace if necessary.
To replace the spring, first assemble the cover,
spring and inner seats together. Then replace
this assembly between the fulcrum arms.
Sprinkle powdered graphite on the spring seats.
DO NOT USE OIL.


Gradually lower the Tank until the spring
assembly is in position, and the spring rod can
be pushed through.
Finish assembly in reverse procedure to that
described in removal.
Remove the shaft and the wheel can be taken out
of the bracket.
To remove the oil seals and bearings proceed as
with the bogie wheels.
Assemble in reverse order.
(c ) Idler Wheel.
1. Removing and Replacing a Track Idler Wheel.
Break the track and pull it clear of the idler
wheel.
Remove the wire from the heads of the two set
screws in each end of the wheel 3pindle and
remove the set screws. Refer Fig* 3(J. The
wheel assembly can then be lifted out of the
bracket.
Replace in reverse order,
2. ' Overhauling an Idler Wheel.
Unscrew the special nut and retainer from. the
wheel spindle with wrench No. 1-11011 Fig. 36.
Push the spindle out of the wheel#
Slide the bearing spacer to one side and push
out one end bearing and oil seal from inside.
Lift out the sleeve and push out the other bearing
and oil seal.
Thoroughly clean all old lubricant from the wheel
hub and wash all parts.
Examine the rubber tyre. Replace the wheel if
the tyre is unserviceable.
Examine the bearings and oil seals. Replace if
necessary.
Examine the lubricator. Replace if damaged.
Assemble in reverse order,
(d) Tensioning Wheel.
The tensioning wheel is mounted on a spindle
carried by a heavy bracket which is bolted to the
hull by four large bolts. See Fig. 37.


The bracket is slotted at the four bolt holes
and this allows 4-J- inches of travel on the bolts
when its tracks are being adjusted.
Tensioning of the track is controlled by
an adjusting screw which screws through a block
inside the bracket, see Pig. 37. The block is
located by a projecting lug attached to the hull.
The head of the adjusting screw is provided with
a locking plate and security pin.
1. Removing and Replacing a Tensioning hheel.
Break the track and pull it clear of the wheel.
Place a support under the wheel.
Remove the split pin and nut from the wheel spindle
with a wrench No.l-11009.
2. Removing and Replacing a Track Tensioning
Bracket.
Break the track and pull it clear of the bracket.
Place a support under the bracket.
Remove the four lock nuts and clamping nuts
securing the bracket to the hull with wrench
No. 1-11009.
The bracket may then be lifted away from the
hull.
To remove the adjusting screw, take the circlip
off the inner end. The screw will then come
right out of the block.
Clean the screw and block and lubricate freely
before assembling.
Replace in reverse order.


Fig. 29. Details of Track and Suspension Arrangements. A later Modification has altered the position
of the idler. See Fig. 30
Fig. 30. Cross section of Suspension


Fig. 31. Wrench 1-11009 used on bogie wheel nuts
Fig. 32. Bogie Wheel Straightener, Tool No. 824-84
Fig. 33. Wrench, No. 1-11008. Used on Bogie-Wheel
Bracket Nuts


Fig. 36. Wrench—idler wheel nuts, Tool No. 1-11011
Fig. 37. Tensioning Wheel Bracket




TRACKS.
Contents.
Pag© .
(a) Rubber Tracks..... - - 37
1. Description - 37
2. Maintenance ■ 37
3 • Removing a Track 37
4. Replacing a Track '3B
5. Adjusting a Track 39
6. Removing and Replacing
a Link 39
(b ) Steel Tracks 39
1. Removing a Track or Link 39
2, Replacing a Track 40
(c) Changing fr©m Rubber to Steel
Tracks 41
(d) Illustrations. 42


TRACKS.
(a) Rubber Tracks.
The rubber tracks are composed of rubber
track shoe units, each assembled with two pin 3.
The units are assembled into an endless track by
steel end connections which are secured to the
ends of the pins by wedges. See Pig. 42.
The steel end connections also serve as guides
to keep the track in alignment with the bogie wheels,
idlers and drive sprocket.
The outer ends of the connections serve as
driving lugs and engage the teeth of the final drive
sprocket.
1. Maintenance;
The rubber track shoes are reversible and should
be reversed when worn to such an extent that further
wear would cause the tubular metal section of the link
te become damaged. Damaged or unserviceable units
should be removed from the track and replaced with
serviceable units.
2. PLemovlng a Track.
(i) The track tension must be released as far as
possible. Loosen the four lock and clanping
nuts securing the track tensioning wheel
bracket to the hull, using Wrench No. 1-11009.
Pig. 38. Do not loosen the two rear nuts t#o
much or unevenly, otherwise the bracket will
dig into the hull at its front edge and refuse
to slide.
Ptemove the pin and locking plate from the track
adjusting screw (Pig. 39). Turn the screw
anti-clockwise with wrench No. 1-11009 (Fig.
40) until the slots in the bracket have
reached the limit of their travel.
The bracket cannot be drawn forward with the
adjusting screw, so if the bracket does not
slide, do not force the screw beyond its
maximum travel which ©ccurs when a circlip
on its inner end contacts the threaded block
inside the bracket. Further force may push
the circlip out of the groove and allow the
screw to come right out of the block.
Difficulty would then be experienced in re-
engaging the thread.
The next two operations will cause the bracket
to slide.
(ii) Drive the tank forward or push it backwards to
transfer the slack in the track to the
sprocket end.


(Hi) Place the track s'tr airier ..tool No.- 1-11050
on the .track as shown in’Pig .“"41 with
the: -arms*, gripping the sprocket. Run
out the cable, and attach the hooks to
the track as close aS possible .to the
first bogie wheel. lighten the
strainer sufficiently-to relieve the
tension.from the links which are to be
disconnected. ;
(iv) Remove the nuts and wedges from one -inside
and one outside end connection and drive
off the end connections. The best place
to break a track is midway between the
sprocket and the hooks of the tool.
(v.) Slacken off and remove the track .-strainer.
(vi l With a- crow-bar move the upper portion of
the track to the rear; over the sprocket
and idler wheels . ■■
- ..
(vii) Push or pull the tank off the tracks. If ®
both tracks are to be removed, disconnect
both before moving the tank. The tank has
to be moved 14 feet to clear- the tracks.
If sufficient space is not' avalirable -t ®
wove the tank the tracks may be,cleared
as follows; Jack up the side at
a. time until the bogie wheels clear the
«V . " track. Haul the track from under the
bogie wheels until clear.
5. Replacing a Track; '
(i) Lay the track on the ground and push and
pull the tank on to it so that the end of
• the track projects approximately 30 ins.
beyond the centre of the front bogie wheel.
(ii) Bring the other end of the track over.the
tfensi®hing'and Idler wheels to the sprocket.
(iii) 2 Place a blocking tube- tool No. 1-11033 Pig. 41
in front of the secodd bogie wheel.
(iv) Take up-as much slack as possible from the t#p
portion of the track by turning the sprocket
• either with the engines or., with a long bar.
If only one track is being -replaced the
opposite side brake should be pulled hard on.
The sprocket on‘the side being replaced, will
then have the greater movement when driven by
the engines .
(v) Couple the track strainer to the track as
previously described.
(vi) Pull the ends of the track together with the
strainer. Driving the sprocket slightly
with the engines and the opposite side brake
on will assist in removing the slack from the
t6p portion of the track.


(vii) If the track is exceptionally tight, bring
the ends together with the coupling clamps,
tool No, 1-11066 (Pig. 42) one on each
side of the track.
(viii) Replace the side connections, wedges and nuts.
(ix) Remove the clamps, strainer and blocking tube,
and adjust the track.
4, Adjusting a Track:
The four lock and clamping nuts in the tensioning
wheel bracket having been loosened as described in
track removal, page 37, turn the track adjusting
screw clockwise to tighten the track,
NOTE; The correct track tension is determined as
follows - With a straight edge four feet long placed
on top of the track between the track idler wheels,
the sag of the track measured from the centre of the
straight edge should be approximately -g- Inch.
When the track is adjusted tighten the clamping
nuts and lock nuts securing the tensioning wheel
bracket to the hull with wrench No. 1-11009 (Pig,3B).
Replace the locking plate and pin on the track adjust-
ing screw.
5. Removing and Replacing a Link:
Move the tank so that the link to be removed is near
the top of the driving sprocket.
Proceed with operations Nos. (i) to (iv) under
’’Removing a Track”, page 37. When driving the
tank forward in operation No. (ii) stop when the
link to be removed is midway between the sprocket
and the first bogie wheel.
One or two links can be removed or replaced at this
s tage .
Place a blocking tube tool No. 1-11033 (Pig. 41)
in front of the second bogie wheel.
Proceed with operations Nos. (vi) to (ix) under
’’Replacing a track” page 38.
Adjust the track as directed above.
(b) Steel Tracks .
1. Removing a Track or Link:
Loosen off the tensioning wheel as directed in
’’Removing a Track - Rubber Tracks”.
Place the track strainer, Tool No. 1-11015 #n the
track at the tensioning wheel end as shown In Pig.
43, letting the holding arms fall into the


pockets at the outer ends of the links. Run
out the cable and attach the hooks to the track
as close as possible to the first bogie wheel
as in Pig. 44. Tighten the strainer until the
portion of the track below the tensioning wheel
is relieved of tension. Any track pin in this
section may then be driven out.
, (If the track is only to be shortened,
remove the desired number of links and tighten
the strainer until the ends of the track are
together and the holes lined up for insertion
of the link pin).
Slacken off and remove the track strainer.
Use the engines in creeper gear to wind off the
upper portion of the track, and tow or push the
tank back 14 feet to clear the track. Alter-
natively, tow or push the tank forward 14 feet
to clear the track. If both tracks are to be
removed disconnect both before moving the tank.
If sufficient space is not available to move the
tank the tracks may be cleared as follows -
Jack up the hull one side at a time until the
bogie wheels clear the track. Haul the track
from under the bogie wheels until clear.
2. Replacing a Track i
Lay the track on the ground and tow or push the
-tank on to it so that the end of the track
projects approximately 30 inches beyond the
centre of the front bogie wheel.
Bring the other end of the track over the
tensioning and idler wheels to the sprocket.
Place a blocking tube tool No. 1-11003 (Pig. 41)
in front of the second bogie wheel from the
sprocket.
Take up as much slack as posss.ble from the top
portion of the track by turning the sprocket
either with the engines or with a long bar.
If only one track is being replaced, the
opposite side brake should be pulled hard on.
The sprocket on the side being replaced will
then have the greater movement when driven by
the engines.
Place the track strainer tool No. 1-11015 on the
track with the extension arms gripping the
sprocket. Run out the cable and attach the
hooks to the track as close as possible to the
first .bogie wheel. Tighten the strainer until
. .the ends of the track are together and the
holes lined up for insertion of ehe track pin.
Drive In the track pin and lock in position with
the lead plug or retainer. When the lead plugs
are driven out of the track links a ring of lead


os left in the locking groove. This must he re-
moved before the new plug is inserted, otherwise
the purpose of the groove is defeated and the
plug will fall out. Pig.4s shows this tool which
has a hardened diamond point. Pushing the point
into the lead and running around the groove will
quickly remove the obstructing metal.
Remove the track strainer and blocking tube.
Adjust the track as directed on page 39.
NOTE: Steel tracks do not need to be run as
tight as the rubber tracks.
(c) Changing from Rubber
to Steel Tracks.
To change from rubber to steel tracks, or
vice versa, it is necessary to change the driving
sprockets.
First remove the tracks as set out above.
Remove the sprockets by unscrewing the 13
large bolts securing each sprocket to the hub.
Pit new sprocket for rubber or steel tracks
as required.


Fig. 38. Wrench No. 1-11009 used on tensioning wheel
bracket nuts
Fig. 39. Track Tensioning Screw
Fig. 40. Wrench No. 1-11009 used on track tensioning screw


Fig. 41. Track Strainer for rubber tracks with blocking
tube No. 1-11033 in position
Fig. 42. Track Coupling Clamp No. 1-11006
Fig. 43. Track Strainer 1-11015 at tensioning wheel end


Fig. 44. Track pin being driven out. Note position of hooks
Fig. 45. Track groove cleaning tool. No. ADD (SR) 76




STEERING AND BRAKES
CONTENTS
(a) Steering 45
1. Description 46
(b ) Brakes 46
1. Description 46
2 . Operation 46
(c) Brake Bands 47
1. Description 47
2. Adjusting Brake Bands 47
3. Removing Brake Bands 48
4. Brake Band Maintenance 48
(d) Air Compressor 48
1. Description 48
2. Operation 48
3. Overhauling - With Compressor Dismounted 49
4. Overhauling - With Compressor in Place 50
(e) Governor >. 50
1. Description 50
2. Adjusting Set Pressure and Pressure Range 51
3. Lubrication .51
(f) Compressor Air Reservoir 52
1. Description 52
(g) Compressor Air Reservoir Control Valve 52
1. Removing 52
2. Dismantling 52
3. Overhauling 52
4. Servicing 53
(h) Brake Chamber Assembly 53
1. Description 53
2. Removing and Dismantling Brake Chamber 53
3. Maintenance 53
(i) Illustrations. 54




STEERING AND BRAKES
(a) Steering.
1. Description,
Steering is accomplished by applying the brake
on the side to which a turn is to be made. If,
for instance, the right hand brake is applied, the
right hand track will be slowed down and through the
differential action (see ’’Controlled Differential”
Transmission Section) the left hand track will be
correspondingly speeded up and so the Tank will
steer to the right. Similarly if the left hand
brake is applied the Tank will steer to the left.
Unlike the Carrier M.G. Aust. which can be
turned In its own length by completely stopping
one track, the A.C.I Tank with controlled diff-
erential steering cannot be turned in its own
length as both tracks must always be driven though
at different speeds. The ratio of these two
speeds controls the turning radius, which is approx-
imately 50 feet with either brake fully applied.
Pig. 46 illustrates this point.
(b) Brakes.
1. Description.
Brake drums and bands are located in the
front axle assembly, one on each side of the
differential assembly. They are independently
operated by hand levers and are assisted by an
air pressure system.
Brakes are used miainly for the purpose of
steering, hence the necessity of having each
side independently operated. Both levers are
used simultaneously to reduce speed.
. An air compressor is driven by a chain from
the left hand drive shaft of the transfer box
and supplies air under pressure to a reservoir
located behind the transfer box. This reservoir
is connected by copper tubing to a twin cylinder
air control valve assembly located partly under the
driver’s seat and the air control valve is connect-
ed by copper tubing to each of two brake chambers
located one at each side of the front axle housing.
A diaphragm in each brake chamber is linked to
the brake actuating linkage. An automatic relief
valve is fitted in the top of the air reservoir and
adjusted to release at 70 lbs. pressure. At the
bottom a manually operated valve is fitted for
draining purposes.
2. Operation.
As the operation of each brake is Identical
a description of one only will be given.
As the brake lever is pulled back, a cam,
integral with the lever, progressively operates
a rocker arm mounted on the end of the air
control valve assembly.


This rocker arm forces the piston down a
corresponding distance in the cylinder, thus
closing the exhaust port and opening an air
inlet valve. Air pressure is accordingly
admitted to the brake chamber assembly, thereby
deflecting the diaphragm which, in
the brake" operating the arm. This arm is fit-
ted to the splined end of the brake shaft, the
other end of the shaft is toggled to the bands
and so the brake is applied.
Braking pressure is directly proportionate
to the amount of movement of the hand lever and
remains constant so long as the lever is . sta-
tionary. When the lever is completely released,
that is, pushed forward as far as possible, the
piston returns to its normal position in the
control cylinder thereby opening the exhaust
port and releasing the brake, and allowing the
inlet valve to close.
The hand lever, in addition to operating
the air valve is also linked to the brake
operating the shaft and so manual operation is
possible should the air pressure system fail.
(c) Brake Bands.
1. Description.
Brake bands are made in three sections,
hinged together, and may be separated alter the
bands have been removed by punching out the
hinge-pins. Each section is lined with material
of the same grade.
Linings are 14 inches long by 5-l/2 inches
wide and 5/16 inches thick. Rivet holes are
counterbored to take a 3/8 inch diam. head.
14 brass tubular rivets secure the lining
to each section. Rivets are l/2 inch long by
3/l6 inch diam. with 3/8 inch diam. head.
2. Adjusting brake bands.
Set the lower adjusting screw to allow .005
inch clearance between the lining and drum at
this point. This clearance can be measured
with .005 feeler gauge.
Tighten the top adjusting nut with special
spanner. See Pig. 50.
This nut has a groove 3/l6 inch deep milled
across the inner end which registers with the
cross pin through which the adjusting rod passes.
As the nut is adjusted the cross pin will be
forced out ‘of the groove and drop back in again
as each half turn is made. The depth of the
groove provides the necessary band clearance,
therefore any greater leverage than that pro-
vided by the special spanner will defeat the
purpose of the groove and result in a binding
brake. Care must be taken to have the groove
registering with the pin when adjustment is com-
pleted.


5. Removing brake bands.
Drain oil from front axle housing. (17 galls.)
Remove brake inspection plate (10 cap screws).
Release lock nut and screw down lower brake
adjusting screw (Fig. 52) well clear of bands.
(Located in front axle housing below bands)
Remove brake adjusting nut (upper) and spacer
spring.
Remove brake link pin by removing cotter and
prying pin out with a screw driver.
Pull bands out from underneath drum.
Reassemble in the reverse order.
4. Brake band maintenance.
Bands should be inspected for worn link pins
and the pins renewed if necessary.
If linings are worn to within 1/32 of the
rivet heads they should be renewed.
Linings are supplied cut to the correct
length with rivet holes drilled and counter-
bored.
(d) Air Compressor.
1. Description.
A single acting twin cylinder, reciprocating
type air compressor Ls mounted on the transfer
box sub-frame and is chain driven off the transfer
box left hand drive shaft.
The function of the compressor is to build
up and maintain air pressure in the reservoir, to
assist steering and braking.
2. Operation.
The air compression is obtained by the
pistons forcing the air out of the cylinder bores
and into the reservoir.
Fig. 47 shows piston (1) at the top of its
upward stroke and all the air has been forced out
of the cylinder through discharge valve (2).
Further rotation of the crankshaft pulls piston
(1) down. As piston (1) nears the end of its
downward stroke the top of the piston passes
below intake ports (A) , placed around the cylinder
bore, and air from the manifold and cleaner is
drawn through the open intake ports into the cyl-
inder. Then, as the piston starts on its upward
stroke, it closes the intake ports and starts
compressing the air in the cylinder bore. As


piston.(l) nears the top of its stroke the.
pressure in the cylinder overcomes the resistance
of spring (3), lifting discharge valve (2) from
seat '(B), permitting the compressed air to pass
out through the discharge line to the reservoir.
After the air has been discharged from the cyl-
inder, spring (3) returns discharge valve (2) to
its seat and the process is repeated until
pressure in the reservoir has been built up to
upper governor setting, usually 60 lbs. per sq.
inch.
When the upper setting is reached the
governor cuts out, delivering air pressure
through the unloader line to the unloader chamber.
This air pressure admitted to cavity (E) forces
diaphragm (13), diaphragm follower (12) and dust
guard (11) to move up, causing lever arm (6) to
rotate on fulcrum pin (7). As the lever arm
rotates, adjusting screws (5) are. forced down
against unloader valves (4), causing the un-
loader valves to move from seats (C).and thereby
opening an air passage from each cylinder into
cavity (D).
While the passages from the cylinders to
cavity (D) are open, the spring-loaded discharge
valves remain closed and the air displaced by the
upward movement of the piston is permitted to
pass without compression through cavity.(D) into
the cylinder in which the piston is moving down,
instead of being compressed and pushed out
through the discharge valve. This method of
pressure control removes the compression force
against the piston and greatly reduces wear on
practically all parts of the compressor.. The
compressor continues its unloaded operation until
reservoir pressure has dropped down to the lower
governor setting. Then the governor cuts in,
and the air is exhausted from the unloader line
and cavity (E), thus permitting spring (10). to
move unloader arm (6) up and permitting spring (8)
to close the unloader valves. As the unloader
valves close the compressor resumes normal
operation.
5. Overhauling - with compressor dismounted.
If after dismantling the cylinder bore. wear
is found to be less than .002 and the bore is in
good condition new piston rings can be fitted
and connecting rod bearings taken up.
In the case of damaged cylinder bores or
wear exceeding .002 inch reconditioning will be
necessary. Pistons and rings are available in
.010, .020 and .030 inch oversize. The
standard bore size is 2.0625 in.
Worn crank pins should be reground and
bearings remetalled and fittedo Where cylinder
wear exceeds .002 in. it will be usually found
necessary, in addition to reconditioning cylinder
bores and crankshaft, to reface discharge valve
seats, and to instal new discharge valves, main
bearings and oil seals.


After assembly the compressor should be
tested and the unloader valve adjusted as
described on page 52 „
The compressor should be thorough run in
before use. 1-1/2 hours at 800-1000 r.p.m. is
recommended with discharge port open to the
atmosphere <.
The following clearances must be adhered
to;-
Piston ring end gaps • 0 010 - .015 inches.
Piston ring side clearances- .0015 -
• ' ,0025 inches.
Connecting rod side clearance maximums-
.ols inches.
4 9 Overhauling - with compressor in place.
Wash pulled curled hair from the air cleaner in
kerosene or gasoline and saturate with a light
lubricating oil before replacing. If operating
under extreme dust conditions, the strainer
should be cleaned more often.
Remove cylinder head. Clean carbon away from
discharge and unloader valves.
Check compressor discharge line; be sure it is
not choked with carbon.
Adjust unloader valve clearance to .010 to .015
in* between top of valves and adjusting
screws (5) Fig. 47.
Check drive alignment and see that all mounting
bolts are securely fastened*
Oil unloader rocker arm fulcrum pin.
Remove unloader box cover and inspect unloader
diaphragms. Replace if necessary.
(e) Governor.
1. Description.
A governor is mounted on the side of the
compressor and is connected by copper tubing to
the pipe line leading from the compressor to the
reservoir.
Its function is to operate the unloader
valve and thereby control the maximum and
minimum pressure in the reservoir.
All air taken into the compressor cylinder
bore must first pass through the air cleaner,
which is filled with pulled curled hair. This
removes all dirt or dust from the air before it
passes into the intake manifold.
Fig. 48 shows the governor in the cut-in
position, that is, the reservoir pressure is
below the cutting-out point, and the tension
exerted by tube (6) through bracket (7) and upper
valve (3) holds lower valve (2) against seat (C)


sealing the reservoir air pressure in cavity (D),
while upper valve (3) is held away from seat (A)
so that cavity (B) and the unloading line are
open to atmosphere through the exhaust port.
When the reservoir pressure has been built up to
60 lbs. the governor cuts out. That is, the
force of the air pressure inside tube (6)
deflects the tube, removing tension maintained
on lower valve (2) through bracket (7) and upper
valve (3). When the tension is removed spring
(1), aided by the air pressure in cavity (D),
pushes lower valve (2) and upper valve (3) up so
that upper valve (3) is held against seat (A),
closing the exhaust port. As lower valve (2) is
moved upward, it moves away from seat (C) and the
air pressure from cavity (D) is permitted to pass
up into cavity (B) and out through the unloader
line. The cut-out position is maintained until
the reservoir air pressure is bled down to the
minimum setting, 40 lbs. When the minimum
setting is reached, the governor cuts in; that
is the tube again exerts sufficient pressure on
bracket (7) and upper valve (3) to force lower
valve (2) down against seat (C), sealing the
reservoir pressure in cavity (D). At the same
time, the upper valve is moved away from seat (A)
so that the air pressure in cavity (B) and the
unloader line is released to atmosphere through
the exhaust port.
2. Adjusting set pressure and pressure range.-
The pressure range may be increased by
removing shims from underneath valve guide (8) ,
or decreased by placing more shims underneath
the valve guide.- However, if the pressure
range is right, the pressure setting may be
raised or lowered by the following methods-
Hold adjusting screw (4) with suitable tool and
back off adjusting screw nut (5).
Adjust pressure by turning adjusting screw.
To raise the set pressure, turn adjusting
screw clockwise; to lower the set pressure,
turn adjusting screw counter-clockwise.
Hold adjusting screw (4) firmly and turn
adjusting screw nut (5) into locked position.
5. Lubrication.
Lubrication is delivered from a reservoir in
the bottom of the housing by a plunger type oil
pump, also located in the bottom of the housing
and operated off the crankshaft. Oil is forced
past a check valve through the oil passage in
the housing into the end of the drilled crank-
shaft and then to all crankshaft bearings and
wrist pins. Cylinders, bores and main bearings
are lubricated by "fling” from big ends (.Fig.49).
For grade of oil and capacity, see Lubrication
Chart.


(f) Compressor Air
—- Reservoir . — * -
1. Description.
The air reservoir is secured with four bolts
to a sub-frame behind the transfer box. A
relief valve, adjusted to release at 70 lbs.
pressure is fitted at one end.
An air pressure gauge located in a small
instrument panel in the rear bulkhead is connected
to the reservoir with copper tubing. Prom the
bottom of this reservoir a copper tube passes to
the atmosphere through a wheel valve located on
the inside of the hull, forward of the right hand
side escape hatch. This outlet is provided to
drain condensate from the reservoir.
Blow condensate out of the reservoir by
opening and closing wheel valve.
(g) Reservoir Air
Control Valve.
1. Removing.
Remove driver’s seat (2 bolts).
Disconnect pipe lines (3).
Remove assembly (2 bolts).
2, Dismantling. Ref. Fig. 51.
Remove clevis pin (A).
Lift off rocker cam (B).
Remove top cover plate (C) (4 nuts). Spring seat
assembly (D) will come away with cover (D).
Remove graduating spring (H).*
Remove piston.
Remove threaded cap (J).
Lift out spring (L) and valve (M).
Lift out sleeve (N).
Lift-out shaft (0),
Valve (P) and spring (R) can now be removed
through the other end of housing (K).
Spring (R) is greater in diameter than spring
(L), and care must be taken to reassemble in their
respective locations.
Reassemble in the reverse order.
5. Overhauling.
After inspection all worn or damaged parts
must be replaced.
P
After the assembly has been refitted, clear-
ance .005 in. minimum must be provided at (T).
Check with .005 in. feeler gauge.
Stem (E) is screwed into spring seat (D) and
locked with pin (P), To provide the necessary
clearance at (T) remove lock pin (F), adjust stem
(E), and replace lock pin (P). A hole (G) is
provided to facilitate turning stem (E), Lock
pin (P) passes through a slot milled in stem (E)
therefore clearance can only be adjusted to the
nearest half turn. Be sure that hand brake lever


is in the "off" position and roller (V) is in
contact with the lever cam when checking this
adjustment.
4. Servicing.
Remove one of the plugs (S) Fig. 51, and
allow air pressure to escape. Replace this
plug, start the motors, and allow the reservoir
to refill• Remove the other plug (S), and
allow air to escape once more, and replace the
plug. This procedure serves to scavenge the
air control valve assembly.
(h) Brake Chamber
Assembly.
1, Description.
Two brake chamber assemblies are used, one
in conjunction with each set of brake bands.
They are located one at each side, screwed into
the front axle housing.
Each assembly is made up of two cone shaped
casings bolted together with 18 bolts and
containing a diaphragm, against which bears a
flat metal disc with a tubular stem. A push rod
with a spherical head on its inner end and a
clevis on the outer, fits into this tubular stem
and protrudes through the casing.
The clevis is connected to the brake link-
age. Copper tubing connects each assembly to
the air control valve and when the diaphragm is
deflected by air pressure the movement is sub-
sequently transmitted to the brake bands. Two
air pressure gauges mounted on a small instrument
panel attached to the gear box are connected by
copper tubing, one to each brake chamber assembly.
2. Removing and dismantling brake chamber.
Disconnect pipe lines.
Disconnect brake rod.
Unscrew assembly out of front axle housing.
Remove 18 bolts and separate the two halves of
the brake chamber.
Diaphragm, tubular sleeve and push rod can now
be lifted out.
5. Maintenance.
Check sleeve for free movement in barrel.
Free if necessary by cleaning, or lap with fine
emery cloth.
Inspect diaphragm for cracks or punctures.
Low pressure reading on the respective
gauge located above the gear box is an indica-
tion of a damaged diaphragm or a leak in the
pipe line to the brake chamber.
NOTE: Parts are not serviced separately.
Therefore -if any parts are found to be ,
unserviceable the complete assembly
should be-renewed.


Fig. 46. Tank turning circle with R.H. brake fully applied
and controlled differential steering in action. The ratio of
sprocket drives derived from the computations is 200:122.
Comparison of turning movement of Carrier and Tank
Fig. 47. Air-compressor details


Fig. 48. Air-compressor governor
Fig. 49. Air-compressor oiling system
Fig. 50. Adjustment of brake bands


Fig. 51. Reservoir air control valve


Fig. 52. Brake system


ENGINE
(Mechanical System)
CONTENTS
(a) Description 59
(b) Bolt Tensions 59
(c) Removal of Engines 60
1. Removing complete Power Unit 60
2. Removing Nos. 1 and 2 Engines 61
3. Removing N 0.3 Engine 61
4. Removing Pan Driving Pulley and Rear
Mounting Bracket 62
(d) Top Overhaul 62
(e) Cylinder Head - 63
1. Cylinder Numbering 63
2. Servicing 63
(f) Removing and Installing Connecting Rods
and Pistons 64
(g) Piston Pins —64
1. Removing - 64
2. Installing 64
(h) Piston Rings - 65
1. Replacing 65
2. Measuring clearance 65
3. Micrometer measurement 65
4. Feeler Gauge measurement 66
(i) Reconditioning of Cylinders 67
1. Temperature correction 68
2* Removing abrasive 68
3• Lubrication 68
(j) Connecting Rod alignment 68
(k) Bearings !
1. Replacing Connecting Rod Bearings 69
2. Replacing Main Bearings 69
3. Replacing Rear Main Bearing Oil Seal 69
(l) Flywheel 70
1. Replacing Flywheel Ring Gear 70
(m) Valves '7O
1. Precautions - Engine dismantling 70
2. Removing and Installing Valves 70
3. Reconditioning Valves and Seats 71
4. Noisy operation of Valve Lifters 71
5. Valve Lifter Leak-down rate - 72
6. Installation of Valve Lifters 73
7. Replacing Timing Chain and Sprockets 73
(n) Camshaft ' 74
1. Removing Camshaft 74
2. Installing Camshaft 74
Chart of Engine Specifications and
Tolerances 75
(o) Illustrations 78




ENGINE (Mechanical System)
(a) Description.
The cylinder blocks and crankcase are in one
casting of grey iron, as also are the cylinder
heads, Pig, 53.
Cylinders are set at 90 degrees. The crank-
shaft is supported by three main bearings. Main
bearing caps are cast iron and are held in place
with special cap screws and lock washers. Shell
type bearings of steel backed babbit are used.
End thrust is taken by the centre main bearing.
Six counterweights are used, four of them
are integral with the crankshaft. Numbers two
and five are piloted by locating sleeves and
held to the crankshaft by special cap screws and
locating washers. Harmonic balancers and "damped
bending" flywheels are fitted.
The connecting rods for opposite cylinders
are carried side by side on the same crankpin.
The cylinder blocks are offset if in. in relation
to each other to provide for this. The large
end of the connecting rod is split on an angle to
permit removal from the top of the cylinder block.
The rods are rifle drilled for pressure
lubrication of the piston rings and the big ends
are also drilled for lubrication of the cylinder
bores.
Connecting rod bearings are of steel backed
babbit type. The pistons are of T slot design
and made of aluminium alloy anodized to provide a
hard wearing surface.
Two compression rings and two oil rings are
used on the pistons. The piston pins float in
the.connecting rods and are retained by circlips.
The camshaft is a solid shaft supported by
three bearings and driven by a silent chain. Both
the camshaft and the crankshaft sprockets are
stamped with the timing mark "0".
Hydraulic valve lifters are used, assuring
quiet operation and eliminating the necessity for
valve tappet adjustments. The distributor oil
pump drive gear is integral with the camshaft.
The camshaft gear meshes with an idler gear that
drives the distributor and oil pump shaft.
The distributor rotates in a clockwise
direction. Valves have 45 degree seats.
(b) Bolt Tensions.
The tightness of the attaching bolts of various
engine parts is very important if distortion and
permanent injury of the parts is to be avoided. A
torque or tension wrench should always be used on
these engine bolts so that they can be accurately
tightened according to the bolt tension specifications
which are given below.


Location, _ .-m...
Size
Min.
Max.
Camshaft Sprocket Nat
3/4 - 16
90
lb/ft
95
lb/ft
Intake & Exhaust"
Manifold
3/8 - 24
25
"
30
h
Connecting Rod Bolts
Special
50
tf
60
ft
Crankshaft Counter-
weight
5/8 - 18
145
I!
155
it
Cylinder Head Bolts
7/16 - 14
70
II
75
ft
Flywheel to Crank-
shaft
7/16 - 20
65
II
70
i»
Oil Pan Drain Plug
l/2 - 20
20
If
25
ii
Main Bearing Caps
to Crankcase
9/16 - 12
1130
II
140
11
Engine Rear Supports
7/l6 - 14
j 50
It
60
ii
(c) Removal of Engines.
1. Removing complete power unit.
Open both master switches.
Disconnect earth cables and starter cables from
batteries.
Disconnect wiring for power unit at the engine plug
and socket.
Remove 40 - 3/4 in. bolts securing engine cover
plate.
Remove both armour plate inspection covers over
No.l and N 0.2 engines.
Pass the loop of a wire rope sling around the
dividing strip separating the two openings and
hoist. The back ledge is used as a pivot
whilst hoisting. It is advisable to move the
lifting tackle backwards or the Tank forward to
prevent the cover from sliding forward and
damaging the power unit.
Remove the armoured tail piece. Disconnect all
outside electrical connections entering the rear
compartment.
Disconnect universal joints of engines (1) and (2)
from their drive shafts and No. (3) at both ends.
In order to do this, the turret and basket must
be revolved to bring the opening in the floor
over the joints.
Disconnect exhaust pipes.
Disconnect wiring leads of fire extinguishers from
junction box on hull.
Disconnect oil pressure gauge unions at engines and
instruments on bulkhead.
Disconnect main accelerator rods from arm at front
end of engine mounting frame.
Disconnect earth straps from sub.frame to hull.
Remove eight sub-frame holding down cap screws.


Use special sling which removes assembly at an
angle. This is absolutely necessary as it is
impossible to hoist the power unit straight up
it must "go in"and "come out" at an angle of 30
degrees. See Pig. 56.
Two special eyes are attached to the sub-frame to
which the sling is attached. Connect the two short
ropes of the sling to these and the long single
rope of the sling to the central cross section of
the sub-frame at the front end and hoist out.
To remove No, 3 engine from the assembly after the
power unit has been taken from the Tank involves a
different procedure from that employed for Nos. 1 and
2 engines.
2. Removing Nos. 1 and 2 Engines from Power Unit •
Drain water from the cooling system, and disconnect
water hoses,
Disconnect at the engine end, all wiring leading
to the engine plug box.
Remove carburettor controls as indicated in top
overhaul.
Disconnect the pipe union to the fuel pump.
Disconnect Gravener fire extinguisher pipes at "Y"
junctions close to both bottles. Disconnect wiring
to Gravener fuse at two-pin connectors located at
front of engines near sub-frame.
Remove the earth strap.
Remove the mounting bQtls (1 cap screw at each front
end bracket, and two bolts at the single rear
bracket under the rear of the clutch housing).
Attach the engine lifting jig (E-11001) by means of
cylinder head cap screws.
Adjust the jig to balance the engine, lift out and
place in a s tand.
3. Removing No. 3 engine. (With Nos, 1 and 2 engine
in the unit).
Drain water from the cooling system.
Drain fuel from the petrol tanks.
Remove top water circulating hoses.
Remove the pipe lines from the top of fuel tanks.
Disconnect the near side fuel tank and the piping of
the Gravener fire extinguishers mounted on it.
Remove Pan assembly complete as described under
"Cooling System".
Remove oil cleaner from engine.
Remove remaining radiator water connections from
the engine *
Disconnect wiring to Gravener fuse at two-pin
connector located at front of engine. Also


disconnect Gravoner wiring leading from engine
to Gravener bottles.
Disconnect wiring leading to the engine plug box.
Disconnect the carburettor controls.
Disconnect the flexible pipe union at the fuel
pump.
Remove the earth strap.
Remove the two bolts securing the rear engine-
mounting bracket to sub-frame.
Remove the cap screws from the front end mounting
brackets. The engine is then ready to be lefted
out.
Attach the engine lifting jig (E-11001) as before.
NOTE: Alternately the engine may be removed
curaplcte with the fan assembly if desired, in this
case omit instructions re separate Pan Assembly
removal.
4. Removing Fan Driving Pulley and Rear Mounting
Bracket•
When engines 1 and 2 have besn removed, it is
possible to withdraw the fan driving pulley from
No. 3 engine rear mounting bracket.
Hoist out the fan assembly.
Remove the universal joint flange nut and with a
suitable puller, withdraw the pulley.
Disconnect the rear mounting bracket from the
flywheel and clutch housing by removal of four
cap screws. Support the rear of the engine whilst
this work is being carried out.
Screw out the pipe leading from the grease nipple
to the elbow inside the housing.
Withdraw the housing (which contains a ball race)
from the clutch shaft, using a suitable puller.
In reassembling, the felt in the retainers on
both sides of the ball race, must be soaked In
engine oil and replaced. Plrst replace the
housing, then fit the rear retainer (which has
the grease pipe screwed into it,) following with
the ball race packed with grease and then the
outer retainer.
Do not omit to connect the pipe leading from
the grease nipple to the elbow.
(d) Top Overhaul.
Remove H.T. leads from plugs.
Remove Spark Plugs.
Remove Wire from heat indicator.
Remove accelerator rods. (The rod between engine
1 and 2 is dismantled by removing two small bolts
from the control plate on carburettor of the left


hand or near side engine.)
Drain radiator and remove water outlet hose.
Remove cylinder head cap screws.
Remove oil cleaner.
Remove Gravener fire extinguisher piping.
Remove head, clean carbon from head and top
of pistons.
To recondition valves, remove cover plate in
Vee of block.
Remove oil pipe from hydraulic valve lifters.
Remove cap screws securing lifter assemblies and
take out assemblies.
Compress valve spring with tool No. J-257X See
Fig. 57, this will remove split retainers,
then draw out valve.
Refaco valves and seats. Lightly grind in valves.
Test stems for length with tool No. J-1055.
See Fig. 61, and shorten if necessary.
Oil the valve stems and replace springs and collets.
Replace valve lifter assemblies (as instructed
page 73) using tool No. J-827 Sec, Fig. 62.
See "Removing and Installing Valves" Page 70.
Replace cylinder heads. Use new gaskets.
Use tension wrench on holding down cap screws
(65 to 70 lbs. ft.) Be careful that the two
oversize head cap screws are used at each
water outlet connection. These are half an
inch longer than the remaining screws and would
break through the water jacket if used in any
other position.
(e) Cylinder Head.
1. Cylinder Numbering.
The left front cylinder, is number one cylinder
and the right front cylinder is number two. The
cylinders in the left block are odd numbered;
those in the right block are even numbered.
The same cylinder heads are used on all engines.
Also, the same cylinder head gaskets are used, and
they are interchangeable between right and left
sides. A non-hardening gasket paste is recommended
for use when installing cylinder head gaskets.
This paste remains in a semi-fluid state which
provides a good seal, yet permits easy dismantling.
2. Cylinder Head Service.
•Thorough tightening of the cylinder head cap
screws is necessary to insure a leafi-proof connection.
Tighten the screws from the center of the head


outward. First, tighten while the engine is cold
then warm up the engine thoroughly and retighten.
The correct bolt tension is 70 to 75 foot pounds.
(f) Removing and Installing
Connecting Rods and
Pistons.
Connecting rod and piston assemblies are
removed from above. The big ends of the connect-
ing rods are split at an angle to make removal
through the bores possible.
To loosen the threads of connecting rod
bolts place a blunt punch against the bolt head
and tap firmly with a heavy hammer.
The punch should be of brass, approximately
the diameter of the bolt head, and three or four
in. long. Held it directly in line with the
bolt for best results.
Always inspect crankshaft journals carefully
whenever connecting rods are removed. A rough
or scored crank pin will result in further failure
if it is not corrected before the engine is re-
assembled .
Fistons should be assembled to the rods so
that the T-slot in the skirt will be on the left
side of the engine.
The big end bearing caps are attached with
special type cap screws. To tighten them, use
connecting rod socket wrench, tool No. J. 1498
(see Fig. 63) or a wrench with a T-handle not
more than 12 in. across.
The lock washers used under the bolt heads
are of special design and material. When
assembling, new lock washers must be used.
When assembling connecting rods to crank-
shaft, make sure that the numbers on the rods
face the bottom of the engine, and that they
correspond with, and are on the same side as the
numbers on the caps.
(g) Piston Pins.
1. Removing.
Remove circlips at each end of piston pin.
It is not necessary to heat the piston for
removal of the piston pin at ordinary room temp-
eratures, the standard fit being a just-free to
a light-push fit through both holes at 70 degrees
F.
2. Installing ,
Lubricate piston pin thoroughly with engine oil.
Push pin into piston by hand from either sidq.
Use new circlips - never refit used circlips.


The piston pins should be a free hand-press
fit in pistons with no perceptible play at 70
degrees.
Piston pins ordinarily will not become loose
enough to cause a knock or a tapping until after
exceedingly high mileages.
(h) Piston Rings.
1. Replacing Piston Rings.
Make sure that the rings are installed
exactly as shown in Pig. 64. Although the
slotted oil control rings operate satisfactorily
with either side up, it is very important to
instal the compression rings as follows; The
lower compression ring has a circumferential
notch in the outside corner ending near the
joint. This notch must be placed toward the
top of the piston; otherwise the rings will
not hold compression, and may cause serious oil
pumping.
2. Measuring Piston Clearance.
Pistons should be measured for size l/8 in.
below the upper cross slot and at right angles to
the piston pin. The clearance should be .0020 in.
to .0022 in. in this position at 70 degress P.
Subtract .0001 in. from measurement for every 5.5
degrees P. above 70 degrees P. or add for below
70 degrees P. Cylinders should be measured 1-1/4
in. from the top, crosswise to the cylinder block.
Replacement pistons'are furnished in the
following sizes;
Standard
.005 Oversize .015 Oversize
• .010 Oversize .030 Oversize
.Piston diameters as given in the engine
specification table (Page 75) can be measured with
a large micrometer as shown in Pig. 65. The
measurements must be taken on the large diameter,
which is 90 degrees from the piston pin hole.
Measure at two points; just above the lower edge
and just below the lower ring groove.
Before ordering pistons for replacement, it
is extremely important to determine the size of
the cylinder bores by actual measurement. This
is essential because the cylinder bore may have
been enlarged by refinishing. Actual measurement
at the time of replacement is the only certain
way to avoiding errors in ordering.
There are two methods of measuring piston
clearance; with micrometer or with ribbon feeler
gauges. Both of these methods are explained in
detail below.
3. Micrometer Measurement.
The equipment required consists of a 3 in.
to 4 in. outside micrometer and an inside
micrometer of the same size. The outside -
micrometer must be adjusted to turn very freely


so that it can be adjusted up to the piston with
a very light turning effort on the screw. If
it is adjusted to get a frictional feel over the
piston, it will show several tens of a
thousandths smaller than its actual size. With
a little practice, fractional thousandths can be
checked very well.
The inside micrometer for measuring the
cylinders must be provided with an extension
handle and adjusted so the * screw turns sufficient-
ly tight to retain its setting while checking the
cylinder at the different points to be measured.
The direct readings shown on'the inside micro-
meter should not be taken as the cylinder sizes.
After obtaining a light feel on the inside micro-
meter when one end of the bar contacts the exact
centre of the cylinder as it is being rotated in
the vertical plane, remove the micrometer and
measure its length with the outside micrometer.
This should be done holding one end
anvil of the outside micrometer, and adjusting
the screw until the same feel is obtained as was
felt in measuring the piston.
By this method, if the two tools do not have
the same reading for a given size, no error will
result in arriving at the actual net clearance of
the piston in the cylinder at any point.
In measuring the pistons, it will be noted
the upper end of the skirt is always the smallest.
All T-slot aluminium pistons are iground tapered
on the skirt to make the piston, .001 in. to
.002 in. larger at the open end. Thus if the
clearance were .002 in. at the upper end. and the
skirt tapered .002 in. there would be no clear-
ance at the bottom, or if the cylinder were .0005
in. smaller at the bottom, the piston would be
in confliction .0005 in.
The above conditions are perfectly normal
and are necessary to long life and quietness of
piston action. No undue friction or^ scoring
results therefrom due to the flexibility design-
ed Into the casting and the oval shape of the
skirt.
4• Feeler Gauge Measurement.
Where no micrometer or dial indicator is
available to measure piston clearance, the use
of a feeler•ribbon gauge will serve satisfactor-
ily as there is-a definite relation between
feeler gauge pull in pounds and micrometer
clearance in thousandths of inches as shown in
Fig. 66 which is set up for .002 in., .0025 in*
and .003 in. gauge thickness.
Peeler ribbon gauges for this purpose must
be considered as precision tools, and if rusted
or ■'wrinkled are unfit for use. The most con-
venient length is about 3 in., with a cotter pin
soldered on one end to hook onto the pull scale.
In addition, the lower ends should be rounded
and any frayed edges honed to prevent possible
scratching of the cylinder and incorrect scale
readings. Extreme c 1 eyn 1 ine-ss and a little •


lubrication is also necessary for accurate
results.
In order to ob -1 n the piston clearance
at the upper end of skirt it Is necessary to
insert the piston into its upper extreme position,
along with the ribbon, which must be kept located
over the vertical slot and not in excess of 1/2 in.
below the upper end of the skirt, as illustrated
in. Fig, 65, It is advisable to mark the ribbon
adjacent to the piston head, so that its proper
location on the piston can be maintained. It is
helpful in getting the ribbon started into the
cylinder along with the piston, to use both thumbs
to spring the piston inward,,
Feeler gauges may also be used for measuring
taper In cylinders as follows:
Using a ribbon which gives between two and
six pounds pull, insert the ribbon with the
piston open end down and into the cylinder about
one inch, taking the pull results at this point
and at intervals of each two ins. downward,
until the open end of the piston is l/8 in. below
the bottom cf the cylinder, By keeping a record
of results the clearance difference can bo read
from the chart (Fig, 66),
Checking she clearances with ribbon gauges
should not be a c tempted without help on the under
side. of the engine to push back the piston when
required ; and also prevent it being damaged if
it should fall through the cylinder.
The clearances as assembled will become
approximately .0005 in*'greater at the upper
end of. the skirt within a few hundred miles of
operation , and remain so until increased due
to normal wear. The initial increase of .0005
in. should not be mistaken as misfitting or rapid
wear, as this condition is due to normalizing of
the piston casting. If this did not occur, it
would be necessary to fit the piston with .0005 in.
more clearance,
(l) Reconditioning
Worn cylinder bores can be reconditioned by
reboring and/or honing.
The point at which cylinder reconditioning
becomes necessary will be governed by the
following main factors:
Oil consumption
Compression pressures and boro wear.
Probable future- availability of the vehicle for
overhaul.
The service needs of the moment.
"Mileage covered since new or from last overhaul.


1. Temperature correction.
As aluminium expands and contracts at approx-
imately twice the rate of iron, it is necessary
to correct the clearance results found, if the
room temperature is much above or below 70 degrees.
The correction given below is for the difference
between the expansion of aluminium and iron or
steel, therefore no consideration should be given
to cylinder temperature or the tools used for
measuring other than that they be at approximately
the same temperature as the pistons v;hen measured.
The temperature correction for piston size at other
than 70 degrees F. is as follows:
Subtract .0001 in. from micrometer reading
for each 5.5 degrees above 70 degrees. Add .0001
in. to micrometer reading for each 5.5 degrees
below 70 degrees.
If ribbon gauges are being used, the
corrections are:
Subtract 2/5 lb. for each 5.5 degrees above
70 degrees before referring to chart.
Add 2/5 lb. for each 5,5 degrees below 70
degrees before referring to chart.
2. Removing Abrasive after Cylinder Reconditioning.
Prior- to the reconditioning operation, tape the
crank pins tightly. Afterwards wash down the
cylinders, crankcase and shaft to remove all
abrasive material. This should be repeated at
least three times, using fresh kerosene each time.
Do not use wiping cloth or an air gun. Remove
and clean the crankshaft thrust bearing, as these
surfaces are sufficiently exposed to gather
abrasive material.
5. Lubrication.
It is important to use a high grade light
bodied oil for breaking in reconditioned engines.
In addition, a 2t% mixture of this lubricant
with the fuel is suggested for the first 200 miles,
which is in the ratio of one pint per five gallons
of fuel. Do not pour the oil into the fuel tank,
as it will settle around the fuel pipe and cause
smoke, hard starting and stalling. The oil must
be stirred into three times as much fuel as oil
used, before adding to the fuel supply. Once the
oil is diluted in this way, it will satisfactorily
blend with the fuel.
(,i) Connecting Rod
Alignment.
Alignment of connecting rods should be
checked before assembly, as even slight
misalignment can cause excessive oil consumption.
Both sides of the rod and piston assembly should be


tested on an alignment fixture.
Vs/hen straightening connecting rods , the rod
should be bent a little further than necessary and
then bent back until straight; otherwise the tough-
ness of the steel used in its construction may
cause the rod to return to its former shape.
(k) Bearings.
1« Replacing Connec tinr rod bea r’.ngs .
Connecting rod bearings are shell type of
stet babbitt. Bearings worn beyond the
limits given on page 75 can be" replaced without
removing the rod as embly. Remove the caps and
replace the upper and lower bearing halves.
Upper and lower bearing halves are not inter-
changeable because the upper bearing has oil
holes for the connecting rod oil passages. The
upper half must be installed cor ; ectly in the rod,
otherwise no oil will reach the piston pins and
cylinder walls.
2. Replacing Main Bearings.
Shell type main bearings of steel-backed babbitt
are used (See Fi g. 67). End thrust is taken by the
center main bearing. Bearings worn beyond the limits
given on page 75 should be replaced, and on no
account should attempts be mad to shim, file or
otherwise take up worn bearings. To make replace-
ment :
Remove cap and take out the worn lower shell.
Rotate the crankshaft *n reverse direction so
that the upper shell is turned out of the
crankcase.
TT se a flattened cotter p‘n in the oil passage hole
to contact the she 11 and force it out.
Place a new upper shell on crankshaft journal with
the locating lug in its correct position and
rotate shaft to turn shell into place.
Instal the lower shell in the can and replace the
cap. When replacing the rear main be ring cap,
always instal new cork plugs in the grooves at
sides of cap to prevent oil leaks. Grease plugs
liberally to facilitate installation.
CAUTION: Always clean oil lines and crankcase
thoroughly before installing new main or connecting
rod bearings.
3. Replacing, Re r Main Bearing Oil Seal.
Installation of a new rear main bearing oil
seal requires use of tool No. J-834 (Fig. 68).
After crankshaft has be- n removed, from engine and v/orn
packing taken out,proceed as follows :-
Remove rear main bearing shells to avoid possible
damage.
Instal a length of new packing in groove in crankcase
and dr’ve up into place, by pounding with a hammer


on handle of tool J-834. Alternatively an arbor
press may be used.
Cut off each end of backing flush with the bearing
edge.
Repeat operation in bearing cap. An arbor press
will provide the best means of holding the
packing in place while cutting.
(L) Flywheel.
1 • Raplacing Flywheel Ring G_eaig.
It is not necessary to replace the entire flywheel
when a flywheel ring gear is damaged. The old
ring gear can be driven of f ’ the flywheel, and a
new one heated and 'nstalled.
The ring gear can bo heated either on a hot
plate or in an oven. A suitable oven can be made
by cutting an oil drum five or six ins. from the
bottom and making a cover to fit.
The gear should be heated to a temperature of
350 to°4oo degrees F., but no hotter. The tempera-
ture can be checked with an ordinary^oven thermo-
meter. If a hot plate is used, two 3 in. pieces
of solder can bo placed on opposite edges of the
gear. When the solder starts to melt, the gear
will be heated sufficiently.
CAUTION: Do not heat the gear with a welding
torch or over’a direct flame. Uncontrolled heat
v/ill destroy the temper of the gear.
(m) Valves.
1. Precautions of Engine Dismantling.
When ever the valves are ground or the engine
Is dismantled for other service work, extreme
care must be exercised to keep any dirt from getting
into the engine. A set of cleaning precautions,
over and above the actual mechanical procedure,
is outlined below.
Before removing the valve cover plates, clean the
engine Vee thoroughly. Washing with kerosene
and a brush and blowing off with air Is satis-
factory, but the best method is to use a kerosene
gun. (This tape of gun sprays a kerosene air
mixture for very effective cleaning).
Cover the intake and exhaust manifold port holes
when the manifolds are taken off. Plywood or
cardboard coated with shellac makes a satis-
factory cover.
After removing the valve lifter brackets, the
openings in the crankcase should be covered with
pieces of wire gau.se cut to fit. Gauze Is super-
ior to rags for preventing valve locks, etc., from
falling into the oil pan, as it leaves no fluff
• in the engine•
The cylinder bores should be covered with Scotch
tape laid in shingle fashion across the entire
block, and vented with a cotter pin Inserted at
the lower edge of each cylinder.
2. Removing and Installing Valves.


It Is necessary to remove the valve lifter
assemblies before amoving valves from tho engine*
The valve lifter J-257-X is used to compress
springs for removal of valve spring retainers and
locks.
Before replacing valve lifter assemblies, valve
stems should be checked for proper length, using
valve stem length gauge J-1055, set; Pig. 61 to
measure distance from end of valve stem to heel
of cam. If valve stems are found to bo too long
when checked in closed position, they should be
ground off until the tool wil-l slide into place
with the; valve seated. Valve lifters should be
dismantled and cleaned before being reinstalled.
If tool J-1055 is not available, it will be necessary
to instal valves, valve springs and lifters and check
clearance between stem and lifters, which should be
,050 - .070 inch.
3 • Reconditioning Valvc-s and Seats.
Valve reconditioning normally is required much
less frequently in engines having hydraulic
valve silencers(See Fig. 69). When this work is
done, however, the close limits given in the
specification table on cage 76 must be maintained.
For example, the clearance between the valve
stems and guides must never exceed .005 inch. Worn
valve guides are not only noisy, but may also
cause excessive oil consumption as well as im-
proper seat in. of the valves.
When replacing valve stem guides, extreme care
must be exercised not to damage the cylinder block
or the new guides. Valve stem gu'.de replacer, Tool
No. J-826, should always'be used for this operation.
Concentric valve seats are of equal Importance.
After seats are reground, eccentricity must not
exceed .0015 inch total indicator reading, and
seats must have a uniform width of .075 inch.
4. Noisy Operation mf Valve Lifters.
Noisy operation of the hydraulic valve mechanism
may be due to :-
Incorrect Oil Level. - The oil level should never
be above nor more than one quart below the n Full M
mark un the ‘ndicator. If the level Is too
high, foaming may result; If too low, air may
enter the pump inlet. In either case, noisy
valve action may result.
Improper Oil Pressure. - If valve action is noisy
after oi'l is hot," determine oil pressure at the
oil silencer pipe. Pressure here should be three
to five pounds when gauge on dash reads 12 to
15 pounds.
Incorrect oil pressure usually results from a
leak In the oiling system, a sticking or Im-
properly operating oil pressure relief valve,
scored parts, ur faulty operation of oil pump.


Weak Valve Lifter Plunder Springs. - These can
cause noisy valve operation by permitting
excessive plunger movement and wear. To
check these springs, remove the silencer
units, dismantle each un J t, thoroughly,
dry each part and reassemble.the un’t. Then
check the pressure requ'red to compress each
plunger spring, dry.
If the strength of these springs is such that
less than six or seven pounds is required to
compress them, the hydraul’c unit should be re-
placed. The valve cylinder and plunger are
mated and should be replaced as a unit.
Dirty, scored or worn valve 1* fter parts. - A
* recurring tap or click synchronized with the
valve action Indicates trouble in single
silencer units, which should be dismantled and
checked for sticking mechanism, clearance
between plunger ..and valve stem, and dirt or
foreign particles, which can be cleaned after
dismantling by w3,p Ing with a soft cloth and
washing in petrol.
The engine oil pan should always' be removed
and cleaned when dirt has be, n responsible for
sticking. The oil passages in the lifter guides
should also be cleaned thoroughly.
Pitting and scoring of the surfaces, may
result from gritty particles, excessive wear or
damage during installation. This cond’* t ? on re-
quires replacement of the hydraul'c unit (cylinder
and plunger). It is not necessary to replace
the valve lifter body.
Incorrect clearance between the cylinder and
plunger is usually caused by mismating of the parts.
The hydraulic cylinder and plunger are carefully
fitted i n manufacture and are not Interchangeable.
5. Valve Iff ter Leak-down Rate.
The leak-down rate of oil in the valva lifter
assembly should always be checked with the special
tester, Tool no. J-1297-A (Pigs. 70, 71) using the
special spacing washer adapter No. J 1297-41. The
use of this tool is explained as follows :-
Assemble adapter, J-1297-41 in right hand socket
of tool.
Fill reservoir of tool with No. 1 grade kerosene.
Release hall check on master unit and pump In
inverted position In kerosene to remove, all air
and fill completely with kerosene.
Insert master unit in left socket of tool.
Insert valve lifter unit to be tested In right hand
socket of tool.
Rest weight of handle on beam pilot and set Indicator
or pointer at zero.
Press down on handle quickly several tines and
note movement of pointer. If pointer goes down,
the leak-duwn rate of the valve lifter being


tested is greater than the master.unit
and should bo discarded v If the pointer
stays at zero or goes up the valve lifter ’ f '
is satisfactory.
6lnstallation of Valve Lifters.
Before installing valve lifters in an engine,
note the following Items to make sure lifters
are assembled correctly.
Ball check should rattle when cylinder unit is
shaken.
Plunger should bounce back when pressed quickly
into cylinder and released.
Plunger spring should be locked into cylinder body
with a twist of plunger.
Cylinder should slide smoothly * nto lifter* body
when free of oil.
Instal lifters as follows
Vnlvo lifter bodies should be filled with oil and
silencer assemblies set in lifter bodies.
Valve lifter brackets should be installed in the
engine, using Tool No. J-827 see Fig. 62.
It Is extrernely * moortant to use this tool
when lifter bodies are filled with oil, as any
pumping of the lifters will draw oil into the
lifter assemblies and render installation very
dif f3.cult.
Engine oil should be applied to tops of lifter
assemblies after they have be: n installed.
The bracket oil fe<d pipes should be connected to
the sup ly end only and the engine cranked
until all air is expelled from the lines.'
The oil feed pipe 3 can then be attached to the
lifter bracket connection.
Check clearance between valve stem and top of
plunger, by forcing oil out of lifter and
fully depressing plunger soring. Clearance
should be .030 ~ .070 inch. If clearance
is less than .030, grind off the end of the
valve stem.
7. Replaclng Timing Chain and Sprockets.
Engine timing chains and sprockets should be
assembled and Installed as a unit. Care should
be exercised to see that the timing marks are
properly lined up as shown in Fig. 72.
Pilot, Tool No. J-836 (Fig. 73) should be used
on the end of camshaft when installing chain and
sprockets. Do not attempt to force camshaft sprocket
on shaft, as th* s might damage distributor and
oil pump drive gear un roar camshaft bearing.
The front cover plate gasket of all engines
is an open-end gasket, but for easier handling
is supplied v/1 th a closed end. When installing ✓


this gasket, therefore, tear off the lower
portion at perforation.
(n) Camshaft.
1. Removing and Installing Camshaft.
Dismantle engine by removing generator, carburettor,
fuel and vacuum pump, manifolds, valve lifter
assemblies, etc., so that camshaft can be
removed.
Remove engine front cover.
Remove nut and eccentric on end of camshaft and
instal pilot tool.
Draw off crankshaft and camshaft timing wheels.
Remove camshaft.
Remove the flywheel housing.
Remove camshaft bearings, 1f necessary by pushing
them out of engine bearing supports, in which
they are a press fit. Special Tool No. J-829
is recommended for th*s operation. See Fig. 74.
2. Installing the C n mshaft.
If new bearings are used, paint outside surfaces
with white lead.
Instal front bearing, then rear bearing, and then
centre bearing, piloting installing Tool No.
J-829 at other two points In each instance. Be
sure to line up oil holes properly.
Replace camshaft and front cover. Be careful not
to overtighten nut on end of camshaft. Correct
bolt tension is from 90 to 95 pounds foot.
Reassemble engine.


ENGINE SPECIFICATIONS AND TOLERANCES
Bore .. *. .... .... .... 3-?5- m
Stroke .. .... .... .... 4J"
Compression ratio .... ..... 6.25-1
Compress’ on pressure (lb. per T
sq. in.)At 1000 R.P.M... 157
Horsepower -
Rated .. -. . J i .. j * * * 30.20
Piston displacement in cu. ini**. 346
Firing order .... .... .... 1-8-7-3-5-6-4-2
CAMSHAFT
Bearing clearance -
New limits •... .... .... .0015—.0033"
Worn limits, not over . .... .0045"
Bearing out of round, not over .. .002"
Number of bearings .... .... 3
CONNECTING RODS
Clearance between be n r*ng and shaft-
New limits ..<* .... 0015-.0025"
Worn limits, not over . .... .0045"
End-play on big end bearings .... .008-.014"
CRANKSHAFT AND MAIN BEARING '
Crankpin diameter .... .Vi « 2.4590-2.4595"
Crankpin out-of-round,• not over , .00025"
Clearance, main bearings -
New limits .... .... .... ,0015-.0025"
Worn limits, not over . 4... ,005"
Main bearing journals,' out-of-
round, not over »... .... .00025"
End-play in crankshaft -
New limits .... .... .... f OOl-.005"
Worn limits .... .... .... .010"
PISTONS AND CYLINDERS
Cylinder bore out of round, not
over .... ........ .... ..... .0005"
Taper, not over- * ...... .... ..0003"
Pis ten Clearance (See Note)
Bottom of skirt .... . *OO2O-,0025"
Cylinder bore, •standard . .... 3.5000-3.5020"
Piston skirt'd*ameter - standard 5.4979-3.4999"
Piston skirt diameter - oversize -
.003" oversize .... 3.5014-5.5029"
.005" oversize. .... 3.5034-3.5049"
.010" oversize 3.5084-5,5099"
.015" oversize ....... .... 3.5135-3.5149"
.030" oversize ..... .... 3.5284-3.5299"
PISTON PINS
Clearance be tween pin and bushing -
New limits ....-- .... .... . 0002-. 0008"
Y/orn limits, not over .. .... .0018"
Clearance between pin and piston -
New limits ....... .... .... .0001-.0003"
Y/orn limits,, not over . ■ .... .0006"
PISTON RINGS
Clearance between rings and sides
of grooves In piston -
Top compression ring .. .... ,0023-.0041"
Bottom compression ring .... .0013-.0026"
Oil rings .... .... ..., 0013-.0026"


Gap between ends -
Compression rings .... .... .007-.012”
Oil rings .... .... .... .007-.015”
Number of compression. rings .... 2
Number of oil rings .... .... 2
Width of compression rings -
Top ring .... .... .... 3/32”
Bottom ring .. .... .... l/8”
Width of oil rings .... .... 5/32”
VALVES, EXHAUST
Clearance betwe n stem-.and guide -
New limits ... .... .... .0022-.0042”
Worn limits, not over .... .005”
Clearance between stem and canslide .030-.070”
(With hydraulic unit compressed)
Clearance betwe . n lifter bracket
and camsllde -
New limits ... .... .... .0010-.0024”
Worn limits, not over. .... .0035”
Distance between valve stem and
heel of camshaft .... .... 3.000”
Head diameter, overall . .... 1.626-1.636”
Stem, length overall ... .... 5-33/64”
Stem, diameter . .... .... .3405-.3415”
Lift... .... .... .... .3 15
angle .... .... .... 45°
Se t width (minimum).... .... .075”
Seat eccentricity, not over (total
indicator reading).... .... .0015”
VALVES, INLET
Clearance betwee n stem and guide -
New limits ... .... .... .0012-.0032”
Worn limits, not over. .... .005”
Clearance between stem and camslide .030-.070”
(with hydraulic unit comnreseed)
Clearance between lifter brack*t
and camslide -
New limits ... .... .... .0010-.0024”
Worn limits, not over. .... .0035”
Distance -betwe n stem and heel of ■
camshaft .... .... .... 3,000”
Head diameter, overall . .... 1.876-1.886”
Stem, length overall ... .... 5-33/64”
Stem, diameter . .... .... .3415-.3425”
Lift... .... .... .... .3 o 5
Seat angle .... .... .... .45°
Seat width (minimum).., .... .075”
Seat eccentricity not over (total
Indicator reading).... .... .0015”
VALVE SPRINGS
Free length .... .... .... 2.210”
Pressure In pounds -
Compressed to 1-59/64” (valve
close d) ,*•« .... 66
Compressed to 1-37/64” (valve-
open) .... ...*«' a .... 145


VALVE TIMING
Intake opens .... .... .... T.D.C.
Intake closes 420 a.B.C.
Exhaust opens 52° 8.8. C.
Exhaust closes ... .... .... 10° A.T.C.
GENERATOR
Belt -
Length - pitch circumference ... 45-31/32"
Width .. .... .... .... 7/8"
Type ... .... .... .... vee.


Fig. 53. Cylinder block arrangement


Fig. 54. Cross sectional view of Cadillac engine
Fig. 55. Sectional view of Cadillac engine


Fig. 56. Removing complete power unit
Fig. 57. Valve spring compressor and collet remover and
replacer, tool No. J-257X


Fig. 58. Valve spring compressor and collet remover and
replacer. Tool No. J-257X
Fig. 59. Valve guide removing. Tool No. KMO-559
Fig. 60. Valve guide replacing. Tool No. J-826


Fig. 61. Testing valve stem length, using Tool No. J-1055
Fig. 62. Installer Tool in position. Replacing valve lifter
assembly. Tool No. J-827
Fig. 63. Connecting rod socket wrench. Tool No. J-1498


Fig. 64. Installation of piston rings
Fig. 65. Measuring piston clearance
Fig. 66. Feeler gauge pull in pounds and micrometer
clearance in thousandths of an inch


Fig. 67. Underside of crankcase, showing bearings and
crankshaft
Fig. 68. Rear main bearing cap puller, Tool No. J-834


Fig. 69. Operation of valve silencer mechanism
Fig. 70. Valve lifter tester. Tool No. J-12970


Fig. 71. Assembling plunger of valve lifter on special pin of
valve lifter tester tool
Fig. 72. Front end of engine with cover-plate removed
showing timing chain and fuel pump drive


Fig. 73. Timing chain pilot, Tool No. J-836
Fig. 74. Camshaft bearing remover, replacer and aligner,
Tool No. J-829


COOLING SYSTEM
CONTENTS
(a) ‘Radiators. : 89
1. Description 89
2. Removing Radiators 89
(b) Pan Assembly. 90
1. Removing Pan Assembly 90
2. Adjusting Pan Jockey Pulley 90
3* Replacing Fan Belts. 90
(c) Water Pumps. 91
1. Dismantling and overhaul of 91
Water Pumps.
2. Reassembling Water Pumps. 91
3. Water Pump (and Generator 91
Belt) Adju3tme nt•
4. Specifications. * 91
(d) Illustrations. _ 92




THE COOLING SYSTEM.
(a) Radiators.
1» Description•
i Three separate fin and tube type radiators, mounted on
tnree sides oi a rectangle, form an enclosed chamber in
which is mounted the rear engine (See Fig. 75, 76). The
top tank's of each radiator are interconnected by water
and pressure relief pipes to two triangular shaped header
or expansion tanks mounted above the fan shrouding. A
pressure, relief valve is mounted in each header tank,
these are vented by pipes leading outside. Water is
circulated by a pump mounted in the front end of one
bank of each engines l cylinders and passes out of each
cylinder head. The water enters the pumps from the
base of the radiators.
A large aero type shrouded fan between two vertical
fuel tanks, lorms the fourth side of the rectangular
chamber. Felt packing is used to seal this enclosed
chamber and prevent the air blowing back.
The chamber is closed at the top by a sheet
metal cover which *s secured to the top tanks of the
rad* a tors.. A large opening is provided
’.n this cover with a removable panel for servicing
the rear engine t.
Air drawn by the fan through the shielded side
louvres in the hull is forced into this chamber and
escapes through the fins of the three radiators and
thence out of the tank through further shielded
louvres in the hull.
The capacity of the radiators and header tanks
is 23 gallons.
The circulation of the water is under a light
pressure and the blow-off valve is set at 5 lbs,.
Draining of radiators is provided for by 1/4
turn pet cocks situated on a pipe leading off the
lower water outlet pipes. Copper tubing leads
from those pet cocks to the engine draining ports
under the floor.
2., Removing, Radiators .
'The radiators are removable when the engine
unit is out of the hull.
Drain the radiator by opening the pet cock.
Remove the sheet metal covering the engine-
unit if still in place.
Disconnect the hoses at the top and bottom.
Remove the petrol tank located on the outside
of the radiator which is to be removed.
Take out the two set screws - one to each
lug situated in- front of the bottom tank of
the radiator, then lift out.
When replacing a radiator, see that the felt
pads at each side are in place.


(b) Fan assembly.
1. Removing cooling; fan assembly.
With the engines out -of the Tank, remove the near
side vertical fuel tank.
Tighten the two adjusting nuts and lock nuts of the
jockey pulley springs.
Insert a lever between- rocker spindle and jockey
pulley and force the pulley against the belt.
Release the springs from the rocker slots.
Remove spindle at base of springs.
Remove the 10 bolts securing the two vertical members
and the jockey pulley bracket to the rear engine support
bracket.
Remove the bolts holding the Graviner fire switches
to the two vertical channel members and place the switches
aside.
Disconnect the bolts holding the fan mounting to the
two vertical support members and remove the six fan
belts .
Disconnect the hoses connecting the two radiator
header tanks and remove the tanks.
Hoist out the assembly.
2. Adjusting fan jockey pulley
The cooling fan is driven by 6 Vee belts, tensioned
by a jockey pulley mounted under the fan shrouding on
the near side. The ratio of crankshaft pulleys to
fan pulleys is 1 to 1.41.
Adjustment of the jockey pulley springs is made by
two adjusting nuts and lock nuts on two threaded spin-
dles, which pass through compression springs. Tighten
the springs until the'pulley is lightly pressing on
the back of the belts. When the belt stretches loosen
the adjusting nuts slightly to allow jockey pulley
further movement towards the belts.
5. Replacing fan belts.
Working through the bulkhead opening dssconnect the
drive shaft from the centre engine at the universal
flange nearest to the engine and remove the old belts.
Insert the ss.x new belts into the six grooves of the
lower driving pulley.
Remove the eight bolts (four each side) wh 4 ch secure
the fan mounting to the two vertical members and lower
the fan mounting about Ih ins.
Insert the six belts into the grooves of the fan
pulley, and se the fan mounting until the holes
register for inserting the eight bolts.
Adjust the jockey pulley to make light contact
with the belts.
Connect up the drive shaft.
NOTE; Belts must be used In sets.


(c) Water Pumps•
One water pump or impeller is utilised for
water circulation for each engine* It circul-
ates the water through hoth "banks of cylinders,
passing from one to the other through a cored
passage uniting each "block. (Pig* 77). v
1. _ Dismantling and overhaul. \
Dismantling of the water pump for replacement
of parts after the pump has been removed from the
vehicle Is performed In the following manner:
Remove belt pulley.
Remove snap ring.
Push impeller rearwards and remove split washer
in bad of front bearing.
Remove the lock ring at front end of rear buttling.
Remove impeller and shaft.
Remove roar bushing assembly toward front, being
careful not to lose any parts.
Remove front bearing by forcing it out toward the
front .
Remove bushing from front bearing.
2_. Reassembling.
In general, reassembly is the reverse of the
dismantling operations. To assemble the pump
packings on the shaft, instal pilot Tool No.
J-831 (Fig. 78)on the end of the shaft and Insert
in the pump body. Also wind string around the
recess near the end of the shaft to present a
smooth surface on which to slide the packings.
5. Water pump (and generator) belt adjustment.
This belt is tightened by raising the generator
until there is between 3/4 In. and 7/8 in. slack
in the belt when measured by pushing inward mid-
way between the generator and crankshaft pulleys.
This adjustment is the sane for both new and used
belts •
4. Specifications.
WATER PUMP.
Clearance between impeller and pump body .050-.092”
Clearance between pump shaft and bush-
ings -
New limits .0010-.0025”
Worn limit, not over .0035”
Packing spring -
Free length lV’
Pressure in pounds compressed to 2-J- - 3
Springs must show no set when compressed
with coils touching.


Fig. 75. Water circulation system
Fig. 76.
Rear Engine Compartment
1. Fuel tank.
2. Rear exhaust pipe.
3. Air vent.
4. Engine unit lifting eyes.
5. Radiators.
6. Oil filler cap.
7. Oil cleaner.
8. Fire extinguisher pipe.
9. Radiator filler caps.
10. Fan driving pulley.
11. Fire extinguisher bottle.
12. Felt seal.
13. Fuel filler cap.
14. Fire extinguisher bottle.
15. Fire extinguisher bottle.


Fig. 77. Extruded view of water pump
Fig. 78. Water pump impellor and shaft, with pilot


FUEL SYSTEM.
CONTENTS.
(a) Fuel Tank 95
1* Description . 95
2. Filters- 95
3. Servicing Filters 9 g
(b) Auto-Pulse Electric Pump 96
1. Description 95
2. Causes of failure _ "..96
3. Overhaul (8 operations) 97
(c) Mechanical Fuel Pump 102
1. Description 102
2, Fuel Pump Troubles 103
3. Visual Inspection 103
4, Draining of sediment 103
5. Testing Fuel Pressure 104
6, Vacuum Testing 104
7* Dismantling and Overhaul 104
8. Testing the Fuel Pump 105
(d) Carburettor 105
1. Description 105
2, Main Fuel Supply 106
3* Accelerating Pump 106
4. Economizer of Power Set System 106
5. Idle System 103
6 . Au t oma tic ch oke 1.1... 1 qs
(e) Carburettor Adjustment -.108
1. Idling Adjustment 108
2 4 Float level adjustment 109
3 ♦ Accelerating Pump Adjustment 109
4, Fast Idle Adjustment- 109
5. Choke Release Adjustment 109
6* Choke Release Dismantling 110
Choke Release Adjustment and
Ass emb ly, H q
8. Thermostat setting HIT 110
(f) Carburettor Service Tools HI
(g) Carburettor Service Operations HI
1 . Complete Assembly ITTITl 11
2 4 Main Body
3. Thr o 111 e B ody „ ~
4. Air Horn H2
(h) Carburettor Testing...... 112
1. Vacuum Test H3
(i) Carburettor Air Cleaner 113
* Servicing 113
(j) Carburettor Controls and Linkage 114
(k) Specifications. H4
(l) Vacuum Gauge Readings. 115
(m) Illustrations 115




FUPL SYSTEM.
(a) ~hiel Tanks.
1. Description.
There are five fuel tanks arranged in the
hack of the hull as depicted in Pig. 76 on
Page 92. The tanks are secured to the power
unit sub-frame by steel straps and turnbuckles,
and are removed with the power unit assemblv.
The combined capacity of the tanks is 130
gallons. One filler cap at the top of the left
hand front tank suffices all five tanks.
Drain plugs are fitted to the bottoms of the
front and side tanks. The drain plug in the left
hand front tank is accessible through a hole in the
floor plate (See Pig. 119 on Pagel36). A 7/16 inch
square socket wrench and extension arc required to
remove this plug.. From this point all tanks may be
drained with the exception of the fuel remaining ■
below the top of the stand pipes in the right hand
front tank.
All tanks are interconnected at the bottom by
large bore pipes to allow fuel to flow from one
tank to the other. They are also interconnected at
the top by l/4 inch piping to prevent air locks. A
tee piece is fitted to the l/4 inch pipe between the
two front tanks; from here a breather pipe is taken
to the.outside of the hull.
The fuel outlet to the carburettors is taken
from the bottom of the right hand front tank. To
maintain a sufficient head of fuel above the outlet
irrespective Of the angle at which the tank is
operating, two stand pipes are fitted to the base of
this tank. The stand pipes are directly coupled at
their lower ends to the two interconnecting fuel
pipes from the other tanks. The top ends are open
and stand 12 inches above the bottom of the tank.
When the fuel level falls below the top of the
stand pipes, fuel is brought from the bottom of the
main tanks to the base of the right hand front tank
through a junction coupling by three auto-pulse
electric pumps. These pumps are controlled by a
float operated valve situated in the right hand
front tank which maintains approximately 10 inches
of fuel above the outlet under all operating
conditions. The inlets to the three Auto-pulse
electric pumps are arranged so that whatever angle
the tank is on, at least one of the pumps will be
pumping fuel from near the lowest point.
From the fuel tank outlet a short flexible pipe
takes the fuel to a junction coupling. The suction
line of each of three mechanical pumps is connected
to this junction coupling and the delivery line from
each of the mechanical pump carries the fuel to one
of the three carburettors. Reference to Fig. 92
will make the layout clearly understood.
2. Filters.
Four No. 70 mesh brass- gau&£hjstrainers l-l/2
inches diameter by 2*-l/4 inches long are’incorporated


in the fuel tanks. Two are located in the
rear tank and one in the left hand front
tank on the outlet flanges to the Auto-pulse
pumps. The other one is located in the right
hand front tank on the outlet flange to the
mechanical pumps. See Pig, 92,
These strainers are accessible onlv when
the power unit is out of the hull and must
therefore be removed and cleaned whenever the
power unit is out for overhaul purposes.
5. Servicing filters.
.To remove a strainer - Uncouple the
flexible pipe from the flange, remove the
locking wire from the four set screws holding
the coupling flange to the bottom of the tank,
take out the set screws and the strainer will
come away with the flange. Two gaskets are
used on each assembly, one between the strainer
and the tank, and one between the strainer and
the coupling flange. If the strainer is stuck
to the gasket care must be taken not to damage
the strainer as a leaking joint will result.
New. gaskets must be used when refitting
and the joint tested before the power unit is
replaced in the hull. The four set screws must
be wired in pairs with No, 18 gauge locking wire.
The usual gauze screen type filter is also fitted
to each of the Auto /pulse and mechanical pumps.
- Cb)_ Auto-pulse electric pump.
1. Description.
The principle of operation of the Auto-pulse
is that of an electromagnet and armature actuating
a bellows, see Pig. 79 on Page 97. When the battery
master switch is closed, current Is supplied through
a relay to the three pumps. Due to the contact
points (30C) and (4OB) in the „'pump (Pig. 79) being
normally closed the circuit is completed through the
electromagnetic coil (A4O) which becomes energised
and attracts the armature (N,30). As the armature
moves towards the core of the electromagnet, it
causes the points to open and the armature is
returned by the spring (372) which closes the points
and again completes the circuit ready for another
cycle of operations.
As the armature is directly coupled to the bellows
(20B) by the drive screw (N 362), the bellows are caused
to expand and contract. On the suction stroke the
armature moves towards the electromagnet and the
bellows expand drawing fuel through the inlet valve
(20A) into the bellows. On the return stroke the
spring (372) closes the bellows forcing the fuel
through the outlet valve and outlet line into the
right-hand front tank.
When the float valve in the tank closes a
pressure will be created within the pump. This
pressure will hold the bellows expanded and the
contact points open until the tank requires
additional fuel.
2, Causes of Failure.
The most common causes of pump failure are


Open or- shorted ..electrical circuit - Make sure
there is sufficient current at the pump
terminal by removing and touching the end
of the supply wire to a metal' part of the , :
f rame. Check for loose or dirty connections
and broken or frayed wiring.
■docked screen filter - remove and clean.
Dirty, worn or pitted contact points - As a
temporary measure the points may be cleaned
with a points file, but if worn or pitted
they must be replaced.
5. Overhaul.
The following operations and illustrations
describe the correct procedure for overhauling
the pump.
Fig. 79. Sectional view of Auto pulse fuel pump


Fig. 80. Operation No. 1
OPERATION No. I.
Servicing and Cleaning Filter
Disassemble by removing parts
354, 342, 312, 347, 304 M, 374
10A and 356.
Clean all parts,'clear away
gasket particles.
Replace screen if damaged.
Insure air tight filter by
using new gaskets 342, 347,
356.
Metal or glass filter bowls
(304 G) may be used as desired.
No special tools needed.
OPERATION No. 2.
Servicing and Cleaning
Valves.
Proceed as before, then
remove 2 screws 357 and
2 lockwashers 377, also
parts 302, 345, 2-20 A
and 2-348.
Clean all parts;
replace valves if warped
or excessively worn.
Fig. 81. Operation No. 2
valve seats may be re-surfaced, using
crocus cloth. Guard tightness of valve chambers
by use of new gaskets 345 and 2-348.
. , No special tools required: lust a cleaning
j ob. e


Fig. 82. Operation No. 3
OPERATION 3.
Replace Upper Contacts; Disassemble Coil and
Armature.
Expose pump’s electrical units by removal of
cover parts 357 A, 391 and N 319.
To replace worn upper contact points, remove
parts 332, 383, 3.84 and 408.
If adding a condenser to lengthen contact
point life, assemble across points.
To separate coil assembly A-40 from rest of
pump, remove 376, 376 A, 372. Using -Jr”
magneto wrench, loosen drive screw nut 359
below bellows stud. Insert thin screw
driver into coil hole and loosen drive
screw 362. Remove 358 A and 378. Separate
coil from armature by removing 358, 365,
378.
If armature work only is required, proceed as
in Operation 4, described immediately follow-
ing.
If coil onlv is to be replaced, follow Operation 5.
In older models the drive spring 375 is retained
by a hinge clip. Compress cut 320 with small
tool, move clip to one side, then proceed as
ab ove.
No special tools are required.


Fig. 83. New style Armature N 30
Fig. 84. Old style Armature O 30
Fig. 85. Operation 5
OPERATION No. 4.
Servicing the ar-
mature .
Older style ar-
matures 030. with
V-shape opening
in front, have
loss power than
type N3O; re-
place with
latter.
Longer drive screw
N 362 is necessary
with present
bellows to in-
sure firm holding.
Overall length
25/32 inches: see
sketches below.
Using short screw
causes bellows
breakage•
For replacement of
lower contact
points 300 punch
out 2 rivets 381 A.
Reassemble with
new 30CL and
rivets 9/32 long
381 A. For correct
locating, use
special tool,
breaker spring.
This tool is
important.
Check armature
hinge spring
when it becomes
weak or rusted
new armature is
necessary.
OPERATION No. 5.
Re-assembling Magnet
and Armature.
It is essential to
proper magnetic
action that ar-
mature and magnet
be precisely lin-
ed up. The use
of special ar-
mature c uttering
t*#l.*s necessary.
Insert centering tool in magnet core hole. Place
armature 30 flat on top of magnet 40 so that
breaker magnet is free inside centering tool
and tool Is free in core hole•
Hold units in position and re-assemble armature and
coil by using parts 2-358, 2-365 and 2.378.


Fig. 86. Operation 6
OPERATION No. 6.
Servicing and Replacing
Bellows.
Follow Operation 3 until
coil and armature are
free; then remove • ,
4-357, 4-377, 303,
346, and 350 A.
If the old style soldered
bellows is replaced while
the pump is down, the new
long drive screw 362 (25/32
long) must be used; also
n-rmMHo , , new t 3 r P e armature N3O to
LNowq T fl Int power t 0 operate one piece
beliows In re-assembly clean faces of 301 and
4-3 F ®h n ? W 343 and 350 - Replace 4-377 and
4 and draw down. No special tools.
Fig. 87. Operation 7
OPERATION No. 7.
Bench Assembly of Pump Unifcs
First chock that space between
breaker spring and main
armature body is .40" at
point shown.
Second, align and assemble armature and coil as
~Operation No. 5. Assemble to bellows ring
303 with 2-378 and 2-358 A. b
Press armature plate flat against coil head B;
assemble drive screw 362 into bellows stud C
bellows can .l us t be seen to start down-
c.rd movement. After releasing armature,
tighten lock nut 359, using i" magneto wrench.
Insert drive spring 372, adjusting screw 376
and rock 376 A. This completes the bench assembly
i pump, and the remaining adjustments should be"
made with pump in test rack.


Fig. 88. Operation 8
OPERATION No. 8.
Final Adjustment on Test
Rack.
A test rack for mecha-
nical pumps can be
used satisfactorily.
Test with fuel, not air.
Remove cover 319. Place
pump in rack, connect
to battery at C. Turn
on current. Pump will
race noisily until it
picks up fuel from
container D*
Align upper and lower
contact points by
bending the flexible
bridge 408 at point T;
never move lower contact
points laterally, always
the upper. Lower contacts
may be adjusted vertically from armature by special
point adjusting tool until best performance
is reached. Shut cock B; and if pressure on Gauge
A is below 2 pounds or other desired cut-off
pressure, tighten pressure adjusting screw (or
stretch spring in older pumps); if pressure is
above ease off at point E to reach the
action^ desired. Put on cover 319 and re-test for
electrical connections.
(?) Mechanical fuel pump.
1. Description.
The following description is to be read in
conjunction with Figv 93.
Flotation of the camshaft eccentric actuates
the rocker arm (5) which in turn pulls the link
(4) and diaphragm assembly (3) downward against
the pressure spring.
!
On the suction stroke of the pump, fuel enters
through pump inlet into the sediment chamber and
then passes through the strainer and the inlet
Valve into the pump chamber. On the return stroke,
the pressure spring pushes the diaphragm upwards,
forcing fuel from the pump chamber through the out-
let valve and outlet line to the carburettor.
When the carburettor bowl is filled, the float
in the carburettor will shut off the needle valve,
thus creating a pressure in the pump chamber.
This pressure will hold the diaphragm in the
downward position until the carburettor requires
additional fuel and the needle valve opens.


The suction stroke is ‘positive and the
discharge stroke of the pump is spring
operated.
The stroke of the diaphragm is propor-
to the amount of fuel required by
the carburettor.
The pumps require no priming and little
attention other than keeping all the connec-
tions tight and the draining of water and
sediment which collects in the sediment
chamber•
A vacuum pump is built integrally with
the fuel pump. This is used on some
vehicles to operate accessories such as
screen wipers, but on Tank A.C. Mark I does
not perform any function so may be disre-
garded .
Fuel pump inspections are an important
part ol the tune-up procedure. However, in
addition to this, it is often necessary to
test, repair or replace a fuel pump without
making a complete engine tune-up.
2 . Fuel pump troubles.
The two most frequent causes of trouble
f . either that the fuel pump will not prime
itself or that it does not supply sufficient
luel to the carburettor. Failure to prime is
generally caused by allowing fuel tanks to be
completely emptied before refilling. Failure
to supply fuel can be caused by leaking or
obstructed fuel line, dirty screen, dirty or
warped valves, worn or punctured diaphragm.
Regardless of the complaint, the trouble
will be revealed if the following service
operations are performed.
5, Visual Inspection.
Fuel leakage through the vent hole in the fuel
pump body indicates leakage of the diaphragm.
Dismantle and overhaul oump as instructed on
page 104.
Fuel leakage, at edge of diaphragm is usually
caused by loose cover screws which should
be tightened. Also check inlet and outlet
connections for leaks.
4. Draining of Sediment.
Remove^ drain plug to drain water and other
,foreign material from sediment chamber.
When an excessive amount of water or
sediment is found in th.e sediment chamber
•f the pump it is advisable tc als« drain
off from the fuel tank siach water or
sediment as has accumulated.


Replace drain plug, nuking sure that it is
properly seated. If drain plug is not
properly seated air will enter at this
point during the intake stroke, preventing
the pump from supplying sufficient fuel.
5. Testing fuel pressure.
Connect fuel pressure gauge to output side of
fuel pump.
Start engine and without racing observe pressure.
Momentarily race engine and observe pressure.
Pressure should be not less than 3 lbs. or
more than 5 lbs. at any speed.
Low fuel pump pressure will limit engine per-
formance. Dismantle and overhaul pump.
High fuel pump pressures will result in high
lloat level in the carburettor and high fuel
consumption and cause the engine to stall.
6. Vacuum Testing.
Connect vacuum gauge to fuel pump intake.
Start the engine and run at idle speed.
The pump will'start building up a vacuum
which should advance until it reads at
least 10.
v »
After the gauge registers 10, stop the engine
observe the gauge.
The hand should fall slowly back at a rate which
will not allov/ it to reach zero in less than one
minute .
A faster rate of fall indicates a poor fuel pump
intake valve condition. Dismantle and overhaul.
Before replacing connections, blow through fuel
line to clear any obstructions.
7. Dismantling^and Overhauling pump.
Remove fuel pump cover.
Remove and clean the screen.
Remove sediment that has failed to drain from
the sediment chamber.
If during visual inspection a leakage was found
at the vent hole in the fuel pump body, the
diagragm Is leaking and must be replaced with
a new part.
Inspect diaphragm pressure spring, check free
length of spring against new part. Replace
the spring If weak or found to be stretched.


Inspect the actuating linkage and pins for wear.
Replace if worn. Worn linkage will cause a
loss of stroke, and low fuel pump pressure
will result.
Examine both intake and delivery valves for
proper seating. Replace the valves if
necessary. Make sure that the valve seat
gaskets are in good condition when reassembled*
Replace screen, making sure the gasket is in good
condition.
Replace cover, making sure the gaskets are properly
seated.
Make sure the drain plug is tight.
8. Testing fuel pump.
If testing equipment is not available a
simple check for capacity may be made without
removing the pump, In the following manner
Disconnect at the carburettor, the fuel line
from the pump. Loosen it slightly at the
fuel pump and swing it out towards the side.
Hold a one quart can under the open end of the
pipe and turn the engine several revolutions
with the starter. When the fuel is coming
from the end of the pipe in regular spurts,
put another empty can under the pipe and
count exactly ten spurts or strokes of the
pump. The fuel pump should deliver at least
five ounces of fuel in ten strokes.
With the pump removed a simple check for
pressure and vacuum may be made as follows ;•
Hold the fingers over the inlet and outlet of
the pump alternately and operate the rocker
arm.
After operating the rocker arm for several
strokes, the pump should, if it is In good
condition, hold both pressure and vacuum
for a few seconds.
(d) Carburettor.
1. Description.
The carburettor used on each engine of the
power unit is a dual down draught 1-J- ins.
Stromberg Model A.A . V. 26 with automatic choke.
Extruded views are shown in Figs. 94 and 95.
This is a twin barrelled carburettor with
a single throttle spindle, upon which the two
threttle valves are mounted. The barrels are
fed from a float chamber common to both, each
barrel having its own choke tube, metering and
discharge jets,, and idle system; but a single
economiser valve and jet serves both barrels, and
a common accelerating pump feeds a separate jet in
each barrel.


In the explanation that follows, one barrel
is generally referred to unless mentioned other
wise.
The A, A. V. or Aero type e a rbur ell or was
evolved with the aim. of eliminating vapour
lock and percolation, and also surge v/hen
turning and stopping suddenly. Following
aviation carburettor practice the float
chamber surrounds the venturi system complete-
ly, the level being maintained by a pair of
floats mounted on a common spindle (See Fig.
94). Thus the central portion of the car-
burettor is kept as cool as possible, while
any cutting out of the fuel supply to the jets
during turning, etc., is avoided, owing to the
disposition of the fuel around the jets and
the baffling of the float chamber.
2. Main Fuel Supply.
The main jet system is modified to
eliminate percolation within the carburettor.
Instead of the main discharge jet being fed
up its central bore, the base of the jet is
plugged, and the fuel from the metering jet
is fed into It through a number of small holes
along its under side as shown in Fig. 89.
Thus vapour bubbles forming in the region of
the metering jot rise Into the annular
passage round the discharge jet, and, failing
to enter the bore of the jet through the small
holes, pass through the larger area up to the
bleed (4). The bleed has a large domed area
below the orifice, which permits the vapour
bubbles to burst and so be vented to at-
mosphere through the orifice.
3. Accelerating Pump.
Fig. 90 shows details of the accelerat-
ing pump. A specially treated leather cup
piston (33) is used, which, v/hen the throttle
is opened, forces fuel through the pump dis-
charge jet and channel to the pump discharge
nozzles.
4. Economizer or Power Jet System•
The economizer system (See Fig. 89) takes
the form of a vacuum piston (5), working in a
cylinder in communication v/ith the engine side
of the throttle (as shown by the dotted passage
2), the piston being spring loaded, tends to
keep it in the lower position. While the
engine Is idling, and also at light loads,
the engine vacuum holds the piston up against
the pressure of the spring; as the throttle
Is opened, the vacuum in the Induction
system falls, allowing the piston to descend
and open the economiser valve (8). Addition-
al fuel is then permitted to flow into the
main discharge jet from the valve through
the passage shown. The economizer should
come Into operation at five to six inches of
man if o 1 d vacuum•


FIG. 89.
FIG. 90.
FIG. 91.
1. Choke Valve.
2. Vacuum Channel.
3. Main Discharge Jet.
4. High Speed Bleeder.
5. Economiser Vacuum Piston.
6. Idle Air Bleeder.
7. Idle Tube.
8. Economiser By-Pass Jet.
9. Main Metering Jet.
10. Main Discharge Jet Plug.
11. Idle Needle Valve.
12. Idle Discharge Holes.
13. Throttle Valve.
14. Primary Venturi.
15. Auxiliary Venturi.
16. Choke Relief Valve.
17. Float.
18. Float Lever.
19. Float Needle Valve Clip.
20. Float Fulcrum Pin.
21. Float Needle Valve.
22. Float Needle Valve Seat.
23. Float Hanger Gaskets.
24. Float Hanger.
25. Float Chamber Vent.
26. Pump Fulcrum Arm.
27. Pump Piston Link.
28. Felt Dust Washer.
29. Retainer Washer.
30. Dust Washer Spring.
31. Spring Retainer Washer.
32. Pump Duration Spring.
33. Pump Piston.
34. Piston Expansion Spring.
35. Pump Relief Valve.
36. Pump By-Pass Jet.
37. Pump Inlet Check Valve.
38. Pump Discharge Channel.
39. Pump Discharge Nozzle.
40. Spark Control Hole.
Stromberg Carburettor, Model AA (Aero Type). Float Chamber
surrounds the Carburettor, so eliminating Flooding on Hills and Cutting -
out on Corners.


5» Idle System.
The idle adjustment is by volume control
with fixed air bleed. The fuel from the car-
burettor bowl passes through the main metering
jet into the idle tube. Air enters the fuel
stream at the idle air bleed and the mixture of
fuel and air then travels downward to the idle
discharge holes. Two idle discharge holes are
drilled in each barrel. With the throttle stop
screw set so that the throttle plate is open to
a speed equivalent to 350 to 400 r.p.m. the lower
discharge hole only is subjected to intake manifold
vacuum. As the throttle is opened to increase the
engine speed the throttle plate is moved above the
upper idle discharge hole and fuel mixture dis-
charges from both idle holes. The lower discharge
hole is provided with an idle adjustment. Turning
out the needle gives a richer mixture and turning
in a leaner mixture.
6. Automatic Choke . •
The automatic choke control is built into a
housing integral with the carburettor air horn.
The actuating factors in the operation of this
automatic choke are manifold vacuum, thermostat
spring, and an offset choke valve in the carburettoi
The vacuum piston and thermostat are directly
connected to the choke valve and control opening
and closing of the choke valve under varying
temperatures and at various throttle positions.
A tube leading from the exhaust manifold to
the thermostat chamber transmits heat to govern the
tension of the thermostat spring. A fast idle cam
operating in conjunction with the automatic choke
provides proper throttle opening for a cold engine
and prevents stalling during the warming up period.
This last idle cam is set, before starting the
engine, by depressing and releasing the accelerator.
The thermostatic spring closes the choke when
the engine is cold. When the engine fires the
manifold vacuum pulls the piston which being con-
nected by a link to the choke valve shaft partially
opens the choke against the tension of the thermo-
static spring. As the thermostat becomes warmed
up by the manifold heat it offers less and less
resistance to the force of the vacuum piston and so
the choke valve continues to open until maximum is
reached.
The opening of the choke automatically cancels
the fast idle Sotting of the cam.
lf:i-..y arburot tor Adjustment.
When starting a cold engine fitted with a
Stromberg carburettor, the accelerator should be
depressed and then released, before cranking the
engine. This will set the fast idle.
1. Idling Adjustment.
hun the engine until it is thoroughly warm so that
choke valve is wide open and throttle screw is
on slow idle.


Set throttle stop, screw so that engine speed
approximates 350-400 r.p.m.
Adjust two idle adjustment screws so that the
engine runs smoothie without loping or
stalling at this speed.
Turn screws clockwise to lean mixture and counter-
clockwise to enrich mixture.
2. Float level adjustment.
The fuel level should he set to 5/8 inch
below the top surface of the float chamber. The
level corresponds to the lower level of the
sight plug when the engine is idling, and may be
checked without dismantlin'-• the carburettor.
The fuel level can be checked at the sight
plug only while the engine is running.
If the float level requires resetting, bend
the float lever arm at the point adjacent to the
fulcrum pin. Tool N6.KMO-269-S-7 (T-24971) should
be used to recheck the position of the floats when
the carburettor is dismantled. Hold the air horn
in inverted position and place the tool on the
gasket. When the floats are properly set the tops
will be flush with the tops of the vertical guides
of the tool, as shown in Pig.loo. The sides of the
floats should be tangent to the guides of the tool
without drag.
If the special tool is not available, the
float location can be checked by measuring from
the top of the float to the gasket. This distance
should be 1-13/32". See Pig.loo.
3. Accelerating Pump Adjustment.
Two holes are provided in the throttle lever
for the accelerating pump rod. This rod should
normally be placed in the inner hole which provides
the shorter stroke. In cases where a richer charge
is required, the rod can be placed in the outer hole.
4. Past Idle Adjustment.
To check the fast idle setting of the carburettor:
Hold throttle stop screw against high lobe of fast
idle cam.
Move choke valve as far as possible to closed position.
Insert a N 0.32 drill (.116" dia.) in the opening,
or the thin portion of choke stop gauge T-25056
•(F'g.lol).
If this amount of opening is not obtained, bend
fast idle rod lightly at point just below choke
shaft.
5. Choke Release Adjustment.
To correct a flooded condition, the choke valve
can be partially opened by fully depressing the
accelerator pedal. This action can be checked
as follows:-


Hold throttle in fully open position.
Measure space between top of choke valve and side
of carburettor upper body. This should be
between .156 and .18 7 ". It can be best measured
by inserting a drill of 11/64 M diameter in
opening, or use choke stop gauge T. 25056 (Pig.lol).
< I
If readjustment is required, bend ear on throttle
lever to correct position.
6. Automatic Choke Dismantling.
Disconnect heat tube from thermostat housing.
Remove carburettor from manifold.
Remove thermostat cover.
Remove vacuum piston from housing.
Clean piston and cylinder walls with a clean rag
saturated with acetone or alcohol. Blow out
all channels with compressed air. Clean screen
on inside of cover by blowing out with compressed
air, being careful not to distort screen.
7 . Automatic Choke Adjustment and Assembly.
Place vacuum piston in cylinder with slot on piston
assembled down. Assemble lever on choke stem.
No lubricant must be used on piston or in cylinder.
Place vacuum piston gauge KMO-269-S9 on choke
housing with small hole fitted over pin of choke
lever and indicator mark lined up with projection
on housing (See Pig.lo2).
Place a N 0.3 drill (.213 inch) between choke valve
and upper body or use choke stop gauge T-25056
(Pig.lol)
Assemble serrated washer, lock washer and lock nut,
tightening merely by hand.
Check choke valve opening.
Remove drill and tighten lock nut with Wrench T 25047
(Pig.lo3).
Reassemble cover, as explained in following note
and reconnect heat tube.
8. Thermostat Setting.
■ ■ ■ I - . ... ...., -i
The thermostat is calibrated to give satisfactory
performance with the fuel ordinarily used. When
installing thermostat cover, see that edge of the .
screen is not crimped or creased, as this would cause
leakage.


Locate thermostat hook at bottom of housing
and then rotate cover in "RICH" direction until
mark M O M coincides with projection on housing.
Place lugs in position and fasten cover screws
securely.
When assembling heat tube connection nut on
to thermostat cover, do not use excessive pressure
to avoid changing position of cover.
(f) Carburettor service tools.
Pig. 104 shows the tools available for servicing
Stromberg carburettor.
(g) Service Operations.
1. Complete assembly.
Remove the carburettor from the engine.
Remove fast idle rod and accelerator pump rod.
Remove the screws attaching the air horn to the
main body.
Remove the air horn and place on bench in inverted
position to avoid bending the floats.
Remove the main body from the throttle body,
2. Main body.
Remove drain plugs, using Tool T-19099 (Fig* 105)
Remove metering jets with Tool T-24924 (Fig. 106)
Remove main discharge jets with Tool T-24967 (Fig. 107)
Remove pump inlet and check valve with tool
J-816-2 (Fig. 109)
Remove economizer valve with Tool J-816-4 (Fig* 110)
Remove idling Jets with Tool J-816-1 (Fig. Ill)
Remove pump discharge nozzle block and the two
gaskets.
Thoroughly clean the main body and jets. Flow
out all jets and passages with compressed air.
Test the economizer valve and pump discharge valve
as shown in Fig. 112, with Tool T-24970. Replace
if leaking.
Reassemble the main body.
3. Throttle body.
-
Remove loose levers, idle adjusting screws and
springs from the throttle body.
Clean the throttle bodv and blow out all passages
with compressed air.


Reassemble throttle body. Turn the idle
mixture adjusting .screws right in, then
back rff 3/4 turn 'n each. Do nrt force
the screvjs against the seat as this will
damage the face of the valve.
Reassemble the throttle body to the main b'dy
making sure that the -gasket is in good
condition.
4. Air horn.
Remove the float fulcrum pin and fiats.
Remove float needle valve and .seat.
Remove accelerator pump fulcrum, arm, and
accelerator pump piston.
o i l ! 4 *
Remove power piston with Tori 2-24733 (Pip-
-108). 6
Remove choke thermostat cover, screen and
spring.
Remove choke seem nut with T" f l T-25047 (P: g.
I°s) a nd remove vacuum piston from housing.
Thoroughly clean air htrn and parts. Clean
choke vacuum piston and cylinder walls with
clean rag saturated with acetone r-v ale. h^l.
Clean the screen o n the inside of the cover
by blowing out with compressed air, being
careful n t to distort the screen. Blow
all channels in the air horn with com-
pressed air.
Reassemble cir ke 1 as described under
adjustments . (Par'e 110), Set vacuum
Piston with Tool KMO-269-S9 (Pig. m 2).
Check power piston for free fit in its cylinder.
Check accelerator pump piston. Replace if
leather is w f rn or hard.
Examine float needle and seat, replace if
worn.
Assemble air hr rn.
Check float level with T- rl T-24971 (Pig. 100)
Assemble carburetter, making sure that air
It rn gasket is in g- od condition.
Lubricate all external joints and linkage.
(h) Carburetter Testing.
The ideal rati '-f air to potr-l is 14 tr
1 and while it is true that engines will
perform with mixture strengths of anything
between 8 to 1, to 10 to l, it folios that
the 0 to l mixture must- be unduly rich while
the 18 to l is unduly lean. A rich mixture
can rf course be detected by black smoke firm
the exhaust, but such methods of tuning are
unsatisfactory.
Very accurate results can be obtained by
the use of an exhaust gas analyser, while"
moderately accurate results can be had by
using a vacuum gauge,


1. Vacuum Test.
The diagnosis r f faults by me-a ns of a vacuum
gauge is based o n the fact that any faulty t-
-r'n which causes the speed rf rne cycle of the
engine ■ perati- n to vary frm another produces a
difference in vacuum in the induction pipe.
Incorrect valve action, leaks in the intake system,
faulty ignition incorrect combustion are thus
indicated -~ n the vacuum gauge. Fig. lie illustrat-
es the vacuum gauge.
T : fit the vacuum gauge remove the.vacuum control
pipe frcm the distributer, fit a toe piece between
the pipe and the distributer and connect the gauge
* branch ol the tee piece. Next start the
engine and when warm allrw it tf idle.
At idling speed it wi 11 be found that a read-
ing of 18 t r 20 in. cf vacuum is obtained with
mo s t engine’s.
The 18 in. rr 20 in. readings are obtained at
approximately sea level. At higher altitudes the
readings will be lowerat 5000 ft, the reading
bu reduced t ? " 15 m. r -v 16 in. All readings
will he altered pr* p-rti' nately at higher levels.
\ihen the engine is thoroughly warm it will be
t- ? und that an .engine in gord condition will give
<~x steady reading. Any defect in the carburetter
valve gear, etc., will cause a variation and it
has been. found that certain defects will give rise
t r definite fluctuations in the vacuum. Some
of the variations are the same f r r more than one
defect, but by eliminating these troubles one at
a time the real trouble will be found.
The easiest way of explaining the vacuum
fluctuations and their cause is by means of the
chart -n pages 115-117. Sixteen different readings
are illustrated and their causes explained at the
of each illustration.
(i) Carburetter air cleaner.
Three "Hat 11 type *ll bath air cleaners are
used, (Fig. 114).0ne on each carburetter and
attached to the carburetter air horn by a band
and clamp screw. Oil capacity 1 pint.
1. Servicing.
Remove the cleaner from the carburetter.
Remove the wing nut from the t* p - f the cleaner
and lift the top out of the lower body, setting
it down in an upright position to prevent the
oil in the element from running up t< the
inside rf the top cover.
Take the lower b-o-dy and thoroughly wash all ~±l and
dirt out of the sump.
Wash. the top sect! n and cleaning element thoroughly
in petrel. Drain *”r blow the element rut with
compressed air until dry.
Refill the sump with one pint of engine


Reassemble and attach t'" the; carburetter,
making sure that the cleaner Is prrporly
seated r n the carburetter and the clamp
screw Is tight.
Dr rr t rvcrflll the cleaner, as this v/ill
restrict the air passage and cause a rich
carburet t r r mixture.
(.]) Carburette r controls
and linkage.
An accelerator pedal coupled by and
lever ls the thr' ttles ? f the three
carburetters. This linkage should be reg-
ularly inspected f"r 1"' so joints and lubric-
ated accordingly t the lubrication schedule.
(K) Specifications
CARBURETTOR
Str^mberg
Mr del , _ AAV-2 6
Size lx 1 ’
Flrat level setting 5/0”
(Fuel level belrv; top surface r T brv/1)
Fuel pump
Delivery per strike 22-25 c.c.
Operating pressure 3jg- - 5 lb.


Vacuum Gauge Readings
1. Motor Normal
Gauge reads between 17
and 21, hand steady, when
motor idling.
2. Motor Normal
When throttle is opened
and closed rapidly hand
falls to 2 and swings back
to 24 or 25 falling back to
normal idle reading stead-
ily. Indicates rings and
valves O.K.
3. Poor Rings
Motor idling, hand read-
ing steady but two or three
points lower than normal.
This may also indicate in-
ferior lubricant.
4. Poor Rings or Inferior
Lubricant
When throttle is opened
and closed rapidly hand
falls to zero and rises to
only 23 or less.
5. Sticking Valve
Hand drops occasionally
about four points at idling
speed.
6. Burnt Valve
Hand drops regularly by
several points at idling
speed.


7. Leaky Valve
Hand drops two or three
points when valve should
close. Short circuiting indi-
vidual spark plugs will in-
dicate cylinder in which the
valve is defective, when
motor idling.
8. Loose Valve Guides
Rapid vibration of hand
between 14 and 19, when
motor idling.
9. Weak Valve Springs
Motor running fast, the
hand registers between 10
and 22. Further increase of
speed increases hand vari-
ations.
10. Late Valve Timing
With motor running at
fast idle speed hand reads
from 8 to 15 and remains
steady.
11. Late Ignition Timing
Hand gives steady read-
ing between 14 and 17 with
motor running at fast
idling speed.
12. Defective Ignition
If hand moves slowly be-
tween 14 and 16 check for
plug gaps too close or con-
tact breaker points not syn-
chronizing at idling speed.


13. Induction Pipe Leak
With motor running at
idle or fast speed, hand
reads between 3 and 5.
Check induction manifold
gaskets.
14. Cylinder Head Gasket
Leaking Between
Cylinders
Hand moves backwards
and forwards regularly be-
tween 5 and 19.
15. Choked Silencer
High reading when en-
gine first started, falling
back to 1 or zero and gradu-
ally increasing to about 15
or 16.
16. Carburettor out of
Adjustment
Hand moves slowly back-
wards and forwards be-
tween 13 and 17. Check
slow-running mixture.


Fig. 92. Fuel line layout


Fig. 93. Mechanical Fuel Pump, dismantled view


Fig. 94. Dismantled view of Carburettor


Fig. 95. Dismantled view of Carburettor


Fig. 96. Fast Idle Adjustments
Fig. 97. Choke Release Adjustment
Fig. 98. Idling Adjustments
Fig. 99. Float Level Adjustment


Fig. 100. Tool No. KMO-269-57 (T-24971)
Fig. 101. Choke Valve Stop Gauge, No. T-25056—a stepped
gauge eliminating the necessity of different size drills for
setting the choke valve
Fig. 102. Choke gauge, Tool No. KMO-269-S9


Fig. 103. Choke stem nut socket wrench, No. T-25047
Fig. 104. Carburettor Service Tools
Fig. 105. Main jet plug screwdriver, Tool No. T-19099


Fig. 106. Metering jet wrench socket, No. T-24924, in
position for removing metering jet
Fig. 107. Main discharge jet remover, Tool No. T-24967
Fig. 108. Power piston wrench, Tool No. T-24733


Fig. 109. Jet wrench —¼ in., in position for removing pump
inlet check valve, Tool No. J-816-2
Fig. 110. Jet wrench —7/16 in., in position for removing
economising valve, Tool No. J-816-4


Fig. 111. Jet wrench—3/16 in., in position for removing
idler jet, Tool No. J-816-1
Fig. 112. Economizer valve tester, Tool No. T-24970
Fig. 113. Vacuum gauge


Fig. 114. Cross section of “Hat” type oil bath air cleaner


LUBRICATION SYSTEM.
CONTENTS.
(a) Engine lubrication 130
(b ) Keeping oil vessels clean 130
(c) Engine Oil Pump ~130
1. Removing Oil Pump „ 130
2 0 Dismantling Oil Pump ~ ..,.131
3. Adjusting end play. 131
(d) Oil Filters ...131
(e) Oil Circulation Indicatorl3l
if) Cleaning Lubrication System 131
(g) Lubrication Schedules 132
(h) Illustrations.. 137
TOLERANCES.
OIL PUMP
Backlash between drive gears, not over ,008 -•012”
Clearance between pump body and drive-
shaft -
New limits 1 T _,OOlO - .0025”
Worn limits, not over ,005”
Clearance between pump body and gears -
New limits. ...’. e OO2 - .004”
Worn limits, not over .006”
End-play in pump gears -
New limits .001 - .004”
Worn limits .006”
OIL PRESSURE REGULATOR
Clearance between valve plunger and
housing ■■
New limits ,0020 - .0035”
Worn limits, not over .005”
Normal pressure at 30 M.P.H, (min.) 25 lbs.
Idle (Average) 15 lbs.
Spring -
Free length (approx.) 2-25/64”
Pressure at 1-13/32” 5-f f 6-J- lbs.
Valve opens at 30 lbs.




1
LUBRICATION SYSTEM.
(a) En&lne Lubricatlon.
The engine is lubricated by a full pressure
oiling system. (Pig* 115).The gear type oil pump is
bolted to the bottom of the crankcase at the left of
the rear main bearing. A pressure regulator is in-
corporated in the pump body. A large sump has
been fitted which holds a greater quantity of oil
than standard.
Oil enters the pump through a screened
and floating intake and Is forced through a
drilled passage to the oil header, which is
drilled lengthwise along the left side of the
crankcase. From the header, other drilled passages
branch through the support webs t# the main and
camshaft bearings.
Oil passes from the main bearings through
drilled passages to the crank pins, connecting
rod bearings, and piston pins. (Pig. 116*). The
cylinder bores are lubricated by oil squirting out
from the bearings and impingeing on the surfaces .
Oil is fed from the rear camshaft
bearing to the distributor, oil pump drive shaft
and gears, and from the front bearing to the timing
chain. Oil is piped from the header to the
hydraulic valve lifters.
A regulator is situated in the oil pump but
is not adjustable except by washering or changing
the spring. Capacity of engine sump 2f gallons.
Access to the sump drain plugs is •btained by re-
moving circular cover plates in the floor «f the
hull. (Fig.ll9).
(b) Keep Oil and Oil Vessels
Clean”’'
Before opening any oil drum or tin, always
wipe the top of the container clean, otherwise
any dirty oil or dirt which may have accumulated
on the top of the container may find its way into
the engine. Before using any measure or funnel,
make sure that’it is clean. After use, funnels
or measures which have been used for engine oil
only may be swilled out with petrol from the
spare petrol can and the oiiy petrol returned cither
to the spare can again or poured into the petrol
tank. The comparatively small quantity of clean
engine oil thus Introduced into the petrol will have
a beneficial rather than a detrimental effect on
the subsequent running of the engine. When
flushing out funnels or measures which have been
used for gear or transmission oils, the oily
petrol must be discarded and, in no case, poured
into the petrol tank.
(c) Engine oil pump.
1. Removing the oil pump.
A tongue cut in the end of the distributor
shaft fits into a slot in the pump shaft and Is
secured with a pin. (Pig.llB).


To remove the pump from the crankcase, re-
move this pin and disconnect the union of the float-
ing screen, then remove the two nuts from the locat-
ing flange above the pump body.
2. Dismantling oil pump.
Dismantle the pump by removing the cap
screws at the lower cover plate. The gear on the
driving shaft is removed by pressing out the shaft.
A small dowel forms the driving key. The driven
gear is free to slide from its shaft.
3 . Adjus ting end play.
A clearance of from 1-g to 4 thousandths be-
tween the gears and the lower cover is desirable,
this can be obtained by selecting a suitable
thickness of packing to form the gasket.
(d ) Oil Filters.
These vehicles are fitted with engine oil
fliters,(Fig . 117), and it is imperative that proper
attention be given to the cleaning of the oil
filter cartridge .
(e) Oil Circulation
Indicator.
A group of three oil pressure gauges sit-
uated on the bulkhead between the engines and the
centre compartment, indicate the oil pressure.
They are connected by copper tubing to the
oil line leading from the engines to the oil .
filters, each engine having Its own gauge. The
normal operating pressure Is 251bs . at 2,000 r.p.rn.
These gauges are supplemented by three
Instrument panel warning lights which show red
when the oil pressure is too low to safely operate
the engine. They are connected by a single wire
to a diaphragm unit mounted at the rear end of the
upper engine crankcase. The lights come on when
the ignition is switched to the "0n n position, but
should go out immediately th' engine is running.
Refer to the Electrical Section for informa-
tion regarding the testing of warning lights.
(f) Cleaning Lubricating
by s tern.
Before Installing new main or connecting rod
bearings, or when assembling valve lifters in an
engine in which considerable sludge is noted in the
valve compartment, the engine lubricating system
should be thoroughly cleaned. To do this;-
Remove oil pump and baffle .
Remove plug at front end of crankcase oil header.
Blow out lubricating system by applying compressed
air and kerosene with kerosdne gun at the upper
end of external valve silencer feed line and at
oil header opening.


Wash down valve chambers and inside of crankcase
with compressed air and kerosene.
Check small oil hole in lower end of each connecting
rod and clean out if necessary.
Clean oil pump, baffle, regulator valve and oil pan
with compressed air and kerosene.
Clean any clogged oil lines with a wire brush.
Remove all traces of kerosene before assembly.
NOTE: On no account must rag be used for cleaning
out any part of the oiling system.


LUBRICATION SCHEDULE
TANKS A.C. MARK I
Assembly
Lubricant
New and
Reconiitioned Units
Sub aerm ent
|
j Capacity
1st Change
at
2nd Change at
-
Engine
Gear Box )
)
Differential)
and Pinal )
Drives )
DDOE •* CO
Oil
250 miles
(Use DDOE 20
Oil)
500 miles
Every
100
1,000
hour s
miles
or
11 qts.
each engine
' '—■—■■■ -
DDOE - 30
Oil
250 miles
1000 miles
Every
300
3,000
hour s
miles
or
68 qt s.
\
Transfer case
DDOE - 30
Oil
250 miles
1000 miles
Every
500
3,000
hours
miles
or
16 qta.
i ■
Turret
Traversing
Gear Box
DDOE - 30
Oil
1000 miles
3000 miles
Every
300
3,000
hours
miles
|
or
j
1 pt.
v
(
j
1
Air Compressor
1
DDOE - 30
Oil |
i
i
!
250 miles
1000 miles
Every
100
1,000
hours
miles
or
i
i
2/3 pc.
\


Fig. 115. Engine oiling system
Fig. 116.
Oil passage to big end
bearings
Fig. 117. Nos. 1 and 2 engines through opening in bulkhead
showing position of oil filter and oil filler caps


Fig. 118. Extruded view of oil pump


Fig. 119. Underside of Tank showing covers for drain holes




ELECTRICAL SYSTEM
CONTENTS
De script ion - - - 138
Specification s ; 138
Key to Terminals - - - 140
6 Volt System - - 146
12 Volt System - - 191
40 Volt System - 200




ELECTRICAL SECTION.
The electrical equipment on the A.C.I. Tank is divided
into three distinct systems:-
1. The 6-volt earth return system, fitted to each of the
three engines supplying the ignition, starting,
lighting and engine auxiliaries.
2. The 12-volt insulated return system, supplying the
current for the Graviner Fire Protection System,
Machine Gun Cooling Motors and for the Wireless.
3. The 40-volt insulated return system supplying power
for the turret traverse operation.
The first two employ batteries to provide power when
the engines are not in operation, whilst the latter operates
directly off the generator without batteries.
Electrical Specification.
6-Volt System.
Generator:
Rotation clockwise looking on
driving end.
Ratio of Generator to Engine Speed 1.96/1
Max Output cold 30-32 amps.at 0 volts
Max Output Speed • 1,700 generator R.PWM.
Cut-in Speed 800
Field Current v 1.67-1.82 amps.
Erush Spring Tension 20/26 ozs.
Commutator out of Round not over ,002' ?
Regulator:
Cut Out Relay
"Air Gap .02 0”
Contact Gap .02 0”
Contacts Close 0.2 - 6.7 Volts
Reverse Current 3 amps at 6 volts.
Voltage Regulator
Air Gap between Armature & Core .070”
Voltage Setting 150°F. 7.2 - 7.4 Volts.
(close)
Current Regulator
Air Gap between Armature & Core .080”
Contact Gap .020”
Current Max. 32-34 amps.
Starter;
Rotation clockwise looking on
pinion.
Amps. No Load 65
Volts ” ” 5
R.P.M. ” M 5,500
Lock Torque 16 lbs. ft.
Amps. Lock Torque 600
Volts ” 3
Brush Spring Tension 24/28 ozs.
Commutator out of round not .002”
End Play Max. .030”


Batteries:
Amp Hours 130
Volts 6
Plates per cell 17
Specific Gravity -
Fully Charged 1.260 - 1.240
Half Charged 1.190 - 1.180
Full Discharged 1.120 or less
Ignition:
Rotation anti-clockwise looking on
driving end.
Distributor Contact Gap .0125/.0175
Spring Tension 20/23 ozs.
Plug Size 10 M/M.
Cam Angle 31°
Automatic Advance 1,000 engine RPM
= 1° engine.
4,000 engine RPM
= 24° engine.
Vacuum Advance Starts 5,5”-7,5”Hg.
18° engine at 15”
-18” Hg.
12-Volt System.
Generator:
Max Output' 40 amp 3
Max Output Volts 13
Max Output Generator R.P.M. 1250
Cut-in Speed 700
Brush Tension 25 oz.
Field Current 1.26 - 1,33
No. Poles 4
Brush Spring Tension 25 oz.
Regulator Unit:
Cut Out Relay
Air Gap ,057”
Contact Gap ,02 0"
Cut-in Voltage 13.5 (Points open
at 0 to 3,0 amps
reverse current)
Current Regulator
Contact Gap .015"
Maximum Current 40 amps.
Voltage Regulator (Settings must
be made on open circuit)
Contact Gap .015"
Regulating Volts 15


40-Volt System.
Generator
Watts 1000
Volts 40
No. Poles 4 (two coils per pole)
Current 25
R.P.M. Max. 4000
Armature Winding Duplex Wave 25 slots 49
segments.
Field Winding Shunt 440 turns N 0.19 B
and S enamelled.
” Current
Brush Tension 12-14 oz.
Regulator Bosch Type
Gap - Top Contacts .0175
” Bottom M .05
Current Limit Relay
Trips at aO amps. 40 volts
Traverse Motor Controiler
R.P.M. 650 40 volts
No. of Fields 4
Field Coils 600 turns No. 24 B and S'
enamelled.
Traverse Motor
HP 1
Armature Winding Wave Simplex
Full load current 25 amps 40 volts.
Solenoid Brake Winding 6,600 turns N 0.27 B and S
enamelled.
Solenoid Brake Current
draw .2 amps at 40 volts.
Field Coils 400 turns N 0.20 B and S
•Field Resistance 4.3 ohms.
Field Current 2.3 amps at 40 volts.
KEY TO TERMINAL NUMBERS
6-Volt System
2. Prom instrument panel light switch to the four instrument
panel lights.
3. From turret fuse board to commander’s push-button.
5. From hull fuse board to terminal strip to base^ junction
connector to turret fuse board then to inspection light
socket.
6. From emergency starter switch to terminal strip to
emergency starting solenoids.
7. From N 0.3 horn type relay to terminal strip to N 0.3.
starting switch.
8. From emergency starter solenoid to terminal strip, to
starter push button to starter switches.


9. Prom N 0.2 horn type relay to terminal strip to N 0.2
starter switch.
10. Prom No.l horn type relay to terminal strip to No.l
starter switch.
11. Prom N 0.3. ignition switch to terminal strip to ignit-
ion cut-off relay,also from N 0.3 ignition switch to
N 0.3 oil pressure indicator light, and N 0.3 temperature
gauge.
12. Prom N 0.2 ignition switch to terminal strip to ignit-
ion cut-out relay, also from N 0.2 ignition switch to
N 0.2 oil pressure indicator light and N 0.2 temperature
gauge.
13. Prom No.l ignition switch to terminal strip to ignit-
ion cut-out relay, also from No.l ignition switch to
No.l oil pressure indicator light and No.l temperature
gauge.
14. Prom N 0.3 emergency change over switch to hull fuse
board to terminal strip to inspection light socket on
hull and N 0.3 horn type relay and also from N 0.3
emergency change over switch to N 0.3 ignition switch.
15. Prom N 0.2 emergency change over switch to hull fuse
board to terminal strip and N 0.2 horn type relay and
also from N 0.2 emergency change over switch to No. 2
ignition switch.
16. Prom No.l emergency change over switch to hull fuse
board to terminal strip and No.l horn type relay and
also from No.l emergency change over switch to No.l
ignition switch.
17. Prom terminal strip to blue tail light pilot light and
also from terminal strip to blue tail light.
18. Prom terminal strip to red tail pilot light and also
from terminal strip to red tail light.
19. Prom hull fuse board to both tail light switches.
20. Prom head light switch to terminal strip and then in
parallel to both head lights.
21. Prom hull fuse board to terminal strip to horn button.
22. Prom hull fuse board to head light switch.
30. Prom interior light switch to terminal strip to
driver T s and gunner ’s interior lights.
31. Heavy.cable from negative of N 0.3 battery to emergency
starting solenoid and to N 0.3 starter motor, also from
emergency starting solenoid to main switch.
02. Heavy cable from negative of N 0,2 battery to emergency
starting solenoid and to N 0.2 starter motor, also from
emergency starting solenoid to main switch.
33. Heavy cable from negative of No.l battery to emergency
starting solenoid and to No.l starter motor, also from
emergency starting solenoid to main switch.
34. Prom N 0.2 voltage regulator "B" terminal to heavy
current strip to N 0.2 engine ammeter and to N 0.2
emergency change over switch and then to N 0.2 selector
switch.


35. Prom N 0.3 voltage regulator ”B ff terminal to heavy
current strip to N 0.3 engine ammeter to N 0.3
emergency change over switch and then to N 0.3 select-
or switch.
36. Prom No.l engine temperature gauge to terminal strip
to main connector to No.l engine thermal unit.
37. Prom N 0.2 engine temperature gauge to terminal strip
to main connector to N 0.2 engine thermal unit.
38. Prom N 0.3 engine temperature gauge to terminal strip
to main connector to N 0.3 engine thermal unit.
39. Prom No.l voltage regulator M B" terminal to heavy
current strip to No.l engine ammeter, to No.l
emergency change over switch and thence to No.l
selector switch.
40. Prom N 0.3 engine oil pressure indicator light to
terminal strip to main connector to N 0.3 oil pressure
engine unit.
41. Prom No.l engine oil pressure indicator light to
terminal strip to main connector to No.l oil pressure
engine unit.
42. Prom N 0.2 engine oil pressure indicator light to
terminal strip to main connector to No.l oil pressure
engine unit.
43. Bus bar in 5 way knife switch connecting No.l or 2
or 3 battery to emergency position for No.l, 2 and
3 engines. Also feed to fuel pump relay fuse in
hull fuse board.
45. Bus bar in 5 way knife switch.
47. Main feed from main switch to heavy current strip to
No.l engine ammeter.
48. Main feed from main switch to heavy current strip to
N 0.2 engine ammeter.
49. Main feed from main switch to heavy current strip to
N 0.3 engine ammeter.
50* Prom hull fuse board to terminal strip to main connect-
or to fuel tank relay.
51. Prom No.l horn type relay to main connector to No.l
engine starter solenoid relay.
52. From N 0.2 horn type relay to main connector to N 0.2
engine starter solenoid relay.
53. Prom N 0.3 horn type relay to main connector to N 0.3
engine starter solenoid relay.
54. From ,n? P n terminal on No.l voltage regulator to main
connector to field terminal on No.l generator.
55. From M F U terminal on N 0.2 voltage regulator to main
connector to field terminal on N 0.2 generator.
56. Prom ff F M terminal on N 0.3 voltage regulator to main
connector to field terminal on N 0.3 generator.


57. Prom ignition cut-off relay to main connector to N 0,3
engine coil primary,
57R. From main connector to fuel tank relay.
t J # ■ :
58. Prom ignition cut-off relay to main connector to N 0.2
engine coil primary,
58R.'From main connector to fuel tank relay.
59. From ignition cut-off relay to main connector to No.l
engine coil primary..
59R. Prom main connector to fuel tank relay.
60. Prom primary output of N 0.3 ignition coil to contact
breaker terminal on N 0.3 distributor.
61. Prom primary output of N 0.2 ignition coil to contact
breaker terminal on N 0.2 distributor.
62. Prom primary output of No.l ignition coil to contact'
breaker terminal on No.l distributor.
63. Prom high, tension terminal of No*3 coil to centre of
N 0.3 distributor,
64. Prom high tension terminal of N 0,2 coil to centre of
N 0,2 distributor.
65. Prom high tension terminal of No.l coil to centre of
No.l distributor,
66. Prom M A n terminal on No.l voltage regulator to main
connector to armature terminal on No.l generator to
No„l starter solenoid relay,
67. Prom "A" terminal on N 0.2 voltage regulator to main
connector to armature terminal of N 0.2 generator to
N 0.2 starter solenoid relay.
68. Prom ?, A n terminal on N 0.3 voltage regulator to main
connector to armature terminal on N 0.3 generator to
N 0.3 starter solenoid relay.
71. Prom main connector to No.l auto-pulse fuel pump.
71A. Prom main conneccor to No fl 2 auto—pulse fuel pump.
718. Prom main connector to N 0,3 auto-pulse fuel pump.
72. Prom turret Bus® board to ?not light switch in
turret.
73. Prom turret spot j.ight switch to switch on spot lamp.
74. Prom turret fuse board to turret interior light switch.
75. Prom turret interjor light switch to turret interior
1 ight s « '•
82. From commander f s ignition push button to base junc-
tion connector to terminal strip to ignition cut-off
relay.
96. Prom horn push button to horn.


12 -Volt System
26. Prom driver’s fire protection push button to terminal
box on bulkhead,to bulkhead fire protection push
button to terminal box, to Graviner bottles and flame
switches.
83. Prom Sig. terminal of wireless terminal box in turret
to base junction connector to lower terminal strip to
wireless junction distribution box in hull.
84. Prom microphone positive terminal of wireless terminal
box in turret to base junction connector to lower
terminal strip to wireless junction distribution box
in hull.
85. Prom S.P. terminal of wireless terminal box in turret
to base junction connector to lower terminal strip to
wireless junction distribution box in hull.
87. Prom turret fuse board to wireless terminal box in
turret.
«
88. Prom E- terminal qf wireless filter box to regulator
terminal strip r,o 12 volt main switch, also to heavy
terminal strip to 12 volt ammeter in instrument panel.
88A. Prom B- terminal of voltage regulator to wireless
filter box*
89. Main 12 volt battery positive feed,from battery positive
post to regulator terminal strip to wireless filter box,
also to forward M.G. cooling pump motor, to lower
terminal strip to base junction connector to Graviner
terminal box on bulkhead to Graviner, drivers and bulk-
head push and to flame switches, to wireless
junction distribution box in hull, to turret fuse board.
89A. Prom positive terminal of 12 volt generator to wireless
filter box.
90. 'Prom turret fuse board to turret M.G. cooling pump motor
switch.
91. Prom turret M.G. cooling pump motor switch to M.G.
cooling pump motor.
92. From armature or negative terminal of 12 volt generator
to armature terminal of 12 volt regulator unit.
93. From field terminal of 12 volt generator to field
terminal of 12 volt regulator.
94. Prom forward M.G. cooling pump motor switch to forward
M.G, cooling pump motor.
95. From forward M G. cooling p;ump motor switch to fuse.
99. Main 12 volt battery negative feed, from 12 volt
battery negative post to heavy terminal 3trip to 12 volt
ammeten in instrument panel.
100. Main 12 volt battery negative feed after leaving 12 volt
main switch, to f.:c for forward M.G, cooling pump
motor, to lower terminal strip to main connector to
Graviner bottles, also from main connector wireless
terminal box In turret and to turret M.G. cooling pump
motor.


40-Volt System.
44. Prom turret traverse controller to solenoid brake in
turret traverse motor.
76. Negative line from voltage regulator unit to base
junction connector to current limit relay.
76A. Prom current limit relay to turret lock interlock.
768. From turret lock interlock to turret traverse con-
troller. Prom turret traverse controller to turret
traverse motor.
77. From generator to voltage regulator,to base junction
connector, to turret traverse controller (Positive,
line). i
c. * * * * * * : ' - 1 * . - t ’
78. Prom turret traverse, controller to armature of
turret traverse motor.
79. Prom turret traverse motor to turret traverse con-.
~ troller.
80. Prom turret traverse motor field to turret traverse
controller. Prom turret traverse controller to
"hold in" coil in current limit relay.


6 -VOLT
ELECTRICAL SYSTEM
CONTENTS
(a) Generators _ 147
I.Description. 2.Location of faults. 3.Work-
shop overhaul. 4.Grounded, armature. s.Arm-
ature short circuited. 6.Grounded field coils.
7.Open circuit in field coils. B.Shorted field
coils. 9.Fitting field coils. 10. Checking
brush ring. 11. Servicing commutator. 12. Tes-
ting generator. 13. Lubrication.
(b) Voltage and Current Regulators 151
l.Cut out relay. 2.Adjustment of relay.
3. Voltage regulator operation. 4.Adjustment of
regulator. s.Voltage adjustment. 6.Current
regulator. 7.Adjustment of current regulator.
(c) Starter Motor 15 5
I.Description. 2.Location of faults. 3.Work-
shop overhaul. 4.Testing.
(d) Ignition 15 q
I.lgnition coil. 2.Distributor. 3.Centrifugal
advance mechanism. 4.Vacuum advance. s.Loca-
tion of ignition faults. 6.Checking coil.
7. Cheeking battery connections. B.Contact
breaker point adjustment. 9.Dirty or pitted
C.B.points. 10. C.B.spring tension. 11. Chec-
king cam angle. 12. Cheeking condenser.
13. Tracking of distributor cap and rotor.
14. Cracked or perished high tension cables.
15. Ignition timing. 16. Checking automatic
advance. 17. Removing and installing distributor.
(e) Spark P lug s 164
l.Type of plug. 2.Troubles. 3.Examining.
4. Adjustment.
(f) Batteries , 165
I.Removing. 2.Ce1l covers. 3.Topping up.
4.Adding electrolyte. s.Testing specific grav-
ity. 6.Heavy discharge test. 7.Ground test.
8. Charging. 9.lnstalling. 10. Troubles.
(g) Instrument Panel and Wiring . 171
I.Panel lights. 2.Switches. 3.Ammeters.
4.011 pressure Indicators. s.Water temperature
gauges. 6.Emergency switching. 7.Emergency
starting. B.lgnition switching. 9.Commanders
switch. 10. Head lights. 11. Tail lights.
12. Internal lights. 13. Turret lights.
14. Spot light. 15. Wiring. 16. Terminal strips.
17. Main switch. 18. Base junction connector.
19. Fuses. 20. Turret fuse box. 21. Ground
connections.
(h) Fuel Pump and Relay 174
I.Description. 2.Relay.
(i) Tachometer p 75
I.Description. 2.Operation. 3.Maintenance.
4.Defective conductors. s.lncorrect wiring.
(j) Illustrations 177




6-VOLT SYSTEM
The 6-volt system is supplied by the three engine
generators and as each of the three engines is identical
an explanation of the arrangement for one engine only will
be given.
(a) Generators
1. Description.
The generator is belt driven and is located at the
front of the engine in the ’’V” between the two banks of
cylinders. It is a standard 6- ’sit Delco-Remy two pole
two brush lap wound machine. The drive pulley carries a
fan f*r ventilation purposes. See Pig. 120.
2. Location of Generator Faults.
If a- generator fails to charge, check as follows to
ascertain whether the trouble is due to a fault in the
generator or in the voltage regulator unit.
Disconnect the armature and field leads at the
generator in question and, after connecting these two leads
together by means of a jumper wire, connect the armature
terminal to a separate ammeter capable of reading 30 amps.
Run the engines at a fast idling speed, touch the other"
lead from the separate ammeter to earth and, if the generator
is in a healthy condition, a charge will be indicated on the
ammeter and the fault is either in the regulator unit or
wiring.
A generator may fail to maintain its battery in a fully
charged state from any of the following causes.
FAULT FINDING TABLE 6-VOLT GENERATOR SYSTEM.
Symptons
X -
Possible Causes
t
i
Generator
Broken or loose connections in
not
charging circuit, i.e. at Gen-
charging.
erator or Regulator Terminals.
Batteries
Commutator dirty or burnt.
Brushes worn.
Brush lead broken.
Brush spring broken.
Regulator out of adjustment.
Cut-out faulty.
Cut-out contacts dirty.
in low
state of
charge.
Loose connections.in charging
Generator
circuit i.e., at Generator or
gives low or
Regulator terminals.
intermittent
Commutator shorting.
output.
Commutator dirty or burnt.
Commutator worn.
Brushes s.tieking or worn.
Brush springsweak.
Brushes not bedding.
Regulator out of adjustment.
Resistance of ground circuit
may be so high that it restricts
flow of current to battery.
Short in field coils.
Short in Armature.


Symptoms
»
Possible Causes
Battery
overcharg-
Generator
ed. Shown
giving high
Regulator out of adjustment.
by burnt
out bulbs
and very
frequent
need for
output
’’topping
up. ”
—
1''
Should a generator be found to be not charging the
armature and field terminals at the generators and volt-
age regulator should be examined to see that these are
tight and making a good connection. The brush cover
should then be removed and the brush gear examined to see
if (a) the brushes are bedding correctly, (b) brushes are
free in their holders and (c) that the commutator is in
good condition. If the trouble is not of an obvious
nature, such as one of the above, the generator should be
removed from the engine and overhauled in the workshop.
5. Generator Workshop Overhaul.
Before dismantling the generator, It should be tested
as a motor. This may be carried out either on the engine
or on the bench with an ammeter in circuit. If carried
out on the engine, the belt should be removed and the "A"
and "B" terminals of the regulator bridged out. In
addition connect the field and armature terminals on the
generator by means of a jumper wire.
If the armature runs smoothly and the current draw is not
more than 6-7 amps, it Is in good condition.
If the armature runs jerkily and draws a pulsating curr-
ent the armature is shorted and should be tested on a
growlser.
To dismantle the generator disconnect the brush leads and
remove l the two through bolts. The front end plate may
now be removed by levering it off with two screw
drivers. The back plate complete with armature may
then be, removed.
The armature should now be placed in a vice and the nut
securing the pulley and fan unscrewed, after which the
pulley and fan can be removed.
Before proceeding further the ball bearing should be
checked for wear by feeling the amount of "wobble”
•between the. bearing and the armature. The commutator
end bush is tested in the same way by fitting the end
plate on to the shaft.
After removing the pulley key, the drive end plate may
now be pulled off, using a puller or a press If necessary,
and the retaining covers removed together with the ball
bearing and oil seal, etc. The following tests should
now be carried out.


4. Grounded Armature.
With test points in series with a 240 volt or 110 volt lamp,
test the armature for "grounds” by placing one point on
each bar of the commutator in turn and the other point on
the armature shaft. (See Pig. 121). A light indicates a
"ground".
5. Armature Short Circuited.
Test for "short" circuits by placing the armature in a
"growler" tester and laying a hack-saw blade over the
armature slots and slowly revolving the armature. A
"short" will be indicated by rapid vibration of the hack-
saw bllade and local heating of the coil affected (See
Fig. '122). Short circuits may sometimes be removed by
undercutting the mica between the segments, whilst open
circuits may be remedied by resoldering the commutator
segments.
If these operations fail, the armature must be rewound or
replaced.
Note: When resoldering commutators resinous flux only
should be used, as acids are corrosive and also
conductors.
6. Grounded Field Coils.
See both ends of the field winding are insulated and, using
the test points, test between one end and the frame. This
will show up any grounds between the frame and the coils.
(See Fig. 123).
7. Open Circuit in Field Coils.
Check the' fields for 'continuity by testing between the two
ends of the field leads, when the test lamp should light
up. (Fig. 124).
8. Shorted Field Colls.
Connect the field coils to a 6-volt battery with an ammeter
connected in the circuit (Fig. 125) and allow a few
minutes; for the coil to warm up. The ammeter should not
read more than 2 amps. Where turns in the field coils
are shotted on each other, a higher current draw will be
indicated.
If field coils show signs of "grounds", they should be
removed by unscrewing the pole screws and either retaped
or renewed. If "shorts" exist they must be renewed.
9. Fitting Field Colls.
When fitting new coils great care must be exercised to see
that the pole pieces are drawn up tightly and that they
are aligned with the frame bore, otherwise the armature
will rub.
fields should then be tested with a small compass for
polarity and connected so that one field is N and the
other S (See Fig. 126) after which the pole screws should
be tightened up and "clinched" over with a centre punch.
10. Checking Brush Ring.
Thoroughly clean the commutator end plate with petrol and
dry it out.


Test the insulated brush holder for insulation with the
test points between the brush holder and the plate.
Should this be faulty, a complete new brush gear should
be fitted.
11. Servicing the Commutator.
Having tested the armature the commutator should now be
examined for flats, burns and eccentricity.
If necessary, turn off In a lathe, using a sharp tool
with plenty of top rake.
Undercut the mica with a hack-saw blade.
Note; If the armature has been resoldered, it must
always be turned off.
Wash the ball bearing in petrol, making sure that it Is
free from pit 3 and cracks. Pack with a high melting
point grease and replace.
Examine the oil retainer and gaskets and replace or
renew.
Screw on the bearing cover plates, after which the drive
end plate may be pressed on to the armature shaft.
The armature should now be gripped in a vice and the
distance washer and fan slipped on, after which the
pulley key is inserted and the pulley fitted.
Set up the spring washer and securing nut.
Cut a piece of No. 00 glass paper to fit the commutator
and secure it with a piece of thread or wax and insert
the armature and drive end bracket into the yoke.
Check the brushes and springs and renew them where nec-
essary.
Prop the brushes up In the holders by means of the ten-
sion arms.
Slip on the commutator end plate and locate by means of
the dowel. Spin the armature to see that it is free.
Drop the brushes on to the glass paper and rock the
armature backward and forward until they are thoroughly
bedded in, then remove the glass paper.
Insert and screw home the through bolts.
The generator is now ready for testing.
12. Testing the Generator.
Where a test bench Is available, mount the generator
On the bench and connect it up to its own Cut-out,
Voltage and Current Regulator Unit. It will be nec-
essary to ground the field terminal for this test.
Increase the speed of the generator slowly until the
ammeter flicks to ’’charge”. The voltage at this moment
should be 6.2 to 6.7 volts if the cut-out Is correctly set
and the speed should be about 800 R.P.M.
The generator should then be run until it has
thoroughly warmed up when the maximum output should be
checked by connecting to a discharged battery. The


maximum output should be 30 amps, at 1,700 R.P.M.
The battery and regulator unit should then be dis-
connected and a final run should be made on open cir-
cuit at about 1500 R.P.M, for 10 seconds to check the
insulation. Short circuits due to insulation break
down will be indicated by local heating and smoke.
The generator is now ready to be installed in the
engine.
13. Lubrication.
A few drops of light engine oil at the oil cups
every 250 miles is the only lubrication necessary.
(b) VOLTAGE ART) CURRENT REGULATOR
The Cut-out Relay, Voltage and Current Regulators
are assembled in one unit and the units for the three
engines are grouped in a recess on the right-hand side
of the engine bulkhead. (See Pig. 3, Page 12).
1. Cut-Out Relay.
The cut-out relay is included in the 'generator
charging circuit to prevent the battery from discharg-
ing through the generator.
•
Referring to Pig.l27 it will be seen that there are
two windings, one in series with the charging circuit
whilst the other (shunt winding) is connected straight
across the generator. The former winding is made up
of comparatively few turns of heavy wire, as it has to
carry the full charging current; whilst the latter
winding comprises a large number of turns of fine wire
and has to withstand the full generator voltage.
The operation of the relay is such that when the
engine runs at sufficient speed,the generator voltage
rises,and consequently the current, until it reaches a
value in the shunt winding where it overcomes a spring
that tends to maintain the contact armature open, thus
closing the contacts. This connects the battery with
the generator and the batter?/ commences to charge.
When the engine speed diminishes to such an extent that
the generator voltage is less than that of the battery,
the current through the series winding flows in the
opposite direction to that in the shunt winding thus
opposing the pull exerted by the shunt winding allowing
the tension of the spring to open the contacts.
2, Adjustment of Relay.
Where voltage regulation is employed, it is of the
upmost importance that the adjustment of the relay is
such that it closes before the regulator voltage (which
is 7.2 to 7.4 volts) is reached.
As the closing voltaye of the relay must be above
the battery voltage, it will be seen that the margin
between the two settings is small.
To adjust the relay, first disconnect the battery
lead at the M B If terminal of the regulator unit and ■
insulate it. *
Measure the gap between the armature and the core
by gently pressing the armature down, just above the


core, until the contacts ,iust close and inserting a .020"
feeler. If the gap is more or less than this figure it
can he adjusted by easing back the two screws at the
back of the relay and moving the armature assembly up
and down until the desired adjustment is obtained when
the screws must again be set up (Fig.l29).
Should both pairs of contacts not close together,
they may be made to do so by bending the spring fingers
accordingly. The contact opening, which is also .020”
is adjusted bv bending the upper armature stop up or
down as the case may be.
An ammeter should now be connected between the
battery lead and the battery terminal of the regulator
unit and a voltmeter connected between the generator
terminal and ground.
Start up the engine and allow it to run for a few
minutes to warm up both generator and relay, then grad-
ually increase the speed until the relay closes, which
should be 6.2 to 6.7 volts. Gradually reduce the speed
and note if cut-out opens the moment current is reversed.
Should the relay not conform to the above requirements,
the spring post tension must be adjusted by bending up
to increase the closing voltage and spring tension or
down to decrease the voltage.
•
3. Voltage Regulator - Operation.
The voltage regulator functions in the nature of an
automatic control that -governs the supply of current to
the battery according to its state of charge.
The voltage regulator, like the cut-out relay, has
two windings, one series and one fine winding.
The heavy winding is connected in series with the field
(See Fier.l27) whilst the fine winding is connected
directly across the generator as in the case of the
The action of the regulator is therefore dependent on:-
(i) The voltage of the generator.
( i) The field current.
spring tension.
Normally, the two spiral springs tend to keep the
contacts closed. However, should the generator voltage or
field current rise sufficiently the springs are overcome
and open the contacts.
Note: The field current will rise in proportion to the
external circuit resistance.
Following the circuit in Fig.l27,it will be seen
that this breaks the ground connection of the field cir-
cuit and the current has to travel through a resistance
to return to ground. This will greatly reduce the field
current and consequently the generator voltage with the
result that the' magnetic effect of the voltage coil is
weakened, whereupon, the spring closes the contacts when
this cycle is again repeated. This action continues in
a series of vibrations.
When the batterm is low the battery terminal vol-
tage will naturally be correspondinglv low and also the


voltage of the battery char in circuit and, in cases where
this is below about 7 volts, the regulator contacts will
remain closed and the battery will receive a full charge.
After the voltage commences to rise above 7 volts, the
regulator operates and opens the contacts for comparatively
short periods. As the voltage continues to rise the length
of the opening period increases until it reaches a stage
where the contacts are only closed for comparatively short
periods, in other words, the resistance (See Pig.l27) is in
circuit most of the time.
This is the set of conditions that exist when the
battery is fully charged.
4. Adjustment of Regulator.
Before any attempt is made to adjust the regulator, the
contacts must be clean and free from pits, dressing them if
necessary. To do this properly, the upper contact mounting
screws must be removed (See Fig.l3o) so that each contact
may be treated separately. Where contacts are badly burned
they should be renewed. In replacin' the contact supports,
care must be exercised that the insulatin’? bushes are re-
placed correctly (See Fig.l3o).
The air gap is measured by pushing down on the armature
as far as it will go and then gradually easing it back until
the contacts just touch; the measurement of the gap between
the armature and pole should then be .070” (Fig.l29).
Should adjustment be necessary, it is made by loosening the
two upper contact screws and moving the upper contact support
up or down as required.
5. Voltage Adjustment-.
The regulator is adjusted to operate at 7.2 to 7.4
volts with 8 to 10 amps flowing and the generator at operat-
ing temperature 150°F.
It is important also, that all readings be taken with
the regulator cover in place as 'this has a magnetic influence
that’ will affect the adjustment.
An ammeter with a variable resistance and a voltmeter
are necessary in order that the regulator may.be properly
adjusted, these being arranged in the form of a test set,
(See Fig.l3l).
The ammeter and resistance are connected in series
between the battery lead and the battery terminal and. the
voltmeter is connected between the battery terminal and.
gr ound.
The generator must now be run up to a speed that will
produce sufficient output to heat up the regulator windings
to operating temperature, after which the speed is reduced
until the cut-out relay contacts open and the voltage reading
noted as an additional check on the relay.
Increase the generator*speed now to about 2,500 R.P.M.;
this corresponds to an engine speed of 1,300 R.P.M. If
the ammeter readins is less than 8 amps lights must be
switched on and, if more than 10 amps, the variable resist-
ance must be increased to reduce the current to 10 amps.


The generator speed should again he reduced; until cut-
out relay points open, and gradually brought up to speed
with 8 to 10 amps flowing and the voltage reading noted.
This should he 7.2 to 7.4 volts with the regulator cover
in place. This procedure should he repeated a number of
times and voltage and current readings should he indentical.
Where a variable resistance is unobtainable a fixed
resistance of 3/4 ohms, capable of carrying a current of
10 amps should be connected between the batterv terminal of
the regulator and ground. The battery lead must be dis-
connected and insulated.
'Alien it becomes necessary to ad,iust the voltage sett-
ing, the adiustment is made by bending the spiral spring
hangers up or down (See Pig.l32). Bending down increases
the tension and voltage setting and vice versa.
When the voltage setting requires only slight adjust-
ment, it can be made to one spring only. Where a larger
error is evident, one spring must be removed and adjust-
ment made to one spring at a time.
With one spring onlv in place, press down the armature
and increase the generator speed until the voltmeter reads
3 volts and keep the generator at this speed. The armature
may now be released and the spring hanger adjusted until
the voltmeter shows 4.5 to 5 volts after which the second
spring is installed and the adjustment completed entirely
on this spring as previously described.
6. Current Regulator.
The current regulator is employed tor the purpose
of keeping the generator output within its maximum which
is 32 to 34 amps.
Referring to Pig.l27 it will be seen that there is
only one heavy winding on this regulator and that it is
connected in series with the generator battery circuit \
therefore the action of th s regulator is influenced purely
by the amount of current flowing in that circuit.
By tracing out the field circuit, it will also be ob-
served that the field current must pass through both the
current and voltage regulator contacts to return to ground.
Consequently, IT either of these contacts are open the field
current must pass through a resistance before completing the
circuit to ground.
There are actuallv two sets of conditions that can exist
in the field circuit with the current regulator contacts open.
(i) Current regulator contacts only open.
(ii) Current and voltage contacts open.
Under condition (i) there are two paths for. the field
current, one through resistance to around (See Pig.l27), the
other through the second resistance and the voltage regulator
contacts to ground.
Under condition (ii) the path for the field. cur-
rent is through the resistance to ground, this condition
further reducing the field current. It should be noted
here that where either of the resistances burn out, rapid
burning of the contacts will result.


7. Adjustment of Current Regulator.
To ensure that the voltage regulator does not operate
whilst the current regulator is being ad,lusted, it is nec-
essary to clip a short jumper lead between the armature of
the voltage regulator and the upper contact support bracket.
The air gap must now be adjusted to .080" in the same
way as the voltage regulator and. with the ammeter in circuit
between the battery lead and the battery terminal, the gen-
erator must be run up to full output sp.ed with all lights,
etc., switched on to prevent overcharging of the battery.
The ammeter reading should remain steady and should not exceed
34 amps.
Where adjustment is necessary it is made by means of the
spring hanger and to one spring where onl?/ small adjustment
is necessary. Bending the spring hanger downwards increases
the current setting, while bending the spring upwards de-
creases the current. (See Pig.l32).
Should a comparatively larve adjustment be necessary the
same procedure.must be adopted as with the voltage regulator,
namely, adjusting each spring separately. In this case, the
regulator is set to rive an output of 16 amps with one spring
in position, a f 'ter which the second spring is installed and
the regulator adjusted to give an output of 32 to 34 amps.
Where springs are in any way defective or distorted
they must be renewed.
(c) STARTER MOTOR.
1. Description
The starter motor is of the four pole wave wound Delco
Remy type. The assembly, like that of the generator, com-
prises four main parts; the drive-end bracket, commutator
end bracket, the yoke and the armature (See Pig.l33).
The connection between the armature and fields is such
that the field coils are divided into two halves which are
connected in parallel. There are four brushes, the two
insulated brushes being cross connected by a flexible equal-
ising lead.
The drive end houses the starter pinion, clutch and
actuating fork.
The armature is supported by two bronze bushes; one in
the commutator end plate and the other at the end of the bell
housing. Lubrication is provided for at the commutator end
only.
Mounted on the yoke of the starter is a relay together
with a. solenoid switch (Pig.l34). The function of the
solenoid is to magnetically shift the pinion into mesh with
the teeth on the flywheel gear ring. After the pinion is
meshed with the flywheel further travel of the solenoid
plunger closes the contacts and the starter motor commences
to crank the engine..
On pressing the starter push in the instrument panel
the relay is energized causing the points to close. This
completes the solenoid circuit causing the shift plunger,
which is locked to the shift lever, to be drawn into the
solenoid when the solenoid windings are energized.


There are two windings in the solenoid, a"pull in"
winding and a "hold in" winding. The "pull in winding
operates only when the pinion enecares with the flywheel
teeth and is' shorted out as the cranking contacts close.
The "hold in" winding holds the plunder in the solenoid
until the relay circuit is broken.
The relay circuit is grounded through the gen-
erator brushes and as soon as the engine runs the gen-
erator commences to charge and the generator counter
voltage, acting back through the relay, reduces the re-
lay voltage opening the points. This breaks the sole-
noid circuit and allows the shift lever return spring
to open the cranking contacts and unmesh pinion.
The counter voltage of the generator prevents the
starter operating, should the driver accidentally press
the starter push while the engine is running, thus
obviating the possibility of damaging the flywheel gear
ring.
2. Location of Starter Motor Faults.
A starting motor may fail to operate or operate in
an unsatisfactory manner from any of the following causes:-
FAULT PILING TABLE
STARTER MOTOR
Symptoms > Possible Causes
Starter lacks power
or fails to turn
engine.
•
Engine abnormally stiff.
Loose connection at starter or
battery terminals.
Battery needs attention.
sticking.
Brushes worn.
Brush springs weak.
Brushes not bedding.
Commutator dirty or greasy.
Armature shaft bent.
Armature shorted.
coils shorted.
Starter operates but
does not crank engine
Defective clutch in starter drive.
Flywheel teeth worn.
Pinion damaged.
Rough or nois:/ en-
gagement
Worn flywheel teeth.
Pinion teeth damaged or worn.
Starter does not
operate
Battery Master Switch "Off"
Battery needs attention
Broken connection in starter or
astarter solenoid circuits.
Starter push button defective.
Starter solenoid switch or
windings defective.
Armature shorted, grounded or
open circuit.
Field coils shorted, grounded
or open circuit.


. Refore removing the starter motor from the engine ex-
amine ali external connections to sec whether tiese are clean
and tight. Check to see that battery is not in a run-down
condition. Then remove the band cover at the commutator end
and inspect the brushes and brush gear for such obvious faults
as worn or sticking brushes, insufficient brush tension or
greasy commutator. If the trouble is not one of the above,
tho starter motor should be removed for workshop overhaul.
5. Starter Motor Workshop Overhaul.
The starter assembly, like that of the venerator is
secured through bolts. The removal, of these and the two
field connections allows the armature and commutator end plate
to be removed, leaving the clutch and pinion assemblv loose •
m the bell housing (See Pig.133).
The centre bearing plate must be removed with the thrust
washer, after which the unscrewing of the actuating fork will
allow the withdrawal of the fork and clutch assembly.
The following procedure should now be carried out:-
Try all bushes on armature.shaft for wear and if necessary
renew the . (Note:- Should the bush be worn the centre
bearing plate must bo removed complete.)
Check the clutch assemblv and if there is sien of anv plav
between the pinion and clutch fit new assembly.
Examine the armature and pole pieces for signs of rubbing and
check the armature shaft and commutator in a lathe, the
eccentricity should not exceed .002”. Where the shaft shows
signs of being bent it must be straightened in a press.
The commutator should be lightly turned if necessary and
polished with No.00 glass-paper. Do not undercut.
Test the armature and fields for "shorts”, "opens" and "o-rounds"
as explained under "Generator Workshop Overhaul".
Test the brush holders and. spring pillars for insulation as
previously explained and renew the brushes and brush springs
where necessary.
Assembly may now be carried out in the reverse order to the
dismantling procedure and the' brushes "sanded" in.
4. Testing Starter.
'/•here a test bench is available, the starter should be
set up, the battery current applied and the motor run on no
load with. a voltmeter and ammeter in circuit. The current
araw running light should be 65 amps at 5 volts and the
armature should resolve at 5,500 R.P.M.
lock torque test the motor should give a torque of
lb lbs/ft. drawing 600 amps, at 8 volts.
, i C j e . no is available, the starter should be
nstallud in the engine for testing. A starter motor should
be capable of cranking over two engines provided the
is fully charged.


(d) IGNITION.
♦
A separate ignition system consisting of a 6-volt
coil and an eimht cylinder distributor is fitted to each
of the three engines. Each coil is fed from a separate
battery when the five emergency knife switches are in the
"Normal" position. Alternatively all three coils can be
supplied from any one battery if necessary. This will
be fully described under "Wiring".
1. Ignition Coil.
A standard 6-volt Delco Remy ignition coil is fitted
to each engine and is mounted on the engine block.
2. Distributor. .
The distributor (See Fig.134) rotates anti-clockwise
when looking on the spindle end and is mounted at the front
of the power unit. It is driven from the camshaft at
half engine speed through an idler gear. An eight lobe
cam operates the single contact breaker. The condenser
is housed close to the contact breaker points and is ac-
cessible when the distributor cap is removed. The distrib-
utor also houses a centrifugal automatic advance mechanism,
together with vacuum advance.
3. The Centrifugal Advance Mechanism.
This consists of two weights located below the con-
tact breaker plate and connected by means of toggles and
calibrated springs. As the envine speed increases, the.
weights tend to fly outwards, due to the action of centrif-
ugal force against the springs moving the cam against the
direction of"rotation, thus advancing the spark.
4. The Vacuum Advance Mechanism.
This consists of a diaphragm fitted to the outside
of the distributor body and link acting against a spring
connected to the movable contact breaker plate, which is
supported on ball bearings so that It can move independ-
ently of the rest of the distributor. When the vacuum
in the manifold Increases, the diaphragm moves against the
calibrated spring, rotating the contact plate against the
direction of the cam, thus advancing the ignition independ-
ent of the speed of the engine.
5. Location of Ignition Faults.
The ignition system, includes the Battery, Coil, Con-
denser and Distributor and also the circuit.
A fault in any of these portions of the system will
be reflected in the system as a whole causing complete or
partial- failure. The following are some of the failures
that are liable to occur and their respective remedies;-


IGNITION FAULT FINDING TABLE.
Svmptoms
Possible Causes
Engine will
fire .
No spark at
plug wire.
not
anv
Fault in Battery Circuit such as Battery
ground or Fattery Negative connections.
Feed wire from Ignition Switch to coil
broken or disconnected.
Lead from Ignition Coil to Distributor
broken or disconnected.
Complete failure of Ignition Coil.
Contact Breaker Lever stuck open, spring
broken or points out of adjustment.
Dirty or Pitted contact breaker points.
Condenser defective.
Defective High Tension Rotor.
Engine misfires
or Performance
poor.
Sparking Plugs dirty or gap incorrect.
Defective sparking plugs.
Loose connections in low tension circuit.
Ignition switch to coil or coil to
distributor leads.
Contact breaker points out of adjustment.
Contact breaker points dirty or pitted.
Contact breaker lever sticking.
Contact breaker lever spring weak.
Distributor cap moulding tracking.
High tension cables cracked or perished.
Faulty condenser.
Automatic advance mechanism sticking.
A hr leak in vacuum unit connections.
6. Checking Ignition Coil.
If the ignition cuts out completely, check whether cur-
rent is reaching the coil by switching the ignition ” on ,? and
touching the coil feed to ground when a spark should occur.
Then check for continuity of the primary winding by dis-
connecting the lead from the coil at the distributor and
touching this to ground when a spark should occur. If the
primary winding of the coil checks correctly and a spark can-
not be obtained at any plug either the condenser is grounded
or the secondary winding is defective. The secondary wind-
ing cannot be tested for continuity by means of a test lamp
at low voltage as the resistance of the windings is too high.
A rough test for the secondary winding is to remove the high
tension coil lead from the distributor and, holding, the end
about 3/8 M away from the engine, flick the contact points
open when a spark should occur.
If a lamp :and test points are available, the primary
circuit can be tested by holding a test point on each of the
low tension terminals. If the lamp fails to light, the
primary winding is open circuited. To check the secondary
winding, hold one test point at the high tension terminal
and the other at one of the low tension terminals. The
lamp will not light due to the high resistance of the sec-
ondary circuit but tiny sparks will be noted if the winding
is not open circuited.


Test for grounded windings bv holding one test point
on the metal container and touch the other point to the
low and high tension terminals.
If the lamp lights or tiny sparks appear at the point
of contact, the windings are grounded.
If a distributor test bench is available, the
suspected coil against a new unit, first leaving the coil
switched on for five minutes so that it attains working-
temperature .
7. Checking Battery Connections.
Remember that the battery negative and battery,
ground connections are an important part of the ignition
primary circuit. See that good electrical connection is
made at both these points and that there is no high resist-
ance due to loose terminals or corrosion.
8. Contact Breaker Point Adjustment.
The gap between the contact breaker points should, be
between the limits of .0125 in. and .0175 in. Contacts
with too wide a gap will cause early timing and the engine
will knock. A large gap will also reduce the period of
,r dwell” which, at high speeds, may not permit sufficient
flow of the primary current to allow the coil to build up
fully, with consequent mis-firing. Too small a gap will
retard the ignition causing the engine to lose power <and
overheat.
To ad lust the contacts, loosen the contact plate
locking screw, Fig.l3s), and turn the eccentric screw
till the gap between the points is set to between .0125 m.
and .0175 in. by means of a feeler gauge. Before ad- .
lusting the gap, make sure that the contact lever heel is
not in contact with one of the cam lobes. Always set the
gap to the maximum limit to allow for heel wear and re-
check after tightening the locking screw in case the adjust-
ment has been upset.
9. Dirty or Pitted Contact Breaker Points.
The contacts must be kept clean and free from oil or
grease. Blackening of the points denotes burning due to
petrol vapour or oil from the automatic advance mechanism
finding its way on to the points. Slackening of the po nts
is also due to too high a voltage which may be caused by
poor earth connections from the batteries to the hull.. A
white or yellowish deposit on the points is an indication
of a defective condenser which should be .tested before
fitting new points or cleaning the existing points.
The contact points should be free from pits and. burns
and should meet so that the whole contact face is utilised.
The contact arm must move freely on its pivot without un-
due play.
To clean the contacts, remove the points and dress
with a clean fine cut contact file finishin off with a
fine stone, or replace if necessary. Do not use emery
cloth to clean contact points. The emery may become em-
bedded in the contact points and cause them to burn rapidly.


10. Contact Breaker Spring Tension.
After long service the contact breaker spring tension
may weaken slightly, allowing the contact points to bounce
at high speeds and resulting in mis-firing. Too much
tension on the other hand will cause hammering of the
contacts and rapid wear of the fibre heel on the contact
lever.
The correct spring tension should be 19-23 oz. and
this should be checked with a spring balance. Alter-
natively, test the tension of the contact breaker lever
by means of a small spring tension gauge, see Fig. 136
which illustrates the Servex Gauge Type V-108. Pressure
at the tip of the gauge arm forces a sliding scale into
the handle. The scale is calibrated in 2-oz. divisions
from 16 to 30-oz.
If necessary, reset the spring by bending or fitting
a replacement contact set.
11. Checking Gam Angie.
The period of closed contacts known as the ’’cam
angle” or "Dwell” is must important. There are several
ways of checking the duration of ’’dwell”. The exact
angle in degrees can be checked on a distributor test
bench. These test machines are usually supplied with a
vacuum pump for checking the vacuum advance and a grad-
uated dial for checking the cam angle and automatic
advance mechanism. The correct ’’cam angle” or ’’dwell”’
is 31° plus or minus 2° variation.
Where such an instrument is not available, a convenient
and fairly reliable method of checking the ’’cam angle” is as
follows:-
Using a low reading voltmeter connect between the ceil
terminal of the distributor and ground. With the engine
running the voltmeter should read from 4i| to 5 volts. A
reading of more than 5 volts indicates too short a ’’dwell”
or too wide a contact breaker gap and less than 4-J- volts
vice versa.
It is always understood that the initial adjustment to
the gap must be made first and subsequent adjustment for
’’dwell”. The contact adjustment for ’’dwell” may not agree
with the initial feeler adjustment due to wear of the
distributor shaft, distributor shaft bearing or cam.
’Where it is impossible to adjust the contacts for
correct cam angle it will usually be found that the
distributor bush, contact breaker heel or cam are worn.
12. Checking Condenser.
If the contact breaker points need cleaning at frequent
intervals and there is trace of a white or yellowish white
deposit on the points, the condenser Is the probable cause
of the trouble.
Remove.the condenser from the distributor and test with
a condenser tester, if available. A unit in good condition
should have a capacity of .22 to .27 microfarads.
If a condenser tester* is not available, it may be test-
ed by using test points with a lamp in circuit at a voltage
of 110 or 220 volts. The condenser should be charged by


momentarily placing one test point on the metal body of
the condenser and the other on the pig tail. The pig
tail should then be wiped across the body when a good
snappy spark should be obtained. If the lamp lights up
when charging the condenser, the condenser is shorted
to ground and should be replaced.
Note: If alternating current is used, the lamp may light
with a dull glow when charging the condenser due to the
ability of a condenser to pass this type of current.
Should no equipment be available for testing a
condenser, substitute a condenser known to be in good
condition and note whether the engine performance
improves.
• l
15. Tracking of Distributor Cap and Rotor.
Tracking is a form of burning which takes place on
the surface of the moulded coil top, distributor cap, or
rotor. Repeated surface moisture from condensation or.
dirt on the outside of the moulding may cause high.tension
leakage across the surface of the moulding which, if
allowed to continue, will cause permanent failure due to
the formation of a carbonized path on the surface of the
moulding.
Tracking between two inserts in the distributor cap
moulding may be caused by an excessive spark plug gap in
cne cylinder.
The spark instead of jumping this large gap, may
travel along the surface of the moulding to the adjacent
insert connected to a plug with a smaller gap, with con-
sequent burning of the moulding.
To prevent tracking keep the spark plug gaps adjust-
ed correctly and keep the moulded coil top, distributor
cap, and moulding clean and dry.
14. Cracked or Perished High Tension Cables.
Any cables showing signs of perishing or cracking
must be replaced. The cables carry a very high voltage
and the insulation is liable to perish as a result of
contact with oil or grease. The insulation may also
become burnt through contact with the hot cylinder head.
15. Ignition Timing.
To time the distributor proceed as follows:-
Disconnect the vacuum advance pipe line, being careful
not to strain the unit and cause it to leak.
Loosen the distributor housing clamp screw.
Turn the engine over until the IG/A timing mark on the
damper case is just opposite the pointer and the high
tension rotor lines up with No.l Insert of the
distributor cap (See Fig. 135).
See that No.l cylinder is on its compression stroke.
Rotate distributor housing until the contacts just
separate.
Holding the cam against the direction of rotation,
tighten the distributor housing clamp screw.


Recheck the timing to make sure that the distributor- has
not slipped during the tightening up of the clamp screw.
Where a syncroscope is available, this adjustment can
be made more accurately as the timing lamp lights the
ignition timing mark up immediately the contacts separate.
This adjustment gives the timing an initial advance
5° on the flywheel before the piston reaches top dead
centre. The firing order is 1,8, 7,3, 6,5, 4, 2.
The left front cylinder is number one cylinder and the
right front cylinder is number two. The cylinders in
the left block are odd numbered and those in the right
block even numbered as shown in Pig. 137.
16. Checking Automatic Advance (Centrifugal and Vacuum).
Where special equipment is provided for checking the
automatic advance it should show an advance of 1° at
1,000 R.P.M. engine speed and 24° at 4,000 R.P.M.
The vacuum advance must be checked with a vacuum pump
and the distributor run at about 900 R.P.M. engine speed.
The advance should commence to operate at 5.5 to 7.5 inches
of mercury. A total of 18° advance should be obtained at
15 to 18 inches of mercury.
A fairly accurate method of checking the vacuum
advance is by means either of a vacuum gauge or tachometer.
The vacuum gauge is usually connected to the intake
manifold by means of an adaptor.
Run the engine up to about 3,000 R.P.M. and note read-
ing of the instrument. Ease down the engine speed and
loosen the clamping scre.w on the distributor. The engine
should now be run up to the previous speed and the distrib-
utor advanced. If the instrument reading is increased the
automatic advance is too little; on the other hand, should
the engine start to ping, the spark is too far advanced.
Where a small advance of the distributor brings no material
change to the Instrument, the spark advance can be taken as
correct.
Where the automatic advance is out of adjustment, the
governor springs must be replaced and where the vacuum
advance is faulty it must be replaced by a new unit.
After checking automatic advance the distributor timing
must be reset to the prescribed 5° ahead of top centre.
17. Removing and Installing Distributor.
Disconnect the coil lead and remove the cap. Remove
the securing nut and bolt; the distributor can now be
lifted out. Install in reverse procedure. As the
distributor driving shaft slot is offset, the tongue of the
distributor shaft will mesh In the correct position only.
18. Maintenance of Ignition System.
Ignition Coils. These do not require any maintenance other
than to keep all connections clean and tight and to keep
the moulded coil top clean and dry to prevent tracking.
Distributor. At the stated intervals the distributor cap
and rotor should be removed and wiped with a soft dry
cloth. The contact breaker gap and spring tension should
be checked and the points if burnt or pitted should be


cleaned with a fine cut contact file.
The only lubrication required is a few drops of
light engine oil on the felt pad under the rotor and a
light smear of vaseline on the cam face at the mileage
laid down. The grease cup lubricating the distributor
shaft bearing should be given a couple of turns at the
same mileage.
(e) Spark Plugs.
1. Type of Plug.
The Cadillac Engines are fitted with A.C.10 m/m
spark plugs Type 104 which have been chosen by the
engine manufacturer as the most suitable for average
conditions. Occasionally when operating under unusual
conditions it becomes necessary to fit colder or hotter
plugs•
2, Sparl: Plug Troubles.
If spark plug troubles develop, it is most import-
ant to investigate the cause of the trouble in order to
find out whether the engine or the plug is at fault.
Ignition troubles caused through a defective coil, leaky
high tension cables, incorrect breaker point setting,
leaky intake manifold gaskets, worn piston rings, etc.
may show up at the plugs.
Spark plugs may give trouble due to the following
causes (Fig. 138):-.
(i) Pre-ignition.
(ii) Fouled, oiled or sooted up.
(iii) Burnt and blistered porcelains and electrodes,
(iv) Worn out.
(vj Cracked or broken insulators.
5. Examining for Colour and Condition.
Visual inspection of the firing ends of the spark
plug insulators gives a good guide to the condition of
the plugs and engine. If the ends of the insulators
are light brown in colour the engine is operating
satisfactorily. If the insulators are white the plug
is running too hot or the mixture too lean. If the
insulators are covered with a dull sooty deposit the
plug is running too cold or the mixture too rich. If
the insulators are covered with a shiny black deposit
the plug is too cold.
4. Adjustment of Gap.
The gap should be set to .025 in. and not allowed
to exceed .030”. A circular wire gauge should be used
in preference to a flat feeler gauge as a much more
accurate setting can be obtained with used plugs from
the round wire gauge than from the flat gauge.
Gaps set too wide will cause misfiring under load
or at speed. Gaps set too close will cause hard start-
ing and uneven idling. If the gaps are incorrectly
set, unsatisfactory performance will result through no
fault of the plug.


If when adjusting the gap the central electrode is bent
an additional stress has been put on the side of the insul-
ator which when heated up in the en 6 ine may crack with con-
sequent complete failure of the plug. To avoid this, bend
the side electrodes in towards the central electrode when
adjusting the gap. If a plug is fractured above the part
exposed to combustion it has not been caused by engine heat,
but by a hit or a poorly fitting spanner being used for fit-
ting or removing the plug.
Always use a correct spanner when fitting or removing
plugs and do not overtighten. Plugs should be screwed up
by hand and then tightened with the spanner.
If a spark tester is available the plugs should be re-
moved, cleaned and adjusted according to maintenance sched-
ule. A good plug set to a gap of ,025 in. should fire
evenly under an air pressure of not less than 80 lbs. per
square inch. Should a plug, after being cleaned fail to
fire evenly at this pressure, it should be discarded and
a new plug fitted.
Note: A pressure of 80 lbs. per square inch of pure dry
air is equivalent to a much higher mixture pressure due to
the minute particles of moisture in the mixture facilitat-
ing the path of the spark.
If at any time Spark Plugs having mica insulators are
fitted, these must on no account be cleaned in a sand
cleaner or with sand paper as this will cause flaking of
the insulator which will give rise to pre-ignition.
This type of plug should be cleaned with a rag dipped in
petrol.
(f) Batteries.
There are five batteries in the tank, each having a
capacity of 130 amp. hours. Three of these are em-
ployed for the power unit (one to each engine) and two
are connected In series forming the 12-volt supply for
the Wireless, M.G. cooling water motors and Graviner
fire protection system.
The engine batteries are situated under the turret
basket, Nos. 1 and 3 being on the right-hand side and
No. 2 on the left, see Pig. 4 page 12.
1. Removing Batteries.
(i) To remove the two offside batteries:-
Traverse turret between 9 and 11 o’clock.
Unscrew two studs at top of each ammunition container.
Lift out square ammeter container (rear) first; then
the longer one (front),
Remove cover from battery by unscrewing two mats.
Disconnect leads from battery-posts.
Slide batteries forward into driver's compartment.
Lift out through driver’s flaps.
ASSEMBLE; IN REVERSE MANNER.


(ii) To remove the one nearside battery:-
Traverse turret to 9 o’clock.
Unscrew two studs on front ammunition container.
Lift out both front and rear ammunition containers.
Remove cover from battery by unscrewing two nuts.
Disconnect leads from battery posts.
Slide battery through into turret basket and remove
from commander’s cupola.
(iii) To remove the two Wireless Batteries:-
These are situated between the driver and front
gunner's seat below the gearbox oil cooler. Two
6 volt 17 plate batteries identical to the engine
batteries are connected in series to give 12 volts.
(iv) To remove the Right Hand Battery:-
Remove the Anti Gas Suit container situated dir-
ectly behind the driver's seat by unscrewing the
fan screwing s tuds.
Remove the top cover by unscrewing the two nuts.
Disconnect the positive and negative terminals.
Note: The positive battery post is to the front
and the negative to the rear.
Remove the nuts from the two long bolts.
Then drop the bolts and slide them out of the
slots in the base plate.
Slide the battery complete with top and bottom case
to the position previously occupied by the anti-
gas suit container.
The battery can now be lifted out through the driv-
er’s hatch.
(v) To Remove the Left Hand Battery:-
As indicated above for the right hand battery only
note that in this case the Positive Terminal No. 89
is to the rear and the negative to the front.
Replace in the reverse manner being careful to see
that the batteries are fitted the correct way round.
2. Battery Cell Covers. (Bellows Type).
Some batteries are fitted with special vent plugs
and cell covers which makes it impossible for the
battery to be topped up above the correct level.
(Pig. 141).
This device consists of a small rubber bellows or
valve fitted below the vent plug. This bellows ex-
pands when the vent plug is removed, closing the gas
vents on either side of the vent plug recess.
Care must be exercised so as not to hold the valve
down when adding distilled water as this would defeat
the functioning of the device.


When the vent plugs are screwed in, the rubber valve
is depressed slightly, thus opening the two apertures in
the side of the vent plug recess and allowing the gas to
escape through the vent plug in the normal manner.
Instructions are moulded on the -tops of the plugs
stating that these must be screwed down when charging.
This is important, and the only time the plugs should
be removed is when actually filling or topping up the
battery. At all other times they must be screwed
tight. Otherwise, trouble will occur due to the gas
pressure generated in the cell during charging, forcing
the electrolyte out through the vent plug aperture,
and thus flooding the top of the battery with conseq-
uent c.orrosion of the battery terminals and adjacent
metal.
5* Adding Distilled Water. (Topping Up.)
The following procedure is to be adopted when add-
ing distilled water to the battery:-
If the specific gravity of the cells is to be tested
this must be carried out before distilled water is added.
It is useless to test the specific gravity of any cell
after adding distilled water until the vehicle has oper-
ated for approximately an hour.
Always top up a battery after the vehicle has been in
use when the electrolyte in the battery is warm. The el-
ectrolyte expands appreciably when warm and too high a
level would be obtained if the battery were topped up
when cold.
It is extremely important that distilled water only be
added to the battery and that it should cover the plates
at all times. ___ The correct level of the electrolyte is
from \ in. to -§- in. above the level of the separators.
Notes- If the battery is fitted with bellows type cell
covers, the vent plugs must be removed and distilled
water added until the level rises to the bottom of the
vent plug recess. This is the correct level.
4. Adding Electrolyte.
Electrolyte must never be added to a battery except
to replace spilled acid. If the specific gravity of
a cell is too low after the battery has been fully
charged, electrolyte at 1300 must be added until the
specific gravity of that cell is adjusted to 1250.
Caution must be exercised when mixing electrolyte.
Always put distilled water in the vessel first and add
the sulphuric acid slowly and carefully otherwise ah
explosion might result from the heat generated by the
addition of water to the acid.
Only pure sulphuric acid and distilled water must
be used and these must be mixed and stored in glass,
earthenware, stone, rubber or lead lined vessels. On
no account use tin-plated or Iron funnels or contain-
ers for either distilled water or sulphuric acid as
a small trace of iron or other metallic impurities will
affect the performance of the battery.
5. Testing Specific Gravity of Battery.
The instrument used for testing specific gravity
is the hydrometer and is shown in Pig, 140. It con-
sists of a glass syringe containing a glass float,
the float being graduated in degrees of gravity.


The specific gravity readings at a temperature of 80
degrees F. should be :-
Fully charged - 1260 - 1240
Half charged, - 1190 - 1180
Fully dis- , - 1120 or less
charged
a correction of 4 should be added to the specific
gravity readings for each 10 degrees P. above 80
degrees, or subtracted for each 10 degrees F. below
80 degrees. See Fig. 143.
Do not attempt to take a specific gravity reading
on a cell that has just been topped up. The readings
of the three cells should be within 20 if the cells are
in .equal condition. If the reading of one cell differs
greatly from the other two the battery should be opened
up for examination.
If readings of 1180 or less are obtained the battery
either needs to be re-charged or is faulty. Such a
batter;/ is only half-charged and trouble is sure to re-
sult unless the particular condition that has caused
the battery to run down Is located and corrected. This
may be lack of charging or a fault in the battery such
as, an inter-cell leak, plates shorting through buck-
ling with consequent damage to separators, or loss of
active material from the plates.
If readings above 1225 and below 1250 are obtained the
battery is in a healthy condition.
6. Heavy Discharge Tc;st.
Taken in conjunction with hydrometer readings, a heavy
discharge test gives an accurate indication of the state
of the battery plates. If a hydrometer is not used in
conjunction with the high-rate discharge tester, low
voltage readings may be interpreted incorrectly and a
battery which is discharged might be mistaken for a
faulty battery.
The best way to check for loss of capacity is by
means of the heavy discharge tester shown in Fig. 143.
This meter has a maximum scale of 3 volts and is of the
prod type. Across the prongs Is mounted a shunt re-
sistance that will carry a heavy current of approxim-
ately 200 amps.
Place hie pointed prods of the tester firmly against
the positive and the negative ter inals of each cell.
This cause 3 a heavy current to pass through the shunt
and a reading of 1.4 when the battery is fully charged
and approximately 1.2 when the battery is half-charged
will be given on the volt-meter.
The tester must be hold against the battery termin-
als for about six seconds. If the volt-meter reading
is steady during this time the battery is in a healthy
condition and should respond to charging. If, however,
the volt-meter reading rapidly falls away the cell is ■
faulty and needs attention.
This test must bo carried out on each of the* three .
cells.
If the volt-meter fails to register any reading for
one of the-, cells it indicates an open circuit inside the
cell.
A snorted cell will always give a reversed polarity
reading when under discharge.


7. Battery Ground Test.
Poor ground connections are the most common causes of
the following troubles:-
(i) Burnt-out lamp bulbs.
(ii) Intensity of light varying with
speed of the engines.
(iii) Pitted breaker points.
(iv) Difficult starting.
(v) Burnt out generators.
(vi) Loss of power and speed.
Test resistances of battery ground connection as
follows:-
Connect one lead of a volt-meter, with a large scale
divided into tenths of a volt, to a clean portion of
the hull which has been freed from paint.
Connect the other lead of the volt-meter to the battery
positive post, not the clamp, and observe the read-
ing of the volt-meter.
If the reading is in excess of one-tenth of a volt, the
battery is not properly grounded.
Disconnect the battery clamp and clean away any corros-
ion between the clamp and the post, re-tighten and
smear the terminals with vaseline (not grease).
If there are any signs of corrosion, neutralise the
action of the acid by cleaning with diluted ammonia.
Check the tightness of the bolts securing the battery
ground wires to the hull of the Tank and see that
this is.clean and free from paint or corrosion.
Check the battery negative connection and see that this
is tight and free from corrosion.
8. Charging Batteries.
When commencing to charge, the voltage and specific
gravity should be noted and subsequent readings taken
every three hours. As a rough rule, the charging rate
in amperes should be half the number of plates per cell,
i.e. a 17 plate battery should be charged at 8-g- amps.
Once gassing has commenced the specific gravity and
voltage should be checked every two hours and also a
temperature reading taken. If, after two hours, the
specific gravity and voltage cease to rise the battery
may be considered fully charged.
The temperature of the battery during charging should
not at any time exceed 110°P. or the battery will be
damaged, If the temperature tends to rise above this fig-
ure reduce the charging, rate.
After the battery is fully charged the specific
gravity of the electrolyte in each cell should be ad-
justed to 1250 10 making the necessary temperature
correction.


When the specific gravity of the electrolyte has boon
satisfactorily adjusted its level also should be ad-
justed until it is about above the tops of the sep-
arators and the battery given a further charge ’of 5
amps for half an hour, when it will be ready for ser-
vice.
9. Installing New Batteries.
The following procedure must be adopted when fitting
new batteries into a vehicle:-
Test the specific gravity. Do not install a battery
if it is below 1200.
Make ground connection and turn off all switches.
Attach negative cable to battery post.
If a spark is not noted proceed with the installation.
On the other hand, if a spark Is noted either one'
of the switches has been left "on" or a short cir-
cuit exists which will cause the discharge of the
new battery.
10. Battery Troubles.
Overcharging:- Overcharging the battery will cause
heating and buckling of the plates which will eventually
break down the separators causing internal short cir-
cuits when the battery will have to be replaced.
The voltage regulator should take care of this but
where overcharging is occuring it will be evident by
the fact that frequent ''topping up 1 ' is necessary.
This may also be caused by a leaking container which,
however, can be detected by inspection.
Sulphation;- Sulphation is caused by leaving the
battery for lengthy periods in a discharged con-
dition.
During discharge the surface of the plates is con-
verted into lead sulphate which becomes hard and en-
amel-like if left for any length of time. The por-
tion of the plate surface that becomes affected does
not respond to the charging current resulting in the
plates buckling due to uneven expansion, and loss of
capacity.
Uhere a battery is slightly sulphated it may be
brought back to normal by charging at a low rate
(as a rough guide - at 1 amp. per positive plate),
until it has gassed for at least four hours after
which It should be completely discharged at 10 amp.
and re-charged at the normal rate.
Dhedding of Active Material.
The plates of the battery are made up of grids
into which the active material is forced. A cer-
tain amount of this material will be shed from
the plates during the life of the battery and falls
into the bottom of the battery container into spaces
provided for that purpose. However, when this
loose material piles up it may cause the battery to
discharge due to an internal short circuit. The
only remedy apart from replating is to empty the
electrolyte and thoroughly wash out the battery in
an inverted position after which it should be filled
with fresh electrolyte and re-charged. This should
be regarded as an emergency measure only.


(g) Instrument Panel
and Wiring.
The Instrument Panel (Pig. 146) is hinged at the bot-
tom and the removal of two thumb screws at each top cor-
ner allows the panel to swing down for access to the con-
nections at the back.
1. Panel Lights.
Two festoon lamps mounted at top of the panel are con-
trolled by *a switch located on the rignt hand side of the
board.
2. Switches.
In a row along the top of the instrument panel are
situated from left to right the Lightning, Ignition,
Starting and Emergency Starting Switches. 2ach eng-
ine has its own Ignition and Starter Switch so that
one, two or three engines can be switched on and start-
ed at will, by means of the starter push button.
Below these switches are two tail light indicator
lamps each wired in parallel with the Red and Blue
tail lamp switches.
3. Ammeters.
In the centre of the instrument panel will be found
the ammeter ior the 12 volt Circuit. On the lower loft
of the panel are situated the three ammeters for the 6-
volt generator circuits.
4. Oil Pressure Indicators.
Situated below the 12 'Volt ammeter are throe oil
pressure ‘’telltale” lamps which are connected to an
oil pressure unit on each engine. These indicators
light up should the oil pressure fail in Its respect-
ive engine.
5. Water Temperature Gauges.
These are situated in line with the three 6-volt
ammeters on the right hand side of the panel. They
are connected to temperatur- units mounted in the
cylinder-head of each engine.
6. Emergency Switches.
A five position, double throw knife switch is pro-
vided whereby the load on any one battery can be trans-
ferred at will to either of the other two batteries.
This switch is mounted o.x the left-hand side of the in-
strument panel just belo ~,T the lighting switches. The
two left-hand switches are connected tb the three batt-
eries whje the remaining three switches transfer the
Ignition, Starter Solenoid and Lamp load to either the
battery for the engine in question when in the "Normal"
position, or to any ot v er battery when in the
’’Emergency” position. It will be seen from the Wiring
Diagram Pig. 144 that the feed for the fuel pump relay
is taken from the centre of the s econd switch from the
left.


7. Emergency Starting.
Should ono or even two of the batteries not be fully
charged, all three batteries may be connected in par-
allel to Nos. 1, 2 or 3 starter motors, by means of a
solenoid switch mounted on the right-hand side of the
hull.
To operate this switch, close the second tumbler
switch from the right in the top row and then press
starter button on the panel.
The circuit arrangement of this is shown in the
wiring diagram in Pig. 145.
The engines, under these conditions, must be start-
ed separately by operating the engine clutches on N 0.2
engine and after starting this engine start engines
Nos. 1 and 3 through the transfer box.
8. Ignition Switching.
The arrangement of the ignition circuits is shown
in the wiring diagram in Pig. 144. Xt will be noted that
a horn type relay is included in each circuit. These
are used to isolate each ignition circuit and are mount-
ed on the engine bulkhead adjacent to the voltage reg-
ulators.
The ignition current is supplied for each engine by
its individual battery during normal operation. However,
as previously explained, the ignition load can be
transferred to any other battery at will.
9. Commanders Ignition Cut-Off Switch.
The commander's emergency push button in the turret
operates a solenoid switch situated in a pocket in
the engine bulkhead, adjacent to the voltage regulat-
ors. This switch opens all three engine ignition
primary circuits and thus stops the engines. Immediate-
ly the button is released the switch is again automat-
ically closed by a spring which retains it in the
closed position. A failure of this switch to close
properly will naturally cause a complete ignition
failure. It should, therefore, always be examined
when no current is apparent at the coil terminals.
10. Head Lights.
The two head lights, fitted with 6-volt 32 c/p
single contact bulbs are controlled by the extreme
left-hand tumbler switch on the upper part of the panel.
The lights are wired with rubber flex through the hull
and the insulation should be checked at frequent inter-
vals to avoid shorts to the hull.
11. Tail Lights.
The two tail lights are controlled by individual
switches situated next to the head light switch. Conn-
ected i n parallel with these switches are two instru-
ment panel indicator lamps.
12. Internal Lights.
Lights are provided above the Gunner and Driver and
are controlled from the instrument panel. Also, on the
right-hand side of the hull is an inspection socket to
which a portable lead lamp can be connected.


15. Turret Lights.
Three interior lights are provided in the tur-
ret controlled by a single switch. An inspection lamp
socket is fitted also. " -
14. Spot Light.
The spot light is controlled by two switches in
series; one on the light and one inside the turret.
15. Wiring.
The main wiring loom is carried along the right-
hand side of the hull and covered by steel troughing.
All cable ends are clearly marked with identification
collets. In the 6 volt system the positive sides of
the batteries are earthed, the negative terminals being
connected by heavy cables to the emergency starting
solenoid from which the starter cables are taken to
their respective starting motors.
A disconnector box of the multiple plug and
socket type permits the engine wiring to be entirely
disconnected from the main loom and thus enable the
engine sub-frame to be removed. This box is situat-
ed at the rear of the transfer box. A locating pin
ensures the correct assembly of the two halves of the
box, and as all terminal numbers are clearly marked
on the lower half the box forms an excellent testing
point for fault location.
16. Terminal Strips.
The main terminal strip will be found on the
right hand side of the instrument panel position.
The forward end of the loom with the exception of the
battery supply leads, is connected to this strip.
The terminal strip is clearly marked with the num-
ber of each load and forms another good testing point
for fault location.
17. Main Switch.
. Connected between the batteries and the instr-
ument panel is a three pole main switch which isol-
ates the batteries from the panel. The leads from
this main switch are taken to a heavy current terminal
strip at the back of the instrument panel. This switch
should be used only when the engines are stopped.
See Pig. 148.
18. Base Junction Connector.
As the turret traverses in relation to the hull it
is necessary for some form of flexible electrical conn-
ection between the turret and the hull. The base junction
connector is fitted to meet this requirement. This takes
the form of a number of insulated rings, termed slip rings,
to which are connected the cables for the turret supply
(See Pig. 147.) There are ten rings in all. The sec-
ond ring from the top i 3 an earth ring which ensures a
good electric connection between the turret and hull.
The rings are enclosed in a metal frame which revolves
with the turret and which carries the spring loaded
brush contacts.
The wiring to the stationary slip rings is taken
to a terminal strip secured to the top of the transfer
case. The connections to this terminal strip must al-
ways be removed and the base junction connector dis-
mounted from the transfer case before the turret is
lifted out.


p
The slip rings and brush gear should be examined at
regular periods for burns and sticking brushes.
19. Fuses.
The hull fuse box is mounted behind the instrument
panel and is accessible from underneath.
The first five fuses from the right are all of 20 amps,
capacity, the left-hand fuse, which feeds the autopulse
relay, has a capacity of 30 amps.. From left to right
the fuses control the following circuitsi-
No. 1 Horn NO. 2 Battery
n 2 Head Lights ,r 2
” 3 Tail Lights ” 3
11 4 Internal & Panel Lights u 3
” 5 Turret Lights M 1 U .
M 6 Autopulse Relay ,? 1
It should be noted that the horn fuse is fed direct
from the heavy current terminal strip.
20. Turret Fuse Box.
A fuse box in the turret protects the 6-volt turret
lighting, spotlight and commanders ignition
switch, also the 12-volt radio and machine gun cooling
motor circuits.
From left to right the fuses supply the following
circuits:-
1. Wireless 30 amp,
2. Cooling 20 ' f
3. Turret Lights 20 ,f
4. Spot Light 20
5. Commander ’ s push button 20 n
21. Ground Connections.
It is of the utmost importance that ground connections
must be clean and of low resistance. This applies part-
icularly to the earthing straps of the 6-volt batteries
and also between the sub-frame and the hull. These
should be checked by means of a low reading voltmeter.
With current flowing, a reading of .1 volt indicates ex-
cess resistance and the connection should be removed
and cleaned.
(h) Fuel Pumps & Relay.
1. Description.
The three fuel pumps are secured to the sub-frame ad-
jacent their respective engines and are installed to
pump fuel to the header tanks.
The pump is electro-magnetic in its action, being op-
erated by a coil and armature.
The Armature is linked to a bellows and opens and
closes them by means of a simple interruptor action.


When the Armature is pulled down by the coil action,
the bellows are opened against a spring. The contacts are
also opened interrupting the operating coil circuit when
the spring immediately returns the bellows which act as
a pulsating pump. When sufficient fuel is pumped into
the header tank, a ball valve shuts off the supply line
and the back pressur will not allow the bellows to close
again which leaves the contacts open and the pump is thus
stopped until the ball valve again opens and relieves the
pressure.
Adjustment of contacts As made by removing the lower
cover and adjusting the armature so that it has .040 in.
clearance from the breaker spring.
2. Fuel Pump Relay.
The fuel pump relay prevents any interconnection
between the individual battery systems through the
fuel pump supply. It is situated on the forward side
of the sub-frame and consists of a single pole switch
operated by a solenoid. There are three coils on
the relay which can be operated by any or all of the
coils. The operating currents are controlled by the
ignition switches on the instrument panel, the coils
being wired to the ignition terminal at the engine dis-
connector box. gee Pig. 150.
See ‘’FUEL 31 STEM 1 ’ for Service Operations.
(1) Tachometer.
1. Description.
The tachometer consists of two units.(Pig.l49).
(i) An a.c. generator situated in front of the transfer
box, in which a 10-pole magnetic system rotates in
the bore of two wound stators at a speed proportional
to engine speed.
(ii) indicator of the double-circuit type mounted on tho
left of the driver.
When in use one winding of the generator is in series
with the electro-magnet of tho indicator unit, while the
second winding of the generator is in series with tho
moving coil system of the indicator. A 3-core Inter-
connecting. load Is used, with one common lead In order to
economise in c nductors. Under no circumstances what-
soever should the relative angular settings of the two
stators in the generator be altered, as this setting con-
trols tho graduations on the scale of tho tachometer.
2. Working Principles.
When connected up, the tachometer has two electrical
circuits. Those are referred to as Circuit A and Cir-
cuit B rtspectlvoly.
Circuit ,A.(Comprising one stator wind- .
ing, intorconnoctin 0 leads, and mag-
netising winding on the indicator) is
highly inductive.
Circuit 3.(Comprising the other stator
winding interconnecting leads, and mov-
ing coil circuit of indicator) is prac-
tically a pure resistance circuit .


As the speed of the tachometer generator increases
the voltage generated in each of the stators rises
correspondingly, but since Circuit A is highly induct-
ive its current remains practically constant at all
speeds. On the other hand since Circuit Bis resis-
tive in character its current increases practically
in proportion to the generator speed. Thus the el-
ectro-magnet in the indicator provides a constant
flux in the moving coil air-gap irrespective of the
generator speed; while the current in the moving
coil is proportional to that speed.
5. Maintenance.
Routine maintenance of these generators should be
restricted to replacing the lubricant in the ball
bearings at periods laid down in the schedule. Ii
rotor is removed from the generator, care should be
taken to prevent metallic particles from adhering to
the rotor claws. Also, since the air-gap clearance
of the generator is small, care must bo takenwhile
handling to avoid distortion of the rotor claws and
shaft. It is not necessary to provide a keeper for
the magnetic system when this is removed from the gen-
erator.
4. Defective Conductors in Flexible Lead.
Assuming that the correct terminals have been con-
nected together originally, the effects. of any open
circuits which may occur in the leads will be as
follows:
(i) Open-circuit in 'Common Lead;- Indicator readb app-
roximately half of the true reading.
(ii) Open-circuit in a Non-common Lead:- No deflection
at all,
5. Incorrect Wiring between Generator and Indicator.
If the flexible cable should be incorrectly wired-
up, so that the wrong pairs of terminals are connect-
ed together, the Indicator will endeavour to read
backwards. In all cases the common lead must. con-
nect together terminal 1 of generator and terminal
1 of the indicator.


Fig. 120. Extruded view of 6-volt generator
Fig. 121.
Earth test for armature
Fig. 122.
Using armature “Growler”


Fig. 123. Testing for
grounded field coils
Fig. 124. Testing for open
circuit in field coils
Fig. 125.
Testing for shorted field
Fig. 126.
Testing for polarity


Fig. 127. Wiring diagram, regulator circuit,
6-volt system
Fig. 128. Cut-out relay adjustment
Fig. 129. Adjustment of regulator air gap


Fig. 130. Removal of upper contacts for point
cleaning
Fig. 131. Checking voltage regulator with test
set
Fig. 132. Current and voltage adjustment


Fig. 133. Starter Motor, dismantled


Fig. 134. Extruded view of Distributor


Fig. 135. Distributor showing timing


Fig. 136. Spring tension gauge
Fig. 137. Cylinder numbering.
Firing Order: 1, 8, 7, 3, 6, 5, 4, 2


Fouled: Indicated by oil and carbon
deposit on insulator and metal part of
plug. Spark plug will misfire or fail
to fire at all.
To Correct: Check spark plug gaps.
Clean and test spark plug for possible
insulator fractures. If plugs are O.K.
and fouling is persistent change to
hotter type plug.
Burnt and Worn: Indicated by blis-
tered and burnt insulator and possible
eroded electrode points; will cause
pre-ignition and faulty motor oper-
ation, especially at high speed and
under load.
To Correct: Fit new spark plugs. If
premature burnt condition indicating
plug operating too hot for service,
change to colder type plug.
Gap Incorrect: Gaps set too wide
will cause misfire under load. Gaps
set too close will cause hard starting
and uneven idling. Gaps burning
rapidly, see “Burnt and Worn.”
To Correct: Check gaps periodically.
If gaps burning too rapidly change to
colder type plug.
Fractured: A fractured insulator will
cause complete plug failure. A frac-
ture above part exposed to combus-
tion can never be caused by engine
heat; it is due to a hit or to a poorly
fitting spanner being used for fitting
or removing plug. Fractures at part
exposed to combustion may be caused
by plug operating too hot.
To Correct: Fractured above: Re-
place with new plug. Fractured at
lower end and insulator appears to be
badly burnt, change to colder type
plug.
Fig. 138. Spark plug troubles


Fig. 139. Sectional view of battery.
Fig. 140. Hydrometer test
Fig. 141. Battery vent plug
Fig. 142.
Heavy discharge test
Fig. 143. Chart showing
specific gravity corrections at
various temperatures


Fig. 144. Ignition circuits—No. 1 Engine
Fig. 145. Wiring diagram, emergency switching


Fig. 146. Instrument Panel
Fig. 147. Base junction connector


Fig. 148. Pictorial wiring diagram


Fig. 149. Tachometer generator
Fig. 150. Fuel pump relay


12-VOLT
ELECTRICAL SYSTEM
CONTENTS
(a) Generators 192
1. Description 192
2. Dismantling & assembling 192
(b) Regulator Unit 192
1. Cut out relay adjustments 192
2. Voltage regulator adjustments 193
3. Voltage regulator contact gap 193
4. Current regulator adjustment 193
5. Current regulator contact gap 194
(c) Batteries ...194
(d) Cooling Pump Motors 194
1. Dismantling 194
(e) Graviner Fire Protection System 195
1. Description 195
2. Testing 195
3. Testing bottle fuses 195
(f) Wiring 195
1. Caution re Graviner 196
2. Main Switch 196
3. Ammeter „ 196
(g) Illustrations 197




12-VOLT SYSTEM.
A 12-volt venerator with its battery provides energy
for the wireless, machine gun cooling pumps and Graviner
Fire Protection circuits. (See Fig.lsl).
(a) Generator.
1. Description.
The generator is of the Delco Remy heavy duty 4 pole
type and is driven by the idler gear on the transfer case at
the rear left hand side, at slightly under engine speed.
It has an output of 40 amps at 13 volts at 1250 R.P.M., its
cut in speed being 700 R.P.M.
Unlike the 6-volt generator the positive terminal is
not grounded, the whole 12-volt system being insulated and
thus protected from interconnection with other systems.
On top of the generator yoke will be found three terminals,
one at the drive end and two at the commutator end. The
terminal at the' drive end is the field terminal marked F and
the other terminals are marked +a and -A, being the two main
terminals. The -A terminal is connected to the A terminal
of the regulator, while the 4A terminal is connected to the
frame of the regulator box.
2. Dismantling and Assembling.
Dismantling and assembling instructions are similar to
those of the 6-volt generators with the exception that both
ends of the armature are in this case supported by ball bear-
ings, also special care must be observed to prevent all brush
leads and pigtails from grounding on the frame or rubbing on
the armature. The brush spring tension should be 25 ozs.
and the field current 1.26-1.33 amp at 12 volts.
(b) Regulator Unit.
The 12*-volt regulator unit is situated on the left hand
side of the hull to the rear of the gunner. (Fi ( '.ls2).
It comprises a cut-out rela~ r , current and voltage regu-
lators and the action of these is similar to that of the
6-volt regulator, the only difference being that the 12-volt
regulator is of the heavy duty type.
1. Cut-out Relay Adjustment.
■ ■ ■>— .-a L
To adjust the cut out relay insert an ammeter in the
lead from the battery to the regulator. Next connect a
voltmeter between the armature terminal "A" and the frame of
the regulator. Slowly increase the engine speed, and note
the voltage at which the cut out points close. This should
be 13.5 - 13.7 volts and on slowing down the engine the
reverse current should not exceed 3 amps when the points open.
The spring tension is adiusted by loosening the locking screw
and turning the large eccentric screw at the back of the
relay frame. (Fig.ls3).
\
Increasing the spring tension increases the cut in vol-
tage while decreasing the tension lowers the cut in voltage.
If the above settings cannot be obtained, check the air
gap between the armature and the core, this should be .057 in.
with the contacts closed and the gap between the contact
points fully open should be .020 in.


2, voltage Regulator Adjustment.
The voltage regulator unit must be checked at op-
erating temperature. Tt is advisable that all tests
and adjustments be made at the end of a run before the
unit has cooled off, or the engine may be run at about
1500 R.P.M. until the unit reaches operating temperature.
Disconnect the lead from "Battery” regulator terminal
and’leave it disconnected while making this chock. The
unit is now operating on open circuit. Connect one of
the voltmeter test leads to the "Battery" terminal on
the regulator or the "A" terminal of generator and the
other lead, to the frame of the regulator as this is an
insulated return circuit. Start the engine and run
generator at not over 1500 R.P.M. and note voltage at
which the regulator operates, which should be 15 volts.
If incorrect, first adjust point opening to .015 in.,
then adjust the voltage setting by loosening the lock
screw and 'turning the eccentric screw to increase or
decrease the tension of the spring; decreasing the
tension decreases the setting. The spring tension
should always be reduced to lower the voltage under the
.specified, value and then increased to bring the voltage-
setting up to the proper value. Tighten the lock screv/
securely after completing adjustments. Check setting
by slowing the venerator until the cut-out relam points
open and then increase the venerator speed to previous
value.
Note: Voltage regulator must be at operating temperature
and in operating position (i.e., horizontal or
vertical) when-setting is made.
Caution: Do not under any condition set above the high
limit given.
5. Voltage Regulator Contact Gap.
uoid the armature down against the core and adjust
the contact point opening to .015 in. by adjusting upper
contact screw. Tighten the lock nut securely after
adjusting the point'opening. Note: When checking points
for the correct gap do not move the upper contact from
its natural position. The spring holding the upper
contact should rise slightly above the fibre insulator
when the points are together and at rest to insure a
wiping action on the points when them are in operation.
If contact points are pitted or burned, clean with a
thin, fine-cut contact file before adjusting the point
yap. The contact file should never be used on other
metals and should not be allowed to become greasy. Do
not use a file on the contacts excessively. Never use
sandpaper or emery cloth to clean contact points.
4. Current Regulator Adjustment.
To check the current regulator setting, it is nec-
essary to keep the voltage regulator points closed.
This may be conveniently done by bridgin' the voltage
regulator contact points with a jumper lead. Connect
an ammeter in series with the at the regulator
’’Battery” terminal and a voltmeter between the armature
terminal and the frame of the regulator unit. Start
engine and increase speed until generator Is running
at about 1500 R.P.M. Note the current regulator set-
ting on the test ammeter, this should not exceed 40 amps.


If incorrect, first adjust point opening to .015 in. then
adjust the current regulator setting bv loosening the lock
screw and turning the <:ccentric screw to increase or decrease
the tension of the armature spring. Increasing the tension
will increase the current setting and decreasing the tension
will decrease- the setting. Remove jumper lead from across
the voltage regulator contact points when adjustments to
current regulator have been completed.
Note:- Current regulator must bo in operating position (i.e.
horizontal or vertical) when setting is mode.
Caution:- Do not under any condition set above rated output
of the generator.
5. Current Regulator Contact Gap.
Hold armature down against core and adjust contact point
gap to .015 in. by adjusting upper contact screw. Tighten
lock nut securel Tr after adjusting point opening. Note: When
checking points for the correct point opening do not move the
upper contact from its natural position. The spring holding
the upper contact should rise slightly above the fibre insulat-
or when the points are together and at rest to insure a wiping
action on the points when they are in operation. If contact
points are pitted or burned, clean as described for voltage
R e gu 1 a t or.
(c) Batteries
The two 6-volt batteries, connected in series, are
mounted directly behind the gear box. As these are similar
to the three engine batteries their maintenance is the same.
When installing, care must be taken to ensure that they are
connected in series and that 'the positive terminal is con-
nected to the frame of the regulator unit.
(d) Cooling Pump Motors.
The two machine guns are equipped with cooling pumps
which are motor driven, the units being situated adjacent to
each. gun.
The motors are of the series type and draw 5.5 amps
when delivering 150 gallons per hour at a pressure equal to a
7-ft. head. r ach motor is controlled bv a switch and pro-
tected by a fuse. (See Fig.ls3).
Very little s.-rvice should be required during the normal
life- of the motor other than the replacement of brushes and
cleaning of commutator.
1. Dismantling:.
Should it become necessary to dismantle the motor, proceed
as follows:-
Disconnect leads from terminal block.
Remove commutator end plate.
Remove brushes and. holders.
Dismantle pump assembly.
Remove commutator bearing support and drive end plate.
The armature, fields etc., may now be tested and any
defective parts should be replaced.


(e) Gravincr Fire Protection
System.
1, Description.
The fire protection svstem is electrically operated
either automatically or "by hand.
Methyl Bromide, contained in metal bottles at a
pressure of 60 lbs. per sq. in. is the extinguishing med-
ium employed. There are three bottles each containing 6
lbs. of chemical and the bottles are situated in front of
nos. 1 and 2 engines.
Flame switches (Tig.ls4) provide for the automatic
operation of the extinguishers, there being two flame
switches to each engine. These switches are so designed
that when the temperature in the vicinity reaches 480°F.
the cap, which is a heat sensitive element, melts, allowing
the spring loaded contacts to close the circuit. This, in
turn, operates fuses in the neck of the three bottles allow-
ing the methyl bromide to discharge through pipes which are-
led around the carburettor and the sump of each engine.
There are two flame switches in the fan aperture for no. 1
and 2 engines, the other two being situated at the bases of
the engines. No. 3 engine has one flame switch at the top
in front of the engine and the other at the base.
Connected in parallel with the flame switches are two
push-buttons, one on the right band side of the hull be-
side the driver and the other on the engine bulkhead above
the oil gauges. The push buttons are protected by a glass
shield in order that they may only be operated deliberately.
The operation of cither push button releases the chemical
from all three bottles.
2, Testing.
Before testing the svstern, the connecting sockets on
each bottle must be removed (Fig.lss). This is done by
simply pulling the socket.
A 12-volt test lamp my.st now be connected to the socket
and the push buttons each pressed in turn when the lamp
should light up. The flame switches (Fig.ls6) should be
tested in the same wav by removing the moulded terminal
cover and shorting out the terminals.
3, Testing Bottle Biscs.
The bottle fuses can be tested for continuity only
and then with only a very small current. This can be
arranged by using a millimeter in series with a 2,000 ohm
resistance and inserting these in series with one of the
leads to the connecting plug on the bottle when the milli-
meter should show about .6 milllamps.
(f) Wiring, 12-volt Circuits.
The supply from the generator is taken to a terminal
strip on top of 'the transfer case, which in turn, is con-
nected to the battery and supplies the forward machine
gun cooling pump motor and the base junction connector.
The supply for the Craviner system is taken from the lower
turret terminal strip (Nos. 89 and 100) to a terminal board
on the engine bulkhead and the Graviner bottles. Lead


no. 89 being taken to the disconnecting box and from there to
feed the flame switches and no. 100 lead takes the feed to
the Graviner bottles.
1. Caution He Graviner System.
Great care must be taken when testing out 12-volt cir-
cuits with the current switched on at the main switch, that
the Graviner leads are not accidentally fed, as this will
release' the methyl bromide from the bottles. The distin-
guishing numbers of the leads at the terminal board and dis-
connecting box on the sub-frame are 'lOO, 89 and 26.
Note:- When working on wiring with 12-volt main switch on,
it is advisable to remove the plugs from all three Graviner
bottles.
2. Main Switch.
The 12-volt supply can be switched off by means of a
single pole switch situated adiacent to the regulator to the
left of the front gunner.
5. Ammeter.
A central zero ammeter is fitted to the instrument panel
for the driver’s information. The normal discharge load
should be about 15 amps for wireless and 5.5 amps for each
cooling pump motor. However, with the engine running the
generator should be quite capable of balancing this load.


Fig. 151. 12-volt Generator
Fig. 152. 12-volt voltage regulator unit


Fig. 153. Cooling pump motor
Fig. 154. Graviner flame switch
Fig. 155. Graviner bottle and bracket


40 VOLT
ELECTRICAL SYSTEM
CONTENTS
(a) Description,- ' 201
(b) Generator 201
1. Location of Generator Faults 202
2. Workshop Overhaul 202
3. Installing Generator 202
(c) Voltage Regulator - 203
1. Description 203
2. Operation 203
3. Adjustment 204
(d) Current Limit Relay 2 05
1. Description 205
2. Adjustment 205
3. Maintenance 205
(e) Turret Lock Interlock 205
•
(f) Turret Traverse Motor. 206
1. Description 206
2. Solenoid Brake 206
3. Terminal Strip 206
4. Removing Motor 206
5. Workshop Overhaul ' 206
6. Testing 207
7. Lubrication 207
(g) Turret Traverse Motor Controller 207
1. Description 207
2. Operation 208
3. Fault Finding • 210
4. Maintenance 210
5. Testing 210
6. Dismantling .211
7. Overhaul 211
8. Assembling 211
9. Testing after Assembly 213
(h) Illustrations 214




(a) Description .
' ' I *' ’ V'l
The 40-volt system operates the turret traverse.
As the turret Is completely supported on a ball race,
very little power is required to turn the turret when
the vehicle is on the level. However, when at an angle,
considerable power is necessary and, in order to keep
the current demand within reasonable limits, a pressure
of 40 volts is used. The current draw is about 20 amps
at full load with the vehicle level but may rise con-
siderably above this when at an angle.
The system comprises a 40-volt Generator with its
voltage Regulator Unit, turret traverse motor, turret
traverse controller and current limit relay.
The generator is driven at engine speed by means of
a flexible coupling from the front of the transfer box
on the left hand side. The voltage control is located
on the wall of the hull, behind the d river, whilst the
traverse motor, controller and current limit relay are
in the turret. (See Pig, 151)
(b) 40-Volt Generator
The Generator is of conventional four pole type
w.Vth the except ion that, in order to reduce the current
parsing through the regulators, two sets of field coils
are used. (See Fig. 152), It has a speed range from
1250 R.P.M. to 4000 R.P.M. The yoke and drive nd
are cast in one section, (See Fig.ls4) and the commutator
end shield is bolted on. The poles are laminated and
are bolted to the yoke and retain in position the two
field coils which are superimposed, each field having
a resistance of approximately 20 ohms % The drive end
is machined to house a sihgle row ball race which supports
the armature at this end. Two race covers (one external
and one Internal) recessed to carry felt washers, retain
the ball race In position. These covers are spigoted for
location and bolted together by means of three l/4 inch
Whitworth cheese headed screws *. The commutator end of
the yoke is spigoted for the reception of the curnmutator
end shield which carries die brush assembly and terminal
block. This end-shield is machined similarly to the
drive end for the ball race and the race covers, but a
double row race is used. The brush gear is mounted on
a laminated insulation ring which is secured t o the end
shield by means of two clips which allow the necessary
brush adjustment. (Fig. 154).
The brush holders are of the box type and Q there are
four pairs of boxes situated at an angle of 90 around
the insulation ring. The brush assembly is secured to
the ring by means of three H 0.2 B.A.countersunk mild steel
screv/s •
Flat sectioned coil brush springs provide the brush
tension which is adjusted by means of a slotted l/4 in.
brass pin vd th a hexagon head, the pin being retained in
position by a l/8 in. Villitworth cheese headed screw
and locknut. The armature is double wave wound, having
25 slots and 49 segments. 0 The shaft drive end
has two keyways set at 180 for the coupling.
The complete unit is base mounted with four l/2 in
S.A.E. bolts and nuts with tapered washers. Further
adjustment for lining up is made by means of shims.


1. Location of Generator Faults.
If t ho generator fails to charge as indicated by a
lamp or ammeter test across terminals 76 and 77 on the
base junction terminal strip, it should be checked to
ascertain the fault is in the generator or the
voltage regulator unit and wiring. (The procedure is
giVen in para. 2. Generators 6 Volt System). It must be
remembered that the 40 volt is an insulated return system
and consequently the return lead from the test ammeter
must be connected to the negative armature terminal of
the generator (97).
If the generator is faulty, the end cover should be
removed and a visual inspection made as to the condition
of the brushes and brush gear and also the commutator.
The brushes should be free in the boxes and when lifted
should return sharply by means of the brush springs.
Worn brushes should be replaced and when springs have
insufficient tension, this should be increased by easing
back the tension pin grub screw and turning the hexagon
head until a tension of 12 - 14 oz. is obtained, after
which the grub screw should be tightened. It should
also be noted whether there are.any signs of thrown solder,
in which case the armature must be removed and re-soldered.
,2. Workshop Overhaul.
Where the generator has been removed for bench over-
haul the following procedure should be followed after
first removing the end cover.
Before dismantling, the generator should be connected
to a direct current source of at least 24 volts and not
exceeding 40 volts and motored. For this test the two
field terminals must be connected together, and an ammeter
inserted in circuit between them and the negative terminal
of the current supply. It should run smoothly without
the armature rubbing and should not draw excessive current.
A heavy current draw and jerky running will indicate either
that the armature is rubbing on the fields or that the
armature is open circuited. Burnt commutator segments is
also an indication of the latter fault.
The procedure for overhaul will be similar to that
given for the 6 Volt generators. Differences In con-
struction details will cause small variations.
The generator is now ready for testing and should first be
run as a motor as previously described.
Connect the generator to its voltage regulator and test
with an artificial load such as a carbon pile resistance
(as used for checking batteries) or by installing the
generator in the vehicle and traversing the turret. The
brush position should be adjusted for sparkless commuta-
tion while the generator is running under load.
Note; The voltage adjustment of the regulator is
critical and any departure from the operating voltage
will result in unsatisfactory operation of the traverse
s’ystem.
3. Installing the Generator.
Fit the coupling to the drive end and place the generator
in position.
Test" alignment of the flange couplings with a feeler. , ,
Tighten* the holding down bolts moderately and start the
engine, noting that the coupling runs true and smooth-
ly. Where there are signs of misalignment the gen-
erator must be packed up with shims until properly
aligned before final tightening.


(c ) Vo I tea-g e Re g 13 1 a tor
1. Description.
The voltage; regulator used on the 40 volt system
Is of Bos.ch design* It is made up of two identical
•units, -one to operate In each field (See Pig. 153).
Therefore, a description of one unit m ll suffice
for both.
The two units, togethe r v.i th their respective
resistances are mounted on a bakelit.e base, which
in turn, is mounted on a mild steel plate. A
metal cover is fitted and secured in place by two
pillars and nuts. The two units are wired in
parallel by two copper.bonding straps.
The resistances are of standard tubular type,
and each had a value of 40 ohms. They aim connect-
ed on one side to their respective generator fields
(Nos. S 3 and 24) and on the other to the positive
linking strap of the regulators (N 0.77). Pig. 155.
Each regulator consists of a solenoid type operat-
ing coil wound, having a resistance of approximately
650 ohms. This is connected directly across the
40 volt terminals on the base plate (Nos. 77 and 97).
As the resistance of this coil is so high the oper-
ating current will be almost (.015 amp. .
approximately). A plunger type armature -carries a
silver contact in each end which can close on con-
tacts carried in e ither end plate. Normally the
lower pair of contacts are maintained closed by
means of a helical steel control spring carried in
the upper end plate which forces the armature
assembly downwards. The tension on this spring is
adjustable. The whole assembly is enclosed in a
metal case.
The two end plates are insulated from the case
by means of .washers and. the case is connected to
the field end of the resistance (No, 23 and 24)(See
Pig. 44), Connection is made between the case and
the armature by means of two diaphragm-like phosphor
bronze springs, one at either end.(See Pig.lss).
These springs have tongues'in the middle that form
a means oi flexible contact, and allow the armature
Plunger full travel. Thus the regulator may be
cons.idered in three insulated portions, the top end
plate positive, the bottom end plate negative, and
me casing, which Is connected to the armature, the
field connection.. The casing is rolled over at ...
each end to retain the end plates and the regulator
Is secured to the panel by means of brackets at
either end, the brackets being linked together
electrically by means of the copper paralleling
strips.
The contacts are adjustable in either end plate,
being in the form ol brass screws, with silver con-
tact inserts and are retained at their setting lock
nuts .h'- r
2. Operation (See Pig. 155)
Nullst she voltage remains below 40 volts the
first contacts remain closed thus short circuiting *
the resistance and connecting the field .directly
across the generator. However, when the voltage
rises above 40 volts the solenoid coil, of the reg-
ulator Overcomes the spring and closes the second
pair of contacts, at the same time opening the first
pair. Under this set of conditions, the resistance


is connected directly across the generator in
parallel with the solenoid coil and the only path
for the field current is through the resistance.
This greatly reduces the field current, and con-
sequently the voltage across the solenoid coil, with
the result that the spring again closes the first
contacts. This cycle is repeated immediately the
voltage rises again, its speed being 150 to 250
cycles per second when voltage control comes into
operation, or immediately the generator voltage
reaches 40 volts.
Either of the field coils is capable of maintain-
ing a voltage of 40 volts, provided that the generator
is running at sufficient speed. It will therefore
be seen that a very fine degree of voltage control can
be obtained with both regulator units correctly adjust-
ed. This Is important as any failure on the part of
the regulator will result in damage to the generator.
Adjustment of Voltage Regulator
The voltage regulator should be connected to the
generator and adjusted with it. One regulator must
be adjusted at a time leaving the other field disconnect-
ed. To adjust the regulator proceed as follows, using
the special tools shown in Fig. 156.
Slack back the lock nuts X, R & Y (Fig. 159) at either
end using lock nut spanners Nos. 1 - 11074 and 1 -
11077.
Screw back the first -contact (lower) (Tool 1 - 11705)
Screw back second contact (upper) S as far as possible
(Tool 1 - 11076)
Screw back spring sleeve "E ,r (Tool 1 - 11074)
Screw in first contact until the pole piece makes
contact against sleeve ,f o ,f (this can be felt).
Sc rev/ back first contact two complete turns, and
maintaining this adjustment tighten lock nut "X".
This- gives an air gap of .05 Ins. Connect a voltmeter
across positive and negative generator leads 77 & 97.
The generator should now be run up to a speed where the
voltmeter will indicate at least 45 volts and the con-
trol spring adjusting sleeve W E U screwed in until the
voltage control operates on 40 volts when the lock ring
"R" should be tightened.
Stop the generator and screw in the second contact n S ,f as
far as possible and then ease it back one complete
turn
5
Run up the generator to speed again and see that the
correct voltage setting is maintained over some minutes.
Should the voltage rise above 40 volts, step the
generator and screw in the second contact ”S U after which
tne first contacts should be adjusted accordingly, but if
the voltage tends to drop the first contact should be
unscrewed slightly and the second contact M S ,r readjusted
to #ne full turn back,
I° ?E • _ NO ADJUSTMENT MUST BE MADE TO THE CONTACTS WITH
T-iii GEr.dRATQy>. RUNNING as wlth both contacts screwed right
in, the. generator is short circuited which will result
in weld_i.rg ol the contacts and damage to the generator.


(f) Current Limit Relay
1. Description
The current limit relay protects the generator
against abnormal conditions such as, overloads and
short circuits.
Referring to Fig. 151 it mil be seen that the
relay is connected in the negative line between the
base junction and the controller. Its action is
simple, the solenoid switch principle being employed.
The solenoid coil has two windings which operate a
plunger and pair of contacts against the action of
a spring. The series or operating coil depends on
the current value for its operation whilst the shunt
coil relies on the voltage. When the relay operates
breaking the motor circuit, the series current is
interrupted. The shunt coil, however, remain connect-
ed across the supply and acts as a holding on coil
against the spring until the relay closes. An oil
dash pot is til so incorporated which allows an overload
for a period of 6 seconds before the solenoid operates.
2. Adjustment
The adjustment of the relay is extremely simple
requiring only the incroa.se or decrease of the spring
tension by the adjusting screw (Sec Fig. 158). This
should be done with an ammeter in circuit adjusting
the relay to operate at 40 amps. A suitable load for
test purposes may bo made up of any form of variable
resistance•
5. Maintenance.
No other maintenance other than the dressing of
c.ontacts is necessary.
(e) Turret Lock Interlock.
1,. Description
When the turret is not being traversed it should
bo locked to prevent it rotating when the tank is
in motion. This is effected by moans of interlock-
ing teeth operated by a small lever and' cam. Operat-
ion of the cam and lever moves the teeth into mesh
with the turret rack, a spiral spring retains them
in this position. The interlock also operates a
switch which opens the traverse motor circuit to prot-
ect it from the operation vh on the turret is locked.
The interlock and switch are illustrated in Fig. 159.


(f) Turret Traverse
Motor
1. Description.
The turret traverse motor is mounted horizontally
inside the turret and is coupled through differential
gearing to the driving pinion which engages in the cir-
cular rack attached to the hull.
The differential gearing is provided so that the
turret can he traversed either by hand or by a 1. HP.
four pole motor.
Only two brushes are provided, these being set at
90° on a laminated insulation base. The brush assembly
is secured to the commutator end plate by means of two
3/l6” round head screws and nuts which pass through slots
in the end plate and allow the brush assembly to be ro-
tated in order that they may be adjusted to ensure spark-
less commutation. Plat section springs, retained by
split pins maintain the brush pressure.
2. Solenoid Brake.
The armature shaft, at the drive end, carries a
brake drum (Pig. 160) which revolves between two brake
shoes when the motor is running. When the motor is at
rest the brake shoes are held against the drum by two
springs, but when current is applied a solenoid coil
operating a plunger overcomes the springs and releases
the brake shoes. The solenoid coil is situated on top
of the yoke and is accessible from the outside by remov-
ing the cover which also carries a stop to limit the
travel of the solenoid plunger. The brake is adjust-
able by means of an adjusting cone at the bottom (Pig.
160) and a special tool is provided for this purpose.
An observation port in the brake housing allows the
brake behaviour to be noted during adjustment.
3. Terminal Strip.
Six terminals are mounted on a strip on top of the
motor frame and carry the leads from the armature field
and solenoid, two from each, and the corresponding
controller leads. (Pig. 160).
4. Removing "*do tor.
The motor is removed from the drive by disconnect-
ing the leads from the controller and removing the six
bolts from the flange around the brake housing. A
square recess in the brake drum forms the coupling.
5. Workshop Overhaul.
The dismantling procedure for the traverse motor
is very similar to that of the 40-V. Generator with the
exception that the motor has a solenoid brake. The
procedure is as follows:-
Unscrew the two 3/l6 ff screws on top of solenoid cover
and remove cover.


Remove solenoid plunger pin and turn motor over when
plunger pin will fall out.
Remove two 5/l6 M bolts securing the brake assembly and
remove assembly and brake drum using pullers if nec-
essary.
Remove dust cover, disconnect a. .ture leads and lever
off commutator end shield.
Unscrew the four 3/l6” bearing c 3r plate screws when
the armature may be removed wit bearing.
Remove brush gear assembly and commutator end ball bear-
ing.
6. Testing.
Test the armature and fields for grounds, continu-
ity, and short circuits. The fields should draw about
2.3 amps and the solenoid coil about .2 amp at 40 volts.
After the motor is assembled it should be given a
run on no load at 40 volts when the current draw should
not exceed 5 amps. It should then be installed in the
turret and connected to the controller with an ammeter
in the supply lead (N 0.76) between the base junction and
the controller. The turret should now be traversed by
hand to see that it is perfectly free, after which the
motor should be tried. It should not draw more than
20 amps at full speed.
7. Lubrication.
The motor requires no lubrication other than pack-
ing the races with grease at overhaul periods.
(g) Turret Traverse Motor
Controller.
1. Description.
The turret motor controller consists of a multiple
bladed switch, cam plate and gearing and a small shunt
motor designed for a speed of 650 rpm at 40-volts (See
Pig. 161).
The multiple bladed switch functions as an u off”
and "on” switch for the traverse motor with its
solenoid brake, also for the controller motor. It
also reverses the current through the traverse motor
armature and thus reverses its direction when required.
The control handle is attached to the switch shaft.
This shaft carries a crank which operates the rack and
pinion, rotating the cam plate. Thus any motion of
the controller handle will be transmitted to the cam
plate. (See Pig. 165)
The cam plate consists of an insulation disc having
one side copper covered,the copper being divided into
insulated sectors and segments. The other side has
four brass segments arranged around its edge.
The copper sectors are connected to the brass
segments through the plate. For the sake of clarity
in the wiring diagram (Pig. 163) the upper side of the
cam plate is referred to as A, B, G, D and E, whilst
the corresponding segments on the other side are
referred to as Al, 81, Cl, Dl, and El. The surface D


does^ not carry current, its function being solely that of
providing a uniform surface for the rotating brush "R”
(Fig. 163 and 164) and the contacts ”P n and ”Q W which are
secured to the cam plate assembly.
The controller motor is a simple shunt wound four
pole ball bearing machine having two brushes displaced at
90° and has its four field coils connected in series.
The armature is wave wound, and a tapping is brought
out from one commutator segment and taken through the
slot to a slip ring (mounted on the knurled portion of
the armature shaft) on which bears a brush which is insert-
ed through an insulation bushing in the housing. This
brush will be in future referred to as the third brush and
it is connected to one pair of contacts (through a term-
inal block) which bear on the brass segments on the cam
plate.
Keyed to the end of the armature shaft, and secured by
a castellated nut and cotter, is the rotating brush assem-
bly. This will be referred to as the rotating brush ~H U .
It takes the form of a slip ring on which bears a brush
carried in an insulation bush in the housing, whilst on its
lower face, it carries another carbon brush which bears on
the copper face of the cam ring. This brush revolves with
the armature. The brush bearing on the slip ring portion
is connected through the reversing switch to the turret
traverse motor armature.
The cam plate, slip ring and third brush assembly are
housed in the motor housing, on the lower end of which is
carried the controller mechanism sub-assembly and reversing
switch. The whole of this assembly is shielded by a cast"’
iron cover held in place by a screwed pillar and nut.
2. Operation.
Although the operation of the traverse motor may at
first sight appear somewhat complex, it is not so when
resolved into simple circuits.
Referring to Fig. 164, it will be seen that in posit-
ions 1, 2 and 3, the same circuit exists, whilst in posit-
ions 4 and 5 there are two parallel circuits. In position
6, however, the contact ~R n (connected to segment TT A fT )
shorts out brush "H” and thus connects the traverse motor
directly across the mains. These three fundamental cir-
cuits are shown in Fig. 164 in their most elementary form
and when a thorough grasp of these is obtained, the’opera-
tion becomes comparatively simple.
Again referring to Fig. 163 position 1, it will be
noticed that the path of the rotating brush "H" is largely
over the ’’dead." semi-circular portion of the cam plate o,, D’’.
However, a small part of the circle overlaps sector "A"
which is, at the moment in contact with contacts "P" which
are connected to the third brush. As the latter is
connected to one commutator segment, it will pass through
all values ol voltage - in other words, it will transmit a
number of impulses. The position now Is that we have a
circuit through the traverse motor that returns by way of
the control motor.
Examining the cam plate again, (Fig.l63) it will be
noticed that, at the point where the rotating brush leaves
the live sector (4), a small semi-circular section is cut
away. This is the point at which the brush is at positive
voltage. Therefore, no current flows and the brush is


able to leave the live sector n A n to M D M without destruct-
ive arcing, as the voltage from the traverse motor arm-
ature current is at positive potential at this point.
Diametrically opposite this point will be another point
in this path that will also be at postive voltage (2),
whilst points at right angles (1 & 3) will be at max-
imum negative voltage. Summing this up - the voltages
at the brush n H" during one revolution (of which there
are 650 per minute) are:- 1 - maximum negative,
2 - positive, 3 - maximum negative, 4 - positive.
In positions 2 and 3 Pig. 163 the circuit is precise-
ly the same, the only difference i. eing that a larger part
of the path of brush is travers. over the live sectors
A and C , consequently, the. point of maximum voltage is
passed through with the result that more current flows and
the traverse motor speeds up,
/In position 4, a somewhat different set of conditions
obtain* Here the cam plate has moved round until contacts
P are making on segment ~C IM and contacts are making
on segment "Bl".. In addition the segment "El" has moved
round and met contact " Q” thus providing an additional
path from segment "E n to negative.
The conditions now are that the current from n B" and
E returns directly to negative whilst that from "C"
returns by way of n Cl n contacts "P" to the 3rd brush. The
circuit is shown in Pig. 163 (2) . It should be noted that
segement :U A M Is not in circuit in this position.
In position 5 the same circuit is traversed but for
a longer period of third brush dwell.
The effect of this is a further increase of speed due
to the fact that a greater portion of the path of the
rotating brush f, H n is on the live segments connected to
brush Q’ which allows a greater current to flow through
the armature.
In the last position, the segement ,r A ,! has moved round
and made contact with r, R n and, as contacts f, Q M are in
connection with ?, A ,f , brush lt H n and consequently the control
motor is by-passed and the traverse motor is connected
directly across the mains.
Although six positions are shown in the wiring diagram,
it should be remembered that there are an Infinite number
of speeds from stop to full speed. In addition to this,
the traverse motor is shown as running in one direction.
Where the motor is to be reversed , the controller has to
be taken through the **off* l , position, after which the arm-
ature connections of the traverse motor are reversed which
reverses the direction of rotation.


5. Fault Finding,,Table.
• ,- ■ - '• i..
40 Volt Turret Traverse Circuit.
Turret will
not operate
' •
Controller
motor does
not operate
Turret lock not disengaged.
40 volt generator not generat-
ing.
40 volt regulator not function-
ing. (For causes see 6 volt
generator.)
Broken connection in 40 volt
circuit:-
Loose connection at Generator,
Regulator, Base Junction
Connector; Current Limit
Relay; Turret Lock,
Controller.
Dirty or sticking contacts in
current limit relay.
Controller motor faulty.
Pitted -or burnt contacts in re-
versing switch in controller.
. .
Controller-
motor
operates
Broken or loose connections
between controller and traverse
motor.
Sticking cam plate brush in
controller.
Sticking third brush in
controller.
Faulty traverse motor.
4. Maintenance of Controller.
Very little maintenance can be carried out on the
controller other than brush inspection, commutator cleaning
and lubricating. All brushes, except the rotating brush
are retained in place by knurled caps, and may be removed
from the exterior for inspection. Inspection or renewal
of the rotating brush, necessitates the removal of the cam
plate assembly. All the brushes are spring loaded, by
helical springs. When examining brushes, these springs
should be examined for tension and signs of heating, also
examine brush pig-tails for good connection to the brush.
The reversing switch can be inspected by removing the
cast iron cover.
The commutator can be cleaned through the inspection
hole, using a wooden or fibre rod with a piece of No.oo
glass paper.
Lubrication can be effected at the commutator end by
removing the front race cover. A high melting point
grease should be used for this purpose. The bearing at
the lower end can only be lubricated on dismantling.
5. Testing.
With the terminal cover removed, eight terminals are
visible (Fig. 165) and reading from left to right their
connections are as follows.’-


No# Connection
44 SB Solenoid Brake
76 - VE) Base Junction Negative
76 - VE)
80 ) Traverse Motor Field
80 )
77 - VS Base Junction (Positive Ring)
78 Turret Traverse Armature
79 » n m
With the generator running, a test lamp of suitable
voltage or a voltmeter connected between terminals 76 and
77 will indicate whether the supply to the controller is
available. Should the supply fail, the generator reg-
ulator and base junction should be checked.
Where supply to the controller is available, it is
necessary to determine whether the traverse motor is at
fault or the controller. Therefore, first test the
motor armature and field circuits through a voltmeter and
battery or a megger if one is available, by disconnecting
the leads from their terminals.
An inspection plate is provided, secured by two
cheese headed screws, on a plane with the rotating brush
H •
With the cover removed the brush may be inspected.
Should arcing be in evidence the cam plate assembly
must be removed and adjustment made to the rotating
brush assembly by easing back the four assembly screws
and moving the brush round a little. After the screws
have been tightened the cam plate should be reassembled
and the controller tested again. If the arcing is now
increased, the brush must be moved in the opposite
direction until the arcing disappears.
Where the controller is at fault and a thorough check
has been made of brushes, etc., the controller must be
removed and overhauled as follows
6. Dismantling.
To dismantle controller, first remove the cast iron
cover and proceed as follows:-
Remove the four countersunk screws which will enable the
cam plate assembly to be removed. Should the cam plate
show signs of burning, it must be cleaned or faced up
in a lathe.
Remove the two commutator brushes and also the third and
slip ring brushes.
Remove the six 3/l6 f? cheese headed screws from the bearing
support, also the commutator and bearing cover.
The armature complete with the lower bearing support may
now be removed.
The rotating brush assembly may now be removed by placing
the armature in a vice and removing the castellated nut
after which the assembly can be removed with a puller.
Check the lower bearing support for "wobble” due to bearing
wear and, if necessary, remove the bearing support and
bearing with puller, after which the bearing may be re-
moved from the support b;/ removing the four cheese headed
screws from the bearing cover.


Remove the commuifator brush assemblies and the commutator
together w‘th its oil seal and bearing.
7. Overhaul.
The armature should be tested in a ''growler" for
"short" and "open" circuits in the usual way. Where the
commutator shows signs of wear or flats, it'should be
turned off and the third brush ring cleaned up if nec-
essary. The fields should also be tested for continuity
and current draw. The fields should have resistance of"
approx. 2 0 ohms or 5 ohms per coil. Therefore at 40 volts,
they will draw about 2 amps which will diminish slightly
at operating temperature.
The testing voltage divided by 20 will give the
approximate current the fields should draw and where there
is any appreciable variation from this figure, the fields
should be dismantled and checked for "shorts".
While the controller is dismantled the third brush
ring should be examined for loose rivets and also the
three rotating brush screws and nuts should be tightened,
making sure that the spring washers are in place.
reversing switch contacts should be examined for
burning and all contacts should be lined up. Where a
switch Is badly burned or damaged, it should be replaced.
8. Assembling.
The controller should now be ready for re-assembly
which should be proceeded-with as followss-
With. the armature held In a vice, place the lower bearing
cover on the shaft, seeing that the felt washer is in
good condition and in place, and press the ball bearing
up to the shoulder on the armature shaft. The bearing
support may now be placed on the shaft and screwed to
the.bearing by means of four cheese headed screws and
spring washers. Where the screws project beyond the
bearing cover, they should be filed flush.
Pit the Woodruff key and instal the rotating brush assem-
bly finally securing it with the castellated nut and
spring washer and inserting the split pin.
A piece of No.oo glass paper should now be fastened round
the commutator and the armature assembly installed,
screwing up the lower bearing support. After which
the commutator end bearing should be pressed on. The
armature should now spin freely. The brushes should
now be inserted and the armature turned backward and
forward until the brushes are thoroughly "sanded" in.
The sandpaper may now be removed through the Inspection
hole and the lower end bearing cover replaced.
Now fit the cam plate assembly (making sure that the
rotating brush is in position) by pressing it firmly
on to the housing, after locating the connecting pins
and sockets and screwing home the six countersunk
screws. Place the cast Iron cover in position and
secure it with Its nut and the controller Is now ready
for testing.


9. Testing after Assembly.
Instal the controller In the turret and connect the
positive and negative leads from the base junction
connector.
The generator should now be run up to speed and the
controller tried in each direction when the controller
motor should revolve freely and without arcing at the
correct speed. The remainder of the leads from the
traverse motor may now be connected and the controller
tested with the traverse motor.
It should be noted that all screws, with the
exception of those with countersunk heads, are fitted
with spring washers and care should be exercised when
reassembling to see that these are replaced, otherwise
the screws may work loose due to vibration and cause
internal damage to the controller.




Fig. 151. Pictorial wiring diagram 40-volt electrical system


Fig. 152. 40-volt generator
Fig. 153. 40-volt voltage regulator unit


Fig. 154. 40-volt generator brush gear
Fig. 155. Wiring Diagram, 40-volt system


Fig. 156. Tools—turret voltage regulator
Fig. 157. Sectional view of voltage regulator


Fig. 158. Current Limit Relay
Fig. 159. Turret Lock interlock


Fig. 160. Turret Traverse Motor
Fig. 161. Turret Traverse Motor Controller


Fig. 162. Cam Plate—traverse motor controller
Fig. 163. Wiring diagram, traverse motor controller


Fig. 164. Wiring diagram (simplified), Traverse motor
controller


Fig. 165. Reversing switch and rack




CLUTCH GROUP
CONTENTS
(a) Engine Clutches, . 223
0f
1. De script ion 223
*2. Removing Clutch - 1 223
3. Installing Clutch 223
4. Replacing Clutch Pacings 223
5. Dismantling Pressure Plate Assembly 223
6. Assembling Pressure Plate Assembly 224
7. Adjusting Clutch Release Levers 224
8. Lubrication of Pilot Bearing 225
9. Removing Locking Pins 225
10. Balancing Clutch 225
11. Engine Clutch Specifications 225
(b) Master Clutch 226
1. De script ion 226
2. Adjusting - - - - 226
3. Adjusting Linkage „ 226
4. Dismantling 227
5. Overhauling 228
6. Master Clutch Data 228
7. Bearings 228
8. Oil Seals 228


(a) Engine Clutches.
The engine clutches are standard. Cadillac
equipment of the single dry-plate type. These
three clutches have no remote control, hut any
one engine can he isolated hy propping its clutch
in a disengaged position or hy removing the drive
snaft assembly between the engine and the transfer
box.
As these clutches are not used for starting
purposes, or for the changing of gears, little
wear is experienced. They must, however, he
capaole 01 transmitting the full engine power
to the transfer box,
A dismantled view of one of these clutches
will he found in Pig. 167.
2. Removing of clutch from engine.
Remove driven shaft and hearing from clutch
housing.
Remove clutch housing pan.
Remove clutch release yoke and sleeve.
Loosen retaining screws securing clutch to
flywheel, a turn or two at a time, until
spring pressure is fully released.
Remove retaining screws and take clutch ass-
embly and driven disc from flywheel.
5. Installing clutch in engine.
If a. new clutch disc is to he installed, check
fit of splines on clutch disc hub and clutch
connection shalt. A free fit is necessary to
prevent clutch drag. Chassis grease applied
to splines will aid in proper assembly.
Install driven disc and pressure plate assembly
loosely on flywheel, making certain firstly
that driven disc is fitted with oil guard'
toward rear and, secondly, that balance marks
on flywheel and pressure plate are in line.
Centre the hub of the driver di.cio. using aliening
arbor, Tool No. J-1031 (Pig. 168) and tighten
retaining screws securely.
Replace clutch housing pan.
4. Replacing clutch _f aclngs
Replacement of facings on the clutch driven
disc should be made only by installation of the
complete disc. Only complete discs are listed
in the Spare .Parts Identification List.
5. Dismantling of Pressure plate assembly.
Place pressure plate assembly in arbor press with
a block under the spring pressure plate and
arrange so that cover Is left free to move down.


Place a block or bar across the top of the
cover, resting it on spring bosses, and
place assembly under compression.
Remove retaining screws holding clutch release
lever clevises in place.
Slowly release the pressure from press and
remove spring cover.
Remove springs and clutch release levers by
taking out clutch release lever pivot pins
and dismantling yokes and rollers.
6. Assembling pressure plate assembly.
Inspect springs carefully and if they show
signs of having been overheated replace
them in complete sets. If springs have
been overheated, they may be blue in col-
our, indicating that the temper has been
drawn, or else paint will be scorched or
burnt off. If heating has continued
long enough, the springs will be dark
c.rey in colour. This is a sign that the
temper has been entirely removed from them.
The free height of the springs should be
checked against the specifications on opp-
osite page.
Place pressure plate in arbor press and set
clutch springs on it in a vertical posit-
ion, seating them on the Insulators resting
on the small bosses.
Install clutch release levers.
Apply a small amount of water pump grease to
driving lugs.
Place the cover on the assembled parts, taking
care that clutch levers are in position and
that tops of pressure plate springs are pro-
perly seated under the seats in the cover.
Lay a bar across the cover and slowly compress
assembly, making sure that the pressure
plate lugs are guided through the proper
holes in the cover.
Insert screws securing the lever pivot clevis
to the cover plate, holding clevis square
while tightening screw.
Release and apply pressure on assembly several
times so that all moving parts will settle
into their working position.
Remove pressure plate assembly from press and
adjust clutch release levers.
7. Adjusting clutch release levers.
Before adjustment is attempted, levers must
be worked several times to centre the bearings.
The only accurate method of adjusting clutch
release levers is by use of Universal Clutch
Lever Adjusting Gauge, Tool No. J-285-C (Pig.
169). The correct procedure is as follows:-


Place gauge in position normally occupied in
the flywheel by driven disc.
fount the pressure plate assembly on the fly-
wheel, tightening attaching screws a turn
or two at a time to avoid springing cover.
Centre the o auge plate.
Lay a short straight edge across centre boss
of gauge, as a guide for positioning clutch
levers,
Set adjustable boss in tool to height of lowest
lever.
Tap clevis mounting screw head, using 8-ounce
hammer, in order to bend pressure plate
cover assembly slightly while holding the
lever down, until all levers are the same
height c.
This method gives the most accurate adjustment
on these clutches, and does not necessitate
fracturing the staking of the adjusting screws
to readjust the levers,
Remove gauge and install clutch with driven
disc.
8. Lubrication of pilot bearing.
Whenever the clutch is removed, the connect-
ion pilot bearing should be inspected to make
sure that it is in condition and adequately
lubricated. To remove the bearing use Tool No.
K-361--R; (Fig. IV.'-). Lubricate lightly with
wheel bearing grease o Too much lubricant
should not De used because of the possibility
of grease reaching the clutch plates.
8. Removing locking pins.
Clutches which are serviced as spare parts
are provided with three locking nin.s nr> hiocks
one at each clutch release lever.
When the clutch is installed and the cover
plate tightened in position, these pins or
blocks are released. It is extremely imp-
ortant that these pins be removed; other-
wise they will drop into the clutch housing
and may cause considerable damage when the
engine is put into operation.
10. Balancing clutch.
balance is a vital factor in the clutch.
To secure proper balance, it is necessary
to place balance marks on the rotating parts
before dismantling so that the clutch can be
reassembled according to these marks.
11. .engine __ C lutch _ Specifications -
Clear nee between hub and splines on clutch
connection shafts
New Limits - .0013-10035“
Worn Limits .0045“
Disc facings -
Diameter inside 7 ?f
Pi am et or on t«1 ho i i <»


Thickne s s ; ; ; .137”
Number used 2
Material Woven
Driven disc with facings -
Number used .. l
Number dampener springs . 8
used
Thickness (overall .306-.316”
compressed)
Runout, not over 025 !f
Pressure springs -
Number used 9
Colour Yellow *
Free Length 2-5/16”
Pressure compressed 145-150 lbs.
to 1-9/16”
(b) Master clutch.
1. Description.
The master clutch is of the dry multi-
plate type and consists of two driving, three
driven and a spring-loaded pressure plate. It
is operated by rod linkage as shown in Fig.
2, Master clutch adjustments.
Disconnect the pedal linkage by removing the
clevis pin connecting the rod to the oper-
ating fork below the clutch housing. See
i"ig.
See that the entire linkage, fork, and release
bearing are operating freely and are lubric-
ated.
Push the release bearing right forward to
clear the fingers.
adjust the fingers by means of. the adjusting
nu "ts . so that a distance of
to 1-3/32 in. is obtained from
the flat face of the cover plate to the
surface of the finger that contacts the
release bearing; all three fingers must
be^ equal. A gauge shown in Fig. 166 is
suitable for making this adjustment.
Tighten the lock nuts firmly after final
adjustment,
3. Adjusting Linkage.
file rods from pedal to cross-shaft and
from cross-shaft to operating fork are ad-
justable for length; an adjustable stop is
also provided to control the position of the
pedal when the clutch is engaged. To ob-
tain smooth clutch operation with the min-
imum pedal effort the linkage must be ad-
justed so that the levers are in a position
that gives maximum advantage. Proceed as
follows i -
Adjust the length of the rod from pedal to
crossshalt to 31o- in. between centres of
clevis eyes, and tighten lock nuts. Once
set, this rod must not be altered to make
running adjustments. See that an equal
amount of thread is engaged in each clevis.


Adjust the stop screw to obtain, with the pedal
right back, a distance of 10-g- in. to 11 in.
from the top of the pedal face to the face
°f t the front axle spacer (i.e. the face to
which the gear box bolts.)
lighten the stop screw lock nut. This adjust-
ment must also remain fixed as it determines
the most efficient pedal position for oper-
ation by the driver.
Adjust the length o 1 the rod from crossshaft
to operating fork to obtain 3 in. of pedal
free travel (measured at the top of the
before clutch operation begins.
This is equivalent to 3/16 in. clearance
between the operating fork and the release
bearing. The pedal must have between 1 in.
and 3 in. of free travel at all times. As
the clutch facings wear, the pedal free
travel diminishes and adjustment must be
made when the free travel becomes reduced
to 1 in., otherwise a slipping clutch will
result.
fake sure all clevis pins have been secured
with split pins, and lock nuts tightened.
4. a i smantlm&.
Remove the complete assembly of transfer box
and clutch as detailed in box
removal' 1 , Transmission Section.
Remove lock washer and nut, and pull univer-
sal yoke off the splined shaft.
Remove outrigger casting from transfer box
•hi? row ball bearing will come away
with the oa3tlnt .).
Hc-move clutch fro*, flange at transfer box
(studs are wired.)
Remove thrust bearing complete.
■mho remainder of clutch to a press and With
on > remove the twelve nuts and
111 t ofi cover plate assembly.
Remove pressure plate and driving and driven
0.1 sc s #
Remove driven shaft from roller pilot bearing,
Lf the roller bearing is to be replaced, remove
the spring circlip and pull the bearing.
If the outer ball bearing is to be replaced,
remove the circular flange from bearing
housing. Oil seal will come away with
the flange.
Remove washer.
Pull double row ball bearing.
Remove backing washer.


Reassemble in reverse order, taking care to
pack the pilot roller bearing with fibre
grease before pressing the driven shaft
on to the bearing. Examine all felt
washers and oil seals and renew if dam-
aged.
5. Overhauling.
Check clutch springs against specifications
below. Weak springs will cause the
clutch to slip.
Check fit of release bearing sleeve, this
must be free to slide.
Check clutch plates, replace if warped, do
not attempt to straighten a warped plate.
Renew facings if worn or oily. Check fit of
plates on splines and pins, they must
slide freely.
Replace wire through cap screws securing
clutch assembly to flange.
Inspect clutch control shafts and linkage,
ill parts must operate freely, otherwise
rapid wear of the clutch facings and re-
lease bearing will result.
Examine linkage for loose joints, and lub-
ricate all parts according to the lub-
rication schedule.
6. Raster Clutch Data.
Dia. of clutch plates 12j in.
Area of driving surface 476.28 sq.in.
Free length of springs 4 in..
Length of springs ass- 3-1/32 in.
embled
Pressure exerted per .. 132 lbs.
spring per sq. in.
Lumber of springs 12
7. Bearings.
1. Roller Type A 1213 T 3, 65 M.M. bore,
120 M.M. 0.D., 23 M.M. wide.
1. Double row ball R.8.F.3210
1. Thrust race cage of brass with 22 steel
balls 3/8 in dia.
8. Oil Seals.
1 each:
No. 52548 O.D. x bore x wide
No. 362228 3# iF "2% " » f »
No. 47535062 4f " "3# 51 f »
No. 32525050 3j " 11 2j ?r " J «
No. 28721237 2-J " "2£ if " f "
Fig. 166. Gauge-adjusting clutch pressure plate
fincers ( ⅛ " m/s. plate).


Fig. 167. Dismantled view of engine clutch


Fig. 168. Clutch aligning arbour
Fig. 169. Clutch lever adjusting gauge, Tool No. J-258-C.
Fig. 170. Clutch pilot bearing puller, Tool No. K-361-R


Fig. 171. Master clutch assembly


Fig. 172. Master clutch operating mechanism. A pedal stop has been added to vehicles now being
produced


TRANSMISSION SECTION
CONTENTS
(a) Gear Box ...... .......234
1 .Descript ion ~.234
2. Removing Gear Box 234
3. Gear Box 234
4. Assembling Gear Box 237
5. Rifle Drilling and Oil Seals 238
6. Oil Pump 238
7. Oil Radiator 238
8. Gear Box Data 239
(b) Transfer Box .....244
1. scription 244
2. Transfer Box 244
3. Transfer Box 244
4. Transfer Box Bearings 245
(c) Front Axle Assembly 245
1 .Description 245
2,Removing and Dismantling
1 Method 1. ...I 247
5. Removing and Dismantling
Method 2. 250
4.Removing and Dismantling
Method 3, 251
5 .Assembling 251
6. Differential 251
7. Assembling Differential 252
8. Case Cover and Centre
Piece Bushings 253
9. side Bearings 253
10. Compensating Pinion Shaft, Needle
Bearings 253
11. Bevel Drive Gear 253
12 .Differential Side Bearing Shims 254
13. Ad justing Bevel Drive Gear and Mesh 254
14. Differential Bearings - 255
(d) Final Drive Assembly 256
1 .Dismantling and Reassembling 256
2.Final Drive Bearings 256
(e) Universal Joints and Carden Shafts 256
(f) Illustrations 258




(a) Gear Box.
1. Description* ’ ./
The gear box is of the straight tooth con-
stant mesh type and provides five forward gears
and one reverse, all of which are indirect. See
Pig. 173.
Dog clutches are used to engage the various
trains of gears and are controlled by selector
forks, gear shift rods and gear lever.
Power is transmitted from the master clutch
through the propeller shaft and universal joints
to the input shaft of the gear box, thence through
the selected gear ratio to the output shaft and
bevel drive pinion.
A gear type oil pump, fitted internally and
driven off the end of "the countershaft circulates
oil under pressure through an external cooling
radiator and back to the gear box where it is dis-
tributed through the input shaft, output shaft and
idler shaft to the various bearings.
Two tapped holes in the top of the casing are
provided for two lifting eyes.
Two cap screws are fitted in these holes, and
the one at the output end is used as the filler
plug.
The level dipstick is located on the left hand
side of the casing.
An oil pressure gauge mounted on top of the
casing.
For grade of oil and capacity see Lubrication
chart.
2. Removing Gear Box.
To remove the gear box, see '’Removing and
Dismantling Front Axle if .
Note: There will be no need to remove the
final drive assemblies as is described in
these pages if the gear box only is to be
removed.
5. Dismantling Gear Box.
For convenience of dismantling mount the gear
box in the special stand No. l-1120.
Remove a bracket from each of three shift rods.
Each is secured with two cap screws.
Remove speedo drive assembly.
Remove castellated nut and universal joint com-
panion flange from input shaft.
Remove cap from, input shaft bearing.
Remove case cover assembly. (15 cap screws and
two bolts). A cap screw can be screwed into
each of the three tapped holes spaced around
this cover, and as these cap screws are even-
ly tightened against the gear case the cover
will be forced out.


Remove gear shift interlocks (2). These can be
lifted out when rods are in neutral.
Remove shift rod support bracket. (Three cap
screws.)
Remove inspection plate from side of casing (13 cap
screws).
Remove gear shift rod poppet assemblies (3) located
one at inner end of each shift rod in the gear
casing. Each assembly comprises a cap screw,
spring, plunger and steel ball.
Remove two cap screws from each of three shift forks
and withdraw the three shift rods. A spacer
sleeve is located on the Ist and reverse shift
rod behind the fork. A similar sleeve is loc-
ated on the 2nd and 3rd shift rod in front of the
fork. These sleeves should be lifted out at the
same time as their respective rods are withdrawn.
Remove spacer from input shaft if not already removed
with the speedo drive assembly.
Remove ballrace from input shaft, with two arm puller.
Remove thrust washer from input shaft.
Remove 4th speed gear and floating bush from input
shaft.
Remove nut and lock washer from output shaft.
Remove speedometer gear from output shaft.
Remove ballrace from output shaft with two arm
puller.
Remove thrust washer from output shaft.
Remove 4th speed gear keyed to output shaft.
Note: All gears and clutches keyed to output shaft
and input shaft have two tapped holes 3/8 in.
3.A.E. in their front face. These holes are pro-
vided for attaching puller No. 1-11196 for ex-
tracting purposes. Care must be taken when
assembling to have the side with the tapped holes
facing the input end of the casing.
Remove two keys from output shaft. All keys in
output shaft and input shaft are provided with
a tapped hole 1/4 in. 3.A.E. To facilitate re-
moval a cap screw can be screwed into this hole
and as it bottoms in the key way it will lift
the key out.
Remove spacer from output shaft.
Remove 4th and sth speed clutch (outer) and fork
from input shaft.
Note: Each of the three shift forks come out ass-
embled in its respective clutch. Care must be
taken to assemble each fork and clutch together
before refitting clutches.


Remove 4th and sth speed clutch (inner) keyed to
input shaft.
Remove two keys from input shaft.
Remove sth speed gear and floating bush from in-
put shaft.
Remove sth speed gear keyed to output shaft.
Remove two keys from output shaft.
Remove 3rd speed gear and floating bush from
output shaft.
Remove 2nd and speed clutch keyed to output
shaft.
Remove 2nd and 3rd speed clutch from output shaft.
Note: bhen reassembling remember to assemble
2nd and 3rd speed clutch outer before fitting
2nd and 3rd speed clutch inner.
Remove two keys from output shaft.
Remove bearing cap from output end of casing.
Remove pin and nut securing bevel pinion to out-
put shaft.
Remove nut and lock washer from counter shaft.
Remove input shaft. Shaft can be driven out of
double row bearing with copper hammer.
Remove oil pump (four cap screws).
Remove bearing (outer) from countershaft. This
bearing can be driven out from input end of
casing with special tool No. 1-111D4.
Remove bearing (inner) from countershaft. To remove
this bearing push the shaft toward the input
end of casing as far as possible. Searing can
then be pulled with Servex type puller No. M6OO.
Lower the countershaft into bottom of casing.
Remove 2nd speed gear and floating bush from out-
put shaft.
Remove bevel pinion and bearing assembly from out-
put shaft with special puller No. 1-11083,
Lift out output shaft.
Lift out countershaft.
Remove reverse gear and floating bush from output
shaft.
Remove Ist and Reverse speed clutch (outer).
Remove Ist and Reverse speed clutch (inner)
from output shaft.
Remove two keys from output shaft.
Remove Ist speed gear and floating bish from
output shaft.


Remove input shaft bearing. This bearing can be
driven out with a long punch from-input end of
casing.
Remove idler gear shaft. A tapped hole is provid-
ed in the end for the purpose of extracting.
Lift out idler gear and floating bush, and two thrust
washers, one from each side.
Pross bearing off bevel pinion.
Note: Shims are located between the bearing and pin-
ion. These shims are provided to adjust the mesh
depth of the pinion with the bevel drive gear and
care must be taken to replace the same amount of
shimming as was removed. Shims are provided in
three different thicknesses - .003, ,010, and .031.
4. Assembling the Gearbox.
The procedure for reassembling the gear .ox is the
reverse of that described for dismantling. Attention
is drawn to the following points which were referred
to during the dismantling operations.
All gears and clutches with tapped holes provided for
extracting purposes must be reassembled with the
tapped holes facing the input end of the casing.
Care must be taken to assemble each fork and clutch
together before refitting clutches.
Assemble 2nd and 3rd speed clutch outer before fitting
2nd and 3rd speed clutch inner.
Shims located between the bearing and pinion removed
during dismantling must be replaced.
The countershaft must be placed in the bottom of the
casing before fitting the output shaft.
Gears can be pressed on with tool No. 1-11190.
A clearance of .010 inches should be provided be-
tween each floating gear and its corresponding sel-
ector clutch, representing .005 inches clearance on
each side of the gear when it is running on the shaft.
It will be realised that since reverse and 2nd gear
are running side by side .015 inches will need to be
allowed between 2nd gear and 2nd and 3rd selector
clutch.
Particular attention is drawn to the fitting of Ist
and reverse selector clutch as the onus is entirely on
the assembler to correctly locate this part. The rem-
aining two clutches, as well as sth gear, which is keyed
to the output shaft, and the input end ball race on
the input shaft, normally press hard up against a shoul-
der on their respective shafts and when so located, pro-
vide the necessarv clearance.


These clearances, however, should he checked
with'a;feeler gauge and if any are found to be in-
sufficient, the respective part should be withdrawn
the required distance.
h ,! ; !
First gear clearance can be checked before the
shaft is assembled; in the box. The remainijng gears
on the output shaft can be checked through tjhe In-
spection plate opening on the side of' the casing
whilst those on the input shaft can be checked from
the input end of the casing.
5. Rifle drilling and Oil seals.
The input shaft, output shaft, and idler shaft
are each rifle drilled. Holes are also drilled
in from the side to meet this rifle drilling.
These holes register with grooves in the floating
bushes and provide an outlet for the oil under
pressure.
Rifle drilling also provides oil passages
through various sections of the gear casing. Care
should be taken when maintenance work is being
carried out to see that all these oil ways are
clear before reassembling.
Two oil seals are located in the input shaft
bearing cap. These can be punched out and re-
placed if necessary.
An oil sub-assembly is located in the speedo-
meter drive assembly. This provides an inlet for
the oil to the output shaft and four cast iron
rings provide an oil seal at its inner end.
The spacer fitted between the input shaft
bearing and the universal joint companion flange
provides an inlet for the oil to the. input shaft.
A groove is machined around the outer and inner
circumference and four drilled holes register
with each of these grooves. Two oil retaining
rings, one cast iron and one bronze are provided
at each side of the outer groove. if these are
removed care should be taken to reassemble the
cast iron rings next to the .groove.
6. Oil Pump.
The oil pump is of the gear type and comprises
a casing and cap, a driver gear keyed to. a shaft
with a woodruff key and a driven gear which is
bushed and turns freely on a shaft. The driver
gear shaft is milled at one end, to form a. tongue,
which registers with a corresponding slot in the
end of the gear box countershaft.
Oil pressure is controlled by a steel ball re-
tained on its seat by a compression spring and cap
screw. The tension of this spring is pre,-determined
and no adjustment is provided. Minimum oil press-
ure is 15 lbs. por so. in.
7. Oil Radiator.
An oil radiator is mounted in an anglj iron frame
behind the gearbox. The oil pump in the gearbox
forces oil through this radiator and back to the
gearbox through copper pipes. A fan driven from
the,propeller shaft forces air past the radiator
fins and tubes 'andacts as a cooling medium. .


G
<!
%
o
pq
§
GEAR Sc
BUSHESo
! SHAFTS c
MARX,
NUMBER c j TEETH.
| DIMENS IONS c
MESHING
- - - WITH.
BUSHING
J . . M A T?Tf _
BUSH DIMENSIONS.
I SHAFT
? MAToTT?
NUMBER c
"A"
First
Final
El-01006
on Output
Shaft c
164..
JClutch
Teeth 27
| Inside dia c
3,, 500
o 0 0 5
I
El-01061
Idler shaft
\
\
| El-01007 "A"
— — . . J.I run : /,r _
s ° 131 I*ooo I / Dia «(output
3 o49 35 + °229 O/Diao
— 9 001
Width 2 C 481 ± o 005 f
El-01001
5 0 1245 +oOOOO
-oOOl
n B u
Reverse
Final
El-01011 J65
!Clutch
|Teeth 27
l/Dia 0
5.500 + «001
— o 0005
Integral
El-01050
Gear n M” on
Countershaft
\
El-01012 ir B”
-C
3 » 129 i:8oo I/Dia °
3 o'49 35 ggOO 0/Dia e
Width 2o981 io005
Output
El-01001
+0OOOO
-oOOl
"C"
Second
Final
El-01015
on Outpui
Shaft c
64
;
Clut ch
Teeth 27
l/Dia c
3 - 500 -fools
Gear ’' G 1 f/ * on 1
Input Shaftci
El-01014 "C"
3 * 129 1*001 I/Dia^ |
3o 4935 O/Dis
Width 2 0 606 £.005
Output
- 0
El-01001
Sc 1225 0 0000
-cOOl
"D"
Third
Final
El-01017
on Output
Shaft c
54
Clutch
Teeth 27
l/Dia c
cz p: H? o 001
o c o°0 o0 005
Integral
Gear n H w on i
Input Shaftci
El-01018 "D"
1
3o° 66 +;88o I/Dia °
50 4955 o/ D ia,
Width 2 0 251 *005
Output 1
El-01001
So 060 : : gooo


r TT ’ Q
'JTilixiJ.v.O c
BUSHES c
o
BBISNSIOKSc . .
MESHING IBUSHING
I.IL.1TL. . J liAPJu
.' BUSH JDILLEUS IONS „ 1
SKAKT
hake . . humess,..
EiftS
jj -L^jCLJL
. pi Q -! - 9 p
-5 tii
Pinal
• O. ci^
21 i/nia.
Keyed to 2.9995 + 1°°|
shaft -oUOoO
Gear 51 J” f •
(-01053) { '
on Innut 1
•Shaft r
Output ; El-01001
2.9S95 +p000
-cOOl
Keyed to shaft*
... . .1
! — r. t •
fourth
P, irr .•>
_j J-— U JLUaj^-
4th
final
42 i/Dia.
Keyed to 2,9975 + »°00
shaft, -.0005
Gear ’•K** j
(-01055) I
on Input |
qT-jci-P+
Ox i of. i-
i
Output El-01001
2 e 9975 + c 0000
-cOOl
Keyed to shaft c
.! •'•.!!
la _
on Gh Ji
19
n.p -i i i r\ 11 i
sj»**.0 Cl J- Vj
(-105.2)
also
Gear "~7 1! \
0
Counter-
shaft c
• - -
it -LI!!
Integral
on Input
-r-*-i-
d! X.CL-*. J
El-01030
«■
Gear "9" 1
(-01017) i
•j|
Input i
*•
il T»?
ux.1
•1 river
Iirout
3lir.lt
11-01033
17 l/Diao
Clutch 3 0 500 e SSL
Teeth ~ c000 'h.
U i |
Gear "E" El-01034
(-C1020;
| - 129 iiSoo I/Dia * !
:5c 49 35 tcCOOC o/Bia. :
~*0 UU1
) Nicith 2c 418 i c 005
Input 1 El-01030
r/ 1 pnc + 0 0000
°° ~ *■ .-cOOl


GEj
ARS C
BUSHES c
J SHAFTS c
MARK*
NUMBER*
TEETH c
DI KENS I OiTS o
j MESHING
! WITHc
BUSHING
MARKo
BUSH DIMENSIONS
II SHAFT
: : NAME. NUMBER.
"K"
4th
Driver
Input
Shaft
E1-.01035
41
Clutch
Teeth
27
l/Dia c
3 ° 500 ir'ooos
Gear !i F n
(-01024)
El-01036
1 3. 066 +"001 i/ Diae
-e000
|3 0 4935 l'ooi° O/Dia
\7idth 2 c 668 i c 005
!i Input
c :
El-01030
\
3 c 060 +C °°W
n L"
Integral
on C/shaft
18
Gear n 0"
.(-01061)
I! Count er-
shaft 0
. "M"
Integral
El-01050
24
Gear "B"
(-01011)
| Counter-
: y shaft c
;; ~Tii
Counter-
shaft
driven
• gear
El-01052
/\A
Keyed
to
shaft c
l/Dia c
2 ovn r +o0005
"" -c 0005
Gear :, G :;
(-01030)
; Counter-
shaft c
•El-01050
9 874 5 + c 0000
- c 001
"0"
first
Idler on
Idler
Shaft
El-01061 ;
27
l/Dla«
o van o 001
0 005
Gear i! L !i
(-01050)
Gear "A"
(-01006) )
El-01062 !
2 ' 379 i;8oo I/Dia »
2 ' 7435+ -Iooo5 0/Dia '
Width 3 C 715 + e 005
| Idler
El-01060
2 C 3725 +o0000
-oOOl


:
TEARS c
BUSHES c
SUAPTS c
ITUIvIBEHc
TEETH© )±I L1TSIONB c
IviSSHIITG- ; BUSTIIITGl
wITH. : HA'iSX. jBuSH DIMENSIONS c
SHAFT
HAMEe
1TUH3ER 0 1
i?
Clutch^
let ,1
li_L“U iUUS'
67 1/piae
4 Keyv/ays : o e 1145
Keyed J 'o
• •* —*4-
Oliol-L i./r
a 0 00 Go
0005
Hating. part !;
of Clutch j:
0/Dia f f
ry f.nc •
El-01010
L... uput
El-01001 j
1
T ' ; ,' / -1 j
3
3 o'1935
T 0 0000
-cOOl
— • ■*: - -f- -•>
U-vlOw. a.
-nci ...
■ ra
7' _ "• g.T E
t •
a./ Jld 0
Keyway s
Keyed to 5 9 062 4
.4iaft r
-'/ J J-.cIc
0 0005
c 0005
5 C 594
Hating Outer
part of Clutch
O/Dia, 9.575:
El-01016 1 |
Output
'El-010014
6 c 062
+ c 000
-a 001
« ’ ' ~i '' ,
■ lX J.
: J- Li. O C ll
_ Gh cl
e Al
— — Xk.,0
1 —/ EiLSLp
Keyed 5*062 4
to shaft 6 '
C/Dia e
40005
, 0005
5© 594
Hating Outer
Part of Clutch
0/Dio.c 9„o7E:
Ll-01107
Input
El-0 10 5Q
\
6 C 062
+ c OoO
-0 001
iutch groove .567 - vide „ clutch fork ,562 4 <999
-*,UUU —,UOO
floating hushes have diametral clearance of 0 006
l/Dia 0 - Inside Diaraeter c
/ ‘'
0/Dia c - Outside Diameter,


G-EAR BOX - BALL ROLLER BEARINGS©
'Output Shaft <
it Do 55522 Differential End c
Double row single sliield
110 x 200 x 69 o 8 mm©
NcDc 77312 )
or )
Hoff<76l2 )
or )
SKPe 63I2Z )
Opp < End c
Single Roy.' Single Shield
60 x 130 x 31 mm©
Lstput Shaft ©
No Do 5311}
or )
Hof f e 5311)
Differential End 0
Plain double rov; c
55 x 120 x 49 o2 mnu
NcDo 1314)
or )
Hof f 0 370 )
Opp 0 Endc ,
Single Row
70 x 150 x 35
Countershaft©
IT© Do 5310)
or )
I-loff© 5310)
Differential End©
Plain Double Roy;©
50 x 110 x 44© 4©
Hoff© Re 3501 )
or SKP )
No Id ll© 50 )
(Roller Bearing )
Opp End©
GEAR BOX OIL PUMP DATA*
DRIVE SHAFT 0
BUSHES ( 2.) c
SPRING©
GEARS e
IDLER SHAFT c
DRIVE GEAR©
Case hardened
mild steel
o 5615 iogg£
Secured by !'To 0
3 Woodruff
Key.
O/Dia. ,6285
i/Bia, ,5565 +
uuu
Length e 5" +
Press in flush with
face and reamer c
2 U free length
3/8" o/Dia, 18 s. W, G,
Load of 5 lbs t ll ozl ® li"
10 active coils in springe
,755“ +»0g0 in the face
15 teeth
Idler has bush 3/4” long
reamed to 0 5565 0
0/Dia c
,6510 +e °onR
** o 0005
l/Dia c
,5 61 5 f.gOO
Width ,755 +
o 00 o


(b) Transfer Box,
1, Description.
The transfer box is; the means of transfer ring the combined
power of the three engines to the master clutch. It con-
sists of a casing and a trein of five helical cut gears in
constant mesh. See Pi;;;. 174.
Each gear is mounted on a splined shaft and each shaft
is supported at each end by.a ballracc, Three of these
gears are driven; the remaining two arc idlers.
Idler gears have 53 teeth and the driven gears 48. The
oil filler plug and dipstick are in the top of the casing.
For grade of oil and capacity see Lubrication Chart.
2. Removing the Transfer Pox.
The turret must be lifted out before the transfer box
can be removed, or serviced without removal. See P, 8,
"Removing the Turret".
Disconnect four universal joints (four cap screws and two
lock plates each)„
Release clamping band from 12 volt generator and move 'gener-
ator clear of the coupling. Coupling will draw apart
without removing the coupling bolts.
Break drive chain to air compressor (pin and keeper).
Remove three bolts from each of the two support brackets
on the master clutch.
Undo master clutch operating rod at clutch end.
Remove four securing bolts from .40 volt generator and
move generator clear of coupling. Coupling will
draw apart without removing coupling bolts.
Remove clips from wiring harness located on top of
transfer case. Dismount terminal strips and move
wiring to one side clear of the case.
Remove eight cap screws holding transfer case to sub-
frame.
Hoist out through turret opening.
3 , Di siim.i.i o 1 il ii j Cue ar, .ns j. uj.~ oox.
Drain oil.
Remove six cap screws securing master clutch drive to
flange on transfer box main shaft.
Remove six nuts from studs securing master clutch frame
to transfer case.
Remove master clutch assembly.
Remove four universal joint yokes. These are splined
to their respective shafts with two opposed keys and
will slide off.
Remove sprocket (compressor drive). Sprocket is fitted
to the shaft with two opposed keys, and secured with a
grub screw.


Remove top inspection plate ('24 nuts),
Remove bearing cover plates, one from each, end
of driving shaft, six nuts secure each,
ifoto; Shims arc located under each of
theso caps and when reassembling these
shims must be replaced under the cap from
which they were removed.
Remove nut and lock washer from input shaft.
Hold a support behind the gear and drive out
shaft.
Lift out gear and one spacer. One bearing and
spacer will remain on shaft.
Press bearing off shaft and slip the spacer off.
Each of the remaining shafts and gears can bo
similarly dismantlod.
To reassemble and replace, rover, e the order des-
cribed under headings "Dismantling" end "Rem-
oving, "
4« Transfer box bearings.
Output end of main Hoffman 160 A.0.(1)
drive shaft
Input end of main . Hoffman 150 A.C.(I)
drive shaft
All other shafts (same Hoffman 340 A,0,(8)
at‘each end)
(c) Front Axle
Assembly.
1, Description,
The front axle assembly comprises a. cent
armour housing, in which is contained a controlled
differential and two jack shafts, two steering
brake drums and bands and two brake shafts. See Pig,
-/ j •
The final drive casings are mounted one to each
side of this cast armour housing. Contained in
each of those casings is a final drive shaft with
a gear sub-assembly splined to its inner end. This
gear is meshed with the final drive pinion which
in turn is splinod to the outer end of the differ-
ential jack shaft.
Or. the outer end. of each final drive shaft a
hub is mounted mid this carries a double sprocket.
Power is transmitted from the bevel pinion,
mounted on the end of the gearbox output shaft,
through the bevel drive gear (crown wheel) and
differential to the jack shaft's, through the
final drive pinions and gear sub-assemblos to
the final drive shaft and hubs to the sprockets,
and so to the tracks.
The object of the controlled differential is to
enable the direction of movement of the tank to bo
changed at will. It should bo remembered that the
tank can only bo steered by making one track


move raster- than the other ana,-the controlled differ- 1
entlal supplies the means for slowing down, the track
on one side and proportionately speeding it up on the
other side. This is accomplished in a manner some-
what similar to the differential fitted to a motor
car, excepting that the usual bevel guars are replaced
by simple spur and an opicyclic train of gears
at each side of the crown wheel.
The following explanation of the construction and
operation of the differential should be read in con-
junction with Fig. 176 of which the numbers in cir-
cles represent the number of teeth in the gears and
the plain numbers refer only to its description.
For the sake of convenience of description the
differential can be divided into four sections; first,
the bevel pinion and crown wheel, secondly the diff-
erential unit incorporating the small pinions and
shafts (1) and (2) and the large gears (8) and (9)
with their corresponding shafts; thirdly, the brake
drums and the epicyclic gears(4) and (6/and (3) and
(5) and fourthly, the main drive shafts (12) and (13).
From Fig. 176 it will be seen that there are three
sets of small pinions (1) and (2) which are supported
by the end plate (16) and the crown wheel centre section.
Each pair of small pinions (1) and (2) are integral with'
their respective shafts and are meshed together, as well
as meshing with the large centre gears which in turn are
splinea to the driving socles. Gear Ho. 5 and 6 are in-
tegral with the short shafts (14) and (15) respectively
as well as with the brake drums, and these units as a
whole are free to rotate around the main driving axles
(12) and (13). Pinion (1) which is integral with
shaft (17) also carries the'integral pinion (3) which
meshes with gear No. 5 which in turn is integral with
the brake drum. Correspondingly, on the othur side,
pinion (2) half of which meshes with pinion (1) is in-
tegral with shaft (18) and pinion (4) which in turn
meshes with gear No. 6 and the corresponding brake
drum..
When the vehicle is moving forward in a straight line,
the crown wheel (7) will rotate, carrying with it the
differential assembly. Pinions (1) and (2) and gears
(9) and (8) will not turn individually but will remain
in the same relation to each other and rotate with the
crown wheel. Similarly, pinions (3) and (4) and gears
(5) and (6) will rotate about the shaft without altering
their position in respect to each other. In other words,
with the tank moving straight ahead and the brakes in
the off position the whole assembly driven by the bevel
pinion rotates as a unit.
Let us now consider the case ’when the tank is to be
turned to one side. If we require to turn to the right
(as seen from the driver’s seat) the right hand brake
steering lever Is pulled back causing the brake band to
contract on the drum 10 (See Fig. 179) preventing con-
trol gear 6 from turning with the differential assem-
bly as a whole . As the differential assembly turns
it carries the pinion shaft and pinion gears 2 and 4
with it.
The external pinion 4, however, must revolve on the-
dead gear 6. Consequently pinion 2, which is integral
with the pinion shaft, drives the main drive shaft gear
8 in a reverse direction to its normal rotation when
the tank is going straight ahead.


The retarding of drive gear 8 through the action
of the controlled differential is less than normal
rotation oi the gear when turning at the same speed
as the crown wheel 7, so that the drive through the
jack shaft 12, is slowed down.
The converse is the case for the left hand drive.
Pinion 1 meshing with pinion 2 rotates in an oppos-
ite direction. This drives the main drive gear 9
in the same direction as its normal rotation, caus-
ing jack shaft 13 to speed up as much faster than the
crown wheel as jack shaft 12 has been retarded.
So, by braking on the right hand brake steering
drum, the right hand main drive shaft slows up, de-
creasing the speed of the right hand track while the
left has beun speeded up.
2. Removing and Dismantling. Method 1.
Drain oil from differential housing and gear box by
removing three drain plugs. Capacity 17 gallons I '.
Drain oil from gearbox by first removing circular
cover plate from underside of hull, and second-
ly., drain plug from bottom of gearbox.
Break each track and remove from sprocket.
Remove the front section of each front fender which
is held to hull by three brackets.
Place sling arounu final drive gear case, between
inner sprocket and flange of case* Adjust
tackle to tighten sling.
Remove three of the final drive mounting cap screws
at approximately equal spacings around mounting
flange and replace with three guide mandrels.
Mandrels can be made of bright steel. Each 9 in.
long by 3/4 in. diameter, screwed 3/4 in. Whit.
(10 T.P.1.) a distance of approx, one inch above
end..
Remove the remaining nineteen cap screws. A: just
the weight on the tackle, lever the gear case
out, move it clear and lower to floor.
Pull out jack shaft by hand.
Remove three cap screws from bearing retainer plate
and remove plate.
Remove bearing keeper ring outer.
Remove boaring rollers and cage.
Remove bearing keeper ring inner.
Extract bearing outer race with standard 2 arm
puller.
Remove spacer.
Release lock nuts and back out steering drum ..
locking screws a distance of approximately half
an inch. These screws lock the drum to tubuTar
brake shaft. Drum can be levered around with a
bar until each locking screw is accessible. Re-
peat foregoing operations on opposite side.


Insid e hull s -
Open both, six and twelve volt main switches.
Remove large instrument panel* Secured at top with
two thumb screws and at bottom with two hex* head
bolts through brackets.
llote: Wiring or other connections to panel need
not be disconnected* Panel can be moved to one
side and supported with tie wire*
Remove three pipe lines (two air and one oil) conn-
ected to small instrument panel located on top of
gearbox, and a rev* counter coupling.
Remove small instrument panel*. Secured to ton web
of gearbox with two bolts*
Remove metal container which is mounted on left hand
brake inspection plate* Six mounting cap screws*
Disconnect gearbox breather pipe at gearbox*
Disconnect differential breather pipe at tee piece
which is located on left hand brake inspection
plate.
Remove metal cover over universal joint. Held with
two cap screws and two nuts.
Remove gear lever. Mounted by one bolt.
Remove oil pipes from oil radiator. Pour connect-
ions at gearbox and two at radiator.
Disconnect the tailshaft universal joint at gearbox
end. Pour cap screws and'two lock platos.
Disconnect vertical brake rods at upper end. One
each side.
Remove accelerator support bracket. Two cap screws.
Remove tee piece from brake chamber assembly left
hand side.
Disconnect clevis link from brake chamber assembly
left hand side.
Remove brake chamber assembly left hand side. Com-
plete unit will unscrew out of hull.
Repeat three last mentioned operations on right hand
side.
Disconnect speedo drive at gearbox.
Remove plates from two circular holes situated above
the final drive gear case on each side. Attach
sling to front axle housing. Using hooks in the
two circular holes and also in the two lugs pro-
vided in front of housing* Adjust t; ckle to tight-
en sling. Height is approximately 4-1/2 tons.
Remove thirty bolts or nuts holding front axle housing
to front bulkhead e (Some of the thirty are bolts,
some are threader studs from which only the nuts
have to be remov. 1) „


.ad jus u tackle as desired and lever front axle
nousing from bulkhead v;ith flat-ended bar.
0./iiijj, clear, lower uo floor and remove sling,
Autach sling to eye in end of gearbox and hoist
ip until unit has assumed a vertical position,
A suitable stand as illustrated in Pig. 177
caul be made up to support the unit in this
vertical position. Tv/o of these items are
l eguired. These rest on the floor under-
lies ch the assembly. One angle iron bolts to
ehe toning lug on the front axle housing v/ith
a 3 x 7/S inch bolt. The other can be ad-
justed in the slotted hole to support the
weight. Release sling.
Attach sling to gear box so that box will balance
vertically when hoisted for removal from front
axle,
.Remove nineteen cap screws holding gearbox to
spacer flange.
Hoist box clear and lower to floor.
Remove spacer flange. Held by eleven hex. head
■bolts, seven countersunk head bolts and two
cap screws.
Remove brake inapt?ton plots* left hnnr] dip
(13 cap screws),
Remove clamp bolt from brake lever arm.
Slidu or eke lever arm 0..- j. splined bra.ke sha.ft,
(ii few taps i/ith ac op per hammier might
necessary),
Note; Braise lever arm is marked across
the outer face. Steering brake shaft
is similarly marked. Care must be taken
when reassembling* to have these marks
corresponding),
Screw down lower brake adjusting screw until head
is well clear of brake band. (Screw located
underneath bands, screwed into housing).
Remove upper brake adjusting nut and spacer spring.
Remove steering brake link pin by removing split
pin and prying the pin out with a screw driver.
Remove brake bands by drawing out from underside
of steering drum.
Remove two oolts irom brake shaft bearing housing'
outer (long).
Remove bearing housing and brake shaft as one unit
by prying to the left and then lifting out.
Pass sling around steering drum and adjust tackle
to tighten sling.
Draw out tubular brake shaft left hand side with
special puller Ho, 1-11090. (Pig.l7B).
Hoist out steering drum and lower to floor.
Repeat twelve last mentioned operations on rirdit
hand side.


Pass sling around differential assembly and adjust
tackle to tighten sling.
Remove six bolts that hold differential side bearing
plate left hand side.
Remove differential side bearing plate by prying it
to the left with flat-end bar and then lifting out.
Repeat two last mentioned operations on right hand
side.
Differential assembly is now suspended on tackle and
can be tipped at an angle and hoisted out.
Remove brake shaft bearing housing inner (short).
From the foregoing the dismantling required to
remove any particular part of the assembly can be
learned. For instance, if the objective was to get
the differential assembly out, there would be no need
to repeat the operations on the right hand side, be-
cause when the dismantling operations have been carr-
ied out up to where differential side' bearing plate
left hand can be removed and the tubular brake shaft
has been removed from the right hand side the diff-
erential assembly can be moved over to the left,
clear of the right hand side bearing plate, and
hoisted out.
It is not advisable to remove the differential
assembly at this stage if it is intended to complete-
ly dismantle the front axle assembly, because once
the tubular brake shaft is removed the weight of the
steering drum is only supported in the brake bands.
This makes removal of the 'remaining bands and parts
difficult.
It is well to bear in mind that if the proposed
work on the differential assembly will involve the
re-setting of the mesh between the bevel drive gear
and bevel drive pinion, shims are provided to ad-
just the differential side play. These shims are
located in the differential side bearing plates. The
back lash between bevel drive gear and pinion is ad-
justed by the amount of shimming disposed at either
side. Therefore both differential side bearing
plates require to be removed to gain access to
these shims.
5. Removing and Dismantling. Method 2.
If working conditions do not provide overhead
tackle, to handle the front axle assembly as
described in method 1, a carrier assembly is
available, No. MM3-195 (Fig. 177).
This carrier assembly should be correctly
positioned under the front axle housing and the
four jacks adjusted to take the weight. After
the dismantling operations, as described on
previous pages, have been carried out, the
front axle assembly can be wheeled away.
If this method is adopted, manpower and bars
or other improvised methods will have to be app-
lied to lift out the final drive case and other
parts previously described as being lifted out
with the tackle.


4. Removing and Dismantling. Mothod 5.
Should, tho conditions exclude the use of either
overhead tackle or carrier assembly, the front axle
assembly can be dismantled without removing the
housing from the bulkhead.
This method necessitates the removal of the floor
plate and supporting cross members (forty cap screws)
from forward gunners and drivers compartment.
After carrying out the sequence of operations as
described in Method 1, the various parts in the
order of dismantling can be lowered down through
. the floor.
It would be necessary to dig a pit beneath the
vehicle, as the normal ground clearance does not
provide sufficient room to move some of the larger
parts from underneath. As an alternative the tank
could be driven onto a suitable timber laid down for
this purpose.
Normal ground clearance under the tank Is 17
inches* The bevel drive gear is 20-g- inches in
diameter*
Whilst this method of removal might be helpful
in an emergency, it cannot be accepted as good en-
gineering practice.
5* Assembling.
All parts should be clean and all bearing sur-
faces smeared with oil before assembling.
The procedure for the re-assembling of the
front axle assembly Is the reverse of that des-
cribed for the dismantling, but if the bevel drive
gear and/or the bevel drive pinion or either of
the compensating case covers or centre piece have
been replaced or renewed, attention must be given
to the mesh adjustment of the bevel drive gear
and pinion.
6. Dismantling Differential.
For Remov 1 see Removal and Dismantling front
axle assembly.
Extract six dowels located three in each com-
pensating case cover a distance of in.'us-
ing special puller No. 1-11101.
Remove split pins and castellated nuts from six
compensating case cover bolts. Three of
these bolts can be withdrawn. The other
three remain in place.
Lift off compensating case cover right hand side.
A few taps with a copper hammer on case outer
flange might be necessary to free case from
compensating case centre piece.
Lift out compensating case centre piece. A few
taps with a copper hammer might again be nec-
essary to free centre piece from left hand
cover.
Lift out one steering differential side gear from
each compensating case cover.


Remove three external pinions and three internal
pinions from each compensating case cover.
One.external pinion is fitted to the splined
end of each internal pinion shaft and secured
with castellated nuts. After split pins and
nuts have been removed the shaft can be driven
out of external pinion with a copper hammer.
Shaft and internal pinion are integral.
Lift out three compensating pinion washers from
each compensating case.
Remove three remaining compensating case bolts
from left hand compensating case cover.
Clean and examine all parts for wear or damage.
7. Assembling differential.
After any repair work found necessary has been
carried out, or new parts fitted, the unit can be
reassembled in the following sequence:-
All bearing surfaces should be smeared with oil
before assembling.
Fit three compensating case bolts in left hand
compensating case cover. These three bolts
are located behind the external pinions,
therefore it is necessary that they be assem-
bled in place before external pinions are
fitted.
Fit three internal pinions and washers to each of
the two compensating case covers and assemble
external pinions on splined ends. Nuts can be
fitted hand tight to retain external pinions.
Fit a steering differential side gear to each com-
pensating case cover. It will be noticed that
the bearing hubs, projecting from each side of
the gear, are of different lengths. The shorter
one fits into the compensating case cover.
Important Note: One tooth on each paternal
pinion is marked and it is necessary before
meshing side gears with their respective in-
ternal gear trains, to turn each pinion to
biio puoi lion where me maikod points
to the centre, as illustrated in Fig. 179.
With pinions located in this position, mesh
the side gears. This is important because
if side gears and internal pinions are not
meshed, teeth on the brake shaft will not mesh
with external pinions.
It is, therefore, good practice after meshing
side gears with internal pinions, to tempor-
arily fit brake shafts, before fitting the two
compensating case covers together.
Tighten external pinion nuts and lock with split
pins. To facilitate tightening, pinions can
be held from turning by jamming a piece of
brass rod between internal pinion and differ-
ential side gear teeth, care being taken not
to damage the teeth.
Fit compensating case centre piece to left hand
compensating case cover.


Pit right hand compensating case cover, care being
taken that side gear does not slip out of mesh
with pinions.
Pit remaining three compensating case bolts.
Pit nuts on each of the six compensating case bolts
and hand-tighten.
Drive in six dowels the full distance and peen over
the metal in the cover to retain each dowel.
Tighten compensating case bolt nuts and lock with
split pins.
Differential is now ready for replacement in the
front axle housing.
8. Compensating case cover and compensating case
centre piece bushings.
ohould it be found necessary to renew the
bushing in either of the the compensating case
covers or the compensating case centre piece, these
bushings can be pressed out.
After new bushings have been pressed in, three
oil holes must be drilled in each. These holes
can. be drilled by continuing the oil holes pro-
vided in the housing, through the bush, with a
3/8 drill.
On the inner side of each compensating case
cover will be found two machined slots. Sections
of the bushing should be staked into each of these
slots, thereby forming a key which prevents the
bushing from turning in the housing.
Two slots will also be found on each side of the
centre piece. The bushing should be staked into
these slots similarly.
9. Differential side bearings.
Differential bearings can be pulled off with a
two arm puller, and replaced in a press, care be-
ing taken to exert the pressure on the inner race
only.
Id. Compensating pinion shaft needle bearings.
Compensating pinion shafts are supported at
each end on needle bearings. The needles are
contained in an outer sleeve and the complete
bearing assembly can be pressed out or installed
with a suitable punch.
11. Bevel drive gear.
The bevel drive gear is secured to the left
hand compensating case cover by six studs and
six castellated nuts.
-i-he studs are screwed into counterbored
holes, in the back of the gear. The bolt holes
in the compensating case cover are correspondingly
counterbored.
Before assembling the bevel gear to the com-
pnesating case cover, a steel bush is.fitted over
each stud and driven into the counterbore in the
bevel gear. These steel bushes project for half


their length and this projection fits into the corr-
esponding counterbore in the case*cover, thereby
taking the drive.
Bevel drive gears and bevel drive pinions are made
and serviced in matched pairs and both parts should be
renewed at the same time.
12. Differential side -bearing shims.
Differential side bearing shims are located between
each of the differential side plates and side plate
covers. They can be removed by first remo ing six
cap screws locked with 16 gauge wire and then prying
the- cover plate away from the side plate. Shims are
made in two sections and can be picked out without
completely separating the two plates, but care should
be taken to keep the corresponding sections together
as shims are of three different thicknesses, viz.
.005, . u OB and .030.
These shims provide adjustment for differential
side play and aiso the amount of shimming disposed at
either side determines the location of the bevel drive
S Gar '» 4 Therefore care should be taken to replace them
on their respective sides.
i°• Adjusting bevel drive gear and bevel drive
pinion mesh.
If the bevel drive gear, bevel drive pinion,
either compensating case cover, or centre piece are
be±ng replaced or renewed care must be taken that
bevel drive gear and pinion are correctly meshed.
Shims are provided behind the pinion.
The thickness of these shims determines the
Pinion mesh depth, that is the distance that the
pinion projects into the bevel drive gear.
Care should be taken to replace the same amount
ot shimming behind the pinion as was there origin-
ally. This applies whether the original pinion is
being refitted or whether a replacement pinion is
being fitted. Shims are also provided behind the
differential side bearings, located between the side
plate and side plate cover.
These shims are provided to adjust the differen-
tial side play and the amount of shimming disposed
either side determines the location of the bevel
drive gear. for the initial set up the same amount
of shimming should bo replaced on each side as was
iound tnore when dismantling. A check can be made
after differential has been set in place and both
side plates tightened home.
Before making this check differential should be
tested lor side play. Differential should turn
freely in its bearings when rotated by hand'and no
side play should bo evident. Shims can be removed
or. added at either side to attain this free running
adjustment. Before adding or removing any shims,
check location of bevel drive gear as described in
the following paragraph. An. Indication can thus
bo gained as to which side shims should be added or
removed.,
A vertical centre line will bo found scribed down
the front of the front axle housing. To the left
of this line a distance of 4.437 In. will be found


scribed another vertical line. The* back face
bevel gear should be lined up with this
luiu nund side line. Shins can bo removed from
one side and. replaced on the .other, if necessary,
to achieve this alignment.
As a final check the teeth of the bevel gear
should be painted with prussian blue, or red lead
or some such marking paint. The spacer flange
snould now be fitted and the gearbox mounted in place
and secured with six cap screws.
Wow select 4th gear and turn the input shaft about
1-.: turns by hand. Tills will turn the pinion approx-
imately 12- turns and the drive gear three turns. Next
remove the gearbox and note the teeth markings.
A comparison between these markings and those
illustrated in iig, 180 will bo an indication as to
whether mesh is correct.
If mesh is incorrect the procedure explained above
should be carried out. Further test markings should
be taken and comparisons and corrections made until
correct mesh is attained.
Fig. 180 illustrates correct and incorrect tooth
contact markings when bevel drive gear and pinion are
run together.
Condition !, A' J shows a full tooth contact which Is
correct.
Condition tT ß‘ f shows a heavy contact at the heel
(outer end oi tooth). This should be corrected
by moving the bevel drive gear tor yd 3 tie, pin-
ion.
Condition Tf C" shows a heavy contact at the toe
(inner end of tooth). This should be corr-
ected by moving the bevel drive gear away
from the pinion.
Condition (, D n shows a low narrow contact. This
should be corrected by decreasing the pinion
depth, i.e. remove necessary amount of shim-
ming from behind the pinion.
Condition ff E ,r shows a high narrow contact. This
should be corrected by increasing the pinion
depth, i.e. add necessary amount of shimming
behind the pinion.
14. Differential bearings.
Side bearings
(Ball race) • (2) ND 3L36
Brake shaft - bearing
(Ball race) • (2) ND43L22
Compensating case bushes
r El-02007 1/Dia. 4.128*.001
O/Dia. 4.-503-.001
Centre piece bush No.
El-02007 1/Dia. 4.128*.001
O/Dia. 4.503-.001


(d) Final drive
assembly*
1. Dismantling and reassembling*
Remove nuts and spring washers (8) from hub studs,
using wrench No. 1-11010* (See Fig. 181).
Remove dowels from hub studs. A sharp tap on the
end of each stud with a copper hammer will help
to loosen dowels.
Lift off hub and sprocket assembly.
Remove cap screws (10) from bearing cap.
Remove split pin and nut from drive shaft'.
Drive out drive shaft with brass drift and heavy
hammer. (Bearing cap and bearing will remain
on shaft).
Lift out spacer, drive shaft bearing.
Lift out drive gear sub-assembly. Bearing will
remain in housing and can be driven out if re-
quired with a long punch.
Remove cover (pinion bearing) 10 cap screws.
Remove' snap ring.
Lift out pinion. Bearing will, remain in housing
and can be pressed out or driven out if required.
Bearing cap and bearing can be pressed off drive
shaft if required.
Two u Gits ,f oil seals located back to back in drive
shaft bearing cap can be pressed out if required.
Sprocket's (2) can be removed from, the hub, by remov-
ing the 13 securing bolts in each with tool No.
1-11010.
The drive gear rim can be separated from the hub by
removing the eight securing bolts.
To reassemble reverse the order as described for dis-
mantling.
2. Final drive bearings.
Pinion bearing inner A 1222 TS. Hyatt (2)
" " outer SKF 6322 (Ball race) (2)
Shaft bearing inner SKF 22226 self aligning
roller (2)
Shaft bearing outer SKF 2232 self aligning
roller (2)
(e) Universal .joints
& cardan shafts.
1. Description.'
Two Mechanics needle bearing type (VC) universal
joints are used in conjunction with the main cardan
shaft. This shaft is the power link between the
master clutch and the gearbox. See Fig. 182.


At the gearbox end this shaft is splined and
one yoke of the universal joint slides on the
spline. The other yoke is secured to the splined
end of the gearbox input shaft with a castellated
nut.
To the other end of the main cardan shaft a
yoke is welded. The yoke of this joint is
secured to the splined end of the master clutch
shaft with a nut and lock washer.
Two Mechanics needle bearing type (4C) universal
joints are used in conjunction with each of the
three cardan shafts between the transfer box and
Nos. 1, 2 and 3 engines respectively.
These joints are welded to the cardan shafts
and are a sliding fit on the splined ends of the
transfer box drive shafts. They are secured to
the spline, on the outer end of the engine clutch
shafts, with a castellated nut.
Universal joints (7C) and (4C) are identical
in assembly, the only difference being that (7C)
is much heavier than (4C). They are made up of
two yokes and a trunnion assembly and can be dis-
mantled by removing eight cap screws, four of
which hold each yoke to the trunnion assembly.
The only service operations required on these
joints is the replacement of worn parts.


Fig. 173. Sectional view of gear box. Idler gear which operates in constant mesh with Gear, Ist speed, has been lowered in
illustration to show input shaft


Fig. 174. Transfer box
Fig. 175. Sectional view of front axle assembly showing final drive


Fig. 176. Controlled differential assembly
Fig. 177. Carrier assembly, Tool No. MM3-195


Fig. 178. Special puller, 1-11090
Fig. 179. Correct meshing of differential gears
Fig. 180. Correct and incorrect tooth contact


Fig. 181. Wrench —sprocket hub nuts, Tool No. 11010
Fig. 182. Universal joints and carden shafts




TOOLS TANK A, C. MARK I
* — -i a-
A.F.V.
CATALOGUE
ARMY
TOOL
NO.
NO.
NO.
ENGINE
J257
T2000
Adaptor*
Valve Spring Compressor.
1-11035
T200I
Adaptor.
Brackets Engine Stand 662.
1-11181
J1031
T2002
ArLor*
Engine Clutch Aligning.
1-11154
KM0269-S9
T2C03
Gauge.
Auto Choke valve setting
!: Carb. st
1-11141
J258C
T2004
Si
Engine Clutch Finger
Equalising.
1-11156
J269-S7
T2005
if
Float Setting "Carb. ;!
1-11155
J1055
T2006
u
Valve Stern length.
1-11184
J827
T2007
installer *’ Lifter Bracket
J1577
T2008
Kit*
Tools Carburettor Overhaul,
1-11157
J836
T2009
Filot.
Camshaft Sprocket Install-
ing.
1-11151
J831
■ ■
T2010
"
Thimble, Water Pump
Impellor Shaft.
1-11177
J834
.-.fi.w'X.L
Puller*
Rear Main Bearing Cap.
1-11144
J829
T2012
Remover.
Camshaft Bearing also
Aligning & Replacer.
1-11133
J822
T2013
Crankshaft Dowel.
1-11152
KMO 559
T2014
si
Valve Guide.
1-11173
j82c/±
T2C15
Replacer
u ff
•
1-11001
L 2016
Sling 0
Engine Lifting (Single
Unit).
1-11110
’12017
n
Engine Lifting (Complete
KMO 242
T2018
Spann'er.
Unit).
Con. Rod Nuts (7/1 6 Spec.
socket).
1-11153
■ !, 269/5
T2019
(t
Power piston & Float
Bender ,5 Carb."
1-11160
J-1275A
T2 020
t?
Sparking Plug.
1-11163
1-11167
J-1559
‘32021
12022
Tester.
Tool.
Economiser Valve "Garb.”
Cart). Jets, Combination
( a )
1-11170
T2023
u
if st (a)
J-1297-
T2024
u
Valve Lifter Checking
Ji297/41
.
with adaptor.
1-11040
T2025
Trolley.
Engine (w/shop)
J-257-X
Mv-lCbl
Valve Spring Compressor (G Type)
Puller Clutch. Pilot Bearing
K-361-K
MV-10
(a) - No*
g to be
supplied
if T2008 is available.
1
SUSPENSION TRACK
& HULL
1-11066
T2100
Clamp.
Coupling
1-11080
T2101
Punch.
Short, Steel Track Line
;
Removing.
1-11081
l T2102
1 1
Long, Steel Track Line
!
Removing.
1-11008
T2103
Snanner.
Fulcrum Pin & Bogie
Bracket Nuts.
1-11012
T2104
»j
Grease Nipple Removing.
1-11011
1
T2105
(f
Idler Wheel Nuts.
1-11010
IT 2106
it
Sprocket Hub Nuts.
1-11009
It 2107
tt
Track Adjusting & 3®gie
1
Wheel Spindle Nuts.
1-11204
j T2108
Spreader
.Bogie Fulcrum Arm.
1-11030
'
T2109
Strainer
.Rubber Track with Handle
and Extension.
1-11015
1
•12110
Steel Track with Handle
and Extension


A.F.V.
GAT.
HO.
ARMY
HO.
TOOL
TURRET TRAVERSE TOOLS
1-11076
T2150
j Screw Driver. Voltage Regulator Contact
| Screw,
1-11074
T2151
Spanner Voltage Regulator Lock
Hut Large.
1-11077
T2152
Spanner Voltage Regulator Lock
Hut Small.
1-11075
T2153
” Voltage Regulator Sleeve.
1-11073
T2154
,f Motor Brake.
TRAILS
MISSION. DIFFERENTIAL & FINAL DRIVE
1-11104
T2050
Drift. Countershaft Bearing mrans.
1-11106
T2051
” Input Shaft
1-11100
*
T2.052
Driver. Dowel Pins Diff. Case.
1-11190
T2053
Installer. Input & Output Shaft Gears
Trans.
1-11083
T2054
Puller. Bevel Drive Pinion Diff.
1-11101
T2055
Puller. Dowel Pins Diff. Case.
1-11196
T2056
” Input & Output Shaft Gears
Trans.
1-11053
T2057
51 Main Drive Pinion Diff*
1-11070
T2058
" Steering Brake Shaft & Bear-
ing Diff.
1-11130
T2059
Spanner. Input & Counter Shaft Huts Trans.
1-11013
T206G
" Steering Brake Adjusting Huts
Diff.
1-11120
T2061
Stand. Transmission Overhaul








