







PSELLUS’ DIALOGUE
ON THE
OPERATION OF DAEMONS;
NOW, FOR TBB FIRST TIME,
TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH
FROM THE ORIGINAL GREEK,
ILLUSTRATED WITH NOTES,
MARCUS COLLISSON,
SYDNEY:
PUBLISHED BY JAMES TEGO, BOOKSELLER AND STATIONER,
PRINTED BY D. L. WELCH,
AT THE ATLAS-OFFICE, OPPOSITE THE POST-OFFICE,
Of whom the work may be bad.'
MDCCCXLIII.


The Translator is willing to devote a few hours daily to private
tuition.—discourse of instruction would include, besides the Classics,
a general English Education. Communications addressed to Marcus
Collisson, may be left at either Mr.Tegg’s, Bookseller, Mr. Welch*
Jointer, opposite the Post-office, or Mr. Sands, Print-seller, George*
street.
Subscribers are informed, that owing to the work being enlarged
by additional matter in the Introduction and Notes, the price will be
Two Shillings.


Sydney, February, 1843.
Your kindness to a stranger at this extremity of
the globe, and your well-known encouragement of general
literature, induce dedicate to you this Translation of
Psellus’ Dialogue on Daemons, as a small, but sincere token
of grateful acknowledgment, hoping you will extend that
indulgence which first literary attempts seem to call for.
I have the honor to be,
Your obliged and obedient humble Servant,
TIIK TRANSLATOR.
Dr. Charles Nicholson.




INTRODUCTORY PREFACE.
Mich.el I’sellus, who flourished in the eleventli cen-
tury, the Author of this little treatise on the operation of
Daemons, was an eminent philologist, philosopher, and
scholar, and filled the office of Tutor to the young Prince
Michael, son of Constantine Ducas, with great credit to him-
self, as appears from the euloginm passed on him by Anna
Comnena, daughter of the emperor Alexis (Alcxiados,
lib. v.) Beside other works, he wrote an exposition of
Aristotle's Philosophy, and Commentaries on the'Book of
Psalms and Solomon’s Song. Mosheim, the ecclesiastical
historian, pays the following tribute to his worth : —“ But
the greatest ornament of the Republic of Letters in the
eleventh century was Michael Psellus, a man illustrious in
every respect, and deeply versed in all the various kinds of
erudition that were known in his age. This great man
recommended warmly to his countrymen the study of phi-
losophy, and particularly the system of Aristotle, which he
embellished and illustrated in several learned and ingenious
productions.”
The work (now for the first time published in an English
dress) was written A. D. about 1050, and was distinguished
by the learned Barthius with the honorable title, “The
Little Golden Book.” It is interesting as a literary curi-
osity, being now exceedingly scarce, as well as by its
subject, on which mankind have generally shown them-
selves verv inquisitive. It is further interesting from its
A 3


detailing most minutely the extraordinary secret proceed-
ings of the Euchitae, otherwise called Massalians (which,
it must be admitted, is a desideratum), and it seems to
determine the true meaning of the expression “ doctrines
of daemons” (Ist Tim. iv., 1).
We may further remark respecting the work, it may be
considered a fair specimen of the manner in which heathen
philosophy was blended with Christian theology in the
author’s day, and of the plausible reasonings with which
the most absurd theories were supported; and it goes far
to show that certain terms, which by ecclesiastical usage
have obtained a harsh signification, had not acquired such
harsh signification so early as the period for which Psellus*
dialogue is laid. It relates also an instance of dcernoniacal
possession which cannot be accounted for on the suppo-
sition that such possessions were imaginary.
The proprie.y of apprising the mere English reader of
the distinction between a daemon and the devil suggests
itself here.* The Pagan world, for the most part, knew
nothing whatever of the devil, though well acquainted with
daemons, and addicted to their worship; and nothing can
be more clearly evinced from Scripture than the fact that
• Properly speaking, the Pagan mythology, though it taught a
future state of punishment, had nothing analogous with the hell of
revelation. Neither Charon, nor Pluto, nor jEacus, nor Rhadaman-
thus, bears the slightest resemblance to that apostate being who is
variously designated Adversaiy, Tempter, and Traducer. The local
arrangement, too, of the Pagan hell, and the administration of Us
punishments, essentially distinguished it from the hell of the Christian
svstem. The Pagan hell wa? ludicrously divided into compartments,
in which men were punished according to their respective demerits,
and had, besides, attached a region called the Elysian Plains, to
which heroes (first-rate characters, in the Pagan’s estimate) were
admitted immediately on their decease, and minor offenders after
they had undergone a purgatorial process. It is true the Latin
Christians adopted the term Inferni to express hell; yet that wag
rather because it was more convenient to adopt a term in general
use, am\ which, in its widest signification, included the idea of a
f'Mine state of punishment, than because there was much natuial
fitness m the term to convey the idea intended.


there is but one devil, whereas the daemons are numerous;
the distinction between them, though invariably observed
in Scripture, has not been carried out in either our autho-
rized translation, the German of Luther, or the Geneva
French. It has been rigidly preserved, however, by the
Syriac version, all the Latin translations, ancient and
modern, and Diodatti’s Italian version. We cannot do
better than cite what Dr. Campbell has so lucidly written
on this subject; after remarking that there is scarcely any
perceptible difference between Sai/iuv and Scufioviov, this
acute critic observes (Diss. vi., p. 1, § 8): —“
dfemon, occurs frequently in the Gospels, and always in
reference to possessions, real or supposed; but the word
Sia jSoXog, devil, is never so applied. The use of the term
Saijionov, daemon, is as constantly indefinite as the term
SiajioXoQ, devil, is definite : not but that it is sometimes
attended by the article, but that is only when the ordinary
rules of composition require that the article be used of a
term that is strictly indefinite. Thus when a possession is
first named, it is called simply Sai/ionov, or dffimon, or
TTViv/Mx a%a9aprov, an unclean spirit; never to Saijiovwv,
or to irvtvfia a%adapTov ; but when in the progress of
the story mention is again made of the same daemon, he is
styled to Scu/ioviov, the daemon, namely, that already
spoken of; and in English, as well as Greek, this is the
usage in regard to all indefinites. Further, the plural
haijiovia occurs frequently, applied to the same order of
beings with the singular; but what sets the difference of
signification in the clearest light is that though both Words,
SiaSoXog and Sai/ioviov, occur often in the Septuagint,
they are invariably used for translating different Hebrew
words ; SiatoXog is always in Hebrew either "ip, tsar,
enemy, or w, Satan, adversary, words never translated
Saijioviov. This word, on the contrary, is made to express
some Hebrew terra signifying idol, Pagan deity, apparition,
or what some render satyr. What the precise idea of the
dsemons to whom possessions were ascribed then was, it


would, perhaps, be impossible for us with any certainty to
affirm; but as it is evident that the two words hatoXoi;
and Saipoviov are not once confounded, though the first
occurs in the New Testament upwards of thirty times, and
the second about sixty, they can by no just rule of inter-
pretation be rendered by the same term ; possessions are
never attributed to the being termed o Sio&oXoc, nor are
his authority and dominion ever ascribed to daemons. Nay,
when the discriminating appellations of the devil are occa-
sionally mentioned, Sat/soviov is never used as one.
It may be proper to subjoin here the most striking
instances of the term being mistranslated in the authorized
version. Acts xvii., 18 : “ Others said he seemeth to be a
setter forth' of strange gods,” should be strange daemons.
Ist Corinth, x., 20, 21 : “ The things which the Gentiles
sacrifice they sacrifice to devils, and not to God, and I
would not that ye should have fellowship with devils ; ye
cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils ;
ye cannot be partakers of the Lord’s table and the table of
devils" Here in every instance the word rendered devils
should be rendered damions. Rev. ix., 20 : “ The rest of
the men which were not killed by these plagues, yet re-
pented not of the works of their hands, that they should
not worship devils read daemons. Ist. Tim. iv., 1 :
“ Giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrine of devils,”
should be daemons. James ii., 19 : “ Thou believest that
there is one God; thou doest well; the devils also believe
and tremble substitute daemons.
With respect to the instance of dacmoniacal possession
recorded in Psellus’ work, and which is irreconcileable
with the supposition that such possessions were imaginary,
although, indeed, it may be objected that that particular
case is not duly authenticated, yet we can hardly conceive
it possible for any one who implicitly believes the infallible
truth of Scripture, and reads it with ordinary attention, to
call in question the reality of dacmoniacal possessions, at
least in the apostolic age. Nothing can be more pertinent


than Dr. Campbell's remarks on this subject (Diss. vi.,
p. 1, § 10): —“A late learned and ingenious author
(Dr. Farmer),” observes Dr. Campbell, “ has written an
elaborate dissertation to evince that there was no real
possession in the demoniacs mentioned in the Gospel, but
that the style there employed was adopted merely in con-
formity to popular prejudice, and used of a natural disease.
Concerning this doctrine, I shall only say, in passing, that
if there had been no more to argue from sacred writ in
favour of the common opinion than the name taifioviZo-
pevof, or even the phrases Satfiovwv f\ t: , exfiaWitv, &c.,
I should have thought his explanation at least not impro-
bable ; but, when I find mention made of the- number of
da-mons in particular possessions, their action so expressly
distinguished from that of the man possessed, conversations
held by the former in regard to the disposal of them after
their expulsion, and accounts given how they were actually
disposed of—when I find desires and passions ascribed
peculiarly to them, and similitudes taken from the conduct
w hich they usually observe, it is. impossible for me to deny
their existence, without admitting that the sacred historians
were either deceived themselves in regard to them, or in-
tended to deceive their readers. Nay, if they were faithful
historians, this reflection, I am afraid, will strike still
deeper.”
Without consenting to all that Psellus advances on the
origin, nature, modes of action, and occasional manifesta-
tion of dannons, yet, believing implicitly the sacred Scrip-
tures, we can have no more doubt of the existence of such
beings than we have of our own. Dr. Campbell also ob-
serves, (Diss. vi., p. 1, §11): —“Though we cannot dis-
cover with certainty, from all that is said in the Gospel
concerning possessions, whether the datmons were con-
ceived to be the ghosts of wicked men deceased, or lapsed
angels, or (as was the opinion of some early Christian
writers, lust. M. Apol. 1) the mongrel breed of certain
angels (whom they understood by the sons of God, men-


Honed in Genesis, eh. vi., 2) and of the daughters of men,
it is plain they were conceived to he malignant spirits.
They are exhibited as the causes of the most direful cala-
mities to the unhappy person whom they possess—dumb-
ness, deafness, madness, palsy, and the like. The descriptive
titles given them always denote some ill quality or other j
most frequently they are called TTi’tvgara axaSagra,
unclean spirits ; sometimes irvtvgara ironqpa, malign
spirits; they are represented as conscious that they are
doomed to misery and torments, though their punishment
be for a while suspended. ‘ Art thou come hither, fiaara-
vaaai q gag, to torment us before the time ?’ Matt, viii.,
29.”
Calmet seems to be of opinion that the daemons are
identical with the apostate angels : we cannot but believe
that such as were connected with dsemoniacal possession
were the same with the apostate angels, the more especially
as we find not the remotest allusion to their origin as a
distinct class, and as both they and the apostate angels are
represented as destined to future torment. The possessed
with datmons at Gadara cry out, on our Lord’s approach,
“ Art thou come to torment us before the time” —(Malt,
viii., 29) —whilst our Lord says, delivering the future
judgment, “ Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, pre-
pared for the devil and his angels: ” from which passages
it would appear that neither Satan nor the daemons are yet
enduring the extreme punishment prepared for them; in-
deed, the scriptural opinion appears to be that, as the devil
walkcth about like a roaring lion seeking whom he may
devour, going to and fro in the earth, walking up and
down in it, so his emissaries, the apostate angels, the
daemons, roam through every part of it, inflicting diseases,
tempting to sin, and blasting physical as well as moral
good. If it be said that such a supposition is irreconcilable
with the power and beneficence of the Divine Being, will
those who make such objection venture to deny the exist-
ence of moral and physical evil ? and if that be reconcil-


able with the power and beneficence of the Supreme, why
may not the doctrine just laid down ? Will it be said that
such a supposition is irreconcilable with the immutability
and permanency of the Divine laws ? Will those who
make such objection assert, that the superficial know-
ledge they may have acquired of nature’s laws warrants
them in saying that they understand the Divine laws ?
who can tell all the causes that lead to any one, even the
most insignificant, event ?—and who can tell but that the
laws of nature, without our perceiving it, are controlled by
dicmonic agency ? We only see a few of the links—we
cannot see all the links of the chain that lead to any one
result.
It may be proper to examine here the Heathen notion of
the word daemon, by which means (mutatis mutandis) we
will be better able to understand its scriptural application.
Its etymology conveys the idea either of an acute intel-
ligence or of an appointed agent; but as these may exist
separately, in distinct beings, or combined in the same
being, it is obvious mere etymology cannot guide us to a
safe conclusion in bur enquiry. Homer applies the epithet
daemons, in more than- one instance, to the dii majomm
gentium (Iliad, v. 222); but whether he regarded the dii
majorum gentium as an inferior order of beings, subordinate
to a superior intelligence, or heroes advanced to this
eminence, or merely applied this term as suitable, in its
primary sense of an acute intelligence, to beings of the
very first order, is somewhat doubtful. The scholiast seems
to favour the view last mentioned (Horn. Iliad. Cantab.
1711, vers. 222). We cannot but be persuaded that Homer
considered all the gods and goddesses of human origin,
and occasionally gave glimpses of his opinion on this point,
though he dared not openly to avow his sentiments. One
very striking instance of this furtive way of insinuating
his private opinions we have in the 22nd book of the Iliad,
74th line, where, speaking of a river in the Troade, he
says, On Xav9ov KaXfovat 9toi, avl ptf h Xicapavlpov,


“ which the Gods call Xauthus, hut men Scamander
Xanthus being the name hy which the ancients designated
the river, he almost says that ancients and gods are con-
vertible terms. It may he objected, “ can Jupiter himself
he included under this idea —Jupiter, to whom almighty
power and supreme dominion are attributed, and who is
styled by the poets “ the father of gods and men, the
greatest and best of beings De La Motte’s reply to
Madame Dacicr is here very apposite—“ What! could
Homer seriously believe Jupiter to he the creator of gods
and men ? Could he think him the father of his own
father Saturn, whom he drove out of heaveur or of Juno,
his sister and his wife, of Neptune and Pluto, his brothers,
or of the nymphs who had charge of him in his childhood,
or of the giants who made war upon him, and would have
dethroned him, if they had been then arrived at the age
of manhood ? How well his actions justify the Latin
epithets, optimus, maximum, most gracious, most mighty,
so often given him, all the world knows.” (Dc la Critique,
seconde partie, Des Dieux.) On the whole, we are rather
inclined to think that Homer considered all gods (the dii
majorum gentium not excepted) as daunons of human
original. Hesiod follows next in order of time ; he
seems decidedly of opinion that all gods were daemons,
and originally human ; he intimates that the daemons are
the men of the golden age, who lived under Saturn, and
avers that they are the protectors of mankind, ouXax«t
roiv Qvgrmv avOpinirtov. (Vide Scholiast on Homer’s Iliad,
A. 222.) Socrates’ sentiments on this subject, as also
those of Plato and his immediate disciples, may be gathered
from the following extract from Plato’s Cratylus ;—“ Soc.
What'shall we consider next? Ilermogenes, Damons, to
be sure, and heroes, and men. Soc. Let it be daemons,
then, and with what propriety they are so named. Con-
sider, Hermogenes, if I say ought worthy of your attention
as to what might have been the sense of the word daemon.
llermog. Proceed. Soc. Are you aware that Hesiod says


certain are daemons ? Hermog. I don’t remember it. Soc.
Nor that he says the first generation of men were golden ?
Herm, I know that, at all events. Soc. Well, then, he
speaks thus respecting it: —
* When destiny concealed this generation
They were called pure subterranean Intelligences* [Daiinones],
Excellent, Avertors of evils, Protectors of mortal men.*
Herm. What, then, pray ? Soc. I think he calls a gene-
ration the golden [generation], not as though produced
from gold, but because excellent and glorious ; and I con-
jecture it is for analogous reasons he says we are an iron
generation. Herm. You say the truth. Soc. You think,
then, he would say, if any one of the present age were
excellent, he belonged to the golden age ? Herm. It is
but the natural inference. Soc. Who are excellent but
the wise ? Herm. The wise, none else. Soc. This, there-
fore, he specially intimates respecting Intelligences, that
he designated them Intelligences because wise and intel-
ligent, and in our ancient speech the word occurs. Ac-
cordingly not only Hesiod, but many other poets also, calls
them appropriately thus. How many, too, are in the habit
of saying, when a good man dies, that he obtains a glorious
lot, and dignity, and becomes an intelligence, designating
him thus owing to his wisdom ?• In the same manner I
aver that the intelligent man is every good man, and that
the same, whether living or dead; is intellectual, and is
correctly called an intelligence.”—Plutarch, who flourished
in the second century, gives the following as his doctrine
of daemons : —“ According to a divine nature and justice,
the souls of virtuous men are advanced to the rank of
daemons ; if they are properly purified, they are exalted into
gods, not by any political institution, but according to right
reason.” The same author says in another place (de Isis
• We have rendered this word, Saifiovtg, intelligences, and will
throughout. Were we to tender it daemons, it would be impossible
to convey the agteeable play on the word which afterwards occurs.


et Osiris, p. 361), that Isis and Osiris were for their virtue
changed into gods, as were Hercules and Bacchus after-
wards, receiving the united honors both of gods and
daemons.
From these data we conclude that the word daemon, as
signifying in its abstract sense an intelligence, was occa-
sionally applied from the earliest times to deities of the
very first order, but afterwards came to be appropriated to
deified men ; and that the heathen (philosophers excepted)
believed in no being identical with or bearing the slightest
resemblance to our God. In the language of one who
cannot be suspected of any partiality to Christianity, they
were “ a kind of superstitious atheists, who acknowledged
no being that corresponds with our idea of a deity,” (Nat.
Hist, of Rel., sect, iv.)
The heathen did not pretend to be acquainted with all
the existing daemons or intelligences. So sensible were
the Greeks of their ignorance on this head, that they
actually had, in Paul’s day, an altar at Athens with the
inscription, “To an unknown God.” They thought by
this contrivance to obviate any bad results that might
accrue from their ignorance, and secure to every daemon or
intelligence a due share of honor. Paul accordingly, with
ingenious artifice, takes advantage of this circumstance'to
introduce Jesus to their notice as a daemon * or intelli-
• It seems probable that the line of conduct pursued by the
Apostle on this occasion was suggested by that remark of the Athe-
nians themselves, “he seems to he a setter forth of strange intelli-
gencesp (usually rendered daemons); because he preached to them
tqv I rjaovv icat rtjv Avaaracnv, Jesus and Resurrection, they
conceived Jesus to be a male intelligence, and Resurrection ; Anas-
tasin, a female intelligence, according to their custom deifying abstract
qualities, and making them gods and goddesses as suited the gender
of the name. Nor can this conduct of the Apostle be termed with
any propriety “ a pious fraud”. ’Tis true that though the term djemon
in its primary use signifies intelligence, his auditors would be very
apt to take the term in its more extended sense. The Apostle, how-
ever, could not justly be held responsible for the acceptation in
which they choose to take his woids; yet it must be admitted that


gence they were unconsciously worshipping. He thus
apologizes on Mar’s Hill, (Acts xvii. 21): —“ Ye men of
Athens, I perceive that in every thing you somewhat sur-
pass in the worship of daemons ( Kara iravra mq ctiatcai-
fiovcarepove*); for as I passed by, and beheld your devo-
tions, I found an altar with this inscription, “ to an un-
known God;’’ whom therefore you ignorantly worship ,
Him declare I unto you.” In this apology the word
daemon does not convey the idea of either an impure or
malignant being, but simply of an intelligence.
It can hardly be questioned but that the heathen, when
worshipping deified men as daemons, were really worship-
ping beings who had no existence but in their own imagi-
nations ; and in so doing, though they could not be said
to worship any particular dwmon, yet might they with
propriety be called worshippers of daemons, beings which,
whether real or imaginary, were confessedly inferior to the
Supreme. In this seems to lie the force of the Apos-
tle’s remark (Ist Cor. x., 19,20,) “ What say I, then ? that
the idol is anything, or that which is offered in sacrifice to
idols anything ? but I say that the things which the Gen-
tiles sacrifice they sacrifice to daemons, and not to God,
and I would not that you should have fellowship with
the Apostle did not in this instance state the whole truth, but merely
so much as suited his immediate purpose of extricating himself from
the power of their fanatical philosophers. His principal object
seems to have been to show that on their own principles, w'hich
admitted a multiplicity of gods, and regarded without jealousy the
gods of other nations, they could not injustice or consistency punish
him for preaching a God they had never heard of before, even
Jesus. With a similar tact the Apostle rescued himself fiom the
malice of the Jews, when arraigned before the high priest, by avow-
ing himself a Pharisee, and insisting that the doctrine of a future
resurrection was the great matter of dispute; but this, as in the
former instance, was not the whole truth ; it answered, however, the
Apostle’s purpose by creating a division in his favour. Sorely this
was the wisdom of the serpent, without its venom.
• The Athenians gloried in the fact .that they were
eaTIQOVg than the other states of Greece, and must have considered
the Apostle’s language highly complimentary.
B 2


daemons. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the
cup of daemons.” As if the Apostle had said, “do I mean
to assert that an idol is intrinsically anything? by no
means; the veriest tyro in the school of Christ knows that
an idol is nothing, for eyes have they, and see not, &c.;
but while I grant this, I still maintain, that the things
which the Gentiles sacrifice they sacrifice to daemons, of
which the idols are symbolical representations.” Possibly
the particular daemon intended by the idol might have no
existence, but idols may be considered with propriety to
represent the class, viz., beings intermediate between God
and man, inferior to the former, but superior to the latter;
“ for to all who come under this description, real or
imaginary, good or bad, the name daemons (intelligences)
is promiscuously applied. The reality of such intermediate
order of beings revelation everywhere supposes, and ra-
tional theism does not contradict. Now it is to the kind
expressed in the definition now given that the pagan deities
are represented as corresponding, and not individually to
particular damans, actually existing. To say, therefore,
that the Gentiles sacrifice to daemons is no more than to
say that they sac-ifice to beings which, whether real or
imaginary, we perceive, from their own account of them,
to be below the Supreme.” (Camph., Diss. vi., p. 1,
§ 15.)
It may be asked, of what practical utility is a work of
this nature—of what practical importance can it be whether
we believe or disbelieve the existence of daemons ? We
humbly conceive it is not optional with us to treat any
portion of divine truth as unimportant, because we cannot
see its practical bearing upon the conduct. If it can be
unequivocally shown from the Word of God that daemons
exist, the belief of the fact belongs to us, the utility of it
to Him that permits it. At the same time, we cannot for-
bear observing that, if it be a work of utility to throw
light, in the least degree, on any portion of the Word of
God, and to rescue a term or a passage from a perverted


use, then we flatter ourselves such ends may be in some
measure effected by the publication of Psellus’ work ; but
if there were no other reason for its publication than a
desire to communicate the arguments with which, in those
comparatively early times, men of a philosophic turn of
mind fortified themselves in the belief of dsemoniacal pos-
sessions (as well in the Apostolic age as in their own time),
we conceive none could justly condemn such a laudable
motive. Surely a supercilious contempt for the Analdm
of ancient literature, which would censure them unheard,
or consign their writings to oblivion, is no mark of either
liberality or wisdom in the present age.


MICHiEL PSELLUS’ DIALOGUE,
BETWEEN
TIMOTHY AND THRACIAN,
ON THE OPERATION OF DAEMONS,
Versus Manes and the Euchitce (a.)
Timothy.—ls it long, Thracian, since you visited
Byzantium ?
Thracian. —Yes, it is long, Timothy; two years per-
haps, or more ; I have been abroad.
Timothy.—But where, and why, and engaged in what
business, were you away so long ?
Thracian. —The questions you put would take too long
to answer just now; I must devise Alcinous’ narrative (S)
if I am obliged to particularize every thing I was present
at, and every thing I endured, while constrained to associate
with impious characters—those Euchitae, or, as many call
them, Enthusiasts—have you not heard of them at all ?
Timothy.—Why, I understand that there are amongst
us individuals as godless as they are absurd, and that in
the midst of the sacred quire * (to speak in comedian
style;) but as to their dogmas, their customs, their laws,
their proceedings, their discourses, I have not yet been
able to learn any thing about them; wherefore I beg of
you to tell me most explicitly whatever you know, if you
are disposed to oblige an intimate acquaintance, I will even
add, a friend.
Thracian. —Even have it so, friend Timothy, though
* In holy orders.


it be enough to give one a head-ache if he but attempt to
describe the outlandish doctrines and doings of dsemon-
ry ; and though you cannot possibly derive any advantage
from such description—for, If it be true what Simonides (c)
says ,(c) that the statement of facts is their delineation, and
that therefore the statement of profitable facts must be
profitable, and the statement of unprofitable facts quite
the opposite—what possible benefit could you derive from
my delineating their seductive statements ?
Timothy. —Nay, but I shall be greatly benefited, Thra-
cian ; surely it is not unserviceable for physicians to be
acquainted with drugs of a deadly nature, that so none
may be endangered by their use: besides, some of the
particulars, at all events, will not be unprofitable. We
have our choice, therefore, either to carry off from your
disquisition what is profitable, or to be on our guard of it
if it have anything pernicious.
Thracian. —Agreed, my friend; you shall hear (as the
poet says) truths certainly, but most unpleasant ones :
but if my narrative advert to certain unseemly proceedings,
I require of you, in common justice, not to be angry with
me who relate them, but with those who do them. This
execrable doctrine had its rise with Manes* the Maniac,
from him their [the Euchitse’s] multitudinous origins have
flowed down as from a foetid fountain; for, according to
the accursed Manes,f there were two origins of all things:
• Here there is obviously a play on the word Manes, which we
have endeavoured to preserve in some measure in the translation;
the Greek reads Trapa M avtVTOQ TOV pavtVTOQ : this descrip-
tion of punning is very ancient. The Jews, playing on the word
Beelzebul, signifying God of Heaven, converted it into Beelzebub,
God of the Dunghill, he being supposed the god of a fly, that de-
lights in ordure.
f The Greek reads £7rj/paru), which signifies lovely; we cannot
but think this either a typographical error, or an error of some tran-
scriber, and that the word, in the original MS., was fTraparw,
which signifies accursed: this view is countenanced by the Latin
translators, employing, as the synonyme, intestabilis.


he, with senseless impiety, opposed a god, the author of
evil, to God, the Creator of every good—a ruler of the
wickedness of the Terrestials, to the bounteous Ruler of
the Caelestials. But the dsemoniacal Euchitse have adopted
yet a third origin ; according to them, two sons, with their
father, make the senior and the junior origin; to the fa-
ther they have assigned the supra-mundane region solely,
to the younger son the atmospheric region, and to the
elder the government of things in the world—a theory
which differs in nothing from the Greek mythology, ac-
cording to which the universe is portioned out into three
parts. These rotten-minded men, having laid this rotten
foundation, thus far are unanimous in their sentiments ;
but from this point are divided in their judgments into
three parties: some yield worship to both sons, maintain-
ing, that though they are at variance, yet that both are
equally deserving of being worshipped, because they are
sprung from one parent, and will yet be reconciled. But
others serve the younger son as being the governor of the
superior region, which extends immediately over the earth;
and yet they do not absolutely disdain the elder son, but
are on their guard of him, as of one who has it in his
power to do them injury; while the third party, who are
further sunk in impiety, withdraw altogether from the
worship of the celestial son, and enshrine in their hearts
the earthly alone, even Satan, dignifying him with the
most august names, as, the First-begotten, Estranged from
the Father, the Creator of Plants and Animals, and the
rest of the compound beings. Preferring to make suit to
him who is the Destroyer and Murderer, gracious God 1
how many insults do they offer to the Celestial, whom they
pronounce envious, an unnatural persecutor of his brother,
(who administers judiciously the government of the world)
and aver, that it is his being puffed up with envy occasions
earthquakes and hail and famine, on which account they
imprecate on him, as well other anathemas, as in particular
that horrible one! * * * * * * *


Timothy. —By what train of reasoning have they brought
themselves to believe and pronounce Satan a son of God,
when not merely the Prophetic Writings, but the Oracles
of Divine Truth everywhere speak but of one son, and he
that reclined on our Lord’s bosom (as is recorded in the
Holy Gospel), exclaims, concerning the divine Xoyoc, “the
Glory as of the Only-begotten of the Father,” whence has
such a tremendous error assailed them ?
Thracian. —Whence, Timothy, but from the Prince of
Lies, who deceives the understandings of his witless vo-
taries by such vain-glorious fiction, vaunting that he will
place his throne above the clouds, and averring that he
will be equal to the Highest; for this very reason he has
been consigned to outer darkness: and when he appears to
them, he announces himself the first-begotten son of God
and creator of all terrene things,* who disposes of every-
thing in the world, and by this means, following up the
peculiar foible of each, cheats the fools, who ought to
have considered him an empty braggart and the arch-
prince of falsehood, and overwhelmed with ridicule his
pompous pretensions, instead of believing everything he
says, and suffering themselves to be led about like oxen
by the nose. However, it will soon be in their power to
convict him of being a liar, for if they insist on his making
good his honied promises, he will turn out no better than
the ass in lion’s skin which, when it attempted to roar like
a lion, its braying betrayed. At present, however, they
resemble the blind, and the deaf, and the insane, since they
cannot perceive, from the consanguinity of universal na-
* This, it must be admitted, is the true character of Satan, so far
as regards his lyinyr propensities ; he was a liar from the beginning.
“ When he spcaketh a lie he spcaketh bis own, for he is a liar, and
his (the liar’s) father.” But whether there "be an admixture of
var ify with mendacity, or his lies be uttered purely with a view to
deceive, is not so easily determined ; yet certainly his mendacious
address to the Messiah, “ All this power will I give thee and the
glory of them, for that is delivered unto me, and to whomsoever
I will I give it,” seems to partake of a boastful character.


ture, that there is but one Creator, nor hear that very
consanguinity declaring the self-same truth, nor discover,
by reasoning, that if there were two opposite creators,
there would not be that one arrangement and oneness
(svoiaie) which binds all things together. As the Prophet
says, “ the ox and the ass know their master and their
master’s crib,” but these bid their Master farewell, and
have elected to the place of God the most abject of all
creatures. “ Scorched though they be with the fire,” (as
the Proverb says) they yet follow and precipitate them-
selves into that fire which has long been provided for him
and his co-apostates.
Timothy.— But what profit do they derive from ab-
juring the Divine religion received from their fathers,* and
rushing on certain destruction ?
Thracian. —As to profit, I do not know that they de-
rive any, but I rather think not; for though the daemons
promise them gold, and possessions, and notoriety, yet you
know they cannot give them to any: they do, however,
present to the initiated phantasms and flashing appearances,
which these men-detesters of God call visions of God.
Such as wish to be spectators of them, gracious Heavens !
how many shameful things, how many unutterable and de-
testable must they witness ! For everything which we con-
sider sanctioned by law, and a doctrine to be preached,
and a duty to be practised, they madly disregard, nay, they
even disregard the laws of nature; to commit their de-
* Here we see how little dependence can be placed on that faith
which is founded on human authority, “ which stands in the wisdom
of man and not in tiie power of God.' 5 Those who can assign no
better reason for their Christianity than that it was transmitted from
their fathers, will become Pagans, Mahommedans, or Inlidels, when
they cannot exercise their teligion safely, or when it is more con-
ducive to their temporal interest to renounce it; or else they are
liable to be drawn into any fanciful theory, that has but the charm
of novelty to recommend it, with talent and eloquence to enforce it.
Little dependence can be reposed in any faith which is not the re-
sult of an Enlightened, rational conviction. Superstition itself is
vastly more influential than nominal ClirUtianify.


baucheries to writing would only befit the impure pen of
Archilochus, (4) nay, I do think that were he present he
would be loath to commemorate orgies so detestable and
vile, as were never witnessed in Greece, no, nor in any
barbarous land ; for where or when did any one ever hear
that man, that august and sacred animal, ate excretions,
whether moist or dry—a monstrosity which, I believe, not
even wild beasts in a rabid state are capable of committing,
and yet this is but the preliminary proceeding with these
execrable wretches.
Timothy. —What for, Thracian ?
Thracian. —Oh, this is one of their secrets—they know
best who do it: however, on my frequently questioning on
this point, all I could learn was, that the daemons became
friendly and affable on their partaking of the excretions.
In this particular I was satisfied they spoke truth, though
incapable of speaking it in other matters; since nothing
can be so eminently gratifying to hostile spirits as to see
man (who is an object of envy), man who has been ho-
noured with the Divine image, fallen to such a state of
degradation : this is putting the finishing stroke on their
folly. Nor is this confined to the Antistites of the dogma*
* It is remarkable that in the whole course of this treatise Pseiius,
speaking of the most revolting doctrines, never once employs the
term atpiffig, but Soyfia, which his Latin translator improperly
renders hasresis. To what is this attributable?—are we to suppose
that the word txtptmg was unknown to Pseiius as a term of re-
proach, or that however appropriate the term might be to express
the word sect, it was altogether inappropriate to express the doc-
trine of a sect. No one instance can be shown in Scripture, nor in
the writings of the first two centuries, of an opinion, whether true
or false, being denominated heresy. It is applied in Scripture in-
differently to either a good or bad sect, without implying either fa-
vour or censure, (thus we read the sect of the Saducees, the sect
of the Pharisees, the strictest sect of our religion), but never to a
sentiment, whether good or bad; in fact, it is nearly synonymous
with cytcrpa, rendered in the authorized version division , gxitTfia,
being the incipient state of that which, in its more confirmed and
aggravated form, is aLpEffig. There is one passage in the New


(to wlioni they tack the appellation, Apostles), but extends
to the Euchitae and the Gnosti.* But as to their mystical
sacrifice,f God preserve me ! who could describe it ? I
blush to repeat the shameful things I witnessed, and yet I
am bound to repeat them, for you, Timothy, have already
Testament which, to a superficial reader, might seem to clash with
the views here stated. “ A man that is a heretick after the first and
second admonition reject; knowing that he who is such is subverted
and sinnelh, being condemned of himself” —(Tit. iii. 10, 11 ) This
is a mis translation in two ways, for not only does it attach to the
word CUptriKOQ, a modern and ecclesiastical sense, which was un-
known in primitive times, but it is at variance with the very genius
and structure of the language. On this last point Dr. Campbell,
with his usual acuteness and accuracy, observes (Diss. 9. p. 4. s. 11) :
—“ It is plain, from the genius of the language, that the word
atpETLKog in this place does not mean a member of an aipegig
or sect, who may be unconscious of any fault , and so is not
equivalent to our word sectary, much less does it answer to our
English word heretic, which always implies, one who entertains
opinions in religion not only erroneous but pernicious ; whereas we
have shewn that the word cape£i£, in scriptural use, has no neces-
sary connection with opinion at all; its immediate connection is
with division or dissension, as it is thereby that sects and parties are
formed. AipcrtKOf av9pu)7rog must therefore mean, one who is
the founder of a sect, or at least has the disposition to create
cttp€££i£ or sects in the community, and may properly be rendeml
a factious man.'*
• The Greek reads Tvuigrotg, the Lat. Comment, suggests
TviogriKOtg, the name of a well-known sect, but we conceive
VvufgTOtg to be the correct reading, and that it is not the Gnostics
are referred to, but a particular class among the Euchtt®, called
tinosti, or Litterati. The conclusion we would draw from the above
passage is, that the EucMt® were divided into three classes—the
Proestatoi or Presidents, the Gnosti or Literati, and the Euchit®
or Praying-men, who formed perhaps the uneducated and largest
portion—the last being most generally known, and the most nu-
merous, the whole body might have been called by the general
name, Euchit®,
t This expression the Enchit® derived from the Christians, who
designated the Lord’s Supper the mystical, i. e., symbolical sacrifice.
This seems to indicate that Transubslantiation formed no part of
the primitive creed.


prevailed on me; I will therefore skim over them lightly,
omitting the more shameful proceedings, lest I should seem
to be acting a tragedy, [rather than giving a plain state-
ment of facts.*] Vesperi enim luminibus accensis, quo
tempore salutarera domini celebramus passionem, in domum
praescriptam deductis, quas sacrilegi sacris suis initiave-
runt, puellis ne lucem execrandi quod designaut, flagitii
testem habeant, cum puellis libidinose volutantur in quam-
cumque tandem, sen sororem, seu propriam filiam, seu ma-
trem quilibet incident. Siquidem et hac in re dsemonibus
rem gratam facere arbitrantur, si leges divinas transgress!
fuerint, in quibas cautum est, ne nuptise cum sanguine
cognato contrahantur. Having perfected this rite, they
are dismissed; on the expiry of nine months, when the
unnatural progeny of an unnatural seed is about being
born, they meet again at the same place, and on the third
day after parturition, tearing the wretched infants from
their mothers, and scarifying their tender flesh with knives,
they catch in basins the dripping blood, and casting the
infants, still breathing, on the pile, consume them ; after-
wards, mingling their ashes with the blood in the basins,
they make a sort of horrible compound, with which, se-
cretly defiling their food, liquid and solid, like those who
mix poison with mead, not only they themselves partake
of these viands, but others also who are not privy to their
secret proceedings.
Timothy. —What end do they propose to themselves by
such revolting pollutions ?
Thracian. —They are persuaded that by this means the
divine symbols inscribed in our souls are thrust out and
expunged, for so long as they continue there the daemon
tribe are afraid and keep aloof, as one might from the
royal signet attached to a cabinet; in order, therefore, to
enable the daemons to reside in their souls they, without
• Note.—Wherever brackets are supplied thus [ ] the words
included are not the author's, but are merely inserted to make the
sense more explicit.


any apprehension, chase away the divine symbols, by their
insults to heaven—and a profitable exchange they have
made of it. But not satisfied with perpetrating this
wickedness themselves, they lay a snare for others; the
polluted viands tempting the pious* also, who, without
being aware of it, partake of the strange food, they like
so many Tantali serving up their children for the enter-
tainment.
Timothy. —Good Heavens, Thracian ! this is what my
grandfather by the father’s side predicted ; for once being
distressed, because some subverted as well the other privi-
leges of the good as their acquisition of a liberal educa-
tion,f I asked him, will there ever be a restoration ? he
being then an old man, and very sagacious in forseeing
coming events, gently stroking my head and fetching a
heavy sigh, replied, “ My son, my child, do you imagine
that they will ever again restore literature, or anything ex-
cellent ? The time is at hand when men will live worse
than wild beasts, for now Antichrist is at hand, even at
the doors, and evil precursors in the shape of monstrous
doctrines and unlawful practices, no better than the orgies
of Bacchus, must usher in his advent. And whatever
things have been represented by the Greeks in their tra-
gedies, as Saturn and Thyestes and Tantalus devouring
their offspring, (Edipus debauching his mother, and Cinyras
his daughters, all these fearful enormities will break in
• Query—might not that aversion which many of the Roman and
Corinthian converts evinced to partaking of food served up at en-
tertainments, or exposed for sale by heathens, have been occasioned
partly by a suspicion that it was secretly defiled by similar practices
to what are here described.
+ Here there seems a pointed allusion to the Emperor Julian,
whose artful policy it was to shut up the schools of the Christians, in
which they taught philosophy and the liberal arts. It may indeed
be objected that Julian lived in the fourth century, whereas Psellus
flourished in the eleventh century. We are not, however, under any
necessity for supposing that Psellus’ Dialogue is laid for his own
day. The Euchitee, against whom this dialogue is levelled, started up
at the close of the fourth century.


upon our state; but see my son, and be on your guard, for
know, know for certain, that not only individuals from the
illiterate and unpolished class, but many also of the
learned,* will be drawn away into the same practices.”
These things, if I am to judge from the result, he spake
prophetically; but 1, when I recall to mind his words,
which are as fresh in my memory now as when he uttered
them, am surprised at what you tell me.
Thracian. —And well you may be surprised ; for, many
as are the absurd nations described by historians in the far
North, and the parts about Lybia and Syrtes, yet I venture
to say no one has ever heard of such impiety being prac-
tised by them, no, nor by the Celts, nor by any other na-
tion near Britain, though destitute of laws and in a savage
state.
Timothy. —lt is afflicting to think, Thracian, that such
horrible practices should take up their abode in our quarter
of the world. But a perplexity of long standing respecting
daemons distresses me ; among other things, I should like
to know whether they are manifestly seen by the demon-
iacal wretches.
Thracian. —Not a doubt of it, my friend, for this they
all strive, might and main ; their assemblage and sacrifice,
and rites, and every horrible practice of theirs, are held for
this purpose, to bring about a manifestation.
Timothy. —How then can they, being incorporeal, be
seen with the visual organs ?
Thracian. —But, my good friend, they are not incor-
poreal; the daemon tribe have a body, and are conversant
with corporeal beings, which one may learn even from the
* It is somewhat remarkable that heresy (we use the word in its
present acceptation) has always originated with the learned. We
doubt if there'can be adduced a single instance of an illiterate
hieresiarch, which would seem to shew that its rise is not.owing so
much to the ignorance of the multitude as to a daring spirit of inno-
vation and depraved ambition in men of learning,
c 2


holy fathers of our religion, if one only addict himself
heartily to magical practices. We hear many too relating
how the daemons appeared to them in a bodily form ; and
the divine Basilius, who beheld invisible things (or at
least not clear to ordinary eyes) maintains it, that not
merely the daemons, but even the pure angels have bodies,*
being a sort of thin, aerial, and pure spirits; and in proof
of this he adduces the testimony of David, most celebrated
of the prophets, saying, “ He maketh his angels spirits,
and his messengers a flame of fire.”f And it must needs
be even so, for when the ministering spirits are despatched
to their respective (as the divine Paul says)
they must needs have some body, in order to their moving,
becoming stationary and apparent; for these effects could
* That Ccelestial beings, Messengers of God to man, have appeared
in visible form, must be admitted by every believer in Revelation ;
but whether they appeared in their proper nature, or in a form
suited to the specific occasion of appearance, it is difficult perhaps to
determine ; yet, if as the Apostle says, “ there is a spiritual as well
as a natural body, (Ist Cor. xv., 44,) a body which shall neither be
frail, nor gross, nor subject to the wants that oppress the present
body, but one which shall be fitted for the highest possible spiritual
service and happiness, there is nothing irrational in the supposition
that angels may have such a body. Abstractedly considered, matter
has nothing contaminating in it—nothing which morally unfits it for
union with a pure spirit; it is merely owing to its being associated
with fallen man, that it seems to possess a degrading property. The
fact that the believer’s happiness will not be consummated till the
union of the soul and body at the resurrection, when the soul will
occupy the body, not as a prison-house, but as a suitable mansion,
goes far to establish this latter point.
+ This passage, Dr. Chalmers in one of his works, (we believe his
Astronomical Discourses,) renders, “He maketh the winds his mes-
sengers, the flaming fire his servants." We cannot but consider the
passage correctly rendered in the authorised version, “He maketh
his angels spirits, [or winds], his ministers a flame of fire;” certain
it is, unless we take the passage in this way, it will be utterly
destitute of force and meaning, in the Ist chap. Epist. Hebrews, 7th
verse, where the Apostle contrasts the superior power and authority
of the Son with that of angels.
|The passage referred to, plainly is, “ are they not all ministering
spirits sent foith t.o minister to those who shall be heirs of salvation."


not be accomplished otherwise than through the medium
of a body.
Timothy. —How comes it then, that in most passages
of Scripture they are spoken of as incorporeal.
Thracian. —It is the practice both with Christian and
profane authors, even the most ancient, to speak of the
grosser description of bodies as corporeal; but those which
are very thin, eluding both the sight and touch, not only
w T e Christians, but even many profane authors think fit to
call incorporeal.
Timothy. —But tell me, the body which angels have by
natural constitution, is it the same with that which daemons
have ?
Thracian. —What folly! there must be a vast difference,
for the angelic, emitting a sort of extraneous rays, is op-
pressive and intolerable to the visual organs : but as to
the daemonic, whether it was once of this sort I cannot
say, but so it would seem; (for Esaias disparagingly calls
Lucifer “ him that had fallen ") now, however it is an ob-
scure and darksome sort of thing, saddened in aspect, di-
vested of its kindred light; but the angelic nature is im-
material, and therefore is capable of penetrating and
passing through all solids, being more impalpable than the
sun’s rays, which, passing through transparent bodies, the
opaque objects on this earth reflect, so as to render its
stroke endurable, for there is something material in it;
but nothing can interpose opposition to an angel, because
they present opposition to nothing, not being homogeneous
with any thing; on the other hand, the bodies of daemons,
though constituted indistinct by their tenuity, are yet in
some measure material and palpable.
Timothy. — l ambecoming quite a sage, Thracian, (as the
proverb says (ej), by these novel accessions of knowledge;
for to me, indeed, this is a novel fact, that some daemons
are corporeal and palpable.
Thracian. —There is no novelty in our being ignorant
of many things, so long as we are men, Timothy, as the
c 3


saying is ; ’tis well, however, if, as ages advance, our good
sense increases. Be assured of this, that in making these
statements, I am not uttering lying raphsodies, like the
Cretans and Phoeniceans,* but am persuaded of their truth
from the Saviour’s words, which affirm, that the daemons
shall be punished with fire, a punishment they would be
incapable of if incorporeal. Since a being that is destitute
of a body cannot suffer in the body, therefore they must
needs undergo punishment by means of bodies, constituted
capable of suffering. Much, however, I have suppressed
which I heard from some who adventured themselves to
intuition ;f for my own part, I have never seen a being of
that nature —Heaven grant that I may never behold the
fearful looks of daemons ! But I conversed with a monk
in Mesopotamia, who really was an initiated inspector of
daemonic phantasms : these magical practices he after-
wards abandoned as worthless and deceptive, and having
made his recantation, attached himself to the true doctrine,
which we profess, and assiduously applying himself, un-
derwent a course of instruction at my hands; he accord-
ingly told me many and extraordinary things about dsemons;
and once, on my asking, if dsemons were capable of animal
passion, “ Not a doubt of it,” said he. Quemadmodum
et sperma nonnulli eorum emittunt et vermes quosdam
spermate procreant. At incredible est, inquam excrement!
quicquam dsemonibus inesse, vasave spermatica et vitalia
vasaquidem eis, inquit ille,hujusmodi nulla insunt, superflui
autem seu excrementi nescio quid emittunt hoc mihi asserenti
credito. But, said I, if they derive nourishment, they must
derive it as we do ? Marcus [for that was his name], replied,
* The Cretans and Phoenicians were remarkable for their lying
propensities, so much so that their bad faith became proverbial. The
Apostle Paul in the Epistle to Titus, (ch. i. 12,) cites the Poet
Epimenides description of them, with approbation of its truth, “ the
Cretans ate always liars, evil beasts, slow bellies.”—Everyone has
heard of the Punica tides.
+ This is a technical phrase. See note on the word ridiculous
tricks, in the 47fh page.


some derive it by inhalation, as for instance a spirit resident
in lungs and nerves, and some from moisture, but not as we
do, with the mouth, but as sponges and testaceous fishes
do, by drawing nourishment from the extraneous moisture
lying around them, and they afterwards void a spermatic
substance, but they do not all resemble each other in
this particular, but only such descriptions of daemons as are
allied to matter, such as the Lucifugus, and Aqueous, and
Subterranean. And are there many descriptions of
daemons, Marcus, I asked again ? There are many, said he,
and of every possible variety of figure and conformation,
so that the air is full of them, both that above and that
around us, the earth and the sea are full of them, and the
lowest subterranean depths. Then, said I, if it would not
be troublesome, would you particularize each ? It would
be troublesome, said he, to recall to mind matters I have
dislodged from thence, yet I cannot refuse, when you com-
mand, and so saying he counted off many species of
daemons, adding their names, their forms, and their haunts.
Timothy. —What’s to hinder you then Thracian, enu-
merating them to us ?
Thracian. —I was not very solicitous, my good sir, to
retain either the substance or arrangement of that conver-
sation, nor can I now recollect it. What possible benefit
could I derive from an over-solicitude to retain their names,
their haunts, and in what particular they resemble, and in
what differ from each other ? therefore, I have allowed such
insipid matter to escape my memory, yet I retain a little
out of a great deal, and whatever you are curious about, if
you enquire of me you shall know it.
Timothy. —This in particular, I wish to know, how
many orders of daemons are there ?
Thracian. —He said, there were in all six species of
daemons, I know not whether subdividing the entire genus
by their habits, or by the degree of their attachment to
bodies —be that as it may, he said that the sexade [of
daemons] were corporeal and mundane, because in that


number all corporeal circumstances are comprised, and
agreeably to it the mundane system was constituted; after-
wards he observed, that this first number [the sexade] was
represented by the scalene triangle, for that beings of the
divine and celestial order were represented by the equila-
teral triangle, as being consistent with itself, and with
difficulty inclinable to evil, whilst human beings were repre-
sented by the isoscelles triangle, as being in some measure
liable to error in their choice, yet capable of reformation
on repentance. On the other hand, that the daemonic
tribe were represented by the scalene* triangle, as being
at variance with itself, and not at all approaching to
excellence. Whether he were really of this opinion or not,
this is certain, he counted off six species of daemons, and
first he mentioned Leliurium,f speaking in his barbarous
vernacular tongue, a name which signifies Igneous. This
order of daemons haunts the air above us, for the entire
genus has been expelled from the regions adjacent to the
moon, as a profane thing with us would be expelled from
a temple, but the second occupies the air contiguous to us,
and is called by the proper name Aerial; the third is the
Earthly, the fourth the Aqueous and Marine, the fifth the
• Here Ethics and Mathematics are curiously blended, few of our
modern mathematicians, we believe, are in the habit of assigning a
moral meaning to Geometrical problems, theorems, or figures; most
probably this notion was derived from the Pythagoreans, but at all
events, it shews that those who embraced such fanciful opinions
were not the illiterate vulgar. It may be necessary to explain this
conceit, more particularly to the mere English reader—the equilateral
triangle, which was bounded by three equal sides, was considered
the emblem of excellence, hence the ccelestial beings were regarded
as represented by it. The Isoscelles triangle, which was bounded by
two equal and one unequal side, was considered not quite so perfect
in its conformation, and was therefore supposed to represent human
beings, while the Scalene triangle, which was bounded by three
sides, every one of which was unequal to the other, was thought
aptly to shadow forth the perverseness and waywardness of the
daemonic tribe.
+ Query, is this the Leraures of the Latins, and the Leprechawn
of the Irish.


Subterranean, and the last the Lucifugus, which can
scarcely be considered sentient beings. All these species
of da;mons are haters of God, and enemies of man, and they
say, that the Aqueous and Subterranean are worse than the
merely bad, but that the Lucifugus are eminently mali-
cious and mischievous, for these, said he, not merely impair
men’s intellects, by phantasies and illusions, hut destroy
them with the same alacrity as we would the most savage
wild beast. The Aqueous suffocate in the water all that
approach them ; the Subterranean and Lucifugus, if they
can only insinuate themselves into the lungs of those they
meet, seize and choke them, rendering them epileptic and
insane; the Aerial and Earthly, with art and cunning
stealthily approach and deceive men’s minds, impelling
them to unlawful and unnatural lusts. But how, said I,
or what doing, do they accomplish this ? is it by lording-it
over us, and leading us about wherever they please, as if
we were so many slaves ? Not by lording it over us, says
Marcus, but by leading us into reminiscences, for when we
are in an imaginative spirit, approaching by virtue of their
spiritual nature, they whisper descriptions of sensual
delights and pleasures, not that they actually emit distinct
sounds, but they insinuate a sort of murmur, that serves
with them the place of words. But it is impossible, said
I, they could utter words without sound ? It is not impos-
sible, said he, as you will perceive, if you only reflect, that
when one is speaking to another at a distance, he must
speak in a high key, but if he be near, he need barely
murmur, and whisper into the ear of his auditor, and if one
could approach the very essence of the soul, there would
be no occasion for any sound whatever, but any word we
pleased would reach its destination by a noiseless path;
a faculty which they say is possessed by disembodied
spirits, for they hold communication with each other in a
noiseless manner, in the same way the daemons hdld com-
munication with us, without our perceiving it, so that it is
impossible to discover from what quarter an attack may be


made upon us.* You need have no doubt on this point, if
you only consider what happens in the atmosphere ; when
the sun shines, he combines colors and forms, and transmits
them to objects capable of receiving them, (as we may
observe in mirrors); thus also the daemons, assuming ap-
pearances and colors, and whatever forms they please,
transport them into our animal spirit, and occasion us in
consequence a vast deal of trouble, suggesting designs,
reviving the recollection of pleasures, obtruding represen-
tations of sensual delights, both waking and sleeping;
sometimes, too, rousing the baser passions by titillations,
they excite to insane and unnatural amours, and especially
when they find warm perspirations co-operating ; for in this
way, donning Pluto’s helmit, with craft and the most
refined subtlety, they create a commotion in men’s minds.
The other description of dlemons have not a particle of
wit, and are incapable of cunning, yet are they dangerous
and very terrible, injuring after the manner of the Cha-
ronean spirit, for (as they report) the Charonean spirit
destroys every thing that comes in its way, whether beast,
man, or bird ; in the same way these daemons terrifically
destroy every one they fall in with, injuring them in body
• This is indeed u the doctrine of daemons,” in all its length, depth,
breadth, and fulness. Were one engaged sinking a well, and life
became suddenly extinct, by inhaling choke-damp, his death was
occasioned by one of the Lucifugus or Subterranean dajmons; was
one while bathing to be suddenly seized with cramp, and sink to
rise no more, he was pulled under by one of the Aqueous or Marine
dasmons; was oue from not keeping the hands or the head indus-
triously employed, to be haunted with the filthy vagrancies of a
prurient imagination, this was the work of an Alrial daemon,
whispering impure desires into his soul; so that, as-Thracian says,
“ it was impossible to tell from what quarter an attack might be
made upon us.” How wretched must have been the condition of
those enslaved to such a degrading superstition. Well might Horace
ask (who probably spoke from a personal experience of this horrible
slavery’—
Somnia terrores magicos, miracula, sagas
Nocturnes lemures, portentaque Thessala rides?
Epint. 11,, book 2, v. 209, 210.


and mind, and subverting their natural habits ; sometimes
they destroy not merely men, but even irrational animals,
in the fire, in the water, or by casting them over precipices.
Timothy. —But what can be their object in entering
irrational animals ? for this happened to the swine at
Gargasa (as the Sacred Writings attest). I am not sur-
prised if, being hostile to men, they injure them ; but what
is the sense of their entering irrational animals ?
Thracian. — Marcus said that it was not from any
motive of hatred, nor from any hostile intention, that they
pounced upon some beasts, but from a vehement desire
for animal heat; for, as they inhabit the most profound
depths, which are cold to the last degree, and destitute of
moisture, they are excessively cold ; being contracted and
pained in consequence, they natui ally long for a moist and
vivifying heat to revel in, and spring into irrational animals,
and plunge into baths and pits ; on the other hand, the
heat that proceeds from fire they avoid, because consuming
and scorching, but gladly attach themselves to the moisture
of animals, as being congenial to their nature, but espe-
cially to that of man, as being most congenial of all; and
when infused into them they occasion no small uproar, the
pores in which the animal spirit resides being clogged, and
the spirit confined and displaced by the bulk of their
bodies, which is the cause of their agitating men’s persons,
and injuring their faculties, and obstructing their motions.
When a subterranean dtemon assails one, he agitates and
distorts the person possessed, and speaks through him,
using the tongue of the sufferer * as if it were his own
• Potter, describing the three different kinds of theomancers, has
a passage which throws considerable light on the above :—“ One sort
of theomancers were possessed with prophesying daemons, which
lodged within them, and dictated whal they should answer to those
wiio inquired of them, or spoke out of the bellies or breasts of the
possessed persons, they all the while remaining speechless, and not
so much as moving their tongues or their lips ; or pronounced the
answer themselves, making use of the members of the demoniac;
these were called BaifXOViKtj7rroi t i. e. possessed with demons;


member; but if a lucifugus daemon clandestinely possess
a person, it occasions a relaxation of his whole system,
stops his utterance, and almost leaves the sufferer dead ;
for this last species is more allied to earth than the others,
and is therefore excessively cold and dry, and any one it
can secretly possess, it blunts and obscures all the sufferer’s
natural power; but, because it is irrational and totally
devoid of intellect, being governed by irrational whim, it
has no more dread of reproof than the most intractable
wild beast, for which reason it is designated with great
propriety dumb and deaf; nor can a sufferer be dispossessed
but by divine power, procurable by prayer and fasting.*
“ But, Marcus,” said I, “ physicians would persuade us to
be of another way of thinking, for they assert that such
affections are not produced by daemons, but are occasioned
by an excess or deficiency of humours, or by a disordered
state of the animal spirits, and accordingly they endeavour
to cure them by medicine or dietetical regimen, but not
by incantations or purifications.” Marcus replied—“ It is
not at all surprising if physicians make such an assertion, for
they understand nothing but what is perceived by the senses,
their whole attention being devoted to the body. Lethar-
gies, Syncopes, cases of hypochondriasm, delirium, which
they can remove by vomits, or evacuations, or unguents,f
and because the spirits either lodged or spoke within their bodies,
theywere also named syya(TTptfiv9oi (which name was also attri-
buted to the dzemons). It is in allusion to such possessed persons
Isaias says, as the Septuagint have it, “ If they say unto you, seek
unto those whose speech is in their belly, and that speak out of the
earth, those that utter vain words, that apeak from the stomach,
shall not a nation seek unto their God? why do they inquire con-
cerning the living from the dead?” (Potter’s Antiq., vol. i., 352,
edit. Edin., 1832.)
* Our Lord says, in reference to the expulsion of dzemons, " This
kind goeth not forth but by prayer and fasting.” To this declaration
allusion is here evidently made.
t From this we learn that the application of unguents to the sick,
referred to by the Apostle James, was not a religious, but a purely
medical application.


it is quite correct to say that these are the effects
of disordered humours ; but enthusiasms, and madness,
and possessions, with which when one is seized he is
incapable of making any use of his judgment, his tongue,
his imagination, his senses, it is quite another thing moves
and excites them, and speaks what the person seized is
unconscious of uttering, though occasionally he prophesies
something.” With what propriety [I ask] can these effects
be called the disordered movements of matter ?
Timothy. —How now, Thracian ! do you yourself assent
to what Marcus says ?
Thracian.— Most undoubtedly, Timothy; for how could
I do otherwise, when I recollect what the holy Gospels
relate concerning persons possessed with daemons, and
what befell the man of Corinth at Paul’s command, and
how many wonderful things are related of them by the
Fathers; and moreover saw with my own eyes, and heatd
with my own ears, their doings atElason; for a man in
that place was in the habit of delivering oracles after the
manner of the priests of Phoebus, and, amongst other things,
predicted not a few concerning myself. Having collected
the multitude of the initiated around him, he said—“ I
apprise the present company of the fact that an individual
will be sent against us, by whom the mysteries of our
worship will be persecuted, and the mysteries of our service
abolished; myself and many others shall be apprehended
by that person ; but, though he be very anxious to carry
me off a prisoner to Byzantium, he shall not do it—not
though he make many and vigorous efforts to accomplish
it.” Such predictions he uttered, though I had never
gone as far from the city as to the neighbouring villages.
He described, too, my aspect, deportment, and occupation,
and many who used to pass to and fro told me the facts.
At length, when I did apprehend him, I asked him how he
came to be gifted with the prophetic art ? He, though he
did not wish to divulge the secret, yet, labouring under a
laconic necessity, confessed the truth, for he said that


lie Lad come to the knowledge of demoniacal practices
through a certain vagabond African, who, bringing him
by night to a mountain, cansing him to partake of a certain
herb, spitting into his mouth, and anointing his eyes with
a certain unguent, enabled him to see a host of demons,
from among which he perceived a sort of raven fly towards
him, and down his throat into his stomach. From that
time up to the present moment he could predict, but only
respecting such things, and at such times, as the demon
who possessed him wished; but on Passion week and the
Resurrection day, so much venerated by Christians, not
though he himself should greatly desire it, is
who possessed him disposed to suggest anything. These
things he told me, and, when one of my followers struck
him on the cheek, “ you,” said he, “ for this one blow shall
receive many; and you,” said he, turning to me, “ shall
suffer great calamities in your person, for the daemons are
fearfully incensed against you for subverting their service,
and will involve you in harassing dangers, such as you
cannot by any possibility escape, unless some power supe-
rior to that of daemons extricate you.f These things the
polluted wretch predicted, as if uttering oracles from the
Delphic Tripod; for they all happened, and I have been
♦ This is just in tye oracular style. There was always some proviso
attached to oracular responses, or some ambiguity in them, which
was calculated to save the oracle’s credit. Thus when Croesus
applied to Apollo's oracle at Delphos, to know whether he should
march against Cyrus, he received for answer—
“ Croesus Halym penetrans, magnam pervertet opum vim.”
<f If Creesus cross the river Halys, he shall overturn a great empire.”
The event proved his own overthrow. The same ambiguity attends
the famous reply of the same oracle to Pyrrhus :
“ Aio te iEacida, Romanos vincere possum.”
“ I do pronounce that Rome
Pyrrhus shall overcome.”
Which may be interpreted to mean, either that Rome should over-
come Pyrrhus, or that Pyrrhus should overcome Rome. It is in


almost undone by the numerous dangers which hcset me,
from which my Saviour alone wonderfully rescued me ;
but who that has seen the oracle in which daemons play
upon wind instruments,* will say that madness in all its
forms are but the vitiated movements of matter ?
Timothy. — l am not at all surprised, Thracian, that
physicians are of this way of thinking, for how many can-
not at all understand this sort of thing ? For my part, I
was first of their opinion, until I saw what was absolutely
portentous and monstrous in its character, which, as it is
quite apropos to the present topic, I shall relate. An old
man like me, and who has, besides, assumed the monastic
habit, is incapable of telling a falsehood. I had an elder
brother married to a woman, who was on the whole of a
good disposition, but exceedingly perverse; she was, too,
afflicted with a variety of diseases. She, in her confine-
ment, was very ill, and raved extravagantly, and, tearing
her bedgown, muttered a sort of barbarous tongue, in a
much the same prudential spirit our hero of Elason here adds,
“ unless some power superior to the deemons extricate you.”
• This is a passage on which we confess ourselves utterly unable
to throw any light; we scarcely dare to hazard a conjecture. It
strikes us, however, that a very successful imposture might be played
off by means of iEolian harps. Perhaps it'is to something of that
nature allusion is made. We may observe, by the way, it is a great
mistake to suppose that oracles ceased universally on the coming of
Christ (as what is here mentioned proves). Though daily declining,
they continued long after, as the laws of the Empeiors Theodosius,
Gratian, and Valerian against such as consulted them clearly evince.
It would be more proper to say that wherever the power of Christ
was brought to bear upon them they ceased, and eventually died
out. Their cessation U attested by Strabo, Juvenal, Lucan, and
others. Plutarch accounts for it by saying that the benefits of the
Gods are not eternal, as themselves, or that the genii who presided
over oracles are subject to death ; whilst Athanasius tells the Pagans
they have been witnesses themselves that the sign of the cross puts
the dannons to flight, silences oracles, and dissipates enchantments
which is confirmed by Arnobins, Lactantius, Prudentius, Minutius
Felix, and others. Lucian says that the oracles were chiefly aft aid
of the subtleties of the Epicureans, and the Christians.
D 2


low murmuring tone; nor could the bystanders compre-
hend what she said, but were in a state of perplexity, not
knowing what to do in so desperate a case. Some women,
however (for the sex is very quick in discovering expe-
dients, and particularly clever in meeting exigencies),*
fetched a very old bald-headed man, with bis skin wrinkled
and sun-burnt to a very dark hue, who, standing with his
sword drawn beside the bed, affected to be angry with the
invalid, and upbraided her much in his own tongue; (I
mention that, because he was an Armenian). The woman
replied to him in the same tongue; first she was very
bold, and, leaning on the bed, rated him with great spirit;
but when the foreigner was more liberal with his exorcisms,
and, as if in a passion, threatened to strike her, upon
this the poor creature crouched and shook all over, and,
speaking in a timid tone, fell fast asleep. We were amazed,
not because she was transported with frenzy, for that with
her was an ordinary occurrence, but because she spoke in
the Armenian tongue, though she had never up to that
hour so much as seen an Armenian, and understood nothing
but her connubial and domestic duties. - ) - On her recovery
* This, it most be admitted, is a compliment to the sex. as hand-
some as it is Jost, and, coming from a monk, is particularly gallant.
t How is a fact of the nature lieie recorded to be accounted for
but on preternatural principles 1 We do not mean to contend for
the tenth of the particular fact here recorded, .but doubtless this, if a
supposed case, Was similar to other real cases that might have been
adduced; else Par-llns would not have introduced it in his Dialogue.
Very pertinent to onr present purpose is the following from Calmet’s
Dictionary ' l4 Some efforts that seem to be supernatural may be
effects of heated imagination, of melancholy blood, of tricks and
contrivance; but if a person suddenly should speak and understand
languages he never learned, talk of sublime matters he never studied,
discover things secret and unknown ; should be lift up himself in
the air without visible assistance, art and speak in a manner very
different from his natural temper and condition, and all this without
any inducement from interest, passion, or other natural motive; if
all these circumstances, or the greater part of them, concur in the
same possession, can there be any room to suspect that it is not
real? There have, then, been possessions in which all those circum-
stances concurred ; there have, therefore, been real ones, but espe-


I asked what she had undergone, and if she could recall to
mind anything that had occurred ; she said she saw a sort
of darksome spectre, resembling a woman, with the hair
dishevelled, springing upon her; that in her terror she
had fallen on the bed, and from that time had no recollec-
tion of what had occurred. She spoke thus on her reco-
very. Ever since that event a sort of bond of ambiguity
keeps me perplexed, as to how the daemon which harassed
this woman could seem feminine, for we may well question
whether the distinction of sex prevails amongst the daemons
as amongst the creatures of earth; and, in the next place,
how could it employ the Armenian tongue ? for we can
hardly conceive that some daemons speak in the Greek,
some in the Chaldee, and others in the Persic or Syriac;
and also why it should crouch at the charmer’s threats,
and fear a naked sword ; for how can a daemon, which can
neither be struck nor slain, suffer from a sword ? These
doubts perplex me exceedingly; upon these points I require
persuasion, which I think you the most competent person
to afford, as you are thoroughly acquainted with the sen-
timents of the ancients, and have acquired a great deal of
historical knowledge.
Thracian. —l should wish, Timothy, to render reasons
dally those which the Gospel declares as such.*’ (Calmet’s Diet.,
art. Daemon.) To much the same purpose is the following, from the
Encyclopaedia Britannica:—“ All that Revelation makes known, all
that human reason can conjecture, concerning the existence of various
orders of spiritual beings, good and bad, is perfectly consistent with,
and even favourable to, the doctrine of daemoniacal possession. It
was generally believed throughout the ancient heathen world ; it was
equally well known to the Jews, and equally respected by them ; it
is mentioned in the New Testament in such language, and such
narratives are related concerning it, that the Gospels cannot well be
regarded in any other light than as pieces of imposture, and Jesus
Christ must be considered as a man who dishonestly took advantage
of the weakness and ignorance of his contemporaries, if this doctrine
be nothing but a vulgar error. It teaches nothing inconsistent with
the general conduct of Providence ; it is not the caution of philo-
sophy, but the pride of reason, that suggests objections against this
doctrine.*’ (Ency. Brit , p. 58, edit. Edin., 1823.)
D 3


for the matters in question, but I am afraid we may seem
a pair of triflers, you in searching for what no one has yet
discovered, I in attempting to explain what I ought rather
to pass over in silence, and especially as I know that things
of this kind are made matters of misrepresentation by
many ; but since, according to [King] Antigonus, one
ought to oblige his friend, not merely in what is very easily
performed, but sometimes also where there is something
of difficulty, I will e’en attempt to loose this bond of am-
biguity [you complain of], reconsidering the matter which
gave occasion to Marcus’ discourses. He said that no
species of daemon was naturally either male or female, but
that their animal passions were the same with those of
the creatures with which they were united s for that the
simple daemonic bodies, which are very ductile and flex-
ible, are accommodative to the nature of every form; for,
as one may observe the clouds exhibiting the appearance
one while of men, at another of bears, at another of ser-
pents, or some other animal, thus also it is with the bodies
of daemons ; but when the clouds are disturbed by external
blasts, diversified appearances are presented; thus also it
is with the daemons, whose persons are transformed ac-
cording to their pleasure into whatever appearance they
please, and are one moment contracted into a less bulk,
the next stretched out into a greater length. The same
thing we see exemplified in lubricous animals in the bowels
of the earth, owing to the softness and pliability of their
nature, which are not merely altered in respect of size,
but also in respect of appearance, and that in a variety of
ways ; the body of daemons likewise is accommodative
in both particulars: not only is it peculiarly yielding, and
takes the impression of objects, but, because it is aerial,
it is susceptible of all kinds of hues, as is the atmosphere;
such is the body of daemons, owing to the imaginative
energy inherent in it, and which extends to it the appear-
ance of colours; for, as when we are panic-struck, we first
are pale, and afterwards blush, according as the mind is


variously affected, owing to the soul extending such affec-
tions to the body, we may well suppose it is just the same
way with the daemons, for they from within can send out
to their bodies the semblance of colours ; for which reason
each, when metamorphosed into that appearance which is
agreeable, extending over the surface of his body the
appearance of color, sometimes appears as a man, some-
times is metamorphosed as a woman, and, changing those
forms, it retains neither constantly, for its appearance is
not substantial, but resembles what occurs in the atmo-
sphere, or water, in which you no sooner infuse a color, or
delineate a form, than straitway it dissolves and is dis-
pelled. We may perceive that the daemons are liable to
similar affections, for in them color, and figure, and all
appearance whatever is evanescent. In these things Mar-
cus, as I conjecture, said what was probable; and from
this time forward let not the question harass you, whether
the distinction of sex exists in daemons on account of the
genital members appearing in them, for these, whether
male or female, are not constant nor habitual; therefore
consider that the daemon which so much harassed the
woman in confinement seemed like a woman, not because
it was really and habitually feminine, but because it pre-
sented the appearance of a woman.
Timothy. —But how comes it Thracian, that it does not
assume now one form, and now another, like the other
daemons, but is always seen in this form, for I have heard
from many, that daemons of the female form only are seen
by women in confinement ?
Thracian. —For this too, Marcus assigned a not im-
probable reason, he said that all daemons have not the same
power and inclination, that in this particular there is a
great diversity amongst them, for some are irrational, as
amongst mortal compound animals, now as amongst them,
man, being endowed with intellectual and rational powers,
is gifted with a more discursive imagination, one which
extends to almost all sensible objects, both in heaven, and


around, and on this earth. Horses, oxen, and animals of
that sort, with a more confined sort of imagination, which
extends but to some things, which exercise the imaginative
faculty, [as for instance,] their companions at pasture,
their stall, or their owners; and gnats, with flies and
worms, have this faculty exceedingly restricted, not know-
ing any of them the hole they leave, where they pro-
ceed, or whither they ought to go, but exercising the
imagination for the single purpose of aliment, in the same
manner also the species of daemons are greatly diversified ;
for amongst them, some as the Empyreal and Aerial are
possessed of a very discursive imagination, one that extends
to every imaginable object; very different from them are
the Subterranean and Lucifugi; they do not assume a
variety of forms, for they are incapable of numerous
spectral appearances, not being possessed of pliability and
versatility of person; the Aqueous and Terrene, occupying
an intermediate position with respect to those already
described, are incapable of changing their forms, but in
whatever forms they delight, in these they constantly con-
tinue. But you should not be at all perplexed, if the
daemon that harassed the woman in confinement appeared
feminine, for being a lascivious daemon, and delighting in
impure moistures, changing its form, it naturally assumed
that which is best adapted for a life of pleasure,* but with
respect to the daemon speaking in the Armenian tongue,
that was a point Marcus did not clear up, it will be mani-
fest, however, from the following considerations:—lt is
impossible to ascertain the peculiar tongue of each particu-
lar daemon, whether [for instance,] such a daemon speak in
the Hebrew, or Greek, or Syriac, or other barbarous
tongue; indeed, [I may ask,] what absolute need have
they of a voice, who usually hold intercourse without one ?
[as I already observed,] but as in the case of the angelsf of
* Spoken like a monk.
t This is speaking very particularly on a subject respecting winch
we know little or nothing, “ secret things belong unto God, but the


the nations, different angels being appointed over different
nations,different angels must associate with each other,,
they use each the tongue of their respective nations; we
things that are revealed,” &c. We are not under any necessity for sup-
posing, (hat angelic beings understand each, but a single language,
they may have an intuitive perception of all languages, and hold"
intercourse with each other, in a manner, of which we cannot form
the most remote conception, it is idle to speculate on such a subject.
Most that can be safely affirmed respecting them, may be comprised
within a few words—that they are innumerable —that they are God’s
executive—that they are vastly superior to us in might and intelli-
gence—and are employed doing good offices to the pious. With
respect to the manner and circumstances of their appearance, we
cannot do better than cite what Calmet says on this subject:—“ The
discovery of angels has usually been after they had delivered their
message, and always for the purpose of a sign, in confirmation of the
faith of the party whom they had addressed; it is evident that the
angel who appeared to Manoab, was taken by both Manoah and
his wife for a prophet only, till after be had delivered his message,
he took leave “ wonderfully,” to convince them of his extraordinary
nature; thus the angel that wrestled with Jacob, at last put the
hollow of his thigh out of joint, a token that he was no mere man.
The angel that spoke to Zacharias, rendered him dumb—a token
beyond the power of mere man, (e. gr. an imposter speaking falsely
in the name of God,) to produce: and so of others.” Sometimes
angels did not reveal themselves fully, they gave as it were, obscure
and very indistinct, though powerful intimations of their presence.
When angels were commissioned to appear to certain persons only,
others who were in company with those persons had revelations,
which indicated an extraordinary occurrence; although the appear-
ance was not to them, yet they seemed to have felt the effects of it,
as Dan., x., 7—“ I, Daniel, alone saw the vision; the men that were
with me saw not the vision; hut a great quaking fell upon them, so
that they fed to hide themselves Paul's vision was very similar
in its effects, see Acts ix, 7, xxii, 9, and xxvi, 14, also that seen by
the guards at the sepulchre, on the occasion of ©ur Lord's Resurrec-
tion, Matt., xxviii. Angels being invisibly engaged in the care and
service of mankind, we can have no difficulty in admitting that
they have had orders on particular occasions to make themselves
known as ccelestial intelligences, they may often assume the human
appearance for ought we can tell; but if they assume it completely,
(as must be supposed, and as nothing forbids,) how can we generally
be the wiser, does not the Apostolic exhortation, “ Be not forgetful
to entertain strangers, for thereby some have entertained angels
unawares,” countenance the idea that such an occurrence w not
impossible even now.


may reasonably conclude, that it is the same way with the
daemons, for which reason some of them with the Greeks
delivered oracles in Heroics, but others with the Chaldees
were evoked in Chaldee, whilst among the they
were induced to approach by means of incanta-
tions, in the same manner too, the daemons amongst the
Armenians, if they happen to go elsewhere, prefer to use
their tongue [the Armenians’] as if it were the vulgar
tongue.
vunguc.
Timothy. —Be it so Thracian ; but what suffering are
they capable of, that they fear threats and a sword ? what
are they to he supposed capable of suffering from such,
that they crouch with fear, and keep aloof ?
Thracian. —You are not the only person Timothy, who
has been perplexed on these points ; before I heard your
doubts on them I expressed mine to Marcus, and he to
remove them, observed, the various species of daemons are
bold, and cowardly in the extreme, but especially such as
are allied to matter. The Aerial indeed possessing the
largest share of intelligence, if one rebuke them, can dis-
tinguish the person rebuking, and no one harrassed by
them can be liberated, unless such a holy character as
addicts himself to the worship of God, and relying on the
Divine povier, calls to his aid the terrible name of the
Divine Aoyof. Those that are allied to matter, unques-
tionably fearing a dismissal to abysses and subterranean
places, and the angels who are usually despatched against
them, when one threatens them with these, [the angels,]
and their being conveyed away to such places, and calls
over them, the designation of the angels appointed to this
office, are afraid, and thrown into great perturbation ; so
that from being deranged, they cannot discerff" who it is
that threatens.
Timothy.— But what advantage, did he say, resulted
from the service of the Aerial daemons ?
Thracian.— He did not say, my good friend, that any
good resulted from those proceedings ; indeed the things


themselves proclaim in a barefaced manner that they are
made up of vanity, imposture, and a groundless imagina-
tion, however fiery meteors, such as are usually called
falling stars, descend from them on their worshippers,
which the madmen have the hardihood to call visions of
God, though they have no truth, nor certainty, nor stability
about them, (for what of a luminous character, could
belong to the darkened daemons,) and though they are but
ridiculous tricks of theirs,* such things as are effected by
optical illusions, or by means called miraculous ? but really
by imposing on the spectators; these things t wretched
man discovered long since, and was meditating to abandon
this religion, yet up to the present moment, I was kept
fascinated, and my perdition had been inevitable, had not
you extricated me [from my perilous situation] by the path
of truth, shining forth like a Pharos, placed to dispel the
darkness of the sea, Marcus having spoke thus shed a flood
of tears, and I consoling him said, you can chuse a fitter
time for weeping, now it is seasonable to magnify your
salvation, and return thanks to God, by whom both your
body and soul are emancipated from perdition.
* There seems here an imitation of what took place on the
initiation of an individual, at the Eleusinian Mysteries; we are the
more confirmed in this opinion, from this Monk Marcus being'
designated in a previous part of the work Tt\i(7Ti]Q £7ro7TT//£,
an initiated inspector, the very technical phrase applied to one
initiated in the greater mysteries—a year having elapsed after one
had been initiated in the minor mysteries, (in which state he was
called fiVffTtJQ ) ; on the sacrifice of a sow to Ceres, he was admit-
ted to the greater mysteries, the sacred rites of which some few
excepted, (to which none but the priests were conscious,) were
frankly revealed to him, whence he was called styopog or £7ro7TTt]g,
i, e., Inspector, (Poll., Antiq. r vol., I, 451.) Upon complying with
certain rites, strange and amazing objects presented themselves;
sometimes places they were in seemed to shake around them ;
sometimes appeared bright and resplendent with light, and radiant
fire, and then again covered with blackness and horror, sometimes
thunder and lightning, sometimes frightful voices and belluwings,
sometimes terrible apparitions astounded the trembling spectators;
their being present at such sights, was called avTOipia, i.e. intui^n.


Timothy. —Tell me this, for I long to know it, whether
the bodies of daemons are of such a nature, as to be capable
of being struck ?
Thracian.— Marcus said, that they could be struck, so
as to be pained by a powerful blow inflicted on the person.
But how, said I, can that be, as they are spirit, and not
solid nor compound, for the faculty of sensation belongs to
compound bodies ? lam amazed, said he, you should be
ignorant of the fact, that it is not the bone or nerve of any
is endowed with the faculty of sensation, but the spirit
inherent in them, therefore, whether the nerve be pained
or refreshed, or suffer any other affection, the pain proceeds
from the immission of spirit into spirit, for a compound
body is not capable of being pained by virtue of itself, but
by virtue of its union with spirit, for when dissected or
dead, it is incapable of suffering, because deprived of the
spirit; also a daemon being altogether spirit, and of a sen-
sitive constitution in every part of it, sees and hears, and is
capable of the sense of touch, without the intervention of
organs of sense, it is pained after the manner of solid bodies,
with this difference, however, that whereas when they are
divided, they are with difficulty, or never made whole, this
when divided, straightway unites, like the particles of air
or water, when some solid body displaces them; but
though the spirit unites swifter than speech, yet is it
pained in the very moment of separation; this is the
reason why it fears and dreads the points of iron instru-
ments—and exorcists, well aware of their aversion, when
they do not wish the daemons to approach a specific place,
set darts and swords erect, and provide certain other
things, either • diverting them from that spot by their
antipathies, or alluring them to another by their attach-
ments. In these particulars, Marcus’ explanation respecting
the daemons, in my judgment, seemed probable.
Timothy. —But did he tell you this Thracian ? did he
tell you whether the daemons were gifted with fore-
knowledge ?


Thracian.—Yes, but not a causal or intelligent, nor
experimental foreknowledge, but merely conjectural, for
which reason it most generally fails, so that they scarcely
ever utter a particle of truth.
Timothy.—Can’t you describe to me, the nature of that
foreknowledge, which is inherent in them ?
Thracian. —I would describe it, if time permitted me,
but now ’tis time to return home, for as you see, the air
around is hazy, and charged with rain, and if we sit here
in the open air, we will be wet through-and-through,
Timothy.—Friend, consider what you d», leaving your
discourse unfinished.
Thracian. — Don’t be uneasy, my best friend, for please
God, the first opportunity you and I meet again, I will
make good whatever is wanting, and that in the Syracusan
style. [Literally beyond the decimes of the Syracusans.]




NOTES.
(a) Manes and the Euchitte. —On the overthrow of the credit
ami anthority of the Gnostic sect in the third century. Manes, or'
Manichams, by birth a Persian, started up originally a Magian phi-
losopher. He was instructed in all those arts esteemed in Persia and
the neighbouring nations, and was thoroughly versed in astronomical
science. “ His genius/' says Mosheim, “was vigorous and sublime,
but redundant and ungoverned, and he was presumptuous enough to
attempt to blend the Magian philosophy with the Christian faith/’
Mosheim gives a long statement of his peculiar doctrines, which
fitters in nothing from what is related of them in this work, except
that it supplies many matters which are here omitted. It may
astonish us how he could gain over parti/.ans from the Christian body
to bis fantastic system, (he more especially as lie prescribed the most
self-denial, prohibiting to the higher order of his followers
(the Elect, as he called them) not merely sensual indulgences, but the
most innocent gratifications; he surmounted every difficulty, however,
by announcing himself the promised Paraclete, who was to instruct
and guide them into all truth. By virtue of this his pretended cha*
racier, he pronounced the Old Testament the work of the Prince of
and the four Gospels, he asserted, were corrupted and
interpolated by designing and artful men, and embellished with
Jewish fables and fictions; be therefore supplied their place by a
gospel which, he said, was dictated to him by God himself, and
which he distinguished by the title of Erteng. He rejected the Acts
of the Apostles, and, though he acknowledged the Epistles that are
attributed to St. Paul to be the productions of that divine Apostle,
yet he looked upon them as considerably corrupted and falsified in a
variety of passages.—Euchitae, or Massalian, (the former being the
Greek, the latter the Hebrew, name), signifying praying-men, was
a sort of general epithet for persons distinguished for gravity of
maimer, and was applied in the east with much the same latitude of
•signification as Bcghard and Lollard were afterwards employed in
the west, and Puritan in still more modern times; so that many
truly pious characters, who dared to oppose the mummery and
superstition of the dark ages, were loaded with the opprobrious
“pitliot Euchita*, in common with those who held most revolting


senth»e»*i »>»'! "ho, fioin very different motives, opposed Ihe
exisrmg order of tb'ng*. Mamchfeans were aVO called by <b‘e
deeigiutlo- It was not till toward the close oi the fourth century
made their appearance as a distinct-religious body
(bait oafne being derived from their habit of continual prayer; they
were founded by certain monks of Mesopotamia ; their doctrine;;
according to Moshcim, was as follows “ They imagined that thi
mind of every man was inhabited by an evil daman, whom it wa*
impossible to expel! by any other means than by constant prayer and
slsging of hymns/’ To this leading tenet they added other enorrifous
opinions, evidently derived from the source whence the Manichaeane
derived their errors, viz., the tenets of the oriental philosophy «
(b) Alcinous' narrative . —Ulysses, feasting with Alcinous, king of
the Pheeaciaus, presuming on the monarch’s ignorance, amused him)
self at his expense by giving a fictitious narrative of Ms adventured
amongst the Lotophagi, Lestrigons) and Cyclops. -Hence any lying
narrative, filled with marvellous adventnres,*came to be called Alci-.
nous* narrative, i- e. such a narrative as was delivered for Alcinous*!
amusement by Ulysses. The phrase passed into a proverb, and is
thus used by Plato, de ROpub., lib. x.-
(c) The statement qffacts is their delineation. —The following
is an expression not only of Simonides, but Democritus, Xoyog
(pyov <TKir} y the narrative of a fact is its shadow. •
(ft) The impure pen of Archilochus. —Archilochus was paying his
addresses to the'daughter of one Lycambcs, and was accepted as a
suitor; but a richer candidate for the lady’s han<l presenting him-
self, Arhilochus was dismissed. Upon this Archilochus lampooned
Lycarnbes in lambic and that with snch effect that in a fit of
vexation he committed suicide. Horace, in bis Ars Poetka (v. 79),
In allusion to this circumstance, says—
“ Archilocum proprio rabies arraavit lambo.”
(e) The following is an expression of Solon: y $ att
TToWa f u I become old by constantly learning
much,” and seems to be the proverb alluded to.
I>. L. Welch, Printer, opposite Post-office.
