





PSYCHOLOGY FOR MUSICIANS


Dedicated
to
the innumerable pupils
who have passed through my classes
at the
Royal College of Music
London
in the hope of reconciliation
now that the
tyranny is overpast.


PSYCHOLOGY FOR
MUSICIANS
by
PERCY C. BUCK
M.A., Mus. Doc. Oxon.
Sometime Professor of Music in the Universities
of Dublin and London
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON NEW YORK TORONTO


OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
AMEN HOUSE, E.C.4
LONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW NEW YORK
TORONTO MELBOURNE CAPETOWN BOMBAY
CALCUTTA MADRAS
HUMPHREY MILFORD
PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN
Published April 1944
Reprinted July 1944


CONTENTS
Page
PREFACE Vli
I PROLEGOMENA I
II REACTION 7
111 HABIT 13
IV THE COMMONSENSE OF TECHNIQUE 22
V IDEAS AND ASSOCIATION 34
VI INTEREST 41
VII ATTENTION 47
VIII MEMORY 55
IX APPERCEPTION 62
X EXPLANATION 70
XI APPRECIATION 83
XII WILL 89
XIII THE MEANING OF EDUCATION 94
XIV THE ELEMENTS OF THINKING 99
XV THE MAP OF PSYCHOLOGY 105
XVI BIBLIOGRAPHY 112
INDEX 11 3


BY THE SAME AUTHOR
Published by the O.U.P. ;
Acoustics for Musicians
Unfigured Harmony
The Scope of Music
The Oxford Song Book. Book I
The Oxford Nursery Song Book
Published by Stainer & Bell:
The Organ
The First Year at the Organ
Published by Benn & Son;
A History of Music
Published by Watts id Co.:
Troasm: A Consideration of the
Principles of Religion


PREFACE
THIS book is not, and does not pretend to be, a treatise on Psych-
ology. It is an attempt to help musicians—more especially the
music-teachers amongst them, present and future—to realize that
Psychologists have many suggestions to offer them, both interesting
and important, which can be applied to the Art of Music in all its
branches.
Such an attempt, ideally, should obviously be made by one who is
' both a trained psychologist and a trained musician. But since such an
Admirable Crichton does not seem to exist—or in any case has not so
far ventured on the task—l hope it will not seem over presumptuous
for an amateur psychologist to try to show his fellow-musicians some
of the ways in which his own mind has been swept and garnished by the
effort to grasp, however falteringly, the facts and underlying principles
of Psychology.
It may reasonably be asked why such an attempt should be made at
all, since it would seem from the start bound to be somewhat super-
ficial, and conceivably might result in a mere smattering of knowledge
and technical terms, which in itself might be a danger and a hindrance
to true understanding. The answer is this. Schools which, by accepting
the provisions of the 1918 (Fisher) Act—of which the Burnham
scale of pay for teachers is probably the most familiar feature—become
entitled to be called “approved” schools, must engage teachers who
have been through a Teachers’ Training Course. And it was ordained
that in such a course one of the compulsory subjects must be Psych-
ology. Consequently all of the principal music-schools of the country,
which at once instituted Training Courses, were obliged to find a
lecturer in this subject. At the Royal College of Music it has been my
privilege to give the Psychology lectures from the beginning, and this
book, as many old pupils will recognize, is a compendium of the
various talks to which they have had to listen.
’One personal explanation I should like to make. Originally the
book was written in 1939, being finished at Christmas, when the war
had lasted some three or four months. As the possibility of publication
seemed remote, it was put on one side to await happier times. Owing
to the attentions of the Luftwaffe it was completely destroyed, together
with all my notes, papers, music, and library. That version was alto-
gether more formal and sedate than this one; carefully documented,
and full of references and verified quotations. I have had to rewrite
it entirely “out of my head”, from my memory of the things I have
been talking about for so many years; for I have found it impossible.


even in libraries, to get at the many volumes I wished to consult. And
it seemed best, under such circumstances, to use the kind of language
which comes most naturally to me, rather than to aim at a more literary
style.
These facts will, I hope, mitigate any feelings on the part of real
psychologists that I have treated their subject with less erudition and
dignity than it deserves.
My very real gratitude is due to Professor Cyril Burt, who was
good enough to read my manuscript and to make numerous suggestions.
I have taken advantage of so many of these, that, if there is any value
in the book, much of it must be credited to him. But if the trained
psychologist finds, here and there, cause to raise his eyebrows, I beg
him to attribute the lapse entirely to me, since in a few cases—an
instance is the avoidance of such a word as “Kinaesthetic”, which
would have simplified many purely psychological points—l have
been stubborn enough to adhere to my belief that of all the dangerous
forms of knowledge that of “blessed words” is the most insidious.
P. C. B.
London: January, 1943


CHAPTER ONE
PROLEGOMENA
THE Sciences, whatever their particular subject matter may be,
invariably follow one simple method of development. Each of
them begins with the collection of facts, and proceeds to classify such
facts until some principle emerges from them which can be treated as a
working-hypothesis; and the more often we find that this hypothesis
proves to be true, the nearer we are to the discovery of a law.
Psychology developed, as it was bound to do, along these lines, and
began by noticing quite ordinary things and striving to piece them
together; so that in this state it might be roughly defined as Organized
Commonsense about Human Nature.
The critical word in the above definition is “organized”. And it
is worth while to consider how even the ordinary things in life owe
far more to organization than we think. If we had not, as children,
been taught our alphabet with the letters invariably in the same
order, we should probably never have mastered it at all. If, in
learning the multiplication-table, we had learnt isolated facts—
on one day that 3 x 3 =9, and next day that 7xß = 56 —we
should never have arranged our bits of information into a system.
Any child will soon learn how to look out a word in a dictionary,
and later on a train in a timetable, because it comprehends the plan;
and the reason that most of us Londoners prefer an A.B.C. to a
Bradshaw is that we have mastered the somewhat elementary basis
of the one, but have been too lazy to master the system of the other.
Thus we arrive at an important discovery of Psychology—one of
momentous value to teachers of any subject—that you can count
on your pupils doing far better, if you provide them with some
kind of scheme or logical connection in the facts they assimilate. The
mind that is willing to set to work without a plan of some sort is not
intelligent. Ask a boy to mow the tennis-court; he will, before begin-
ning, decide to run the machine either across or lengthwise in parallel
lines. Were he to start from just anywhere and zig-zag haphazardly
in any chance direction, you would have very serious doubts as to
whether his intelligence was normal.
A little thought will show us how all advances come from the dis-
covery of some underlying principle. For instance, primitive nomad
tribes wander about, happen on a tract where there is food growing,
eat the place bare, and wander off to find another. Then someone dis-
covers that corn grows from seed; so they eat the best and plant the


remainder, determining to make a return visit. Later, by another
brainwave, they discover that by planting the seed from the best corn
they will improve the future crop they are counting on; and so the
quality of food and the standard of living gradually improve.
Music-teachers should learn from this that even the elements
of music ought, from the very beginning, to be based on some
principle. In the matter of key-signatures, for instance, I have
found numberless students, often quite advanced instrumentally,
who had no idea that the last sharp in a key-signature is always, in
major keys, the leading note. And quite lately I “supervized” a
class of children being taught by such a student. As she told me
that she was teaching signatures I asked a child what major key had
four sharps: “We’ve only learnt one sharp G, two sharps D, one
flat F, two flats Bjj, so we don’t know.” Surely if there are seven
different major keys with sharps it must be easier to teach one rule
than to memorize seven isolated facts?
The time arrived when Psychology became too big and broad a
subject to be treated as mere organized common-sense. The experi-
mental and quantitative methods used in other sciences were then in-
troduced into Psychology, so that it became a laboratory science, like
physiology or chemistry. The reason for the change, both in nomen-
clature and method is due to the discovery by psychologists—possibly
owing to the teaching of Locke—that, when you teach a pupil, the
thing you are really teaching, and must make contact with, is the pupil’s
mind. Accepting this discovery it became imperative to inquire into
what Mind is and how it works; and perhaps the simplest definition of
Psychology is that which calls it the Science of the Mind. Every musician,
whether performer, teacher, or composer, has to make his appeal to
the minds of his fellow-creatures; so he may reasonably expect to make
that appeal more effective if he has studied the apparatus with which
he has to make contact.
Let us first try to determine what the mind is, and its field of action.
Suppose your car is at your front door, and you are going to drive some-
where in it. You take your seat, turn on the petrol, start the engine,
and go through all the necessary drill. At the right moment the engine
connects with the car and you are moving. You can go on, stop, turn
right or left at your pleasure.
Now I want you to notice just one fact; that the car is a machine,
whilst you are a mind. The car did everything solely because your
mind made it act in that way. No sane human being has ever imagined,
nor ever will, that there can, in some distant future, arrive a day when a


triumphant mechanician will invent a car which can start itself, run
down the street, and turn right or left of its own accord. The directing
mind must always be there, separate and disparate from the mechanism.
In a human being, however, the miracle has happened. If we
imagine, without any gruesome details, a body that has not yet come to
life lying on a couch. It is just a machine, like the car, waiting to be put
into action. You started the engine of your car, and it at once became
alive and full of potentialities; and if you could start the heart-beating
of the body on the couch it too would then be alive. But at some later
moment the body, unlike the car, will take direction of its own move-
ments, will lift an arm, or will perform some act of its own accord. 11
has become “aware”, it is conscious, it has performed the miracle of
fusing the machine and the directing mind into one; and a mechanism
has become a personality.
We may call this directing mind the Ego , and the machine—which,
being directed, is naturally in the accusative case—the Me. In this
sense the motor-car consists of nothing but Me; it has no Ego, and
never will have one, so the missing element has to be supplied in the
form of a driver, separate and apart. The human being is Ego and Me
fused into one by Consciousness.
Any student specializing in Psychology would be expected at this
point to read widely and to think deeply in order to be clear-headed on
the meaning and implications of this word. And such reading and
thinking—even if not very wide or deep—would be good for, and I
believe interesting to, all of you. You would find, for instance, that
when we are stunned our consciousness ceases; but that when we go to
sleep it seems to be quietly in abeyance, still acting, though out of our
control. It is a common experience for one to go to sleep worrying
over some problem, and to wake up to find the problem has, as we say,
“solved itself”; our mind has been working, as it were, “on its own”.
The phrase Subconscious Mind has been invented to account for
such workings as the above; and it is worth calling your attention to
such a phenomenon, as you will find very soon that one of the really
important facts w'hich Psychology has to teach you and me is that we
shall do our job better—especially the physical part of it—if we trust
the machine to do it without the supervision of the mind. All of us,
at some awkward moment in our lives, have been quite unable to recall
the name of the person to whom we are talking. At last we give it up
in despair and go about our business; and straightway the name comes
to mind—when we are not thinking of it at all.
For non-specialists it is sufficient to know that when the body on
the couch became “aware” and self-acting it had been provided with a


Mind\ recognizing that to the Psychologist the word mind does not
cover processes of a single type. Nearly every mental process includes
three distinguishable functions; Thinking, Willing , and Feeling.
Nowadays Psychologists have still further extended the field of
their study, and find that the last definition—the Science of the Mind
—is a little cramping. So you will find modern Psychology has to allow
for an enlarged scope. Earlier psychologists treated the processes of
the mind as though they were always conscious processes—often, in-
deed, as though they were exclusively intellectual processes. It is
essential, therefore, to realize that feeling and willing are quite as im-
portant as perceiving and thinking, and that many of the mind’s motives
may be wholly unconscious. Such a range must clearly include many
things which, however absorbingly interesting they may be to psych-
ologists or in themselves, can add little or nothing to the equipment of a
musician. It would be interesting to know why, when you are singing
or playing at your best, your dog j ust sits and howls; but the knowledge
might conceivably lead to your trying to perform so as to please him, and
so the problem may well be left alone.
There are two purely psychological points which are worth noticing
before we go on.
(a) Ask any friend what he means by the word “experience”,
and you will usually get the answer “Something that happens to
one”. It will be more scientific, and so more true, if you accept the
word as meaning, not the event, but your reaction to an event.
If you were to overhear someone discussing your character you
might feel pleased, or possibly annoyed; i.e. pleasure or annoyance
would be,your reaction. If you did not quite catch the remarks, your
reaction would be curiosity as to what was really said; if you were
deaf and heard nothing, then there would be no reaction. Yet in
all three cases the event—i.e. the whole occurrence outside yourself
—was identical, though you had in each case a different experience.
We all start our lives with an inherited disposition: a tendency to
react in a certain way; and every experience we undergo adds itself
to our accumulating knowledge of how to meet—i.e. to react to —
a situation, how to control and conduct ourselves, and how to piece
together our experiences into an understanding of life. And all the
time we are modifying our native dispositions.
(b) In our very early days, when we are acquiring new data at
every moment of our lives, we acquire knowledge almost entirely
through the evidence of our senses; and this fact is epitomized by
saying that children are Objective. It is certainly true that children
(a word which means unsophisticated folk of any age} are struck


by the superficial things. It is the plot and the incidents—especially
the accidents—in the story; the brilliant colour or the “anecdote”
in the picture: the tune and rhythm of the piece of music, or the
brass band playing it: these are the things that arrest and hold the
young. And the process of education is very largely a growth and
development away from the purely objective stage, and towards the
stage when the mind can apprehend the meaning and purpose that
lies behind the outward and visible sign. That means, towards the
Subjective , or Interpretative.
In the Arts this is specially true. The ingredients of a popular
tune —its rhythm, shape, sequences, etc.—are generally so obvious
as to be almost primitive, and the popular picture is the one that
tells a story (like “The Doctor”) or recalls (like “Derby Day”)
some event which everyone can take in. It is right and natural that
this should be so, and it would be unpsychological to lament it; all
that is asked of you is to be indignant that, as far as music is con-
cerned, so many millions should make no progress in discrimination
and never discover that music has any meaning at all. For as we
grow up and develope in taste we discover that the plot, the colour,
and the tune, important though they still are, are infinitely less
absorbing to us, because we have also discovered that behind words
and notes and colours there can be a meaning and a motive which
in our early stages we never divined. In every piece of music we
hear, you and I search for this hidden treasure, knowing that it is
the one thing that really matters since it is the one thing which will
touch our hearts. And, in the prosaic language of Science, that means
that we have passed at all events some milestones on the road from the
Objective to the Subjective.
If, as I hope,you havegrasped the broad meaning of those twowords,
one short warning will possibly save you from being somewhat mysti-
fied by their use. At first they seem to be synonymous with concrete
and abstract; and we then think of them only in connection with the
sense of touch. A table is objective because we know it to be “solid”.
But you must accustom yourselves to think of the words as applicable
also to the other senses. The full-score of the Choral Symphony is
objective because you can put it on the scales and weigh it; and what
you are weighing would be equally objective if it happened to be any
other symphony. But the Choral Symphony itself, apart from any
copy of it, is also objective because it is in itself a real and recognizable
entity, and would continue to be the Choral Symphony if every copy
in the world were lost or destroyed.
The last paragraph dealt with a point which is at bottom a philoso-
phical rather than a psychological question: i.e. the meaning of the


word “real”. For musicians it will be sufficient to realize that we
develop from children, who judge by the easy recognition of melody
and rhythm, into more sophisticated beings who look for the feeling
embodied in the form; from the tune to which our itching feet insist
on beating time, to the hidden meaning behind the quiet phrase which
once may have seemed so pointless and unexciting. And one of the
greatest contributions that Psychology makes to Civilization—which
means the education of man in the mass—is by pointing out that all
education, in any subject, must aim at grasping the inner meaning in-
stead of confining our attention to the outward appearance. The fact
that England produced Shakespeare and Milton does not mean that
we are a literary nation; the test of that is the number of us who appre-
ciate the works of those poets. So when you hear a discussion—as
inevitably you will, sooner or later—as to whether England is a musical
nation—remind the participants that the question is not to be settled
by the number and quality of the composers we produce, nor by the
percentage of people who “like music”, but by the kind of music these
people like.


CHAPTER TWO
REACTION
IN learning any new subject, of any kind, you will always find
that there are certain new words, or old words with new uses, with
which you must sooner or later become familiar. You cannot discuss
cricket with a man who refuses to learn the meaning of or
“coverpoint”, nor football or hockey if he does not understand “off-
side”. One such a word, in Psychology, is Reaction. The word was
purposely used in Chapter one, in its usual primary sense; but it will be
wise to go a little deeper into its meaning before leaving it.
When a man of Science wishes to examine anything at all minutely,
his first endeavour will be to get his material into some logical order or
arrangement. In the case of an “event”—i.e. anything that happens—
the order will necessarily be chronological. How did the various
episodes occur, in order of time, and by what nomenclature shall we
group them ?
The psychologist has devised four classes which will help you to
analyse, or to describe, any happening in your life.
I. Stimulus
2. Sensation
3. Perception
4. Concept
Technical terms such as these, grouped in a style reminiscent of the
duller kind of school book, are admittedly a little forbidding; but this
particular quartet does serve as an excellent introduction to Psychology
—especially to a musician—because it does exactly describe what
happens in all circumstances, from the most trivial to the most com-
plicated.
Consider an example. You sit writing a letter, and a knock on
the door is heard. What has happened?
(1) Something (in this case air-vibrations caused by the knock
on the door) has set your aural nerve working; it has been stimulated
into action, so the air-vibrations are the Stimulus.
(2) Your nervous-system is so constituted that when a nerve is
agitated into action it carries its message to your brain, and “re-
gisters” there. Y our body is, from the purely physical point of view,
a receiving-apparatus, or sensitive plate, for recording the effects
B


made on your external nerve-endings by outside stimuli. Conse
quently you are said to have received a sense-impression which,
conveyed to the brain, is in this case immediately recognized as
the sensation of sound. You will readily see that the most obvious
information you receive about the outside world takes the form of
sensation: one of your five 1 senses must be the channel through
which the stimulus reaches the brain. If you were to lose the use
of all of them, then nothing in the outside world could get into
contact with you. You might still be thinking, but your thought
would necessarily be confined to things apprehended in previous
sensations. In this instance of the door-knocking, for example, if
you happened to be deaf your brain would register no sensation,
although the stimulus would be the same, whether you are deaf or
not. (So, with all your senses, so far as your mind does not interpret
the stimuli, what you perceive may be called a simple Sensation.)
(3) You have now the one concrete fact of sound (registered)
in your brain, pinned down like a specimen on a piece of cork; and
at this moment the higher levels of your mind come into the arena.
The mind’s first job is to discover what the specimen is, for there are
a thousand different noises that might have set your nerve working.
From previous experiences you have no difficulty in deciding, or
perceiving, what caused that particular noise, and you are said to
have a Percept of it. Had the sound which suddenly arrested your
attention been a siren, you would have had a different percept though
one of the same nature; for you would recognize that the stimulus
had not been the same.
(4) At this point the mind, having satisfied itself as to the origin
and nature of the sound, begins to cogitate about it; were you expect-
ing anyone, was it a runaway boy, or possibly the postman? In
fact, you begin at once to form conceptions of “what you are going
to do about it”. There are psychologists who treat these plannings
of the mind as Concepts. But it will be safer for you and me to use
the word in its more restricted sense of general or abstract idea as
opposed to a special example. If you look at a coin you have a Per-
cept of it: if you think of your balance (or overdraft) at the bank
you have a Concept. If you only know one Sonata in the world, that
constitutes your Percept of a Sonata: but if you have even a nodding
acquaintance with twenty sonatas you have in your mind an idea
of the Greatest Common Measure of them all, and that is your
Concept of a Sonata.
I The psychologist recognizes more than five senses: but the popular
classification will suffice here.


It is always difficult at first to grasp the exact connotation of a tech-
nical term —think how long it took you all to discover exactly what is
meant by the word “Binary”. And in Psychology, as in Music, there
are words in the use of which experts are sometimes at variance. The
difficulty often arises from our being overapt to think of things as dis-
tributable into watertight compartments, whereas in fact classes of
things are liable, like the colours of the rainbow, to overlap and run
into one another. Where the overlapping occurs is not of supreme im-
portance to us musicians, but it is always important for teachers to try
to fix the point at which different minds diverge. Supposing you were to
enter a classroom in any school and unexpectedly play the chord DFB fr.
To all present the stimulus is identical; all record the same sensations;
their percepts are the same, though varying in clearness of definition—
they all, for instance, hear three notes, though most of them could not
tell you the number. But their concepts will vary enormously. I have
tried the experiment, and can tell you some of the answers when the
listeners were asked what was passing through their minds:
(a) It’s a major chord (fairly often)
(b) It’s a first inversion (now and then)
(c) It’s a common chord (occasionally)
(d) The top note is B flat (rarely)
(e) It’s not in tune (perhaps their ears were sharper than mine)
(f) It’s the first chord of “God Save the King” (quite frequently)
The sense-organs, then, are in communication with the sensory
areas in the Brain; the Brain receives the sensory impulses; and the
brain-areas subserving intellectual functions then, as it were, co-
ordinate and examine the data supplied.
But there is another factor; one of special importance to musicians.
At what point does the question of Feeling arise? Most people have, at
some time, seen a performance by a white-robed dancer on to whom
the limelight man has thrown a variety of colours. The “event” to
use that philosophical term again, proceeded quite independently of
the tints imposed on it, and would have been exactly the same if the
varied hues had been omitted; but a new interest and appeal arose, super-
added to our enjoyment, due entirely to the colour-scheme. So every
human experience is accompanied by a “feeling-tone”, which is the
result of our reaction to the experience; and a simple example will
illustrate it.
Suppose you are sitting peacefully in an armchair, and sounds
strike your ear. You have experienced the sensation of sound, and


you perceive that it is someone singing in the flat upstairs. If that is
always happening you may have learnt how to ignore it; or if you
are absorbed in the thing you are doing you may have little difficulty
in inhibiting attention to it. In both cases the psychological process
is nipped in the bud. But if the singing succeeds in forcing itself on
your attention, then innumerable results may ensue. It may be a
favourite song beautifully sung: your mind forms concepts about it
and you feel pleasure. Or it may happen that your critical faculty—
which is one form of the application of concepts to percepts —tells
you it is bad music, or full of mistakes, or out of tune; and your
feelings will follow your verdict. Always you will find—save in
the one imaginary case where your reaction attains the absolute
zero of complete indifference—that you either like or dislike a
thing to some extent, however small. The psychologist calls these
feelings “pleasure” and “pain”, and though such words sound rather
portentous when applied to cases near the indifference line, yet they
are useful terms. If you are not clean you must be dirty, to however
small a degree. In the room where I am writing these words there
is a clock which ticks loudly enough to be audible, and I wish it
wouldn’t. It would never occur to me to say, in mentioning the fact,
that my experience was painful; but my feeling about it does come,
psychologically, into the category of pain, simply because I would,
if I could, stop it.
It is not necessary, at this point, that the musician should know
more than the bare outline of the physical process by which sensory
impulses (i.e. the nerve-impulses from the sense-organs) reach the
brain; though later on, in considering instrumental technique, the
matter will come up again. But there is one fact which ought to be
noticed. When a friend speaks to you on the telephone the vibrations
of his voice are conveyed to your ear along a wire; and your voice travels
back to him along the same wire. If, for the moment, you look on your
senses as five friends—which they are—telling you about something
that has happened, their messages came to you along wires; but your
messages back have another set of wires to carry them. These body-
wires are called Nerves , and they are real material things—like thin
silken threads, forming a network of communication all over your body.
The nerves from the surface of the body to the brain are technically
called Afferent or Sensory nerves; those which, when you have decided
what steps to take, carry back a message to your muscles are the Efferent
or Motor nerves.
If you get out of bed and step on a tintack your touch-sense im-
mediately telephones a message along its afferent nerve to your brain
which is decoded by your perception into “Right foot big toe on


tmtack”. If reflex action, or instinct, or previous experience has
not already led to a kind of automatic withdrawal on your part then
you consider the case (for however short a moment) and send a
message along an efferent nerve to your foot-muscles to remove your
toe, and probably another message to your eye, along another effer-
ent nerve, telling it to have a look and see if any serious damage has
been done.
It is always the desire of people who analyse things to group them
into classes; and it is a useful method of co-ordinating knowledge, so
long as it is realized that such classes, with their divisions and sub-
divisions, are seldom really watertight compartments. So, in dealing
with Reaction, psychologists have agreed that it can best be dealt with
under three headings :
(1) Reflex Action. This class includes all those purely bodily move-
ments which are performed by the “machine” and are normally outside
the control of the mind. If a speck of dust touches your eyelashes then
you will blink your eye; which is nature’s mechanical method of saving
your eye from getting things into it. That is a reflex action. It is
possible in some cases—in this one, for instance—to inhibit the action
by will-power, if you know beforehand when the test is going to be
made. You might, for example, allow me to touch your eyelashes and
send an order to your eyelid (along an efferent nerve) at all costs not to
blink. But if, taking you unawares, I do it again five seconds later, the
reflex will work for a certainty. Such actions, you will readily see, are
essentially physiological, and are only tabulated by psychologists to
make their classification of reactions complete. They are Native Re-
actions of the most primitive form.
(2) Instinctive Reaction. This is Native Reaction of a somewhat
more sophisticated kind since it is, in however rudimentary a way,
purposive. From the moment of our birth, whether we are human
beings, or kittens, or tigers, we have to face a hundred incidents every
day of our lives to which we are forced to react. How we will react
in any given situation, before we have had the benefit of any training or
advice, depends on our disposition; which is the sum total of all the
qualities we happen to have inherited, through no virtue or vice of
our own, from a long line of ancestors. In recent years biologists have
discovered many very interesting things about heredity; but I do not
think any one of them would risk a wager on what kind of disposition
will appear in the child of any two parents, either in human beings or
animals. In the same litter of puppies you will find one that has in


herited its mother’s calm tractability, another its father’s pugilistic
ferocity. Any one of you may have inherited a maternal grandmother’s
unselfishness and a paternal grandfather’s skill in games; whilst your
brother may have had the bad luck to inherit a paternal grandmother’s
conceit and a maternal grandfather’s addiction to drink. We enter the
cradle as a mixture of inherited tendencies for which we ate not in the
least responsible, and all our reactions will be in accordance with them
unless in later life we learn to modify them through training and educa-
tion.
(3) Acquired Reaction. The last paragraph may seem, at first sight,
to paint a rather grim and gloomy picture of human nature; and not
many years ago it would assuredly have been denounced as material-
istic, pessimistic, and even irreligious. Nowadays it is so universally
accepted as a starting-point for the study of ourselves that it might
almost be called the first axiom of any thinker who wishes to look facts
in the face. Nor need those facts in themselves alarm anyone, for they
imply but one thing: that the whole of our training and education is in
reality but one prolonged endeavour to substitute acquired reactions
for native ones. It is the simplest of identities; being educated =acquir-
ing reactions which are not native to us. If you were to make a list of
all the things you had done in any one day of your life you would be
astonished at the overwhelming proportion of them which you would
never have done, or would have done quite differently, but for your
upbringing. Why did you wash yourself, or do your hair? Why did
you refrain from sniffling? Why did you greet anyone with a smiling
“good morning”,or write a letter to a sick friend,'or sayplease whenyou
asked for the salt, or go and practise your scales? You would have done
none of these things if you had been left severely alone when young,
and no one had ever taught you the elements of living.
To you as teachers this matter is more important than at first it
appears. We are all of us apt to look on a naturally happy and obedient
child as “virtuous”, and on a quick and clever pupil as “gifted”, and to
feel aggrieved if we have to teach a slow or difficult child. But wise
teachers know that to have the latter kind of pupil is a piece of luck.
It is a challenge to them which they should accept gladly. The great
minds of the world have not always been more brilliant as children than
their companions, and some other teacher exists who would succeed
with any pupil you are likely to have. And the challenge to you, that
you should see if you can substitute acquired reactions for native ones,
is a compliment paid you by Fortune, and you should accept it with
both hands.


CHAPTER THREE
HABIT
HABIT and Reaction are closely connected. If you feel certain
that a man will behave in a certain way, you say it is his habit.
In Chapter Two Reaction in its simplest form was discussed; and
before talking about Habit it will clear the ground if we do a little ex-
ploring where the two overlap.
Every native reaction follows out a certain chronological course
before it is complete. It goes through three stages, called
(i) Cognition
(2) Affect
(3) Conation
These three technical terms should be easy to grasp when it is seen
that they refer to the three functions of Mind—Thinking, Feeling,
and Willing.
(1 ) Cognition means being aware—generally of a stimulus or sensa-
tion. Something has come into contact with one of your five senses,
your brain has registered a sensation, and your mind realizes that you
have been touched, or spoken to, or whatever it may be.
(2) Affect (with the accent on the first syllable) means that the
experience affects (accent on the second) you in some way: i.e. you
either like it or dislike it, to however small an extent.
(3) Conation is your tendency to act with a purpose (as the result
of your feeling). The cat has cognition of fish, through her eyes or
nose; her affect is so much on the pleasurable side that she sets to work
to get at it. You may have cognition of a draught, dislike it, and con-
sider shutting the window—though if it is not a very bad draught, and
you are in a very comfortable armchair, the affect may not be strong
enough to overcome your laziness, and there will be no conation.
F rom the above little piece of “bookwork” there emerges one of the
fundamental maxims of Psychology: that every reaction is preceded
by feeling, and, conversely, that all feeling leads to action. 1 Psycholo-
gists, since they want to use words which (being derived from Latin
and Greek) will be understood all over the world, are often obliged to
avoid “plain English”; and they express this maxim by saying that
1 The “special case” of Instinct will be referred to later on.


there can be no Impression without Expression, or that every Cogni-
tion has its Motor Consequences.
At this point a word should be said about a term frequently used
in Psychology— lnhibition. To the plain “common-sense” man it
might reasonably seem that if you “stop” something from happening
then there is no positive action, because no visible movement has
occurred. If you think of two tug-of-war teams so evenly matched
that there is equilibrium between them, the contestants will not
agree that they are doing nothing, since they are straining every
muscle to inhibit the other side from attaining its ends. That is a
physical example; and for a psychical one consider the amount of
energy you have (doubtless) sometimes had to expend in the mere
effort to keep your temper. So that in the statement that all feeling
leads to action we include the fact that such action may take the
form of Inhibition.
Psychologically the terms “Habit” and “Acquired Reaction” are
practically synonymous;for every acquired reaction, once it really is
acquired, has become a habit, and the only habits which are not “ac-
quired” are those which are reflex or native. Since, therefore, all
training aims at the establishing of acquired reactions—or, as we may
now call them, habits—let us see what Psychologists have to tell us
about them.
The first point is this: that you have no right to call any process a
habit until it has become automatic. You and I were once taught our
alphabet, and frequently, at first, made mistakes in repeating it; but
there came a time when we could be absolutely certain about it, when
we knew that, once started, our tongues would do the rest. At that
moment the habit was born. When we were first taught to play the
scale of C major we had to think carefully, and often unsuccessfully,
as to where the thumb came; you do not have to think about it now, I
hope, because the process is automatic. Your arithmetical tables, vour
history dates, all the data with which education begins, are acquired-
in the same manner; by thinking, until ultimately you can do it by
rote, as it were, without thinking. And you must note specially that
in the early stages the thinking is always essential: a baby teaching itself
to walk is using its brain as much as a mathematician solving a probl em,
but, once acquired, the art of walking needs no thinking. All of us, in
our early days, had to be told to put our hand over a yawn, or not to
sniffle; by now, doing the one and inhibiting the other has become
second nature. And it is curious and interesting to note how such
conventions are accompanied by an awareness, unformulated and


almost unconscious, that they exist for the benefit of other people;
for few of us, I imagine, “cover” a yawn in the privacy of our own bed-
rooms—though even then the knowledge that a yawn is coming prob-
ably gives an incipient start to our arm-muscles in the habitual direction.
And in the same sheltered spot I am sure most of you sniffle, when you
feel like it, quite unashamedly.
There is one danger, in the matter of habit, which is worth
mentioning. When two habitual paths of action begin in the same
way but diverge at some point later on, there is always a risk that we
may follow the wrong track at the junction. For instance, “going
to bed” and “dressing for dinner” do, for a time, involve the same
actions; and a friend of mine had to endure much leg-pulling through
taking the wrong track “over the points”. One winter’s evening
he went to his bedroom to “dress” for a banquet at which he had to
make a speech. The curtains were drawn, so he turned on the lights
and began to undress, his mind being occupied with his oration.
After a time his wife, fearing he would be late, went up to see if she
could help, and found him comfortably in bed, going to sleep.
Many pianists have told me of a musical instance of the same error
—a calamity which some of you may have experienced, as I have
myself. It frequently happens that some section of a piece of music—
especially old music—has to be repeated, and that the composer
has provided one ending for the first occasion and another for the
second. The nightmare comes when you find that, reaching the end
for the second time you miss the cue and have perforce to go back
again to be beginning—with the prospect of an eternal merry-go-
round from which there is no deliverance.
A very elementary sketch of the nervous-system has already been
given. No music-student need pry too deeply into purely physiological
processes, but he must now be told a little more as to the function of
the nerves in the formation of habits.
In reading the history of some great store, such as Whiteley’s,
Harrod’s, Maple’s, or any other, we generally find that the founder
began in quite a small way —probably with one shop. When he has
mastered the management of this—let us say a tobacconist’s business—
he trains a manager to carry out his wishes, whilst he himself starts
another—say a grocery—next door. In time a manager takes over,
while a third business is born, and so on, until there is a complete
Universal Stores.
Now the human mind works very much on the same plan. By con-
centration on one job it controls the muscles (through the nerves)
until the “automatic” moment arrives when there is no further need


for mind-control. There still is control, but the mind has delegated
it to a nerve-centre —Mr. Whiteley’s manager—and the mind is now
free to attend to other things. When you were learning to ride a
bicycle you had to concentrate all your thinking powers on the business;
in all your school-days you probably never focused your mind on any-
thing so intensely. But when at last you could say “Now I can ride”,
the control of your muscles had been handed over to a nerve-centre,
and your mind was free; you could take out and light a cigarette,
salute a passing friend, or hold conversation with a companion rider.
The Psychologist would say that after nerve-currents have been re-
peatedly sent down the same path to the requisite muscles, those paths
become deepened into well-worn channels, and the nerve currents
now flow along them automatically, without any need for attentive
consciousness.
It is possible for students to understand, and even to be interested in,
such information about their bodies, and yet to miss the application of
the knowledge to their own specialized work. So here are some of
the implications of the above which, as musicians, you should consider.
(1) When an action has become automatic, and has thus earned the
title of Habit, the muscles have, as it were, fallen into a rut; they have
memorized a method and sequence of action, and will always act in
that one way and no other. Think of some little difficult passage which
you have thoroughly mastered on your own instrument. You can now
play it with ease and certainty, as you have learnt to do it. But if you
were asked to play it suddenly with a different fingering, there will
almost certainly be a catastrophe.
A letter long carried in the pocket acquires such creases that at last
it refuses to fold any other way; and it is a good thing to think of habits
as having formed a kind of “rut” into which the cartwheels must find
a way if things are to work smoothly. French psychologists actually
use the word canalization to describe the process, and the analogy is
one which is easy to follow.
(2) You should now understand exactly what psychologists mean
when they say “Do things carelessly”. If misunderstood the maxim
is clearly dangerous. But it is really a terse and striking way of remind-
ing you that the final end of all practice is the moment when you can
do the thing without thinking; when, that is, you can rely on your
nerve-centres and muscles fulfilling their task, whilst your mind is care-
free. When, however, you have not yet reached the automatic stage —
when Mr. Whiteley still has to supervise—the supreme consideration


is the absence of carelessness. Any practice done without conscientious
carefulness is a psychological sin; and if it is only just filling in ten
minutes of spare time those ten minutes may well cost you ten hours of
expiation. It is safe to say that careless practice, with a large number of
students, retards their progress to such an extent that hard work can
scarcely do more than catch up with it. When you have pupils you will
discover the bitter truth that redeeming a fault is far more laborious
than instilling a virtue.
(3) You know, and Mr. Whiteley knew, that when a job is once
delegated to someone chosen for his competence, nothing but harm
can result from your hovering round, putting in a word of advice, and
generally killing your agent’s interest, independence, and sense of
responsibility. So when you can once do a thing automatically, do not
allow your mind to interfere; you will do better without it. I remember
many years ago—before the days of electric railways—being one of a
group of schoolboys who made up a prize (by paying a penny apiece)
which was to be won by the boy who could walk farthest along a railway-
line. Some only managed four or five steps, some a few more; but one
boy negotiated fifty, then turned round and came back. We all crowded
round to learn the secret of the miracle. He told us (although I am sure
he had never heard the word Psychology) that one day, when he was
no better at it than we had proved ourselves to be, he discovered that
it was easy to do if you thought of something else; so while he was per-
forming in this competition he had repeated to himself the “thirteen-
times-table”. We all found, on experimenting, that this was true, and
immediately set off in search of uninitiated innocents to provide a
purse for us.
We often think that our muscles cannot overcome some difficulty,
whereas they can do it with ease, if we let them. For instance, ask
any pianist if they can play “two against three” in one hand: “two”
with thumb and first finger
then with the three free fingers add


I have often found really good pianists “give it up”, yet it is only the
mind which finds it formidable. Just place your hand on the table
and imagine you are playing this bar—
—and your muscles have done what was asked of them perfectly
and without any difficulty whatever.
(4) Many of you have probably regretted, at some time, that you
were “nervous”, and it may help you to know something about the
why and wherefore. In the first place, do not regret it too much, for
nervousness is largely an index of sensitiveness, and without sensitive-
ness you will never be an artist at all. All fine performers are nervous,
though they differ in their control of it. When you are completely at
your ease you do a thing, as has been insisted on, automatically, through
your nerves having control of your muscles. As soon as you are influ-
enced emotionally your nervous control is affected, and your muscles
do not work quite normally. Go into the Albert Hall when it is empty
and walk across the platform, and your gait will be perfectly normal.
But if, just before starting, you had been told there was a large and
critical audience waiting to see you walk across and to criticize you,
it is quite certain your feelings would be affected and your gait in some
way abnormal. You might be amused, or alarmed, or self-conscious,
any of which states would mean that your nerve centres, or the co-
ordinating centres in your brain, were not able to function quite as auto-
matically as usual in the management of your muscles. If they were
seriously affected they would behave as Mr. Whiteley’s manager would,
in an unexpected crisis: they would send for the Director. So your
nerve-centres in such a crisis need your conscious attention—i.e.
brain and will-power to come back into control, for there is nothing
else in the world that can help you. Such control will become less and
less imperative at every repetition, though it may remain (and should
remain) essential in some degree all your life. If you realize that you
must, for the sake of your artistic value, retain some degree of that self-
consciousness which we call “nervousness”, and that self-control is the
only imaginable cure should you happen, at the moment, to have too
much, this knowledge will reduce your sufferings. For if you agree
that you have no self-control you must face the fact that publicity was
not meant for you.


Professor William James, in his Talks to Teachers on Psychology—
a book which should be read again and again by every teacher (and
parent) in the world—offers five pieces of advice, out of his great experi-
ence, to those who wish to acquire any new habit. I will give you his
maxims in my own words.
(1) Start with a flourish of trumpets. Suppose you determine to
get up every morning at 6 in order to put in some practice before break-
fast. If you keep that resolution to yourself then, when it breaks down,
you will be the only person to know about it; and few of us despise our
own personal failures as much as we should. Publish your resolve abroad,
let the rest of the household and your friends know of the decision you
have made. Then, when tempted to break your pledge, you will be
fortified by the feeling that, out of self-respect, you cannot have the
finger of scorn pointed at you.
(2) Miss no chance of putting your resolve into practice. If you come
to the conclusion that you must not use quite so much bad language do
not forthwith seek the company of elderly aunts and those amongst
whom you would be restrained by mere good manners. Go even more
than usual amongst those from whom you picked up the habit, and by
an effort of will restrain yourself.
Some years ago a curate told me that a working-man, in whose
family he was interested, was taking to drink. The man’s excuse was
that on the way home from the factory there were seven public-houses,
and he couldn’t be expected to pass them all. So with infinite pains,
and a local map, the curate worked out a new route from factory to
home, on which there were no public-houses at all. Now if the curate
was acting solely in the interests of the wife and children, this solution
has its good points; but if he wanted to reform the man, any psych-
ologist would have told him that his new route should have contained
as many more public-houses as could be found.
You may suppress, but cannot eradicate a tendency by destroying
its scope of action; in all probability it will, during its temporary restraint
be merely accumulating force and momentum for an ungovernable
outbreak when the opportunity occurs. You do not cure a boil by
putting cold cream on it, however much it may ease the situation.
(3) Create opportunities. This maxim, being the corollary of the
last, has also been covered by the examples given. But it will provide a
piece of practical advice for those of you who suffer from an excess of
nervousness. You may find that your ordinary life offers you few


opportunities for acquiring a natural ease and confidence in perform-
ance. Then try for all you are worth to discover some way of rounding
up an audience. Offer to perform, even if you have to be a little “push-
ing” about it; collect a few friends whenever you can, and inflict your-
self on them; find a pupil and play her pieces to her; ask some children
to tea and play for their dancing. No amount of self-examination and
wishful thinking, whether in an armchair or on your knees, is going to
kill your agitations; nothing in the world will do that except giving
your nervous-system repeated opportunities of fighting and winning.
(4) Never make an exception. It is an unkind proviso of nature
that one crime demands many acts of atonement. If you work at a
passage where the difficulty is the fingering, your only chance is to
decide on how you will finger it, and work on it with concentrated
thought until it is automatic. It may mean a thousand repetitions.
But if, after fifty of them you are careless and stumble, you have not
just merely done it wrong for once; you have wiped out all the benefit
derived from probably twenty-five of your trials.
(5) James’ final maxim is one which applies mainly to teachers, and
especially to young teachers; and perhaps most of all to those keen and
eager spirits who wish, above all things, to be conscientious and thor-
ough: Don't talk too much; the “rut ” is the goal at which you are aiming.
It has been my duty for many years, as Supervisor of the Teachers’
Training Course at the Royal College of Music, to watch students
giving lessons, and to write a report on what I see and hear. The
students themselves see these reports, and in them find criticisms of
both their strong and weak points. If I had to generalize about the
reports of about twenty years, I should unhesitatingly say that the most
universal fault is overtalking. I have been to a half-hour singing-
class in which—timed by a stopwatch—the children have actually
sung for no more than seven minutes. Any experienced trainer knows
that in such a class five minutes talking to twenty-five of singing is a
much nearer approach to the right ratio. If you are teaching a boy to
bat you must tell him, tersely, what he does wrong, and why; and you
should show him how, if you can. But if you talk for twenty-three
minutes out of a half-hour at the nets the only possible result will be
inefficiency and boredom.
One last point is of real importance, because it is the basic fact at
the bottom of all that has been said about Habit. We can only think of
one thing at a time ; i.e. only one idea can be focal in our mind. If you


have ever found yourself talking to your partner at a dinner-party,
and have become interested in the conversation that is going on between
the pair on your other side, you must have discovered this truth. For
a short time, with luck, you may be quick enough, by “shuttling” your
attention to and fro, to say “yes” or “no” to your partner at the right
moment; but sooner or later your applecart is upset. Try this truth out
for yourselves in this way. Sit down and read at sight a piece of music
sufficiently difficult to demand your real attention; then get some friend
to come and ask you, while you are playing, any simple question—
as simple as you like, provided it is not one which you can answer
automatically. If your friend were to say “What happened in 1066”
you would probably go on playing without disturbance; but if he were
to say “What is three times seventeen” I think you would find your
playing either suddenly halt or, if you still make the effort to go on,
that its accuracy, time, rhythm, and everything else would collapse like
a pyramid of cards.


CHAPTER FOUR
THE COMMONSENSE OF TECHNIQUE
THE purpose of the last lecture was to give you some idea, in
broad outline, of what psychologists think and say about Habit.
And it is more than probable that it occurred to many of you, as you
were listening, that to us musicians Habit is closely interwoven with
what we call Technique. Certainly that is the case; and I doubt
whether there is any section of Psychology from which we can learn
more. So in this talk you shall hear of some of the ways in which we can
find a practical application for the theories you have heard; since all
of us, whether instrumentalists, singers, or composers, work at our
subjects with the idea of acquiring that Technique which will enable
us to show what we can do when we no longer have to bother about
difficulties in performance.
In all the thousands of things which human beings try to do—
whether with the mind or the body—it always becomes patent, sooner
or later, that some ways of doing a thing are better than others; “better”
meaning that, if we master that way, we can have higher hopes of cer-
tainty and precision. We cannot, in things which have to be done con-
stantly, invent a new way every time, whether it is boiling an egg or
playing a Chopin Scherzo. So, whether it be because we are wise (as
optimists think) or because we want to save ourselves trouble (accord-
ing to the pessimists) we organize and systematize our processes by
analysis and experience and call the result the Technique of the subj ect.
To musicians it is scarcely necessary to stress its necessity, since so
many of them are rather in the danger of exaggerating it, through not
clearly seeing that it is, in essence, only a means to an end. The more
skill you have, as you know, the more adequate will be your power
of presenting what you have in your mind and heart; which is another
way of saying that your power of expressing yourself is limited by your
technique.
Let us begin—as is always wise in thinking about words which we
habitually use—by analysing the word a little.
Technique may be either Mental or Muscular. Children can do
long-division sums—a feat which would probably have completely
baffled Julius Caesar—simply because they have learnt the mental
technical process invented for the purpose. Many of you are trying to
acquire the technique of part-writing; and the smiles you see on the
faces of your teachers seldom arise from their appreciation of your
efforts. They are rather wondering if and when your eyes and ears will
ever acquire the technical skill which will make you secure from con


secutive octaves and false relations. For the present it is unnecessary
to say more about Mental Technique, so now we will turn to what
is of more practical importance and immediate interest to you; the
Muscular Technique necessary for instrumental and vocal progress.
Muscular Technique. In talking about muscular technique one
mistake is so common as to be almost universal, and we musicians are
amongst the worst offenders. We are apt to talk about “piano-tech-
nique”, “violin-technique”, “singing-technique”, and so on, as if the
word “technique” meant something different in each case. But our
bodily movements are all muscular movements, and there are certain
ways of using muscles which are right—for the reason that they are
more reliable, are easier in the end, and lead more quickly to automatic
action—and other ways that are wrong. These rules, so long as they
are fundamentally observed, can be modified and adapted to particular
purposes, but they cannot be rescinded.
As an analogy, consider the word “Grammar”. It means, roughly,
that in an attempt to communicate with anyone by word of mouth men
discovered that, in order to be intelligible, certain rules have to be fol-
lowed. For special reasons these rules varied in different languages,
and idiosyncracies of grammar grew up—e.g. in Russian, I am told, the
plural is not used until you have six of a thing, because, when people
counted on their fingers, five was one handful. But the word “Gram-
mar” means the same to a Russian and an Englishman, independently
of any modification in its application to their languages. In the same
way you must master your muscular technique, whether your aim is a
stroke at cricket, a new dance-step, a back-bracket at skating, or a
chromatic scale; and the right way of using your muscles in the one is
never the wrong way in the other.
One more preliminary. Many people—at all events, in my experi-
ence, many music-students—are so ignorant of their bodies that they
do not realize that your muscles are the “lean” of your body as opposed
to the fat, and that they exist for the purpose of controlling joints.
Leaving aside physiological details about tendons, and about joints
(such as the wrist) which will move in many directions, the ordinary
simple joint is where two bones come together as if on a hinge. Look at
the knuckle of your own first finger. One muscle, covering the joint
like a piece of elastic with an end attached to each bone, will lift the
finger; another, fixed underneath in the same way, will pull it down.
An anatomist would want to emend and amplify this rough draft
in detail; but for you and me, as musicians, it is correct enough for a
working hypothesis. A physiologist might prefer to say that all our


jointed limbs, such as the forearm, the wrist, and the fingers, are con-
trolled mainly by muscles working in pairs. Thus, to bend a finger, a
bending or flexor muscle is contracted. To straighten it, an extending
or extensor muscle is contracted. In ordinary health states most of our
muscles are moderately contracted: “braced” or “toned up” as we say.
But when we deliberately move a joint we sharply increase the con-
traction of the muscle that bends it, and the opposing muscles are at the
same time loosened or relaxed. However, if too much energy is put
into a movement the energy is apt to overflow into muscles whose con-
traction is quite unnecessary, and, indeed, likely to impede the move-
ment we want to produce.
Now we are ready to consider certain rules for the management of
these muscles which have been discovered for us by psychologists and
physiologists.
(1) The muscles of a joint can he in any of three conditions: absolutely
rigid, absolutely loose ( i.e. relaxed ), or balanced.
“Rigid” means all muscles tight, as when you clench your fist.
“Loose” means no muscle tightened in any way, as when you shake
your hand to warm your fingers.
“Balanced” means one muscle tight, the other loose, as when you
lift your arm and hold it at a certain height. As soon as you relax the
holding muscle the arm falls, and the “pulling-down” muscle has
not been used at all.
When you take your seat at the piano your arms are hanging
at your side, and all your arm-muscles are loose. But before you
begin to play you have to “manage” six joints; shoulder, elbow,
wrist, knuckles, and the two finger-joints. Only one set of muscles
is needed to lift the arm from the shoulder to the proper angle; only
one to make the elbow-angle as you want it; only one to raise the
wrist and prevent it from “flopping”; only one of each pair of
knuckle-muscles, to hold the fingers above the keys; but in the
two top finger-joints both muscles must be firm and rigid to prevent
the joints from giving way when the key is put down.
(2) Never tighten any muscle except those whose tightness is necessary
for the job in hand.
Whatever your instrument, you must all have been told hundreds,
of times—especially in your early lessons—to “loosen” or “relax”
In all probability you thought you were loose. Nearly every difficulty,
however, in any muscular activity, turns out to be, when you have
mastered it, merely the discovery of how to loosen certain muscles


whose tightness was holding you back. So make sure that you know
what relaxing means.
Suppose a pupil is playing the piano to you in such a way that
you say “Relax!” Being obedient, she relaxes; which means that
her six joints become ungoverned in each arm, and her arms fall
quite loosely to her sides. You did not mean the pupil to relax, but
merely to loosen certain muscles she has tightened unnecessarily;
but how is she to know? Certain muscles must be tight, and acquiring
technique in any muscular difficulty is always mainly, not training
the muscles used, but finding out the knack of loosening the others.
For nearly everyone in the world, when they are required to stiffen
the up or the down muscles, immediately stiffen both. Try this
experiment on your friends; ask them to stand up and hold out both
arms at shoulder-level. When you say “Drop” they are to let their
arms fall to their sides. In the majority of cases you will find the
arms hit the sides and stay there; which means the arms never
“dropped” at all, but were pulled down by the lowering muscles.
If the right method had been used the arms would have been held
in position by the tightened “lifting” muscle, and on the word “Drop”
this muscle would have relaxed, the arms would have fallen , and
would have gone on dangling against the sides like weighted ropes.
In the same way, when you hold your hand as you would in playing
the piano, if I were to press the back of your hand slightly it should
make no impression, for your holding muscle prevents the wrist
from falling. But if I put a finger, from underneath, on the palm
of your hand, and pressed it, the hand should rise from the wrist,
because the pulling-down muscle should not be in use.
It would be easy to give you the names of all of these muscles; and
if I did I suspect that some of you —the information-hungry ones—
would conscientiously memorize them all. But that kind of knowledge
is entirely unnecessary. I do not believe that any musician ever im-
proved his technique—and it is quite possible that some may even have
hindered its natural growth—by knowing that a certain muscle, which
you use every time you play a scale, is called the extensor ossis metacarpi
pollicis.
(3) tightening the muscles of a joint, do not allow others to
tighten in sympathy.
It was pointed out to you a little way back that you have six joints to
control in mastering anything which employs your arms. And you
will remember that “control” means the sending of a telegram along a
nerve from the brain to the muscle. Now unfortunately we all suffer


from a habit, when a message is sent to a muscle at any distance, of
obeying the order with all those joints which come between. Try
this on yourself. Lay your arm on the table with all the muscles re-
laxed; then grasp some object with your fingers. You will be an
exceptional case if you do not find that when your fingers tightened on
the object, your wrist tightened also. Then try an example on your
friends. Ask them to put their arms out slightly in front of them and
then to “wring” their hands, i.e. shaking arms with wrists and fingers
loose. At a given order they are to clench their fists. When the order
is given you will find all of them have stopped “wringing”. “Clench-
ing” is tightening the fingers into a bunch, and a very little practice
will show you (and your friends) that the order to tighten was sent to
the fingers and not the wrist, and that to continue shaking the wrist
when the fingers clench is quite easy.
In piano playing this tendency is of real importance, since the
chief fault of young players—rigidity—is due to the knack not
having been mastered. Many teachers are not aware of the difficulty,
and even advanced players sometimes do not know the cause of it.
For instance, lay your right arm and hand on the table, and frame
the fingers tightly so that they would play the chord
Now consciously loosen your wrist, keeping your fingers rigid, and
tap the table thirteen times. Even an elementary pupil would soon
acquire ease in doing this. Having got the knack it ought to be quite
easy to play the opening of the last movement of Beethoven’s Sonata
in C major, op. 2, No. 3
If you were to give the above movement to a pupil without any
technical advice, she might labour at it for a week and then bring
it to her lesson thoroughly disheartened, and with all manner of
faults established which you would have to eradicate. But show her
first how easy it is to do on the table, then to apply to the piano with
only the thumb to steer, and finally the one snag of the last chord


but one being a 6/4 and not a 6/3 (and the possibility, and extra fun,
of playing G and A in the last two chords with the left hand), and
she will be one step nearer to realizing that an analysis of the difficulty
makes all technique ten times easier.
(4) Improvement in sight-reading means reducing your rehearsal-
interval.
When we perform any muscular action which is to be succeeded
immediately by another we are said to “mentally rehearse” the second
action whilst performing the first. The orders go down from the brain
to the muscles just a little beforehand so that they shall be ready for
action when the time comes. There is no deep or difficult meaning in
the words “mentally rehearse”; it just accounts for something we all do.
Show these notes,
to any pianist in an armchair,
and it is a practical certainly that his thumb and two fingers are alert
and ready to pounce on the chord.
It has been said in print—though I hope the experiment is not fre-
quent —that if a hen is running along and you suddenly and unexpectedly
chop off its head, it will go on running for a few steps before falling
down dead. The nerve-messages ordering those few posthumous paces
have left the brain before the head left the body and the process is so
rapid that the muscles receive their orders and act on them. Whether
this particular instance be true or not, the process is confirmed in many
ways in our own lives. When children, in the early stages of reading,
see the words the cat is on the mat, they look at t, then at h, then
at e, and by an effort of memory say “the”, and transfer their attention
to c. Each letter and each word is so isolated that the meaning of the
sentence is often not apprehended. But if any of you were to read a
sentence out loud you would discover, possibly to your surprise, that
you were never looking at the word your tongue was actually pro-
nouncing, but always a little to the right. It is the same in music. If
you are a really bad reader—in the stage of the child reading about the
cat—you look at a chord and play it, then look at the next. But very
soon, if you persevere, you find you are never looking at the chord you
are playing; and as you improve in your reading you look more and
more to the right, your brain having “rehearsed” a number of chords
and sent orders to your fingers. If ever you “turn over” for a good
player you will be astonished at how far ahead he likes the “turn” to
come. On one occasion I turned over for a really good reader who was
playing at sight a difficult piano part in a piano-quintet. Before we


began I asked him how far ahead he wanted the turn, and he said
“about three inches”. If the story of the hen is true, it seems quite
likely that if this pianist had lost his head—in the objective sense—his
fingers would have gone on playing at least some of the three inches.
The importance of all this lies in the fact that so many good pianists
are not also good readers. In a roomful of students, who can all play
you a Chopin Scherzo, what percentage would you trust to accompany
a Brahms song at sight? If you are a slow reader, remember that any-
one can read a piece at a bar a minute, and there is no excuse other than
laziness for not acquiring speed. If the child, struggling with the cat
sentence, were to lament that she would never be able to read rapidly
“like a grown-up”, you know that she is talking nonsense, and that the
speed at which you and I can read English is not due to cleverness or to
any special gift. And the same is true, with no qualification, about the
reading of music. To confess that you are a bad reader is to confess to
laziness. There are few things you could not now read perfectly,
given a rehearsal-interval of five seconds, and with a little trouble you
could reduce that to four seconds; and if you fix your mind firmly on
the fact that it is, as with reading English, the power of having the next
chord mentally rehearsed and up-your-sleeve which is the root of the
whole matter, then any one of you can become just as good as ever you
want to be.
(5) You will remember, I hope, that when talking to you about
Habit, I told you two facts: (a) that an habitual action, being auto-
matic, is performed without conscious supervision by the mind, and (b)
that we cannot think of more than one thing at a time. A very little
thought will tell you, however, that we are constantly doing many
things at the same time. We can walk, talk, and open an umbrella, all
simultaneously. But in such cases of combined actions you will invari-
ably find that mental supervision is only wanted for one action, the
others being in charge of a nerve-centre. If you could think of ten
things that you could do simultaneously, then at least nine of them must
have reached the automatic stage.
There is a point of technique, which arises at this stage, of real im-
portance to teachers; and it is this. If you think of two things which
you can do, each by itself, with perfect ease, the mere act of combining
them together —even when both have reached the perfectly automatic
stage—is in itself a difficulty, and often a very great one. Every teacher
should have convinced himself of the truth of this fact, so put yourselves,
here and now, to an experimental test. Close your fists, and extend your


first fingers; then raise your arms to the level of your chin, some six
inches away from it, with the points of the first fingers just touching—
Keeping the left arm still, move the right hand in circles away from
you. Nothing could be easier. Then, keeping the right arm still, move
the left hand in circles towards you. Again, nothing could be easier.
Lastly, starting from rest, try to do both movements together, always
remembering that the right-hand circles are “away” and the left-hand
‘upwards”. T o the great majority of people this feat is so difficult that
it is almost humiliating, but with a little slow practice something
“clicks” in your mind and you find you have “got the knack”, for your
mind has found out how to “rehearse” the muscular movements, and
to bring the rehearsal-interval down to zero—which means that the
whole business has been handed over to a nerve-centre. The practice
of such exercises is well worth while even to the most brilliant pianist,
for every such knack acquired is one more victory of mind over muscle.
Apply this fact to teaching a child the scale of C major. The
child learns one hand, then the other, and the time has come to
play both together —a feat so difficult to most beginners that it is
almost an invitation to stumbling. And the difficulty lies in three
facts: (a) Doing both hands together, a difficulty in itself; (b)
using the thumbs on different notes; (c) one hand is “thumb under
fingers” whilst the other is “fingers over thumb”. Any psychologist
would tell you that when the hands are first combined it is far easier
for them to play in contrary motion, for then both hands are doing
exactly the same thing at the same time, and you are mastering your
difficulties one by one.
The “circles” exercise is only one of dozens which can be invented
and should be practised for the purpose of muscle-control, and I will
tell you now of some more. Master them yourselves, and then make
your pupils do them—and I can assure you they will look on them as
real fun.
(a) Tap'the floor with toe and heel: one two J one two | etc. Then
tap the table with your fingers one two three | one two three | etc.,
making bars of the same duration as when you were tapping your feet.


Then do both together. My experience is that any child can learn to
do this in a week, and has thereby gone a long way towards killing the
bogey of “two against three” which haunted most of us for so long.
(b) Take hold of your nose with the left hand, pass your right hand
through the loop and take hold of your left ear. Now suddenly change,
taking the nose with the right hand, whilst through the loop the left
hand seizes the right ear. This particular exercise has the extra value
that it should convince you that, before you can attempt the change-
over, you must mentally rehearse the movements you are going to
make.
(c) Sit in a chair and, lifting your right leg from the ground, describe
circles with your foot as in the illustration—
Keeping it moving all the time, imagine
that you are standing at a blackboard
with a piece of chalk in your hand, and
write a capital D, making the down-
stroke first and the semicircle upwards.
All organists should master this diffi-
culty in all the four possible combina-
tions—R.H. & R. Foot: R.H. & L.
Foot: L.H. & L.F.: L.H. & R.F.,
taking care that the direction of the
foot-circle is always the opposite to the
hand-circle.
(d) Say the alphabet quickly out loud. When you have finished clap
your hands to this rhythm—or tap it on the table:
When the rhythm is going smoothly and evenly, start saying the
alphabet as before, taking care that it is independent and not in time to
the rhythm.
(e) In conducting, as you probably know, the function of the right
hand is to give the time, and of the left hand to control expression. Now
imagine you have a two-part choir in front of you and the contraltos,
on your left, are singing too loudly. Just “hush” them with your left
hand. No one could find any difficulty in doing that. Now imagine
that they are singing something in common-time, and beat four in a
bar for them. Whilst beating time use your left hand to hush your


contraltos as before. Any conductor who cannot do this with ease
should defer his next appearance until he can.
(f) Endless combinations of movements can be made, when, once
you can do such things “carelessly”. Do the “circles” again, when you
have mastered the knack, and add saying the alphabet. Do the “two-
against-three”, standing at the piano, and with the left hand play
“Three blind mice”—and so on.
It is easy to dismiss such proceedings as frivolous and beneath one’s
dignity. But since acquiring technique means nothing but learning to
control muscle by mind until control is superfluous, every new con-
quest, however unimportant it may seem, is storing power in reserve;
and in the case of children, to whom the normal technical exercises
are a weariness of the flesh, if we can make the gaining of control a
little amusing we are working for the same ends and also lightening a
burden from which there is no escape.
When working at Technique, whether muscular or mental, there
always comes a point where we have done enough. If we continue, from
conscientiousness or compulsion, we shall get no further benefit from
our work. Psychologists would say that we have reached “Saturation-
point”. A sponge will hold a certain amount of water and no more;
if you go on pouring water on the top it merely runs out at the bottom. 1
With human beings, whatever the business in hand, whether
mental or muscular, there is always danger in forcing the machine
beyond saturation-point; and it is a danger which instrumentalists
and singers should recognize and avoid. And luckily our bodies have
their own way of calling our attention to the fact—of showing, as it
were, the red lamp of danger. In mental work, it is boredom. Your
mind has had enough of that particular activity for the present. It
may be maintained, and often rightly, that there are occasions in life
when one must persist and persevere through the direst boredom, if
only for the sake of one’s character and will-power; but from the purely
practical point of view you are not going to do first-rate mental work
I The doctrine of the “saturation-point” needs discrimination, and not a
wooden compliance. Two qualifications will occur to many readers: (i) In
mental and muscular work something often occurs which James calls “getting
your second mental wind”. If you give up too soon this phenomenon never
gets a chance. (2) Some of us, in improving, do not move gradually onwards,
but reach what psychologists call a “plateau”, stay there for a time, then leap
on again, almost with a jerk.


after reaching the stage of being bored by it, and too great a persistence
in it may lead to overwork and brain-fag.
In muscular work the red lamp is tiredness. The moment that any
suspicion of tiredness occurs your muscles are telling you they have
had enough of that particular activity; and though you may occasion-
ally go on working them a little longer without disaster, to do so as a
habit is to invite muscle-strain and all its attendant nervous disorders.
But it must not be thought that the first sign of boredom or tiredness
is a providential permit to take your ease in an armchair. If you have
been working at French irregular verbs or Greek paradigms till you
can stand it no longer you can change over to an hour with the Binomial
Theorem without any danger of brain-fag; and if you have been prac-
tising wrist-exercises till your wrist shows the red light by beginning
to ache you are in no peril of collapse if you change over to finger
staccato, or any kind of practice which calls into play a different set of
muscles.
It is worth while to call the attention of musicians to two smaller
points, which are both important in practice.
(i) Economize your muscular actions , never using more muscles
than are absolutely necessary; and this involves analysing, when prac-
tising, any complex movement you may have to make. It not only
ensures certainty, through being the easiest way in the end, but it also
saves time. Have you noticed how, if your bus-fare involves being
given two tickets, the inexperienced conductor pulls out one ticket and
punches it, then the other; whilst the experienced ones always pull
out two at a time and save, in the course of the day, very many muscular
movements? Recently I asked a pianist—a good player—to play the
first six notes of “God Save the King” with one finger, all as crotchets:
Then I asked her to play it again, putting in between each crotchet the
same note two octaves higher. She played each note as before, and in
all six cases (i) lifted her hand at right-angles to the piano, (2) stopped,
(3) moved two octaves to the right, (4) stopped, (5) put down the note
wanted. Five muscular motions for each note. And it can all be done
in one by describing a semicircle with the forearm. As certainty of jump
arrives, the semicircle can flatten a little into an arc of a larger circle,
but the one movement remains. You will find, in all young pupils, a


great disinclination to take the hands off the piano, and such an exercise
is extremely good for them, whilst incidentally it is gaining arm-control.
(b) Do not expect, and do not allow your pupils to expect, much
improvement to come during practice. The Russians have a proverb
that we learn to skate in the summer, and to swim in the winter; which
is a forceful, if exaggerated, way of saying that it is between practices
that muscles settle down and, so to speak, assimilate what you have
been teaching them.


CHAPTER FIVE
IDEAS AND ASSOCIATION
ONE of the main principles of philosophy, so universally accepted
that it might almost be called one of the Laws of Thought, used
to be that every happening has a cause. This Principle of Causation, as
it was called, has, it is rumoured, had doubts thrown on it in recent
years by those who probe the inner mysteries; but for us ordinary mor-
tals it still holds good in the matters with which we shall be called on
to deal. If a man falls down in the street the cause may be a weak heart,
or a piece of orange-peel, or a birthday celebration; but it cannot be
just nothing.
The main discoveries of Science have all been in strict accordance
with the psychological processes about which I have spoken to you.
Men noticed facts, collected and classified them, and finally someone
wiser than his fellows discovered a principle or underlying cause which
accounted for them. For innumerable years everyone had seen apples
fall from trees, and knew that they always would drop if the tree, so to
speak, let go; but Newton was the first human being to see what
was the real problem; why do they dropi So we got the law of gravi-
tation.
Seeking for the real cause of anything is, however, an elusive business;
for there is generally an immediate cause, coupled up with a hundred
other antecedent causes like links in a chain, with an ultimate , and usually
undiscoverable cause in the dim past. Do not think of such a statement
as a learned and solemn theory, for it applies simply and obviously to
the most ordinary things. Why are you here to-day? Because the lecture
was put down on your time-sheet. Why was it put down? Because
psychology-lectures are, by Government edict, part of a Teachers’
Training Course. Why was such an edict issued? And a hundred other
whys.
As practical people, we shall find that the immediate cause is the
one with which we are most concerned, however much we may, as
thinkers, be interested in its predecessors. If I were late for my lecture
and told you it was because my train was half-an-hour behind time, I
am sure you would accept my apology and not ask what had caused
the delay of the train.
All action has an immediate cause. If at the breakfast-table you give
a little cough, it may be because you have an incipient cold and your
throat is irritated; or it may be from nervousness because you have been
asked why you came in so late last night; or you may be giving a hint to


a brother or sister that they are letting a cat out of a bag; or a dozen
other reasons can be imagined. But there must be a cause of some sort
for the cough. And that cause must be either something in your mind
or something outside of it: i.e. something subjective or something objec-
tive. The throat-irritation would be an objective cause, because it
would be something definitely happening to a part of your body; the
fear of the awkward question would be subjective, because it exists in
your own mind and nowhere else. And these subjective things are
Ideas. The mind is the home, and the only home, of ideas; and the
chief inhabitants of the mind are its ideas.
It is usual to group ideas into two classes;
(a) Mental-Images , which are the outcome of the experience of
our senses. If I were suddenly to ask one of you “Have you ever seen
an elephant?” it is a thousand to one the mental-image of one crosses
your mind. Even if it did not, you would find no difficulty in under-
standing that other people experienced mental-images of elephants.
But as psychologists you must forget that the word “image” happens to
be connected with sight, because you can have an auditory-image, or
one connected with any of your senses. For instance, were I to ask
you “Do you know the Meistersinger Prelude?” something will
happen, if you do know it, though no one can prophesy with certainty
what the happening will be. It may be an aural mental-image of the
tune, or a visual one of the look of the opening phrase on paper, or
(if you happen to have absolute pitch) a recognition of the chord of C
major, or (if you happen to have been playing it recently) a tactual
one of the feel of the fingers on the keyboard; or even, if your first
hearing of it was (as my own was) in the hot and stuffy gallery of an
opera-house, a nasal mental-image of the peculiar smell which seems
to haunt that region. “Audiles”—i.e. people to whom auditory-images
come easily—are very rare, compared to “visuals”. Practically every-
one can look at a sentence in print (within the compass of their under-
standing) and see what it means without the help of sound. No one
who can read the words keep off the grass has to say them “out
loud” in order to get their meaning. But the number of people who
canlook at a bar of printed music and “hear” it—again without sound—
would form a minute percentage of the population of any country.
Yet the acquisition of this power —of the first importance to anyone
who takes music seriously—is quite easy to anyone with a little patience
and determination. Were you to hand me a lyric, asking'if I admired
it, would you not be astonished if I said I could not tell till I had read
it aloud? Yet if I handed you—trained musicians—an unknown


Chorale, asking if you liked it, I fear some of you would have to admit
that you must play it over first.
(b) Pure Ideas are more elusive than mental-images, partly because,
from childhood, we have always tried to objectify things; that is, to
get at a pure idea by means of an example. If I were to ask you, like
Pilate, “What is Truth?” you would probably, and a child would almost
certainly, answer by giving an example. You might say “We are both
in this room”. That would be true, but it would not be Truth. The
really significant difference between Mental-Images and Pure Ideas
is one which I think you will appreciate at once; you have an idea of
what a mental-image is, but you cannot have a mental-image of an
idea. If you really see the truth of this, then no more distinction should
be necessary.
It is a limitation of the mind, as I have already told you several times,
that it can only attend to one thing at a time. And the greatest hind-
rance, as you must often have discovered, to mental progress is that, at
every moment of our lives, there are innumerable other things all trying
to allure and distract our attention. Psychologists put the fact in this
way: our minds are focused on one thing, but there are at all times a
few other things on the threshold of our consciousness, elbowing their
way into the focus, and a large number of other things in the margin,
only waiting for a chance of getting near enough to the centre of things
to join in the scramble. And in thinking about mental processes you
will find these three words useful: Margin, Threshold, and Focus. One
psychologist suggests that we should think of a country railway-station
with a very small booking-office, and a crowd of travellers on a busy
market-day, all wanting to buy tickets. The clerk at the pigeon-hole
can only attend to one person at a time—the man in the focus who is
buying his ticket. But all the time the dozen or so of people who have
succeeded in getting into the shed—this is all before the days of queues—
are trying to force their way to the pigeon-hole to be attended to; and
these are the thresholders. Meanwhile the crowd outside —those in
the margin—are fighting their way in so as to gain their ends in or
out of their turn. That is an illustration of what is happening in
our minds all day long; something or other eternally trying to call our
attention away from the thing in focus. In the last few minutes I have
noticed that one of you —all the time no doubt trying to keep my words
in focus—has shifted her seat twice, apparently feeling a draught;
another has uncrossed and recrossed her knees, because certain irritated
nerves called for relief; and I myself have been distracted because the


pianist above us has played the last note of the third bar of Chopin’s
Prelude in C minor as E flat instead of Et|.
Complex Ideas seldom lead to action until feeling is aroused. If you
pass a beggar in the street you do not automatically give him money,
though you comprehend quite well that a gift is what he is aiming at.
It is not till some feeling opens your heart that you open your purse.
It may be you have just had a tip from an uncle and feel generous; it
may be that the beggar is an ill-clad child on a bitter day. Again, you
may be sitting one evening in a comfortable armchair finishing a novel,
and suddenly hear the clock strike midnight. The idea at once arises
that it is long past your normal bedtime, but you will not move until
some feeling spurs you to action; a sense of duty, or the remembrance
of a promise to go to bed early, which you feel you ought to keep; or
even, possibly, the thought of what you will look like to-morrow morn-
ing.
At this point it is convenient to draw attention to Instinct. There
is no need for the music-student, unless he intends to penetrate more
seriously into Psychology, to go deeply into what is called the Lange-
James theory, but in order that his ideas about instinctive actions may
be clear it will be worth his while to recognize two facts :
(1) The first is, that Instinct always implies action. Many of us
talk loosely about people being instinctively musical, or of their giving
way to the instinct of fear, or of our feeling instinctively that we shall
have bad luck to-day. In all these cases we are using the wrong word,
and should say “intuitively” or—as in the last case—resort to slang
and say we “have a hunch”. If someone strikes at you, you raise your
hands in self-defence; that is an instinctive action. If you happen to be
frightened of cows it would be psychologically interesting to find out
the origin of your fear; but it is the fact that you run away when you
meet one, and find yourself doing it before you have had time to con-
sider any course of action, which constitutes the instinctive part of the
episode.
(2) The second point is, that in instinctive actions such as the above,
the action is not preceded by feeling. Indeed, there are those who would
say that the acid test as to whether an action is instinctive or not —and
there are border-line cases—is whether the action occurred before or
after feeling was aroused; though not every psychologist would com-
mit himself quite so far.
It must be remembered that even instinctive actions can be arrested


by feelings arising from some other idea which may be quite uncon
nected with the main event; and arrested so soon after their start that
they may be said to have been inhibited. If, for instance, just as you
were on the point of running away from that cow, you caught sight,
looking at you from over the hedge, of the face of your dearest enemy,
you might well feel pride enough, though with your heart in your
mouth, to make a more dignified exit.
We come now to a fact which will at once be recognized by every
one of you as something which has been happening to you all your
lives: the Association of Ideas. You all know what the phrase means,
and will understand at once why psychologists call it “Habit applied to
Mind”. Two ideas (or more) which have for a long time, or on many
occasions, been associated together become so closely connected that
either of them, on entering your mind, invariably calls up the other.
In the textbooks you will be told that there are two ways in which this
associating process happens. If I suddenly say A.B.C. most of you will
find your minds have supplied D.E.F. If I say “Our father” I am sure
the words “which art” have suddenly come into your heads out of the
blue. That process is called Association by Contiguity , meaning that the
one has so frequently followed the other that for the rest of your lives
they will be found, as it were, arm-in-arm. This habit is so strong in
some folk that it sometimes becomes an oddity; they can never resist
the temptation to complete a quotation, quite impervious as to its
appropriateness. When I was a boy I remember an old gentleman of
this kind asking my father for his opinion on a mutual acquaintance, and
my father said he was afraid the man was rather a “rolling stone”.
Like a pistol-shot the old gentleman said “gathers no moss”.
We all depend on association more than we realize. In my student
days I had but one copy of the “Forty-eight” and all my acquaint-
ance with them was made from that copy. And to this day I cannot
think of any one of them without recalling whether it began on
the righthand or lefthand page. When we come to inquire into
“Memory” I think you will see that even such a trifling point as
this has its importance.
There is another method of association called Association by Common
Factor. If in the course of your reading you came across a statement
that two things were different “in kind” you might not at once grasp
the meaning; and though it is not particularly subtle it is a matter of
some importance for clear thinking. Philosophers sometimes think
of two opposite qualities as stretching out in two directions from a


middle- or zero-point. Think, for example, of a straight line, and of
the righthand end of it as representing very beautiful things, the left-
hand end very ugly ones, and all things between arranged in order of
merit from the point of view of beauty. As you move from right to
left things become less and less beautiful; and there will clearly be a
point near the middle where they have just ceased to be beautiful at all
and are on the point of becoming positively ugly. That is the zero-
point; and the illustration may make it clear why philosophers say that
beauty and ugliness are the same “in kind”. Similarly virtue and vice
are the same in kind, because if one becomes less and less good one
ultimately crosses the zero-point and begins to be positively wicked.-
A child can see that if a thing becomes less and less bright it will not,
on passing the point where it ceases to be bright, suddenly become ugly
or wicked; though the child does not know the reason to be that both
ugliness and wickedness are different in kind from brightness. Yet
many verbal jokes are founded on the confusion between things
different in kind. Do you remember the man who had dined too well
and on his way home asked the policeman “ Constable, is this Picca-
dilly or is it Thursday?”
Such ideas as are the same in kind are said to have a “common
factor”, and our speech is full of them: rich and poor, tall and short,
plain and coloured, and so on. And when you need, especially for
purposes of definition or explanation, to get at the exact meaning of an
idea in words (often a very difficult thing to do, e.g. with a word like
“tonality”) it is always a help to ask oneself what is the word’s opposite
“in kind”. A great deal of muddled thinking, for example, about music
has been due to the common error of thinking that the opposite to
“classical” is “modern”.
It is in some ways, perhaps, rather a misfortune that the mind works
in this rather prosaic way, mechanically tying up, as it were, bundles
of ideas so that we have to recall them with their accretions and seldom
really examine them in isolation. But we have to face the fact that the
mind does work in that way, and a wise teacher will try to discover
whether the fact cannot serve useful ends. Psychology is encouraging
in this respect, telling us that we can generally break an old association
by forging a new one. A schoolmaster once told me of a new boy who
came to his school—an English boy who had been brought up in Franee,
and whose normal expression of surprise was, in consequence, “Mon
Dieu”. Very soon the boy, gradually dropping his French, began to
make the same exclamation in English. It obviously had to be stopped,
so the schoolmaster—a wise man in his generation—instructed the
other boys that whenever the delinquent said “My God” they were
D


immediately to add “fathers”. In a short time the boy was cured.
Another example from my own experience may help you when you
are in a like predicament. I once had to teach the piano to a small boy—
learning very unwillingly to please his mother. He had so little aptitude
that when for the first time he tackled the easiest-of pieces in G major
nothing would persuade him to venture on to a black note. So I took
to exclaiming “Oh” every time the offending F natural was sounded.
My groans had no effect whatever, so I tried a new ruse; just before
he played the note I drew in an audible breath, and the warning worked.
No boy could resist the temptation to score off his teacher, and he came
to connect the look of a note in the lowest space of the treble stave with
my preparations for a groan, and very soon the cure was complete.
But he told me, many years afterwards, that the note F sharp was still
linked in his mind with an incipient cry of pain from me.


CHAPTER SIX
INTEREST
IN speaking of Native Reactions I pointed out to you how we are
all born with a certain set of tendencies—good and bad, useful and
dangerous—which, in their sum-total, constitute our dispositions; and
that, were it not for training and acquired reactions, we should, in a
civilized community, be in a sorry way. All these natural idiosyncrasies
involve certain natural interests. You, personally may have been born
with the interest, spontaneous and unforced, in music: but you may
have a sister who positively dislikes music, yet adores painting, or
mathematics, or foreign languages.
In the early days of Psychology there was a great belief—a belief
not without a valuable element of truth—that the proper course in
educating any child was to discover its natural interests and to work on
these, and in its way this idea was unquestionably a great step forward
in educating; and certainly one cannot deny that our learning progresses
with greater ease and speed in those subjects in which we are inter-
ested. But there are other considerations which these believers forgot,
and three of them are worth -thinking about.
(i) In youth we are “sensational”, and interested mainly in con-
crete things; as we grow up we become more and more intellectualized
and interested in ideas. People tell me that nowadays every small boy,
asked what he wants to be when he grows up, would choose some
branch of engineering, owing to the novelty and attraction of cars,
motor-cycles, aeroplanes and wireless—none of which even existed
in my own schooldays. But a very large proportion of those boys will
have found, by the age of twenty, that their interests have shifted on to
something quite different: mathematics, or medicine, or music. Hence
it would be clearly unwise to pin down a child to a plan of education
founded on tastes which we know will, in a large percentage of cases,
change even before the plan chosen is completed.
(2) One of the greatest benefits we confer on a child by educating
him—in the opinion of many thinkers immeasurably the greatest of all
—is not the actual learning and accomplishment he will attain to, but
the fact that he has acquired the power of working, and working pro-
perly, at something which, if left to his own free choice, he would
never have wanted to do at all. As things are in this world, it is rather
a sad reflection that only a minute fraction of the population are ever
going to spend their lives doing those things they are hankering to do.


You yourselves will seldom have the chance of interpreting great
music to audiences who are hungering for it; unless you are a great
deal luckier than most musicians you are much more likely to have to
spend innumerable weary hours, whether in health or no, teaching
music in unalluring surroundings, often on almost unendurable instru-
ments, to pupils who are mostly ungifted and frequently have no per-
sonal desire to learn. Your one and only chance of survival, the one
condition on which you can come out of it all still sane and inspiriting,
is that at some time or other you have learnt that, once a job has been
taken on, for your soul’s sake you must put in your best work at it.
I am not emphasizing the moral side, though the moral side is obviously
there; but rather the psychological fact that if once you condone slip-
shod work in yourself you have become, to everyone who falls within
your sphere of influence, not an educator but a contagious disease.
(3) Education does not imply, as will be discussed in a later chapter,
knowing a lot of things but being a certain kind of person. And in the
case of artists of any kind this is truer than of most men. A writer may
have mastered the technique of prose or poetry, but if he fails to be
interesting, why should any one read him? You may have mastered
the technique of your instrument, but your power to grip your audience
depends not on your amazing technical display—that only astonishes—
but on your power of being interesting. And “being interesting’ ’ comes,
not from spending the whole of your life down the one byway of music,
but from your having made yourself into a certain kind of person by
spreading your wings and getting into contact with great ideas wherever
and whenever you can find them. The minds and souls of all the great
thinkers and artists and teachers of all time have been moved by ideas
which they have placed at your service, and every hour that you spend
in the company of the great minds must, unless you are incredibly non-
absorbent, make you a more interesting person, and, ipso facto, more
worth listening to as a performer.
Interest is always active. This saying of the textbooks, at first sight
and in cold print, may look to you arid and academic. But it conveys
a truth well worth remembering; that when once you are keenly
interested in a thing you always want to be “at it”, and resent being kept
away from it. By itself this statement may merely seem to mean that
if once you get keen on lawn-tennis you are always wanting to have
a game; but it includes the more important fact that if, at a given
moment, your interest is actively engaged on a thing then it over-
rides other interests. Try to imagine the greediest boy in the world, to


whom the intervals between meals are just one long weariness. If he
is once really interested in solving the last clue of the crossword, or
finding the piece for some curiously-shaped hole in a jig-saw, then you
will ring the gong in vain.
There are two kinds of Interest: Immediate and Mediate. The
former covers those things in which you are naturally interested for
their own sake, the latter covering those things which by themselves
would not appeal to you, but have become interesting for some other
reason.
With all of you I may presume that Music is an immediate interest,
but there must be some of you who detest the actual labour of working
at technique. You know, however, that you eagerly desire to improve;
that you cannot improve without developing your technical equipment:
that you have reached your present stage only by such work, which
fact has given you faith that you can go further by the same means; and
so you come to be interested in doing it for ulterior reasons. Probably
each one of you possesses something—a book, a photograph, or a
ring on your finger—not specially interesting on its own account, but
highly prized by you personally because of some association. That is
“mediate interest”.
If your nursery days included any F rench fables, you may remember
the pathetic little story of Jeannot’s Knife. Jeannot was a peasant boy,
devoted to his mother, who once gave him a clasp-knife—a simple
contraption of wooden handle and steel blade. Soon afterwards she
died, and to Jeannot the knife—his only inheritance—became almost
a sacred symbol of her, from which he would never part. The blade
wore out and was replaced, and then the handle wore out and another
took its place, and by the time he was an old man both had been many
times renewed, and not a particle of the original knife had existed for
many years. But his last dying command was that they should place
in his coffin “the knife my mother gave me”.
Arising out of Mediate Interest is what is sometimes called the Law
of Interest’, that dull things can always be made interesting if we can
find the way to link them up with things which make a natural appeal.
It is a truth on which men have acted since time began, without know-
ing that they were psychologists. Many practical instances can be
thought of with ease. Why do you think there were marks and prizes
at your school if it was not to get work out of you by enticement? Did
no teacher ever play the old gambit of saying how pleased your parents
would be if you came out top in some subject—such as F rench irregular
verbs—which you found particularly wearisome? Or appeal to your


pugnacity by saying that surely you would never allow so-and-so to
beat you in form-order? Innumerable boys who loathed the subject of
Geography have been made keen about it by being given a stamp-
album; and people who detest railway time-tables find they acquire
almost a halo when a holiday journey has to be mapped out. And have
you not still a remnant of that special interest which all children feel
in things that are their “very own”?
The late Mrs. Curwen, a most remarkable (and lovable) woman,
and a great teacher, once told me that in her early days she taught
two sisters, and gave a volume of pieces to the elder, writing the girl’s
name in it. The younger girl—the more gifted of the two—needing
a new piece, was told (for economy’s sake) to learn one from her
sister’s volume. To Mrs. Curwen’s surprise the child seemed to lose
all interest in her work until, after a great deal of bother, it was
wrung from her, with tears, that she wanted a piece that belonged
to herself alone. A new copy was provided, and the sun came out
again.
When you look around and think of the things at which your various
grown-up friends work with energy and zeal, you will be surprised
at how many adult enthusiasms are really secondary, or “mediate”.
If your father is a surgeon, you cannot imagine that he ever derived
immediate pleasure from cutting anyone with a knife; so why does he
do it? And think of how many girls and women in recent years have
given up most of the things they like to eat and drink, solely from un-
willingness to let their weight increase. Children, however, being
sensational, are interested almost entirely in immediate results, and
cannot look far ahead. You may get a child—though I am very far
from recommending the experiment—to practise scales by placing a
piece of chocolate on the piano, to be eaten when the clock strikes; but a
glowing prophecy of how well she will play in two years time will not
move her to any great resolution. With intelligent grown-ups, however-
the motive-power of most of our actions is foresight.
In reading about Interest you will probably, some day, come across
the statement that “Interest is rhythmic”. Such a saying is apt to be
accepted, by the unthinking, as merely academic, or even a little cryptic.
But it means no more, and no less, than this; that “being interested” is
not a stable state of mind, but rather one that ebbs and flows. If you
are a good teacher you may succeed in getting your pupils interested in
their work; but you must be a better teacher still to keep them inter-
ested. Do not make the mistake, so natural to young teachers, of think-
ing that vour really valuable work is amongst your gifted pupils, and


that the rank and file are just an unfortunate necessity which you have
to suffer in order to earn your living. Almost any teacher, except a
miraculously bad one, can get a talented pupil to improve, for really
talented pupils teach themselves and need little more than a guiding
hand. The real measure of your success will be the number of those
whom you raise from the mire, where, but for you, they might have
stayed. You and I know how great music can open the windows of
heaven; and you must realize that, to the majority of your pupils, the
only possibility of ever getting a glimpse into Paradise depends on you.
So you must try, above everything else, to make your lessons of such a
kind that your pupils’ interest will flow of its own accord, and then to
forge links which will carry them over the inevitable ebb that will
follow. Never, by any chance whatever, give a lesson unprepared, for
that is the first unbreakable law of all good teaching; and if, in spite of
every effort, you fail to arouse that curiosity which is the outward
sign of interest, do not despair—either of the pupil or yourself—because
it is beyond doubt that there exists a teacher somewhere in the world
who could succeed, and there are still many ways you have not tried.
Not long ago I heard an experienced teacher say that every lesson
should be a complete entity in itself, a little microcosm, self-sufficing
as a chapter in a book. And I could not help wondering that he should
have been led by experience to a conclusion so different from my own.
If ever you have read a serial story you will know how it is the business
of the writer to end his instalment with words which will make you
impatient for next week’s continuation; “in fear and trembling she
opened the door and was confronted by a sight too terrifying for words”
(to be continued next week). In the same way you can end a lesson by a
challenge. If, for instance, you have initiated a pupil into the mystery
of the dominant seventh of C, you can say “See if, by next week, you
can find out for me the dominant seventh in any other key. I shall
be surprised if you do.”
To supplement what I have told you about Interest, I should like
to give you two maxims, and to urge you to think about both of them a
good deal. They are not to be found in any text-books, but both are, I
believe, of real importance to any student who wishes to grow in wisdom.
Maxim I. Any fool can do the thing that interests him , though not
necessarily in a first-class way. The point of the maxim is, that if you
honestly desire to improve you must not keep on doing the things for
which you have a flair, but must find out what you are bad at, and
hammer away at that. If you want to improve at lawn-tennis, but
know your backhand is the weak spot, do not take the righthand court


and shout “Yours, partner” every time a backhander comes along;
nor, if you finally have to take it, run round it to turn it into a forehand
stroke. Go and practise backhanders against a wall until you are fit for
good company. If you love playing Chopin and Liszt, but know that
Bach and Scarlatti expose your weaknesses, do not always try to cajole
your teacher into giving you something romantic. Work at the thing
you ought to be able to do but cannot, and work until the secret comes,
as come it will. And if you do, not the least surprising result will be
your discovery that your work at Bach has improved your Chopin
out of all recognition.
Maxim ii. It is your duty to be interesting. This may seem a hard
saying to those sensitive and shy people who are conscious of a difficulty
in winning and holding attention. But there is a solution, and you
may learn it from a true parable.
When Horace, the Roman poet, was an old man, the young poets
came to him on his birthday and read an address to him, couched in
terms of flattering courtesy. Would he tell them, they asked, how it was
that he could touch people’s hearts, so that they themselves could learn
his secret. In his reply Horace told them that there was only one way
of touching men’s hearts, and that was by showing them that you had
touched your own.
Do you not realize, whoever it may be talking to you, that the
moment he becomes eager and shows his obvious absorption in the
matter, you yourself cannot fail to be interested. Cannot you recall
some one teacher, from your schooldays, who could hold you spell-
bound? What could be the source of that electricity other than the
teacher’s enthusiasm of the moment? I have known teachers who
could come here and hold your attention in talking about a quaver-rest;
but it would only be because, in talking about it, they themselves be-
came really interested. For it is difficult to think of anything in the
world in which a wise man could not interest himself by seeing it “ sub
specie csternitatis": not in isolation or as a transient thing, but in its
relationship to the great whole of which it is a part. Remember, then,
that in order to be interesting only one condition is necessary: that you
must show that you are interested.


CHAPTER SEVEN
ATTENTION
ATTENTION is usually defined as the Concentration of Con-
sciousness. There is always something in the “focus” of the mind,
however tenuous our hold over it may be; and until it has been ousted
by one of its competitors from the ‘ ‘margin” we are said to be “attending”
to it.
There is one point in connection with this which all teachers
should grasp at the start; that once the spell of your attention is
broken it is extraordinarily difficult—with children one might
almost say impossible—to recapture it—i.e. to replace the same idea
in the focus of your mind. If you are telling your best story, with
everybody “all ears”, and in the middle of it something distracting
occurs—the dog and the cat start a fight and have to be separated,
or the chair of the heavyweight guest suddenly collapses—you
know how impossible it is, when peace and calm have been restored,
to pick up your story again with the words “As I was saying”.
Consequently, if you happen to be talking eloquently to your class
about the mysteries of Compound Time, and suddenly the Alert
sounds, necessitating ten minutes in the shelter, you should, when
you come back again to the class-room, finish off your lesson with
anything in the world except Compound Time.
There are two kinds of Attention: (a) Spontaneous , and (b) Deliberate
or Volitional.
(a) Spontaneous Attention is sometimes subdivided again, and is
said to be either primitive or intellectual. This means little more than
that the object of your attention is appealing either to your senses or
to your mind; i.e. it might be labelled as objective or subjective. Even
the baby in the perambulator will find its attention immediately
arrested by a barrel-organ or a brass-band; and the danger of allowing
our mental attention to be distracted, or even destroyed, by some
phenomenon presented by one of our senses is a danger that persists
through life. However absorbing the sermon, the spectacle of a cat
walking down the aisle will break the spell of attention in the most
devout. However magnificently you are playing or singing one un-
controlled sneeze in the audience is fatal. And both of these accidents
would be illustrations of primitive attention.
Intellectual attention is when, given that the interest is spontaneous,
the concentration of the mind beats the appeal to the senses. If, for
example, you set a mechanical toy in motion it is the visible movement


that interests the child (primitive), but it is the mechanism that appeals
to the grown-up—he wants to know how it works (intellectual).
(b) Deliberate or Volitional Attention —the power of concentrating
on a thing not in itself natively interesting—is probably the greatest
mental asset of any we can possess, for without it progress in things of
the mind is impossible. And it should be a real encouragement to you
to learn that, in the opinion of all psychologists, it is acquirable—
unless you are prepared to admit that you are totally devoid of will-
power. So you should one and all seriously take yourselves to task and
determine that, at any cost of personal convenience, you will go in
quest of it.
Innumerable people will tell you, self-excusing themselves for their
poor attainments, that they never could concentrate; and the state-
ment is invariably untrue. All of us have, usually to an unlimited
extent, the power of spontaneous concentration. When you have just
finished the last chapter of an absorbing novel your attention has been
so completely occupied that you will hear with surprise that someone
has been asking you questions without getting an answer from you.
And you could probably not only describe every detailed incident in
those fifty pages but could say whether any one of them occurred in
the righthand or lefthand side of the page. If, in your schooldays, you
had acquired the power of reading fifty pages of history in the same
way, think, not only of the amount of knowledge you would have stored
in your mind, but of the toil and worry you would have spared yourself.
And you would also have won one more victory of mind over matter.
Invaluable as is the power of Deliberate Attention, the teacher
must never forget that, in a lesson , it has to be eliminated. If your pupil,
or your class, is obliged to “pull itself together” in order to attend
to you, then there has been something amiss in your method. You
can never expect that all your pupils will come to your room with
the eager light in their eyes betokening that they are hungry to learn;
but they are nevertheless, like all human beings, ready and glad to
attend to anything which interests them. Still, there will be occasions,
whether your fault or theirs, when the difficulty of securing their spon-
taneous attention will seem almost superhuman. In such a quandary
the psychologist can offer you three pieces of practical advice—you
can call them “tips” if you like:
(i) Change the subject. In America, where they are fond of making
experiments with large masses of people and tabulating the results in
the form of percentages, some psychologists set out to discover how


long the normal human being could be trusted to keep his mind fixed
on one thing and one thing only, keeping the object focal and undis-
turbed by marginal ideas. The verdict, i.e. the average result after
thousands of experiments, was, I am told, almost exactly eleven
seconds. The tests were, of course, always those in which deliberate
attention was necessary; when the attention had to be consciously
focused on something—such as a brassheaded nail on the wall—
which was in itself uninteresting. You can easily make the experiment
on yourselves. Fix your mind on one of your fingernails, or the electric-
light bulb, or a patch on the carpet, determined to concentrate on it
like a cat watching a mousehole, and see how long it is before you find
some marginal idea has elbowed its way into your mind.
Most of you will probably admit that the chord of the dominant
seventh is not in itself a thing of spontaneous and absorbing interest,
and that you do not expect any of your classes to find it so; and this
implies that, when you are telling a class about it they will be
obliged, about every eleven seconds, to jerk themselves back into
attending to what you are saying. Yet only recently a young teacher
said to me, with not a little pride, “I gave my whole lecture to-day
on the dominant seventh”. I cannot help wondering whether her
satisfaction with herself and her feat really equates with the feelings
of the unfortunate class that had to undergo the penance.
(2) Challenge their intelligence. Real teaching is not “telling”, it is
making them find out; and even if they fail, or find out wrong, more
good than harm has been done, because the habit of using the mind
has been strengthened.
Recently I “supervised” a class in which a young teacher was
initiating some small children into the meaning and function of a
dot after a note. It must be allowed that the most gifted teacher
might find it difficult to radiate interest over a dotted crotchet; much
may therefore be forgiven to an inexperienced beginner. But she
ought to have been sensitive enough to “feel” the complete boredom
that permeated her class. It was imperative to relieve it, so I asked
the children what they thought a “dotted sixpence” would amount
to, and they were at once alive again.
Some day most of you will have to take a class in what is, curiously,
known as “aural training”. The word “curiously” is used because the
sole object of such a class is, at bottom, to train people to listen, and
listening is not done with the ears. “Listening” is the application of the
mind to the sounds which the ear—a purely physical organ—may or


may not hear. If I say to you “Was that an Alert” you all immediately
listen; that is, you focus your minds into a state of readiness to deal
with the evidence of one of your senses, if it happens to occur. Your
ears do one thing only: they “hear sound”. That means that something
from outside your body has attacked you and made your machine work;
you have been put in the accusative case by a stimulus from outside.
When you “listen”, however, you are in the nominative, for you are
focusing your own mind by your own active efforts (will power) on
something presented to it. So do not think it an unimportant truth
that hearing is a function of the ear, whilst listening is a function of
the mind.
In most Aural Classes there is too much “telling”, and too little
mind-training. You all realize, for instance, that in fine music the
important “part” or “line” of the music is not necessarily the “treble”
or top part. You know that it is an essential condition of appreciating
Bach that one should take in the inner parts. Yet even amongst fully
trained professional musicians the number of those who are really good
at hearing inner parts is astonishingly small. If you take a really well-
known and simple tune, and write a treble part above it and a bass
underneath, you will be surprised at how few of your musical friends
can “spot” the tune. Here are two examples to try on them, in case
you suspect me of underestimating their ability:
Even with a class of quite small children you can begin a training in
listening with elementary examples, such as the one given below. You
should collect a store of similar specimens, and might well spend a few
minutes on them at the end of any class—especially one where the
interest has shown any signs of lagging.


You will find, in giving such tests, that you arc teaching your class
genuine concentration, you are training them in a habit essential to
musicianship, you are making a refreshing change from something
which, however essential it is, they may have found a little dull; and
you will find that the children enjoy it as much as a game—which it is.
A lesson which was given to my form at school when, as very small
boys beginning Latin, we were being introduced to the Accusative
Case, is worth recording as an example of challenging intelligence.
Our master had a puppy named Pickles, well-known to all of us, and
he was training it to keep to heel. He had explained the accusative
case to us in words, as well as he could, and probably feeling that we
were not very receptive about it, he said he would tell us a story about
Pickles, and we were to correct him at once when he used any word
wrongly. “I am training Pickles to walk behind me, and he will keep
running in front. So I got a little whip, and told him that the very next
time he ran in front I would hit he.” With one accord we all shouted
“him”. He then explained that “him” was simply the accusative of
“he”, and that curiously enough we should find that in Latin accusa-
tives also ended in “m”. That was “challenging our intelligence” and
nothing else; and I am sure you will realize that we learnt more in two
minutes than many hours of “instruction” would have drummed into
our heads. You may say the man was a “born teacher”, and so he was.
But of the best teachers I have ever known I think the majority were
not the “born” ones, but those who had made themselves excellent, as
you may, by study, experience, and humility. And the greatest of these
is humility.
(3) Always he prepared to switch to something which employs the
senses. Sir William Ramsay, the great scientist, told me once that some-
times he found, in his large classes at University College, that the
attention had dwindled to zero. It might be the end of term, an exciting
football match that afternoon, or a dance in the evening. So he always
carried a piece of string in his waistcoat pocket, and at a crisis would
stop talking, take out the string, and slowly and carefully manipulate
it, as if about to make a “cat’s cradle”. He said the effect was always


instantaneous. Every student followed everything he did with it. And
when he quietly replaced it in his pocket they recognized the silent
rebuke, with a little self-conscious amusement, and he had their atten-
tion once more.
So you will find, as an application of the above ruse, that in your
teaching most of the things you merely say about music will fall on
stony ground, unless the sense of hearing is brought into play. If,
for example, you are struggling with the difficulty—a very real
one at a certain point in the teaching of theory—of getting your
harmony class to use second-inversions properly, there is nothing
that an angel from heaven could say that will really get into their
heads the one and only point of the whole trouble—i.e. that when
we hear a 6/4 chord something in our minds tells us that the bottom
note is a dominant. It is more than likely that most of you are entirely
unenlightened by that statement. But if I play two simple chords,
of which the second is a 6/4 you know at once that something at
the back of your mind is begging for an F sharp.
It sometimes surprises teachers that, in their lessons and lectures,
they must aim at eliminating this Deliberate Attention, in spite of the
great importance we rightly attach to Concentration. So let me add
at once that it is the one habit above all others that you must try to
establish in your pupils’ work. Practice done without concentration
is a psychological sin for which, if your aims are serious, you will sooner
or later pay dearly. If you had realized at school that your progress
depended, not on the number of hours you gave to your work, but
on the intensity with which you applied your mind to what you were
doing, you would have saved yourself many dreary and wasted hours,
and would find that to-day you had less leeway to make up. When
once you have discovered that real application—a word which implies
determination—had resulted in the mastery of something whicji once
you could not do, you will find (and I am sure some of you must already
have experienced the delight of finding) that what began with effort
has become a sustaining desire. You actually enjoy making the effort
of application because you have tasted the joy of conquering difficulties.
Bishop Gore, of Oxford, whose whole life had been connected


with education and centres of learning, was once asked to make some
generalization about students, from his great experience of them. And
he said that the most striking and unexpected discovery he had made
was that, although the natural gifts of people varied enormously, yet
he was convinced that such differences in talent were of little or no
account compared with the question of what a man does with whatever
talent he possesses.
One more psychological point is worth noticing, because it has a
direct application on all teaching. When a person’s natural interest
and attention are aroused by undesirable things, how can you change
them? And for this purpose psychologists suggest two cures :
(1) By grafting on an over-riding interest. Enough has been said in
Chapter Six on this point. We will all, like athletes in training, gladly
forgo a pleasure for some end we really wish to achieve.
(2) By gratification. This form of cure may seem, to the sterner
moralists, to lack austerity, but if it succeeds in its end it needs little
apology. I am told that the manufacturers of biscuits and sweets allow
new hands to gorge themselves to their heart’s content, knowing that
in a short time repletion will safeguard their goods from further depre-
dation.
I once had a boy to teach—in redemption of a promise to his
mother—who rather dismayed me at his first lesson by saying that
the only music in the world he had any use for was “rag-time”—
the popular poison of the moment. So we came to an amicable
understanding that we should take it in turns to choose his piece,
with the stipulation (to which, in his surprise at the concession, he
agreed and adhered) that when he chose his ragtime he should work
at it seriously. He won the toss, and really tried to master his piece
technically; then I chose a simple and tuneful bit of Schumann. For
about a year we went on like this until one day, when it was his
turn to choose, he turned to me and said, rather plaintively, “Please,
sir, must I play any more ragtimes?”
Even if you have found nothing in what I have said about Attention
which seems to you to be of any special importance, I should like to fix
firmly in your minds one maxim which is possibly the most important
single fact that Psychology has to teach you. You will remember my
saying that the mind is always attending to something. If, therefore,
you ever allow yourself to say that your class was inattentive, you are
simply saying what is not true. They are attending to something, and


your remark is merely a public confession that they found something
else more interesting than they found you. Surely that is not a fact to
publish from the housetops. Do not, as so many teachers do every day
of the week, lay the blame on them, but commune with your own soul
and try to discover why and where you lost hold over them, and allowed
their minds to wander. They are under no vow or obligation to attend
to you, and you are being paid to teach them—i.e. to gain and hold
their attention; so that you will admit there are many teachers in the
world who are earning their living on false pretences. It would not be a
bad thing if every teacher in the world were to have hanging in his
bedroom, so that it would be seen first thing every morning on waking
up, a motto framed and glazed like the texts of an older generation;
and the words would be; “If ever my class is inattentive, it is because I
am dull.”


CHAPTER EIGHT
MEMORY
EVERY musician will be ready to admit the importance of Mem-
ory, and should therefore be glad to clarify his ideas, possibly a
little vague and unorganized, as to its nature and possibilities.
The first point to be recognized is this: that Memory is of two kinds
(a) Recognition , (b) the power of Recall. We frequently meet people
who attribute the want of success in their school careers to their having
a “bad memory”; and they will not readily believe that this plea is
seldom or never true. Practically everybody has a good memory in
one of the two classes named above, though very few, in my experience,
have excellence in both. The mere knowledge that you are weak in
one category and strong in the other should spur you on to repair your
deficiency, and I believe you will find that Psychology can help you.
(a) Recognition , sometimes called Memory Proper. You will re-
member that I have already pointed out the cardinal difference between
ideas and sensations; that you can, for example, have an idea of a smell,
but not the smell of an idea. Memory deals with ideas—sometimes, of
course, prompted by sensations—and Recognition occurs when an
idea presents itself, and we recognize that we have met with it before;
or when we meet with an object—i.e. have a sense-impression—and
the idea occurs that it is not our first time of meeting.
(b) Recall happens when we search in our minds for something,
and the idea comes up to the surface; often making an apparently in-
stantaneous appearance, but always chronologically subsequent to the
first moment of search. You meet your father in the street; you see
his face and figure, then recognize him as someone you know; having
done that you then recall who it is. It is all done in such a small fraction
of a second that we are apt to think of the whole event as one and in-
divisible. In the same way, if I strike a certain triad of notes on the
piano you will all say “Major common chord, root position” and it
only took a minute fraction of a second for you to discover the fact.
But think of the many things which happened, all in chronological
order, (i) My fingers struck the keys, (2) the hammers hit the strings,
(3) the strings vibrated, (4) the air took up the vibrations of the strings,
(5) the air-vibrations travelled to your ear-drum, and thence to the
sensory end-organs in your inner ear, (6) the stimulation of these end-
organs caused currents of nerve energy to travel up the auditory nerve
to the brain, (7) when the currents reach the auditory areas at the side
E


of the brain, sensations of sound are heard, (8) when the nerve-currents
travel across the association-paths to the appropriate speech-centres,
and so down to your lips and tongue, you utter the phrase “common-
chord”.
Our power of Recall depends, primarily, on the Retention with
which nature has endowed us; and the retentiveness of different people
varies very widely. You may remember the simile of the “Rut” which
was used in discussing muscular habits; and you will find it useful to
think of your power of Retention as working in the same way, applying,
so to speak, the law of Habit to your mind.
But Nature may have given you poor powers of retention, which
you wish to improve; and improvement can be ensured by the expedient
of coupling ideas together; for memory is always a nexus, or linking-
up, of two or more things. As William James points out, if someone
suddenly confronts you and says “Remember!” your mind is a blank.
You can only remember that A is B; that two and two make four;
that your name is Mary; that the knot in your handkerchief was in-
tended to remind you to do some special thing—though in my own case
the discovery of such a knot so often led to a long and vain effort to
recall what it was for, that I have abandoned this particular form of
mental nudging.
The above paragraph is in reality just a roundabout way of stating
that, to a psychologist, Memory is practically just a convenient synonym
iot Association of Ideas. You associate 1066 with the Battle of Hastings,
and, having made the nexus when you were young, you have succeeded
in retaining it. You connect some quite arbitrary number with your
telephone or stores-ticket, and if your retention is good the number
sticks. If you have learnt a piece of music by heart, always playing
from the same copy, I am sure that most of you, in playing it, uncon-
sciously remember where the “turning-over” places come.
If such associations are made in early youth, when your brain is
plastic, they will last apparently for ever. I can tell you now, with cer-
tainty, what was the number of my father’s stores-ticket sixty years
ago; but to save my life I could not tell you a single figure in my own,
and I have to carry it about with me. All of you, probably, can remem-
ber some occasion when a chance sight, or word, or even smell, has
suddenly brought to mind a fact or incident, perhaps of long ago,
which you had practically forgotten. A friend of mine, who has some
rough shooting, used to go round it with the “keeper” at the end of
the season, to “clean things up”. On one occasion they were crossing a
bridge over a stream, and solely to make conversation my friend said


“What do you think is the nicest way of having your breakfast-egg
done?” Before the man could answer some birds got up, and the desul-
tory conversation was forgotten, with the question unanswered. A
year later, cleaning up again, they were crossing the same bridge, in
silence, when the keeper suddenly turned to him and said “Poached”.
There are several points in connection with memory which will
well repay thought—more especially as at first you will possibly be dis-
inclined to accept some of them as true.
(2) You cannot improve the retentiveness with which you are born.
But before you are seized with depression let me add that you can
improve your powers of memorization, almost without limit, by
developing your association-systems.
(2) Improvement in one association-system does not affect another.
That is, however much you may develop your system in one particular
line, you will not thereby improve your normal memory in other lines. 1
There are, for instance, men whose memory —say for scientific facts—
is so colossal that one does literally wonder that one mind can hold such
a vast amount of information. But if by chance you know such a man,
you know also that he is the last person to trust with a letter to be
posted, and that his wife would be quite astonished if he remembered
his wedding-day or her birthday. Again, if you were to determine to
learn by heart ten lines of Shakespeare every day you would certainly
find that the time taken for the task grew less and less. You might, in a
month, reduce it from twenty minutes to five; and you would probably
feel that you were “improving your memory”. But you will find that
you take just as long as before to memorize a piece of music or a list of
history-dates.
(3) Interest is of supreme importance. We have all known boys who,
though good at games, are perilously near the bottom of their forms—
“because I cannot remember dates and irregular verbs and things like
that. My memory is so bad”. Yet such a boy will generally be able to
tell you, in the summer term, the average of every leading batsman
from a mere cursory glance—not a study—of the newspaper average-
lists. If I mentioned the name of a piece of music to a group of pianists—
say Beethoven’s Sonata Pathetique—and asked them to say something
I This is perhaps not quite exactly true. Twenty years ago, or so, few
psychologists would have expressed belief in “transfer of training”. Now-
adays there is a little more readiness to admit the possibility under rare condi-
tions.


about it, they would think of many things. The solemn opening, and
the very look of it on the paper; the key of the slow movement; the
time of the Rondo; and a dozen other things, which they have never
had to “memorize” at all, would crowd into their minds at once. But
it would have been a wearisome and laborious task to learn all these
things if they had not been interested in music.
(4) Artificial aids to memory are not always to be despised. There is a
tendency to label all adventitious helps to memory as “cramming”,
and then dismiss them as evil. Without suggesting that cramming is
the most desirable form of learning, it is possible to say something in its
defence, since any artificial help is necessarily a form of cramming—
being a substitute for learning a thing outright. When you learnt your
notes, were you not told that the spaces in the treble stave spelt the
word face? That is cramming; and it would be mere pedantry to say
it was a bad method of helping you to remember. In my club, recently,
a friend and I met at the pegs where we hang our coats, which are num-
bered. He walked straight to the peg where his coat hung, whilst I was
searching rather hopelessly for mine. I asked him how on earth he
managed to remember his number, and he told me that generally he
had to search as I was doing, but that he had noticed, on hanging up
his coat in the morning, that the number of his peg was twenty-three.
Youthful memories came to mind and he had said to himself “The
Lord is my shepherd”. Your generation, they say, does not know its
Bible, but I trust that most of you will decipher the association in that
story. It is, all the same, an example of cramming of a primitive and
elementary kind.
There is one characteristic of cramming, seldom recognized or
acknowledged, which justifies a limited and reasonable defence; it is
that, although you are relying on an auxiliary crutch for your power of
recall, there does arrive a moment when you have assimilated the fact
and can discard the crutch. As a boy I found it extremely difficult to
remember dates, so I had recourse to a system which was common in
those days. You convert your figures into the corresponding letters of
the alphabet, and then make up a sentence in which those letters each
begin a word. When we were doing the Elizabethan period, for in-
stance, I wanted to fix the date 1588 in my mind ; so I took the letters
AEHH and invented the sentence “All England howls Hallelujah”.
The connection, as you see, stayed in my mind, but it was not long
necessary for me to recall the sentence in order to remember the date
of the Armada.
In matters which are “off the beat” of our real studies such aids to


memory are often useful and pardonable short cuts. To you and me
Astronomy is not a subject on which we wish to spend much time;
nevertheless it is desirable for any educated person to know the names
of the planets. Their names and order, starting from the Sun, was
planted in my mind by a sentence I was made to learn as a schoolboy—
the futility of the sentence being one of the reasons one remembered it—
“ Men very easily make jugs serve useful needs”. Again, I do not
now have to think of the sentence in order to recall the names of
Mercury, Venus, the Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and
Neptune. And anyone who wishes to remember the order of the
colours in the Solar spectrum (or the Rainbow) has only to learn the
word vibgyor (Violet, Indigo, Blue, Green, Yellow, Orange, Red).
You should be on your guard by recognizing the fact that mental
memory, like the muscular-memory which we call Habit, may some-
times let you down when two diverse things follow the same path to a
point, and then diverge. As an example, you will all know the two
tunes “Home, sweet home” and “The bluebells of Scotland”. One
of my children, when quite young, used to amuse me, quite unintention-
ally, by constantly singing the “Bluebells”, but on reaching the last
line invariably ending with “Home, sweet home”. A man to whom I
related this incident supplied me with another instance—which is also
an intelligence test, as some of you may not see the point. He told a
friend he was going on business to Melbourne, but knew nobody there.
“What luck”, said the friend, “I know a man there who is the life and
soul of the place. Just introduce yourself as my friend, and he will give
you the time of your life. He has the unusual name of Crummack, so
write it down.” “No, I needn’t write it; I shall rememberaname like
that easily.” He then repeated to himself (saving your presence)
“Crummack, stomach; crummack, stomach”; sure that he could rely
on the association. Many months afterwards they met again, and on
being asked how he had enjoyed himself in Melbourne he replied “V ery
much indeed; but I couldn’t find anyone who knew your friend Kelly”.
Everybody would like to have a good memory, and to improve the
one they possess, however satisfactory it may be. And to that end
psychologists offer you two pieces of practical advice;
(2) When trying to get anything “by heart” employ as many of
your muscles and senses as you reasonably can. You must surely have
discovered that if you have to learn a speech from Shakespeare the
quickest way is not just to sit in a chair and read it. Say it out loud,
make the appropriate movements with arms and face, try to simulate
the sequence of the moods. You would have taken months longer—


perhaps years—to learn your Alphabet if you had never said it out loud;
and I think most of you would still be uncertain, like myself, of the
number of days in each month if you had never learnt the jingle which
begins “Thirty days hath September”. Few, if any, singers can learn
to sing a song properly by memorizing it in an armchair; nor can you
master the fingering of a difficult passage by just learning it off from the
book. In both cases you must bring into play the muscles which are
going to be used, in the knowledge that, sooner or later—another case
of habit—the muscular memory will be free from the domination of
the mind. “Finger-memory” is just another case of “doing without
Mr. Whiteley”; and I expect that all of you, if asked to write out any
piece of music you know by heart, would before very long find your-
selves drumming on the table with your fingers, in order to find out
the next chord.
(2) When the thing to be remembered consists of a number of
facts, try to find some principle running through them—some thread,
as it were, on which to hang your beads—before you begin to try to
learn the separate and individual facts.
A musical example of this piece of advice occurs in teaching
Key-signatures. Even nowadays, in spite of the general improvement
in teaching, one often finds children—sometimes even students in
the more august musical institutions—who know their keys up
to three or four sharps and flats, but beyond that are obviously only
hazarding a guess. If you once grasp the nature of a tetrachord you
soon “tumble” to the fact that, in major keys, each new sharp is
added to the signature solely to provide the new key with a leading-
note; consequently, in the sharp signatures, the key-note is always
a semitone above the last sharp. Similarly—you can work it out for
yourselves if it sounds erudite in words—in the flat-keys each new
flat, being the topnote of the lower tetrachord, necessarily becomes
the key-note of the next key. In 2 flats, for example, the E flat
has to be put in to create the lower tetrachord of B flat major—
B flat, C. D. E flat. When you leave out the upper tetrachord—
F. G. A. B flat—you are left with the top half of the scale of E[j.
Thus in flat-signatures the last flat but one is your Tonic. If you
understand this, you give your mind one infallible principle to work
on, so logical that you will never forget it, instead of fifteen isolated
facts to store in your memory, each one of them—especially to a
child—easily forgettable.
Most psychologists, in writing about Memory, add an interesting
paragraph on Forgetfulness. Pushed to its logical conclusion the act of


recalling a thing—if we had to remember what happened at every
moment between the event and its recall—would take as long as the
gap happened to be. But for the merciful gift of forgetting, or ignoring
the things you do not wish to remember, it would take you twenty-four
hours to recall what you were doing at exactly this time yesterday.
This thought is interesting, and a little humorous, seeming almost to
rehabilitate what we usually look on as a regrettable human failing.
But it has considerable importance, in that it led psychologists to
make experiments as to the rate at which we forget. In one experiment,
for instance, a large number of people were persuaded to learn a piece
of nonsense-poetry —after the manner of “’Twas brillig”. Each of
them, on becoming word-perfect, was sent away and asked to appear
again at specified intervals, so that it might be discovered how much
they remembered. It was roughly calculated that, on an average, after
half an hour half the poem was retained; after eight hours, one third of
it; after a month, one fifth. If you were to make a corresponding graph
you might call it the “Graph of Forgetfulness”; and there is a valuable
lesson to be learnt from the steepness of the curve in its initial stages.
For it shouts the information to us that we must reinforce our efforts
as soon as possible. In practical language it tells us that half-an-hour’s
practice every day of the week will be far better for us than three and a
half hours on any one day, because we are catching up with the forget-
fulness of muscle or mind at the point where the deterioration is more
rapid. There are, admittedly, some people who need “warming up”;
they do not really settle down to work for ten minutes or so; and in
such cases the subdivisions of the time available must be made with in-
telligence. But if you find your pupils are allotted an hour a day for
practice I think you would be wise to arrange for two half-hours, as
far separated as possible, in the case of nearly all of them, and invariably,
I venture to say, in the case of children.


CHAPTER NINE
APPERCEPTION
YOU will recall that, in the last chapter, we discovered that there
are two kinds of Memory. The first, Recognition, is sometimes
called Objective Memory , and has been said, in the unpoetical language
of the textbooks, to be due to Contiguity of Impression', the second, which
is Recall, is Subjective. In case you still do not feel quite at home in
the use of these two words “objective” and “subjective”, and think it
strange that the former should be applied to mental things—for we
can “recognize” a similarity in ideas—let me again remind you to
free your mind from the conception of an “object” as something neces-
sarily material and solid. In everything about which you think there
is always the “thing known” and the knowledge about it—whether it
is a cathedral or a crotchet rest: and the “thing known”, pinned down
for examination like a butterfly on a cork, is objective, the ideas about
it are subjective.
All of us, I suspect, have at some time felt the temptation, on acquir-
ing a new technical term or phrase, to parade it in public, sometimes
to confute an antagonist unfamiliar with it, sometimes merely to dis-
play our erudition. I hope none of you will succumb to this ignoble
lure by hurling the word Apperception at anyone’s head. It really
carries a simple meaning which, so far as you will be concerned with it,
may be almost exactly expressed by the homely and humble word
“twig”. But this latter is a word whose connotation is only nicely
comprehended by the English-speaking races, and thinkers prefer a
word which, from its Latin origin, can be grasped all over the world.
So remember that, for all practical purposes, if you “twig” an idea you
“apperceive” it.
Apperception deals with new things, which we interpret in the
light of our previous ideas; that is, by arranging our ideas into groups,
on some principle of connection and relationship, we try to “place” a
new idea. We all have, in our minds, little bundles of ideas, accumulated
from infancy, stored as it were in pigeon-holes with a label outside.
The moment I say the word “Dog”, you at once find it quite easy to
focus your attention on to all the knowledge you have ever gathered
about dogs since you first saw one. If I were to throw on a screen a
picture of a miniature lapdog, followed by one of a huge wolfhound,
you would know immediately that each of them was a dog. If I were
to say I am now going to talk to you about “Sport”, another pigeon-
hole in your mind is opened, full of ideas about every game you know.


Or if I said the one word “Sonatas”, a third group of ideas immediately
comes into your consciousness.
These groups, or clusters, or nuclei of ideas are called, in learned
circles, Apperception-masses. There was once a time when the word
Dog meant to you solely the one household specimen of your home.
Gradually, from your perambulator, you became aware that there
were other specimens in the world; your idea of the connotation of the
word expanded and your cluster of ideas grew. No stranger from an-
other world, who had never seen a dog, would readily believe that a
tiny pom and a large St. Bernard had anything in common; but your
apperception-mass of dogs has grown to include both without hesita-
tion. Those of you who know any philosophy will probably already be
thinking of the Platonic Idea, and will see that you have, in the course
of your life, built up a conception of dog which, though a distillation,
as it were, from the specimens you have met, is nevertheless not a
mental-image of any actual and individual animal.
The first important point about Apperception is this; that when a
new idea is presented to our minds it immediately tries to find the group,
or pigeon-hole, to which it belongs; and until it succeeds we have not
“apperceived” it. When I was a schoolboy the Yale lock was invented,
and a friend showed me what you would all immediately recognize
as an ordinary latchkey, and asked me what I thought it was. Having
never seen one before it was, of course, a complete puzzle, and the
nearest guess I could think of was that it might be a Jew’s harp. You
can, lam sure, follow the process. Something unknown was trying
to find, in the storeroom of my mind, some cluster of ideas with which
it had a common denominator; failing to do so any attempt to classify
it became mere speculation.
A second point is this: that when a new idea has found its pigeonhole
it necessarily modifies our conceptions, which before the new arrival
had been derived from specimens met with up to that point. When it
became clear that what the school friend showed me was not a Jew’s
harp but a latchkey, then for the rest of my life my idea of “Latchkey”
was modified and different. If your idea of “dog” was at one time
founded on the experience of a single fox-terrier, then the moment
your neighbour’s collie gained admittance to your apperception-mass
your idea of dog had to become the greatest common measure of the
two specimens. And that is the way in which all your conceptions of
everything under the sun have grown, ever since the day you were
born.
One further point is of special importance to teachers. In the cases
mentioned above our ideas of the meaning of the labels on our mental


pigeonholes have gradually evolved through the modifications made by
new ideas. But there are cases where, by taking thought, we can dis-
cover logical conditions which will enormously help us in our apper-
ceptions, and make many other things—memorizing, for instance—
infinitely easier. There are some wonderful folk in the world, as you
probably know, who are said to know their Bradshaw by heart. Ask
them the time of a train from somewhere to anywhere and Instantly
they have an answer. But they have not, as you might imagine, memor-
ized all the trains in the book; they have discovered the underlying
principle—a mystery to you and me—on which timetables are compiled.
It is often a matter of astonishment to me to find that quite good
pianists, though they may “finger” well enough, have often never
apperceived the principles of fingering. In an examination in piano-
teaching, for example, any of you might be asked where the thumb
comes in playing the scale of E flat major, and I am sure you would
all say, without hesitation, “on F and C in the right hand, on G
and Din the left”. But if the examiner asks “Why not the other
way round?” he very seldom receives an answer which proves that
the fundamental principles of all fingering have been grasped.
Philosophers have often lamented that the real bar to progress In
this world is not ignorance, but “knowing wrong”. It does not enor-
mously matter if a given child does not know that two and two makes
four; but if the child is cocksure that it makes five, then there is danger
ahead. And one of the outstanding difficulties for all teachers is the
finding of words which will make one’s meaning unmistakable. No
mere words can bring a realization of a thing comparable with that
to be won by an experience of it. Think of the impossibility of explain-
ing the word “blue” to a man born blind. All the best teacher can do is
to give examples—to hold it under the pupil’s nose, so to speak—
until the moment suddenly arrives when, by a flash of intuition, he
“twigs” what we are driving at; until, that is, the moment of Apper-
ception arrives. Supposing I said that so-and-so was a “vacillating”
kind of person, you would all know exactly what I meant; but there
was a time when that word was not in your vocabulary at all, later on a
time when you heard it and wondered what it “meant”, and lastly a
time when you apperceived it so completely that it became a word you
might use at any moment. There are many such words in music, and I
expect that some of you have not yet completely twigged all of them.
Are you quite certain of the exact meaning of the word Tonality—
bearing in mind the wise man who said we have no right to say we really
understand a thing until we can explain it to someone who doesn’t?


The English language presents a special difficulty for teachers in
that we have, from ancient times, refrained from giving a new thing a
new name, preferring so often to give a new meaning to an old word.
Half the words in our language, as foreigners complain, seem to have a
secondary meaning as well as a primary. I remember hearing a rather
strange incident described, when someone remarked “That’s rather a
tall story”; whereupon a French lady, who spoke English quite well,
turned to me and said “How can one story be nearer to the ceiling than
another?”
In music endless confusion arises, especially in the minds of the
young, from this laziness of invention. We talk of major and minor
keys, but also of black and white keys; of the notes of a scale and
the notes on a page of music; of a “bar”, when we may mean the
perpendicular bar-lines or the notes between them; and the words
“major” and “minor” are used to refer to characteristics of keys or
to size of intervals. I remember my own dumbfounded amazement,
when I was told, in learning the elements of theory, that intervals
were counted from the bottom note upwards, and proceeded to
apply the method to chords. I found, in the case of the first inversion
of the chord of C major , E. G. C., that it consisted of a minor third
and a minor sixth from E.; whereas if you made it into a minor
chord, E flat G. C., your two intervals from E flat both became
major. To you and me now it is all understandable, but it can never
be really wise to bewilder the young.
Mrs. Curwen once told me that, having taught a young pupil
that 3/4 time meant “Three crotchets in a bar”, the child went home
and happened to find her mother playing Handel’s Largo. Anxious
to air her new technical knowledge the child said “What time is that
in?” When the mother said it was 3/4 time the child looked at the
music. “It can’t be, mother; why, the very first bar has a dotted
minim, and not three crotchets.” Mrs. Curwen used to tell that
story as an illustration of her own carelessness in forgetting that
children are literal, and have an embarrassing way of believing
exactly what you tell them. Always remember the child who was
sure she knew what an “average” was; “it’s the thing hens lay so
many eggs on”. And make it clear that bars in 3/4 time contain
notes to the value of three crotchets.
This “literalness” on the part of all children—and a great many
grown-ups—is a characteristic which no teacher can afford to ignore.
It does not arise from stupidity, but from the commonsense idea that
your words mean precisely what they say. Psychologists dignify this
fact by calling it the Law of Economy, which means that so long as the


words are seen to mean something , then that will do. Words cannot
always be expected—especially by the young—to make sense; indeed,
if at school you ever had to battle with translating Csesar, you may
recall the surprise with which you occasionally found that a sentence
meant something you might have said yourself.
Many amusing examples of errors due to this Law find their way
into those sagas of Master Malaprop known as “schoolboy howlers”;
and it is often amusing, and should be instructive to any teacher, to
trace where the train of thought went off the lines. Can you follow the
mind of the child who said an Optimist was the man who looked after
your eyes, while a Pessimist attended to your feet? A volcano, said
another child, was a mountain with a hole on top, and if you looked
over the edge you could see the Creator smoking. An old Inspector
tells how he was once examining a Church school at Bonchurch, a
village in the Isle of Wight, where at that time most of the Solent pilots
lived. He asked the children to recite the Creed, and every one of them,
at a certain spot, said “Suffered under the Bonchurch Pilot”. One
more example is worth giving as a warning to you to avoid the rather
slovenly speech with which so many English people desecrate their
mother-tongue. The Vicar of a country parish told me he once visited
his Sunday school just after Christmas, and asked a class if they could
tell him the meaning of the word Epiphany. Every hand at once went
up, with fingers flicking; and he asked a child in the back row, who im-
mediately said “Railway porter”. All the hands at once went down,
clearly satisfied that the answer was correct. Being naturally puzzled,
the Vicar afterwards asked the teacher if she had explained the word.
“Certainly”, she replied, “I told them it was the Manifestation.”
“Man” they knew, and also “Station”, and the Law of Economy did
the rest.
It is possible that, to some of you, all that I have said may seem to
amount to little more than that there is a danger of people getting hold
of the “wrong end of the stick”. But there is more to it than that; and
I would like to give you one more example, not in any spirit of humour
or flippancy, but as an illustration of how this habit of interpreting words
at their face value may, through a child going wrong over one little
word of two letters, endanger and jeopardize the happiness of a house-
hold. A young married couple had a small daughter who never gave
a moment’s trouble, and was everything any parents could wish. When
the time came for her to use a pencil, it was noticed that, though un-
doubtedly righthanded, she invariably transferred it to her left hand,
as soon as she was alone; and in those days lefthandedness was not
approved of. In spite of all commands she persisted in the habit as soon


as supervision ceased. The parents, terribly worried at this first dis-
obedience, could get no explanation from her, until one day, the father,
to whom she was specially devoted, persuaded her to give her reason.
“I do it because God does it”, she said. And when asked what made her
think that, she explained “He has to, because Jesus Christ is sitting
on his right hand”.
The deeper importance of Apperception, however, lies in its im-
plications. Here are three reasons why psychologists pay so much
attention to what at first sight may seem a little obvious and trivial;
(i) Stereotyped Apperception-masses create a danger to which we are
increasingly liable as we grow older. You must often have heard it
said—and in later life you will realize the truth of it—that ideas which
are considered “dangerous” in your youth become out-of-date back-
numbers by the time you are old. Even the most conservative of you
(in a non-political sense) have, I am certain, ideas on such things as
socialism, marriage and divorce, or education, which, though they
seem to you merely normal, and not in the least “advanced”, would
nevertheless have shocked your great-grandparents beyond measure.
In my early student days we were sternly discouraged from even
talking about Wagner; it had to be done surreptitiously. He was, we
were told, an iconoclast, a heretic in art, an evil influence; and his music
was a “medley of wrong notes”. Have you, in these days, heard no
echo of such things from the greybeards of to-day concerning modern
music? Meanwhile, Wagner has became so respectable that, in a
lecture on “Modern Music”, I doubt if his name would be even men-
tioned. And the cause of the opposition in both cases is exactly the
same—ossification of the apperception-masses. Some despondent Psy-
chologist—and I do not think he was very far from the truth—has
averred that the average human being lived for the rest of life on the
conclusions reached by the age of thirty. In fifty years time music,
whatever it may be like, will certainly be something radically different
from what it is now; for change is the essential condition of life, and
neither music nor human beings can keep alive by stagnation. So it
becomes a crucial question for each one of you: are you going to fix
your opinions by the age of thirty, and repeat to your grandchildren,
once again, all the old abusive and abortive criticism of anything that is
new, and in consequence does not conform to your ideas? A great
thinker once said “When you tell me you have a conviction, you are
merely proclaiming that, on the subject at issue, you have given up
thinking”. So keep your apperception-masses fluid and assimilative,
dread stagnation of idea like the mind-poison which it is, and make


it a matter of conscience that the whole furniture of your mind shall be
periodically examined and refurbished.
(2) The highest aim that I can put before you as musicians is that
you should further the cause of good music. It is not derogatory to the
human race to say that the number of people who are born capable of
recognizing and liking the best straightaway is negligible, if it is not
actually zero. The power to appreciate great music is not a gift, it is a
reward. Most people, it is true, are susceptible to the superficially
attractive things; to rhythm, to tune, to diminished sevenths, and the
sound of the trumpet. But they have a long way to travel before they
will get the genuine thrill from the Forty-eight. It will be your busi-
ness to build up their apperception-masses, helping them day by day,
and term by term, to discover that there is something in great music
which does not deny them the qualities they long for, but keeps those
qualities in place and proportion, combining them into a unity never
to be found in music of the baser sort. Your enemies, in your musical
life, will not be those who do not care about music, nor even those who
hate it, but those who love it but like it bad. If in your lives as teachers
you can bring even a few of these last over into your camp you will
have proved your mettle, and may well ignore the Gentiles without the
Law.
(3) Lastly we have a purely psychological consideration: All Ideas
lead to Action. On this text I have already preached to you. It is brought
up again because at this point I want you to see that your every action—
especially action in any sort of crisis where rapid decision is involved —
will depend on the character, quality, and quantity of the ideas you
have gathered together in your apperception-masses. An “able man”
is not just a man who can do his job well so long as it follows a normal
routine. In giving that title we express our belief that he would not be
found wanting when things were abnormal; we think he could cope
with a new situation. It is the man whose masses have petrified who
stands gaping and hesitant in an emergency. If you have to choose
between two pupils, and were told that one was gifted and easy to teach,
but the other rather a difficult problem, I wonder which you would
choose. For myself, merely to satisfy my own interest, I would choose
the latter invariably. Never allow yourselves even to begin to despair
when you find a pupil who “beats” you. Heaven has sent you a golden
chance of calling up and applying every device your ingenuity can
suggest. Grasp it with both hands, not merely for the pupil’s sake, but
because your own value for life will be raised to a higher power by every


problem that you surmount. So you must keep your minds open and
acquisitive, continually enlarging your masses in every possible way,
in order to face and cope with the many challenges which will beset
your paths as teachers.


CHAPTER TEN
EXPLANATION
A TEACHER has many duties. Amongst the humbler of them is
the duty of imparting information; amongst the higher, and prob-
ably the highest of them all, the duty of getting their pupils to see the
principles underlying facts. You will have to hammer away, using
every illustration and analogy that your ingenuity can muster, until
the divine moment comes when the principle is apperceived.
The practical outcome of this truth—and I hope you accept it as
a truth—is that every teacher will succeed or fail mainly in accordance
with his powers of explanation, for it is only by this means that he can
prise open the intellect and imagination of his pupil. You will remem-
ber, I hope, the instance I gave you, in an earlier talk, of the school-
master teaching the accusative case; for it is a perfect example, hall-
marked by the fact that in it the pupils did all the thinking.
There are two kinds of knowledge: knowledge from the inside and
from the outside —by apprehension or synthesis. Bergson gives us an
excellent example. If you have never been up in an aeroplane, he says,
and want to know what if feels like, you can ask a dozen people who
know from experience. Each account given you will bring you a
little nearer to the idea, and after comparing and combining all you
have been told—i.e. by synthesis —you may imagine that you have
almost got the feeling. But the very moment you step into a plane and
ascend you have suddenly acquired a real knowledge of how it feels,
an apprehension of the whole matter which you could never have
distilled from a thousand descriptions. And Bergson calls that the
moment when you have had a “flash of intuition”.
All teaching is an attempt to bring the pupil to the point where this
flash occurs; and though it comes more quickly in the case of the clever
pupil, there are few except the wilfully stupid who cannot attain to it
in anything which you are likely to be called on to teach; and even
the wilfully stupid are vulnerable to interest.
The meaning and application of all this should be clear if you recall
some idea that you have definitely apprehended, think how long it
took before the flash came, and how lucid and simple it all seems to be
now. You will all of you know precisely what I mean if I say the word
“dominant seventh”. The words present no kind of difficulty to your
understanding, and their meaning is so obvious to you now, that it is
not easy to believe that once they had a puzzling and oracular mystery
about them. The idea conveyed by the words is itself pellucidly simple,
and your only real difficulty was in arriving at the idea through the


words in which it had to be expressed. So when you have to teach such
things to your pupils always remember that the difficulty does not lie
in the idea, but in their arriving at flashpoint from the things you say.
Objective Explanation. In its early stages all explanation is objective;
that is to say, you teach the name of the thing in question, or else illus-
trate the thing from its name. If a child asks you what an angle is,
you explain—and probably draw an example of—two straight lines
meeting. If a beginner points to the odd-looking symbol at the beginning
of a piece of music and asks what it is, you tell him it is a clef. The only
real danger in this early stage is that of telling too much, often from a
conscientious desire to tell the whole truth. It is true that, from your
example of an angle, the child may henceforth think of it as a “corner”;
but he will not suffer seriously from that limitation, since, until he
learns Trigonometry, there is no necessity for him to know that you
also get an angle by going round the other way. And I have known a
“thorough” music-mistress so thrilled at a child volunteering a question
about a clef that she straightway enumerated all the clefs there are;
and it is difficult to think of any information less likely to stimulate a
beginner.
Explanation of a primary kind, such as the above examples typify,
is little more than imparting information; an important matter, if
only for the purpose of increasing vocabulary. But a little further on
we find ourselves called on to use comparison and analogy, and here
comes in the precept, familiar to all of you, that our explanation must
he from the known to the unknown. “What is a Gorilla?” brings the
answer “a very large monkey, as big as a man, and stronger”. A ’cello
is “a large violin which plays the bass, and is much too large to go under
the chin”. A Cathedral is an enormous church, Cavalry means soldiers
on horseback, and if you asked me what kind of a game baseball is I
should say at once “Did you ever play Rounders?” The method is so
natural and usual that you will hear with some surprise that logicians
dignify it with the name of “Definition per genus et differentiam".
You name the family group, and specify the individual difference.
Subjective Explanation. Objective explanation is clearly right in
the early stages of any subject. But there comes a time in the education
of the mind when the crucial condition of understanding a thing is the
apprehension of the idea or principle lying behind some abstract word,
and mental progress depends on grasping it. And in such cases the inex-
perienced, or unaccomplished, or lazy teacher is apt to fall back on
objective in place of the more difficult subjective explanation. For in-
F


stance, when asked what the word “Courage” means, such a teacher
is tempted to tell a story of some man or woman’s brave action, adding
“It was Courage that enabled him to do that”. An even lazier teacher
might say that Courage meant “feeling no fear”. Even with the young
such definitions are dangerous, and may be positively harmful; for
every child knows that he experiences fear, and might despondently
assume that he never could be brave. Men who have done really brave
things can seldom be induced to talk about them, but of those whom I
have listened to all agreed on one point: that they were “frightened out
of their lives” the whole time. The true definition of Courage, and
the most important aspect of it educationally, is that it is the
power of inhibiting fear.
There are many words in the Art of Music which are difficult
to apprehend and even more difficult to explain; but no one can
acquire musicianship without assimilating the inner meaning of
such words, so that, even if you are never going to teach, it will be
good for you to apply your minds to a few of them, as it is more than
likely that in some cases the “flash of intuition” has, up to the pre-
sent, passed you by.
(1) Key. This is a word you will frequently be called upon to
explain. Do not take refuge in saying that there is one flat in the
key of F, and that if you find two flats then the key is B flat, and so
on. That is objective explanation. What your pupils have to realize,
if they are to be musicians, is that “key” does not mean a scale, or a
particular collection of notes, but that our minds have a curious and
ineradicable habit of co-ordinating notes to a Tonic. Young pian-
ists always tend to think of a key as so many white notes and so many
black: young violinists think in terms of the position of the left hand;
to singers, young and old, it is just a matter of notation. If once you
see that it is none of these things in essence, then you may well
spend a little time in thinking over how you are going to explain it.
(2) Intervals. It has often happened to me, in my supervision of
teachers, that I have come into a room when a class was being intro-
duced to Intervals. The procedure has been almost invariably the
same. The teacher writes on the blackboard various two-note
chords, and explains that one is called a major third, one a minor
sixth, and so on. Now this method is, psychologically, definitely
wrong, and that for a very simple reason: it is trying to teach two
things at a time. An interval, such as the two just named, is always
expressed as a number (if for the moment we allow “unison” and
“octave” to represent numbers) with an adjective in front of it;
two entirely distinct ideas, arrived at by equally distinct methods.


Quite small children can be made absolutely safe in arriving at the
number, since it only involves counting out seven letters of the
alphabet on their fingers. But the adjective can only be arrived at
securely by knowing the notes of the scale if we use the lower note
as Tonic; and small children are not familiar with all the scales. I
wonder if all of you, trained musicians as you are, can tell me in-
stantaneously and with certainty the name of this interval;
Small children might well know enough to say “a sixth”; but few
of them would know that in B major the sixth note is G sharp, and
that therefore the interval, being one semitone larger, must be an
augmented sixth. You may think it is rather an outlandish one to
ask, but it is not; its key is D sharp minor, which is the relative
minor of F sharp major, and it might, and does, occur in many
pieces in five, six, or seven sharps.
To impress you with the importance of this point, try this experi-
ment on your musical friends: put down these two notes on the piano
and ask them what the interval is called. Nine out of ten will at
once say “a major third”. The tenth, I hope, will be wise enough
to ask you the names of the notes. If you say “B sharp and E” or
“C and F flat” it is a diminished fourth; and there is no law against
you calling one B sharp and the other F flat, in which case it is some
exotic kind of a fifth; indeed, there is no reason why, if it pleases
you, you might not call one D double-flat and the other D double-
sharp, when the interval must be called some kind of a nightmare
unison.
So keep the number and the adjective quite distinct; teach the
number as early as you like, but keep the adjective until your pupils
have a working acquaintance with their scales.
(3) Time. This is one of those words, already regretted, which
we in England use in so many different senses that children’s minds
are in a fog the moment they hear the word. We speak of “fast and
slow time”, “simple and compound time”, “strict and free time”,
and, if there is a repeat, “first and second time”. So it can do nothing
but good to examine the word.
Now we live in a dimension called Time, and in that dimension


music has its whole existence, just as architecture has its whole
existence in the dimension of Space. But “Musical-Time” is some-
thing which results from our treatment of the Time-dimension. If
we do nothing to the time in which we live, beyond letting it peace-
fully flow, then it has no connection with music beyond being a
medium in which music might exist. If you tap the table, at exactly
equal intervals and without accent, you have merely divided a part
of the time in which we live into equal sections; again, nothing to do
with music. If you tap the table in the same way again, but this
time accenting taps I, 3,5, etc., or taps 1,4, 7, etc., then you have
grouped your taps into systems which may serve as the basis either
of “bars” for the composer or “feet” for the poet. You have, as it
were, provided a symmetrical trellis-work which may serve as the
canvas for words or for musical sounds; and when used for musical
sounds it is called “Time”. Do it on the piano, on one note, with
the accents as before, and you will have provided, in spite of the
monotony and absence of feeling, perfect examples of “two in a bar”
and “three in a bar”—the only two Times that exist.
The last six words may surprise you; you may at once say “What
about four-in-a-bar?” A moment’s reflection should convince you
that, in any piece of music in Common Time, you can change the
time-signature to 2/2 without making any difference to it whatever.
Were you not taught that in Common Time there is a strong accent
on the first beat of the bar, and a “secondary” accent on the third
beat? That is a perfectly frank avowal of the fact that the time is
“duple”.
The difficulties of teaching Time are entirely due, not to any
musical difficulty in the idea, but to the arithmetical complications of
Time-signatures. Consider a simple phrase
then consider this
The two phrases are identical in every way except in script. To call
one quadruple time and the other duple is merely stating a fact
about the script, as unconnected with the essential idea of Time as
would be the printing of one example in red ink and the other in
blue. For that idea is the one of recurrent accent in groups of two or


three, and is nothing else; though there are many charming com-
positions in which by alternating these groups—2 -(- 3or 3 2
composers give us works in so-called five-time.
One more point—the perennial difficulty of getting children to
apperceive “compound Time”. Recently I supervised a class in
which the teacher was talking about Time, and to my delight she
began with a truth: “There are only two kinds of Time”, she said.
Then, to my distress, she added “Simple and compound”. This is
just another case of confusing the arithmetical-basis with the accent-
basis. If apples are “three a penny” you cannot go into a shop and
buy only one without having a discussion and making some sort of a
bargain; the arithmetic of our coinage forbids it. It has nothing
whatever to do with the value of the apples or of your money, and
if there happened to be a coin worth a third of a penny the transaction
would be simple. Similarly, you must often have been asked to put
a bass to a melody. Suppose the melody is in 2/4 time, and you
arrive at a bar with two crotchets in it. If you choose a minim for
your bars, or two crotchets, or four quavers, no problem arises in
writing them down; but you may think it would be nice to have
three notes in the bass to each crotchet in the tune. Then there must
clearly be a “wangle”, merely because, like the penny, a crotchet
will not divide into three. You have, by the common consent of
writers of music, two courses open to you. You can write your
three-note groups as “triplets”—
in which case the wangle consists in pretending that there can
be three quavers in a crotchet. Or you can wangle by saying “Let’s
make the beat into a dotted crotchet, and pretend a dotted crotchet
can be equal to two quavers ” :
But all the above six bars are identical in Time, for 6/8 time would


automatically cease to exist if we were sensible enough to invent a
note which was a third of a crotchet.
(4) Rhythm. This is admittedly a difficult word to apperceive,
and still more difficult, as some of you have already discovered, to
explain. But it would be less difficult if musicians would ask them-
selves where it begins. Play, quite normally, some tune of exactly
equal notes, such as this hymn-tune:
No fault can be found with the Time of this example, nor with its
Metre —which is the grouping, on some symmetrical plan, of its
Tune-accents. But the question of Rhythm has not arisen, and does
not arise until there is some deviation from the pure Time-pattern.
Many folk think that by accenting more and more the first and third
beats of each bar they would be making it more and more rhythmical,
whereas they would only be accentuating the Time. You know
the way in which children will sometimes say a line of poetry with
exaggerated accents on the strong beats. “The way was long , the
wind was cold." We do not call that rhythm, but “sing-song”: and
you could not make your minim hymn-tune rhythmical merely by
thumping the accents. Many musicians, having themselves acquired
a delicate sense of rhythm, will disagree with these statements, or
at best think the whole matter purely academic. But since the word
is admittedly difficult to explain it is surely best to attempt to find
where the difficulty lies; and primarily it will be found to lie in not
recognizing that Time provides the normal accent-system, and
rhythm is not born until there occurs some deviation from that
norm. Any child can grasp that in the “Easter hymn” the first four
bars establish a time-norm, while the second four illustrate rhythm;
So before you tackle Rhythm make certain that the Time-sense is
secure, and you will then have no trouble in showing that ,on that
adamantine system it is possible to overlay any kind of pattern or
arabesque you may choose.
One more point is worth making, for the sake of clearness. You
will remember that Metre was described as the grouping of bars or
feet on some plan. Your minds are so constituted that, in listening
to musical phrases you unconsciously (or subconsciously) count


the accented beats in a phrase, and expect the next phrase to balance.
If the organist in church were to play over the hymn-tune as follows;
almost everyone in the congregation would know that something
had “gone wrong”. For they had subconsciously realized that the
first phrase contained four stresses, and their sense of balance asked
that the second should have four stresses as well. This is what we
are referring to when we speak of Bar-rhythm, or Secondary rhythm,
and it is often an interesting feature in music. Have you ever dis-
covered that the Brahms’ “Variations on a Theme of Haydn”, and
his part-song “Vineta” are both in five-bar rhythm? At the end of
the Meistersinger, where the various guild-processions come in
one after another there is a witty instance. They come in to tunes
which are mostly in normal eight-bar phrases, but now and then a
guild, in its eagerness to assert itself, begins before its predecessor
has finished, lopping off the last bar so that, if you are not shrewd,
you might imagine Wagner had “miscounted”. This kind of lop-
ping, or dove-tailing, occurs fairly often in the folksongs which I
hope you will teach your classes;
Whether such a device was due to a deliberate artistic invention, to a
simple miscalculation, or to an undeveloped sense of balance, or
merely to a mistake on the part of the singer from whom it was taken
down, will, I think, never be determined with certainty.
(5) Phrasing. This, again, you will find an extremely difficult
word to explain; but since it is the acid-test of musicianship in all
performance it is clearly worth thinking about. No words you can
use will ever bring the “flash of intuition” to even your cleverest
pupil; but there are many facts which a good teacher will bring to
notice, and each fact absorbed erects a milestone. Here are four,
given in the hope that you will think out a dozen more for your-
selves:
(a) Phrasing is punctuation. The necessity of taking breath in
speaking has led to the invention of commas, semi-colons, and full-
stops, in order that we may provide ourselves with opportunities to
breathe. And the mind feels the necessity for the same points of rest.
I remember being given an example, as a schoolboy, of how one
missing comma may make a sentence contradict itself;


“Always tell the truth—if you can’t, tell a good lie”. You may
think the advice morally doubtful, but you will probably agree that
there are occasions when the truth must be suppressed—as in “Am
I going to die, Doctor?”—and when an untruth is demanded a
bold one is better than a shuffling conscience-salving weakling. But
omit the comma, and you have “Always tell the truth—if you can’t
tell a good lie.”
Now the end of a slur in a musical phrase always means at least a
comma. You are at that point to take a mental breath, and definitely
to cut short the last note and put in a rest, however short. Can you
sing, or play, or even think of this phrase without including the three
short silences for which the composer asks, by his phrase-marks
instead of by rests?
(b) Normally, the highest note is the climax, and tonally the most
important. This is for the physical reason that extra height in pitch
means extra tension in vocal-cords; and the mind has in consequence
become habituated to coupling the higher note with the greater
emotional stress. The least important beat in Common Time is
the fourth in the bar; yet to which note would any of you intuitively
give the greatest importance in the following?
(c) A long slur is often merely a general instruction to play
smoothly. But short slurs often tell you quite definitely that the
accent is to be redistributed, and the rests to be inserted in different
places. You will probably agree that the following phrase is reason-
ably interpreted:
played


but the phrase happens, in the original, to be set out as;
and I think you would want to play it as:
(d) Tied notes are often interpreted by children as meaning
merely that you need not take the trouble to strike the key again.
Most of them —and many grown-ups—never realize that when a
composer ties a note on a weak beat to one on a strong beat he is
asking you to transfer to the weak beat, by a kind of syncopation,
accent belonging to the strong one. In the following example, I
think you will all agree that the least important of all the seven notes
is the third: it needs only the slightest tap, just to keep the movement
going:
But if the composer ties the third and fourth notes, does it not
become the most important of the seven?
There are many other things you will wish your pupils to under-
stand, and your talks and explanations will guide them along the
track to the promised land. The only golden rule is invariably to
connect any explanation with an illustration of it in sound. In
teaching Cadences, for example, it is of little real use to tell a pupil
that an “Amen” is a plagal cadence; it might just as well be a half-
close in another key. But they all know “Good King Wenceslas”,
and realize that its final cadence is out of the ordinary. If you should
ever talk to them about Modes, do not give them mere statistical
information about the Mixo-Lydian or Hypo-lonian, etc.; that is
only knowledge from the outside. Make them sing “Searching for


lambs” or “What shall we do with a drunken sailor?” and the real
tang and taste of the Modes will be theirs for life. The intelligent
pupils, again, may even ask you why a chord ugly in itself is ever used;
and the answer is the purely psychological one that relief is the most
exquisite form of pleasure—as you find out when your toothache
stops. If you were given these three notes as bass, tenor, and alto
and were asked to put in the treble
would it ever occur to you to write F sharp? Try the four notes,
and shudder at their ugliness. Then play:
Again, play this chord
which I am sure you will admit to be ugly. Then play the opening of
“Annie Laurie” and see if there is any other chord could take its
place.
You have often heard that dirt is “matter in the wrong place”.
It is equally true that beauty iff frequently ugliness in the right one.


There are two Methods which are genuinely helpful when we
want to get at the ideas lying behind facts.
(1) The Genetic Method. Genesis means “origin”, and the Genetic
Method pays tribute to the fact that if you desire to comprehend any-
thing properly you must trace out how it came to be what it is. There
is nothing “highbrow” about this. Can you not recall someone you
know whose character was, for a time, a puzzle to you ? You could not
anticipate their reactions, nor find a satisfactory solution for their way
of looking at things. Then you get a chance of greater intimacy; you
stay with her and see her home life and environment, or you meet her
parents and see the kind of opinions and character that have influenced
her formative years. All of a sudden you find the “key”, and feel that
under the same circumstances your own outlook on life would probably
have been very similar to hers. Again, if you had to “get up” the English
Constitution for an examination, you would find yourself very ill-
equipped if you had confined yourself to studying what it is at the pre-
sent day, for it is past comprehension to anyone who has not tried to
trace its origin and gradual growth.
In music the Genetic Method is a plea, and a very powerful one,
for the study of History, both musical and civil; for without any know-
ledge of history a deep understanding of music is impossible. A know-
ledge of the later medieval Church, however slight, will fertilize your
understanding of Byrd and Palestrina; a knowledge of the Reformation
period, even a superficial one, will immensely increase your interest
in Bach; without some glimmering of what the word Renaissance
stands for you will miss.being in at the very birth of modern music;
and without any idea of what the Romantic Movement implied you
must miss, however much you enjoy the music of Beethoven and
Chopin, all understanding of the dynamic impulses which brought
them forth and sustained them.
(2) The second is called the Historical Method. It means that, if
you would appraise anything arising from another period, you must
put yourself in the shoes of a contemporary.
You and I are perhaps a little surprised at the way in which Henry
VIII treated his wives; but to the people of his time—even the eccles-
iastics—it did not seem specially abnormal, and those who did depre-
cate it would have given reasons very different from yours and mine.
If we apply Bond-street standards of dress to the ladies of Polynesia we
are only stultifying ourselves.
You will not then grasp the aims of any composer who lived before
your own period unless you can imagine yourself as a contemporary


member of his audience; forgetting for the moment all that music
has done since in providing more sophisticated ways of expressing
emotion. Those who have never learned to transplant themselves in
this way, forgetting that every style, however archaic it now seems,
was once modern, are apt to think that the older composers had no
emotion to express. But once discover how to eliminate the intervening
centuries and to take your seat in their audience as a contemporary,
and you will find that their power over the material and the ways and
means open to them was so astonishing that we ourselves, accomplishing
so much less with such ampler opportunities, may well be filled with
admiration and humility.


CHAPTER ELEVEN
APPRECIATION
THE most important change that has happened in the last fifty
years, in regard to the teaching of music, is undoubtedly due to the
recognition of one fact; that whereas in the old days “learning music”
meant solely being taught to play or sing, it nowadays includes, as a
matter of at least equal importance, learning to recognize and under-
stand good music.
In those days, if you wished to prove how good a teacher you were,
you had but one thing to do. You gathered your pupils together and
made them play, then asked the listeners to pronounce that it was
good playing. Nowadays any good judge of your work would question
the pupils as to their sensitiveness towards the music. The means by
which this change of attitude has come about is now usually called
the teaching of Appreciation; and though many musicians dislike the
word, and suspect that it too often means just cramming a child with
undigested jargon about First-movement Form, yet it is difficult to
find a better label, and in the right hands, using intelligent methods,
valuable results can certainly be obtained.
My object now is not to give you a precis of useful talks which you
may hereafter deliver to your classes, since, if your teaching is to bear
fruit, it must originate in your own mind and experience: that is, from
what your own mind has found out and assimilated from the experience
of your own growth in discrimination. I shall attempt only to make you
think, a little below the surface, as to what the word Appreciation
means.
The first important fact is this. Words beginning with AP, you will
find, generally imply the suggestion of “Valuation”. To “praise” a
thing has a simple meaning; to “appraise” it means to bring it before
some tribunal of your mind, and to estimate its worth. To “prove”
conveys a simple idea; to “approve” is to say that you have applied some
standard of judgment which the object has satisfied. This rather obvious
point is worth insisting on because once, at an international meeting on
Appreciation, a speaker (who had travelled from a far country) rose up
and threw cold water on “philosophical nonsense”, saying, with all
the assurance of a closed mind, “If I really like anything, then I appre-
ciate it”. He should have been told, but was not, that the simple fact
that so many people “really like” bad music is the whole raison d'etre
of a discussion on Appreciation.
Works of Art are, as you will all agree, works of Imagination. So
let us first get a clear idea of what we mean by that word.


The best definition of Imagination that I know is one which will
probably surprise you. It is not “fancy”, or “day-dreaming”, or “build-
ing castles in the air”, but “the power of seeing things as they really
are”. Perhaps an illustration will convince you. Have you not, amongst
your friends or those you admire, someone whom you knew, possibly
for a considerable time, before discovering their value? You put them
down as self-centred, unimaginative, or dull; them something happened
which enlightened you as to their true character and you saw how
woefully mistaken your estimate had been. You had not had enough
imagination to see the gold beneath the surface.
Imagination is of two kinds; these used to be called Creative and
Receptive , but are now more generally labelled Productive and Repro-
ductive.
(a) Productive, or Creative Imagination is constructive, and it is
abstract in character. The artist who feels, and can translate his feeling
into words, paint, or musical notes, is constructive and has Creative
Imagination. It is not common, as you know, in its higher forms,
because the ability to get feeling into form implies technique, and
people gifted with imagination are often too impatient to master the
methods of expressing it; which is one reason for the phrase “mute,
inglorious Miltons”.
(b) Reproductive Imagination is reconstructive; concrete and parti-
cular. All children possess it, as you discover if you tell them a story.
Tell them that same story a second time, and woe betide you if the
princess’ gown is blue when the previous time it had been red.
They visualize the story, and see mental-images of your castles and
dragons.
Appreciation is the application to anything of the Receptive Imagina-
tion. Beethoven feels, and enshrines his feelings in a Waldstein Sonata.
You play the notes printed, and you may “like” the result; but it is
not till you have recaptured the feeling which urged him to compose
the work, or think that you have, that you have any right to say you
appreciate it. You have then penetrated below the surface, and your
imagination has reconstructed his emotional purpose.
There is one special danger, so persistent and so surreptitious that
you should always be on your guard against it, for it is the enemy of all
criticism. It is that we often think we appreciate a thing when our
enjoyment and approval are really due to some secondary cause; or,
per contra , some secondary reason strangles an appreciation which


should be there. Can you be quite sure of giving a just judgment on a
performance, independently of whether the performer is a person
you are devoted to, or loathe? There is a useful word to add to your
vocabulary in this connection: qud , meaning “as an example of”. Ima-
'gine a man who has never tasted tea. If he were tortured with thirst
and you poured out a cup for him, he might well say “What a delicious
cup of tea”; but he is appreciating it qud drink, not qud tea. So you, on
hearing your first fugue, might say “what a perfect fugue”; but you
would be judging it qud music—for all you know it may, qud fugue,
be but a poor specimen. Many a “thriller” is all that we could ask of it,
qud thriller; but do not tell your friends it is a “fine book”, for that would
imply excellence qud literature.
Appreciation passes through three main stages, and so it can be
roughly divided into three classes; crude, intelligent , and critical.
Crude appreciation. Someone, possibly a relation of the gentleman
at the International Congress, once said “ If I could appreciate anything
as a dog appreciates a bone, I should be satisfied”.
Now a dog’s appreciation of a bone depends on two things: (i) Is
it his first bone? If so he may appreciate it qud food, but not qud bone.
(2) If it is not his first bone, can he recall the others for purposes of
comparison? Crude appreciation is sensational: i.e. in our first experience
of anything we can only say we like or dislike. The cat, feeling the
warmth of the fire for the first time in its life, enjoys it as an alternative
to the cold outside. On the second occasion he has a rudimentary stand-
ard of judgment, and is entitled to say “This is a better fire than last
night’s”. And at this point he has entered on the stage of
Intelligent Appreciation. This involves j udgment, at first elementary,
but growing in breadth and value as our apperception-masses are en-
larged. We have an ever-increasing bundle of experiences of things,
not as a rule formulated into any system of valuation, but sufficiently
realized to enable us to give a verdict, and possibly to justify it. As
these systems of valuation become more and more developed they
gradually become for us our principles of judgment, and we are then
approaching to
Critical Appreciation. When you have acquired the feeling of
“security of judgment” you have no further to go. You may be right
or wrong in your verdicts: that depends on the calibre of your mind.
But you will know that your verdicts of good or bad are not founded
on personal caprice, since you have built up an apparatus of discrimin


ation; and you will know that your private likings and dislikings have
not been allowed to over-ride your judgment. We speak of certain
people “having good taste” as if it were a gift from heaven; but few, if
any, of us are born liking the best things. Is it reasonable to suppose
that the great minds of the world of Art—the Shakespeares, the Bachs,
the Michael Angelos —the men who have penetrated deepest into life’s
mysteries, will embody their thoughts and feelings in ways that can be
apprehended by an untutored child?
Although care has been taken to point out that “liking” does not
constitute appreciation, it is nevertheless necessary that appreciation
should include liking. It would be a little disingenuous and absurd to
say “I do appreciate that sonata, but I don’t like it”. It is not until
you have learnt to love the things which your judgment tells you are
fine, and to loathe those you j udge to be bad, that you have truly reached
the stage of critical appreciation. For it involves both Feeling and
Understanding, which is why it has been defined as “realization of
value, plus appeal”.
As teachers your business will be to raise all of your pupils from the
crude to the intelligent class, and as many as you can from the intelligent
to the critical stage; and my own experience is that a large percentage
of human beings can be brought, with patience and guidance, if not to
an undisputed position in the critical class, at least so far on the road to it
as to be at all events in sight of the promised land.
There are three Caveats I should like to set before you, and it may
stretch your minds, and help them to stray down some side-avenues of
thought, if you will consider them.
Caveat 1. Do not allow critical acumen to deaden your emotional
reactions. It is too often the case that the expert confines his attention
to technique. Go to the theatre with an actor-friend, and you will be
astonished at how little of his attention has been given to the play; you
may even find he is surprised that you think it of such importance.
Once I found myself with a painter, looking at a charming picture of a
child with her hands behind her back. He simply refused to consider
it, saying, with some contempt, that the artist had evaded the difficulty
of painting the hands. And in the early days of Wagner—l mean the
days when we in England were rather tentatively making acquaint-
ance with his works—a musician of importance at the time refused
either to listen to or discuss the Meistersinger Prelude on the ground
that, according to him, the second subject was in the same key as the
first; whilst an eminent critic pronounced Tchaikovsky’s Fifth Sym-
phony to be no symphony at all, because it had a waltz in it.


Caveat 11. Remember that we do not, and cannot, “understand”
Art, for the reason that the part we understand is not Art. Yet Art
must reach the Feelings via the Understanding. This is a great philo-
sophical truth, fundamental to all musical appreciation, and is not
nearly so cryptic as it sounds. To repeat an example you have had
before, were I to say to you, on a late November evening, “It is getting
dark quickly now”, I am making a plain conversational statement of
fact, with no Art about it. When the poet says “Fast falls the eventide”
he is making precisely the same statement as I did, but is calling in the
art of poetry in order, somehow or other, to touch your emotions. If
he had said it, even more poetically, in Chinese, you would have had no
artistic reaction (except, maybe, to the beauty of the mere sound of
voice or words) simply because you did not understand. Were you to
say “that is a beautiful picture, but I cannot tell you whether it is a
sunset or a house on fire” you are clearly talking nonsense; though,
again, you may like it qud a splash of colour. Before it can reach your
feelings you must understand it; after that you can apply to it your
powers of critical appreciation.
Caveat 111. It is a common remark that an Artist constructs a work
of Imagination; a statement which, though true, is only half true.
Out of his own imagination he has created his work; but his real object
is to make you and me, by the use of our imagination, reconstruct it;
and his success or failure in doing this is the great critical criterion. It
is possible that you have, at the end of a novel, found yourself with a
lump in your throat and tears running down your cheeks—although
you knew perfectly well that you had been reading about events which
never happened and people who never lived. The novelist did, of course,
construct the work of imagination you have been reading, but the
proof of his success lay in the fact that he made you reconstruct it all
with such actuality that, for the time being, it was the world in which
you were living. If you had finished your reading entirely unmoved
his object, in your particular case, would have been unattained, whether
from want of skill on his part, or want of receptivity on yours. And if
you see that all Art is an attack by one man’s skill on another’s recep-
tivity, and think of the varying degrees of receptivity of your own
friends and relations, then you will realize how far criticism must
always be from an exact science.
So in music a composer may say that his work is created solely to
get into shape some emotional stress —that is, to relieve his
or to “project his personality”. But if his music does not touch any of
us, then he has failed to make us, through our reconstructive imagina-
G


tions, recognize what his emotions were—that is, we cannot see why
he wrote it.
The appreciation of all great music calls for a recognition of this
combination of feeling and understanding, and allowing for differences
of balance in different composers. There is plenty to “understand” in a
Chopin Ballade, and plenty to “feel” in a Bach Fugue; but the ratio
is different.
Fifty years ago people, even musical people, were given to saying
that there was no feeling to be found in Bach, or that it was mere brag-
ging to pretend to understand Brahms. So if ever you find yourself
unable to make sense of, or feel moved by, music (or anything else)
which is new and strange do not be quick to condemn. For it may
merely be that, for the time being, the lens of your mind has not learned
to focus on the new object, and that your growth and expansion, both
in Understanding and Appreciation, depend on the effort you make in
readjusting your mind and increasing your receptivity.


CHAPTER TWELVE
WILL
THE field of Psychology is a large one; it might, indeed, be called
limitless, since its principles and truths can be adapted and applied
to any subject as easily as to Music. But when we have explored all its
avenues, however superficially, we are inevitably confronted with
the fact that, if our discoveries are to be of any practical value to our-
selves or others, one further thing is required: the Will to act upon them.
We can learn from Psychology things which will so systematize our
outlook that every thought and action should be logical, considered,
and fertile. But all we have learnt will be sterile and valueless unless
it be put into practice by the power of the Will. It may help us,
therefore, to make some inquiries as to what this mysterious power
is.
The English, for a “practical” race—accustomed to making up
their minds (even too quickly) and acting, and given to a slight con-
tempt for the “theorizers” who urge reflection—are curiously enig-
matic in their use of words connected with will-power. Any English-
man will claim to admire “determination”; but when it is displayed by
an antagonist he labels it “obstinacy”. “Desire” has acquired a con-
nection with sex which renders its use more than a little dangerous.
“Wish” has become almost a word suggesting the impossible: you
wish the rain would stop, or that you had never been born. “Volun-
tary” is almost a negation of all the compelling qualities which will-
power implies; for if you were told that your attendance at these lectures
was voluntary, you would understand that you need not settle any
course, but j ust come or not as you liked at the moment. So psycholo-
gists use the word “volition”, which the dictionary tells us means
“Exercise of the Will, or the power of Willing”.
At first sight you might perhaps think that matters of Will fell rather
into the domain of Ethics, or even of Philosophy, rather than Psych-
ology. But you will at once trace the connection when you consider
the psychological maxim that All Will ends in Action. Students are
sometimes foolish enough to learn such aphorisms by heart, for examin-
ation purposes, without ever realizing their simple and practical im-
plications. If you happen to be reading, late at night, and on hearing
the clock strike midnight you say to yourself “I am determined to go to
bed”, you have merely formed a resolution. To exercise your Will you
must shut up the book and get out of the armchair. The question now
arises as to whether all actions, or which kind of actions, involve the
use of Will; and psychologists divide actions into three classes:


(a) Reflex Actions. These are altogether outside the scope of the
Will, and can only be connected with it by an act of Inhibition. Let
me recall the simple instance I gave you in an earlier lecture. If
anything touches your eyelashes, you blink; that is a reflex action, a
provision of Nature for the protection of your eyes. But if I tell you I
am going to make you blink by touching them you could possibly, by
exercising will-power, inhibit the reaction; though if a speck of dust
were to touch them unawares the next moment, the reaction will
assuredly occur.
(b) Voluntary Actions. Our first infantile actions, such as snatching
or crying, are all involuntary, many of them being purely instinctive;
some indeed—such as blushing—remain involuntary all our lives,
often to our regret, and have more than a little in common with re-
flexes. They are due to a stimulus, and through being exercised the
reactions grow into habits. In given cases we rehearse mentally the
action we are going to take, without considering alternatives. You
want to brush away a fly which is irritating your forehead, so one of
your hands moves up to perform the action, your mind rehearsing its
movements in advance. This “mental rehearsal”, though it may sound
merely doctrinaire, is a very real thing, and is of considerable import-
ance to musicians. If you ask a pianist to play such a chord as
the mere act of looking at it sets nerves and muscles on a hair-trigger,
ready to “explode in action” at the right moment. Look at that chord
again, then suddenly look at this one
I feel certain that—at all events in the case of those of you who are
pianists—you have actually felt a “switch” in the muscles of your
hand, and are now prepared, should you be asked to play the chord, for
a different set of muscular actions. That is “mental rehearsal”, and it
occurs in every voluntary action we make; with the old proviso that
when the action has become automatic a nerve-centre will relieve the
brain of the duty cf supervision.
I have previously pointed out to you how in “reading”—whether
“outloud” from a book, or printed music—we are always looking at a


word or a chord well ahead of the one we are pronouncing or playing.
Your mind has “rehearsed” the necessary movements for fingers or
tongue; and the distance between the chord you are playing and the
one you are looking at is an index of your power of muscular-memory
and your skill as a sight-reader.
Voluntary actions, involving no choice, are sometimes labelled Ideo-
motor, which means that some idea—such as the percept of the above
chords—has created a motor impulse. And the obvious fact that the
action is always subsequent to its mental rehearsal is important, because
technical progress depends almost entirely on reducing the gap between
them to a minimum. If I hold out my pencil in my hand, and ask you
to keep your eye on it, you can; if I then move my hand in a circle you
can still keep your eye on the pencil. But if suddenly I make my circle
in the reverse direction you lose sight of the pencil for a moment,
because you have “prepared” your eyes to move in a certain circular
path, and have not had time to re-adjust and issue new orders. That is
the fact on which all conjuring has to rely. Again, you and I can
glance at a series of letters—say Wolverhampton —and “take in”
the word so rapidly that the process seems to be practically instantan-
eous; but have you not sometimes passed through a station in a fast
train, seen the letters of its name, but found yourself unable to piece
them together into a word?
You will remember that stress has been laid, in earlier chapters,
on the fact that the satisfactory performance of a complex action
involves mastering each separate movement before combining them;
how learning to waltz means mastering certain steps until suddenly
the combination of movements fuses into a whole. That is also the
only way of salvation in acquiring the more recondite accomplish-
ments of the musician. Most of you, I feel sure, would like to be able
to transpose; and may be surprised to hear that you can do it now,
though with a time-lag that makes your attempts of no practical
value. If you exercise your will, and resolve to practise, the one and
only thing you have to do is to reduce the time that it takes you to
look at a chord in one key and see what it would be in another. With
yourselves, as with your pupils, you should begin with something
easy enough to be encouraging. Take some such example as this:


You can all of you “feel” your fingers on the first chord. How
many seconds does it take you to “feel” the same chord in the key of
B flat? Even if you have to take ten seconds you would find that,
with a very little practice, you could reduce it to eight, then six, then
four, and so on. My faith in the human brain forbids me to believe
that any one of you could not, with five minutes practice a day,
reach in a month the stage when you could play quite easily the
first three chords of any hymn tune in any key named. If you could,
you have passed the pons asinorum , and further excellence in trans-
position depends henceforth on nothing but your own resolve.
Similarly you could learn to read from score, however bad you
may prove at first, by taking an easy partsong, or the adagio of a
string-quartet, and begin by playing only the treble and the bass—
to widen the “stretch of the eye” that has probably been confined to
two-stave piano music. Then add one inner part, and later both.
Spend as long as you like over each chord, for every experiment is
reducing your time-lag; and in the end you will discover, if you have
ambition and perseverance, that even a full score is not so insur-
mountably difficult as it may seem to you now.
(c) Determined Actions. The suggestion for the idea which leads
to action may be either external or internal. You may go into a room,
see a tumbler and a jug of lemonade and help yourself to a drink; or
see a piano and sit down and “try” it. The immediate cause of your
action was not thirst, or love of music, but the chance sight of certain
external things which “put the idea in your head”. Or you may be
assiduously practising when suddenly you remember that to-morrow
is your mother’s birthday, and you haven’t written the letter. And I
hope such an internal idea would lead to action.
Now there arises a piece of close psychological reasoning which is
sometimes found a little difficult.
Determined Action is always due to a Motive ; and a Motive is due
to an Internal Idea plus Feeling. You want to improve; that internal
idea suggests to you that you should get up and practise before breakfast.
But whether you actually do so or not depends on how strongly you
desire to improve—i.e. on whether the strength of your desire is
sufficient to make you put the idea into practice. This is sometimes
expressed by saying that “Strength of Feeling governs persistence of
Motive”; the strength of your thirst governs your persistency in finding
something to drink.
Of these two factors in Motive—ldea and Feeling—the Idea is a
“constant” whereas the Feeling is a “variable”. This sounds rather


academic and forbidding, but its meaning is simple. The idea which
led you to form a resolution on New Year’s Day is exactly the same idea
when February arrives, but the feeling about it, which was so strong
and urgent at the rather emotional moment of its birth, has generally
so vapourized that you find yourself wondering how you ever came to
be so sentimental as to register the vow.
This is the point where, not only in New Year resolutions but in
everything in life, Will comes into play. Feeling has faded away, as
it always will, and can no longer maintain the supremacy of the ego
over the me. There is nothing in the world you can call to your aid
except Will; and if you have not kept that in working order, by con-
stant reliance on it in all the small matters of life, woe betide you in
the crises.
It is easy to see that here Psychology approaches the domain of
Ethics and Morality—two subjects on which it is no part of my duty to
preach to you. It is, however, so easy and so usual to assert that a know-
ledge of the processes of the Mind can have no bearing on Art or on
Character, that I hope you will not think it officious or sententious of me
to point out that, if you desire to be an asset to the world you live in, a
testimonial to the Institution that has tried to train you, and a human
being who has any right to indulge in self-respect, then your end will
only be attained by the inflexibility with which you master and exercise
your will-power.


CHAPTER THIRTEEN
THE MEANING OF EDUCATION
SHOULD some inquisitive questioner, such as Socrates, come
and ask you whether, when you have children of your own, you
intend to have them educated, you would, I imagine, with one accord
answer. Yes. If he then, after his manner, were to ask you Why? it
would be extremely interesting to hear your replies.
If this Education is such a desirable and precious thing that you will
on no account withhold it from your children, you surely must be
quite clear as to what you mean by the word. If, however, you find
you are at all vague about its connotation it should be worth while to
probe a little into the subj ect, since its main principles are as necessary in,
and as applicable to, the teaching of Music as to any other form of
improving our mental grip and grasp of things.
When a philosopher—which means anyone who “thinks”—is
confronted with a problem he asks himself three questions about it;
and each question can be epitomized in a monosyllable: What, Why,
and How. I hope that you were taught at school to think out your
essays on those lines. Suppose you had to write an essay on Sport you
are not intended to enumerate all the games you know. You should
begin by inquiring “What is Sport?” It is obviously, for instance, some-
thing quite different from a game, since Chess is a game but not a sport,
and pheasant-shooting a sport but not a game. “Why” do you have it
in life: what is its end and purpose, and is it desirable or undesirable?
If the former, “How” are you going to promote it? Surely the worst
essay-writer amongst you could, for a few pages, clothe that skeleton?
Next time you have an unoccupied evening try to outline, in some such
way, the precis of an essay on “What is Art”; and even if your paper
never attains the dignity ofbeing delivered as a lecture, it will have
taken you on to another milestone on the road of clear thinking.
What then, do we mean by the word Education?
The first point to consider—and probably the most important, as
it is the most frequently ignored—is this. Education consists of two
distinct things: Knowledge and Understanding. They might be
labelled Learning and Apperception, or even, in their widest sense,
Science and Philosophy. Thinkers discovered, ages ago, that some
things are matters of fact, verifiable by reference to standards of
measurement. If you say that one log is twice the weight of another,
or one stick twice the length, the truth of your statement can be tested,
for the things in question are measureable. And all such knowledge
falls into the domain of Science.


The same thinkers saw clearly that there were other matters in
which no yard-stick could be applied. They had no doubt whatever
that one thing could be more beautiful than another, or one man more
wicked than his neighbour. But it was plainly nonsense to say that one
thing was exactly twice as beautiful as another, or that the saint was
just seven times as good as the sinner. And all these immeasurable and
imponderable matters fall into the domain of Philosophy.
It is a common mistake to imagine that the Philsopher aims at pro-
viding standards of measurement; he knows full well that such a pur-
pose would be unattainable. His aim is to help you and me to think
below the surface in the elusive matters with which he deals, until by
the grace of heaven, we acquire a certain competence to judge—not
authoritatively or infallibly, but always by taking thought—between
the good and the bad, the genuine thing and the imitation.
And it is here that a fact emerges which is of quite supreme import-
ance, though presumably unknown—since it is never even mentioned
—to the busybodies who write to the papers about Education, or the
officials who administer it. And the fact is this. Although the subjects
falling into the category of Science are of the very greatest consequence
to the human race —for without them we should never have learnt
how to build a house or to navigate the seas—yet it is in the category of
Philosophy that we find all the matters about which men feel deeply.
It is Politics, Art, and Religion that stir men’s hearts and tempers.
The great minds of the world have thought persistently on these things,
opening many avenues and warning us of many pitfalls. But their
insight cannot be tabulated into the clearcut systems which the “prac-
tical man” can comprehend, so he dismisses them with the shrug of the
shoulder which says “everything of that sort is just theorizing”. The
difference between good and bad, whether in morals, in music, or in
anything else, is the one thing in the world which is of vital importance
to everyone. And the fact that, when we try to discover that difference,
we find the sea uncharted makes its exploration only the more imper-
ative, and points out to us quite unmistakably what we should make
the aim of Education.
The unthinking people of the world, those who imagine that the end
of Education is information, have always been the drag on its wheels.
It should, in their opinion, be exclusively utilitarian, preparing a man
for the career he is to follow. “Why on earth should my son learn
Trigonometry?” such a man once said. “He is going to be a grocer,
so confine his education to the subjects that will help him.” There is,
unfortunately, a comfortable feeling abroad that such an ignorant
point of view has no influence nowadays; but it is difficult to avoid


feeling that even our august educational authorities, with their “voca-
tional training”, are capitulating to the same heresy under a prettier
name.
Information, it may readily be granted, must be the foundation of
all education; but not its end and aim. There is, I think, an almost
perfect analogy in food. We need health and strength, so we eat and
drink; but food is not in itself “health and strength”, for these depend
on what our digestion does with our food. We need education, and so
we acquire information; but our education depends on what our
Intellect—which is our mental digestion—does with the information
provided. If you are very patient, and have a very good parrot, you
might teach it to repeat all the dates in history; but you cannot make a
parrot into a historian, simply because you cannot educate him.
The Greek philosophers pointed out that a man has four sides to his
nature, these four sides, as it were plaited together, constituting the
whole man. They form four categories, and every human activity
can find its place in one or other of them. These four sides are:
(1) Physical —dealing with the body
(2) Intellectual —dealing with thought
(3) Aesthetic —dealing with the feelings
(4) Moral —dealing with conduct and character
To the Greeks education meant training and control in all these
four divisions; and though the idea may at first seem far-fetched it is
worth considering whether a return to it might not help to solve some
of the world’s present problems. Certainly the departure from this
conception of Education is responsible for a great part of the antagon-
ism in national ideals from which our troubles now arise. In my own
student days, for instance, it is not far wide of the mark to say that
German education centred round (2) and (3}, almost to the exclusion
of (1) and (4); whereas in England (1) and (4) were all-important, (2)
very subsidiary, and (3) completely ignored. Every German I ever
knew was only too ready to boast of his country’s intellectual and
artistic pre-eminence, and if he himself did not happen to be learned
or artistic would apologize for the fact with genuine regret. But physical
fitness and moral character—though of course both were often met
with—were matters of chance.
In England, on the other hand, any Headmaster would claim with
pride that, though his boys were perhaps not up to any very high intel-
lectual standard yet they had acquired character and were fine physical


specimens. The boys themselves, with a polite assumption of an
apologetic tone, might disclaim being “musical” or “brainy”, but one
could almost hear the sotto-voce “Thank heaven”.
It would have seemed odd to the German that the Greek, if a man
was getting too obese for his waistcoat, would have called him un-
educated; and I should very much like to be there if an English boy,
in the next world, were to tell Plato that he thought music was “rather
rot”. So let us hope that, amongst the many who seem to have strong
views about the new education that is to come after the war, and who,
from their position in Church and State will be given an opportunity
of airing them, there will be one or two of sufficient insight to dismount
from their private hobby-horse, and to put the case for the complete
man.
To you and me, as musicians, there is a special interest in the third
strand—the Aesthetic side—since it is the one round which the main
business of our lives is entwined. One of our claims is that Art should
take its place in the education of every child; that is to say that all
children should grow up in an environment in which care is taken to
surround them with beautiful things. It ought not even to be too
much to hope that some day a school-building will have been evolved
which is not definitely offensive to the eye. In many schools, including
the Elementary ones, really beautiful pictures cover the walls, in many
really good music is sung, and often sung beautifully. But there is as
yet no recognition, official or private, of the fact that the purpose of
Education Is not to make us learned, but to enable us to discriminate
between good and bad, and that if we lack this discrimination in artistic
things we shall miss half the joy of life. No man would say that he
cares not a rap whether his own children read good or bad books, like
good or bad music, have good or bad pictures hung in their nurseries;
he wishes them to have their discriminating powers educated. But he
is indifferent to the fate of other people’s children, thinking, presum-
ably that their imaginations will grow without being fed. He can hardly
maintain seriously that if a child’s formative years are spent assimilating
bad standards no irremediable harm has been done. Children can and do
love the very best—witness the popularity of the “Unfinished Sym-
phony”. And in my time as Music Adviser to the L.C.C. I discovered,
to my surprise and delight, that when asked to choose the most perfect
piece of music they had ever heard, many Elementary Schools in London
chose Bach’s “Jesu, joy of man’s desiring”.
The real aim of those who teach any branch of Art should be, not
merely to produce a select few who will paint or play better because of
our teaching, but to awaken and stir the imagination of the whole


body; that is our only true justification for pleading for Art in Educa-
tion. You and I know that the richness or aridity of our lives is condi-
tioned by our Imaginations, but few people realize its full potentiality.
Make a list, one day, of the men and women of History to whom you
would grant the epithet “great”. Plato and Socrates, King Alfred and
Napoleon, Florence Nightingale, Darwin, Newton: add or subtract
as you choose, you will find but one quality common to all of them.
Some were good, some bad; some had great intellectual power, some
small; but every one on any possible list will have had “vision”. They
worked on the same material that was at everyone’s disposal, and their
imagination transmuted it.
How then, you may ask, is the Imagination to be trained? Games
are there for training the body; schoolwork is intended to train the
intellect; religion works in the moral field. What means are there for
developing and training this great quality of Imagination, without
which bare facts can never cluster round a dream? The only method
which human wit has ever devised for such a purpose is Art. Many
men have been born strong in body, some with fine intellects, a reason-
able number with fine character; but only one here and there with real
imagination. Those of us who are “just average”, but want to reach a
little nearer to our ideals, know that only by training —including self-
training—shall we fulfil our desire. Why pretend that it is only on our
imaginative side that the attempt is not worth making?
The endeavour to educate people who already love music so that
they will want that music to be good, may seem at first sight a trivial
contribution to make to the world’s welfare. So I would like you to
meditate on the considered utterances of two fine minds. Ruskin,
when questioned on this very point—the influence of Taste on Char-
acter —replied; “Tell me the things a man likes, and I will tell you the
kind of man he is.” And in our own time Professor Mackail, in words
you might well frame and hang up as a text, said “To have loved the
best, and to have known it for the best, is to have been successful in
life”.


CHAPTER FOURTEEN
THE ELEMENTS OF THINKING
THE word “thinking”, in its primary sense, means exercising the
mind, not necessarily with any purpose or interest. To that
extent it is an activity which, presumably, we share with the animal
world; for your dog must be thinking when he recognizes your voice,
since memory is a function of the mind. “The mind is always attending
to something” is an acknowledgement of the fact that we are thinking
throughout our conscious life. But the great bulk of this, being without
definite purpose, would be better named “ruminating”. If, however,
you desire to be a human being whose opinions and views are of any
positive value it is imperative that you should learn, not merely to
ruminate, but to “think out”. If you try to remember what you had
for breakfast you are certainly thinking, and it would be an entirely
harmless occupation; but if you are a housekeeper, and in these difficult
days had to solve the problem of to-morrow’s breakfast, then you would
be “thinking out”. It is in this latter sense that the word is to be used
in this talk, since it is in that sense we use the word when we call a man
a “thinker”, postulating that he uses his intellect to attack problems.
One of the main purposes of Education is to ensure that as large a
number of people as is possible shall grow up “thinkers out” and not
mere “ruminators”. It would be difficult to believe that the Goddess
of Learning is gratified with her success in this respect, although in
the case of each individual so many years are devoted to the effort. If
those years have, in the case of any one of you, failed to make you
thinkers it would be ridiculous to suppose that, in one more hour, the
want of success is likely to be retrieved. But your education does
not end when you leave school—it would be truer to say that it begins
then—and you will be educating yourselves, willy-nilly, all your lives;
and it is possible, even in one hour, to tell you of a few elementary mis-
conceptions about thinking which may hitherto have been obstacles
in the path of your progress.
(i) True thinking is arguing with yourself. Your object, if you
are as honest as you would claim to be, is one simple thing: to arrive
at the truth, or at a working-hypothesis as near to the truth as, for the
time being, you can penetrate. Try to blot out from your memory all
those so-called arguments you must have heard in which two cocksure
partisans have simply insisted impatiently each on his own point of view;
such bickerings are wrangles, not arguments. When you yourself
are confronted by a problem imagine that two counsel, for the prose


cution and defence, are impartially presenting their case before you,
and pointing out the holes in that of their opponent; with your own
judgment as the tribunal, vowed to pronounced a verdict in
accordance with the evidence.
In talking to you about Apperception I tried to impress on you the
duty of keeping your apperception-masses fluid and receptive through-
out your lives. The moment you cease doing so, stagnation sets in,
and stagnation is intellectual death. One of your apperception-masses
is your Conscience, another is your “artistic Conscience”; and what a
great thinker (W. K. Clifford) said about the former, you can apply to
the latter:
“I cannot believe that any falsehood whatever is necessary to moral-
ity. It cannot be true of my race and yours that to keep ourselves from
becoming scoundrels we must needs believe a lie. The sense of right
grew up among healthy men, and was fixed by the practice of com-
radeship. It has never had help from phantoms and falsehoods, and it
never can want any. By faith in man and piety towards men we have
taught each other the right hitherto; with faith in man and piety to-
wards men, we shall nevermore depart from it.... It is wrong, always,
everywhere, and for any one, to believe anything upon insufficient
evidence. If a man, holding a belief which he was taught in childhood
or persuaded of afterwards, keeps down and pushes away any doubts
which arise about it in his mind, purposely avoids the reading of books
and the company of men that call in question or discuss it, and regards
as impious those questions which cannot easily be asked without dis-
turbing it—the life of that man is one long sin against mankind.”
(2) When you have reached a verdict on any question you must
accept it unswervingly, and act upon it until such time as new evidence
compels you to reopen the matter and stage a new trial. Do not fail,
however, to consider searchingly the implications of your verdict;
for it is in this opening of new avenues of thought that all the virtue
of any knowledge consists. You will see the bearing of this from an
instance. In a class on Acoustics we were recently dealing with the
Velocity of Sound. The students were told that it was roughly 1,100
feet per second; and as a contrast they were told that light travelled at
the colossal speed of 18 6,000 miles per second, and the even more aston-
ishing fact that some stars are so far away that their light takes 2,000
years to reach us; which means that if the star suddenly exploded and
ceased to exist at this moment, our astronomers would still be able to
see it for the next 2,000 years. Many of the class were interested, wrote
the facts down carefully, and asked me to repeat the figures for check


ing; and they were possibly pleased to feel that they had a little more
information to-day than yesterday. But few of them can have seen the
implications, for they were clearly incredulous when I pointed out that,
if an astronomer on that star had a telescope powerful enough to enable
him to see what was happening on this earth, and was actually at that
moment looking at us, he would behold the events which occurred
here 2,000 years ago; which means that, a year or so from now, he
would see Julius Caesar landing in Britain. To realize this is to get an
inkling of the importance of the observer without which one cannot
even begin to understand the basis of the Theory of Relativity; for
what would be the use of telling that astronomer that the event he was
witnessing with his own eyes—not a copy, or a photograph, or any kind
of reproduction, but the genuine first-time actuality—happened 2,000
years ago?
(3) Do not grudge time given to thinking out things, as if it was the
same thing as day-dreaming. There are Eastern Races with whom a
daily seclusion for meditation is a traditional habit; and though you
may think that a counsel of perfection, there are nevertheless innumer-
able periods of the day when most of us do little but ruminate. If it
took you an hour this morning to come here from your home, how
was your mind occupied? “ You have a long way to walk back”, said a
friend to a philosopher. “No”, was the reply, “I just start thinking
about something, and find myself at my front door.” The Old Testa-
ment prophet tells us that the wisdom of a learned man cometh by
opportunity of leisure; but the aphorism is not altogether true. To ac-
quire his learning he must have set apart much time, but even a crowded
day will provide a wise man with many opportunities for reflection.
“Why are you idling?” said Emerson’s mother to her son. “I am not
idling, I am storing energy.”
(4) In talking about Explanation you may remember my telling
you that all teaching necessarily begins with definition. You must
know what a word means, and how a thing is named, before you search
for further knowledge. So begin your serious thinking with over-
hauling words in common use, and see whether your apprehension of
them is genuine or shallow. I have, for example, already pointed out
to you that the answer to the question “Is England musical?”—often
debated with some heat—depends solely on the meaning you give to
the word musical. The shallow meaning is “fond of music”, and the
answer would be yes; the true meaning is “fond of good music”, which
immediately puts a question-mark to your answer. Make a list of


words which you use over and over again, and the next time you spend
ten minutes in an omnibus try to think out one of them. Here are some
ideas to start with:
(a) What is the real difference between a professional and an
amateur? Does not your mind immediately turn to the shallow ex-
planation of money-payments? Two definitions have been made which
may help you to think deeper than that:
“An amateur can be satisfied with knowing a fact; a professional
must know the reason why.”
“An amateur practises until he can do a thing right, a professional
until he can’t do it wrong.”
(b) What is Criticism?
“A man is a better critic of a thing than you are, if he can point out
to you some beauty in it which you had missed.”
“If you say you like or dislike a thing you are not criticizing. Critic-
ism begins with the word Because.”
(c) What do you mean by Success?
“Success is the ratio between what you are and what you might
have been.”
“Success is not beating other people; it is beating yourself.”
(5) There are two methods of thinking, and you should always be
aware which you are using. The first, which logicians call Deduction,
starts with a law or conviction, and in the light of that judges a given
instance. “I’m a modernist, so I maintain that if it’s by Scriabin it
must be first rate.” Deduction may have its uses, but it has been for all
time one of the heavier curses laid on mankind, for by its opening state-
ment it avows that the Court is prejudiced. Every progressive step in
the world’s history, in every branch of human activity, has been met
point-blank by a major premiss which outlawed it. It is the only method
ever used by people who are too lazy to think. The second method,
called Induction, is that of Science: the collection of instances until
there emerges from them something near enough to a general law to be
available as a working-hypothesis. Use Deduction by all means—one
has to —for the smaller things in daily life, with the proviso that your
opening statement is your opinion and has not the authority of the
tablets of Sinai. But let all your real thinking be an effort to reach T ruth,
not to proclaim that you have found it.
(6) We all could enumerate a number of qualities which we admire;
102
PSYCHOLOGY FOR MUSICIANS


qualities which, if we could be born again, we would wish the fairy-
godmother to insert in our make-up. Even if you keep this list a secret
in your heart, you should nevertheless overhaul it periodically, and see
if growing wisdom suggests amendment. I expect most of you would,
for example, like to be quick, and you may be surprised to be told that
in doing so you are unwise. The whole world, you will tell me, looks
down with a touch of pity on the slowcoach. But hear what that great
writer and thinker, Walter Savage Landor, has to say about it:
“Quickness is amongst the least of the mind’s properties, and be-
longs to her in almost her lowest state; nay, it doth not abandon her
when she is driven from her home, when she is wandering and insane.
The mad often retain it; the liar has it; the cheat has it; we find it on
the racecourse and at the card table; education does not give it, and
reflection takes away from it.”
I have known a good number of men with first-class minds; but
though many of them, perhaps most, could be reasonably quick under
pressure, I have never known one who resorted to speed when there
was a possibility of reflection. This was one characteristic that made
them first class. Do not be unreasonably hesitating or slow, or you will
be bound to “miss the bus”; but no one ever caught an intellectual or
artistic bus by galloping after it.
(7) A phrase has become current in recent years that has always
filled me with some alarm: “the will to believe.” It may, of course,
carry a meaning that is not on the surface. For if one sees a thing is
true, one will straightway believe it. If one does not see it is true, but
would like to believe it—and such a case is easy to imagine—then to
bring the Will into action seems to be merely tampering with the judge
after the manner of Hitler in Belgium. I can understand any of you
earnestly desiring to love your Bach, if you have not yet honestly
reached that stage; and it is understandable if you feel it a stage you
“ought” to and must reach, though I should much rather you said
“hope” than “ought”. The danger is that the sense of duty anticipates
the flash of intuition. When anyone says “I simply adore the forty-
eight” do you not suspect that they are boasting of having reached a
goal that they have never set eyes on? If you have any artistic con-
science, never pretend. Will to make the effort to appreciate all that
is good and great, by means of the discrimination which you gain by
thought and understanding. But do not let a sense of duty make you
adopt the opinions of others, for that is pure stealing, and a sin against
H


your own mental and artistic growth. Do not aim at reaping your ideas
from the golden harvest of another man’s brain, but set to work rooting
out the weeds and tares from your own.
(8) Lastly, there is an error in thinking, to which we are all liable,
which has stunted the mental and artistic development of too many by
leading them into a blind alley. It lies in mistaking the Means for the
End. Have you never met the pundit who seems to know all the op.
numbers in Classical Music? It is useful to know whereabouts in a
list of, say, Beethoven’s Sonatas a particular work may come; for one
thing the knowledge will, or should, tell you to which “period” it
belongs, for another you will be saved trouble in ordering a copy from a
shop. But there are people who, as soon as you mention a work, fire
off at you “Op. 127” as if it were proof positive of their own musical
value—which, truth to tell, in such cases I have often found to be an
imaginary quantity. Again, your work in Harmony and Counter-
point is inflicted on you in the hope that it will ultimately increase your
musicianship; but in my young days the man who, often by very hard
work, had mastered the intricacies of eight-part counterpoint, became a
Mus. Doc., taught his pupils the tricks of the trade, and too frequently
had no further traffic with the Art of Music.
The danger for performers lies in the parade of technique. In
Chapter Four enough was said about the why and wherefore of tech-
nical skill, and I need only repeat that it is a means and not an end. If
you are an artist you will know, in your heart, that when your listeners
say how beautiful the music was, you have succeeded; when they only
comment on how well you played or sang, you have failed. Do not
the playing of fireworks, the insertion of the high note at the end of the
song, and all such falls from grace, merely prove that the performer
has not thought out the problem of the duty of an Artist to his Art?


Sides
Action
Aim
Means
A
Physical
The body
Reliability
Habit
B
Intellectual
Thinking
Wisdom
Understanding
C
Aesthetic
Feeling
Happiness
Control
D
Moral
Conscience
Character
Love of truth
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
THE MAP OF PSYCHOLOGY ¹
YOU must often have been told, in your school-days, that the
whole is greater than its parts; though I doubt if the full im-
plications of that statement occurred to you. An ocean is composed
of drops of water; but a man might spend his life studying drops of
water and yet die in ignorance of all that the word ocean means. Every
component part of a building might be spread out before you in a
builder’s yard, but you cannot see the building, for it is something more
than the sum of its parts.
The talks to which you have listened have put before you many
apparently isolated facts and principles, and they must often have been
already familiar to you, and may sometimes have seemed rambling and
discursive. In this final lecture we have to see if they can be fused and
welded together into a coherent plan, if we can make an ocean or an
edifice out of our fragments. If in the end you see that the facts and
principles do come together and form a whole, that properly strung the
isolated beads will make a necklace, then you will have grasped—or
apperceived—the meaning of the word Psychology.
When speaking to you about Education I told you of the Four Sides
of Man; and now I want you to consider those sides again in relation
to their fields of action, to the ends we strive to attain in each field, and
to the methods which make it possible to reach those ends: that is to
say the what, the why, and the how.
1 1 cannot help feeling that psychologists in general will disapprove of this
chapter, and even of its title. They are anxious nowadays to establish the
fact that they deal with pure science, and will not willingly become ethical
philosophers by considering aims and purposes. But I do not see, myself,
how the application of psychology to educational purposes can be made unless
we consider the aim of the teacher as well as the method he adopts.


A. The Physical Side.
In this category you can place everything that I have said to you
about such things as Habit and Technique. To all of us here, as
musicians, these two words, almost synonymous, are of superlative
importance; and as this lecture is necessarily a summing-up, you must
not resent a little recapitulation.
(1) Remember, then, above all things that your minds (and your
pupils’ minds) can only attend to one thing at a time. In performance,
that one thing must be the musical interpretation, which must come
straight from the heart, and must never be cut-and-dried. Conse-
quently every movement of your arms, legs, fingers, and vocal cords
must be automatic, to leave your mind free and unencumbered for the
higher purpose. You may remember my calling your attention to one
of the great mistakes we human beings continually make—the con-
fusing of the end with the means. Wrestle out with yourselves what
you honestly think to be the end of Technique. Is it not that the world
may be able to see, when you no longer have to bother about accuracy,
how interesting an interpreter you can be? Your first imperative
obligation, as a performer, or conductor, or class-teacher, is to create a
spell, and however gifted you may be all your nervous energy will be
required for that. Once created, that electrical contact must be main-
tained at all costs, and you will inexorably find that the moment you
switch your mind on to the “hard passage” the contact is broken; for
the spell existed between your mind and theirs, and once broken, its
recapture is next to impossible.
(2) Muscle-control is attained only by concentration of mind. It
may need a thousand repetitions; but a million, without concentration,
will not secure it. Girls have told me that, at school, they always prac-
tised their scales with a novel on the music-desk. I hope they derived
some profit from the literature, for they could have gained little or
none in any other way.
(3) Find out whether you —and each of your pupils—are of the
kind to whom improvement comes gradually or in jumps. If you, or
they, are in the latter class, cultivate faith by remembering that every-
thing you can now do with ease and certainty was at one time a new and
difficult problem. No technical difficulty I have ever been confronted
with in music has filled me with such absolute despair as my first five
minutes of learning to ride a bicycle.
(4) Do not let conscientiousness in your work drive you to ignore
saturation point. The first sign of muscular fatigue is a hint to you that


the sponge is full; after that it is dangerous to risk strain, and foolish to
waste time.
B. The Intellectual Side.
(1) Remember that improvement in one direction does hot imply
improvement in another. You may work at eight-part Counterpoint
until it is child’s play to you, or practise singing chromatic scales and
shakes till the gallery marvels at your skill with open mouths: but you
have only improved yourself in those particular lines. Your technique
in two directions is greater than it was, but you are unwise to think you
are therefore a better composer or a better Lieder singer: indeed, you will
be a little lucky if you are not a worse. A fine mathematician is often a
very indifferent bridge-player—even at adding up the score—and the
best schoolboy chess-player I ever knew never succeeded in reaching the
Upper School.
(2) Always search for a general rule, both in learning for yourself
and in teaching others. If I were to ask you the sum of the first ten
odd numbers, no doubt you could tell me in time, though some of you
might want pencil and paper. Once you know the rule that the sum is
always the square of the number you take—in this case it will be 100 —
you are applying a principle instead of juggling with a lot of facts. I
wonder if you have ever thought out, for instance, why the seven sharps
in a key-signature had to come in that order and no other; why the
order of the seven flats had to be the exact reverse and could not have
been otherwise; why you are asked, if your melody begins with an
incomplete bar, to make your last bar correspondingly incomplete.
(3) Closely allied with the above, though it may sound morealarm-
ingly philosophical, always try to get at the universal from the particular.
That is one of the things which Algebra tries to do, as opposed to Arith-
metic. The latter says that if apples are “two a penny”, and you spend
threepence, you will get six apples. Algebra, to get at a truth independent
of two and three and six, says if apples are x a penny, and you spend y
pence, you will get xy apples. If I asked you for an example of a major
key-chord you might say C.-E.-G. or D.-Fjf.-A., or any other—all
particular cases.. If you said “Tonic, mediant, dominant”, you have
expressed it “universally” because it is true whatever note the Tonic
happens to be. Solfa-ists introduce children to a great musical truth,
expressed in terms of the universal, by teaching them to sing Doh-mi-
soh on any sound they may happen to hear, for they are teaching a
universal idea instead of a particular application of it.


(4) That Interest and Attention are things of the mind is a fact you
probably never doubted; and I am sure you will accept the psycholo-
gist’s claim that unless you can evoke them your teaching will prove
arid and worthless. You also knew, before listening to me, that a dull
thing will become interesting if the right link can be found: how such
an intrinsically dull thing as a postage-stamp can rivet the attention of a
collector. But perhaps you did not realize that, even in the dullest
incidentals of teaching, a link can and must be found; and that want of
interest and attention in the pupils is, always and everywhere, to be
attributed to the teacher.
In these two fields, the Physical and Mental, cleverness and quick-
ness are due either to rapidity of sensation, as in reading, or of associa-
tion, as in memorizing. But such cleverness, though it unfortunately
often carries off the prizes, is not necessarily deep-seated. I remember
once, when trying to solve a crossword puzzle, being beaten by a clue
which I then read out, asking for help: “Give me a kiss and I can
seven letters”. In less than two seconds a quick-witted boy—otherwise
rather unintelligent—gave the answer—Mexican. I confess that I
felt anyone with such a quick working brain should have reached a
higher intellectual status than this boy; then I remembered the quota-
tion I have given you from Landor, and realized that to assume that
Nature intended the boy to be a scholar was as rash as to assume that a
child who happens to.be endowed with “absolute pitch” should therefore
devote its life to music.
C. The Aesthetic Side.
This, as I told you, is the realm of the F eelings and the Imagination;
and the field includes all that will add to, or subtract from, the sum of
human happiness.
(1) The intensity with which we feel, though it does vary from
man to man, is not to be judged superficially. Some people’s emotions
respond to a hint: the very thought of misfortune makes them sad and
sympathetic. Others have to be worked up, often with difficulty.
But the time-factor is not the true test. “Depth of feeling” is not
necessarily to be attributed to those whose eyes quickly fill with tears
nor imperviousness to those who do not readily display emotion.
(2) Control of our feelings should be as fixed a goal as control of our
muscles; and with honesty of purpose it is equally within our reach.
Not, as a rule, in the case of congenital likes and dislikes, though even
these have their variations from time to time, and sometimes prove


impermanent and modifiable. If you happen to dislike beer, as I do, it
is improbable that any amount of determination will make you like it
—even if you can think of any reason why you should embark on the
effort. Yet when, during the 1914-18 war, I had a spell of work as an
agricultural labourer, I discovered that, after a long session of digging,
the one and only craving of my soul was for beer. Soon after peace the
old dislike returned, and though I am sorry to have lost a capacity for
enjoyment, I have acquired, I hope, a certain sympathy and under-
standing.
Taste, in the sense of discrimination, has been defined as Thought
guiding Feeling; and the definition is in itself an assertion of the
possibility of control. An almost casual remark of Sir Walter Parratt
influenced me, as a student, more than I can say. “Sometimes I find”,
he said, “that I dislike a passage in Brahms”; then he quickly added
“ But I always know it is my fault”. If you steadily and fervently aim,
on such occasions, at discovering why the composer put those notes on
paper, you will generally end, with a little wholesome humiliation, by
wondering at your own original lack of imagination.
(3) Remember, in this realm of the Feelings, that pleasure and
happiness are not to be truly measured by quantity but by quality: not
by amount, but by depth. If you are fond of cigarettes, and are a judge
of them, would you rather have a single first-class one, or a dozen poor
specimens? If you understand cricket, would you rather see Bradman
bat for five minutes, or watch me do it for an hour? Happiness is a
frame of mind, not a thing to which standards of measurement can be
applied; pleasure is an incident, being your reaction to a stimulus. And
I think all of us would rather be deeply touched for a moment, than
made to purr for ten minutes.
To any artist the importance of the Imagination is self-evident and
axiomatic, and I would like to give you two quotations from writers
who were not themselves professional artists, which may help to
strengthen your case when you speak with our enemies in the gate.
Einstein once said “Imagination is more important than know-
ledge; for knowledge is limited, but Imagination encircles the world.”
And another scientist said—
“ Experience without Imagination's sterile. Imagination can make
the prisoner in his cell dream dreams, and then, taking his pen, write
the Pilgrim’s Progress', it can make us poor human beings become only
a little lower than the angels; it can stand at the bedside of the humblest
drudge and say ‘Get up, for to-day there are to be visions’.”


D. The Field of Morals.
You will have seen, lam sure, that Psychology inevitably leads us to
a point where we are face to face with Morality. That lies outside the
range of anything about which I am supposed to talk to you. But
taking the word in its broadest sense of “character” there are facets
which the artist should recognize as affecting his work.
Your own personal morality—in the sense of character—depends
solely on whether or no your Will obeys the dictates of your Con-
science. But of all the millions who know this only individuals here
and there seem to have perceived the inevitable corollary. Your
conscience is a bundle of conclusions you have reached, drawn from
experience, or instruction, or thought, as to right and wrong. So is the
conscience of the first stranger you meet. But his bundle is entirely
different from yours, and many things you may think perfectly right—
say Sunday Tennis—he may think hopelessly wrong. That fact led
the wise man to put my corollary into an aphorism: “Your first duty
to your conscience is to educate it.”
I would have refrained altogether from touching on Morality, even
to this elementary extent, were it not that the “Artistic Conscience” is,
in Music probably more than in other Arts, necessary to salvation. Of
the outstanding importance of your character, I need only say that
every time you go on a platform, every time you confront a class, your
character will stand out in the limelight in everything you do or say.
“It does not matter what you say to me”, said Emerson; “What you
are shouts so loud that I cannot hear your words.” Another wise man
said the same in other words; “The artist does not see things as they
are, but as he is.” I will not make a list of the many ignoble ways in
which all performers are tempted to focus attention and applause on
themselves. But I would like you, some day when you are in the mood
for it, to ask yourselves one question, as an acid-test. If you had just
finished your performance, and one of your listeners came up to speak
to you, would you rather he said “How beautiful the music was”, or
“How well you did that”. According to your answer you will know
whether your artistic conscience is in need of further education.
The object of this talk has been, as you see, to try to knit together
the strands of all the various things about which I have spoken to you, •
so that you might see that the isolated units can be brought together and
fitted into a semblance of a mosaic of Psychology. I hope you have
also noticed that, while trying to show you the applications of that
Science to the Art of Music, I have also tried to establish the dignity of
our Art, and its fitness for influencing the intellectual, the aesthetic,


and even the moral side of man. It is for you to go out into the world
with the resolve to maintain and further this dignity. To do so you
must aim high: not for the sake of financial gain, nor for the grati-
fication of the artistic temperament —a very different thing from the
artistic conscience. You must do so because you realize, as a study of
psychology compels you to realize, that Life is a bigger thing than any
of its branches, including Music. So I will say farewell to you with a
parable, leaving you to unravel its implications.
A great Cathedral was being built, and a visitor found himself in
the yard where the masons carved their angels and gargoyles. Going
up to a man he asked “What are you carving that for?” and the answer
came “A pound a day”. Going to a second mason he again asked why
the man was carving his figure; and the answer came “Because I love
carving”. Of a third mason he asked the same question, and this time
the answer was “Because I love Cathedrals”.
Music will not make you rich, but it can make you happy; it will
not save your soul, but it can make your soul worth saving. But the
condition of both is that you should look on your careers not as pedlars
having something to sell, but as idealists, trying to foster the world’s
imagination, and making the Art of Music subservient to the greater
Art of Living.


BIBLIOGRAPHY
For further reading the student will find any of the following works
worthy of study;
T. P. Nunn; Education; its Data and first Principles.
P. Sandiford: Educational Psychology.
G. H. Thomson: Instinct, Intelligence and Character.
R. S. Woodworth: Psychology: a study of Mental Life.
LI. Wynn Jones: Theory and Practice of Psychology.
R. M. Ogden: Hearing.
A. B. Wood: A Textbook of Sound.
J. H. Robinson: The Mind in the Making.
William James: Talks to Teachers on Psychology.
W. McDougall: Social Psychology.
D. C. Miller: A Science of Musical Sounds.
C. W. Valentine: The Psychology of Beauty (2nd Ed.).
M. Schoen: The Effects of Music.
C. E. Seashore: Psychology of Music.


INDEX
Page Page
Accusative case 51 Economy of muscles 32
Acquired reaction • 12 Efferent Nerves 1 b
Affect 13 Ego and Me 3
Afferent nerves 10 Einstein (quotation) 109
Apperception (c.9) 62 Elements of thinking (c. 14) 99
Apperception-masses 63 Emerson (quotation) no
Appreciation (c. 11) 83 Experience 4
Artistic conscience no Explanation (c. 10) 70
Association of Ideas 38 External suggestion 92
Associating systems 57
Attention (c.7) 47 Feeling 4
Automatic action 14 Flash of intuition 70
Focus 36
Forgetfulness 60
Bar-rhythm 77 p our sides of man 96
Billy Boy 77
Boredom 3 1
Garrulousness 20
Genetic method 81
Cadences 79 Grafting 53
Canalization 16 Grammar 23
Carelessness 16 Gratification 53
Causation 34
Challenging intelligence 49 Habit (c.3) 13
Change of subject 48 Historical method 81
Clifford (quotation) 100 Horace 46
Cluster of ideas 63
Cognition 13 Ideas and association (c. 5) 34
Comma (importance of) 78 Ideo-motor action 91
Common factor 38 Imagination 83
Commonsense of Technique (c.4) 4 „ 98
Compound time 75 Immediate cause 34
Conation 13 „ interest 43
Concentration 52 Importance of highest note 78
Conducting 30 Improvement 106
Consciousness 3 „ (memory) 57
Contiguity 38 Inhibition 14
Cramming 58 Inner parts 50
Creative imagination 84 Instinct 37
Critical appreciation 8 5 Intelligent appreciation 8 5
Crude appreciation 85 „ attention 47
Interest (c.6) 41
_ . . Internal Suggestion 92
auction 102 Intervals (teaching of) 72
Deferent nerves 10 ' 0 '
Deliberate attention 47
Determined action 92 James (rules of habit) 19
Discord 80 Jeannot’s Knife 43


Page Page
Key signatures 60 Pleasure and pain 10
Key (teaching of) 72 Primitive attention 47
Knowledge by apprehension 70 Prolegomena (c.i) 1
„ by synthesis 70 Principle of causation 34
Punctuation 78
Pure ideas 36
Landor (quotation) 103
Law of economy 65
„ of Interest 43 Qua 85
Listening 49
Literalness of children 65
Reaction (c.2) 7
Recall 5 5
Map of Psychology (c. 15) 105 Receptive imagination 84
Margin of mind 36 Recognition 55
Master Malaprop 66 Reflex action 90
Meaning of Education (c.i 3) 94 Relaxation 24
Meaning of stars 100 Rhythm 76
Means and End 104 Rumination 99
Mediate interest 43
Memory (c.8) 55
Mental images 3 5 Saturation point 3 1
>> rehearsal 27 Score-reading 92
» » 3° Secondary rhythm 77
„ technique 22 Second inversions 52
Metre 76 Sensation 7
Mind 4 Sensitiveness 18
Modes 79 Sensory nerves 10
Motive 92 Sight-reading 28
Muscular condition 24 Similarity in kind 3 8
„ technique 23 slurs 78
Spontaneous attention 47
Stimulus 7
Native reaction 11 Subconscious mind 3
Nerves 10 Subjective and objective 5
Nervousness 18 explanation 71
Nuclei of ideas 63 (> memory 62
Synthesis 70
Objective and subjective 4
„ explanation 71 Technique (c.4) 22
>> memory 62 Threshold of mind 36
Organization 1 Thinking out 99
Tied notes 79
Tightness (muscular) 24
Perception 7 Time (teaching of) 74
Philosophy 94 Tiredness 32
Phrasing 77 Transposition 91


Page Page
Ultimate cause 34 Voluntary actions 90
Will (c. 12) 89
Vineta 77 Will to believe 103
Vocational training 96
Volitional attention 47 Zero-point 39


THIS BOOK IS PRODUCED IN COMPLETE CONFORMITY
WITH THE AUTHORIZED ECONOMY
STANDARDS
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY THE CHISWICK PRESS LTD
NEW SOUTHGATE, LONDON, N.l 1.
