

AIR MINISTRY
AIR PUBLICATION 3 139
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
IN FLYING PERSONNEL
of the
ROYAL AIR FORCE
INVESTIGATED DURING THE WAR 1939-1945




AIR MINISTRY
AIR PUBLICATION 3139
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
IN FLYING PERSONNEL
of the
ROYAL AIR FORCE
INVESTIGATED DURING THE WAR 1939-1945
Crown Copyright Reserved
The following reports on investigations into psychological
disorders in flying personnel during the war period 1939-1945
are issued for the information and guidance of the senior executive
and all medical officers of the Royal Air Force.
By Command of the Air Council.
W.B.[?]
LONDON : HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
1947


Air Ministry,
Kingsway,
To the Permanent Under Secretary of State for Air. London, W.C.2.
Sir,
- I have the honour to submit a survey of psychological disorders in flying
personnel of the Royal Air Force investigated during the war 1939-1945,
to enable the medical branch to give authoritative advice to the executive
on the operational limit of members of air crews.
The study was begun at operational commands in 1942 by Air Vice-Marshal
Sir Charles P. Symonds, K.8.E., C. 8., M.D., F.R.C.P., Consultant in Neuro-
psychiatry, and Wing Commander Denis J. Williams, D.Sc., M.D., F.R.C.P.,
Specialist in Neuro-psychiatry. Field investigations were carried out in the
operational commands by Squadron Leader D. D. Reid, M.D. An assessment
of the incidence of predisposition to psychological disorders in flying personnel
showed that two-thirds of individuals who failed to withstand the stress of
flying were predisposed to nervous breakdown. As this group undoubtedly
contained individuals capable of adapting themselves satisfactorily to operational
flying, it was decided that only severely predisposed individuals should be
rejected at entry, and that those with other degrees of predisposition should be
watched carefully during training and eliminated if signs of temperamental
unsuitability appeared.
For this reason the attention of medical officers and flying instructors
was directed to signs of temperamental unsuitability for duties as members of
air crews. Flying instructors are particularly well placed to discern signs of
nervousness in the air from observation of pupils in the mirror, from their
manner of handling the controls and obeying instructions, and from observation
of behaviour on the ground, such as lack of keenness, excuses for putting off
flying, and reporting sick for trivialities.
Surveys of psychological disorder in air crew showed similar findings year by
year : about 3,000 cases of nervous breakdown and 300 of lack of confidence
annually, which indicated that a uniform standard of psychiatric examination
was being maintained.
As regards type of flying duty associated with breakdown, one-third of the
neurosis cases occurred in Bomber and one-third in Flying Training Commands,
the remainder being distributed among flying personnel of Coastal, Fighter and
Transport Commands. One-third broke down without experience of operational
flying, one-third with under 100 hours' and one-third with over 100 hours’
operational flying.
Types of nervous breakdown were chiefly anxiety and hysteria, both
together accounting for over 90 per cent of cases. Practically all cases of nervous
breakdown (98-4 per cent) arose from underlying psychological rather than
physical causes.
Analysis of the disposal of cases of psychological disorder showed that
22\ per cent of cases returned to full flying and 3| per cent to limited flying;
the majority of cases, 72 per cent, were grounded; 1-9 per cent required to
be invalided.
In 1945, the reliability of the psychiatric method of diagnosing psychological
disorders in R.A.F. flying personnel was investigated by statistical methods by
Professor A! Bradford Hill, D.Sc., Ph.D., and Wing Commander Denis J.
Williams, D.Sc., M.D., F.R.C.P. A fair degree of agreement in psychiatric
diagnosis was found in the assessment of severe predisposition, but in the other
degrees of predisposition the disagreement was such that it was decided that the
psychiatric assessment per se should not be used in selection of air crew at
entry but should be regarded as one medical factor to be taken into account by
the selection board in the final summing-up.
I have the honour to be. Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
H. E. WHITTINGHAM
Director-General of Medical Services,
Royal Air Force.
January, 1946.


CONTENTS
Chapter Page
I—Critical review of the published literature, by Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles
P. Symonds and Wing Commander Denis J. Williams .. .. 1-17
ll—Use and abuse of the term ‘ flying stress by Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles
P. Symonds .. .. .. .. .... .. .. .. 18-21
111 Series of cases with psychological disorder examined in relation to the
problem of selection of flying personnel, by Air Vice-Marshal Sir
Charles P. Symonds .. . . .. .. .. . . .. 22-30
IV— Personal investigation of psychological disorder in flying personnel of
Bomber Command, by Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds
and Wing Commander Denis J. Williams .. .. .. .. 31—64
V—Personal investigation of psychological disorder in flying personnel of
Fighter Command, by Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds
and Wing Commander Denis J. Williams .. .. . . .. 65-70
Vl—Personal investigation of psychological disorder in flying personnel of
Coastal Command, by Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds
and Wing Commander Denis J. Williams .. .. .. .. 71-81
Vll—lnvestigation of psychological disorder in flying personnel by the Unit
Medical Officers, by Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds and
Wing Commander Denis J. Williams .. . . .. .. .. 82-90
Vlll—Human response to flying stress (based on the Dunham and the Croonian
Lectures for 1943), by Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds . . 100-
116
IX—Statistical survey of the occurrence of psychological disorder in flying
personnel in six months (3rd February to 3rd August, 1942), by Air
Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds and Wing Commander Denis J.
Williams .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 117-
139
X—Clinical and statistical study of neurosis precipitated by flying duties, by
Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds and Wing Commander
Denis f. Williams .. .. .. . . . . .. .. . . 140-
172
Xl—Occurrence of neurosis in Royal Air Force (air crews), 1943-1944, by Air
Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds .. .. .. .. . . 173
177
XII —Occurrence of neurosis in Royal Air Force (aircrews), 1944-1945, by Air
Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds and Wing Commander Denis J.
Williams ' . . .. . . . . .. . . .. .. . . 178-
182
XIII — Time of recognition of neurosis in flying personnel, by Wing Commander
Denis J. Williams . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 183-
184
XIV— Predisposition to psychological disorder in normal flying personnel, by
Wing Commander Denis J. Williams .. .. .. .. .. 185-
192
XV—Signs of temperamental unsuitability in air crews under training, by Air
Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds and Wing Commander Denis
J. Williams .. .. . . .. .. . . .. .. 193-
202
Appendix to Chapter XV.—Notes for flying instructors on recognition
of nervousness in pilots under training {lssued by the Director-General
of Medical Services, June, 1943.) .. .. .. .. .. 203-
204
(76643) A 2


Chapter Page
XVl—Assessment of temperament in connection with selection of air crews : the
psychiatric method employed, by Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles
P. Symonds and Wing Commander Denis J. Williams .. . . 205-
224
Appendix to Chapter XVl.—Note on the observers' analysis of their
method .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. • • 225-
229
XVll—Probability of return to full flying of men who have broken down under
the strain of operational duties, by Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P.
Symonds and Wing Commander Denis J. Williams . . .. 230-
233
XVlll—Prognosis for a return to full flying duties after psychological disorder,
by Squadron Leader D. D. Reid .. .. .. .. . . .. 234
244
XlX—Some measures of the effect of operational stress on bomber crews, by
Squadron Leader D. D. Reid .. .. .. .. . . .. 245-
258
XX —Episodes of unconsciousness, confusion and amnesia while flying, by
Wing Commander Denis J. Williams .. .. . . .. . . 259-
281
XXI— Psychological aspects of airsickness, by Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P.
Symonds and Wing Commander Denis.J. Williams .. .. .. 282
307
XXII — Reliability of psychiatric opinion in the Royal Air Force, by Professor
A. Bradford Hill and Wing Commander Denis J. Williams .. 308-
320
XXlll—Fluctuations in navigator performance during operational sorties, by
Squadron Leader D. D. Reid .. .. . . .. . . . . 321-
331
Glossary' .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 332-
333
Index .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 334-
343
Contents— contd .


CHAPTER I
CRITICAL REVIEW OF THE PUBLISHED LITERATURE
by
Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds, K.B.E., C.B., M.D., F.R.C.P., and
Wing Commander Denis J. Williams, D.Sc., M.D., F.R.C.P.
FPRC Report 412 (b), January, 1942
Introduction
Although medical officers in civil and military flying centres have recognised
pyschological disorders in members of air crews since the latter part of the war
of 1914-18, few descriptions of these disorders can be found in the medical
literature. Until recently they escaped the notice of the trained psychiatrist,
so that those accounts which have appeared have been based upon the observa-
tions of medical officers whose interests have been more general. In conse-
quence, these disorders have been described mainly in relation to other aspects
of aviation and have not received the detailed attention which they deserve.
The growth of aviation has occurred at a time when there have been great
changes in the field of psychological medicine. This association has engendered
confusion in thought and terminology so that the literature must be reviewed
with a critical interest in its place in modern psychiatry as well as with regard
to its direct relationship to aviation.
1. General description and symptomatology
Anderson (1919) reported psychological disorders in 10 per cent of 600
pilots in squadrons under his care in the 1914-18 war. He found that these
disorders occurred early in flying training, or later in the stress of active
combatant flying. - Symptoms sometimes arose after the pilot’s first solo flight,
or when he first flew a new type of plane. Later on the precipitant was often
a crash or the witnessing of a disaster, but occasionally the symptoms did not
appear until the ill effect of further flying stress became cumulative. He
noticed the frequency with which neurasthenic symptoms occurred, the
patients showing great fatigue, irritability, and apathy, but he also recorded
the occurrence of hysterical manifestations. Anderson differentiated clearly
between the psychological illness arising during, training, and those disorders
resulting from the experiences of war flying. In the first group the prognosis
was so bad that he recommended permanent removal from flying duties. When
a pilot had completed 100 hours of operational flying the position was different,
especially if there had been any particularly unpleasant precipitating cause,
and it was his experience that in these cases simple psychotherapy was successful
in returning the pilot to flying duties—" the earlier the stage of onset of the
neurosis in a flying man’s career the more hopeless it is to deal with or cure."
In all cases he stressed the importance of psychological examination as soon
as possible after symptoms had appeared.
At the same time Gotch (1919) reported a larger group of 200 cases of
psychological disorder which he described in some detail. His system of case-
note taking, with insistence upon a full family and personal history, including
childhood reactions and behaviour traits, adjustment to the Service and to
flying conditions, as well as details of the man’s flying experience (types of
craft, total and operational hours, combats, maximal and average heights,
(78642) A 8


unpleasant experiences, degree of confidence, and so on) bear a very close
resemblance to the system used to-day. Gotch described the major symptoms
in each group and pointed out that the neuroses resulting from flying duties
had the same symptom patterns as neuroses arising from other causes and in
other occupations. In discussing treatment he distinguished between the
management of a case of pure fatigue and that of neurosis. Like Anderson,
he concluded that the shorter the flying experience the worse was the prognosis,
but he thought that with early psychotherapy, including a full investigation,
explanation, reassurance and rest the majority of the disorders resulting
from war flying should resolve completely.
It was recognised by the observers in contact with pilots in the 1914-18 war
that the reaction types of the psychological disorders arising in them and in
other members of air crews did not differ fundamentally from the psychological
illnesses of civil life. In his Goulstonian Lectures, Birley (1920) described
vividly the deterioration of pilots as a result of the great stress of aerial warfare ’
during 1917 and 1918. He showed that after the young pilot had reached
the zenith of his efficiency, fatigue, uncertainty, fear and physical distress
caused a decrease in his efficiency, his powers of leadership and his offensive
spirit. The appearance of this deterioration depended upon the quality of
the man and the degree of stress with which he had to contend. He traced
the syndrome from its beginnings in a loss of zest for flying to a fully developed
anxiety state, and said that although the men called it ‘ wind up ’ the condition
is in fact an anxiety neurosis. The presence of this anxiety neurosis became
a permanent and difficult problem in the latter months of the war, when
the type of men entering into the Service had deteriorated and the powers
of resistance were insufficient for the stress encountered. It is quite apparent
from these observations that Birley did not consider these psychological
disturbances to be specific to flying, and he refers to the degree of flying stress
as only one of the causes of the neuroses in flying personnel. Dudley (1918)
had expressed similar views when he said that the condition of nervous
exhaustion seen in pilots depended upon the temperament and character of the
pilot, the type of work and the machine he used, the weather and the
environment of the aerodrome.
Anderson (1919) and Gotch (1919) similarly did not consider that the
neuroses seen in pilots were diseases sui generis, but they realised that they
were the result of unusual stresses acting upon individuals with varying degrees
of predisposition. Gotch sums up his views by saying: " War flying imposes
as great a stress as is possible on men in their most unstable years.” Rook
(1939) on the basis of his experience writes: “ One fact which was clearly brought
out in the war was that any individual would sooner or later break down if
the stress was sufficiently severe.”
Head, in his report on the sense of stability and balance in the air (1919),
pointed out that such factors as loss of confidence or anxiety from extraneous
causes such as family worries or unpleasant experiences associated with war
flying, may cause regression in the efficient performance of flying duties. Rippon
and Manuel (1918) discussing the place of temperament and physical fitness
in aviation, described deterioration in performance in predisposed individuals.
Dudley (1918) also described a state of nervous exhaustion which depended for
its appearance upon the personality and the stress to which the personality
was subjected. ,
In other belligerent countries there was simultaneous interest in the
incidence of psychological disorders in air crews. This is shown by the number
of papers which were published immediately after the 1914-18 war in France,


Germany, America and Italy concerning the selection of air crews upon psycho-
logical criteria (vide infra). As in this country, few described the disorders
themselves. Perrin de Brichambaut (1921), in discussing the merits of different
methods of selection, touched upon the causes of neurosis in air crews, while
Dockeray and Isaacs (1920) reviewed the opinions held in the allied countries
at the end of the war.
Except for Bauer’s monograph " Aviation Medicine ” in 1926 no further
significant work appeared until the development of commercial aviation in the
early thirties, when interest in selection of flying personnel and in physical and
physiological aspects of flying grew, particularly in America and Germany. Un-
fortunately much of the German aviation literature is not at present available.
Schubert (1935) and Armstrong (1936 and 1939) described neuroses occurring
in pilots. Their views will be discussed later in relation to the present work.
A series of general dissertations upon the psychology of flying (Reinartz 1932,
Jensen 1936, Patient 1938, Walshe 1941) have not advanced knowledge in
any specific direction.
The reaction types recognised by different observers in psychological
disorders in flying personnel have been described under many names. Anderson
(1919) divided the types into neurasthenic or hysterical, and said that the
chief symptom in the neurasthenic though often denied was aerophobia—fear
of flying. He added a group of cases arising after a flying accident, and said
the condition is absolutely the same as the traumatic neurosis known as railway
spine or railway brain. Gotch (1919) divided his cases upon aetiology, but his
descriptions include simple fatigue, anxiety states, neurasthenia and loss of
confidence without any psychological illness. Birley (1920) distinguished
between pure fatigue, fear, a mixture of these disguised by the patients in such
terms as wind up and a fully established anxiety neurosis. Many of the early
writers considered these psychological disorders generically under an omnibus
title which included such names as : flying stress, aviators’ neurasthenia,
aero-neurosis (Anderson, 1919), chronic fatigue, staleness, aviators’ stomach,
aeroasthenia, and simply fatigue (Armstrong 1939). Both these authors
favoured the name aero-neurosis, but in this country flying stress used originally
by Flack to describe the main cause, was later used incorrectly to refer to the
effects, the neurosis itself. In America the name aero-neurosis has found
favour, while on the Continent mal des aviateurs (Perrin de Brichambaut 1922)
was popular among a similar range of synonyms (Schubert 1935).
This accent upon a name, so common in medicine, and usually so unfortunate
in its results, endowed these syndromes with a false specificity and the recognised
division of psychological disorders into reaction types, and the explanation of
these types upon the basis of personal predisposition and environmental stress
was ignored. After the war of 1914-18 cases were not studied systematically
until civil aviation matured in the United States. The natural consequence
was that when psychological disorders again made their appearance in associa-
tion with commercial aviation they were considered to be specifically due to
the physical and mental hardships of flying, and a new disease was bom.
Thus in 1936 Armstrong published a paper entitled " A special form of functional
psychoneurosis appearing in airplane pilots.” He called this new syndrome
" aero-neurosis ” and later (1939) stated —" There are two general types of
neurosis which develop in airplane pilots. One type develops in relatively
stable individuals, is not necessarily disabling, and is an entity seen only in
aviators. The other type develops in relatively unstable pilots or in relatively
stable pilots under conditions of unusual stress, is disabling, and is identical
with those neuroses seen in general practice. The former is known as aero-
neurosis while the latter is composed of the ordinary neuroses which have
(76642) A 4


flying as the principal inciting cause.” He defined aero-neurosis as " a chronic
functional nervous disorder occurring in professional aviators, characterised
by gastric distress, nervous irritability, fatigue of the higher voluntary mental
centres, insomnia, and increased motor activity.” No criticisms of this division
of the neuroses seen in flying personnel have since been published, but it is
at variance with the view of observers during the war 1914-18, who either
tried to bring the symptom patterns into line with recognised psychiatric
reaction types, or who looked on the psychological illnesses as one group under
a single heading. Archer (1939) divided the psychogenic disorders resulting
from active Service flying aetiologically into those conditions developing in
otherwise healthy stable individuals—anxiety states; and those which are
due to the revelation of latent mental instability—psychoses, anxiety states,
hysterical syndrome, and the disclosure of a psychopathic personality. He
said that these conditions had to be differentiated from those due to toxaemia,
epilepsy or organic disease of the nervous or other systems.
As no other serious attempts to describe the reaction types have been
foilnd in the literature, the charge made in the opening paragraph of confusion
in thought and terminology in the psychological disorders in flying personnel
is well founded.
2. Aetiology
Gotch (1919) emphasised the difference between the effects of flying per se
and operational flying. He found that although pilots who break down after
an accident late in their flying careers usually made a full recovery, the prognosis
was bad if the accident had been caused by fire in the aircraft, breakage of the
machine, or a direct hit by anti-aircraft fire.
Birley (1920) thought that the special susceptibility of an operational
pilot to such a breakdown depended particularly upon the hazardous nature
of his work—for instance, fighter pilots were more vulnerable than artillery
observers, the irregular hours of sleep, the individual nature of the responsi-
bility shouldered, the fatigue of flying as such; possibly the physical effects
of altitude and the deterioration in morale of fatigued men in contact with
each other.
3. Constitutional predisposition
Gotch found evidence of some degree of nervous instability in the families
of 167 of his 200 cases of psychological disorder in air crews, so that 83 per cent
were definitely predisposed, a significant point in relation to the discussion
upon the selection of air crews which appears later. He recognised several
distinct aetiological types of psychological disorder—those physically and
mentally stale, showing symptoms of pure fatigue ; those with mental breakdown
due to identifiable psychological causes—these were grouped as neurasthenia;
those with a similar breakdown, attributed to toxic causes such as influenza,
malaria, dysentery, tuberculosis or oral sepsis; those showing disorders of
conduct (these included all who showed themselves unstable or untrustworthy,
for he used the term psychopaths in a broader sense than it is used to-day) ;
those with physiogenic mental breakdown caused by such factors as oxygen
lack at high altitude, airsickness or heterophoria ; and a small group of frank
malingerers.
4. Temperamental causes
So many different types of temperament are met in successful pilots, that
it seems simplest to begin by describing those traits the presence or absence
of which have been found to cause inefficiency in flying. Even were there


not such a wide variation between personality type and any specific perform-
ance, the attempt to link the two would be difficult, and McDougall (1913)
said a propos of such an attempt—" Some of the best modem psychologists
have been led into absurdities by attempting this impossible task ... in one
respect only can we make a decided advance upon the ancients, we can realise
the great complexity of the problem and can frankly admit ignorance.” Birley
(1920) referring to war flying, put the matter simply by drawing attention to
two men of widely different temperament who both pursued their same highly
specialised vocation with, consummate skill—Dr. W. G. Grace and Prince
Ranjitsinghi. Head (1919) said: “Flying introduces no elements which are
not in evidence in riding a motor bicycle, game-shooting, cricket or golf,"
and related the abilities to pursue these interests and to fly efficiently.
This relationship is not now so close as it was 24 years ago, for the efficient
extension of the body image to the end of a club, or the wings of a small plane,
is a more intimate and less mechanical affair than the same extension in a
modern four-engined bomber. When the bomber is flown by instruments
alone, the personal projection alters and different factors operate.
Even if an individual’s temperament is suited to flying, it must be realised
that aptitude for flying per se does not necessarily indicate temperamental
suitability for operational flying, which calls for additional qualities. Those
who are devoid of flying ability do not reach the state of operational training,
so that in practice both forms of aptitude are often considered together (Birley
1920). The disparity between the temperamental ability to fly and to fly in
operations may be striking and was described by Thorndike (1919).
The great diversity in temperament which is compatible with success in
aviation is reflected in individual views upon the desiderata for ideal pilots.
Dockeray (1920) thought that quiet methodical men became the best pilots
in the U.S. Army Air Corps, but ten years later a report of the School of
Aviation Medicine stated that strong and active instincts of exploration and
curiosity were desirable. Similarly, Patient (1938) concluded that there was no
difference between the ability of the introvert and the extrovert to become good
pilots. Rook (1939) said : “ Many of the pilots who won Victoria Crosses in the
war were of a quiet sensitive type, and some were distinctly hyper-nervous.”
Birley (1920) in his report upon temperament and Service flying, drew
attention to the individual nature of the pilots’ work in the R.A.F. in contrast
to the more gregarious conditions of duty in the other Services, and stressed
the additional temperamental requirements needed for such exacting service.
But with this broad generalisation he admitted that exact temperamental
requirements could not be defined, and he thought the difficulty so great that
accurate selection upon the basis of temperament, personality, and character was
impossible. He said: “We cannot at present identify the potential cricketer
or mathematician except by watching how the former catches a ball and how
the latter does sums, and the same principles would seem also to apply to the
art of flying.” Rivers and Rippon (1920) after attempting to correlate per-
formance with temperament, on the basis of personal interview, came to the
same conclusion. Anderson (1919) while he held that there was a definite
temperamental aptitude for flying, said that its definition and recognition
were very difficult. Although temperamental suitability appears so unpre-
dictable, unsuitability is the main cause of many of the psychological disorders
which arise in flying personnel. "In certain cases flying did not cause, but
unmasked a pre-existing condition ” (Birley 1920). Temperamental unsuita-
bility is therefore a major concern of selectors of candidates for flying duties.
Selection of air crews will consequently be considered in relation to temperament
later in this review.


5. Flight factors causing psychological disorders
(а) The factors in flight which predispose to psychological disorders have
been reviewed by Porter (1936) and Armstrong (1939), and literature upon the
physiological effects of flying has recently been assembled by Razran and
Brown (1941). Reports upon the causes of psychological disorders arising
from flying in British pilots were made after the war 1914-18 by Flack and
Birley in the special report upon the medical problems of flying (1920) and
in the U.S.A. by Dockeray and Isaacs (1921). Aspects of this subject have
already been discussed earlier in this review, pertinent references being quoted.
(б) Fatigue. —The most important single predisposing cause of psychological
breakdown in flying personnel is fatigue. Viteles (1932) has discussed
occupational fatigue factors, and an excellent review of the general literature
upon fatigue has been made by Smith (1941). Miller (1936) described the
forms of fatigue found in pilots. Richardson (1935), Porter (1936), Whittingham
(1939), Armstrong (1939) and McFarland (1941) have dealt with the many causes
of fatigue which are inherent in civil and military flying.
Armstrong (1939) lists the main causes of occupational fatigue in flying
as those due to physical agents —extremes of temperature, vibration, glare,
noise, wind, accelerations and changes in atmospheric pressure, oxygen lack,
carbon monoxide and emotional stress —physical discomfort, responsibility,
attention, concentration, alertness, apprehension, anxiety and fear. Many of
these causes may arise without regard to flying. McFarland (1941) in
discussing pilot fatigue and considering the factors described by Armstrong,
detailed some of the methods for their prevention; He found that with proper
attention to details cumulative fatigue could be eliminated from civil aviation,
but he pointed out that aircraft design, flying conditions and the psychological
stresses, inseparable from wartime flying produced more difficult and sometimes
insoluble problems. He agrees that the fatigue in flying is central in origin,
since the neuromuscular causes of fatigue are not present, and many of the
factors producing fatigue are psychological. On the basis of Cannon’s work
(1929) he thinks it possible that the very lack of physical movement may have
a cumulative deleterious effect. The response of the vegetative nervous system,
in association with the appropriate endocrine responses to emotional stress, is
in primitive states accompanied by bodily activity. The inhibition of this
activity through the requirements of flying interferes with this biological
response and may well have a cumulative ill effect on the efficiency of the
individual undergoing the stress. Lottig (1937) had previously drawn attention
to this relationship between behaviour and the vegetative system in producing
fatigue in pilots.
(c) High altitudes. —The physiological responses to the well recognised
changes encountered at high altitude, especially the fall in barometric pressure,
oxygen content of the atmosphere and temperature have been studied in
relation to pure physiology (Henderson 1938, Haldane and Priestley 1935)
since Bert’s original observations in 1878, and in relation to aviation since
Glaisher’s work in 1862. The literature on the effects of high altitude in
aviation is dealt with in Schubert’s Monograph (1935), in von Diringshoven’s
"Medical Guide for Flying Personnel” (1940), and in the standard reference
works cited earlier in this review, notably in Chapters 16 and 22 of Armstrong’s
“ Principles and Practice of Aviation Medicine ” (1939).
The psychological effects have received less detailed and much less accurate
and critical scrutiny. The effects may be immediate or cumulative. The
immediate changes were called altitude sickness by Schneider (1918) and they
arise during single periods of anoxia. In the last war attention was drawn to


the intellectual and physical changes associated with flying at 18,000 ft.
without oxygen. It was known that perception was diminished and judgment
impaired (Birley 1920), and that there was a gradual decrease in efficiency;
(Corbett and Bazett 1920), and Birley’s Goulstonian lectures (1920) deal with
the subject in some detail. McFarland (1939) has shown that the first
demonstrable evidence of neuro-muscular and psychological inefficiency
occurs at about 12,000 feet. The symptoms, described by Armstrong (1939),
are very variable. After initial anxiety they range from tiredness, depression,
lethargy and apathy to euphoria, hilariousness, pugnacity and uncontrolled
laughter, but he stresses the important place of fatigue in all the symptom
patterns encountered. Besides being demonstrably inefficient to testing, the
subject feels tired. Neuro-muscular control, judged by handwriting and
co-ordinated behaviour tests, begins to show deterioration at 14,000 feet, and
this objective change is accompanied by psychological deterioration. The field
of attention becomes narrowed, memory is defective and there is loss of
judgment and self-criticism. The effect of this deterioration upon attention,
concentration, memory, ability to perform mental and manual work, colour-
naming, card-sorting, and writing, have been reported in papers listed by
Razran and Brown (1941).
Cumulative ill-effects of repeated exposure to high altitude were also recognised
in the last war, and were described by Birley (1920) and Corbet and Bazett
(1920). These observers were impressed by the deterioration in performance,
increasing fatigue, and inability to withstand the same degree of stress in
pilots who had made frequent ascents to high altitude without oxygen, but
the heights flown without oxygen were sometimes up to 18,000 to 20,000 feet.
They also observed a relationship between the number of high altitude flights
and this cumulative fatigue, and found that the pilots' capacity to withstand
anoxia gradually fell. Armstrong (1939) records that the number of unexplained
fatal crashes in the war 1914-18 fell dramatically when oxygen equipment
came into general use, and that in America before the use of oxygen became
obligatory, civil pilots complained of chronic altitude sickness. Armstrong
and Hein (1939) were able to produce irritability, nervousness, insomnia, an
increased difficulty in mental concentration, retention and attention, with total
lack of insight, in a group of students subjected to an oxygen tension equal to
12,000 feet each day for 29 days. Armstrong also reports bodily and mental
fatigue, lassitude, sleepiness, lack of volition, pronounced irritability and
disregard for danger in pilots who flew at high altitudes (12,000 to 16,000 feet)
without oxygen during photographic reconnaissance. Symptoms persist after
the series of ascents has ceased, the pilot remaining unduly fatigued, apathetic
and inefficient, although no evidence has been produced to show that there
are any permanent structural effects and ultimate recovery is the rule. Miller
(1936) suggested that adrenal dysfunction may play some part in producing
deterioration after repeated anoxemia, but reasons were tenuous. Giragossintz
and Sundstroen (1937) described destructive changes in the adrenal glands of
rats after repeated exposure to low atmospheric pressure and these changes
were associated with adrenal cortical insufficiency. Armstrong and Hein (1938)
showed that histological changes are present in the adrenal glands of rabbits
subjected to four hours at the equivalent of 18,000 feet each day for five weeks
and over. They speculate upon the relationship between chronic altitude
sickness and the clinical effects of dysfunction of the cortex of the adrenal
glands. Lottig (1937) as has been mentioned already also postulated a
relationship between the psychological changes seen in pilots and the functional
activity of the vegetative nervous system. The earlier work on the effects
of diminished oxygen tension upon the activity of adrenal glands has been
described in a special report by the Air Medical Investigation Committee of


the Medical Research Council (1918). It seems that this abnormal fatigue
state must have a physical cause, which may possibly have its basis in some
such inadequacy of the sympathetico-adrenal mechanism, but the evidence of
this is not yet very strong.
The other effects of altitude related to decreased atmospheric pressure are
not usually the direct cause of psychological disorders in flying personnel, and
will not in consequence be reviewed. Armstrong (1939) has dealt with them
exhaustively.
6. Other physical causes
Many less dramatic causes of psychological deterioration in flying personnel
have been described. The type of aircraft itself and the conditions existing
in the airfield (Dudley 1918), noise (Richardson 1935, Whittingham 1939,
McFarland 1941), discomfort (Richardson 1935), unsuitable clothing (Whitting-
ham 1939), cold (Birley 1920, and many others), glare (Livingston 1932,
Whittingham 1939) and vibration (Grow 1936). They have been dealt with
at length by Armstrong (1939), McFarland (1941) and Whittingham (1939),
and need not be enlarged upon here.
7. Psychological causes
The predisposing constitutional causes of psychological illness have been
considered in relation to aviation, and the flight factors causing fatigue and
deterioration have also been referred to. The literature upon fatigue itself
has been reviewed. There remains the host of precipitating and contributory
causes of a purely psychological nature. The chief of these is fear. As this
review is primarily concerned with the practical preventive aspects of psycho-
logical disorders in flying personnel, many of the aspects of fear inseparable
from wartime flying are beyond its scope.
Fear whether acute or long drawn out, then usually called anxiety, seems
to be an integral part of the stress of flying and with this in mind Rook (1939)
has said: " All flying to some extent produces a nervous strain in the individual.
The average young adult approaches flying with little fear, his senses fill
with the thrill of speed, and the joy of controlling a wonderful of
machinery. Some, more imaginative, pass through a period when fear has
more or less to be consciously repressed, eventually gaining confidence with
increasing skill. For some, fear never wholly disappears, apd symptoms of
an anxiety state may occur at an early period of their training. Even the
most seasoned pilots may show that loss of confidence which, unless immediately
treated, will end in a frank anxiety state. Suddenly, for some reason not
obvious to the outsider, some minor accident, private worries, or even the
awakening of a too lively imagination, may liberate a series of repressions.”
The view is held by most of those who have close contact with flying
personnel that fear in varying degree, at various levels of consciousness, and in
different stages of repression, is an accompaniment of flying. This is especially
so in wartime. (Birley 1923, Archer 1939), and Rivers (1920) have analysed
the fear reaction in relation to physical inactivity and frustrations, an emotional
maladjustment particularly common in flying. The literature on war neuroses
(reviewed by Dunn 1941) contains a wealth of information upon the part
played by fear or anxiety in precipitating psychological illness. The duty of
the medical officer in considering all the factors here reviewed is not to dismiss
the emotion of fear and its contributory causes, but to realise that if the pilot
“ can be spared from experiencing in too great a measure the mental
conflict which characterises the period of stress, if he can be rested at the
crucial moment, he will in a comparatively short time again be fit to return to


the fighting line, not to embark again on these critical months of danger and
inexperience, but to jump with one bound into a second period of confidence
and efficiency ” (Birley 1920).
8. Prophylaxis ; flight factors
(a) Physical causes. —The writers referred to on page 8 paid attention to
the preventive aspects of these causes. A summary of the literature dealing
with the methods used to prevent noise, glare, discomfort, cold, and so on,
would therefore involve repetition, as well as much technical material which
is beyond the scope of this present review.
(b) Fatigue. —ln reviewing the factors in flight causing deterioration,
physical as well as purely psychological, fatigue was given the first place.
Fatigue has many physical and psychological causes (Viteles 1932) and all
the other factors which have been considered are causally related to it. The
reduction of fatigue has been the main thesis in all the papers referred to on
pages 6 and 7 concerned with fatigue in flying personnel, and the literature
already quoted upon the deleterious physical and psychological factors in flight
is pertinent.
(c) Psychological causes. —The emotion of fear was considered far the most
important psychological determinant of the psychological disorders seen in
flying personnel. The conscious awareness of fear, depending as it does upon
the degree of repression to which the emotion is subjected, is affected by many
adverse physical and psychological conditions. Again, these conditions have
already been reviewed in the appropriate paragraphs, and repetition is
unnecessary. Of particular importance is individual predisposition to fear,
largely dependent upon temperament. The reduction of fear by selection of
those with suitable temperament for war flying, or rejection of those without,
is dealt with under the next heading. But the individual’s resistance to
deleterious factors does not only depend upon his temperament and character,
his physical health and his own psychological adjustment. It is also coloured
by the total reaction of his group, that is, by its morale. The literature upon
the whole question of morale in relation to war conditions has recently been
reviewed by Child (1941).
9. Selection of flying personnel
(a) Constitutional predisposition. —As determination in efficiency of air
crews, as well as evident psychological illnesses, was apparent in the later
stages of the 1914-18 war, attempts were made to remove the predisposed
individual and to forestall symptoms in the non-predisposed. In devising his
cardio-respiratory tests for flying efficiency and flying strain, Flack (1920) was
greatly concerned with the psychological as well as the physical make-up of
the individuals tested, and his physical tests designed to give some indication of
perseverance, will power, and fatiguability. Birley (1920) applied the tests to
flying personnel who showed deterioration in flying efficiency, including men
who were simply fatigued, temperamentally unfit, and men whose symptoms
were attributed to a head injury. He found a great difference between the
results of Flack’s tests in fit pilots, and in those in a state of chronic fatigue,
and also found that after rest and recuperation the standard of performance
of the tests rose. It is interesting that a high level of performance was observed
in pilots who had been sent home for a rest, in those who had been taken off
flying after a trivial head injury, and in those who would not fly, whereas the
performance was very poor in those who had had a head injury sufficiently
severe to require invaliding, in those who were permanently unfit for flying
on medical grounds, in the great majority of those considered temperamentally


unfit and in pilots who showed an abnormal psychological response to excessive
flying stress. As those considered temperamentally unfit showed unsatisfactory
results to the test he concluded that it had merely revealed a predisposition to
neurosis. Of men who had lost zest for flying after a trivial head injury he
said: “ Failure to fly was not so much due to the actual concussion as to the
constitution of the individuals concussed. ... In other words, it is not
concussion of the brain which chiefly matters, but concussion of the mind.”
It is evident from these results that, as he had intended, Flack’s tests gave
some indication of the temperamental qualities of the individual. These
workers approached the psychological problems arising from flying duties
from a physical standpoint, but their tests formed the basis of all future methods
of selection. Since the war 1914-18, selection of aviation candidates has been
based mainly upon physical and secondarily upon psychological testing.
Physical testing. —We are not here primarily concerned with the physical
methods of selection, although “ more stress should be laid on the suitability
or unsuitability of the mental make up of the would-be pilot and less on the
actual physical efficiency as found at the original examination, as long as
organic disease is absent ” (Rook 1939), but they have an indirect bearing
upon many of the problems which will be considered later. The general physical
tests, and those involving time and the candidate’s sustained effort, as opposed
to the special tests of organ efficiency, have by their very nature a relationship
to, temperament. This fact was realised by Flack (1919) who devised his cardio-
respiratory tests to give an indication of the candidate's response to fatigue
and of his powers of perseverance and determination. “ It would seem, therefore,
that a routine application of these tests to pilots in training for high flying would
indicate the powers of endurance of the subject for the fatigue of high flying.”
Birley (1920), who was interested in temperament, showed that in practice
Flack’s tests were valid. Elaborations of these tests are contained in a full
survey of the subject in Air Publication 130, " The Medical Examination
for Fitness for Flying (R.A.F. and Civil) ” (1938). Thorndike (1919 and 1920)
described analogous tests in use in the U.S.A. Similar batteries of tests were
devised by Schneider (1920 and 1924) and details of the system have been
described by Bauer (1926), Armstrong (1939), Mashburn (1939), Spunt (1941) and
others. The tests have been discussed in relation to flying efficiency by
Rook (1939).
Psychological testing. —The inter-relationship of physical and psychological
testing has already been shown on the basis of Flack and Birley’s work (1920).
Razran and Brown (1941) have recently made a comprehensive summary of
this subject, observing that the test construction has been hampered by crude
criteria since the war 1914-18, and concluding that it is “ really difficult
to think of another field of such practical importance as that of the selection
of aircraft pilots in which so much confusion reigns, and in which research
has been attempted and interpreted by investigators of such varying back-
ground and training.” A summary follows of the more pertinent aspects of
testing to which they refer.
The criteria for selection have been based upon the records of various
air training schools, in the following ways :
Successful pilots contrasted with failures during training (Hemmon
1919, Thorndike 1919 and 1920, De Foney 1931 and 1933, Lacker 1937,
Longacre 1931, Mashburn 1934).
Accidents v. non-accident pilots (Yerkes 1919, Sutton 1930), ratings
made by instructors and others (Flack and Bowdler 1920, Hemmon
1919, Nechayeff 1923, Parsons 1918, Stratton, McComas, Coover and
Bagby 1920).


Many of the psychological criteria which have been advanced have been
shown to have an insignificant relationship to the ability to fly. The tests
shown to have practical significance and mentioned by Razran and Brown
are; —
The startle tests of emotional stability, and the free association
tests of fear of flying (Parsons 1918).
Complex reaction time and judgment tests (Stratton, McComas,
Coover and Bagby 1920).
Mental alertness (Thorndike 1919).
Hemmon’s battery (1919) evaluating emotional stability, tilt
perception, choice reaction, mental alertness and using the Miles
ataxiameter complex co-ordinators (U.S. Army Med. Bull. No. 26,
1931, Mashburn 1939).
Various flying analogy tests which have been devised in Germany
(Kronfeld 1919; Selz 1919; Stern 1919), Denmark (Ericksen 1927),
Spain (Azon 1934), England (Burton and Reid 1924) and in Italy (the
Carlinga cockpit, described in the U.S. Army Bulletin 1931).
This subject was reviewed after the last war by Dockary and Isaacs (1921),
Gradenigo and Gemelli (1919), and by Perrin de Brichambaut (1921). Other
tests for resistance to emotioual excitement apart from startle tests have been
described by Camus (1919), Capek (1930) and Talenti (1929). The full scope
of the tests described in these papers is not covered in this short abstract.
The difficulty which has arisen in compiling a suitable battery of tests is
reflected in \he wide scope of the literature and although there is now general
agreement that some form of psychological testing is desirable, its form is
difficult to define. One group of workers has stressed the importance of evaluating
the whole personality. Rivers and Rippon (1920) used the method of personal
interview upon accepted clinical psychiatric lines, but were not satisfied with
the results. Talenti and Enzo de Meo (1940) advised very close observation
both in the entrance examination and afterwards in the aviation school.
Room (1941) has pointed out that the emotional response to an entrance
examination may give a false impression of the candidate’s capabilities and
temperament. Archer (1939) advises a full psychiatric interview, with
investigations of the candidate’s past record and his family history, as well
as assessment of the total personality, as well as circulation of a questionnaire
to the candidate’s school, similar to that employed by the Vocational Guidance
Department of the National Institute of Industrial Psychology. Patient (1938)
thinks that a very full assessment of the total personality, with special emphasis
upon such qualities as cheerfulness, stability, self-reliance, aggressiveness,
modesty, frankness, powers of co-operation and relaxation and so on, will
favour more efficient selection. Poppen (1941) states that however objective
the tests become, it is not feasible to eliminate the personal interview entirely.
Carlson (1941) has used intelligence tests and finds that 20 per cent of candidates
fall below the requirements of the U.S. Army Air Corps.
Another group of workers, many of whom have already been quoted,
have used various forms of simple and complex tests of kinaesthetic ability
and other objective methods of assessing the candidates’ response to stimuli.
These tests, most of them now of purely historic interest, have become
increasingly complex, each addition being fresh evidence of the great defect
of the method, that it takes no account of the total personality. Recently
elaborations have been achieved which require the simultaneous performance
of complex and inter-related actions calling for speed, judgment, dexterity
and endurance. They are based upon the simpler co-ordinated, pursuit metres


of the Reid (1924) type, and as they evolve they approach closer to the actual
conditions existing in an aeroplane cockpit. The use of still more elaborate
batteries is in process, but the details have not yet been published.
The trend of this evolution of the tests supports the view of those (Birley
1920, Rivers and Rippon 1920, Talenti and Enzo de Meo 1940) who think that
aptitude can only be efficiently demonstrated by trial, urging observation in
the aviation school and in the air during the early stages of training. A more
conservative, but obviously valid, observation by Thorndike (1919) and Birley
(1919), is that even were the assessment of temperamental suitability for
flying efficient, it does not necessarily reflect the airman’s suitability for with-
standing the stress of operational service.
From a survey of the literature it seems that although selection by psycho-
logical methods prevents acceptance of some candidates who are tempera-
mentally unsuitable for flying, it does not seem possible by such methods to
recognise those with a marked flying aptitude. This has been appreciated by
many observers, including Anderson (1919), Birley (1920) and Rook (1939).
This is to say that evaluation of the total personality in relation to Service
flying either as a whole or by analysis of its components with special tests has
value in rejecting the unsuitable but not in selecting those eminently suitable
for flying training. This appears to be true however skilled the examiner
or however detailed the examination. Burton and Rook (1939) followed the
flying careers of 100 candidates, some of whom were somewhat below the
acceptance level upon ordinary standards, but who were nevertheless allowed
to train. They found that the proportion of failures to learn to fly was equal
in the groups above and below the standard requirements.
(d) Results of selection. —The batteries of physical and psychological
tests at present in use produce a very high rejection rate. All the reports
published in the United States show a level of about 80 per cent. Benson (1937)
made observations on 10,000 applicants, and found that the rejection rate had
risen from 75-6 per cent in 1931 to 84 per cent in 1936. Of these 62*2 per cent
were rejected for ocular defects, 19-4 per cent for medical reasons and 10 per
cent for neuro-psychiatric causes. Even with this high rejection rate, selection
is not adequate, for in 1933 although the rejection rate was 70 per cent, less
than 40 per cent of those accepted completed training. Mashburn (1934),
Gore and Lawton (1936) found that of 575 candidates examined at Maxwell
Field in 1933-1935, 80 per cent were rejected, but even so only 84 of the 112
started primary flying training after the aviation school, and a mere 42
graduated as pilots. This is 7"3 per cent of the candidates. Nevertheless,
selection has doubtless reduced inefficiency in air crews and as the great majority
of accidents are due to pilot error (between 80 and 90 per cent, according to
McFarland 1941) and not to mechanical or unavoidable natural causes, the
reduction has great practical value. In the 1914-18 war the proportion of
pilots grounded through psychological disorders was reduced from 90 per cent
to 12 per cent after a system of selection had been adopted (Bauer 1926).
With so many variable factors, such as modification in aircraft design,
increased efficiency of, instruments and ground control, together with added
responsibility and strain, it is difficult to assess with any accuracy the value of
selection for war flying by long-term observation, and the literature does not
contain any data upon a long-term follow up of two groups of pilots selected
and unselected, or selected under different conditions. Indeed, Mashburn (1939)
has severely criticised th 6 practical validity of many of the tests employed.
As Poppen (1941) observes, the trend of new examination methods is
distinctly towards greater objectivity. This is, of course, highly desirable.


References
1.
Air Service Medical ..
War Department. Air Service, Division of Military
Aeronautics. Washington. 1919, 446. Gov. Print-
ing Office.
2.
Anderson, H. G.
The Selection of Candidates for the Air Service.
Lancet. 1918, i, 395.
3.
Medical and surgical aspects of aviation. London.
1919, ch. 5, 96.
4.
Archer, B. C. ..
The emotional factor in Service aviation. J. Roy.
Nav. Med. Service. April, 1939, 25, 108.
5.
Armstrong, H. G.
A special form of functional psychoneurosis appearing
in airplane pilots. J. Am. Med. Ass. 1936, 106,
1347.
6.
Principles and practice of aviation medicine. W.
Wilkins Co., Baltimore. 1939, 496.
7.
Armstrong, H. G. & Hein, J. \V.
Effect of repeated daily exposures to anoxemia. J. Av.
Med. 1938, 9, 92.
8.
Army Reports of the War Office
Committee of Enquiry into Shell Shock. 1922.
H.M. Stationery Office.
9.
Azov, A,
Notre mithode d’examen de Vaptitude psychophysique
des pilots aviateurs. C.R. 8th Conf. Int. Psycho-
tech (Prague) 1934, 203. (from 72). •
10.
Barach, A.L. ..
Effect of low and high oxygen tensions on' mental
functioning. J. Av. Med. March 1941, 12, 30.
n.
Bartlett, F. C. ..
Psychology and the soldier. 1927. Cambridge Univ.
Press.
12.
Bartlett, W. M. & Carter, J. B.
Combined electro-cardiography, siethography and car-
dioscopy in the selection of pilots. J. Av. Med.
1941. 12, 2.
13.
Bauer, L. H. ..
Aviation Medicine. Baltimore, 1926.
14.
Benson, O.O...
Analysis of the causes of disqualification of 500 appli-
cants rejected for flying training. J. Av. Med.
1937, 8, 3.
15.
Bert, P...
La pression baromeirique. Paris. Massar. 1878.
but it results in rejection upon rigid criteria, so that the rejection rate of each
speciality may be expected to rise. For instance, attention has recently been
drawn (Bartlett and Carter 1941) to unsuspected cardiac defects in candidates,
demonstrated by combined electro-cardiography, stethography and cardioscopy.
Using the electro-encephalogram, Williams (1941) has shown that the proportion
of abnormals in successful pilots is lower than in the normal healthy population
and Thorner, Gibbs and Gibbs (1941) have found a relationship between
efficient performance of pilots and characteristics in the normal electro-
encephalogram.
The development of such methods of detecting abnormalities unrevealed
by routine clinical examinations will naturally increase the rejection rate,
and should lead to a point at which unfitness or potential unfitness in the
selected candidates may reach a very low figure. It is evident, however,
that this advance is made through rejection and not selection, so that more and
more apparently unsuitable candidates who might in fact prove efficient
pilots, are rejected. A point must be reached at which the practicability of
this degree of selection has to be judged in relationship to the factors of supply
and demand.


16.
Birley, J. L
Goulstonian Lectures on The principles of medico
service as applied to military aviation. Lancet.
1920, i, 1147.
ibid 1920, i, 1205.
ibid 1920, i, 1251.
17.
1* • • • * * * * •
Medical aspects of high flying. Medical Research
Council. Medical problems of flying. Spec. Rep.
Series 1920, S3, 5.
18.
Temperament and Service flying. Medical Research
Council. Medical problems of flying. Spec. Rep.
Series 1920, 53, 141.
19.
,,
The psychology of courage. Lancet, 1923, i, 779.
20.
Burton, H. L. & Reid, G. H...
Psychomotor responses in relation to flying. Proc.
Roy. Sec. Med. 1924, 17, 43.
21.
Burton, H. L. & Rook, A. F...
Unpublished observations. Rook, A. F. J. Roy.
Nav. Med. Serv. 1939, 25, 203.
22.
Camus, J.
Etudes des reactions psychomoirives ct des reactions
£motives des candidates cl Vaviation. C.R. Soc.
Biol. Paris, 1919, 82, 673.
23.
Cannon, W. B...
Bodily changes in pain, hunger, fear and rage. New
York. Appleton. 1929.
24.
Capek, D.
L’emploi du reflexe psycho-galvanique dans Vexamen
du personnel volant. 5th Int. Cong. Aer. Nav.
1930, 2, 1366. (from 72).
25.
Carlson, W. A.. .•
Intelligence testing of flying cadet applicants: a
report cm psychometric measurement. J. Av.
Med. 12, 1941, No. 3, 226.
26.
Child, I. L
Morale — a bibliographical review. Psych. Bull
June, 1941. No. 6, 38, 393.
27.
Corbett, C. D. H.
Flying fatigue and efficiency. Unpublished paper
quoted by Birley. Lancet, 1920, i, 1150.
28.
Corbett, C. D. H. & Bazett,
H. C.
A study of the reaction of pilots and observers to
diminished oxygen pressure. Medical Research
Council. Medical problems of flying. Spec. Rep.
Series. 1920, 53, 18.
29,
De Foney, C. G.
A psychological study made on candidates for aviation
training. Nav. Med. Bull. Washington, 1931,
29, 191.
30.
-
A second psychological study made on candidates for
aviation training. Ibid, 1933, 31, 103.
31.
Dill, D. B
Life, heat and altitude. Harvard Univ. Press. Cam-
bridge, Mass. 1938.
32.'
Dockary, F.
Department of Psychology in Aviation Medicine in
the A.E.F. Washington Gov. Printing Office, 1920,
4, 113.
33.
Dockary, F. & Isaacs, S.
Psychological Research in aviation in Italy, France,
England and the A.E.F. Air Serv. Inform.
Circ. 1921, 3, No. 327 26 (from 72).
34.
Dudley, S. F. ..
Active Service flying: the medical point of view. J.
Roy. Nav. Med. Serv. 1918, 4, 1931.
35.
Dunn, W. H. ..
War neuroses. Psych. Bull. June 1941, 38, No, 6,
497.
36.
Erickson, E. C.
New psychological tests for pilots. 4th Int. Cong.
Aer. Nav. 1927, 4, 522 (from 72),
37.
Flack, M.
A study of the reaction of pilots and observers to
diminished oxygen pressure. Medical Research
Council. Reports of. Air Medical Investigation
Committee. 1918, No. 5.
38.
,, , *
Flying stress. Ibid. 1918, No. 7.


39
Flack, M
Tests for flying efficiency and flying strain. Medical
Research Council. Med. Inst, of Flying, 1920,
53, 93.
40
Flack, M. & Bowdlcr, A. P. . .
The selection of candidates for flying. Medical
Research Council. Medical problems of flying.
Sec. Rep. Series, 1920, No. 53, 81.
41
Giragossintz, G. & Sundstroen,
E.
Cortico-adrenal insufficiency in cats under reduced
pressure. Proc. Sec. Exper. Biol, and Med., 1937,
36, 432.
42.
Glaisher, J.
Notes of effects experienced during recent balloon
ascents. Lancet, 1862, 2, 539.
43.
Gore, T. L. & Lawton, W. H.
Analysis of 575 examinations at Maxwell Field for
primary-flying training. J. Av. Med., 1936, 7,
172.
44.
Gotch, O. H. ’
The "aero-neurosis" of war flying, ch. 5, p. 109 in
Anderson, H. G. Med. and Surg. Aspects of
Aviation, 1919.
45.
Gradcnigo, G. & Gemelli, A. ..
I realtiva per la scelta del personalI navigante nell'aris.
Riv. Psicol, 1918, 14, 145 (from 72).
46.
Grow, M. C.
A study of fatigue. Mil. Surgeon, 1936, 78, 103.
47.
Haldane, J. S. & Priestley,
J. G.
Respiration. New Haven, Yale Univ. Press, 1935.
48.
Head, H
Sense of stability and balance in the air. Medical
Research Council. Medical problems of flying.
Spec. Rep. Series. No. 53, 1919, 215.
49.
Hellchaudt, F. A. & Karpovich,
P. V.
Fitness, fatigue and recuperation. War Medicine,
1941, 1, 745.
50.
Hemmon, V. A. C.
Air Service tests of aptitude for flying. J. appl.
Psychol, 1919, 3, 103.
51.
Henderson, Y.. .
Adventures in respiration, Baltimore. Williams,
Wilkins and Co., 1938.
52.
Jensen, W. S. . .
Psychological care of the pilot. J. Av. Med., 1936,
7, 70.
53.
Kronfield, A. . .
Fine experimental — psychologische. Tauglichkeit-
sprufung/zum Flugdienst. Z. augew. Psychol,
1919, 15, 193 (from 72).
54.
Lacker, D.
La psychotechnique et les pilots d'avions. Arch. Int.
Neurol, 1937, 56, 293 (from 72).
55.
Longacre, R. F.
Personality study. J. Av. Med., 1930, 1, 33.
56.
Lottig, H.
Wechsebezrehunger zwischen Psyche und vegeiatinem
Nerveusystem heim Fleuger. Luftfahrtmed. Be-
handlunge, 1937, 221.
57.
MacDougall, W.
Social psychology. London, Methuen, 1913.
58.
McFarland, R. A.
The effects of oxygen deprivation (high altitude) on
the human organism. Gov. Printing Office, Wash-
ington, 1938. Rep. No. 13, Dept, of Commerce.
59.
”
The psychophysiological effects of reduced oxygen
pressure. Res. Publ. Ass. Nerv. and Ment Eds.,
1939, 19, 112.
60.
Fqtigue in aircraft pilots. New Eng. J. Med. Nov
27th, 1941, 225, 845.
61.
Manuel, E. G. ..
The strain and stress of flying. Lancet, 1918, 2,
415.
62.
Mashburn, N. C.
Mashburn automatic serial action apparatus for
delecting flying aptitude. J. Av. Med., 5, 1934,
145.
63.
The selection of the trainee for military aviation. Mil.
Surgeon, 1939, 84, 428.


64.
Miller, W. H
Fatigue — special effects and tests. J. Av. Med., 1936,
7, 161.
65.
Nechayeff, A. P.
On the question of experimental psychological examina-
tion of pilots. J. Pschol. Moscow, 1923, 2, 3.
(from 72).
66.
Parsons, R. P...
A search for non-physical standards for naval aviators.
Nav. Med. Bull. Washington, 1918, 12, 155.
67.
Patient, W. F... .. ..
Temperament and the aviator. J. Av. Med., 1938,
9, 104.
68.
Paton, S.
Effects of low oxygen pressure on the personality of the
aviator. J. Am. Med. Ass., 1918, 71, 1399.
'69.
Perrin de Brichambaut, P. . .
Critires de Vappitude au vol en avion, fftude. com-
parative des differentes melhodes d’examen employes
en France, dans les Pays Allids et chez les Puissances
centrales. Paris, Arnette, 1921 (from 72).
70. Poppen, J. R. ..
The recent trends in aviation medicine. J. Av. Med.,
1941, March, 14, 58.
71.
Porter, H.
Fatigue factors in special relation to flying. J. Av.
Med., 1936, 7, 120.
72.
Razran, G. H. S. & Brown,
H. C.
Aviation. Psych, Bull. June 1941, 38, No. 6,
322.
73.
Reinartz, E. G.
Some neuropsychiatric problems of the Flight Surgeon.
J. Av. Med., 1932, 3, 137.
74.
Richardson, A. V. J. ..
Efficiency of personnel in the Services. Proc. Roy.
Soc. Med., 1935, 29, 31.
75.
Rippon, T. S. & Manuel, E. G.
The essential characteristics of successful and un-
successful aviators with special reference to tempera-
ment. Lancet, 1918, 2, 411.
76.
Rivers, W. H. R. & Rippon,
T. S.
Mental aptitude for aviation. Medical Research
Council. Medical problems of -flying. Spec. Rep.
Series, 1920, 53, 257.
77.
Rook, A. F.
Physical efficiency and Service flying. J. Roy. Nav.
Med. Serv., 1939, 25, 203.
78.
Schneider, E. C.
Air Service Medical Gov. Printing Office. Washington,
1918. From Aviation Medicine, Armstrong, H. G.
79.
A cardiovascular rating as a measure of physical
fatigue and efficiency. J. Am. Med. Ass., 1920,
'74, 1507.
80.
Further observations on a cardiovascular physical
fitness test. Air Service Inf. Circ., 1924, 5, No.
462, 48 (from 72).
81.
Schubert, G. ..
Physiologie des Menschen im Flugzeug. In Monogr.
Physiol. Pfl. Tierre, Bd. 34, Berlin, Springer.
82.
Solz, O...
Uber den Anteil der individuellen Eigenschaften der
Flugzeufuhrer und Beobachter an Fliegerunfalien.
Z. anvew. Psychol, 1919, 15, 254 (from 72).
83.
Smith, K. R
Fatigue. Psych. Bull., June 1941, 38, No. 6, 364,'
84.
Spunt, T.
New physical standards for army pilots. New Eng.
J. Med.,,1941, 225, 999.
85.
Stamm, L. E. ..
Reaction time tests carried out in flight cadets with
descriptions of apparatus. Medical Research Coun-
cil. Medical problems of flying. Spec. Rep. Series,
1918, 53, 265.
86.
Stern, E.
Uber cine experimentell-psychologische Eignungspru,
fung fur Flugzeugfuhrer. Z. angew Psychol, 1919-
15, 236 (from 72).


87.
Stratton, G. M., McCommas,
H. C., Coover, J. E. & Bagby,
E.
Psychological tests for selecting aviators. J. Exper
Psychol, 1920, '3, 405.
88.
Sutton, D. G. ..
Psychology in aviation. Nav. Med. Bull. Washing-
ton, 1930, 28, 5.
89.
Talenti, C.
Sulla valutazione dell’emozionabilita per mezzo della
reazione psicogalvanica. Bull. Soc. Ital. Bil. Spec.,
1929, 4, 714 (from 72).
90.
Talenti, C. & Enzo de Meo ..
La psicotecnica in medicina aeronautica. Revista di
Med. Aeronaut, 1939, 2, 306 (from 72).
91.
Thorndike, E. L.
The selection of military aviators, U.S. Air Service J.,
(1919), 2, No. 1, 28.
92.
,,
ibid. 1920, 2, No. 6, 29.
93.
Thorner, M., Gibbs, F. A. &
Gibbs, E. L.
Relationship between the electro-encephalogram and
flying ability. Unpublished communication.
94.
U.S. Army Med. Bulletin, 1931
No. 26, 1931 (from 72).
95.
Viteles, M. S. ..
Industrial medicine. New York, W. W. Norton &■
Co., 1932.
96.
von Diringshofen, H. ..
Medical guide for flying personnel. Trans. V. E.
Henderson, Toronto. Univ. of Toronto Press,
1940, 102.
97.
Walshe, M. N
The importance of nervous energy in aviation. Proc.
Mayo Clinic, 1941, Nov. 5th, 18, 707.
98.
Whittingham, H. E. ..
Preventive medicine in relation to aviation. Proc.
Roy. Soc. Med., 1939, 32, 455, J. Roy. Naval
Med. Service, 1939, 25, 317.
99.
Williams, D. J.
The significance of an abnormal electroencephalogram .
J. Neurol, Psychiat., 1941, 4, 257.
100.
Yerkes, R. M. ..
Report of the Psychological Committee of the
National Research Council. U.S.A., Psychol. Rev.,
1919, 26, 94.
101.
Livingstone, P. C.
The study of sun glare in Iraq. Brit. J. Ophthalmol.
1932, 16, 577.
102.
Medical Research Council
The effects of diminished tension of oxygen with
especial reference to the activity of the adrenal glands.
Report of the Air Med. Inv. Committee, 1918, 37,
8.


CHAPTER II
USE AND ABUSE OF THE TERM FLYING STRESS'
by
Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds, K.B.E., C.B., M.D., F.R.C.P.
FPRC Report 412, January, 1942
During the war of 1914-18 it became apparent that flying personnel might
show inefikiency or loss of confidence in the air without evidence of any known
physical disease to account for these phenomena. The problem of wastage
from this source became important and investigations into the nature and causes
of such conditions were undertaken. The approach in the first place was
physiological and resulted in the tests for physical efficiency devised by Flack
and reported in “ Tests for Flying Efficiency and Flying. Strain " (1920). From
this report it appears that although psychological factors might be evident
in the aetiology of the condition, they were taken into account only in so far
as they might be presumed to have caused, or contributed to, a state of nervous
exhaustion, other factors concerned being the effects of altitude and physical
fatigue. All these factors together were summed up as flying strain or flying
stress, and by a natural but inexact transition the symptoms attributed to
these factors were called collectively flying stress. Thus on the same page of
Flack’s report we find reference to “ cases who have broken down through
flying stress ” and to a state in which " flying stress has markedly supervened.”
Birley’s report “ Temperament and Service flying ” (1920) indicates that
a symptom picture of psychological disturbance psychologically determined
was already recognised and that the term temperamental unfitness was in use
to describe this. It appears that this term was employed to include both
those whose inefficiency or lack of confidence had appeared without any crash
or unpleasant experience, and those who had shown no evidence of inefficiency
or lack of confidence until after such an experience or after a considerable
period of operational flying. Birley observed that in the former group as
compared with the latter the tests for physical efficiency were generally
satisfactorily passed; and that there was frequently a positive family, or
personal, history of neuropathy. He concluded that temperamental unfitness
and physical unfitness were closely allied, and that in the temperamentally
unfit the unfitness “ lies largely in an undue susceptibility to mental shock.”
Individual susceptibility of this kind therefore was a factor which must be
taken into account as well as the strain of flying. Birley concluded his report
with the suggestion " that certain conditions which are at present called flying
stress could more appropriately be designated by the title flying distress. He
implied presumably that whereas the title flying stress was applicable to a
state caused by the excessive strain of flying duties, it should not be applied to
a state in which constitutional defect, not excessive strain, was the cause.
Other terms which came into use in the early days of flying were aviation
neurasthenia and aero-neurosis. The latter was used by Anderson (1919) to
include any type of functional nervous disorder brought on by flying. He and
Gotch (who was responsible for the section on the aeroneurosis of war flying)
include under aeroneurosis conditions of tiredness or staleness, toxic state,
oxygen want, air sickness, heterophoria and constitutional psychopathy, as
well as those in whom " the breakdown as regards flying has a purely mental
origin.” They admit, however, that the vast majority of cases fall into the
last group.


It is evident that nomenclature was already proving a difficult problem,
and that the different meanings attached to new terms had resulted in confusion.
The reasons for this are not far to seek. At that time aviation was in its infancy
and little was known of the effects of altitude and gravity upon the human body.
When flying personnel developed functional disorder of any kind it was at once
assumed that this was a physical effect of the new and unknown factors which
were called flying strain or flying stress. At the same time and for similar
reasons, soldiers who developed functional nervous disorder after exposure
to the effects of high explosives of a weight and force never before experi-
enced were assumed to be suffering from the physical effect of blast or shell
shock. This would not have mattered much if flying stress and shell shock had
continued to be used to describe new causes of functional disorder, for critical
examination of the clinical syndromes resulting from these causes would fairly
soon have revealed that while some of these syndromes were attributable to
physical causes, as for example the syndrome of anoxia from flying, or blast
concussion from shell explosion, the vast majority were due to psychological
causes. When this had been appreciated, as it was much later, it
would soon have been evident that the syndromes of psychological causation
were in no respect different from the neuroses of civil life and were classifiable
under existing headings. Unfortunately both flying stress and shell shock
came to be used to describe syndromes instead of causes, and the result in the
case of shell shock is well known. It was assumed that a new clinical syndrome
or disease had arisen attributable to shell blast and that anyone who had been
exposed to shell fire might develop this new disease. Shell shock became a
diagnosis which ranked for attributability with gun-shot wound, and implied
in just the same way as a wound, a purely external cause. Flying stress
also became a diagnosis with similar implications and we have noted Birley's
uneasiness at finding it so used in cases where it was evident to him that the
true cause of the nervous disorder observed was not the stress of flying but
" undue susceptibility to mental shock.”
After the war, the War Office Committee of Enquiry into Shell Shock (1922)
published its detailed and critical review of the evidence given on the subject
by medical and executive officers. The opening paragraph of the recommenda-
tions made by that committee reads : " The term shell-shock should be
eliminated from official nomenclature, the disorders hitherto included under
this heading being designated by the recognised medical terms for these
conditions.” Medical and executive officers of the Royal Air Force gave
evidence before the committee and described, as the result of terrifying
experiences in the air, symptoms which differed in no material respect from
those observed in soldiers, and were in fact called shell-shock by those who
described them. Nowhere in their evidence have I been able to find the term
flying stress. This seems tacit admission that flying stress was merely a synonym
for shell-shock and that the recommendation quoted above was as much
applicable to the former as the latter. Nevertheless flying stress as a diagnostic
term appears to have survived in the Royal Air Force with the implication that
the strain of flying duties could produce a clinical syndrome sui generis.
This view received strong support from Armstrong (1936, 1939) who,
under the title aero-neurosis, for which he accepts flying stress as a synonym,
described “ a special form of functional psychoneurosis appearing in airplane
pilots." This he distinguishes from all other neuroses as “an entity seen only
among aviators.” Its main features are described as gastric distress, nervous
irritability, fatigue of the higher voluntary mental centres, insomnia and
increased motor activity. It is attributed primarily to the stress of flying, the
symptoms only developing after several years. Among exciting causes a
variety of factors are‘considered, both physical and psychological. The list


appears to include every possible ill with which the aviator may be beset, from
carbon monoxide poisoning and centrifugal force at one end of the scale to
chronic anxiety and psychic trauma at the other. The only effective treatment
in the author’s experience has been removal from flying duties. Return to
flying after improvement is usually followed sooner or later by relapse. In
discussing pathogenesis the author concludes that a psychogenic basis provides
the best explanation and proceeds to describe the mental state engendered by
emotional conflict together with its associated bodily reactions. Unfortunately
the author appears to be unacquainted with psychiatric terminology and
definition as used to-day, for he states that in .aero-neurosis “ there are no doubts
or hesitations as in psychasthenia, no quitting under the guise of organic
disability as in neurasthenia, no infantile reactions of hysteria, or none of the
obsessions or mental manias of the anxiety state.” Reference to any textbook
of psychiatry published within the last five years will reveal that the author’s
understanding of what meant by these terms is imperfect.
Critical review fails to convince the psychiatric reader of Armstrong’s
claim that what he describes is a new disease, or that it is a disease confined
to aviators. It appears to be only our old friend shell-shock in a new disguise,
in fact an anxiety state, complicated as often by symptoms of the kind covered
in modem psychiatric parlance by the term neurasthenia—a combination well
known in people who have had nothing to do either with aviation or war.
A communication from Dill and Ivy (1941) to the Committee on Aviation
Medicine of the National Research Council, U.S.A., deals with another
supposedly new disorder among flying personnel designated acute pilot's fatigue
The authors report that they have seen no evidence showing that the condition
actually exists, but proceed to consider in some detail the factors which might
contribute to such condition, such as general physical unfitness, emotional
stress of various kinds, CO poisoning, cold and the effects of altitude. All
these are well known, but there has as yet been no proof from the experience
gained in this war that any clinical syndrome may result from each or all of
these factors, which cannot be described in existing terms.
The tendency to invent new terms for neurosis in flying personnel is due
largely to the desire, especially on the executive side, to avoid for the man
who has often achieved much, or at any rate has done his best, any appellation
which would class him as ‘ neurotic.’ Fortunately the classification of all mental
disorder in terms of reaction types now almost universally adopted in this
country will allow us to give a name to any psychological disorder of the kind
which might be included under flying stress, aero-neurosis, acute pilot’s fatigue,
and for that matter shell-shock, without introducing the term ‘ neurosis.’
The following classification is now in use for psychological disorder in
flying personnel for the Royal Air Force :
Anxiety
Depression
Elation
Fatigue syndrome
Hysteria
Obsessional
Schizophrenia
Organic acute
Organic chronic
It will be observed that a concession has been made to popular prejudice by
the insertion of fatigue syndrome which replaces the term neurasthenia of current
psychiatric usage. This is considered justifiable provided that it is strictly
understood that fatigue syndrome means a syndrome in which sensations of


References
Anderson, H. G.
Medical and surgical aspects of aviation. Oxford
Medical Publications, 1919.
Armstrong, H. G.
.. A special form of functional psychoneurosis appearing
in airplane pilots. J.A.1I.A. 1936, 106, 1347.
Principles and practice of aviation medicine. Williams
& Wilkins, Baltimore, 1939.
Birley, J. L. . .
.. .. Temperament and Service flying. Medical Research
Council. Special Report Series. Medical problems
of flying. 1920, 53, 141.
Dill, D. B. & Ivy, A. C.
National Research Council. U.S.A., Division of
Medical Sciences, Committee on Aviation
Medicine, 1941, Report 29.
Flack, 11.
Tests for flying efficiency and flying strain. Medical
Research Council. Special Report Series. Medical
problems of flying. 1920, 53, 93.
Report of the War Office Committee of Enquiry into Shell-Shock. 1922. H.M. Stationery
Office.
fatigue, or complaint of undue fatiguability are the prominent symptoms, and
that it does not mean a syndrome caused by fatigue. This point is laboured to
avoid possible confusion between effects and causes. The fatigue syndrome in
some cases is due mainly to physical exhaustion, in others (probably more)
it is mainly due to emotional conflict; it is not infrequently due to a combina-
tion of both, as well as to other causes such as oxygen want, or the after effects
of infective illness.
It is submitted, therefore, that there is no justification for the term flying
stress as a diagnostic heading, and that such usage might well have harmful
effects of the kind which attended the use of shell-shock, of which the Committee
of Enquiry reported that it “ was wholly misleading but unfortunately its use
had been established and the harm was already done.” On the other, hand
flying stress might usefully be employed in its original sense to designate the
especial strains or stresses to which flying personnel are exposed. It might
well in this sense be used in a quantitative way to denote the amount of strain
to which a man had been put. Thus a man who had had a crash without
injury to himself or others might be said to have been exposed to slight
flying stress ; a man who had had a similar crash with painful injury to himself
or fatal injury to others, to moderate flying stress and so on. Such estimates
especially as recorded by commanding officers would be of considerable value
to the medical branch if the man subsequently became ill with psychological
disorder. There will still be problems of flying stress for discussion by executive
and medical officers: for example, how much flying stress can the average
man stand without breaking down ; what are the most important elements in
flying stress for fighter, bomber and reconnaissance personnel; what
psychological types stand up to flying stress best or worst ? But it should be
understood once and for all that flying stress is that which happens to the man,
not that which happens in him : it is a set of causes, not a set of symptoms.


CHAPTER III
A SERIES OF CASES WITH PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDER
EXAMINED IN RELATION TO THE
PROBLEMS OF SELECTION OF FLYING PERSONNEL
by
Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds, K.B.E., C.B., M.D., F.R.C.P.
FPRC. Report 412(a), January 1942
1. Material
In relation to the problem of selection of flying personnel I have examined
my notes on 100 consecutive cases referred to Central Medical Board on account
of psychological disorder. These cases were of course a selected group in so far
as they had all developed sufficient evidence of psychological disorder to cause
them to be referred for a consultant’s opinion. They were unselected in so far
as they were 100 taken in alphabetical order from a group seen between
October 1940 and November 1941 without reference to the duration of flying
experience, position in aircraft or other factors. It may, therefore, be worth
recording some of these points for the series as a whole.
(a) Age. —The average age for pilots was 25-57 years, the extremes being
19 and 37 ; the average age for other members of air crew was 25-24 years, the
extremes being 19 and 36.
( b) Rank. —55 were commissioned and 45 non-commissioned.
(c) Category in crew. —7l were pilots, 8 observers, 12 wireless operators-
air gunners and 9 air gunners.
(i d) Duties. —65 of the subjects had been engaged upon'operational duties,
as follows :
24 Night bombers
12 Day bombers
18 Fighters
2 Coastal flying boats
4 Coastal General Reconnaissance
2 Coastal fighters
1 Night fighter
2 Army Co-operation
Of the remainder, 29 were under training, 5 were instructors and one had
completed his training but not begun operational duties.
(e) Flying hours. —The total number of flying hours for 71 pilots was
52,455, with an average of 738-8 hours. For other than pilots, the total was
8,462 hours, with an average of 291 •79 hours. The total number of flying hours
for 34 personnel (pilots and crews) with no operational experience was
22,215 hours, with an average of 653-37 hours. For 35 with an operational tour
more than half completed the total was 20,680 hours, with an average of
590-85 hours. The larger average of flying hours for the group with no
operational flying is due to the fact that this group includes 5 instructors with
a total of 11,100 hours, and 4 others with a total of 6,050 hours, mostly pre-war,
who broke down before beginning operational duties. When these are
subtracted the average flying hours for the remainder of the non-operational
group is 202 • 6 hours.


2. Method of case examination
The method of examination was that of the ordinary routine followed in
such cases in clinical practice. The patient was first encouraged to state in
what respects he felt unwell or uneasy. When it became apparent that his
symptoms were of a nervous type enquiry was made as to the existence of any
such disorder in other members of his family. An outline was then obtained
of his life history from childhood up to the time he entered upon his flying
career, with special reference to school achievement in work and games, and
jobs held. A note was made of any previous illness or injury, and especially of
any evidence of timidity, general or specific, lack of aggressiveness, liability to
depression or anxiety, obsessional trends or psychopathic traits. The history
of the flying career was next taken with particular attention to the reasons for
volunteering for flying duties and to any unpleasant experiences or difficulties
since these duties had been commenced. The date of onset, of symptoms com-
plained of was then determined in relation to flying experience, or other possible
causal factors, such as physical illness or private worries. A brief examination
of the nervous system completed the examination. Notes were made of any
abnormalities observed in the mental state. The duration of the examination
was limited to three quarters of an hour. No attempt was made to obtain
answers to a set of questions such as that employed by Air Commodore R. D.
Gillespie, though many of the points included in his questionnaire were covered
in taking the history. It was considered more profitable in the time available
to get the patient talking, to extract as much information as possible upon
special points in the course of conversation, and to obtain a clinical impression,
rather than a formal score.
3. Analysis of clinical data
Examination of the material suggested that it would most profitably be
considered for the purpose in hand in relation to the amount of operational
work achieved. Two groups of cases were therefore first selected : A, 34 men’
who had not served in operational units, and B, 35 men who had completed more
than half an operational tour or had in the course of operations suffered severe
or exceptional stress in a shorter time. In each group two sets of facts were
looked for, first those which in the observer’s opinion provided evidence of a
predisposition to breakdown, second those which indicated external causes
for the breakdown (i.e. psychological or physiological stress, whether from
flying duties or other sources). When predisposition was evident an attempt was
made in the light of the clinical impression recorded, to decide whether the
observer, as a result of a single clinical examination, would have rejected the
individual for air crew duties. If so, the predisposition was noted as severe,
if not, as mild. When the external causes included stress of flying duties, the
degree of stress was roughly estimated against normal flying experience as
nil, slight, moderate, severe, or exceptional.
Group A : 34 men with no operational hours to their credit
Instructors. —Five of the group would probably never have been posted
to operational units, but would have continued to be employed as instructors.
All had more than 1,000 hours to their credit. They form a small group which
is outside the main topic of discussion but deserves comment. One, aged 27,
with 3,500 hours of commercial flying on commencing Service training could
not adapt himself to aerobatics, which he felt were unsafe. One was stale
after nearly 2,000 hours instructing and had domestic worries. One in 1,700
hours flying had once had to bale-out, had had a crash without injury,
subsequently a minor head injury in a motor accident, and had recently
experienced a loss of a co-instructor killed in a crash. In none of these three
cases was there any evidence of predisposition to psychological disorder.


Of the two others, one was liable to depressive moods, with an uncle subject
to recurrent depressive illness, and was worried over the fact that his wife
was German bom. The other, with 2,900 hours (father had a history of break-
down), had always been moody and irritable, disliked instructing and had
recently had to cancel his approaching marriage as his fiancee had developed
tuberculosis. In these two cases therefore there was evidence of predisposition,
but rated as of mild degree, i.e. it would not have warranted rejection.
Men (29) under training, or with their training completed, who would ordinarily
* have been expected to proceed to operational duties
(a) Four in whom no predisposition could be found: in every case there
had been some degree of stress. In three cases it was graded slight, and in
one moderate. For the sake of indicating at this stage the grounds taken
for assessment of stress, details will be given.
Case 50 : Symptoms began after witnessing a fatal crash. Flying stress slight.
Case 37 : Suffered minor injuries in a crash, including concussion. Nervousness
of flying began after this. Flying stress slight.
Case 54 : Crash with minor injuries. Flying stress slight.
Cast 56 : A pilot who crashed with minor injuries to himself, W/Op. killed. Flying
stress moderate.
(b) Nine in whom a mild degree of predisposition was found: in three of
these cases there had been no unpleasant experience whatever ; in three others
there had been some unpleasant experience, but none beyond the average
(two had had crashes without injury to self or others, one had witnessed a
similar crash at a time when he was anxious about his wife who was pregnant) ;
the remaining three had all suffered some degree of flying stress, two mild,
one severe. The last case was that of a W/Op.A.G. who was the sole survivor
of a Beaufort crash and learned that his best friend had been killed in a similar
crash on the same day. An example of this group is the following:—
Case 3 : P/O A. Pilot aged 28. u/t fighter, flying hours 1,200.
Complaints : Defective hearing and vision : loss of weight: awfully nervous,
jumpy and irritable : "if a door slams, my heart pounds ; ” difficulty in concentra-
tion.
Family history ; Mother has spells of depression and nervousness, for which she
has to go to bed under doctor’s orders.
Personal history : Apt to get depressed and irritable for a day or two if things go
wrong. Apart from this no abnormal traits. Married seven years, no children.
Flying history : Took up flying as a career in U.S.A. after leaving college, and
became a commercial pilot. Was a careful pilot, did over 1,000 hours with no crashes
or unpleasant experience. Two of his friends volunteered for the Eagle Squa'dron,
and he thought he would go too. He was influenced by the fact that his wife was
English.
Clinical history : After a few hours flying in Masters, on coming in to land his brakes
locked and he turned over. He was momentarily unconscious, suffered a cut scalp
(no stitch needed) and multiple contusions. He was put to bed in sick quarters
with a hypnotic, but did not sleep. The next night he slept better but had a slight
headache for a day or two. On returning to flying a fortnight after the accident
he found he had lost his nerve. He had to drive himself to fly. Nevertheless, he con-
tinued for two months having then completed 70 hours solo in this type and then
as he had not recovered his confidence, reported sick. The ophthahlmic and E.N.T.
reports revealed no cause for his symptoms. He stated that he felt incapable of
continuing with flying duties. According to his own statement he had lost 50 pounds
in weight since his accident. He was marked A4hßh for three months permanently
unfit Al. Six weeks later he was seen again as he felt unable to cope with ground
duties. The sight of aeroplanes upset him. Three of his friends had been killed in
crashes. He could not concentrate on his job, he was clearly anxious to return home.
He was considered permanently unfit for flying, disability non-attributable.
Comment: The main evidences of predisposition in this case were in the
family history and his reasons for joining the R.A.F. The predisposition


however was not considered to be of more than mild degree. Flying stress
was rated as slight. There was no evidence of head injury of a degree which
could be considered important as a causal factor. The impression gained
was that he was an individual of poor morale, and not a strong character.
(c) Sixteen in whom a severe degree of predisposition was found: in 13
of these there had been no unpleasant experience whatever. They had broken
down in the ordinary course of flying training. In one, symptoms developed
after a single crash without injury to self or others. Flying stress nil. The
other two were deemed to have suffered’slight flying stress (one crash landed
without injury to self or others after having been lost for some time in fog;
the other had witnessed two fatal crashes). An example of this group is the
following:—
Case 49 : Sgt. G. Pilot, aged 23. Flying hours 190. Operational hours nil.
Complaints; Headache (especially when flying), depression and difficulty in con-
centration.
Family history: Father always an anxious type had a nervous breakdown five years
ago : he ‘ went to pieces ’ and was off work under medical care for several weeks.
Personal history : At the age of nine he was away from school for six months owing
to ' a mania for tapping things and screwing his eyes up ’. He recovered from this,
but always had a tendency to worry about small things. After school he obtained
a post as assistant cashier. He worried a good deal about his future. Married two
years. No children.
Flying history ; He was keen to fly and joined the V.R. before the war. He had no
special difficulties or unpleasant experiences in training.
Clinical history : For the past year he had been anxious and unhappy without at
first any special cause. He had difficulty in getting off to sleep. He envied his friends
who were carefree. He wanted to feel that he was doing something worth while,
but when he got on to Hudsons the noise got on his nerves. He found himself
obliged to think of this and could not give his attention to the job. After first
reporting sick he was operated on for a deviated nasal septum. It was after this that
his other symptoms became associated with headache. Marked permanently unfit
air crew.
Comment: The incidence of predisposition in the family and personal
history is clear and he would have been unhesitatingly rejected on a single
clinical examination. Flying stress, nil.
Group B : Thirty-five men who had completed more than half an operational tour
or who had in the course of operations suffered severe or exceptional stress in a
shorter time
(a) Eight cases in which no predisposition could be found: the incidence
of stress was as follows :
Flying stress moderate .. .. .. 3 cases
„ „ severe .. .. .. 4 cases
~ „ exceptional .. .. .. 1 case
This sub-group included one D.F.C. and two D.F.Ms.
Brief examples are as follows
Case 46 : F/Lt. G. D.F.C. Pilot, aged 23. Flying hours 600. 25 sorties on day
bombers. Heavy casualties in Squadron. After completion of his tour felt tired.
Was posted to an O.T.U. as instructor. There he had an operation for chronic
appendicitis. While he was convalescent his baby died and he became depressed and
sleepless. He was grounded for two months, and thereafter had four months non-
operational flying. At the end of this time though he still appeared somewhat tense
and restless, he considered himself as fit, and was passed fit for full flying.
He described his mother as a nervous person, but she had never been under medical
care on this account. There was no other history of psychological disorder in the
family. He, himself, had had at the age of 16 a disturbance of some kind in the night,
which from the story might possibly have been epileptic or an attack of somnambu-
lism. There was no other evidence of personal abnormality.
Comment: It was considered that there was no definite evidence of
predisposition in this case. Flying stress was rated as moderate.


■ Case 20 ; F/Lt. C. Pilot, aged 24. Flying hours 590. Operational hours 270 in
fighters. During the Battle of Britain claimed 4 enemy aircraft. Was subsequently
on Dcfiants, in which he was never quite happy and had 5 crash landings but without
injury to himself. After this he was knocked over by the blast of a bomb during an
attack on his airfield, sustained a bruise on his forehead and was momentarily
unconscious. After this he became nervous, depressed, restless and irritable and
completely lost his confidence for flying. He failed to recover it after four months
rest from flying duties. A paternal uncle had periodic mental breakdowns with
recovery. There was no other abnormality in the family history, nor any abnormality
in his own life history.
Comment: Although the story of his uncle’s illness taken together with
his own was suggestive of an inherited liability, the rule taken for purposes of
the present analysis has been not to include mental disorder in second degree
relatives unless supported by other evidence of predisposition. Predisposition,
therefore, was considered to be absent. Flying stress was rated as moderate,
but the addition of the bombing made the toted stress severe.
Case 88 : Sgt. M., D.F.M. Pilot, aged 21. Flying hours 400. 13 sorties in night-
bombers. On last trip in mid-November was shot down into sea and was 16 hours
with the rest of the crew in dinghy. Was awarded D.F.M. as captain of aircraft
on this trip. Afterwards visualised the episode repeatedly and could not sleep,
but in two-and-a-half months he recovered and passed fit full flying duties. The
only suggestion of predisposition was the story that one of his brothers had been
nervous after an accident.
Comment: Predisposition was considered nil. Flying stress severe.
Case 25 : F/O C. Fighter pilot, aged 25. Flying hours 400. More than 30 combats,
shot down into North Sea in February, 1940, and picked up after swimming for 20
minutes. In June, 1940, shot down in flames over Dunkirk, burnt on face (not badly).
In September, 1940, shot down in flames over Kent, baled out, moderately burned
face and hands. After his first experience he had nightmares for some time ; after
the second he felt shaky but concealed his nervousness. After the third he began to
have repeated imperative visualisation of one or other of his experiences, and con-
fessed himself terrified of being burned again.
Comment: No suggestion of predisposition could be found in this case.
Flying stress was exceptional.
{ (b) Nineteen cases in which a mild degree of predisposition was found: the
incidence of stress was as follows :
Flying stress nil .. .. 1 case
„ „ slight .. .. 1 case
„ „ moderate .. .. .. 11 cases
„ „ severe .. .. .. 5 cases
„ „ exceptional .. .. 1 case
This sub-group included 1 D.F.C. and Bar, 2 D.F.Cs., 3 D.F.Ms. and 1 George
Medal. Two cases may be given as examples of this group :
Case 62 : Sgt. K., D.F.M. Pilot, aged 25. Flying hours 700. 30 sorties on night-
bombers.
Complaints : Anxiety and loss of confidence. " There is a continual battle between
what I see on the flying panel and my other senses. I am afraid I shall not be able
to control my natural impulses in bumpy weather. I want to ignore the instruments
and fly by what I feel.”
Family history : His father was said to be self-conscious and ill at ease with strangers.
Personal history : He was born and educated in the country. After school he was
employed as a clerk. He came to work in London at the age of 21 and did not like
the crowds. " I wanted to get away into the open and the fields away from them."
He disliked travelling in the tubes, having an uncomfortable feeling of being enclosed.
He was keen on amateur dramatics, but suffered so badly from stagte fright that it
was a torture. Knowing that it was good for him he forced himself to take big parts
to get over his nerves. He was always mildly obsessional, unhappy unless all his
things were in the right place and his correspondence up to date, and liking to have
each stage of a job properly tidied up before he went on to the next.


Flying history : He joined the R.A.F. because he wanted to fly. After Blenheims
he went to Hampdens and on his first flight got into a stabilised yaw, pulling out at
50 feet. He was shaken by this but got over it in a few days. He then did 13 sorties
as second pilot in a Hampden and completed a first pilot's course of instruction.
Clinical history : His first trip as first pilot was to Cologne, all instrument flying.
He felt tired, lost confidence in himself, became anxious, and reported sick. He
was seen by a neuro-psychiatrist, who observed that he had only had 7 days’ leave
in 17 months. He was given 14 days’ leave, came back, completed the operational
tour and was awarded the D.F.M. He practised instrument flying all he could by
going into clouds and after a few trips got over his loss of confidence.
Comment: Predisposition was assessed as mild. Flying stress was moderate.
Fatigue and staleness had played an important part.
Case 27 : P/O D. Pilot. George Medal. Aged 27. Flying hours 240. Operational
hours 100 on day-bombers.
Complaints : Loss of confidence in flying: can’t sleep if he knows he has got to
go in an aeroplane.
Family history : Nothing abnormal.
Personal history : His father died young. He was brought up, with two sisters,
‘by a lot of women ’ and thinks he was pampered as a boy. At school he could not
take chaffing, and was sensitive and depressed if left out of things. He was liable
to moods of depression if things went WTong. He went into an office, but disliked the
indoor life and was restless.
Flying history : He did well during training, but was dissatisfied with himself.
He had the idea that instead of having ability he had luck. His instructor told him
he had a sense of inferiority. He had one crash night flying in training, and sub-
sequently was never quite confident when night flying. He was posted with friends
to an operational squadron with only 13 hours’ experience on twin-engined aircraft,
and felt conscious of his inexperience. In the first month with the squadron three
of his friends were killed owing, as he thought, to inexperience.
Clinical history : He was wounded by ack-ack in the thigh and ankle in an attack
on the Danish coast but flew his aircraft home. He tried to jettison his bombs but
one failed to disengage and exploded on landing. He was awarded the G.M. for
getting his air gunner out of the burning wreckage. While in hospital he became
shaky and depressed, and as his wounds healed was very unhappy at the thought of
flying again. Two months after his wound he was passed fit for full flying duties,
and at that time concealed his apprehension. On returning to his unit he was given
dual but had to force himself to fly. He was then put on to night flying, but couldn’t
land and his instructor refused to let him go.solo. After this he did two long daylight
sweeps but, before flights, waiting was a torture. He then reported sick. On examina-
tion he was restless, tense and self-reproachful. " I feel I’m yellow, and a disgrace
to the squadron.” He was given a ground job for three months, and afterwards
marked limited to light aircraft at home only, but four months later had not flown
and was doing an administrative job. He was still anxious and self-reproachful.
Comment: Predisposition was assessed as mild, flying stress as severe.
(c) Eight cases in which a severe degree of predisposition was found:
in this sub-group, which included one D.F.M., the incidence of stress was as
follows;
Flying stress slight .. .. ~ 2 cases
„ „ moderate .. .. .. 3 cases
„ „ severe .. .. .. 3 cases
Case 55 : F/O H. Fighter pilot, aged 29. Flying hours 500. Operational hours 150.
Hurricanes.
Complaints : Insomnia, depression, loss of confidence in ability to fly.
Family history ; Father was a bad sleeper and conscientious to an abnormal degree.
Personal history : He was solitary as a child, but reasonably happy at his preparatory
school and at Eton. He then tried his hand as a newspaper reporter and subsequently
had a post as a private secretary. Four years ago when anxious over his work, he
suffered from insomnia with subsequent recurrence under similar circumstances.
The insomnia was then, as now, related to obsessional tendencies. In June, 1939,
after failing to fulfil his hope of becoming engaged he had a severe bout of insomnia,
being sometimes without sleep for several nights. For this he had treatment, and
on medical advice took a three-months holiday, from which he was recalled to active
service. He married in November, 1939.


Flying history : He joined the Auxiliary Air Force in 1936, enjoyed his flying and
had no difficulties or unpleasant experience. He flew throughout the Battle of
Britain in Hurricanes, claimed to have shot down four enemy aircraft and was
twice shot down himself. During the earlier part of this period he was sleeping well
and experienced no more than the average affective reaction.
Clinical history: He was then made a flight commander and slept badly at the
dispersal hut, sometimes getting no sleep at all. He became anxious about his sleep
and began to have retrospective anxiety about his combats. He was relieved of his
flight but lost confidence in his ability to fly, and was posted to an O.T.U. There he
crashed a Spitfire and subsequently reported sick. " I would like to fly, but I only
hope it won't upset my sleep. You can do any other job whether you’ve slept or not.
but not flying. I think of this in the night.” He was admitted to Torquay, where
he remained under treatment for six weeks. He was then marked Alhßh, one hour
flight, not above 10,000 feet, for 6 months, but was given a ground job. Six months
later he reported periodic insomnia—about once in ten days. He was unable to get
off to sleep owing to obsessional thoughts, for example, whether he had forgotten to
do something during the day, or whether, if he were going away, he would sleep in
strange surroundings. He had done one solo flight of 1J hours, but did not like it
because he had to get back within a specified time. He did not think he could ever
get back to operational flying. He was marked permanently unfit for flying duties
and for overseas.
Comment: Predisposition and flying stress were assessed as severe.
4. Discussion
The value of these observations is limited first by the fact that all these
individuals had already developed psychological disorder before they were
first seen. As it is probably true that in every case of psychological disorder
there are two groups of factors, the one internal (predisposition), the other
external (stress), the observer must necessarily be prejudiced in favour of
finding evidence of both. With regard to predisposition it must be admitted
that persistent enquiry in most people will reveal some imperfection in the
family or personal history of a kind which may be regarded as a possible factor
in the causation of breakdown. Such a discovery does not necessarily mean
that the imperfections revealed have acted causally in the breakdown which
has occurred, for there is a great variety in predisposing factors and an equal
variety in the factors of external stress. Breakdown may be due to a chance
combination of a particular set of the one with a particular set of the other.
What kind of predisposition, what kind of stress and what particular combina-
tions of each are important in causing breakdown in flying personnel are questions
which will be considered in further reports.
With regard to flying stress it may be questioned whether the attempt
to evaluate it on a scale such as has been used here is of any value at all, when
one considers all the factors which may be operative. What matters is not so
much what happens to the man as the circumstances of the happening, both
external and internal. This will be evident from some of the case records
quoted.
The assessment of predisposition and stress in the cases under review
has been made with full recognition of these difficulties. It remains to be seen
whether anything of possible value emerges from it. It is of interest to note
that the proportion of cases showing no predisposition in the non-operational
group was 4 out of 29 as compared with 8 out of 35 in the operational
group. Sixteen of the non-operational showed severe predisposition as
compared with 8 of the operational group.
• The incidence of flying stress in the operational group is inevitably
greater than in the non-operational. Within the non-operational group however
there is a relationship between predisposition and stress which does appear to
be significant. In this group 14 of 16 individuals with severe predisposition
broke down with no stress, as compared with 6 out of 9 with mild pre


disposition, and none out of 4 with no predisposition. There is a trend
therefore suggesting an inverse relationship between stress and predisposition.
But when we consider the operational group the trend is less evident. Five
out of 8 individuals with severe predisposition broke down with moderate
stress or less, as compared with 13 out of 19 with mild predisposition, and
3 out of 8 with no predisposition. Although none of these figures is large,
their general trends are interesting.
The difference between the two groups of cases requires explanation.
It is possibly to be found in the much greater opportunity in the operational
group, owing to the variety of external causes, of that chance matching of
specific stress with specific predisposition which may cause a breakdown in
any individual without relation to his sum total of predisposition as judged
by clinical standards. On the whole it appears that predisposition assessed
by the method described in this report is, within limits, an indication of the
probability of psychological disorder developing under non-operational con-
ditions, but is of doubtful value in those who have completed half an operational
tour.
If the 24 individuals assessed as showing severe predisposition had been
rejected as candidates for air crew what would the. Service have gained and
lost ? It would have gained by saving training 16 individuals with a total of
7,420 flying hours, who proved incapable of making any contribution to the
operational effort. It would have lost by the rejection of eight who had
contributed as follows :
Case 12 : Pilot. Coastal G.R. 300 operational hours. 1 M.E. 109 destroyed. No
likelihood of return to operational flying.
Case 17 : Airgunner. Coastal G.R. 300 operational hours. Prospect of return
to operational flying good.
Case 31 ; Pilot. Night bomber. 28 sorties (5 from Britain, 23 from Middle East).
Prospect of return to operational flying doubtful.
Case 41 ; Pilot. Night bomber. 14 sorties. No prospect of return to operational
flying.
Case 55: Pilot. Fighter. 150 hours. 4 enemy aircraft claimed. No prospect of return
to operational flying.
Case 71: Observer. Night bomber. 20 sorties. No prospect of return to operational
flying.
Case 73 : Airgunner. Night bomber. 19 sorties. Little prospect of return to opera-
tional flying.
Case 83 : Observer. Day bomber. 100 hours. D.F.M. No prospect of return to
operational flying.
These contributions have to be discounted by the adverse effect upon the
morale of others of psychological breakdown, especially if it occurs before
the end of an operational tour. It would therefore seem possible that rejection
of all these individuals might have shown a balance on the profit side of the
account. On the debit side we have to allow for the possibility that other
personnel still engaged on operational flying would have shown a similar
predisposition and would therefore by the same criteria have been rejected.
Further research must determine this question.
If those with mild predisposition had been rejected the profit and loss
account would have shown a quite different balance. Nine individuals would
have been rejected who proved incapable of achieving operational duties,
but of these one might have done so had he not had the misfortune to suffer
severe stress during training. In return for this, 19 would have been lost
to the Service who had completed more than half an operational tour, of whom
seven had won decorations. In 6of these 19 there was a good prospect of
eventual return to operational flying.
(76642) B


4. Summary
(1) The records of 100 unselected cases seen by the writer at No. 1 Central
Medical Board for psychological disorder have been examined, and data as to
age, rank, crew category, duties and flying hours tabulated.
(2) The method of clinical examination is described.
Cases have been selected for detailed analysis: those with no operational
hours (34) and those with an operational tour more than half completed (35).
(3) In each group an attempt has been made to assess predisposition and stress.
(4) It is claimed that there is a relation between predisposition, as estimated
by . clinical examination, and stress, such that in the non-operational group
the probability of psychological breakdown under a specified degree of stress
may within certain limits be forecast.
(5) If a severe degree of predisposition as assessed by this method were
taken as a cause for rejection, more than half of those who broke down before
reaching operational squadrons would have been thus rejected, but at the
same time nearly a quarter of those who completed more than half an operational
tour would have been rejected.
(6) If a mild degree of predisposition were taken as ground for rejection,
25 out of 29 of a non-operational group would have been rejected, and 27 out
of 35 of the operational group. Eight of these 27 had been awarded decorations.
(7) The practical value of a single neuro-psychiatric examination in the
selection of-flying personnel is discussed.
Note. —Chapters IV, V and VI relate to the problem of neurosis in air crews
of Bomber, Fighter and Coastal Commands. These reports were based upon
a personal canvass of the views of executive and medical officers who were in
intimate contact with the problem as it affected air crews on their stations.
The method used is fully explained in the preamble to Chapter IV, which
concerns Bomber Command. The reports were for internal reasons submitted
independently to each Command. They all had much the same form and it
would therefore be tedious to reproduce all three in extenso, so the compromise
has been adopted of reproducing one of the original reports in full, and then
describing how the other two differed from it. The Bomber Command report
has been selected as the prototype because the psychiatric casualties in that
command were so much higher than in the others, both in actual numbers and
in incidence (see Chapters VII, VIII, IX), that the problem of the psychological
care of flying personnel was more urgent there. Special aspects of the subject
which were encountered in Fighter and Coastal Commands are described and
are related to experiences in Bomber Command in Chapters V and VI.


CHAPTER IV
PERSONAL INVESTIGATION OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS
IN FLYING PERSONNEL OF BOMBER COMMAND
by
Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds, K.B.E., C.B., M.D., F.R.C.P., and
Wing Commander Denis J. Williams, D.Sc.,M.D., F.R.C.P.
FPRC Report 412(f). August, 1942
Introduction
1. Purpose
The purpose of this investigation, as defined by the Director-General
of Medical Services, was “ to gain definite evidence as to the incidence and
causes of flying stress and to ensure that our knowledge of these matters is
brought up to date and kept up with current operational experience.” In
Chapter IX is an interim report upon the incidence based on data obtained
from the Central Registry of cases of psychological disorder in flying personnel.
The present report is mainly concerned with flying stress and the symptoms
which may result from it. Flying stress represents the sum of all those
factors which constitute the mental and physical strain of flying under war
conditions. The effects of this load upon a man vary in relation to its weight
and to the mental and physical stamina of the individual. When the load is
too heavy for a man to carry, its effects are revealed by signs of fatigue, anxiety,
or inefficiency, and in other ways which will be examined in some detail.
It should be clearly understood that the term flying stress is not used by us to
describe these ill-effects but as a synonym for the load or strain of war flying.
Unfortunately, flying stress has been loosely used in some quarters to cover the
effects of overloading. In order to avoid any confusion which might arise from
this misuse, we shall throughout speak of the Load and the Signs, the former
being equivalent to flying stress and the latter to the effects of flying stress.
2. Method of collecting evidence
The authors separately visited representative stations in each operational
group and sought information from Station Commanders, Squadron
Commanders and Station and Squadron Medical Officers. The interview was,
with few exceptions, conducted privately and made .as informal as possible,
and occupied a half to one hour. It was explained that the Director-General
of Medical Services wished to bring the instruction of junior medical officers
up to date with current operational experience and that as the unit medical
officers could not share this experience it was essential to interrogate general
duty officers who were concerned with the leadership, training and care of
flying personnel. The knowledge thus gained would be used to help junior
medical officers to prepare themselves to advise or assist Squadron Commanders
when asked to do so.
After this explanation, two broad questions were proposed. " What
are the things which get people down ? ” and “ How do you tell when a man has
had enough ? ” Leading questions were then used to obtain information on
subjects which from experience had been found worthy of discussion. Longhand
notes were made of the replies to these questions, and of any other relevant
material, and full reports of the interview were made as soon as possible.
(76642) B 2


In giving us their facts and opinions the officers were primarily concerned
with the problem of impairment of operational efficiency and the effective loss
of flying personnel resulting from flying stress. Both in their unsolicited expres-
sions and in their replies to questions, some of them raised issues which are
outside the bounds of medical opinion. This naturally occurred more often
in the case of general duty officers whose outlook was practical and com-
prehensive. Views were expressed for example on the duties of the squadron
commander, the form of relief employment and the value of discipline. These
views are presented objectively in exactly the same way as those covering
more orthodox medical subjects, but unlike these they are presented in ignorance
of their full significance. It has been thought necessary to include them as
they form an essential part of the results of our medical enquiry, and it has been
our object to record this without any selection or mutilation.
3. Material
The report deals with the results of interrogation of 44 general duty
officers and 37 medical officers in Bomber Command. As the method employed
gave the examinee as much freedom as possible in the expression of his views,
the topics discussed varied from one individual to another. In no case was it
found on subsequent analysis that all the questions had been covered by one
individual. The material therefore is not such as would result from a systematic
questionnaire, but comprises a variety of positive opinions more or less relevant
to the questions proposed. These opinions were given freely, as a rule emphatic-
ally, and appeared to reflect previous consideration of the topics discussed.
4. Method of presentation
The information was analysed under headings which had been formulated
during collection, the points most frequently raised being given special
prominence under each heading. When it seemed valuable the number of
observers in agreement was stated and when there was divergence of opinion
the number on each side. The relative numbers of general duty officers and
medical officers were only stated when it seemed that the subject of discussion
might concern one more than the other. As might be expected, some officers
had given more thought to specific problems than others, and one more observant
or thoughtful than his fellows would present a measured and critical statement,
the importance of which was out of all proportion to its numerical significance.
As the report is based on the pooled results of two investigators any unavoidable
personal emphasis which might have been present in collecting the information
has been reduced. The final synthesis of opinion presents a picture of existing
conditions as described by others which has not been retouched or personally
modified and a serious attempt has been made to maintain a true perspective.
The report has been presented in three parts, the first dealing with the Effects
of Flying Stress. This includes opinions on the purpose of looking out for these
effects ; the value of an operational limit in preventing them; the value of
relief employment or rest in counteracting them ; and the measure of success
at present achieved in getting men back fit for a second tour. The second section
of the report deals with Flying Stress, or the Load, and includes opinions offered
on the constituents of the load itself and the factors which may affect the man’s
ability to carry it. The third concerns the Medical Qfficer's Function in Detecting
and Preventing the Effects of Stress. Although many of the subjects had a
common application to all duties, in the command there are obviously special
problems inherent in the various duties performed. When they appeared to
be specially relevant to one form of duty this has been indicated in the text.


PART ONE : THE EFFECTS OF FLYING STRESS
I. SIGNS INDICATING THE EFFECTS OF FLYING STRESS
1. Facts observed by others
(a) Change in appearance, talk and behaviour. —Forty-five officers, over half
of them squadron and station commanders, said they could often tell by
changes in his appearance, behaviour or conversation when a member of an
operational air crew was beginning to feel the stress of his duties. Only three
of the group, all experienced medical officers, thought it very easy to detect
alterations in personality, but 30 said that if jmu know the man you can
observe these subtle changes in the mess, at briefing, take-off and return, or
elsewhere. They emphasised the difficulty of observing these changes in
personality. One medical officer said that changes are difficult to assess unless
the man is really well known, so that, because of the impossibility of mixing
with N.C.Os. in their mess, he himself only felt confident when dealing with the
officers with whom he lived and mixed freely. A station commander said that
there are so many different types of individual, each of whom reacts differently,
that one has to live with them and observe them closely to notice any change.
The same number of observers had noticed increased restlessness, excitability
or irritability as had observed decreased activity, quietness, loss of interest
and a tendency to be solitary. The explanation of this was given by 25 people
who said that the important thing to look for is a change in the individual's
personality. As one medical officer put it: “ You will notice, only if you know
your men well, that a quiet man will become sociable and garrulous, and a normal
man quiet, solitary and mood}'.” Practically all stated or implied that the
most significant sign was a change in behaviour whatever its direction, and they
urged that the man had to be known personally to appreciate this change.
This is not to say that the change is ephemeral and only to be appreciated by
experts. It was noticed by ordinary men, living under ordinary Service
conditions. Special signs of a positive kind frequently noted were increased
excitability, restlessness, irritability, or truculence. These signs ranged from
‘ Making weak remarks around the mess and roaring with laughter at them ’
to ‘ becoming irritable, sarcastic, truculent and out for trouble in the mess. ’
The contrasting signs of unusual quietness, with a desire for solitude are equally
evident. This behaviour is ‘ more obvious if the man is usually a good mixer.
He ceases to be one of the party. He may remain in it without interest, or keep
drifting away, starting a game of shove-halfpenny, but soon losing interest in
even that. He breaks off a conversation and tends to be solitary, and later
becomes unoccupied and lacks all initiative. ’ ‘ They sit around in the mess
without bothering to read —they just sit. ’ They also go to sleep in their chairs
Their facial expression may change in a variety of ways._ They look tired
and haggard, pale, worried, tense and nervy or miserable and depressed. One
squadron commander said that after a few unpleasant experiences; “ The man
begins to look unhappy and worried and his face becomes rigid. You hear
that he has become quiet and has withdrawn into himself.” A medical officer
reported a loss in weight of 14 pounds in 100 operational hours which was later
rapidly regained. Slight changes in manner such as fidgeting and sometimes
a tremor may be seen. Other observations have been a tendency to complain
of trivial things ; inability to concentrate —‘ he chucks a book down instead of
sticking to it, ’ and increased smoking and drinking, which are referred to
later. All these changes illustrate the alteration in total behaviour which has
already been stressed.
The man’s conversation fits in with this picture of loneliness and anxiety.
' He thinks about the casualties he has seen ; he talks about the people who
O-iM'l) B 3


have been shot down in the searchlights. In discussion in the mess he enlarges
on the casualties, and his mind leans toward the dangers rather than concen-
trating on the job in hand. He is fidgety and not in repose and looks here, there
and everywhere.’ One station commander called this a state of alarm.
Although these signs have been reported by so many, a man who has long
passed his peak of operational efficiency ‘ may appear quite normal, so that
sometimes you find that when you are sure a man is feeling strained you are
wrong and that those who break down may not show any symptoms.’
(b) Loss of keenness for flying duties. —One observer remarked ; " The first
evidence of the effects of flying stress is usually to be found in diminished
enthusiasm. A keen man will react to the announcement of ‘ a heavily defended
target for to-night ’ with immediate professional interest, but if he is suffering
from the effects of stress he will show his lack of keenness by immediate
preoccupation with the defences.” This loss of keenness has been described
by 20 observers, 15 being station or squadron commanders. A lack of
enthusiasm, apparent in the man’s manner or conversation may be seen at
briefing, when unnecessary questions may be asked about the sortie, or trivial
reasons may be given for not flying. In the mess he may be half-hearted and
mention the possibility of icing-up. Some men over-compcnsate and appear
wildly enthusiastic, emphasising their keenness too forcibly. These signs are
most apparent to the crews and squadron officers but they can also be seen by
the medical officer. They may be the very first signs of deterioration, and,
as they can be directly observed by the executive officers, are especially
valuable.
(c) Loss of efficiency. —Flying stress may cause loss of efficiency in
operational flying, which can be recognised by squadron and flight commanders.
A number of ways in which it might appear were described. The actual
standard of flying may decline; there may be foolish errors of judgment;
gross carelessness, leading to bad landings or crashes. In operations, care-
lessness or recklessness may lead to catastrophes, the real cause of which
would be unknown unless the crews are fortunate enough to escape, when they
may return and report lack of proper evasive action, or the acceptance of
foolish risks. When one particular aircraft is badly damaged in successive
trips ‘ this usually means that the pilot’s judgment is going. He forces himself
to go in regardless of risks because he is afraid that his nerve is getting shaky.’
‘ The navigator may become inefficient and make'silly mistakes, he gives wrong
fixes, or sets the wrong course,' or he may ‘ go to pieces over the target.’
More often, an aircraft returns before reaching the target, a mechanical
defect being blamed. The defects may be trivial or imaginary, and they include
minor engine troubles, such as a fall in revs or oil pressure, turret trouble, or
difficulty with the intercomm. These unnecessary failures are usually due to
the captain of the aircraft. Once they occur they tend to be repeated, a different
reason being found each time. They sometimes cause operational squadron
commanders great anxiety and one said that when a crew returns without
reaching the target more than once, he immediately investigates the cause.
Another described ■ how he used to go into the aircraft himself when an
unconfirmed defect was reported immediately before take off, to investigate.
He would explain that all was well and if there was still reluctance on the part
of the captain, he would invite another pilot to fly the aircraft. Another squadron
commander regularly visited each aircraft with the engineer officer just
before take off, ‘ just to pat them on the back and nurse them into the air, but
chiefly to prevent returns for mechanical defects.’
Over-the-target inefficiency may be apparent in high bombing and in
failure to press home the attack, with inaccuracy or actual jettisoning of


the bombs on the fringe of the target. At other times the inefficient crew may
fail to find the target. Such evidence of inefficiency is commonly associated with
some of the signs of individual deterioration which have already been described.
A squadron commander said: “You can usually tell when a man has had
enough, you can tell by the results of his trips. He either takes undue risks or
becomes over-cautious. If you study a man carefully you will find that he
behaves rather differently during operations. In the first five trips it is well
to sum up what he is like. After that if he alters at all you must look out for
trouble. Generally the extreme he will go to depends on his wanting to do the
opposite to what he feels, so that if he is feeling afraid he compensates by
new risks.” One medical officer emphasised that information is only available
on those airmen who return from operations. He argued that if, as has already
been stated, carelessness, recklessness and loss of judgment result from excessive
stress, there must surely be an abnormally high casualty rate in the air crews
who, through one member, have become inefficient.
(d) Alcoholic excess. —Of 25 officers who mentioned this subject, all except
one had at some time observed increased drinking as a result of stress in flying
crews. Usually the symptom has a gradual onset, is steadily progressive, and
‘ quite different from the occasional outburst used to relieve tension after an
unpleasant experience.’ It is accompanied by the other signs which have been
described.
2. Facts reported by the man
Physical symptoms. —A medical officer said : “ There are two sorts of men.
The first report sick with some trivial complaint which has no real physical
basis. After a talk if you ask them why they have come to sick quarters they
will say that they are afraid or that they panic in the air. The other sort never
report sick. They show their signs and symptoms in the mess, but they keep on
flying and in the end write themselves off, because they become inefficient
through loss of judgment.” The second group has already been dealt with.
There is in fact a third group, who say quite honestly that they cannot carry on—
they will be discussed later.
Those who come complaining of physical symptoms can readily be divided
into: —
{a) Those who are exaggerating an existing slight disability. —They use
' some existing physical reason such as a visual defect or a varicocele ’ to take
them off flying, or they may repeatedly report sick with mild ‘ sinus trouble ’,
or airsickness which is not in fact incapacitating. They are the smallest group
and the least likely to return to operational flying. They may use their disability
after they have been briefed for a particularly hazardous sortie, the anticipation
of which is too much for them. One man used a small boil in this way, but
when eventually it had recovered he said that he was too afraid to fly again.
Complaints of sinus trouble, including nasal catarrh and ear trouble are also
frequent. Here no accompanying signs may be found and one medical officer
said that anomalies in the onset of pain in relation to altitude may give a clue
to its psychological cause. These people do not suggest that they cannot fly
until the motive behind their complaints has been exposed. They then have
to make the decision whether or not they will fly again. The result of the
decision is usually unsatisfactory.
{b) Those who have physical symptoms resulting entirely from mental strain. —
This group (the largest) has been described by 27 observers. As one squadron
commander put it: “They come complaining of trivial physical ailments
which have no real foundation. This is especially evident if they get wind
early of a particularly bad raid —even very good men do this sometimes.”
(76842) B 4


The most common symptoms are abdominal discomfort, nausea, mild dyspepsia,
and even vomiting. These symptoms are not caused by flying as such, but
originate in the visceral response to anticipation of danger. ‘ Occasionally
mild dyspepsia and a feeling of discomfort and impending diarrhoea may occur
before operations, especially on approaching the aircraft. It disappears once
they are on board.’ Headache and visual complaints, such as eye strain, pain
over the eyes, or blurring of vision are almost as common. Some men report
sick repeatedly in this way throughout their tour. A medical officer said, “I
keep them going by explanation and encouragement —even if they have purely
physical complaints I talk to them about fear, quite frankly, and explain that
it is not peculiar to them alone. This helps them greatly, and even if their
symptoms don’t go, they carry on.”
It is unusual for these men to say at first that they cannot carry on with
operations. ‘ They all exaggerate the point that they don’t want to come off
flying. But later, if they are kept on they may say that they do not think it
fair to the rest of the crew that they should carry on, because they are afraid
they may let them down.’ Ultimately, when they are faced with the question
of their inability to carry on, or their fear of doing so, they describe the fear
and stress which have produced their symptoms. Whatever their reaction to
this situation, whether an admission of fear, an inability to carry on or a refusal
to do so, the outlook, compared with those who in the first place came saying
frankly that they were afraid and could not go on, is bad. It is important to
exclude physical causes for the disorder, as some of those with symptoms such
as headaches, sickness, sleep troubles and loss of weight may be suffering from
bodily illness. An experienced medical officer said, “It is difficult to distinguish
between the man who doesn’t like it and the one who is genuinely ill, but it is
most important to do so, and you must weigh up the whole man.”
Sleeplessness may be a prominent feature in this group. It was reported
by 11 observers and may be associated with nightmares related to flying
experiences. ‘ The}’ come complaining of sleeplessness and dreaming of flak
all night long.’ Only one medical officer reported fatigue as a symptom.
Tiredness is sometimes used to mean loss of zest for flying, but here the
mechanism is apparent and the symptoms not primarily based on physical or
mental fatigue, which are discussed under The Load.
(c) Those unable to carry on. —Fifteen officers observed that a man may
go to his squadron or flight commander and say that he cannot carry on wdth
operational flying. He may imply that he can never return to operations or
say that he simply needs a temporary rest. The outlook in both these groups,
wdth careful handling, is better than in those already described who have
spurious or real physical symptoms. Sometimes they frankly admit fear or
say that their nerve has gone. ‘ The man who comes up complaining of inability
to carry on is the honest type, and there is more chance of getting him back to
flying than the others.’ There seems general agreement with this statement,
the experience being that ‘ If a man is honest wdth himself to say that he has
had enough, he wdll come to the squadron commander straight away and some-
thing can be done about it.’ The management of these men obviously depends
mafnly upon the stress to which they have been submitted. They wdll be dealt
with more fully under Operational Limit.
3. Facts noticed, but not reported, by the man himself
These observations are based on the introspective accounts of their reactions
to stress given by squadron commanders, in order to illustrate their discussion
of points in squadron management. These officers had all completed one or
more tours wdthout having reported any symptoms, or having been taken off


operations before the limit of the tour had been reached. The most common
observation of these officers was of their personal experience of increasing fear
in the later stages of an operational tour. The intensity of fear, usually
anticipatory in type, may be associated with increasing physical symptoms.
One said; “I judge these men entirely on my own reactions because I know
what it is like both before a trip and wheif you start a second tour. Everyone
is frightened and if they could stop reasonably they would, unless they were
damn fools.” A squadron commander, talking of the factors which caused
failure for non-medical reasons, said: “If they are as afraid as lam they know
what wind-up is. They are scared stiff and I don’t blame them either." They
may lose confidence in themselves in the air and experience panic over the
target.
Although the usual story is that of fear, the complaint may be of fatigue,
as with one officer who, after 40 hours in his second tour, found himself tired,
listless and slow in taking evasive action. He found that after a little while
in the air his instrument panels invariably became double. He went on leave
and his symptoms disappeared. Another squadron commander said that he
became tired and his fear became obvious and increasingly difficult to control.
In the end he was shaky and whenever a gun opened up he would jump. He
completed his tour successfully. A squadron commander of great distinction
said he lost a stone in weight during a period of intensive operations, but he
soon regained it in a rest period afterwards. Another said that he became
sleepless and dreamed about his flying experiences. It was noticeable that in
describing their own reactions to stress these officers dwelt upon the primary
symptoms —fear and fatigue, rather than those of secondary development,
thus showing evidence of their superior intelligence and insight.
11. ROLE OF THE MEDICAL OFFICER IN DETECTING THE
EFFECTS OF STRESS
Out of 26 general duty officers who discussed the function of the medical
officer in this respect, only 2 doubted his value. One took the extreme view
that the medical officer should not be concerned with this problem. He
thought, nevertheless, that the medical officer was valuable in maintaining
morale in the squadron. The other believed that a good squadron commander
had greater opportunities for observing the crews than had the medical officer,
and that unless tactful, a medical officer could do harm by over-scrupulous
enquiry about the welfare of air crews. All the others were emphatic as to the
value of a good squadron medical officer and welcomed his advice in deciding
when a man had had enough (see page 38). A squadron commander said:
" I get a tremendous lot of information from him about the ability of people
to carry on. We believe in not keeping a man on until he breaks, but posting
him so that he won’t break, and we will get him back later. For this I rely
to a very great extent on the judgment of the medical officer.” The 24 general
duty officers who referred to the co-operation between the medical officer and
themselves said that the medical officer came to them with advice and
information about air crews, and they in turn went to the medical officer.
They liked him to take the initiative and to come to them spontaneously. The
squadron medical officer should be the intermediary between the squadron
and the squadron commander in this respect, but although the liaison should
be close, it should also be unobstrusive, so that however great the understanding,
on the station their relationship should be that of commanding officer and
subordinate. Having noticed the earliest signs of deterioration, even when a
man has come to him in confidence, he should then refer the question of future
management to the squadron or flight commander who, usually, will welcome
his further advice. One commanding officer said: “ The doctor sees a man
from one angle and I see him from another.”


To enable the medical officer to observe the earliest signs of deterioration
and especially to be able to appreciate the changes in personality which may
occur, he must always be in intimate contact with the crews. He should
mix with them in the mess, drink with them and go on parties with them.
In duty hours he should spend time in the crew rooms and hangars, and during
operations should be present at briefing, take-off, return and interrogation.
In order to establish common interest, he should fly occasionally and be
concerned for all aspects of squadron life —in fact he should ‘ think squadron
and live squadron every minute of the day’. His observation of the crews
must never be apparent, but should take the form of friendly interest.
A number of highly successful medical officers supplement this with a private
card index system, recording the personal characteristics, flying experience,
operational stress, and successes of each man.
The observation and assessment of officers are made easy by the readiness
with which contact can be made with them in the mess. It is quite different
with the N.C.Os., into whose mess an officer hesitates to intrude, and so
suggestions for a common mess or club for flying personnel have been made
partly to remedy this ( Living Conditions, page 59). The medical officer can
increase his contacts with the crews and his observation of them by making
use of his relationship to them as their doctor. When the crews respect his
opinion they will come to him for advice, and having done so they may readily
be engaged in a discussion about themselves or their work. ‘lf they have
confidence in the medical officer they will come before they have actually
thrown their hand in.’ When they ask to see him an immediate and informal
interview should be arranged. One squadron medical officer arranged for
one heavy bomber crew each day to come to the station sick quarters for
ultra-violet light. During the time they sat round the lamp he got to know
them personally. Another arranged informal discussions on oxygen, equip-
ment and quasi-medical affairs, ostensibly for education, actually for
observation and personal contact. In order to maintain this relationship
with the crews the medical officer needs special personal qualities which are
dealt with in (Role of the medical officer in relation to the load, pp. 61-62).
11l OPERATIONAL LIMIT
1. Reasons for and against an operational limit
Definite opinions were expressed on this subject by 43 officers, all except
three of whom were in favour of a limit of some sort. The more important
reasons in favour of it were as follows. Although any widely-applied limit
has disadvantages, an arbitrary limit is as practicable a method of maintaining
efficiency as any. There must be a yard-stick for the squadron commander’s
use and with it he is given a standard reference point from which he can measure
the achievement of individual members of his squadron. Not only does it
remove great responsibility from his shoulders, but it helps in handling those
who are sub-standard. It also provides a measure of safety,, for some
commanders find it impossible to assess a man’s capacity, and some men do
not show that they have passed their peak until they have deteriorated greatly.
It is particularly useful in dealing with N.C.Os. who form the bulk of the
squadron but who are not intimately known to the squadron and flight
commanders, and may well show the effects of stress without his knowledge.
The limit also helps the crews themselves. They know roughly the degree
of effort required of them, and they do not have the alternative of continuing
operations until they are killed, missing or showing symptoms. They can look
forward to the end of the tour and they have a goal at which to aim. If the


limit is within the reach of the average member of a crew he will be
removed before deterioration begins and so can remain efficient for a second
tour ( Second Tour, page 63). Lastly, even were it encouraged, many men
would not report that they had passed their zenith or had reached the limit
of their endurance, through a misplaced sense of guilt. Rather, a competitive
spirit would be fostered which, by overtaxing the average crew member,
would ultimately have disastrous results. Having a constantly applied limit is
much fairer on everybody, for they are all asked to make the same effort. The
objections to a limit were based on a recognition of the variations in the
individual capacity to carry the load.
2 . Comments on the present arrangement of tour
(a) The measure. —Seventeen officers approved of the 200-hour limit for
heavy bombers, but 11 thought that it was unsatisfactory. The main
objections were that the effort could not equitably be measured in hours.
The new four-engined bomber must make about 40 trips as opposed to 30 in
twin-engined craft. Stations further removed from enemy territory on
account of the greater distance include fewer sorties in their 200 hours.
Therefore the load may be more accurate if measured by the number of sorties
than by the number of hours. Three thought that 200 hours was beyond the
reach of the average man, and that if the limit were lower, more men would
be available for an efficient second tour.
(b) Flexibility. —Of 17 officers who discussed this point, only two were
in favour of an inflexible limit. The remainder thought the present system
too rigid. The reasons for this were expressed as follows : ' The 200-hour
limit is too rigid, for it makes the nervous man more nervous. If it were
made elastic there would be less anxiety at the end of the tour. At present
the men feel they must conserve themselves in the last few trips, which they
may stretch out to add as many hours as possible to the total.’ Some tend to
take undue risks in the last few trips, so that one wing commander said:
“If ever I hear a man say ‘ this is my last trip ’, either I don’t send him on the
trip or I tell him he has another dozen to do, then send him twice more and
unexpectedly take him off”. Several thought that although the present limit
should be used, it should in fact be a maximum limit, above which no one
should go, but below which, men could be rested without any stigma. One
commander put it thus : “ The 200-hour limit is reasonable, but the discretion
to take a man off should be left to the station and squadron commander
with the medical officer.” Good types of men who come off before the limit
is reached should not be considered to be lacking in moral fibre, for some
men have to finish before others. The universal application of a fixed limit
is unfair. An equable figure cannot be adopted because ‘ the strain varies
with the type of work,[rate of loss, degree of success, type of man ’. Another
officer added the type of aircraft to this list of variable factors. The general
opinion was that these factors, especially the variation in temperament and
operational conditions, were so potent that they made a fixed limit undesirable.
(c) Knowing the limit. —All except six approved of the limit being known
for the reasons already given. These six mentioned the excessive caution or
recklessness at the end of the tour which has been described above. Two
thought that the suggestion of a limit to one’s duty was bad for the morale of
the Service.
(d) Constructive suggestions. —The commonest view expressed was that
the limit should remain at 200 hours, but that discretion should be left to the
station authorities to take a man off sooner, if they thought it advisable,
without any formal action, or further opinion. The mechanism suggested


was that the flight commander or squadron medical officer should help the
squadron commander by reporting signs of stress. The squadron commander
would then weigh up the man’s performance and the operational hours completed,
taking into account his temperament and his present condition.- If considered
fit, he would then recommend that he should be sent to relief employment.
It was suggested by some that the station and squadron commanders
with the squadron medical officer should hold a relief employment board either
as the necessity arose or as a periodic review of those in the second half of the
tour. If the men remained well they would be taken off at a fixed upper limit.
There would therefore be a maximum but no fixed minimum to the number of
hours constituting a tour. There were notable exceptions to this point of view.
A squadron commander had had so much success in bolstering up morale and
keeping sub-average men going to the end of the tour that he would never
hear of anyone being taken off before the 200 hour mark without disciplinary
action. In the light of his own operational experience he considered that the
strain of continued fear was such that everyone would prefer to come off earlier
if he had a valid reason fot doing so. It was also suggested that there should
be a fixed limit within the compass of the average crew, but that the limit
should vary, its level depending on the type of duty and aircraft used. A flexible
guiding limit was also suggested. This would be used to indicate what majf
be expected of the average crews in set circumstances. It would be modified
by the squadron commander as already outlined. Lastly, there was a
suggestion to set an arbitrary minimum as well as a maximum, a report being
submitted if a man were taken off below the minimum. There was fairly
general agreement that no one should be allowed to elect to operate beyond the
limit, because this would defeat its object by causing competition and invidious
distinction, and encouraging the man with a strong sense of duty to strain
himself beyond his capacity. Two commanders thought that an extra 50 hours
should be allowed those who were still at their peak efficiency.
One distinguished squadron commander summed up the problem of the
limit as follows : “ The operational performance of a good crew goes steadily
uphill to a peak. It then levels off and later comes down again. The
deterioration is due to operational and not physical tiredness. The man should
be caught at his peak before he begins to crack up. If he is rested at the peak
of his form he will come back from the O.T.U. ready for a second tour, but if
you send him back when he is getting to the quiet stage, he will not return, for
his reaction will be severe.” It is therefore impossible to keep a hard and fast
limit. Men should be taken off when they have had enough but there should
be an arbitrary minimum to guide the squadron commander, and a report
should be rendered if a man comes off too soon. There should also be a known
arbitrary maximum so that the good men will know when they are going to
get their rest, but some, especially in day bombing, will need to come off long
before this, since apart from individual variation in capacity to withstand the
strain, the strain of the trips varies. If there is no maximum, the very keen
crew will go on indefinitely and never be any good again. The factors
determining the limit for day bombers are different. (Conditions peculiar to
Day Bomber Squadrons, pages 62-64).
IV. RELIEF EMPLOYMENT
1. Many of those interviewed, having discussed the value of recognising
when a man has had enough, with the object of insuring his fitness for a second
tour, proceeded to give their opinions upon the most suitable form of employ-
ment for him in the interval. These opinions were invariably based upon the
necessity in Bomber Command for a steady supply of men with operational


experience to act as instructors in the O.T.Us., the O.T.U. not being just a
rest, but alternative duty. This was accepted as the controlling factor in
determining the nature of relief employment for the majority. Of 35 officers,
all except one said that most men dislike going to the O.T.U. and would welcome
any alternative.
2. Comments on present arrangements for relief employment
(a) Lack of rest experienced at an O.T. U. —A wing commander said : “ The
O.T.U. is a relief from nervous tension, but it is no rest physically. They
hate the O.T.U. because it is much harder work. They start early in the
morning and go on late at night, but it does keep them in with flying.” Added
to the fatigue of long flying hours, there was the constant strain of teaching,
the anxiety caused by inexperienced pupils and awareness of the extra risk
involved in flying hard-worked and badly handled aircraft. One squadron
commander, who also suffered from temperamental unsuitability for instruc-
tional duties, expressed himself thus; “ I went to an O.T.U. and was dead
tired in no time, and frightened stiff too.”
(b) Duration of relief employment. —A rest is needed from operations, and
for a time the man benefits from the change. After a while he becomes conscious
of the security of his new employment and develops a liking for it. His contact
with operational flying becomes remote and he is loth to return. As time
goes on the effort needed to return becomes greater and he has become at
heart a permanent instructor.
(c) Temperamental suitability. —The opinion was expressed that from the
beginning some men like instructing and that these make the good instructors.
Many others after disliking the work at first, make an adjustment and settle
down to it. There is also a considerable number who continue to dislike
instructing and are inefficient at it. For these the period of employment at
an O.T.U. is the greatest strain. A squadron commarider in his second tour,
in discussing his own experience, stated that he knew that he was not mentally
suited for instructing. When he went to an O.T.U. he realised that owing to
his inability to teach them, his pupils would be inefficient and would come to
grief, and this was what in fact happened.
(d) Atmosphere. —Some men do not benefit by a period at an O.T.U.
because the contrast is not great enough. The aircraft are the same, the
flying hours are high, there may still be anxiety, especially when dual control
is not used, and the preparation for operations is apparent everywhere. On
the other hand there is not the same sense of achievement as at an operational
station, and there is less freedom.
(e) Screening. —Men are at present anxious lest they will be brought out
of relief employment to go on special raids or maximal efforts shortly after
they have completed their tour. The possibility of this has a demoralising
effect and was strongly deprecated. The effect of this was more marked on
the squadron than on the man himself. Crews still on operations knew that
some of their colleagues had been sent on a raid shortly after going on to relief
employment. They felt that they would never have a guaranteed rest period.
The effect of casualties in these men was particularly disastrous.
3. Constructive suggestions
(a) Alternative employment. —Twenty-four officers mentioned this possi-
bility. Some thought that in spite of the need for instructors in O.T.Us. more
opportunities should be offered for alternative employment. This should not
be optional ‘as no one would ever go to the O.T.Us.’ Rather, the small


proportion of men for whom an alternative form of employment seems desirable
should be selected by the station and squadron commanders, particular
attention being given to temperamental suitability for instructional duties.
A number of suggestions were made as to the form that such alternative
employment should take, including an exchange into other commands, or
ground employment with opportunities for occasional flying. One experienced
officer considered that if it were not for the needs of the O.T.Us. a period of
six to eight weeks away from flying and the Service would be the best preparation
for returning to a second tour. Eleven general duty officers suggested
relief employment in another command. Eight advised exchange between
Bomber and Flying Training Command on the grounds that instructing at
F.T.S. would offer greater change and relaxation. They contended that the
pupils at the F.T.S. would also gain by contact with men who had had
experience of operations. All but one agreed that relief employment should
always include flying duties. It was also suggested that facilities should be
available for temporary transfer of some to Coastal or Ferry Command. A station
commander said: “At present the commands are quite independent, and
people in Bomber Command have the hardest time. They are either operating
or instructing. There should be a constant flow to all commands so that
people would each have one operational tour, one period of instructing, and
then go on to such jobs as ferrying, Catalinas, and so on, instead of their second
tour. In the end their appetite would return.” To allow sufficient time to
arrange a transfer, it was suggested that a month or so before the end of a tour
the station commander should be told what relief employment a man would
prefer.
(6) Duration of relief employment. —The ideal time needed to recuperate
and return to operational flying was thought to be about 3 to 6 months.
This short period of relief employment was thought ample because ‘ the
longer you are off the harder it is to return.’ It was recognised that in this
time the instructor had just been trained and was only beginning to become
efficient, but the length of time should be a compromise between that needed
for return to operations at maximum efficiency, and the minimum required
from the new instructor at the O.T.U. A stay of as long as 18 months at an
O.T.U. was too long and made the return very difficult. Two observers thought
it better to fix the period of relief employment at the O.T.U. in flying hours,
and one said it should not exceed 200.
V. THE VALUE OF MEN RETURNING FOR A SECOND TOUR
Eleven officers who discussed this subject were unanimous in the opinion
that the men who came back fit for a second tour were of great value to their
squadrons. It was therefore most important that they should be well looked
after during the first tour and protected from the effects of excessive stress.
One squadron commander summed up his experience thus: " Those men who
return for their second tour are immensely valuable. They.are experienced,
well trained, and teach the others. They usually come back as officers, making
valuable flight commanders or seconds in command. It is well worth nursing
them on the first tour because if they are looked after they come back just as,
or even more, efficient.” .He went on to say that the duration of the first tour
was in his experience a factor of importance in determining the value of a second-
tour man. He preferred a man who had done 20 sorties to the man who had
done 45. He believed it possible by careful handling to get three short tours
from the same man. The need for good leaders was such that the conservation
of these experienced men was most important. The same opinion was expressed
by a station commander who said : “You should always aim at getting your


men back on a second tour because these experienced men make very good
leaders ” ; and by a station medical officer of great experience who said:
“ If you bring them back for a second tour- while still fit they will be very good
and even better than during the first. They will make the leaders."
From these opinions it may be concluded that the early detection of the
signs of overloading, before any irreparable harm has been done, is of great
practical value for operational efficiency. It follows that a proper understanding
of the factors affecting the load are of equal importance.
PART TWO: FLYING STRESS—THE LOAD
I. FACTORS CONTRIBUTING TO THE LOAD
The present investigation reveals, as might have been expected, that
picked men under certain conditions may carry a load of mental and physical
strain far greater than could have been predicted, and this without complaint
or surprise to themselves. The load is relative. There are natural sources of
strength and endurance to support it, together with the advantages of training,
discipline, leadership and morale, and the confidence bom of first-rate
equipment. Analysis of flying stress, therefore, must take into account not
only the factors which contribute to the load, but those which increase or
impair a man’s ability to carry it. This was at once apparent in the answers
obtained to the question : “ What are the things which get people down ? ”
for they referred as often to lack of the supporting as excess of the loading
factors. In presenting our material we have distinguished, as far as possible,
between factors contributing to the load and factors affecting the man’s ability
.to carry the load. We-shall conclude by presenting opinions obtained upon
the function of the medical officer in lessening the load and helping the man to
carry it.
1. Operational conditions
(a) Nature of operations
(i) The weather. —The effect of bad weather on the morale of flying
personnel, discussed by 30 officers, depends on whether it influences the trip
out, conditions over the target, the return, or whether it causes postponement
or cancellation of the sortie. On the trip out weather plays little part in adding
to the load so long as there is not heavy icing. Over the target bad visibility
is demoralising because the crews get disheartened when they do not see the
results of their raid, and they are apt to feel that they have wasted their time
if they do not know how accurate'their bombing has been. In contrast, uplift
due to good visibility such as the 1942 raids' on Paris and Cologne was enormous.
( Success , pages 55-66).
On return bad weather adds to the load, because crews worry about
. the return to base, finding it, and landing in poor visibility or bad weather,
more than actually doing the job of bombing. Anxiety about the risks of the
return trip has been lessened by the use of improved navigational aids.
{Hazardous Return, pages 44-45). In causing cancellation, postponement or
inactivity, weather may be an important adverse factor.
(ii) Length of trip. —The majority said that the length of trip at night did
not affect the load, one even thought that crews preferred long trips which
make their operational tour go quickly. When over the sea a long trip causes
little anxiety, unless there is a specific fear of sea crossings, but if it involves
many hours over Germany the anxiety is increased. A long trip on their own,


particularly if the automatic pilot is not working, may cause fatigue, but in the
ordinary course of events it has no bad effect. Even so, it is good for the sake
of morale to throw in a few short easy trips from time to time. In day bombers,
however, the strain is greatly increased on a long trip.
(iii) Enemy defences. —The extent to which the hazards of the enemy
defences increase the load of the crews was described by 32 observers. It
depends upon three distinct factors :
The nature and intensity of the defences. —There was agreement that
the intensity of the defences adds to the anxiety of a sortie. As one
squadron commander put it: “You would go crackers if you were
kept going to Essen or Kiel, whereas Bremen is easy ”. The increase in
the enemy’s defences in the last year has greatly increased the stress of
operations and many observers referred indirectly to this in discussing
stress in relation to the operational limit. There was great difference
of opinion as to the effects of different types of defence. On the whole,
the most demoralising are searchlights because they are so obviously
looking for one, and because the effects of being coned are so serious.
They usually cannot see night fighters (so that they do not add greatly to
the anxiety) and the crews are aware that they are only really effective
after they have been coned, or on a moonlight night. If the crew runs into
heavy flak it .upsets them, but light flak, which can be seen and often
avoided, has no bad effect. Flak reduces their operational efficiency
because they spend their time taking evasive action, but this pre-
occupation with action reduces their anxiety.
The psychological effects of having got away with it in spite of severe
opposition. —lt seems that the demoralising effects of the enemy defences
are mainly anticipatory. If little opposition is encountered the crews
consider they have had an easy trip, and have caught the enemy napping.
Consequently their confidence is increased. If they return having
encountered intense and accurate opposition they have not only a sense
of relief but also a feeling of self-confidence, for they have shown that
even the worst the enemy can do does not stop them returning. This
paradoxical response to danger may be very marked. When another
crew, less fortunate, is missing they treat it impersonally. Having
escaped themselves they are buoyed up until the same target is briefed
again. They then anticipate the dangers which are in front of them,
and there is recrudescence of fear. The way in which the crew responds
to a target defended by heavy flak is a good index of how they will last
the tour.
The specific and often irrational fears of the individual. —Four officers
raised the subject of specific fears. One man may have a specific fear
of flak, another more calculating, may consider that to be hit by flak is
just bad luck, and realise that night fighters are really more dangerous.
One may be afraid of searchlights to a degree which in the light of
experience is irrational, while another may feel that although search-
lights are very unpleasant they are in reality just a nuisance. It was
evident that in assessing operational stress no yard-stick could be
adopted, but individual susceptibilities had to be considered.
(iv) Hazardous return. —Thirteen observers discussed the uncertainty and
dangers of returning from the sortie as a factor which might sometimes be
important in increasing the load. Four thought that being lost was the most
potent cause of anxiety and might prove a great strain, especially for the sub-
average man ( Weather , page 43). Two of these added that with the improved
navigational aids now in use this was an infrequent occurrence. A long return


trip over enemy territory naturally added to the load, as did engine failure or
damage to the aircraft by flak, but if they got back safely with a damaged air-
craft or with one engine cut, their confidence was greatly enhanced and they
felt that for the next trip with an efficient aircraft they had plenty of reserve
in hand.
(b) Anticipation
It was evident from the opinion of 33 officers who discussed the emotional
results of the cancellation of a sortie that the anticipation of a raid is as great a
load as the raid itself, unless this happens to be unusually hazardous. ‘As
soon as the day breaks there is a strain, because they are looking forward to
the operation, and the sooner they know it is on or off the better they like it,
so that uncertain weather has a particularly bad effect on them.’ Several
squadron commanders consequently planned an early briefing to allay the
Crews’ doubts, but one very experienced officer said he preferred them to have
as full a day as possible, and so made briefing very late to reduce anticipation
of the raid itself. A commander of a day bomber squadron said: “ Prolonged
standing by, which has reached 16 hours on end, does them much more harm
than the operation. The strain of standing by is great, but when you are
under way everything is all right ”. Another commander said: “ When they
are briefed in bad weather there is a deterioration in morale, because there is the
uncertainty. The whole nerve strain of an operation lies in getting ready for
it, so that when a raid is cancelled it should really count as a sortie. The
operation itself doesn’t get them down, it is thinking what might happen that
does.”
(i) Briefing. —Sixteen officers agreed that the form of briefing may affect
morale greatly. They thought that briefing should be short and to the point
and should not be touched up with encouragement ‘ to go in and win ’ or the
justification of possible casualties. Rather there should be factual emphasis
on the importance of the target, the purpose of its destruction, and the most
economical way of achieving it. ‘lt is best not to question that they will all
come back, but give it to them straight, telling them the dangers, giving the
reasons, describing the plans and showing why they should not go wrong.’ In
this way professional interest in all aspects of the raid is fostered, and morbid
anticipation of catastrophes limited.
(ii) Cancellation. —-The disastrous effects upon morale of repeated cancella-
tion of sorties, especially when late in the day, was emphasised by 33 observers.
An experienced squadron commander said that ‘ last minute scrubbing ’ was
the most demoralising factor with which he had to contend in managing an
operational squadron. He would much rather send his squadron on . a raid
even with ten-tenths cloud over the target, than subject them to the dis-
appointment, frustration and demoralisation of last minute cancellation due to
weather conditions on the Continent.
Late cancellations. —Most of these 33 observers said that the lateness of
the cancellation was the worst factor. Cancellation of sorties due to bad or
deteriorating weather was unavoidable, but the earlier in the day the
cancellation was known to the crews the milder was the reaction to it. A station
commander said: "A last-minute cancellation, waiting for bad weather to
change, or waiting for a delayed operation has a most demoralising effect,”
and a squadron commander: “ I have been revving up my engines when I’ve
been told to turn back. It just about makes me burst a blood vessel.” A
station medical officer observed: “ Scrubbing may occur so late that they
cannot make any plans for an evening off. This sometimes happens for a
whole week, and gets them right down.” r.


Repeated cancellations. —Even if sorties are not cancelled at the last
minute, in continued bad weather crews may be briefed day after day without
going on a raid. As examples, one station commander mentioned this as
having occurred for 18 nights in succession, and a squadron commander said
that his squadron had been standing by every day except five for a whole
month without operating at all. As an instance of the bad effect of repeated
cancellation upon morale, a station medical officer remarked: “ One freshman
was scrubbed 17 times before he got his first trip. He only lasted three trips
after this, and then said he had had it”.
The effect of cancellations was described as a lowering of morale throughout
the squadron. It becomes apparent after five or six postponements and affects
freshmen and captains specially. The bad effects are shown in the men's
behaviour, for they become dissatisfied and irritable. The main causes for
this are :
A repeated cycle of preparation, anxiety, excitement and strain,
followed by prolonged suspense and then ultimate frustration. This
seems to have been particularly potent in the case of the freshman
already quoted.
Prolonged inactivity in bad weather. ‘When a sortie is expected
alternative programmes cannot be arranged and the crews hang around
most of the days unoccupied ( Inactivity , paragraph (c) below).
After the emotional tension of the day the crews, ultimately released,
find it is too late to arrange any form of recreation, and so continue to
hang about the station, mess or bars.
(iii) Constructive suggestions— There was unanimity in urging that
cancellation should be announced by Group as early in the day as possible.
A squadron commander said that maintenance of morale was so important
that it would be preferable only to brief a raid if the weather was very likely
to be suitable, even if this meant the sacrifice of some of the operational effort.
A station commander said that he had maintained morale in the winter by
taking the responsibility of not announcing an operation if the weather
conditions were likely to prevent it. He thought the risjc he had taken was
justified, but fortunately had not been wrong in his judgments. He suggested
that whenever possible the crews should be told definitely, early in the da}',
that there would or would not be operations that night. These observers said
that excessive difficulties may be insuperable and scrubbing inevitable, but
they stressed the serious effects of delay', inactivity and cancellation, and
thought that air crew morale should be taken into consideration in shaping
the operational programme.
(c) Operational inactivity
Thirty-one observers said that when inactivity was prolonged this caused
a deterioration in morale. ‘ Last summer our losses were terrific, but there
was not nearly the fall in morale that there was during the winter’s inactivity.’
‘ They are far more contented when at the job regularly. After a raid there is
something to talk about which is interesting and stimulating, but the period
of waiting and anticipation is a strain.’ A few days of inactivity is very
useful for training, lectures and recreation, but after about a week ‘ it begins
to get them down ’. The effect is particularly seen before the first sortie
after a quiet period {Signs, pp. 33-37). Squadron commanders agreed that
with a little initiative and ingenuity the time can be filled in. 1 ‘ I point out
that training is the best insurance policy they can take out, and when ops. are
impossible I keep them at it.’ Lectures, films, discussions on technique and
equipment, air training, organised games and recreation can be arranged with
a little foresight, during bad weather periods.


(d) Critical points
In heavy bombers there are three critical periods in the tour at which men
are likely to show the effects of stress, as well as the critical period after
exceptional strain has been experienced.
(i) In the first few trips. —Twelve observers reported spontaneously that
between the 3rd and 6th trip there is a great likelihood of waverers reporting
that they cannot go on with their duty. There was striking agreement in the
story. ‘ln the first few trips he sees what he is up against, in the next he
makes an effort, but by the 6th he has thrown his hand in.’ He usually
manages the first three. He is invariably an unsuitable individual and the
outlook is usually hopeless.
(ii) Around the 12 th to \Ath trip. —Nine observers reported that during the
first 12 trips a man has come to a full realisation of the hazards of his duty.
The end of the tour is far off and he feels he cannot go on. ‘He begins to
count how long he has to go.’ Again there was close agreement upon the
time of onset. ‘ They begin to realise the dangers and reach the critical
point after about 14 trips. It is much easier to get the first half of a tour out
of a man than the second.’ This critical point may be heightened by the
added responsibility of being first pilot. These men, with explanation and
encouragement, control their fear, and nearly all go back to complete their tour.
(iii) At the 241 h or 25th trip. —Near the end of the tour some men who have
had a hard tour of duty, or who have not the staying power, report sick or see
the squadron commander. They are showing the effects of stress, and should
be rested. Most of them will do well.
(iv) After exceptional stress. —There is a critical period immediately after
a bad crash, a forced landing in the sea, or a succession of unpleasant
experiences. This is fortuitous and may of course occur anywhere in the
tour. One medical officer said : “ There is nothing you can do about it —it
happens before you know.” Two others advised immediate prophylactic
treatment —securing prolonged sleep, advice and encouragement, a further
trip or two and then leave: the results, they report, are good.
2. Some physical factors
(a) Physical fatigue
Physical fatigue is considered here as one of the loading factors adding
to the stress of operations. It is to be distinguished from the feeling of
tiredness, or from the evidences of deterioration which have already been
considered [see Signs, pp. 33-47).
Few of the officers interrogated thought that in the ordinary course of
events physical fatigue added greatly to the stress of an operational tour.
Twenty-two of the 32 who mentioned fatigue said that it was usually
insignificant. Six said that there may be physical fatigue during a period of
intensive operations. In these circumstances the fatigue may be such that
actual deterioration in efficiency may occur. For instance, a station
commander stated that one time after his squadron had done seven raids in
12 nights they were obviously tired, and at the end were not finding their
target. One medical officer would chart each man’s operational effort from
his crew’s accounts and the fortnightly squadron returns, to ensure that a
crew was not being overworked. The relation of the intensity of the operational
effort to fatigue and the value of spacing the number and types of target are
fully dealt with in Spacing of Effort, pp. 54-55.


Physical fatigue is sometimes encountered apart from these periods of
overwork. A medical officer said, “ Fatigue is an important adverse factor
and is largely physical. This is not due to the length of the trips but to the
uneven rhythm of sleep and feeding during the operational period. Even a
tough man at the end of his tour will spend most of his leave in sleeping ”
{Sleep, see paragraph (b) below). On the other hand, the majority said that in
ordinary circumstances the weather so determined the spacing of the operational
effort that fatigue did not normally arise. In fact, one medical officer thought
that crews are so conscious that they might become tired that they make
allowances for themselves, and so fatigue does not arise in any circumstances.
In heavy bombers physical fatigue definitely can occur in a long trip, especially
if there is no second pilot, and if the automatic pilot is not used. Small men
particularly find the physical exertion required in taking evasive action to be
considerable, but this kind of fatigue is dispelled by one good night’s sleep.
There is a great individual difference in the amount of work which men can
perform. The physical fatigue of flying a heavy bomber is limited to the
pilot who, as captain of the aircraft, has an added mental load. There was
agreement that big men found these planes easier to fly than small men of
slender build, and one station commander thought that there should be special
selection for these heavy jobs. A squadron commander said that physical
discomfort, caused by unsuitable seats, poorly fitting goggles or masks,
contributed more to the total fatigue than lack of sleep or pressure of work.
Four observers considered that the symptoms of fatigue were largely due to
fear and that physical fatigue alone was not an important factor in the stress
of operational flying.
(b) Loss of sleep
The place of loss of sleep in adding to the load of crews was discussed
by 28 observers. Fifteen of these said that lack of sleep existed, especially in
the summer, but 13 thought that there was no lack. Loss of sleep maj' be
directly due to spacing of the operations themselves or to factors not directly
related to the operational tour, such as unsuitable sleeping conditions, failure
to use facilities offered, or inability to sleep in the day time.
The operations themselves do not under average conditions cause much
loss of sleep but during periods of intensive activity this may become a serious
problem, for ' When crews have been out on a few consecutive nights there
is a falling off in efficiency, reaction time becomes slow, and there is liable to
be an increase in aircraft losses ’. The ease with which crews can make up
for lost sleep obviously depends to a great extent on the spacing of the effort.
The ideal spacing which has often only theoretical interest, since it is governed
by the weather, is discussed under the heading in relation to fatigue and sleep.
A station commander said that during the operational tour unevenness of
the rhythm of existence makes it impossible to obtain enough sleep even
though there may be a sufficient number of hours. He said that after two
nights’ operations a man must be given a night’s sleep. Another said that
there was no lack of sleep if operations were not more frequent than on
alternate nights.
Arrangements for sleep were thought perfectly adequate on the whole, but
because of some individuals’ difficulty in sleeping in the day time it was suggested
that air crews should have separate air crew sleeping quarters, or that there
should be individual cubicles in the quarters. One commanding officer had
forbidden the morning broadcast news to ensure quiet for the crews.
Some men cannot adjust themselves to sleep in the day time and every
consideration should be given to these people. They cannot become accustomed
to the change in sleep rhythm, they are disturbed by daylight noises, and


especially in summer the light keeps them awake. ‘ Some people cannot
sleep in the day and during a period of intense operational activity may not
average more than two hours. At the end of my operational tour I felt the
idea of getting a full night’s sleep was marvellous. When you are short of
sleep your control is lost.’ It was suggested that by reversing the whole
programme of day and night during the tour some of these men who cannot
sleep during the day after a raid would be taught to acquire a rhythm for day
sleep. The point was made that it is the perpetual changing of the rhythm,
owing to the variation in ±he intensity of the operational effort which causes
the difficulty.
Ten officers said that the main trouble is that the men will not go to bed.
They go to parties and will not make use of the facilities offered to them. A
station commander said : “ Lack of sleep depends mostly on the individual
and his initiative. Officers have excellent facilities and the N.C.Os. often
sleep right through to tea time, so if they don’t get enough it is their fault
One officer thought that they should be educated to spend a sufficient number
of hours in bed after a sortie, and another thought that firmer discipline should
be imposed, the N.C.O. aircrew being kept on the stations for fixed periods
after an operation. The position is summed up in the remark: ‘ Taking
it all the year round it is mainly their own fault if they do not get enough
sleep, but if they do two operations running there is very little sleep for
48 hours’.
Lastly, the sleep of squadron and flight commanders should be considered
as a separate problem. The commander of a heavy bomber squadron does
not operate often although he spends much of his nights out of bed on the
station, but the flight commander not only operates frequently but may have
responsible executive duties in the day time. These require his presence in
his office in the morning, so that both his night and his day sleep are broken up.
The consensus of opinion was that although crews usually have adequate
facilities for sleep, of which they often do not make full use, the senior
operational officers have too many day duties to ensure ample sleep and
relaxation.
(c) Cold and altitude
Seventeen observers dismissed these factors as unimportant under present
conditions in heavy bomber crews. The Taylor suit has reduced the hardships
of the rear gunner, the only member of the crew who really suffered from cold,
unless the heating broke down. The effects of altitude on the rare occasions
when they arise are due to individual carelessness or misfortune with the
oxygen apparatus, masks, or clothing.
3. Catastrophes
(a) Casualties
There was great disparity in the 48 answers to the question, “ What effect
have casualties in getting men down ? ” Fifteen observers unreservedly said
that casualties did not affect the men at all or that they did so only
temporarily. ‘ They develop an extraordinary reaction to deaths. If
casualties are well spaced out and they don’t talk about them, they don’t
matter at all.’ ‘ They are just one of those things.’ ‘ They treat casualties
lightly,’ ‘ Casualties and crashes are taken in a spirit of fatalism.’ Eleven
thought that casualties invariably affected the morale of the squadron. This
disagreement suggests that the influence of casualties must be affected by
other factors, and observers discussed features which added to their
significance. The more important of these are :


(i) The casualty rate. —Seven officers said that there was- appreciable
anxiety when the rate was high. ‘ A bad run quickly gets them down.’ ‘ Loss
of crews causes a panic state in the squadron.’ ‘ When the casualty rate is
high the men are apt to work out for themselves their chances of survival and
when this happens the effects are bad.’ On the other hand: ‘ casualties don’t
get them down in a period of great activity.’ The uplifting effect of activity
and successes was mentioned by 14 officers ( Success , pp. 55-56).
(ii) Personal losses. —Often, when changes are rapid, the squadron does not
know the missing crew intimately and the loss is impersonal. ‘lf inexperienced
air crews are lost they say ‘‘ that’s tough,” but don’t worry.’ The effect on the
squadron may be noticed if casualties include: an experienced man, their
reaction being ‘if he has gone what chance have I’ ; a leader, ‘my
station has lost three squadron commanders in quick succession and the
effect on morale has been very bad ’; a personal friend in their own crew ;
if a man has to stand down and his crew is missing the effect on him is disastrous.
‘A good crew was lost on their last trip, but the second pilot was attending
a court at the time and so escaped. He has since packed up, having only
done 10 trips.’
(iii) Success. —lf the casualties have been incurred to some purpose there
are no bad effects. A medical officer said: “ Casualties have a direct effect
on morale, but if the crews feel the losses have been balanced by success it
doesn’t worry them.” Another said: “ When casualties were very high,
morale went up because they were getting successes to balance them.”
(iv) The leader. —Leadership is especially important in this connection.
A station commander said a propos of casualties : "It staggers me that they
are so unflinching. It'must be the squadron commanders.” A commander
of a day bomber squadron said when the casualty rate was exceptionally
high: “ I used to discuss the economics and show that the results were well
worth it and point out that if one aircraft and crew were lost for each ship,
the results were superb.” He said his squadron took heavy casualties very
well ( Leadership , pp. 53-54).
(b) Crashes
By the time a crew has reached a squadron the effects of experiencing or
witnessing crashes is not great unless special catastrophic features attend it;
in fact if a crew ‘ gets away with a crash it may well increase their con-
fidence.’
(i) Crashes experienced. —Factors which increase the strain after a crash
are fire; unavoidable or unexplained crashes unrelated to pilot error; personal
injury; immersion in the sea; features which match specific fears of the
individual.
(ii) Crashes witnessed. —Seeing a crash has a worse effect on the crews
than aircraft failing to return through enemy action. The crashes which
influence the onlookers most are those which occur on the airfield, especially
when they are accompanied by fire or explosions. Again the effects are
enhanced by uncertainty as to the cause or its possible prevention. The
deleterious effects of crashes are caused almost entirely by the man himself
anticipating a similar catastrophe, so that the more unavoidable, distressing,
or personally related it seems to him, the worse are the repercussions upon his
morale.


11. FACTORS AFFECTING THE MAN’S ABILITY TO CARRY THE LOAD
1. The intrinsic factor
The intrinsic factor of individual capacity is dependent upon inherent
qualities which are fixed : the problem which arises is that of the selection of
■flying personnel. Many of those interviewed and especially the most experienced
station and squadron commanders dwelt upon the inherent quality of the man
as the most important- single factor concerned in his ability to succeed in the
operational effort, most of them going on to discuss the difficulties of selection
for operations during training. One said that in order to be of use to the
squadron, a man must be temperamentally suited to flying, and have the
right offensive spirit. If a man has these two qualities he will keep going in
spite of opposition, his one purpose being to strike hard at the enemy. As he
can fly intuitively and has this purpose, he becomes ah efficient member of the
bomber squadron. If he has not both these qualities he is handicapped from
the start, and may well fail to complete his tour. A senior officer with much
experience of selection of flying personnel, divided entrants into three groups;
those who obviously have the offensive spirit and will prove a success
whatever the operational stress; those who hide their temperamental
deficiencies behind a show of enthusiasm (these should be weeded out early
in training, for they soon show their quality) ; and (the largest group) the
quiet, unassuming, normal men, all of them problems, because although they
have not yet developed the offensive spirit it may well be latent, and will
show itself after they have successfully completed training —this group produces
many great operational pilots. The processes of selection and rejection which
have gone on in training, ensure that only a minority of unsuitable men reach
an operational squadron (12 observers reported that these are all weeded out
in the first few raids). Many of these officers said that these men' were not
really to be blamed, because they are made of poorer material than the rest of
the squadron. Although they cannot be blamed, the result of their inadequacy
—failure to accept the load —may have disastrous effects upon the morale of
others. The successful members of the squadron have all had to exert some
degree of self-discipline in order to stay the course. To some, the load is not
great, but to others the same load is almost overpowering, and their self-
discipline must consequently be great. It is thus evident that in relation to
a man’s ability to carry the load, the constitutional, intrinsic, factor is generally
held to be of great importance. It follows that prevention of the effects of
flying stress should begin with the selection of the right type of man for flying
duties. The problem of selection of flying personnel is, however, beyond
the scope of this report.
2. Extrinsic factors
The extrinsic factors affecting the man’s ability to carry the load may be
divided into factors directly connected with flying and factors indirectly
connected with flying. The extrinsic factors are capable of modification ; this
led to discussion of the ways and means of supporting morale and endurance.
(a) FACTORS DIRECTLY CONNECTED WITH FLYING
(i) Confidence in the crews
It was said of a day bomber squadron : ‘ The crew spirit is the strongest
thing I have ever met, stronger than the feeling of brother for brother, or man
for wife. If one member of the crew is on an operation and the other two have
had to stand down, they don’t go off the station, but hang about looking
miserable till he comes back .... The crew confidence is steadily built up and
will then continue, even if to the outsider it appears unjustified. For instance


the crew will swear by their pilot and not want to go with any other, even though
he is obviously to others a poor one.’ This is also said to be true of heavy
bombers. ‘ Crew confidence is often intense and you cannot run a crew
without it. The crew should be kept together and strangers should not be
put into it.’ Crew confidence can be fostered by careful matching at the
O.T.U. After they had been crewed up at the O.T.U. and reached the squadron*
one commander always asked them if they were happy together, but very
few said they were not. Sometimes it seemed that a man would not fit in
with the rest of the crew and he reshuffled it. All those who discussed this
said that they tried to avoid moving anyone out of a crew or interfering with
it in any way. Once they have been crewed up, the captain is mainly responsible
for keeping the crew together, and their loyalty to him becomes intense. ‘lf
the captain is a man the others rely on, it is a first-class crew.’’ ‘A good
captain and a good pilot are both essential, but it is difficult to find both in the
same man.’ {Leadership, pp. 53-54). A further method of fostering the crew
spirit is to praise them as a crew, and not as individuals. A squadron
commander said that if they came back with a good photograph he praised the
whole crew, or gave them 48 hours off.
Of 39 officers who discussed crew confidence 22 referred to the disintegrating
effect of one bad member. Air gunners because of their loneliness and in-
activity are particularly apt to complain and affect the others The effect of an.
unsuitable captain is much greater than that of any other member of the crew,
and their deterioration under him is much more rapid. For example an
experienced air observer, who had never had symptoms while flying, went on
a freshman’s first two raids and vomited each time. His pilot was changed
and he was never sick again. If a man is weak but is an accepted member of
the crew the rest will nurse him along, but if he ever seems likely to jeopardise
the safety of the aircraft they as a crew will report him to. the squadron
commander. Each man relies on the rest of the crew to such an extent that
the individual members will conceal illness in order to remain in the team.
(ii) Flying training and operational experience
Of the 17 officers who emphasised the importance of flying training in
reducing the load, 11 found that at present it left nothing to be desired, and
only 2 thought that there had recently been some deterioration in, the skill
of men reaching operations. The standard to aim at is ‘to be fit to fly auto-
matically with all their dash available for the job.’ Although they come to
the squadron well trained it is difficult to make them continue training, although
there are adequate facilities for it in the squadron. (Operational Inactivity,
page 46). ' They have to be forced to train but the effort pays by giving them
more confidence —it is the best insurance policy they can take out.’ When
a pilot’s training has been suitable ‘ If he meets flak he will take evasive action
in a methodical, systematic way, and he will tend to think of hostile ground
defences as inferiors, a lower race of mortals than the air crew.' It was stated
that ‘ Adequate training is the most important factor of all in building up
confidence, form which arises fearlessness.’ Badly trained men, on the other
hand, have a greater load to carry and become more fatigued than the well
trained.
Operational experience may have different effects on morale : ‘lt is good
and bad, for the experienced man knows more about danger and so discriminates,
but he is also apt to anticipate.’ Squadron commanders favour the established
practice of sending a man as a second pilot for his first two or three operational
trips for if he is inexperienced he does not yet know what danger is, and
consequently takes undue risks and may not return. With increasing experience
he usually ‘ reaches a stage of professional confidence and keenness.’


Although this confidence is mainly derived from personal experience, it can
also be gained from the experience of others and may to a large extent be
acquired by personal contacts before the man begins operations.
(iii) Leadership
Forty-five officers (22 general duties and 23 medical) discussed the
importance of leadership in helping the man to accept and carry the load of
operational flying. There was no exception to the opinion that good leadership
was vital and many thought it the most important factor of all. The discussion
of leadership in the squadron will be limited to the squadron and flight
commanders because 37 of the 45 referred to them specifically, and the
expression that ‘ the squadron commander is the most important man in the
Air Force ’ summed up all opinions. It was evident that all the squadron
commanders interviewed had given much thought to leadership and to their
personal relationship to the squadron, and that the opinions they gave
represented their own experiences. Similarly, the medical officers were
describing their observations of the commanders with whom they had worked.
They all had definite views on the quality of leadership and the place of the
leader, and there was close uniformity of opinion. One medical officer had
seen 22 commanders of his squadron, most of whom were first-class leaders.
In discussing the personality of the ideal commander his final opinion was
that ‘No two were ever the same.’ A very experienced wing commander
said; “ One man is thick headed and has no imagination, another is
nervous but drives himself on, another will beat anything up, another is just an
easy-going jolly nice fellow.” Each of these if he has the personality to lead,
may be a perfectly good squadron commander.
Nevertheless, some qualities, which will be summarised, were widely held
to be desirable in the leader of a squadron. He must have had operational
experience. If he had not completed a tour he should quickly show himself
an efficient operational pilot. ‘He should be a good steady man who goes to
see what it is like, they don’t like being led by a wild pilot.’ He should not
pick and choose his sorties for the crews will soon notice, and one commander
who was acutely aware of this, always told the adjutant a day or so beforehand,
before the target was known, that he would be going on the next sortie. The
commander ought occasionally to go on difficult raids, and should also go out
when losses are heavy or morale low. In operations he should always set an
example : ‘ He should fly just enough to be one of the lads and to share their
hazards.’ He must be keen and have plenty of initiative and drive, his whole
interest being in the squadron. ‘ The leader must be prepared to make the war
his whole interest and get on with it.’ He is expected to have a personal
knowledge of all the crews and to mix freely and be friendly with them. It
is important that the leader should be accessible to the crews and listen to
them when required to do so. Rather than appearing too sympathetic arid
kind he should be hard, and in all matters connected with flying must be fair
and exert discipline, not giving an inch where duty is concerned. ( Discipline ,
pp. 57-58). Above all, whatever his other qualities, or his type of personality,
he must be' a leader. ‘ A very good pilot may be a bad leader.’ This quality
of leadership becomes particularly evident when things are going badly. ‘He
was at once active after a period of very heavy casualties, organising intensive
training, and keeping the spirit of aggressiveness going.’ ‘ When things are
going badly he speaks quietly and with confidence.’ ‘He should take a trip
at the right moment when morale'is low.’
The emphasis on the leader’s place in maintaining squadron morale was
such that 34 officers described the fortunes of the squadron in terms of its
commanders. A good one will build it up to a very high level of efficiency—


‘ Good leadership is calculated to drop all the bombs on the target.’ ‘ The
backbone of morale is a good squadron commander ; a bad one will have an
immediate effect.’ ‘ I have had several cases of lack of confidence. They
usually occur in epidemics, and when an epidemic occurs it is usually due to
a bad squadron or flight commander. It became known that a squadron
commander wouldn’t fly operationally and five cases occurred in the first
fortnight.’ ' I have seen men crack because they had no confidence in their
flight commander, who was really quite a good chap.” A station commander
said; " Leadership is all important. A bad squadron or flight commander
makes all the difference to the crews and you can see the efficiency fall and
consequent breakdown occur. This is usually due to attending too much to
administration and not taking enough interest in the men.”
(iv) Spacing of effort
Thirty-three observers, 21 of them general duties officers, discussed the
effect upon the crews of variations in the spacing of the operational effort-
The intensity of the effort varies with the frequency of the raids and with the
type of targets. Its effect depends largely upon the extent to which it interferes
with sleep and recreation. ( Fatigue , pp. 47-48 and Sleep, pp. 48-49).
Frequency. —The spacing of the raids in heavy bombers is usually determined
by the weather and moon ; 18 officers gave their views on the ideal spacing
from the point of view of the crews. They were concerned with the maximal
effort in a time of intense activity, and with the most efficient spacing throughout
the whole tour. Two thought that during a period of maximal effort it is possible
to do three trips on consecutive nights without a fall in efficiency, so long as
there are suitable arrangements for sleeping and feeding, but three others
thought that even in exceptional circumstances this is too much, two consecutive
nights being the most to be asked of a crew— ‘ After two nights’ operations
a man must be given a sleep ’. ‘ Two days on and one off is about the limit
they can stand.’ They considered this point important because “ If there have
been many operations in a short time the crews don’t fly so well ”. ‘ They get
tired and don’t find the target.’ Only one considered that two consecutive
nights was excessive, but one medical officer thought that “ After two nights
on, one night in is not enough to catch up on ”. Fourteen officers gave opinions
upon the ideal spacing of operations in ordinary conditions. One considered
alternate nights to be satisfactory but two thought this excessive. The more
usual opinion was that two nights on and one off, a spacing of three times a week
or alternate nights for not more than 10 days was feasible. One said the ideal
was one night on and two off, but this was not nearly the most they could do
with efficiency, while another gave the careful opinion that with two nights on
and then two off, the man was able to have a good night’s sleep, and a late
evening for relaxation, so that he could go on indefinitely. Another said that
with one night off only it was impossible to get social relaxation as well as a
good night's sleep. {Sleep, pp. 48-49). Five officers said that the load of
the tour was greatly diminished by keeping steadily at it, in order to get the
effort over in the shortest possible time. A long drawn out tour is very
demoralising, and the habit of operating is hard to acquire and easy to lose.
‘ It is much less strain to finish the tour in six months than to drag it out for 12.’
‘lt is best for them to operate frequently and regularly. Three nights in a
row is too much, the ideal is one on, and one off and one for training or
alternatively two on and two off. With alternate nights they never get relaxa-
tion, they are either operating or sleeping. The best crews like to keep to their
job and to get their tour over.’


The type of target. —' It is of great psychological importance that a crew
who have had a series of attacks on heavily defended targets should have a
chance or two over easy targets before going back to the stiffer job. ’ ‘ Endless
trips on a place like Brest or Essen get them down. Quite apart from the
difficulty of the target it is a good thing to mix the targets up. There is nothing
better for morale than a change of trip, even though the target is heavily
defended, because they like something novel.’ This view was shared by 15
officers. All except three of them thought it advisable to distribute easy trips
or novel targets through the squadron. The three officers who dissented were
in day bomber squadrons and they found this ideal to be impracticable because
the battle order is announced before the target is known.
{v) Success and recognition of effort
The place of success in restoring morale when casualties have been high
has already been mentioned {Catastrophes, pp. 49 -50). The value of success
known to crews was discussed by 33 observers* seven of whom considered
the effects of success and 19 of lack of success. Of the total, six thought that
the crews were not greatly concerned about the success which attended their
raids and that lack of success did not affect them seriously. On the other
hand, 18 thought this factor made a great difference to them. Success known
to the squadron bolsters up morale —‘ After a good night they come back rub-
bing their hands. After a bad one it would have been much better for their
morale if they had not gone.’ The stimulating effect of known success is more
evident in day than in night bombing— ‘ Success makes a particular difference
in day bombing because you can always see what happens and it is a thrilling
sight to see a hit.’ ‘ The odds of finding a ship are Ito 3so that it is always
likely and it keeps their tails up.’ The effect of failure to observe success may
be unpredictable due to bad visibility. If it is night bombing, it may cause
despondency, though ‘ not seeing the target is part of the job and so it doesn’t
worry them.’ If due to actual failure it may have bad effects —‘ New photo-
graphic methods show up their failures and add to the bad effect of the failure.’
In day bombers it is similar. ‘ When the Tirpitz was bombed we lost eight
crews without any result and the effect was disastrous.’ On the other hand
the leader of a light bomber squadron engaged on attacking aerodromes at
night said ‘ Our targets are so hard to hit anyway that all we can do is always
to believe we’ve hit the right one ’. Summarising the divergent views it seems
that:—
Known success gives a great uplift.
Failure to observe success bothers some and not others.
Actual failure has a demoralising effect if associated with losses,
but otherwise it is often accepted as part of the job.
Recognition of a man’s effort was discussed by 28 observers. Six of these
talked about the value of praise give by the squadron and flight commanders,
particularly early in the tour. Constant good work is apt to go by unnoticed,
and a pat on the back and an occasional word of praise is greatly appreciated.
‘ Praise should not be lavish but should be used with great judgment.’
It matters greatly at the right moment.’ ‘ Lack of praise for brave failures
makes them feel that they are not being appreciated ’ but ‘ a bit of quiet praise
from the squadron commander pushes morale right up.’
Of 23 people who raised the question of decorations, only two thought
them unimportant for the efficiency and welfare of the squadron. All the others
thought that immediate awards were particularly valuable, because the award
came through while the man was in the squadron, so that all the crews got


uplift from it. The only comment in relation' to immediate awards was upon
the difficulty in including the whole crew in the award since some, especially
the wireless operator and air gunner, may play a passive part. This was
also mentioned by three officers in discussing awards in general.
Non-immediate awards caused some discussion. Twelve were satisfied
with the present arrangements in their respective groups, and three of these
even thought that too many decoratious were given, while six had criticisms
to offer. Four officers thought that greater recognition should be given to good
all-round performance by the whole crew. This good performance is not always
recognised— ‘ The mere fact that we have not been beaten up leads to our not
getting any gongs, whereas it is really an indication of our efficiency. If we
find our targets without casualties it is really a good show and this should be
recognised.’ The most frequent observation made was that an insufficient
number are given. The arguments were that any man who has completed a
good tour without ‘ putting up any blacks ’ certainly deserves a decoration.
All the squadron commanders who said this attempted to put their views
into practice. One said that as only 20 per cent of the flying personnel were
posted away from the station having completed a tour they certainly deserved
something. On the other hand, four said that the D.F.C. and D.F.M. should be
reserved for distinguished flying and in order to give recognition to a greater
number of praiseworthy operational air crew, another form of award should be
made. A Service ribbon to be given at the end of the tour* with a bar for an
additional tour or a badge or stripe on the sleeve similar to the wound or
overseas service stripe of the last war were suggested. The purpose of this was
to give everyone something to work for, instead of the uncertainty of a
decoration ; to distinguish those who had flown operationally from the others ;
to enhance their prestige as instructors at O.T.Us. and to preserve the D.F.C.
and D.F.M. for outstanding gallantry. Against these arguments were advanced
the opposing views that an operational tour represented only the man’s duty,
and was therefore to be taken for granted; and that distinguished flying is
needed to complete a tour. Another point raised was that non-immediate
awards do not often come through until the man has left the squadron, so that
they have no personal value for the crews and their effect upon morale is
consequently reduced.
(vi) Confidence in aircraft and maintenance
Of 27 officers who were asked " What part does confidence in the aircraft
play in affecting the load ? ” 16 said that in their squadron confidence in the
aircraft was as high as it possibly could be, eight that it was very important
in maintaining morale, and four that loss of confidence was accompanied by a
great deterioration in morale. Those who referred to loss of confidence in a
type of aircraft mentioned specific reasons for this. Some said that just after
conversion to a new type, teething troubles occurred and confidence was low ;
this invariably led to a deterioration in morale. Specific anxiety was mentioned ;
observers were anxious about belly landings. For example, in Bostons, when
it was known that these could be accomplished safely, the confidence of the
whole crew went up. Mechanical failures when unexplained may cause disruption
of morale in a squadron. A medical officer quoted an example. A squadron
were unable to find the cause for repeated fires in the engines. ‘We were
facing a show-down in morale, but happened to convert to another type in
time.’ The unexplained mechanical failures are most potent. A squadron
commander said: “ Confidence in the aircraft can be maintained by the C. 0.,
* Provided shortly after presentation of this report by the award of the General Service
ribbon to men who had been engaged in operations from homo based stations.


squadron commander and engineer officer, whose main job is to clear bogeys
away. When things go wrong they should at all costs explain, even if the
explanation is not really correct. The men are faddy about their aircraft,
and if something goes wrong which they can’t understand they get very
depressed and anxious.”
Besides confidence in a type, they have confidence in one aircraft and
always like to fly that one ‘ however ropey it is ’. They easily develop super-
stitions, and will not fly a particular aircraft for foolish reasons. For instance,
there had been a series of fatal crashes in H. for Harry, and after that no one
in the squadron would fly aircraft with that letter. Once great confidence has
been established it persists, often quite illogically.
Eight officers also emphasised the place of confidence in aircraft maintenance,
saying that it may affect a crew considerably. It depends primarily on the
engineer officer and after that on the ground crew itself. A squadron
commander encouraged his air crews to know their ground crews personally
so as to learn what good reliable men they were. He complained that it was
hard on the air crews that so many respected mechanics were being posted
away from them. ‘ Confidence not only in servicing the aircraft, but in the
organisation of the whole station is most valuable for morale.’ Some of the
factors influencing this will now be considered.
(b) Factors indirectly connected with flying
(i) Discipline
Twenty-six out of 37 officers who discussed discipline in relation to opera-
tional efficiency and the welfare of air crews thought that some form of discipline
should be imposed on the ground. They all differentiated sharply between
ground discipline and discipline in the air. Although there were divergent
views on the place of discipline among aircrews while on the ground, no one
hesitated to insist how important flying discipline is. This was emphasised
particularly by commanders of day bomber squadrons. ‘ Flying discipline is
most important because most of our work is done in formation.’ ‘ I had a
man who had to be told more than once about keeping formation, but he thought
he knew everything. If he had been trained to unquestioning obedience he
would not in the end have been killed.’ A commander of a heavy bomber
squadron said: ‘ A good squadron will have its own self-discipline in the air.'
Another said “ The men who are lost are those who forget their training or
disobey orders.” Flying discipline differs from that on the ground, for ‘ in the
air things are different, there team spirit counts and they can afford to be
matey, but if they have discipline behind them this is all right ’.
Fifteen officers thought that discipline imposed on the ground was reflected
in efficiency in the air. ‘ Discipline inculcates respect for the leaders, orderliness
and method, personal esteem, and the realisation that orders have to be
carried out. The last is the most important. When I wonder if they are getting
right to the target I think that if they are obeying orders on the ground it is
likely that they are similarly obeying orders in the air and reaching their
objective.’ A station commander said: “ A man who is not taught to be
methodical and who forgets things on the ground forgets things in the air."
Many men have been lost through this. It is a question of habit and self-
discipline. Before they take off, if a routine has not been inculcated, mistakes
and omissions are made at the very beginning, and later in an emergency through
lack of routine, further mistakes are made and confidence is lost.” Apart
from the obedience inculcated by discipline on the ground, the fostering of
self-discipline and self-respect was mentioned by nine officers, two of whom
made these remarks : “ good captains and good men are 90 per cent smart in


my squadron.” “If a man is slovenly on the ground the odds are that he will
be slovenly in flying. You can see this in the way they keep their rooms and
in the way they fly.” Two officers thought that ground discipline did not
increase flying discipline. ‘ The air crews may be quite undisciplined and yet
be first class.'
Nine officers, although they thought that discipline on the ground was
reflected in the efficiency of flying, thought it inadvisable to impose discipline
on air crews. ‘ They don’t like it, and you get far more co-operation in the
air without it. Besides, when a man’s been shot at a few times he is, in his
own eyes, entitled to a bit of freedom.’ ‘ You must lead air crews, not force
them —they don’t want too strict discipline.’ One senior station commander,
although convinced that ground discipline was reflected in air efficiency had,
through experience, arrived at the conclusion that distinction between ranks
in air crews would be better abolished. Three others agreed with him. They
advocated a common rank and common messes for flying personnel. Some
favoured a considerable measure of freedom in the relations between officers
and sergeant aircrew when together, but added that for the sake of order and
management and for example to the ground staff the crews had to comply
with the usual rules of discipline while on the station.
Only three of the 26 officers who advocated firm discipline wished to see
rigid parade-ground discipline imposed, and only five recommended any form
of parades and drills for air crews. Four said categorically that this is
undesirable, and six thought that all attempts to enforce a system of ground
discipline should be suspended during a period of operations. The forms
advised ranged from that of a peace time service to ‘ compliance with orders
and a respect for his seniors ’. The aim of the great majority was summed
up in the remark ‘ You can have outward form and no discipline, and discipline
with no outward form. If the second type can be inculcated, well and good,
but usually something more concrete is- needed ’. The more concrete proposals
were insistence on personal smartness and cleanliness on the stations and in the
mess, with respect for leaders; and strict and immediate compliance with
all orders with instance on punctuality at all times.
(ii) P.T. and games
Thirty-six officers, 14 of them medical officers, discussed the value of
regular exercise for air crews. Twenty-five recommended some form of
regular exercise, but ten of these thought that games should be quite informal
and suited to individual tastes. ‘ Games are good if they are not too highly
organised.’ They deplored compulsory exercise, and advised rather that team
games should be arranged between officers and sergeants, and golf, tennis,
squash or swimming should be encouraged. Five of them thought team
games were quite unnecessary. Eight thought that the crews should not be
coerced into exercise during an operational period, and that games became
irksome unless the weather is bad. because air crews hate to be driven to any
form of non-essential exercise. Of 20 officers who mentioned physical training,
11 thought it not worth pushing. ‘ P.T. is no good—it just browns them off.’
No one was prepared to enforce compulsory P.T., but the general opiniofx of
those who thought it valuable was that it should be instituted in periods of
prolonged operational inactivity. If instituted it should be managed by a
well trained tactful instructor.
Nine thought that regular exercise was unimportant. ‘ They should be
fit enough with their ordinary exercise, walking on the station, and exertion in
the aircraft.’ Seven officers said that there was no need to be athletically
fit to be efficient in bombing raids. A station commander said: “ There is no


great need to keep air crews in strict physical training, what you want to be
fit for is flying, and the way to keep fit for flying is to go on flying”. Even
those who advised games for air crews did not ask for great physical fitness.
One summed up the position by saying: “ The crews need not be athletically fit
but they whould be well enough to keep their limbs supple and their eyes clear.
It is good for them morally, mentally and physically”. On the other hand,
one thought that being fit to play a game made for comfort at altitude and
another commander of a day bomber squadron said he kept fit in case he ever
had to stand exertion and exposure after ditching.
(iii) Living conditions
There was a great contrast between the opinions of 20 officers depending
upon whether they were on permanent or temporary stations. On permanent
stations living conditions were in general calculated to reduce the load, but
in the temporary stations the hardships experienced by air crews living in
dispersed sites, especially in winter, were thought worthy of comment by six
officers, especially the distance of the sites from the administrative block and
from the bath house. N.C.O. aircrew had in all weathers to make several
journeys to and from their dispersed quarters —to briefing, to a meal, to the
sortie and, on return, for a bath before resting. They considered that this,
with the absence of any water on the sites, adds greatly to the strain of
operations. ‘ln winter they have to come in to be briefed, have a meal, go
out to the sites and then back. They are damp and dismal. In the site
there are no washing facilities and there are no fires at all. There is also no
one to look after them.’ Suggestions upon factors affecting the load in both
types of station related to closer supervision of air crews’ quarters which the
crews tend to leave dirty and untidy, and to care in the disposal of air crews
in the quarters. It was desirable to have all the crew in the same room, but
not more than one crew in each room lest the effect of casualties be accentuated.
It was also desirable to employ a whole-time, permanent A.C.H. servant in
the crew rooms, to be responsible for hot drinks, general comfort and drying
clothing. An extension of the drying-rooms with a communal room replacing
lockers would be possible, if a man were constantly in charge to prevent
pilfering. The flying clothing would thus be drier and better cared for. The
A.C.H. would also be responsible for the vacuum flasks and hot drinks for the
sortie. Sleeping conditions have already been dealt with (Sleep, pp. 48-49).
Ten officers who mentioned feeding arrangements were totally satisfied with
them. Two said that in the aircraft they kept all the sweet chocolate and
biscuits to .eat next day. They prefer a plain or bitter chocolate, chewing gum
and boiled sweets.
(iv) , Recreation
Off the station. —The 29 observers who discussed recreational facilities laid
emphasis on the importance of getting right away from the station at regular
intervals. Thirteen said that with the present transport difficulties it was
not possible for all the air crews to reach the nearest town each week. Because
they thought it so important, the commanders of these stations made strenuous
efforts to achieve this. Five mentioned the necessity of a crew knowing before-
hand whether they would be operating the next day, so that they could plan
their evening accordingly. In this connection the squadron release day was
spoken of with deep appreciation, and reference was made to the ill effects of
its cancellation. A commander said : “ When they’re off the job they should
have as much recreation as possible. Once every eight to ten days a squadron
should have a day off, whatever the work. The crew will last longer and, though
the effort may be submaximal, the long term economy will be worth it ”.


On the station. —Now that transport facilities are difficult, greater effort
should be made to provide recreation on the station. Three officers suggested
an air crew club for the use of flying personnel. One suggested that it should
have a bar and reading room and that, of the non-flying personnel, the
medical officer only should have access to it. It was thought this club would
simplify the recreational problem in the station.
(v) ' Leave
Every one of 27 officers considered the present leave regulation for flying
personnel perfectly adequate. In practice it is not always possible to give
full or regular leave during busy moon periods, or when the squadron strength
is depleted. Some opinions given about leave were :
It should be regular (not always practicable).
It should be known to the crews well in advance so that plans can
be made.
It should not be too long.
It should be spent in suitable environment.
Opinions varied as to the maximum during operations. Most observers
suggested about seven days. ‘ A man is silly to take more than ten days. If
he takes more than this, he loses contact with the technique and with current
affairs in the squadron. He does not know where things are and has to pick
up the threads again.’ The highest figure given was 12 days, two squadron
commanders preferred to limit the leave period to four days at a time during
the operational tour.
‘ The benefit depends on the mental aspect of the people with whom they
spend their leave.’ ‘ Sympathetic relatives may have a thoroughly bad effect.’
In this respect, air crews from the Dominions have a special problem. ‘ Rest
houses like country clubs should be provided for Colonials who have often
nowhere to go.’ Apart from regular privilege leave during operations, leave
should only be given if the man is really fatigued. ‘lf a man is genuinely
tired he gets ten days, if he is shaky he has none.’
(vi) Domestic factors
The part played by domestic worries in adding to the load' was described
by 18 observers. One medical officer said that they contributed to 90 per
cent of cases of breakdown, but another thought their effect trivial. The
others all considered that they contributed materially to the load. The
Factors,mentioned were :
Marriage during the tour.
Pregnancy, especially in the early months and at full term. Two
observers suggested compassionate leave at the time of the
confinement.
Financial worries.
The family’s anxiety. The wives worry and transfer their worry
to the husbands during leave or in letters.
Much more rarely, very real anxieties or catastrophes such as a
mental breakdown or serious illness in the family, particularly
the wife.
The effect of these anxieties depends on the man’s attitude—he may use
them as an excuse not to fly, or he may put his duty before his family, and
lon the wife’s personality—in this respect sergeants’ wives in general tend to be
I less helpful than officers’.
Living out. —Family affairs are so likely to interfere with duty that
23 officers said that all operational air crews should live on the station and
their families should be out of immediate reach—3o miles was given as an


arbitrary minimum distance from the Station. The crews should go home on
leave, but not at other times. One squadron commander who had lived out
on his first tour said that his wife worried a bit but it did not upset him—
‘ but considering all kinds of wives it is best not to make exceptions, but to
have all air crews living in ’. There were no dissentients from this view.
3. The role of the medical officer in relation to the load
The place of the medical officer in relation to operational crews was
discussed by 40 officers, of whom 26 were in the general duties branch.
Every one of the 40 observers agreed that the medical officer had an important
part to play in maintaining morale in the squadron. Regarding this, such
observations as ‘ The medical officer is the most important man in the
squadron ’ and ‘ The squadron medical officer is the most important doctor
in the Air Force ’, were not exceptional. In order to help members of the
squadron, he must know them personally, and must have their respect.
The crews should be prepared to confide in him and to accept his
advice, however hard it may seem. On his part, he must have the confidence
of the squadron commander and must adopt an attitude to squadron affairs,
and particularly to operations, which is consistent with maximum operational
efficiency. A squadron commander said: “ One good medical officer used to
make the fellows go to him because of his outlook, but the doctor was never
soft. He used to shoot them back to me ” {Role of the medical officer in
detecting the effects of stress, pp. 37-38).
Station and squadron commanders were emphatic that medical officers
should be carefully chosen for this work, and they agreed very closely upon
the most suitable type of men for it. They preferred a man with fairly wide
experience, not one newly qualified. His age should be around thirty years,
and he should be mature and have sufficient savoir faire for the crews to come
along with their domestic and social troubles. Sometimes a younger man is
able to fill this role, and then he has the advantage that he is more likely to
play games and enter into a party. Above all, the squadron medical officer
must, be a good mixer. It is easier for him if he is not teetotal, but though
he should drink with the crews he should always be a little behind them and
should not be the life and soul of the party, in case he should lose their respect.
He must be a practical man who can cope with an emergency, so that he
always has the crews’ confidence, but for this he need not be a good academic
physician. In order to maintain their confidence he must always be available
when emergencies may arise. He should invariably be present at briefing,
take off, return and interrogation, and should mix freely in the crew rooms.
High praise is ‘ Whenever there is flying the doc is there ’. This-entails living
in the station and taking recreation with the squadron in the crew rooms, the
hangars, in the air, the messes and in outside parties. Although liaison between
the medical officer and the commanding officers should be as intimate as
possible, it should be outside the knowledge of the crews.
Eight officers thought that the usefulness of the squadron medical officer
would be enhanced by careful selection and also by some form of education in
squadron affairs. It is important that the medical officer should be persona
grata on arrival at a squadron. It was suggested that if he had had no squadron
experience he should first be attached supernumerary for instruction to another
squadron before being posted to his own.
Being readily accessible to all members of the squadron he is in a
privileged position and will soon have the crews’ confidence. ‘lf the air
crews look up to him and respect him, they will trust him, and be in his
confidence with very beneficial results. The failures are nice enough men,
(76642) 0


but they are fish out of water.’ An experienced and successful medical
officer said: “ The actual approach depends on the personality. He should
work in close collaboration with the squadron and flight commanders, but
this should not be evident to the men. By his attitude and approach he
will inspire their confidence." {Role of the Medical Officer in detecting effects of
stress, pp. 37-38 ; and Operational Limit, pp. 38-40).
The crews should look on the medical officer not only as one of themselves,
but as their doctor. They will bring their small complaints to him, and they
will expect him to be available in times of disaster. When they bring their
anxieties and fears : to him, or when by word or sign he sees evidence of
deterioration, he should act promptly, for ‘ Decision and acceptance of
responsibility in these cases is the medical officer’s supreme task.’ The
men will make confidences to the medical officer that they would hide from
others, and some will even go to a medical officer, knowing that he will discuss
the problem with the squadron commander, rather than go to the squadron
commander himself. In this way the medical officer obtains a unique position
in the squadron, and if he uses it property can have a great influence upon
squadron morale.
111. CONDITIONS PECULIAR TO DAY BOMBER SQUADRONS
[Appendix to FPRC 412(f))
Sixteen officers of day bomber squadrons, nine general duties and seven
medical, were interrogated. The substance of their observations was the
same as that obtained from the officers of heavy bomber squadrons and much
of the material gained from them has been incorporated in the body of the
report, but there were nevertheless some observations peculiar to day bombers
which have not been mentioned.
The signs. —There are unusual facilities for observing a man’s operational
efficiency in day bombers. Two squadron commanders said that they summed
up a man in his first five trips by the way he behaved in formation flying,
and after that if his performance changed they kept an eye on him. They
thought it significant if a man who had been keeping his place in formation
began to keep too close, or at the sight of danger tended to break formation.
It is so dangerous, however, for aircraft in day bomber squadrons to break
formation and return to base alone, that it is unusual to find men who are
showing the signs of stress turning back complaining of mechanical failures.
This is a marked contrast to the situation in heavy night bombers.
Experience. —The value of training and operational experience is especially
great in day bombers. ‘ Experience counts for an enormous amount, because
the seasoned man is able to cope with any emergency, as he has had it before.
More men are lost by making mistakes than by bad luck.’ The forms which
the emergency may take are more varied than in night bombing, since they
include all the hazards of aerial combat and the tactics of close formation
flying.'
Leadership. —From this it follows that the leader has an important function
in leading the squadron personalty into combat, in addition to his duties relating
to squadron management on the ground. While in the air he is in much more
intimate contact with his squadron than is the night bomber squadron
commander, and is in fact in the forefront throughout the raid. Consequently
as well as leading difficult raids for the sake of morale, he should also lead
important raids where his experience will count for so much. His steady


leadership is important and since experience counts for so much the wing
commander and his crew should be both very good and very senior in operational
flying. It has been said: "*A good leader makes the squadron. ” A group
commander said that leadership mattered more in day than in night bombers.
.He therefore advised picking the leaders mainly upon their operational
records, irrespective of age.: " this means picking young men who will always
be on the job themselves and who have got personality and can get the best
out of people." A wing commander said : " All our operations are team shows,
and nothing is individual, so that the example of the leader is all-important.”
Second tour. —As leadership in day bombers involves the ability to lead
a formation into operations and as experience is so important, general duty
officers of day bomber squadrons laid special emphasis upon the importance
of regaining tried men for second tour. Having urged the necessity for conserving
a man for an efficient second tour an experienced wing commander said :
" An added reason is that the great snag in day bombing is to get hold of good
leaders, who are much more important to us than to night bombers. ” It
was this officer who thought it feasible by careful nursing to get a good man'
back for three short tours, rather than two longer ones, his object being to
prolong the man’s period of leadership. A medical officer said that the
experienced men who came back efficient and at the top of their form became
the officers of the squadron and by their obvious superiority soon became
flight commanders. From then on their value was greatly enhanced.
Operational limit.—lt has been shown in the body of the report that the
main object of an operational limit is to secure a man’s return for a second
tour with unimpaired efficiency. The officers of day bomber squadrons, as has
been shown, all stressed particularly how important this was in their Group.
They consequently had decided views upon the operational limit. Every one
of the 13 officers who discussed an operational limit in day bombers said that
the universal application of a fixed limit was impossible. The reasons were:
the type of work varies so much; the rate of loss and degree of success is so
unpredictable; the amount of stress to which a man may be subjected on a
fixed number of trips or hours varies so enormously; the men themselves
vary so much in their response to the stress.
One said that there should be a fixed maximum, and two that there should
be a maximum for each type of duty. This should be within the reach of the
best man, but the individuals should be taken off while they were still fit,
the limit only being used to prevent over-working the exceptional man. They
all said that the limit of 160 hours was impracticable since no one ever reached it.
A squadron commander of great experience said : “No one-has ever reached
the 160-hour limit, because only one man has completed 28 trips and the limit
on an average would mean about 56. ” There was unanimity—whether a
maximum be fixed in hours or sorties—that the length of a tour depends upon
the individual. ‘ You can’t limit anyone in a particular manner. There are a
lot of good chaps who have done 20 trips, come off, and who were good for a
second tour, but if they had gone beyond 20 they would never have come back.
It is the job of the squadron commander more than anything else to watch
the individual from this point of view. It is best to take him off a bit early
so that he will come back for a second tour, but in day bombers you must leave
it to a large extent to the individual. There should be a maximum for any par-
ticular kind of work but the man should not know when he is coming off.
The operational performance of crews goes steadily uphill to a peak. It then
levels off and later in the tour begins to go downhill again. The men should be
caught at the peak before they begin to crack up. It was therefore impossible
to keep a hard and fast limit, but it would be well to have a very flexible
(766421 C 2


scheme with a known limit so that they know when they are going to get their
rest. It would be good to make an arbitrary limit of 25 to 30 trips in order to
guide the squadron commander, but some people on day bombers should be
taken off long before this. If there is no maximum, the very keen crew will
go on indefinitely and get an enormous reaction in the O.T.U. and be no good
afterwards.’ The case was quoted of one excellent man who in his first five
trips had ‘ a hell of a hammering ’ and simply had to be taken off, having
completed his tour of duty. Three officers suggested an arbitrary minimum,
below which if a man is taken off the reasons must be given.
- The suggested mechanisms by which the station and squadron com-
manders together with the medical officers- may determine the end of the
individual’s tour have already been described in the body of the chapter.
Operational conditions. —The depth of penetration into enemy territory,
particularly Germany, adds greatly to the strain of a raid. The effect which the
particular target has upon the crews depends upon the amount of flak
encountered over it.
Heavily defended targets soon become known and the anticipation of a
raid on one of them may consequent!}’ have a demoralising effect. The intense
strain of shipping beats is similarly based on the fear of flak. In day bombing
the weather does not add greatly to the stress except by postponing operations
(i Operational Inactivity, p. 46).
Operational inactivity. —Fourteen of the 16 officers said that operational
inactivity always causes a fall in morale. ‘ Inactivity is one of the worst things,
you must keep working. Last summer the losses were terrific, but there was not
nearly the fall in morale that there was in winter inactivity.’ The crews soon
get tired of training during a period of inactivity and they need other forms of
occupation and recreation to keep up their morale. Two squadron commanders
described the efforts they made to keep their crews training during periods of
operational inactivity, both to occupy them and because of the importance
of efficient formation flying. It was one of these officers who said : “ training
is the best insurance policy they can take out.” Standing-by has a similar
demoralising effect, but here the anticipation of the sortie adds to the stress.
If the sortie is cancelled after a prolonged standing-by the effect is even worse.
( Anticipation , pp. 45-46.)
Physical factors. — Fatigue and loss of sleep do not exist in the ordinary
course of events but if crews are working very hard they may become tired
for a short while.
The critical points in the tour of a day bomber are the first few trips,
as in heavy bombers—' in the first few trips they go out and see nothing
and are disappointed or they get a bad doing and are a bit worried ’; at about
the 12th to 14th trip ‘ a man will work himself up to about the 12th op.
and then begin to think he has done enough and wants a rest.’ ' They begin
to feel the effects at the 12th to 14th trip but this depends so much on the type
of operations ’; after any particularly unpleasant incident;’ ‘ late in the tour,
when signs of deterioration are present.’ A squadron commander said : " the
first trip and the last couple are the worst ”. Reference to the main report shows
that these critical points coincide closely with those given for Bomber Command
in general.


CHAPTER V
PERSONAL INVESTIGATION OF PSYCHOLOGICAL. DISORDER IN
FLYING PERSONNEL OF FIGHTER COMMAND
by
Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds, K.B.E., C.B., M.D., F.R.C.P., and
Wing Commander Denis J. Williams, D.Sc., M.D., F.R.C.P.
FPRC Report 412 (e), August, 1942
Introduction
In the main, the signs by which the effects of flying stress were recognised
were similar in all the commands, many of the factors which contributed to
the load were common and the more general factors which affected the man’s
ability to carry the load w r ere of course identical. The place of the medical
officer in detecting the effects of stress and in preventing their occurrence was
similar, and the trend of application and criticism of the operational limit and
the form of relief employment was uniform in the commands. There were,
nevertheless, points of difference in detail which depended upon the different
conditions of operational employment which should be described. These
differences can readily be fitted into the general framework of Chapter IV. The
present chapter and Chapter VI should therefore be read against the back-
ground of Chapter IV.
1. The signs
Loss of efficiency. —-Loss of efficienc} r is more easily recognised than in
Bomber or Coastal Commands, for the squadron commander has direct
observation of his flying personnel in the formation flying of operations, as
well as upon the ground. Thus, lagging in or breaking away from formation
may be noticed. Deterioration in flying, bad landings, and general carelessness
were commented upon— ‘ His flying isn’t as good as it was ... he begins to
lose his appreciation of danger and thus either gets killed or else merely piles
up.’ The introspective accounts of deterioration given by some of the squadron
commanders were also coloured by the nature of their operational duties.
2. Facts noticed, but not reported, by the man himself
Common to all these stories was an account of the development of fear to
a degree which called for an increasing effort of will to control it. Some degree
of fear was admitted as natural and stimulating, increasing alertness and
sharpening judgment. Any effect fear might have had in claiming attention
and impairing efficiency was in the earlier stages of the operational career
offset by the interest of the job, the desire to do well at it and perhaps win
a decoration, and the offensive spirit. The experience of a few successes added
to the weight of these balancing factors, and the balance was such that once
airborne the pilot was relatively fearless. The cumulative effects of stress,
both mental and physical, weakened the inhibitory effect of the balancing
factors, so that fearlessness was gradually lost. An effort now had to be made
to control fear. One officer told how in the Battle of France he knew quite
well when he had had enough; he was so frightened that he sweated every
time he got into an aeroplane and couldn’t sleep ; he had to carry on as there
were no reliefs. (After a period of rest he did brilliant work, gained the D.F.C.
and bar and since he was interviewed has won the D. 5.0.). Another described
(76642) C 3


himself as getting into a state in which you don’t care whether you are shot down
or not: “If the King had come down to look on no one would have bothered.”
He thought that a number of pilots were lost in the Battle of Britain from
getting into this state. Another noticed that he was becoming jumpy and irrit-
able, and that he had a sudden craving for leave, though previously he had not
wanted it or taken it. Another found himself waking tired in the mornings, and
feeling jumpy when a show was on. Another stated that on his first tour he
never thought of his personal safety, but rather enjoyed it. He felt the physical
strain (of the Battle of Britain) but was mentally unperturbed. At the start
• of his second tour he still felt keen and had no qualms whatever, nor any
thought for himself. Gradually thereafter he reached a stage when he had
to force himself to go on operations with a smile and while on the job felt very
bad (enough, he thought, to interfere with his efficiency). Then he became
aware of continued concern for his own safety. It became a great strain to
preserve his composure. He felt he was becoming a coward, which he had
never been before. He argued to himself, however, that real courage was the
ability to overcome natural fear in the presence of danger and forced himself
to carry on. Finally he reported his state to the medical officer and was given
a rest. (This officer had already won the D. 5.0., and D.F.C. and bar.)
3. Operational limit
The agreement upon signs was followed by similar comment upon' the
200-hour operational limit, which was on the whole considered to be satisfactory.
Those who criticised it pointed out that no account was taken of the stress
encountered in the 200 hours, whether it occurred on sweeps or convoy work,
whether in long or short trips over the sea, with shallow or deep penetration,
and whether or not engaged in combat. Furthermore it takes no account of the
length of time taken or of the individual capacity to endure the strain.
4. The load : operational conditions
There are special loading factors in day fighters, particularly the nature
of the operations, involving long sweeps over the sea and over enemy occupied
territory, often with deep penetration and anxiety over petrol shortage.
Repeated anticipation after briefing and cancellation and long hours of
immediate readiness were generally considered to be a greater load than actually
going on an operational sweep. Such an opinion as : ‘ The greatest strain is
hanging about before operations and having them postponed—they get keyed
up to a pitch and then brood ’ —was characteristic. Of rather less moment is
the demoralising effect of long periods of operational inactivity usually
enforced by bad weather.
5. Physical factors
The physical factors incriminated were a little different from those blamed
in heavy squadrons. Fatigue and cold were important, but the cumulative
effect of flying at high altitude was mentioned repeatedly. ‘ You are tired,
limp and cannot be bothered, so you sink in a chair, your muscles feel flabby,
you have not the physical energy to pick up a book—four low patrols are not
too fatiguing, but after two climbs to 30,000 feet you feel absolutely weak and
washed out, and just want to go to bed and sleep.’ Idiosyncracy to this form
of deterioration was recognised by some.
6. Training and experience
In day fighting particularly flying training and operational experience
were considered vital, for to be efficient on a sweep a pilot must be free to devote
the whole of his concentration to combat. If his flying is to serve him at


its best on these occasions it must be perfect, and automatically perfect. In
order to obtain this perfection he must practise assiduously. Similarly
operational experience was invaluable.
The value of operational experience was discussed from several angles by
seven observers. It was stated that the first sweep was a strain but 'if in
your first few sweeps there is no action you may become over-confident and
think there is nothing in it. You need a good fight to get experience.' ‘ Most
people who are lost are bumped because they don’t obey orders. This is due to
over-confidence resulting from inexperience.' One station commander thought
it very important that the novice should if possible go on simple jobs for the
first few trips so that he could obtain his early experience gradually: "If he
gets on a deep penetration for his first trip he cannot tell the difference between
a Hun and a Spitfire, keeps looking behind and seeing things, may get
separated and have to battle his way back. This may shatter the average chap,
though a man above average may get good value from the experience.” Two
wing leaders and one squadron medical officer emphasised the importance of
a proper understanding and digestion of operational experience. The latter,
who was invariably present at dispersal after a sweep, said that the experience
of combat was so compressed that the pilots don’t know until afterwards
what has happened, till they have talked it out. He described three types of
reaction: “ the man who forgets his bad experience at once, the man who
after he gets back does an intelligent retrospective analysis, and the man who
ruminates.” The last suffers strain. Both wing leaders who discussed the
question insisted upon the importance when casualties have occurred of
explaining to the pilots as soon as possible after they return from the sweep
why these casualties happened and how they might have been avoided. For
lack of such instruction one of them said : " many a bloke becomes windy
almost from the start because his experiences are warped by reflection.” -,
7. Discipline
For similar reasons, discipline was held to be of great value for ‘ discipline
on the ground reflects itself in the air; if you can’t keep them together on the
ground you can’t keep them together in the air.’ ‘ Individualism is frowned
upon and the pilot is only an individual while he is pressing his button. The
individualists are soon missing.’
8. P.T. and games
Physical fitness was urged more strongly than in the heavy squadrons
and the amount of indulgence was deplored. Eighteen officers were in favour
of some form of regular exercise, and only four thought it unimportant. The
majority were opposed to P.T. and to compulsory games, but felt that reasonable
exercise, enjoyed by the man, increased his efficiency and alertness in the air.
9- Recreation
Recreation had a similar value but in particular the squadron release day,
with adequate transport, was commended most strongly of all. Several
emphasised the gain in recreational value if the day off was known beforehand.
The main reason for this was that it enabled the man to plan ahead his occupation
and company. Another reason advanced was that it enabled those who Were
so disposed to indulge in an alcoholic party without restraint. This was
emphasised by two squadron commanders and one medical officer who believed
m the value of an occasional party of this kind as a means of relaxation. One
of them said : “A release day to be any good must be fixed beforehand. It
(76642) C 4


enables a man to have a party the night before and know he won’t be flying.
The worst thing in the world is to be told you are going to have a day off and
then have to go flying with a hang-over Another suggested that the release
day should be from 1 p.m. to 1 p.m. " so that they can have a party and recover
from it Of those who thought it important that the day off should be fixed
beforehand, some commented on the difficulties of arranging this during phases
of operational activity, for example; ‘at present if we do a show and lose
two aircraft, the fellow you have promised Wednesday off has it cancelled
This squadron commander thought the chances of a recreational engagement
being cancelled were such that few people bothered to make one. Others
mentioned that the provision of a planned day off was dependent on an adequate
reserve of pilots. One wing leader emphasised the need for squadron and
flight commanders to have a regular day off on account of their additional
duties and responsibilities, and observed that in fact these were the men who
very often did not get it owing to their sense of devotion to duty, and in
consequence felt the effects of stress earlier than others.
10. Leave
The nature of the operational duties was reflected also in a comment
upon leave. More than seven days leave was considered by some to be too
long, for it tended to let the man get out of practice and to lose his confidence.
Short periods of leave, for example five days every four weeks, were thought
to be more beneficial.
11. Problems of flying stress peculiar to night fighters
{a) The signs. —Loss of keenness may be evident in a tendency to over rate
the badness of the weather as a reason for not going up or coming back early,
and nervousness in the air may often be noticed by the controller over the radio.
(b) Operational limit. —There was general agreement that the limit in terms
of operational hours was unsatisfactory since, the amount of stress was so
variable, and that there should be an over-riding limit in terms of months,
for after a time most men find the unnatural existence of living by night trying,
and need a change. Two squadron commanders independently suggested
12 months as the maximum for a continuous period of night flying.
(c) Relief employment. —Firm opinions were expressed on this subject by
a station commander and a squadron commander. Each said that it was
more of a strain teaching others to fly at night than flying at night operationally.
Posting to a night fighter O.T.U. therefore was the reverse of a rest. Moreover,
it failed to provide what the man chiefly needed, a change from the unnatural
and monotonous state of living by night instead of day. It was suggested
that there should be provision for interchange with other commands so that
the period of relief employment should be spent on day flying. One station
commander considered that the right kind of rest would be three months
working on the land.
(d) Operational conditions. —The impression gained from 11 general duty
officers who discussed the matter was that the risks from enemy action
encountered by night fighters were relatively small. One squadron commander
summarised the position thus : “ The risks are negligible compared with other
types of operational flying ; 10 per cent of the hazard is enemy action, 90 per
cent the flying. Apart from the boredom of inactivity it’s a thoroughly good
job, interesting, exciting at times, and comparatively safe ”. Eight mentioned
bad weather as the night fighter’s biggest enemy, and most important source of
strain. Four emphasised the strain of instrument flying as an addition to the load


in night fighters. It was stated that some men never became entirely confident
in this, and that even an experienced man might occasionally have to contend
with the conviction that his instruments were wrong, and the temptation
to believe in his physical sensations. Nine mentioned operational inactivity
as a serious load upon morale. At the time these officers were interviewed
there had been very few opportunities for contact with enemy aircraft for many
months. This meant ‘ endless practice with no action : lots of fully-trained
crews with nothing doing ’. They became bored with practices and one of the
squadron commander’s biggest worries was to keep them happy and occupied.
One squadron commander remarked : " Anybody with experience who looked
into my squadron could diagnose that they are suffering from operational
inactivity now ”.
( e) Sleep. —Eleven discussed the problem of securing an adequate amount
of sleep for night fighter crews. Three considered that there was no real
difficulty if organisation were satisfactory and discipline enforced. If left to
themselves crews were apt to get too little sleep as the result of delay in getting
to bed, or getting up too early in order to go out of the camp. If after a night’s
flying they were forced to be in bed by a certain hour and told they were not
allowed to go out until they had had their proper hours of sleep, they would have
enough. The majority however thought that there was a real shortage of sleep
which they ascribed to various causes. The most important was the inability
of the average man to accustom himself to sleeping sometimes at night (when
not on flying duty) sometimes by day. ' The uneven rhythm makes it impossible
to switch over to day sleep. After two nights on you get a day or two off and
return to the other habit of living.’ 'lf you were on night duty for three months
you could get into a routine but with two nights on and two off you cannot
get into step.’ On stations containing only night fighter units the remedy
suggested was a revised routine so that the working day for all flying personnel
began regularly with breakfast at 13.00 hours. This would promote the habit
of sleeping by day and would especially relieve the load for squadron and
flight commanders who at present were often flying at night but had to be
in their offices in the mornings.
Another practical difficulty was that of air crews who had gone to bed in
the early hours of the morning having to break their rest in order to get
breakfast. On one station this had been met by allowing them to have breakfast
in bed. This was satisfactory for the officers who had batmen to bring it to them,
but did not solve the problem for sergeants. On stations on which there were
day flying as well as night flying squadrons the noise in the day time, especially
the noise of aircraft, made sleep difficult under any circumstances. Facilities
for sleeping at dispersal during the night when not on duty were described as
unsatisfactory on the whole, owing to overcrowding and the disturbance caused
by men coming in and going out at different times all through the night. The
impression gained from the amount of attention devoted to the matter, and the
effort made to secure improvement, was that lack of sleep for individuals
who need full measure and cannot take their sleep in snatches is a factor of
considerable importance in increasing the load for night fighters.
(/) Intrinsic factor. —In relation to the intrinsic factor of individual capacity
three squadron commanders dwelt upon the recognition of specific incapacity
for night flying. This might be due to several causes : fear of the dark in a man
who had plenty of confidence by day; difficulty with instrument flying;
or a low general standard of flying ability. Such incapacity whatever its cause
was easily discerned by an experienced commander. It added greatly to the
man’s load. One squadron commander held that aptitude for night flying
was so specialised that it should be recognised and the disposal of the unsuitable


should be made easier than it is at present. Losses should be cut early and the
man should be transferred at once to other duties.
(g) Training and experience. —The view was expressed that training and
experience had a greater effect in reducing the load for the individual than in
any other type of unit. The greater the number of hours of night flying a man
had had the less strain he found it. For anyone with less than 200 hours of
night flying the strain was considerable.
( h) Physical fitness. —The problem of maintaining physical fitness had its
special difficulties for night fighters. It was mentioned that organised games
in the afternoon tended to make a man tired and sleepy in the evening. There-
fore, one station commander who considered physical fitness important had
P.T. daily for all air crew before noon.
[j] Success and recognition.—Lack of success was specifically mentioned by
several as being a greater load for night fighters than others, owing to the
long periods without opportunity for contact with the enemy. Views generally
held were thus expressed by one station commander: “They see a Hun
and the effect is as good as a week’s leave. If they go a long while without seeing
any Huns they get very depressed.”
Lack of recognition was also held by several observers to be a more
important factor for night fighters than other units in affecting a man’s ability
to carry the load. It was stated that awards were few as compared with day
fighters, and that the chance of earning a decoration by shooting down three
enemy aircraft was small. Some form of recognition for continued good
performance was therefore more necessary than in other units. It was repre-
sented that although the dangers for night fighters were less, the demand for a
consistently high standard of flying was greater. One station commander
considered that " it would be better if the D.F.C. were kept for gallantry in
the face of the enemy and the A.F.C. was given for good stooging through the
operational tour ”.


CHAPTER VI
PERSONAL INVESTIGATION OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDER IN FLYING
PERSONNEL OF COASTAL COMMAND
by
Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds, K.B.E., C.B., M.D., F.R.C.P., and
Wing Commander Denis J. Williams, D.Sc., M.D., F.R.C.P.
FPRC Report 412 ( h ), December, 1942
Introduction
There was great similarity between the results of the enquiry into the
incidence and causes of flying stress in Bomber and Coastal Commands, largely
because so many of the duties were undertaken in the same types of aircraft,
two or four-engined, with the same squadron organisation and similar
conditions of station life. Observations of special importance or which refer
to conditions peculiar to Coastal Command and which can readily be fitted
into the framework of Chapter IV are described in this chapter.
1. The signs
The signs indicating the effects of stress were identical except that, because
of the different nature of the duties, loss of efficiency was manifested in different
ways.
Loss of efficiency. —The loss of keenness on the ground leads to deterioration
in efficiency in the air. This may be apparent in a tendency to return early from
patrol and to justify this action with complaints of petty mechanical failures,
such as low oil pressure or minor engine troubles. The men use weather as
an excuse, too. ‘ Often it is necessary to turn back from a trip, but men will
begin to turn back because of the weather when it is really stuff they could get
through. Sometimes before take-off they report the aircraft U/S without
cause being found.’ Loss of efficiency may be shown by failure to press home
an attack, or by carelessness in flying technique. ‘ They go off without
everything being on the top line, a bit over-confident thinking that nothing is
going to happen.’ This carelessness is particularly liable to occur at the end
of a long patrol when it is accentuated by fatigue. A squadron commander
said: “If you see an experienced man under or over-shooting you should find
the cause.” Another said that he approached a good pilot who was making
bad landings on return, but who refused to admit tiredness, and insisted on
going on only to write himself off a month later. An. experienced medical
officer of a general reconnaissance squadron said that in a time of great stress
an excellent captain, whom he had noticed getting overtired, undershot and
crashed. Another experienced crew just scraped home from patrol. The
next trip they lost their way over Ireland owing to poor navigation, a very
unusual thing for this crew. Shortly after, they flew into a hillside near the
station. At the same time another captain, who had been piling up hours,
made an astounding slip, giving the position of a convoy in clear.
Loss of efficiency, before it leads to an increase in accidents and errors,
may be noticed by the controller, who may say that the flight reports are not
so good. It may be reported that a boat is dirty and less well looked after, or
Signals may report deterioration in efficiency. A commander of a flying boat
base said: “It is pretty easy to detect anjr loss of efficiency in a crew. When I


see a boat going off to time with unfailing* regularity, the crew smart and the
boat clean and tidy, I know they are all right.” Occasionally the crew may
report inefficiency in one member, saying, for instance, that a navigator is
slow in his calculations, but except when this occurs it is not possible to pin it
down to an individual, and it is merely evident that the efficiency of the whole
crew is falling.
2. Facts noticed, but not reported, by the man himself
The similar conditions of duty were reflected in the introspective accounts
of deterioration given by the commanders interrogated. A flight commander
on boats gave this introspective account of his deterioration: "You must
at the end of 1,000 hours find it very difficult to maintain the physical effort
and mental concentration which is necessary to keep the job on the top line.
For three months I found it increasingly difficult to work up the energy and
enthusiasm to get around the boat, and I got to a point when I didn’t check
up on every little detail. I missed an error in navigation, which took no
account of drift, and that was my undoing; it resulted in a pile up which
would have been avoided if I had been efficient.” The awareness of
deterioration has individual differences —‘ One begins to mistrust one’s own
flying ability and becomes excessively cautious.’ In another the ever-present
realisation of fear becomes more apparent and he may become more apprehensive
of such things as flying two-engined craft over the sea. Fourteen officers
thought that the man himself is first aware of the changes in his attitude to
operational flying, but there was agreement that the best men hesitate to
admit it. those who carry on without admitting their own
deterioration are likely, through their increasing inefficiency, to have otherwise
avoidable crashes.
3. Operational limit
The general principles underlying comment and constructive suggestion
upon the operational limit has been presented in the Bomber Command report,
but there was specific and forceful criticism of its measurement. In present
conditions the limit chosen for particular duties was too long in some cases.
For instance, a Cight Fommander of a Photographic Reconnaissance Unit
(P.R.U.) flight said that he had never met anyone who had reached the limit.
No one said that the existing limit was too short, but most of the remaining
42 observers considered the measure of the limit to be satisfactory for their
particular duties. The time required to complete the hours of an operational
tour greatly affects the difficulty in reaching the limit in some duties. One
medical officer said: “it would take up to 18 months to do 1,000 hours in
Catalinas and this station is so isolated that this should be taken into account.”
A Fight Commander in P.R.U. said that in 13 months he had just passed half
his tour and it was the monotony which affected him rather than the nature of
the operations.
Suggestions as to the form the limit should take in different duties were
as follows :
General reconnaissance :
Whitleys and Wellingtons. —Some officers thought that the present limit of
600 hours was reasonable, if it were used as a flexible guide, ‘ For some men, 300
hours may be a long time, but others can do 700 hours easily.’ Others considered
that it should be lower, one even suggesting 300 hours. Special features of duty
which lowered the men’s ability to reach q high limit are the very long trips they do,
and the anxiety about engine failure over the sea.
Hudsons. —The tour must be carefully graduated to the duties. A maximum of
500 hours was considered satisfactory for general reconnaissance, while a limit of


200 hours for offensive strikes is far too high, since this represents 60 to 70 trips. A
squadron commander said that at one time morale fell through this, since the
squadron were losing on an average a crew a month, so that theoretically there was
no chance of anyone surviving. One station commander pointed out that in Hudsons
the duties are so variable, and the operational conditions in the same duty depend so
much on the locality, that a generally applied limit is of little value.
Ansons. —There was no anxiety about the limit since confidence in the aircraft
is so high and casualties have been low.
Boats. —A few officers considered 1,000 hours a reasonable limit, but the general
opinion was that it was rather high. The objection to this long tour was not that
exceptional stress was encountered, but that the time required to complete it led to
staleness. There was a general recognition that some men could go to 2,000 hours
without losing efficiency, but ' as the tour will take 18 months to do, it is much
better to send them on a rest before they really need it.’ One station commander
thought a datum line at 750 hours would be best. Many said that the limit had to
be modified to suit the duties, for instance, patrols in the Bay and in the Arctic or
the Middle East were much more exacting than Atlantic convoy patrols, and so
required a lower limit. All the officers of Catalina squadrons found that fatigue was
greater than that found in the same length of time in Sunderlands.
•In Liberators and Fortresses also the tour will depend on the location of the duties.
As one squadron commander said : " 500 hours over the Atlantic is very different
from 500 hours over the Channel ”, but experience has not yet been gained upon the
staying power of the average air crews in these aircraft.
Photographic Reconnaissance Unit. —The present limit was thought to be much
too high in relation to casualty rates and enemy opposition. A flight commander
said the old 300 hour limit should be restored, or better still, the limit should be
assessed in sorties or months, since long periods of inactivity were encountered in
the tour, particularly in winter.
3. The load : operational conditions
The special circumstances of operations in the command influence the
nature of the load which has to be home by the air crews. Strains, such as
those imposed by the weather, flying over the sea and long trips and
consequent fatigue are more exacting than in the other commands, while the
acute factors such as the effects of enemy opposition, casualties and crashes
are less evident.
(a) The effect of bad weather in causing anxiety and fatigue was emphasised
by many of those questioned. The anxiety arises from doubt as to the weather
conditions which will be encountered on return to base, especially if the landfall
is difficult op the base is surrounded by hills. One station commander with
exceptional operational experience said that the uncertainty of the weather
at the end of a flight would play on a man’s nerves for the whole trip. Others
described the strain ‘ when you come back after your 12 hours, sometimes
with little knowledge of what the weather will be, and little petrol. If you
do find the weather down it is very tricky and this comes at the end of a trip
when the pilot is tired.’ It was observed that in Coastal Command one must
fly under conditions of weather worse than those which obtain in other
Commands, and that owing to the length of their trips they frequently have
either to take off or land in the dark, thus adding to the strain. Some added
that with modern navigational aids and expert flying control this source of
strain was now less than in the past. The view generally expressed may be
summed up in the words of a squadron commander who said: “Weather is
our enemy. If everyone knew when he went out that the weather would
be fine when he came back all would be well. It’s the fear of the weather
that gets people down in our job.” It was also represented that bad weather
greatly increased the fatigue of flying, and that it might sometimes cause
strain of another kind when owing to bad weather conditions crews had to
stand by for a long period before going off on a long trip. For Air Sea Rescue
units bad weather' greatly increased the difficulties of their job, and for


Photographic Reconnaissance Units unfavourable conditions might add to the
strain either by disappointment at getting no results for a long trip or, if the
weather were unsuitable for several days, leading to an accumulation of work
with consequent fatigue.
(6) The strain of long trips over the sea was emphasised by many officers
as contributing to the load in various ways. The monotony of it in itself was'
said to be an important source of fatigue. * ' Miles and miles of flying
over the water is very trying with nothing to look at, staring to look for
something with no idea of where it will appear. The desire to take half
an hour off is very strong.’ Several squadron commanders considered this
to be the most important single factor in the load for Coastal Command.
It was mentioned that the effect might be cumulative, inducing a state of
apathy towards the end of the operational tour. The commander of a boat
flight said: “ After you have done about 700 hours it is a great effort to
maintain concentration and enthusiasm for 12 hours”.
(c) Fear of ditching owing to mechanical failure was another source of
strain frequently mentioned. This was intimately related to confidence in
aircraft. The state of feeling commonly experienced was thus expressed by
two squadron commanders, “ Coming home from a trip you begin to look at
your motors, and you are apt to sit a bit tight in your seat, knowing that if
you do go into the drink there is not a chance of being picked up.
Mechanical failure is a constant source of anxiety because of the danger of
coming down in the drink. We have had one or two men cracking up because
of this.” Fear of similar disaster from navigational error was also mentioned.
This was instanced by reluctance to use the heating apparatus in one type of
aircraft for fear of compass deviation. It was said that towards the end of a
long trip with little petrol to spare the anxiety about making a landfall might
be a great strain, especially for the captain.
( d ) Another source of strain mentioned was that of flying for long distances
over the sea at low altitudes, especially at night or in bad weather. This added
to the strain of flying as the automatic pilot could not be used, and to anxiety
in case pressure changes might result in flying into the sea or into hilly islands.
This was especially emphasised as an element of stress for torpedo bombers.
(e) Length of trip has already been discussed as a factor in the monotony
of flying over the sea ; it will also be referred to as a source of physical fatigue.
It merits separate consideration as a cause of central nervous fatigue resulting
from a combination of other factors with the prolonged exercise of highly
skilled performance. Several officers questioned referred to a state occurring
in the pilot at the end of a long trip in which there was falling off in efficiency
characterised by an indifference to hazard, with loss of judgment and skill.
This might not be appreciated by the individual at the time. There might be
a tendency in this state for the pilot coming in to land through bilk and in
bad visibility to get his aircraft down somewhere and anyhow. This state was
mentioned especially by officers of Boat squadrons in which the length of trips
might exceed 20 hours, and in which the first pilot, in addition to his
responsibility for aircraft and crew, might be flying the aircraft most of the
time, and was invariably in control on landing (Loss of Efficiency, pages 69-75).
4. Physical factors
Almost all the officers interviewed mentioned fatigue as an important
factor in the load. Many of them naturally tended to include the strain of
anxiety. When this tendency was elicited and allowed for, there were over
40 (most of them general duty officers) who considered physical fatigue of


some importance. We have included under this heading the strain of
continued visual attention, as well as the effects of glare, noise, vibration,
cramped quarters, hunger, lack of sleep, and the occupational fatigue of
skilled performance {Length of trip, paras. \b), (d) and (e), p. 74).
Combinations of physical factors related to different types of aircraft
and duties
There was most general agreement on the importance of fatigue in Boats,
especially in Catalinas. The reasons given were : the length of trip which clearly
adds to the weight of all other factors ; lack of sleep, which after about 16 hours
begins to be important; lack of a hot meal (it was stated that the addition of special
equipment had made it difficult if not impossible to cook) ; cramped quarters,
leading both to discomfort, and to bodily fatigue from getting about the aircraft in
flying clothing ; noise ; glare. The strain was greatest for the captain because he
had to do most of the flying, supervise the work of the whole crew, move about the
aircraft a good deal, and take off and land the aircraft himself. An experienced
squadron medical officer said that he had been told by good captains that the strain
of the long trips was very great—"At the end of one, no one in the crew can be
anywhere near the top line, and this is often the moment calling most for resource,
initiative and judgment”. He thought the repeated strain of these long trips had
a cumulative effect.
In Sunderlands the ability to get two or three hot meals in the course of a long
trip, and to move about the aircraft with comparative freedom, was said to offset
fatigue to a considerable extent, though all the eigfit officers with experience of
these aircraft considered that fatigue arising from the other factors was important.
Fatigue was also emphasised by the commander and medical officer of a
Hampden Torpedo-Bomber squadron, the reasons given being that the pilot’s scat
is such that after four or five hours’ flying it is difficult to find a comfortable position,
there is no second pilot, and when flying at low altitudes the pilot cannot trust the
automatic device for long enough even to stretch his legs.
Ten officers described fatigue in Whitleys as of some importance on trips of
9or 10 hours. Cramped conditions were mentioned as contributory to this. It was
generally held that a crew recovered from the fatigue of one of these trips after a
day’s rest, but that the number of trips which could be done in a week without
cumulative effect was limited.
In Wellingtons fatigue was not considered to be important. ' There is a little
fatigue at the end of the trip, but with a second pilot and George this is all right.
They only do two trips a week, so it is quite easy.’
In Hudsons fatigue was described as still less important, the trips on the average
being shorter and the aircraft more comfortable.
In Liberators and Fortresses more stress was laid upon fatigue on account of the
length of the trips, together with the inability to cook a hot meal. This factor, as
in the Catalinas, was considered to be of great importance. In the Liberator Mark I
it was possible to carry a Clyde Cooker. A squadron commander said that in this
type, haying had a hot meal in the middle of the trip, he used to come back relatively
fresh, whereas from a similar trip in the later types with nothing but sandwiches he
would return feeling completely washed out. He thought that this state of fatigue
had probably been the cause of several crashes. Both in the Liberator and the
Fortress the addition of special equipment had resulted in cramped quarters, thus
adding to fatigue.
Fatigue in Beaufighters was not considered of importance unless they were
flying for relatively long periods at sea level when the occupational factor became
evident. In all these types of aircraft and duties the strain of prolonged visual
concentration upon the sea was considered to be an important source of fatigue. One
squadron commander of a Boat squadron said: “After 16 hours you don’t see any-
thing at all. Everything becomes blurred, and you would miss a submarine or air-
craft”.
Visual strain was also described by officers of Air-Sea Rescue units.
In a Metereological Flight and a Photographic Reconnaissance Unit the only
mention of fatigue was in relation to long P.R.U. trips in a Spitfire. These might
last up to five hours. ‘ You sit strapped to the parachute and get cramped. You find
yourself adopting all sorts of odd positions upon which you gave to ring the changes.
You have to keep moving around, or else you lose your concentration.’
Eleven officers mentioned cold as a loading factor. It was held to be of minor
importance except in certain types of aircraft, especially Catalinas and Liberators,


when operating over northern waters. The main reason for this was lack of heating,
either because the apparatus provided did not work, or because there were side
effects (fumes, deviation of compass) which made aircrews unwilling to use it. The
effect of low temperatures under such conditions was thus described by experienced
captains of Catalinas. ‘ Under these conditions you get into a state in which you
don’t care, and the extra effort to get things done and to worry about getting back
become impossible.’ ‘ Sometimes one gets so cold one doesn’t care what happens
at all. It is the same feeling one gets with severe airsickness. It may come to a point
when the crew as a whole don’t care at all.’ A similar state of apathy was stated
sometimes to occur in Liberators. Three out of eight officers of Sunderland squadrons
also mentioned cold as a stress factor, two of them criticising the efficiency of the
heating apparatus.
5. Factors affecting the man’s ability to carry the load
These were described in much the same way as in Bomber Command,
but great emphasis was placed on leadership, and much thought had been
given to this subject.
(a) Leadership
It was repeatedly stated that the most important factor in building
up morale and so preventing the effects of stress was good leadership. Forty-
two officers, 28 of general duty officers,' discussed this subject
at length, and with obvious concern for its importance, with comment upon
the place of the station, squadron and flight commanders in leading the
aircrews. Concerning the selection of the potential leaders the opinions expressed
fell into two groups. First there is the problem of selection from existing
aircrew. It was said that no commissions should ever be given to aircrew
until they had been tested in the squadron. There was the feeling that at
present too many aircrew were being commissioned, irrespective of their
ability to lead. In particular, instances such as that of air gunners arriving
at a squadron with the rank of pilot officer were quoted. It was pointed
out that the only practical difference between this man and his sergeant
colleagues was that he lived in a different mess and wore a different uniform.
A squadron commander said: ‘ln order to achieve and maintain proper
leadership there must be proper selection of officers. Men should only be selected
from aircrews for commissions on the basis of their power to lead and to
administer.' At present they are taken out because they are merely good members
of the crew. There are not sufficient good leaders in the squadron to-day,
and the reason is that people have been selected for their ability to fly.” Another
referring to the same subject in the same terms added : “At present there are
plenty of pilot officers and flying officers but when the time comes they
will be no good as squadron leaders ”.
The second view had a similar basis, that men were commissioned because
they were efficient members of air crew without consideration for their capacity
to lead. The approach to the problem was different, however. It was pointed
out that the granting of a commission had become a means of promotion of
senior N.C.Os. rather than an appointment to a new form of duty. The view
was held that the present ranks for air crews made this procedure inevitable,
since only two grades of promotion existed for aircrew and therefore the*
granting of a commission had to be used as a routine step in the ladder of
promotion. Six officers uniformly distributed throughout the command who
mentioned this recommended that aircrew ranks should be lowered although
the rates of pay should be unaffected. One experienced squadron commander
suggested that while the living conditions, privileges and pay of aircrew
should remain unchanged, their ranks should be Aircrew Second Class (A C 2)
First Class (A.C.I), Leading Aircrew (L.A.C.). The members of the crew who


showed themselves suitable to be N.C.Os. by their personality and example
should be promoted sergeants, to lead aircrews in their full capacity
as N.C.Os. Promotion to flight sergeant and warrant Officer would then
occur, and from the N.C.Os. the men who stood out by virtue of their
personality, education, mode of living and excellence of performance should
be selected to be the leaders. In this way the officer would invariably be
capable of leadership, and a proper standard of flight and squadron commanders
would be maintained.
The discussion upon the method of selection led to views upon the type
of leader. It was repeatedly emphasised that flying ability and qualities of
leadership were not necessarily associated, although everyone said that flight
and squadron commanders should have had operational experience, should
fly on operations occasionally, and should take an active and vital interest in
operational flying. ‘ Morale was low until a new C.O. came who was always
there, if he was not flying himself, to see the crews off or returning. He nursed
along the timid, flew with the shaky crews himself, chose the shaky-dos and
sent the squadron morale right up’. A station commander said : “ The com-
mander must have his whole interest in the squadron both on the ground and in
the air ”. Some said that it was unimportant that the squadron leader should
be the best pilot—what the squadron liked was just to see that he was willing
and able to share their risks and hardships.
The qualities most to be desired in a leader were variously portrayed,
but several officers said that the best results seemed to be obtained by those
who, though mixing freely with the air crews and knowing them intimately,
could still maintain discipline and, when occasion demanded, be firm and
impersonal. It was the experience of some that the more quiet and restrained
leaders commanded greater respect than others. They thought it simple to
recognise the potential leader, although his personality could not be forecast.
The successful commander was found to mix freely with the crews and to
join in parties in the officers’ and N.C.Os’. messes, relaxing any show of discipline
or authority. He did this in order to observe the crews and to know them per-
sonally. He should mix with them equally in their occupation on the ground,
in training, in games and in recreation. This personal interest in the crews was
an essential prerequisite of good leadership in the squadron. Squadron and
flight commanders who lived in close personal touch with the squadron were
repaid by the efficiency and high morale in the squadron. This personal method
of leadership was often made difficult by the inaccessibility of the N.C.Os.
in their mess ; the number of air crews in squadrons of heavy aircraft; the
rapid turnover of crews; and repeated movements of squadrons with posting
of senior officers. The method was seen in operation in ideal circumstances in
small squadrons of the Fleet Air Arm, whose personnel had been unchanged
for many months. Using the naval divisional system the squadron commanders
had the intimate confidence of all their crews.' The result was that, in spite of
strict discipline, signs of deterioration were easily recognised, and stress was
reduced to a minimum. This gave weight to the observation that in large
squadrons the flight commanders are in a better position to influence their
men by good leadership than is the squadron commander.
One successful commander had a captain’s conference each week, which
he himself did not attend, presided over by the flight - commanders. Here
difficulties were discussed and advice sought. Within two hours the flight
commanders and their seconds in command met the squadron commander
and thrashed out all the difficulties. Solutions were discovered, and applied
' so that the crews are constantly aware that their leaders have their welfare
at heart and that they are being considered’.


The education of leaders was discussed. Those who raised this
subject agreed that the quality of leadership is inherent in the man, and at
best can only be guided. Reference was made to a command letter issued in
September, 1942, which provides for such education in newly commissioned
officers. There were suggestions that the more senior officers when becoming
flight commanders should be guided in leadership and administration, with
advice upon the handling of men and on the most effective way of increasing
their efficiency and helping them through their tour.
The very important part played by the captain, especially in large aircraft
and boats, was a frequent subject of discussion. " The captain’s job in these
large aircraft is very responsible and is a trying one. When the men are well
disciplined on the ground it makes things much easier for the captain ”, said
one squadron commander. Talking of this a squadron commander said:
“ The captain has a lot to do with it. A good captain means a clean boat
and a tidy crew, and if you see a scruffy crew you know that the boat is wrong.”
The responsibility of the captain is great and consequently he is especially
liable to fatigue. He requires a special training, and his selection is as important
as that of the other leaders already discussed. The importance of having a
captain of senior rank was mentioned by several. They thought that every
effort should be made to prevent a sergeant captaining a craft with a commis-
sioned officer in the crew. As it is the convention to make the pilot captain
it sometimes happened that, as has been described above, a good pilot without
the gift of leadership was in practice superseded by another member of the
crew, often the navigator. This unofficial delegation of powers was unfortunate
and resulted from faulty selection.
(b) Success and recognition oi effort
The peculiar nature of duties in Coastal Command, involving as they
do monotonous reconnaissance with infrequent and uncertain reward led to
much comment upon the effect of success and recognition of effort in counter-
acting the effects of stress.
(c) Success
The place of success and its recognition in maintaining morale was discussed
by 70 officers. That success has a high morale value was indicated by
many, and instances were given of the uplift caused throughout the whole
squadron by successful attacks on U-boats, shipping and enemy aircraft.
The success of an Air-Sea Rescue squadron in saving life and of a
Photographic Reconnaissance Unit flight in obtaining excellent photographs
were all mentioned.
Lack of success was thought by the majority to have a very demoralising
effect, and such expressions as ‘ Anti-submarine patrol in our area where
you never see any is killing for morale,’ and ‘ If they don’t get an occasional
success some of them loose the aggressive spirit and are contented just to
stooge ’ were typical. Four said that the crews did not mind failing to achieve
material success, but this was offset by the observation that there was a tendency
in the command to rationalise upon this topic. It was observed that lack of
success had the same effect as inactivity and that they usually ran together.
{lnactivity, pp. 46-47).
Ten officers referred to the lack of offensive success in their particular
duties. These observations were particularly apt in night bombing
squadrons engaged upon anti-submarine patrol. A squadron leader said;
“ In night bombing there was a definite objective and a prospect of success


which inspired high morale. As soon as the aircraft landed the ground
crews would come out to see if the bombs had been dropped, as they usually
had, and wanted to know all about the trip. Now they don’t bother as they
know the depth charges they’ve loaded will still be there. They used to be keen
to paint a new bomb on the aircraft as soon as possible for each sortie done,
but soon gave it up, for there was nothing to make them enthusiastic.”
A commander of a Beaufighter Reconnaissance Squadron said : “ Their
present job has a very low morale value. It is tip and run along the coast
looking for shipping and taking a photo. There is no chance of being offensive
and they have no concrete success.” He had asked permission to strafe aero-
dromes on the Dutch coast in order to raise morale. Another said: “ Here
they get fed up seeing only our own ships and getting no positive results ”;
and another: “ They want to bomb something and like material success.
It is very demoralising just looking for shipping and coming back with the news.”
Success has its greatest value when it means fully completing the specific
job in hand.
Constructive suggestions were put forward to counteract the demoralising
effect of this apparent lack of concrete results in really important duties.
The first was explanation of the purpose of their duties. On anti-submarine
patrols by day, results had been poor, and morale was low. When the crews
were told that they were keeping U-boats submerged by day to be the targets
for night patrols they knew what they were stooging for, and morale rose.
Again, a wing commander said that he had heard confidentially that there
had been no sinkings in the area of their patrols for weeks. He thought that
had the crews been told this, they would not have resented the .monotony
and lack of material success.
The demonstration of success in photographic reconnaissance by showing
the flight their photographs on the same day created a competitive spirit and a
sense of professional pride. In Air-Sea Rescue, squadrons making contact
with the crews rescued had an enormously valuable effect. One squadron com-
mander made every 7 effort to trace the rescued crews and to invite them to
the station to meet thp squadron. This often took weeks, and sometimes they 7
had forgotten the event by the time a party was arranged. He urged that as
so many searches were fruitless, groups should notify the squadron of the identity
of rescued crews without delay, so that squadron records of the success could
be kept, and the squadron see how worth while was their work. It was thought
that when life-boats were fitted to Hudsons the morale effect of a rescue would
be enormous.* The reaction of many was summed up in a wing commander’s
remark : “We don’t get that personal satisfaction out of the job that others
have and that in itself over a period of time gets people down. There are so
many hours of flying in which we see nothing, that the crews tend to get
apathetic.” Another said that he always tried to give a new crew the chance
of an early success. He picks out a ship in a poorly defended area for them
because “ Once a crew has pulled something off they have confidence and are
all set for the tour, but when they go out many times and see nothing they are
likely to throw in their hands.”
(d) Praise
Praise is most important. Recognition of conscientious effort and of hard-
won success by a telegram from Command or Group has an enormous effect
upon the squadron, which was exemplified by eight officers who felt that this
recognition by higher authorities would not lose in value by more frequent
application. The practice of going to Command or Group to report the sinking
* This was later found to be the case.


of a submarine was also warmly recommended. The most valuable praise of
all was, however, the quiet praise of the commanding officer. A very experienced
squadron commander said: " Air crews are not deeply interested in the moral
issues of the war. They are simple souls and must have someone to work for.
If they leave the ops. room saying to themselves ‘ I did a good job and the
C. is pleased ' the}’ have achieved all they want. ”
(e) Decorations
There was general agreement on the very high morale value of decorations.
This is nearly as great to the other members of the squadron as it is to the
recipient himself. It follows that to have their full effect, awards should be
made while the man is still in the squadron, so that they may all participate
in the honour and celebrate it together, for an award which is made when the
man has gone to the O.T.U. helps the squadron spirit very little. Several
officers consequently said that immediate awards are the most valuable. A
station commander summed up the views of others by saying: " Adequate
decoration is the greatest factor in maintaining morale, but the decoration should
be given while the man is in the squadron, for this has a huge effect on the rest.
They all have a party and they all wonder who will get the next. Immediate
awards are the most worth while of the lot. ”
Twenty-two officers, all senior and many decorated, urged widespread
distribution of decorations in the Command. They said that they were aware
that within the allotment, decorations were fairly given, and that the hazards of
their job were often not as great as in Bomber and Fighter Commands, but
argued that if the value of their work obtained recognition men would be all
the better able to stand up to their load. One wing commander said : " The
lack of decorations supports the popular view, which has even got into the
Service, that Coastal Command is just an unimportant stooge job compared
with Fighter and Bomber. ” As so few decorations were available for distri-
bution those in duties which called for prolonged high performance with little
material success, such as General Reconnaissance, Photographic Reconnaissance
Unit and Air-Sea Rescue were particularly likely to. receive too meagre
recognition.
This argument led to the view that as spectacular success is rare and some
times fortuitous by the very nature of the duties, decorations should be made
more often for duty efficiently performed without evidence of offensive success.
This view led to the suggestion of the award of a tour ribbon. Seven officers
said that if a man had completed his full tour efficiently and well, his flying
had been distinguished, and even if he had not been as fortunate as some in,
say, destroying U-boats, he should be awarded the D.F.C. A commander of
a General Reconnaissance squadron said ; "it is very difficult to find any one
tiling on which to recommend a man and you don’t get recognition for just plain
stooging, so that a high proportion of people end a tour unrecognised. They
should be given the D.F.C. ; and a Station Commander; “ Anyone who
has done a good tour and been shot up once or twice by flak boats deserves
the D.F.C. ” Eight officers said that the D.F.C. should be preserved for
immediate awards, in recognition of great success or great gallantry, but that
another ribbon should be given for distinguished operational flying. A wing
commander said : “ The standard of decorations was invented for the last war
and not for the changed conditions of this war. There should be a D.F.C.
and D.F.M. for every member of a crew that gets a U-boat, or at the end of a
good tour they should'be decorated.” Another that: “ They really should
have something to show when they go to an 0.T.U., but this shouldn’t be the
D. which should be kept for special occasions. A tour ribbon would be


best.” Some of these officers suggested a star for succeeding tours as well as a
distinctive ribbon, and some remarked on the difficulty of giving recognition
to members of the crew other than the captain. Two suggested a crew medal, and
two mentioned the uplift given by the crew being mentioned in dispatches
when the captain is decorated. Whatever suggestions they made, these officers
were unanimous about the positive value of the hope of decoration because
*' when we get no positive results we have nothing with which to bolster up
morale in a rather tedious job.”


CHAPTER VII
INVESTIGATION OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS IN FLYING
PERSONNEL BY UNIT MEDICAL OFFICERS
by
Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds, K.B.E., C.B., M.D., F.R.C.P., and
Wing Commander Denis J. Williams, D.Sc., M.D., F.R.C.P.
FPRC Report 412(k), February, 1945
Introduction
Many of the reports upon psychological disorder in flying personnel which
have been submitted by us, have presented the subject as it is seen by the
neuro-psychiatric specialist. This has necessarily been true of all the reports
based upon the system of case cards returned by these specialists. Although
the information obtained from such a source has many obvious advantages
over that which might be obtained from other medical officers, it has the dis-
advantage of being second-hand. The men seen by the neuro-psychiatrist
have all been referred by the station medical officer, who has selected them
from a large number. Others he may have handled himself, or marked for
executive disposal without asking for specialist advice. In all cases, whether
ultimately referred to the specialist or not, there is information available to the
unit medical officer, who has watched the man’s progress through his flying
career, has observed his reactions to stress and has obtained verbal assessments
of stress and reaction from commanding officers with whom he is in daily
contact—intimate, personal knowledge of the case which the specialist lacks.
This,gap in our knowledge, _recognised when we began investigations, we have
tried to fill by carrying our enquiries to unit commanders and medical officers
in the operational commands (Chapters IV, V and VI). The present investigation
represents an attempt to obtain an account of psychological disorder in flying
personnel as seen and described by unit medical officers themselves, including
all cases dealt with by them, whether referred to a neuro-psychiatrist or not.
The attempt has not been altogether successful, for there is reason to believe
that we have not obtained a complete sample of the material, but enough has
been accumulated to furnish an idea of how the problems of lack of confidence
and neurosis in air crew are handled by unit medical officers of the Royal
Air Force.
1. Method
The method adopted in compiling this report was to obtain from the
unit medical officer a simple case return of a stereotyped kind for all members
of air crew seen by him ‘ for complaints which have no physical basis, or who
having no physical disability, state that they feel unable to carry on with
flying duties ’. The card gave details of the patient’s Service particulars and
his flying experience, with short accounts of the main symptoms of the illness,
its main causes, the treatment and disposal advised, and the prognosis.
Diagnosis was limited to a choice of five headings : anxiety, depression, fatigue
syndrome, hysteria and loss of confidence. The instructions to medical
officers with a specimen card are reproduced on pages 97-98. An adequate
number of cards, with instructions, was forwarded to every unit medical
officer in Bomber, Coastal and Flying Training Commands, to Air Defence of
Great Britain and 2nd Tactical Air Force. Squadrons operating from the


Cases
'Pilot
83
Air Gunner
74
Air crew category «
Navigator
Wireless Operator
41
39
Flight Engineer
29 ■
Others
20
Exactly a third were commissioned.
'Night bombing
117
Under training ..
87
Instructing
19
Coastal General Reconnais
sance
18
DntipQ <
Night fighter
10
X/UliLO < ■ • > '
Troop glider
10
Coastal boats
6
Day bomber
5
Day fighter
4
Other five operational
duties ..
10
It is interesting that night bombing contributed 65 per cent of all the cases
from operational units.
Cases
'Under 20 ..
28
Age .. .. <
21-25
126
26-30
66
Over 30 ..
66
’ 1- 100 ..
43
Total hours flying
101- 200
201- 500
58
118
experience
501-1,000
36
More than 1,000 ..
31
About two-thirds had over 200 flying hours to their credit.
Cases
'No operational flying
110
Under 100 operational
Operational flying ■«
hours
Over 100 operational
98
hours ..
78
Just over 60 per cent had had operational experience.
United Kingdom and Western Europe were consequently included, and all
flying training units in the United Kingdom. Senior Medical Officers of Groups
were responsible through the command, for ensuring a card return for every
case arising during the 20 weeks beginning 15th May, 1941.
2. Material
The number of cases reported was considerably less than previous
calculation had led us to expect, and records were received from a comparatively
small number of the medical officers concerned. We believe, therefore, that
our material represents the contribution of those medical officers who were
most interested in the investigation rather than a fair sample of all cases.
3. Characteristics of the 286 cases reported


Although no great reliability is claimed for this group of cases as a sample
of all neurosis occurring in air crews, comparison of the characteristics given
above with those for all cases reaching the neuro-psychiatrists in 1943-1944
(Chapter XI) shows that there is no great dissimilarity between the two groups.
4. Symptoms of flying stress
The early stage of symptoms resulting from flying stress has been considered
in reports, but the independent records of medical officers of individual cases
provide a clinical picture which is full of significant detail, and when viewed
as a whole gives a clear and lively impression. This might be conveyed to others
by reproducing the observations recorded under “ Symptoms ” on all the cards,
but even this would be inadequate, for symptoms can only be properly appreci-
ated in their full setting or cause and circumstance. It is impracticable to append
to this report all the data required for the complete picture. We propose,
however, in this and in other sections to present many illustrative case records,
in which the most relevant features will be described in the medical officer’s
own words. In each case an outline cf the whole story will be provided as a
background to the special feature to be discussed. Thus in the present section
which is chiefly concerned with symptoms, the case records quoted will also
contain observations upon aetiology, treatment and prognosis, which will
be referred to later under the appropriate headings.
The symptoms described might be classified as mainly psychological or
mainly physical, severe or slight, acute or chronic, and in several other ways.
Arbitrary classifications of this kind, however, make partitions which are too
inelastic to contain the facts of clinical observation. Therefore, no systematic
classification of symptoms will be attempted, though the distinctions mentioned
above will appear in some of the cases quoted.
Case 43 ; A Flying Officer, air gunner, aged 33, was seen at an O.X.U. where he
was instructing, but just due for a second operational tour in heavy bombers. He
complained of insomnia, loss of appetite, nervousness, a feeling of dread, and of the
possibility of letting his crew down if called upon to fly on operations again. It was
noted that he was irritable with air crew and other familiars. The medical officer
discovered that his first tour (26 sorties) had been quiet, judged by ordinary standards,
but after 17 trips tenseness became extreme, though he finished the tour. He was
not disturbed by non-operational flying. The case was discussed with the Chief
Instructor, and it was decided that he should continue his job as a Gunnery Instructor
for the time being, the ultimate prospect of returning to operations being regarded as
fair.
The symptoms in this case arose from the cumulative stress of a normal
operational tour and were reactivated by the prospect of a second.
Case 135 ; A Sergeant, air gunner, aged 20, was seen on an operational station,
where he had completed 12 sorties on heavy bombers, complaining of waking up
at night in a cold sweat, having bouts of uncontrollable quivering, and dreaming
every night about crashes, which always involved his own crew but never himself.
These symptoms began after a sortie to Brunswick on which the starboard inner
motor was shot away and the port inner feathered. The aircraft was attacked five
times on this trip and one of the crew wounded. Shortly after this, while he was
away, the rest of the crew went missing. He was engaged to be married. He was
treated on the station before reference to a neuro-psychiatrist, with a poor prognosis.
The combination of symptoms presented in this case is repeated in many
of the records, usually associated with some outstanding episode of stress as
in this instance, but sometimes as a reaction to flying generally as in the
following case.
Case 49 : A Sergeant, air gunner, aged 30, was seen at an 0.T.U., with a total of 13
hours’ flying, complaining of sleeplessness, lack of appetite and nightmares concerning
aircraft. 'He wakes up in the night in a hot or cold sweat. When in the air he loses
his grip on himself, gets flustered and panicky and seems to do everything wrong.’
The symptoms had begun when he started flying He had had nightmares as a child


and had always been a bad sleeper. He was anxious about his wife, who had pul-
monary tuberculosis. The medical officer gave him a bad prognosis and he was
disposed of by the executive.
This case is representative of a group in which temperamental unsuitability
for flying reveals itself by anxiety symptoms early in’training.
Case 18 : A Sergeant, flight engineer, who had completed 20 sorties on heavy
bombers without any special stress, complained that' he feels very tired most of the
time, especially after flying. Sleep does not revive him. He has headaches and his
eyes feel sore after reading.' His symptoms had been present 14 days, the last 9
of which had been spent on privilege leave without improvement. The medical
officer found no neurotic predisposition, arranged for him to have 10 days ground
duties, during which he saw him several times and gave him medicines, and observed
in an after note ‘he finished his tour quite fresh.’
The symptoms in this case are typical of a small group in which tiredness
is the leading complaint.
Case 131 : A Flying Officer, pilot, aged 26, was seen at the beginning of a tour of
nightfighter Mosquitos. ‘He Complained of periodic spells of insomnia with
nightmares, and dread of flying particularly in poor weather, especially icing—
is preoccupied with the thought of the things that might go wrong.’ His symptoms
were of 2J years’ duration dating from an occasion during his first operational tour
in Hampden night bombers, when he had to ditch due to icing and was in the sea
(January) for 18 hours. He was off flying for a month and then completed his tour
despite symptoms. Subsequently he instructed at an O.T.U. for eighteen months.
Three of his near relatives had had psychological illness and he himself was in-
trospective. Re-assurance and explanation from his medical officer did not help
him and he refused sedatives. He was therefore referred to a neuro-psychiatrist with
a bad prognosis for further operational flying.
This case is an example of long standing symptoms in a predisposed indi-
vidual of good morale, symptoms which only became disabling when he returned
to operations after a very long break.
Case 36 ; A Sergeant, flight engineer, aged 36, was seen on a heavy bomber opera-
tional station when he had completed 1 sortie. He did not consult the medical officer,
but was examined routinely when he stated that he was unwilling to continue flying.
' He lacks confidence in his own ability to carry out duties as an air crew member,
is depressed, worries over trifles, and sleeps badly. He has decided that he will not
make the grade and wishes to discontinue flying.’ He had one crash landing at
his H.C.U. The medical officer found that he had always been a chronic worrier
and thought him temperamentally unsuited for air crew duties. He was disposed of
by the executive.
In this case the symptoms were slight, the decision to withdraw firm.
Case 26 : A Sergeant, navigator, aged 32, with no operational experience, was seen
at a heavy bomber O.T.U. complaining that " he has been worried and unable to
think clearly all day. He could not sleep after last night’s flying is pale and tense
and asks to be taken off flying for the night.” On the previous night his aircraft
had nearly crashed, overshooting three times owing to unserviceable flaps. Six weeks
previously he had been in a creash landing and was trapped in the fuselage. Five
months previously he had been in a forced landing with an engine on fire. The
medical officer found no neurotic predisposition, took him into Sick Quarters, ad-
ministered 3 grains of nembutal, and gave him an encouraging talk next morning.
He returned to full flying duties and finished his course. The medical officer remarked
under prognosis ' average type, chief trouble is lack of confidence in pilot. Will
probably experience some difficulty in completing operations.'
The symptoms in this case were acute but mild and were relieved by prompt
and efficient treatment.
Case 38 : A Sergeant, navigator, aged 26, with no operational experience, was seen
at a heavy bomber O.T.U. complaining of headache while plotting. ‘He asks to
come off flying for this reason, as he feels he cannot take responsibility for the
safety of the crew unless the headaches can be cured.’ He had had no stress. The
medical officer considered him slightly predisposed to neurosis owing to timidity.
Previous correction of a minor refractive error had failed to relieve headache. It
Mas noted that he had started training as a pilot'but failed to make grade for


Diagnosis
Anxiety
Cases
..147
Lacks confidence
.
.. 97
Hysteria
.. 28
Fatigue syndrome
• .. 26
Depression
.. 14
defective vision, which was really a neurotic symptom. He was referred to a
neuro-psychiatrist and boarded permanently unfit for flying duties. The medical
officer considered that he should have been weeded out before.
This case is representative of a group in which physical symptoms are
presented with little anxiety.
Case 265 : A Sergeant, air-gunner, aged 35, who had completed 20 sorties on heavy
bombers, presented at his operational station with anxiety and tremors, tired eyes
and backache. The medical officer observed “He has been drinking overmuch. No
particular stress. The crew do not wish to have him any longer. His mother had a
nervous breakdown. He has always been emotional and temperamental and afraid
of heights." He was referred at once to a neuro-psychiatrist, with a poor prognosis.
In this case it was probably not so much the nature of the man’s symptoms
as his crew’s reluctance to have him which influenced the medical officer’s
disposal.
Case 275 : A Warrant Officer, pilot, with a total of 19 operational sorties on Bostons
and night-intruding Mosquitos, was seen on an operational station complaining
of evening headaches and a feeling of uneasiness and tension. ‘ Says he feels jittery
and lacks confidence in night flying following a crash. He had similar symptoms
after a crash in India two years ago, when he injured his leg and was in hospital three
months. .Was O.K. on Bostons but not confident on Mosquitos, but was persevering
and then had a night crash after four hours’ flying. After this he had to hang about
waiting for an executive decision whether he was fit to fly or not. The suspense
affected him. He is rather a worrying type but quite keen. His confidence has been
restored by explanation of his symptoms and he is keen to get back on Bostons. He
is to be returned to a Boston Squadron and I think will cope satisfactorily. The
Mosquito was master of him rather than he master of the Mosquito. He had com-
pleted 16 successful operations on Bostons before transferring to Mosquitos.'
This case illustrates the interpretation of symptoms and their management
by a very experienced station medical officer.
2. Diagnosis
The cases were divided among the five available diagnoses as follows :
It will be observed that 78 per cent of the diagnoses were either anxiety
state or - lack of confidence. Both these terms imply a state of fear, almost
invariably arising from and related to flying duties. One distinction between
the two in the minds of medical officers appears to be that between fear which
is beyond volitional control and that which is not. The former is characterised
as morbid and recognised as a medical disability, the latter is regarded as no
more than the mental distress endured by fit men. A second distinction is that
provided by the presence or absence, in association with fear, of mental or
bodily symptoms such as depression, tension, restlessness, irritability, compulsive
feelings, phobias, insomnia, nightmares, tremor, sweating and so on. Whether
a medical officer made the diagnosis lack of confidence or anxiety state seems
to have depended upon the relative .importance given to these two distin-
guishing features. It is evident that in the minds of most medical officers
-the important question is not whether the man has symptoms apart from fear,
but whether his fear or other symptoms are beyond his control.


Among the 97 cases labelled lack of confidence, there are very few in which
no symptoms of any kind were recorded. The following cases illustrate this
small group.
Case 60 : A Sergeant, air gunner, aged 31, with 100 hours flying, was seen by the
medical officer at a Heavy Conversion Unit. ‘He asks to come off flying, as he states
that his wife would leave him if he does not. No worries. No nervous symptoms
associated with flying. No crashes. No flying stress. No evidence of nervous
predisposition. A long talk with the object of getting him to change his mind has
had no result.’ The commanding officer was informed and the case dealt with by
the executive. The medical officer’s comment was as follows : ‘lf keen to fly
w'ould do so despite his wife’s threat. He must realise that she would not leave him
if he told her that his duty was to continue.’
Case 246 : A Sergeant, flight engineer, aged 24, with 30 hours operational flying on
heavy bombers, refused to fly after briefing for a long trip to Germany following
several easier targets. ‘He never claimed any sort of illness and admitted there
was nothing wrong with him.’ He had home worries, his wife being ill. There was
no evidence of any abnormal instability or excessive timidity. 'He is rather the
self-assured type now, although worked up at the time of his refusal to fly.’ He
was dealt with by the executive.
In other cases the diagnosis of lack of confidence was apparently made
because of the absence of any other symptoms except those of fear, though the
fear was considered beyond the man’s control. The following case is an
example:—
Case 225 : A Sergeant, air gunner, aged 27, 120 hours, no operations, reported to
the medical officer at a Heavy Conversion Unit, having experienced an acute fear
reaction while flying. A Halifax went out of control, the patient had to abandon
aircraft but at first could not open the turret. He was very afraid. He did not fly
for a week ; when he did so he again experienced acute fear in the air. No neurotic
predisposition was discovered. The medical officer instituted the following treatment.
He explained the mechanism of fear and told the patient that it was natural and
universal. He admitted him to Station Sick Quarters and gave him nembutal. He
flew with him and encouraged him while in the air. He then used suggestion on the
ground and got him crewed up again. At this point a further crash on the station
occurred. The patient set out on a cross-country flight but had such acute symptoms
of fear, sweating, trembling and irrationally wanting to abandon aircraft, that the
trip was abandoned after 10 minutes. The medical officer’s comment was " A
good type who has made every effort to get over it. He might have been O.K. if
he had flown sooner after the incident, but I doubt if he could make much of ops.
if crashes are going to shake him like this every time.” He was consequently
referred for executive disposal without reference to a psychiatrist.
It is of interest that 21 of the 97 cases with lack of confidence were also
given another diagnosis, usually anxiety state. An example is Case 195: —
Case 195 : A Sergeant, navigator, aged 24, 250 hours, 10-day bombing sorties in
Mosquitos. His pilot was forced to abandon four sorties because the patient said he
felt ill and unable to carry on. On one occasion at his O.T.U. when lost in cloud the
same thing occurred. His symptoms ‘ varied from trembling and vomiting to semi-
collapse. He says that everything goes hazy but that the symptoms vary each time.'
The only, stress he had experienced was on one trip in which an engine cut out over
enemy territory. The pilot had no difficulty in bringing the aircraft back home. No
neurotic predisposition was discovered. The M.O. saw the patient each time and
gave him luminal before his trips. He encouraged him and remarks that he had
" given him four chances." He then considered it unwise to persevere any further
with the patient, and referred him to the executive for disposal as a case of lack of
confidence.
There is no indication in this case of the reason for disposing of the case
as lack of confidence, but it may be supposed that the medical officer thought
that his symptoms were not severe enough to be disabling and could have
been endured with an effort of will. The case might well, however, have been
disposed of as ‘an anxiety state by a medical officer with different views and
illustrates the difficulty in making the distinction between lack of confidence
and neurosis.


It is shown by Bradford Hill and Williams (Chapter XXII) that whereas
there was generally fairly close agreement between two independent psychiatrists
in making a diagnosis of anxiety state or hysteria in flying personnel, there
was only an even chance of agreeing upon the diagnosis lack of confidence,
the alternative diagnosis being almost invariably anxiety state. In the present
series of cases the same difficulty is evident, but the tendency of the medical
officer as compared with the neuro-psychiatrist is to attach less importance
to the symptom pattern and more importance to the criterion of volitional
control. This may well be because the unit medical officer knows, that many
men endure fear with associated symptoms of what the psychiatrist would
probably call an anxiety state, without disability. The tendency of the unit
medical officer, therefore, when confronted with a state of fear, whether
associated with other symptoms or not, is to ask himself whether these symptoms
may not be overcome. It is only when the case fails to respond to treatment
that he is prepared to regard the man either as suffering from a medical disability
in the form of an anxiety neurosis, or as having failed to try his best. Among
the cases kept at full flying by the unit medical officer are some men who might
have been regarded by the psychiatrist as at least temporarily unfit owing to
an anxiety state. One of us from his past experience as an infantry medical
officer has been long convinced that the dividing line between anxiety neurosis
and normal fear in combatants is artificial and related to circumstance. The
same view has been expressed by Spiegel (1944) writing of his experiences
as an infantry battalion medical officer in the Tunisian campaign. “It soon
became apparent ”, he says, “ that a tense, tremulous soldier was not neces-
sarily a psychiatric casualty. He was if we made him one and sent him back,
but often he was not a casualty simply because he was not permitted to be one.
(author’s italics.) A state of tension and anxiety is so common in the front
lines that it must be regarded as a normal reaction in this grossly abnormal
situation. Where ordinary physiological signs of fear end, and where signs of a
clinical syndrome begin, is often difficult to decide. This is an important
consideration because not only was some of the gallant and heroic work done
by men and officers in acute anxiety states, but a considerable amount of the
ordinary combat accomplishment was performed by ordinary men experiencing
rather severe anxiety.” This statement is the more interesting because it
is made by a trained psychiatrist. Circumstances for air crews are of course
very different from those of the soldier. Exposure to danger is occasional and
intermittent, opportunity for reporting sick between operations is easy and
there is always the consideration of which doctor and patient are both aware,
that even a mild anxiety state may make a man unfit for air crew duties. The
medical officer cannot press men so hard in the air as on the ground. Never-
theless one fifth of the cases reported in this series were kept at their duties
despite their fear or anxiety state. The following case is a characteristic example.
Case 218 : A Flying Officer, navigator, aged 24, 300 hours, 17 night bombing sorties
in Lancasters. Since his third operational sortie the patient had reported to the
unit medical officer on several occasions. At his first visit he admitted lack of con-
fidence for flying and fear that he would let the crew down. Several times after that
he reported to station Sick Quarters with minor complaints ' rather unnecessarily.'
He also complained of slight air-sickness. His operational tour had been uneventful.
The medical officer found him *' a sensitive individual who has calculated the odds
against survival. He is facing up to the task by forcing himself to carry on.” He was
persistently reassured about his ability to succeed and the medical officer enlisted
the help of the navigation officer, who used to congratulate the patient on his good
performances. A frank discussion of fear helped the patient, and the medical officer
commented; " With persistent encouragement I feel confident he will complete
his tour of duty.” The patient continued to operate and the medical officer’s last note
was " he will complete his tour with encouragement, although if he sustains anv
great stress I fear he will break down.” The patient and his crew subsequently
failed to return from an operation, but the medical officer had sustained him through
at least 14 sorties. 5


Physical symptoms associated with an anxiety or fear state were usually
accepted as a part of this syndrome, the diagnosis of hysteria being reserved
for cases in which symptoms were produced or maintained by obvious motiva-
tion. The diagnosis of hysteria was recorded in only 10 per cent of the cases.
In several cases in which the record suggests that this diagnosis might have
been made the medical officer seems to have concluded that motivation was
too near the conscious level to warrant any label other than lack of confidence.
The following is a characteristic example :
Case 134 : A Flight Sergeant, navigator, aged 26, who had completed five sorties on
Boston day-bombers without any special stress, had the following record : ‘ For
several weeks has complained of poor vision and suggested that he was incapable of
doing his job. The ophthalmic specialist finds him fit for full flying duties. He
states that his mother and only surviving brother are invalids. He was reassured
in several but after vainly trying to get taken off flying on account of
poor eyesight, put in a written request to the C.O. to be taken off on account of family
troubles.’ The case was dealt with by the executive.
Comparing this case with others we must conclude that the distinction
between lack of confidence and hysteria is as difficult for the medical officer
as that between lack of confidence and anxiety, and is arrived at by practical
rather than academic considerations. If the man who presents physical symp-
toms as an excuse for evading flying duties is ready to abandon them with
reassurance he is given the more respectable diagnosis of a neurosis. The following
case for example was diagnosed hysteria ;
Case 12 ; A Sergeant, air gunner, aged 23, 252 hours, had done 240 operational
hours on anti-submarine patrols from Newfoundland on Hudsons without any
exceptional experiences. This operational flying was said to have been ‘ unofficial ’
owing to shortage of crews. He was now under training at an O.T.U. for heavy
bombers. He reported sick with noise in the right ear for two months following a
mild otitis media, and a story of vomiting after most of his meals for the past fortnight.
The medical officer found no abnormalities, but discovered that he recently had
learned that his wife, with whom he had had only a few weeks’ married life, had left
him for another man. He found no evidence of neurotic predisposition, but suspended
him from flying, pending the report of an aural surgeon, who found no disability.
With reassurance he returned to full duty. The vomiting ceased.
This is a characteristic example of a type of patient whom one would not
expect to reach the neuro-psychiatrist, the man with a tendency to take
hysterical advantage of minor physical ailments whose path in this direction
is blocked by prompt and appropriate action on the station.
Fatigue syndrome and depression were appropriately used and do not need
special mention here, since they have been dealt with fully in the clinical report
on neurosis in air crews (Chapter X) and will be discussed later in this report.
In many cases physical symptoms dominated the picture, and the patient
went to see the doctor to obtain relief. The medical officer was usually able to
recognise the cause, and it is noteworthy that in only 46 cases of the whole
series (16 per cent) were special clinical investigations or opinions, apart from
those of the neuro-psychiatrist, called for. In many of these 46 cases some
associated physical disorder, such as a recent head injury or unrelated physical
defect, furnished sound reason for investigation as in Case 279 :
Case 279; A Dutch Flying Officer, navigator, radio, aged 31, four night-intruder patrols
in yiosquitos. All four sorties had been very eventful. On the first he crash-landed and
was trapped in the aircraft, which had caught fire. On the last the aircraft was badly
damaged by flak, and he and the pilot baled out. The patient struck the right side
of the forehead on landing, had seyere headaches, and returned to the station in a
very excited condition. After a week’s leave he still had the headaches, complained
of weakness of the right eye, and was unable to concentrate on reading or on driving
a car for more than 10 minutes. He had been subject to headaches and ‘ eyestrain ’
since school days; he was considered very highly strung, intelligent and conscientious.
The medical officer referred him to an ophthalmologist, who found no abnormality.
He was then admitted to hospital, where a small stellate fracture of the right frontal


bone was found, but the neuro-psychiatrist did not think that this altogether
accounted for his symptoms. He was, therefore, transferred to the R.A.F. Officers'
Hospital for psychiatric treatment. His squadron commander had great confidence
in him and the prognosis was thought to be excellent.
In several instances as in Cases 134 and 12 (page 93) the medical officer
had clearly used reference for a physical examination as part of his psychiatric
management of the case; but in one or two cases, as for example Case 55,
repeated investigation of physical complaints seemed to show a failure to
grasp the true situation.
Case 55 ; A Pilot Officer, pilot, aged 30, 3,750 hours flying, 3 sorties in day fighters.
Ex-Instructor. Complained of muzzincss in the head and pain in the left ear.
While flying was giddy and deaf in the right ear. This was thought to be due to
barotrauma, but flying with an instructor showed that the aural symptoms occurred
on ascent and the deafness was thought to be spurious. He then complained of
dyspepsia and pain in the epigastrium. He had had a crash with fire, without injury,
in 1939, and had baled out successfully in 1940. The M.O. found him ‘ very keen
to talk about his symptoms at great length and not at all keen to go on operations.’
He was referred 3 times to an E.N.T. specialist, was given a decompression test,
was sent to a medical specialist to have investigated the condition of his alimentary
tract,’ and then, all tests being negative, was sent to a neuro-psychiatrist. The only
treatment given in the station was phenobarbitone. The M.O. thought the prognosis
bad.
By contrast to this case it was interesting to observe when studying the
case notes how the experienced medical officer in dealing with air crew whose
symptoms were related to the psychological strain of their duties avoided
sending them to hospital for anything except confirmation of the psychiatric
diagnosis. The medical officers who showed in their cards that they had not the
confidence to manage the case alone and who delegated the whole problem
of treatment and disposal to a neuro-psychiatrist, more often asked for
investigations by the ophthalmologist, otologist or general physician before
doing so.
3. Causes
Evidence of psychological stress above the average was recorded in the
flying experience of 177 men (62 per cent), while stress arising from factors
unrelated to flying was noted in 84 (30 per cent). Of special interest was the
frequency with which the medical officer commented upon acute psychological
trauma, which had initiated, precipitated, or accentuated the disorder. A
description of such acute trauma was given in 100 cases (35 per cent). The
trauma varied in its form, severity and time of occurrence, as will be seen by
reference to case histories.
Case 129 : A Sergeant, air gunner, aged 19, with 75 hours flying, was involved
at an O.T.U. in a severe crash on take-off with two 500-lb. bombs on board. He was
uninjured. The next day two of his friends were killed flying from his station. There-
after he developed continuous anxiety in the air with inability to cope with his
duties. He was subsequently grounded.
This case is an example of the most usual kind of acute psychological
trauma. Other examples are Cases 135 (page 84), 26 (page 85), 275 (page 86),
225 (page 87).
A temporary loss of confidence as a result of acute psychological trauma
may easily infect several members of the same crew. For instance, four cards
were returned for pilot, navigator, wireless operator and air gunner, all of whom
were flying in a Catalina aircraft which made a forced landing and rapidly sank
nose first, and from which they all had difficulty in making their escape. Two
complained of headaches and two of loss of confidence in flying, while three
returned to full flying duties. Sometimes a man may pass through several
intensely distressing experiences', and each may give rise to temporary loss of


confidence or anxiety, the outcome of which will depend partly on the unit
medical officer. This was so in Case 79.
Case 79 ; A Flight Sergeant, air gunner, aged 26, 200 hours flying, 8 night bombing
sorties in Lancasters, reported to his unit medical officer with headaches, dizziness
and insomnia. On his first sortie with a strange crew the aircraft was badly shot up
over Berlin. On his eighth sortie both outer engines cut over Munich, an order to
abandon aircraft was given and countermanded ; the aircraft went on to Corsica
on 2 engines where it crash-landed, the rear gunner being killed. The patient’s wife
and mother were opposed to him continuing flying. He was given a rest from flying,
admitted to Sick Quarters, and given nembutal, the medical officer used suggestion
and encouragement, and the Flight Commander was asked to give him some easy
trips. He returned to operational flying and the M.O. stated : " Provided no un-
toward incidents occur he should finish his tour with no further trouble.” On the
15th sortie the crew had to abandon aircraft, the rear gunner’s parachute was U/S
so he jumped clinging to the patient but was unable to maintain his hold when
the parachute opened. Later the patient reported sick with depression and anxiety,
his main complaint being of nightmares in which his sister took the place of the
rear gunner. He was referred to a neuro-psychiatrist, who advised boarding to non-
operational flying. The medical officer’s comment was ; "A man who has tried hard
to carry on but who is unlikely to resume operations. If he does, I would not expect
him to complete a tour.”
In nearly a third of the cases in which acute psychological trauma had
occurred, it was associated with physical injury, especially fractures or bums.
Throughout the case returns'the emphasis was upon danger and fear, in
contrast to exhaustion and fatigue. Even when fatigue was noted it was often
associated with prolonged exposure to the hazards of operational flying as
described in Case 284.
Case 284 ; A Flying Officer, pilot, aged 23, 1,150 hours with 29 heavy bomber
sorties, complained of fatigue, dizziness, blurring of vision and difficulty in concen-
trating on the dials. He had done two day sorties and two night sorties in the 4
days before reporting sick at the tail end of his tour. He found the day trips par-
ticularly trying because of the need to concentrate upon formation flying, fie had
been doing very frequent sorties in the preceding month. He was found to be
moderately predisposed to neurosis. The unit medical officer admitted him to Sick
Quarters for 5 days, gave him sedatives, sent him on 10 days sick leave and referred
him for specialist opinion. He returned to complete his tour.
Fatigue was presented as a cause of breakdown in 24 instances. This was
sometimes the acute fatigue of a short period of intensive operational activity.
It was more often the end result of many months of sustained flying. This
was particularly the case in instructors (Case 126) and in flying boats of Coastal
Command (Case 263).
Case 126 : A Flying Officer, pilot instructor, aged 24, 860 hours, returned from sick
leave after naso-pharyngitis and stated that he was so utterly fed up with instructing
that he could not bear it any longer and that it was affecting his health. His.work
involved the repetition of the same routine B.A.T. course every week. The Chief
Instructor and a neuro-psychiatrist were consulted and recommendations for early
posting to operations were made. The M.O’s. comment was : “He is mentally
stable. Ido not think he will get a posting to operations before his tour of instructing
is ended, but I think he will settle down again.”
Case 263 : A Flying Officer, pilot, aged 29, 2,300 hours, 600 on anti-submarine
offensive patrol in Catalinas, reported sick with a fatigue syndrome after 100
operational hours on his second tour. Ho complained that the horizon blurred at
take-off and that he could see several images of the horizon. He had had similar
symptoms at the end of his first tour. The unit medical officer gave the cause of his
illness as (1) sorties lasting 14-18 hours ; (2) the responsibility of his duties as skipper
with a crew of 9. No predisposition was discovered and he was admitted to hospital
for rest and treatment. He was posted for 3 months to non-oporational flying with
trips not lasting for longer than 3 hours.
An example of a man who developed a fatigue syndrome as a result of
intensive flying without much stress was that of a pilot officer, navigator,
aged 28, with 170 hours flying, who had had no leave for 31 months, and had
only had one half day off flying in the seven weeks before reporting sick. He
returned to full flying after a short period of leave.


4. Predisposition to neurosis
The unit medical officers recognised signs of predisposition to neurosis in
the man’s past history or in that of his famUy in 130 cases (45 per cent). This
is a considerably lower proportion than in any sample of cases from neuro-
psychiatric specialists, who usually find evidence of predisposition in nearly
three-quarters of their cases.
Among the factors responsible for this difference are :
(a) The medical officers’ lack of psychiatric training.
( b) The limitations of an interview in the unit. The patients may not
be so forthright in discussing their personal affairs in close
proximity to then: colleagues and duties.
(c) The inclusion of some of the more benign cases which do not reach
the neuro-psychiatrist.
For these reasons, and because the subject has been dealt with so fully
in other reports, it need not be pursued here.
5. Treatment
The unit medical officer described a constructive form of treatment,
carried out by himself on the station in 199 cases (70 per cent). Of the
remaining 30 per cent of cases where treatment was not attempted, the
explanation was in many instances to be found in the type of case which had
presented. For instance 60 per cent of the cases not treated on the station
had been given a bad or hopeless prognosis by the medical officer, in 30 per
cent a diagnosis of lack of confidence had been made and the matter referred
for executive management, and in 38 per cent the man was under training
and considered unsuitable for air crew duties. The circumstances of many of
these cases show that treatment on the station would have been inadvisable.
There were few cases in which the medical officer seemed to have missed the
opportunity for helping the man while he was still in the unit.
The kind of treatment which was used by unit medical officers varied of
course with the nature of the psychological disorder and the circumstances in
which it 'had occurred. It will be best to give an indication of the, broad
principles which were followed and to illustrate the method employed by case
histories. The first consideration which influenced the medical officer’s
approach seemed to be whether the man’s symptoms in their nature or
intensity were worse than those experienced by others who were able to carry
on with their duties; the second depended upon the man’s attitude to his
duties and to his symptoms —whether or not he was prepared to persevere ;
the third was the kind of man the medical officer judged him to be or the
amount of predisposition he recognised, and the last was the stage in training
or in operations which the man had reached. It was evident, of course, that
all these points were used in judging prognosis, and that the medical officers
were consequently influenced in their management of the case by their view of
its outcome. There is an important result of this attitude, which depends upon
the medical officer’s relation to his squadron. Those who have confidence in
their ability to sustain the weaker members of the squadron will institute a
well considered course of treatment, will enlist the co-operation of executive
officers, and will go to great lengths to save the man from grounding, while
those medical officers at the other end of the scale, who think it' either
unprofitable or impracticable to adopt such a policy will precipitately refer
their patients to the nearest neuro-psychiatric specialist with a sigh of relief, an
echo of which reached us in the card returns. Examples are given in cases 87
and 191 (page 93).


Case 87 : A Sergeant, air gunner, aged 34, with 145 flying hours, reported sick
after three night bombing sorties in Lancasters, and complained of a dread of flying
and particularly of operational flying, of which he was ashamed, of feeling tense
and nervous all day, and of fits of depression. He has had no special stress, but the
medical officer considered the cause of his illness to be the commencement of his
first operational tour. He was described as having a cyclothymic temperament,
never sticking at a job for long. He had been in the Merchant Navy and the National
Fire Service before joining the R.A.F. For 13 years, after an ulcer on a tonsil in
1930, he had persistent fear of cancer of the throat. This was largely dissipated by
explanation. Having interviewed the patient at length and obtained a history of
his personal illnesses and of his past life the following treatment was instituted by
the unit medical officer. He was admitted to the Station Sick Quarters for 48 hours
for a rest; he was put to bed and given 3 grs. nembutal that night; he was also
given 15 grs. of sodium bromide three times a day ; the medical officer ' convinced
him that all other crews feel as he does when they first operate, but nevertheless
they continue with their job ; ’ the captain of his aircraft, the squadron commander
and the gunnery leader were in turn interviewed by the medical officer, who des-
cribed to them the defects in the patient's personality and the difficulty he was
having in performing his duties. They were asked to encourage him throughout
his tour as much as was possible. The patient was then sent to duty, continuing
medical treatment for 48 hours, and having flown again was sent on a short period
of leave. After this the medical officer made the notes " Encouragement + +
from myself, the wing commander, flight commander, gunnery leader and the
captain.” He noted that the 4th operational sortie was successfully completed, and
considered that the tour would continue successfully although the patient might
require early screening. Follow-up six months, later revealed that the patient had
continued his tour satisfactorily until on his 22nd sortie his aircraft crashed in
Sweden and he was killed.
In contrast to this case, in which a greatly handicapped member of a night
bomber crew had been sustained from his third sortie until his death in the
22nd sortie, is the following case. Here with less cause the responsibility for
treatment was transferred by the unit medical officer to the psychiatrist.
Case 191 : A Flight Sergeant, bomb aimer, aged 24, 450 hours flying, 30 operational
hours, engaged in container dropping, complained of insomnia, nightmares, anxiety,
tremors and fear while flying. Six months before his aircraft had made an uneventful
forced landing, he saw an aircraft shot down on his second sortie, and two weeks
before reporting sick his aircraft had overshot with damage but no injury to the
crew. He had also sustained psychological stress apart from flying, for a year
previously his fiancee had married a man who was also operating from the same
station, and who was reported missing a week before he went sick. He was a well-
educated man, without evidence of predisposition. As soon as the patient had reported
sick the medical officer arranged an interview with the neuro-psychiatrist and the
patient was admitted to hospital for treatment. Although he had taken no active
steps to treat the patient on the station, the medical officer thought there was
" a reasonable chance of recovery in a reasonable type,”
Two hundred and seven of the cases (72 per cent) were referred to a neuro-
psychiatrist and 47 (16 per cent) were referred for another specialist opinion,
usually ophthalmic, medical or E.N.T. Forty-one (14 per cent) were
subsequently admitted to hospital.
An indication of the form of treatment used on the station is given by the
following observations. Of the 199 patients who were treated on the station,
157 (nearly 80 per cent) received psychotherapy, a brief outline of which was
given on the cards. In so far as all the .patients were interviewed by the
medical officer they all received psychological treatment, but in 80 per cent
a note was made of explanation, persuasion, or suggestion, usually reinforced
by other methods, such as taking the man into the air, sending him on leave or
admitting him to sick quarters. Ninety-two (46 per cent) were given medical
treatment. In most instances this was mild sedation, such as 3 grains of
nembutal or 10 grains of medinal, but in some it included symptomatic
treatment of a simple kind, such as alkalis for dyspepsia, or local nasal treatment.
This symptomatic treatment was usually administered with evident knowledge
of its psychological value.
(766-12) D


Sixty-five men (a third of those treated on the station) were given a
temporary rest from flying, which ranged from 48 hours’ leave or a few days
ground duty on the station, to 7 or 10 days’ leave, and sometimes an arrange-
ment was made with the squadron commander for temporary relief from
particularly hazardous operational sorties. In 27 instances (14 per cent)
the medical officer advised posting from the unit to other duties, particularly
when the operational tour was nearing its completion —so called ‘ accelerated
relief employment’. • An example of the kind of case in which this was advised
is provided by Case 184.
Case 184 : A Warrant Officer, navigator bomber, aged 22, had flown 780 hours,
480 on Leighlight and offensive anti-submarine Liberators, reported sick with
episodes of depression. He experienced confusion and excitement before an opera-
tional sortie, complained of inability to concentrate on his job, when approaching
land, particularly in bad weather, experienced insomnia and nightmares and found
that his behaviour was becoming unsociable. The symptoms had been present in
mild degree for five months and severely for four or five weeks. He had experienced
considerable flying stress. On his first tour he was shot into the sea by a U-boat and
received injuries. He was on his 60th sortie. There was no evidence of neurotic
predisposition. He was grounded, admitted to Sick Quarters and given IJgrs.
nembutal at night for a week. He was interviewed three times by the medical officer
who then advised termination of his tour of operational duty with accelerated relief
employment which consisted of instructional duties at an O.T.U. The recommenda-
tion was implemented and the patient recovered. The medical officer commented :
“ I regard this W/O as a good trier, but one who was unable to complete his second
tour on account of a weakened response to the stress of his trade which had been
caused by his previous experiences”.
Sometimes loss of confidence for operational flying may be overcome when
some of the leading factors which handicap the man are removed. Two interest-
ing examples of a satisfactory outcome from such a temporary loss of confidence
which w'as brought about by treatment helped by a change in the loading
factors, are given in Cases 261 and 204.
Case 261 : A Warrant Officer, wireless operator, aged 34, with 1,000 hours, had
flown 900 operational hours in Leighlight Liberators on anti-submarine patrol.
He was referred to the medical officer by his captain for ' suspected fear of flying
duties because of dwindling keenness and nervousness during landing’. The patient
asked for transfer to Flying Boats. Two years previously he had been in a Sunderland
which made a forced landing in the sea after anti-aircraft damage over Norway. A
year previously he sustained an injury in a heavy landing in a Catalina, and he said
he had a phobia for the cramped accommodation in a Liberator. No evidence of
predisposition was discovered. He was seen by the medical officer on two occasions,
and the causes of his symptoms were explained to him. He was encouraged and
persuaded to return to duty. He was later referred to a neuro-psychiatrist, who made
a diagnosis of lack of confidence and on his return to his unit from this appointment
a firm attitude was adopted towards him after consultation with his wing com-
mander, who returned him to full flying duties with a different and senior crew.
On his first sortie with this new crew the aircraft developed engine trouble and had
to make an emergency landing at base. The captain immediately changed to another
aircraft, and while on patrol successfully attacked a U-boat. From that time on
the patient was confident and enthusiastic for operational flying in Liberators.
In this case confidence was restored by success. In the following case
confidence returned when great domestic anxiety ceased.
Case 204 : A Flight Sergeant, engineer, aged 32, 500 hours’ flying, 380 operational
in offensive anti-submarine patrol in Catalinas, reported with persistant anxiety
in the air of two months’ duration. He had no symptoms on the ground and simply
asked to be removed from flying duties. He had been flying one 18-hour sortie every
five days for many months. After nine years of marriage his wife deserted him, taking
his two children. She obstructed divorce proceedings and the patient feared that if he
were killed his money would revert to his wife and not to his children. The medical
officer commented that the patient was a very sound type with a good work and
Service record, and his squadron commander also had a high opinion of him. They
adopted a sympathetic attitude to his loss of confidence but, in spite of explanation
and persuasion, his attitude was unchanged. He was therefore temporarily grounded;
a neuro-psychiatrist who saw him confirmed the good impression but could find no


evidence of neurosis, and advised executive disposal with a strong medical recom-
mendation in the man’s favour. In the meantime the divorce was agreed to and was
to have been completed satisfactorily for the patient within a few months. The
Flight Sergeant promptly asked to return to operational flying and the medical
officer gave him a good prognosis on the grounds that he was "a good type, he had
had severe domestic anxiety for two years and he had had intensive operational
flying”. He returned successfully to operational flying.
It might well be argued that in some cases it would be more profitable to
remove a man from flying rather than seek to sustain a weak member of a crew
in duties for which he shows unsuitability. Case 15 seems to be an example of
such a case, where misplaced encouragement was given to an unsuitable member
of air crew.
Case 15 : A Flying Officer, air-gunner, aged 35, with 100 hours' flying, was seen
at a heavy bomber O.T.U. complaining of vague pain in his right ear, backache,
pain in his left calf and poor sleep. The history showed that he was a slightly unstable
type, who volunteered for air crew because he was on a pansy job (Catering Officer).
After completing training at a Sunderland O.T.U. he complained of backache, was
submitted as a case of lack of moral fibre, but subsequently granted his request to
convert to medium bombers. Instead he found himself at a heavy bomber O.T.U.
The medical officer treated him with reassurance, sedatives, and local treatment
to his ear and kept him at duty. The note under prognosis was " Has been posted to
a Conversion Unit now. Apparently the captain of the crew expressed dissatisfaction
with him before they left. I think the prognosis is poor in this case, and doubt if he
will ever become operational ”,
So far, in discussing treatment, it has been assumed that fear has been the
important factor in the aetiology, but the management of the few cases in
which the illness had been mainly caused by fatigue may be rather different.
Here the course adopted, depending upon the severity of the symptoms, was to
advise temporary grounding as in Case 18 (page 85), leave as in Case 284 (page
91) or a period of non-operational flying as in Case 263 (page 91).
In order to complete an account of the forms of treatment, the methods
used in cases where symptoms were slight, but where the man professed himself
unable to continue operational flying should be mentioned. Here the medical
officer may recognise the lack of confidence as being a temporary affair,
perhaps the result of a recent unpleasant episode and may persuade the man
to reconsider his decision. Sometimes, too, the medical officer may recognise
sources of anxiety unconnected with flying duties. Case 204 (page 94) is a
good example of this.
In some instructors, who had been employed on non-operational duties for
long periods, posting to-operations comes as a rude shock. Morale may be
deviated away from offensive flying, and it is the unit medical officer’s duty
to attempt to give the man a correct orientation to his duties (Case 264).
Case 264 : A Flight Lieutenant, pilot, aged 32, 1,500 hours, mainly instructing,
was posted to a Photographic Reconnaissance O.T.U. He wrote a letter to his
commanding officer stating that he was 32, and that the British climate did not
agree with him, that he felt tired at the end of his training flights and that he could
be of more use in a non-operational job, especially as a younger man would do opera-
tional trips better. He had previously complained of pain in the groins, for which
no cause could be found but he was unduly worried about it. He had been instructing
on Tiger Moths for three years before transfer to Mosquitos. The medical officer
said ; “He was happy in his rather nice job instructing, and it comes ,as rather a
shock that he is expected now to do operations in Mosquitos”. He was considered
predisposed to neurosis. At interview he was found to be quite well. The position
was explained to him and the implications of his attitude to his duties made quite
clear. He was then referred to his Chief Instructor for a similar interview. He
consequently withdrew his application to be removed from operations and continued
willingly. The unit medical officer’s final comment was ; “He had been training
so long that he had lost sight of the fact that he might have to do operational flying.
He should do well with encouragement and occasional reassurance about his health
over which he worries unduly”.
(76642) D 2


No.
Percentage
Good prognosis
76
29
Doubtful prognosis ..
50
20
Bad prognosis
92
35
Hopeless prognosis ..
41
16
Full flying ..
Cases
70
Percentage
35-0
Limited flying
7
3-5
Executive
63
31-5
Grounded
59
20-5
Invalided
1
0-5
6. Results of treatment
The outcome of treatment on the stations may be judged from the 127
cases in which a final disposition had been made after treatment was complete :
54 of these (42 per cent) returned to full flying and 7 (5 per cent) to limited
flying ; 26 (20 per cent) were grounded ; 39 (31 per cent) referred for executive
disposal. The final outcome of treatment in all the cases is unknown since the
final disposal has not yet been made in the remaining 72 cases. It seems,
however, that nearly a half of the cases treated on the station return to flying
duties, compared with a third of the cases interviewed by a neuro-psychiatrist
(Chapter XI).
7. Prognosis and disposal
An opinion on the ultimate prognosis for flying duties was given by the
medical officer in 259 cases, as follows ;
It will be seen that in half the cases little hope was entertained of
continued efficiency. The prognosis was considered to be better when a neurosis
was diagnosed, a bad or hopeless prognosis being given in 65 per cent of those
considered to be lacking in confidence. The disposal of the patients followed
the prognosis for flying very closely, so that considering the patients who had
been given a final disposal, 92 per cent with a good prognosis, 78 per cent
with a doubtful prognosis, 29 per cent with a bad prognosis, and none of those
with a hopeless prognosis returned to flying duties.
So far the disposals of the men treated on the station have been given, and
(in the preceding paragraph) the disposals of those in whom the prognosis was
good or bad. Information on the final disposal was available at the time of
writing in 200 instances ;
Reference to Chapter XI shows that these figures are almost identical
with those for all cases referred to neuro-psychiatrists in the preceding year.
As the great majority of the cases here reported were referred to the neuro-
psychiatrist after seeing the unit medical officer, it is evident that the
psychiatrist must have influenced disposal. In this connection it is to be
observed that out of 286 members of air crews seen by medical officers on the
station, 207 (nearly three-quarters) had been referred to a neuro-psychiatrist
within a period of seven months from the commencement of the card return
by medical officers. Of the 97 cases labelled lack of confidence, only 59 (60 per
cent) were referred for a neuro-psychiatric opinion, for in these cases the
station authorities, medical and executive, are urged to handle the matter with
the greatest expedition, and there is opportunity later for obtaining a
psychiatric opinion before disposal is decided. Thus, of the remaining cases
in which the medical officer recognised the presence of psychological illness
he referred more than three-quarters to the neuro-psychiatrist. The main
reasons for reference seem to have been a bad prognosis with need for medical


disposal; failure of treatment on the station ; or the wish for expert backing
in making the diagnosis of anxiety rather than lack of confidence. As already
indicated there were some cases in which reference to the neuro-psychiatrist
appears to have been premature or unnecessary. The results of treatment on
the station on the whole were good and in the hands of some medical officers
were excellent, and this investigation supports the view that cases of early
neurosis in air crew should be handled in the first place by the unit medical
officer rather than referred for specialist treatment.
8. Instructions to Medical Officers on disposal of cases
{Appendix to FPRC 412(A))
{a) At the direction of the D.G.M.S. an investigation is being carried out
into the number and types of cases of psychological disorder in flying personnel
seen by medical officers on stations, and their disposal. Medical officers will
co-operate by providing data from the date indicated by Senior Medical Officer,
Group, until further notice, upon all flying personnel seen by them for complaints
which have no physical bases, or who having no physical disability, state that
they feel unable to carry on with flying duties.' All cases of neurosis, and all
men lacking confidence will be included in the survey, and it is essential that a
return should be made for every case however trivial or transient the
disturbance may be. The individuals concerned should not be allowed to know
that the information is being recorded. The information received from medical
officers will be treated as confidential and will be used for research purposes only.
{b) The case return is simple—merely filling in one of the enclosed cards
according to the instructions given below. The card will be initiated by the
medical officer when the case is first seen by him and will be completed and
returned, under confidential cover, through Station Sick Quarters to the S.M.O.
Group twenty-one days later, irrespective of the date of disposal. If after
twenty-one days the disposal (vide instructions below) is altered or has been
delayed a fresh card will be initiated—headed " 2nd Card ” —and rendered
at the earliest possible date. The S.M.O. Group, who is responsible to Command
for the efficiency of the scheme, will forward the card forthwith to the Central
Registry of Psychological Disorders in Flying Personnel.
In filling in the cards the following points should be noted:—
File No .. . . .. Leave blank.
Air crew category .. .. i.e., pilot, bomb aimer, navigator, etc.—not to be
confused with duties.
Duties .. .. .. i.e., instructor, U/T, night bomber, day bomber,
day fighter, fighter-bomber, night fighter, coastal
boats, G.R., bomber, torpedo-bomber, bomber
anti-sub, air/sea rescue, Met., P.R.U., etc.
Diagnosis .. .. .. The psychiatric diagnoses have been limited to
the four most important. Delete those non-applicable.
Fatigue syndrome should be reserved for cases
in which sensation of mental or bodily fatigue or
undue fatiguability are outstanding complaints.
It is synonymous with neurasthenia. If more
than one reaction type is present they should be
numbered in order of importance. (If a diagnosis
cannot be made, delete all and give an outline of
the case under Symptoms.)
Main symptoms .. .. A very few words with an indication of the duration
of the disorder.
Main causes .. .. .. Flying. —An outline of the hazards or fatigue he
has experienced over and above the average to be
expected in the number of hours flown.
Non-flying. —Worries about home, health, money, etc.
(76642) D 3


Specimen Card
(front)
Name ROBINSON, J. C.
Rank F/O
No. 938251
Aircrew Pilot
Category
Age 25
Unit 15 Squadron File No.
Station Mere M.O. S/Ldr. Bloggs
Total hrs. 450 Diagnosis Anxiety
Op. hrs. Depression
or Sorties Tl sorties Fatigue
Aircraft Lancs. syndrome
Duties Night bomber Hysteria
Lacking
confidence
Main symptoms
Sleepless and dreaming of flying.
Depressed and anxious about his home life.
Losing weight—solitary in mess.
Asks to ‘come off flying.
Main causes
Flying Had two difficult trips in one of which
Rear A/G killed, and back on 3 engines to
crash land at base.
Non-Flying Wife pregnant.
(reverse)
Predisposition ..
Nil discovered, but strikes me as always having had to
drive himself to the job. ,
Treatment
Seen twice—given nembutal gr. iii and a night in
S.S.Q. second time. Long talk in which he said he was
afraid. Told his W/Cdr. about him.
Disposal ..
To duty for posting to O.T.U.
Prognosis and comment
Likely to make a good instructor and do a second tour.
An average good type who had a little difficulty in
staying the course.
Predisposition to neurosis ,, Any history of nervous or mental illness in the
patient or his family, or of excessive timidity or
instability in civil life which comes to light in the
interview, and which may give you the impression
that he is temperamentally unsuited for his duties.
Do not ash questions about family or past history
which might upset the patient or impair his confidence
in himself.
Treatment .. .. .. A note of the methods you used, e.g., explanation
of symptoms, encouragement, ■ persuasion, whether
one interview or more, rest from flying or operations,
sedatives, leave, early termination of tour.
Disposal .. .. .. Should indicate what happened to the man after
treatment by the medical officer, e.g.;—
(a) returned to full flying after treatment on the
station.
(b) referred to S/Ldr Neuro-psychiatrist.
(c) seen by commanding officer and returned to
full flying.
(d) seen by commanding officer and dealt with as
case of lack of confidence under S.7 letter.


References
Bradford Hill, A. & Williams. D. J.
The reliability of psychiatric opinion in the Royal
Air Force. 1944, FPRC 601 (see Chapter
XXII).
Spiegel, H. X.
Psychiatric observations in the Tunisian campaign.
Am. Journ. Orthopsychiatry. 1944, 14, 381.
Symonds, C. P. & Williams, D. J...
Investigation into psychological disorders in flying
personnel.
(a) Personal investigation in Fighter Command. 1942,
FPRC 412 (e) (see Chapter V).
(b) Personal investigation in Bomber Command. 1942,
FPRC 412 (f) (see Chapter IV).
{c) Personal investigation in Coastal Command. 1942,
FPRC 412 (h) (see Chapter VI).
(d) The occurrence of neurosis in R.A.F, aircew, 1943-
1944, FPRC 412 (i) (see Chapter XI).
(e) A clinical and statistical study of neurosis precipi-
tated by flying duties. 1943, FPRC 547
(see Chapter X).
(76642)
D 4


CHAPTER VIII
THE HUMAN RESPONSE TO FLYING STRESS*
by
Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds, K.B.E., C.B., M.D., F.R.C.P.
December, 1943
LECTURE I: NEUROSIS IN FLYING PERSONNEL
1. Historical
When Dr. Janies Birley (1920 a) gave the Goulstonian Lectures twenty-
three years ago on Medical Science and Aviation he described in words which
have lost none of their freshness and vigour the picture of what he called flying
stress, and because this term has been widely employed I shall begin by explain-
ing the sense in which Birley used it and the change of meaning that has since
taken place. Birley and his colleagues were confronted with the twofold
problem of studying, first, the unknown factors of stress to which the airman
was exposed, and, secondly, the effects of this stress upon the human organism.
Unfortunatley, as so often happens in the study of functional disorder, the
distinction between causes and symptoms was in the end ignored, and ' flying
stress,’ which was appropriately coined, for the load which the airman had to
carry, was later used to describe the state of ill-health which resulted when this
load was too heavy. Flying stress, in fact, became a clinical diagnosis.
The implication that the occupation of flying had resulted in a new disease
found ready acceptance not only because the occupation was so new and so
dramatic but because there seemed evidence that lack of oxygen, which at that
time was inevitable in high flying and unknown in any other occupation,
could cause functional nervous disorder of a widespread and long-lasting kind.
It was certain, at any rate, that a person actually suffering from anoxia showed
psychological disorder as well as other symptoms. It was assumed that
repeated exposure to anoxia might lead to persistent effects of the same
kind. Thus Flack (1920), who was one of the pioneers in aviation medicine,
attributed nervousness, insomnia, lack of confidence, and disinclination to fly
to this cause. Birley (1920 b) soon became suspicious of this opinion, for he
observed these symptoms in men who had not flown at high altitudes. He
suggested that the cause in these cases was occupational fatigue. The position
of flying stress as an occupational disease was thus upheld. Later, however,
he noted that the same symptoms might be seen in men who had neither flown
at high altitudes nor flown long enough to suffer from cumulative fatigue. He
observed that in this group there was often a family or personal history of
neuropathy, and suggested that here there was temperamental unfitness
" which,” he said, “ lies largely in an undue susceptibility to mental shock,
to which these individuals react primarily by various mental and psychical
phenomena and secondarily by various alterations in their physical state.”
How far this last observation has been confirmed and extended during the
present war I shall hope to show. I may anticipate now by saying that there
is no more warrant for the use of flying stress as a term of clinical diagnosis
than there was for shell-shock which, it was agreed by the War Office
Committee (1922) appointed to inquire into the subject, was wholly misleading,
♦ Based upon the Dunham Lectures at Harvard University, March, 1943, and the
Croonian Lectures before the Royal College of Physicians of London, May, 1943. Reprinted
from the British Medical Journal, December 4 and December 1 f, 1943, Vol. ii, 703 and 740.


“ and should be eliminated from official nomenclature, the disorders hitherto
included under this heading being designated by the recognized medical terms
for these conditions.” The objection to the use of flying stress as a
diagnosis of course applies equally to other terms such as aeroneurosis
and aviator’s neurasthenia. All are founded upon error, and might well —as
shell-shock did—have become a danger to morale. Flying stress should be used
only to denote the load which air crews have to carry. For the ill effects which may
result in some persons from overloading, termsof ordinary clinical usage will suffice.
2. Scope and methods of present investigation
In our study of functional nervous disorder in flying personnel during the
present war we began with certain advantages. Before long the apparatus
for maintaining oxygen supply at heights had been so perfected that it was
usually possible to exclude anoxia as a casual factor unless there was evidence
that the apparatus had not been properly used or had gone wrong. Our view
of the neuroses also was broader and deeper than had been possible 25 years
ago. Our approach to the problem rested upon the belief that the symptom
pattern or reaction type of a neurosis cannot be related to any single cause
that an anxiety state, for example, may have as its main cause emotional
conflict, infection, or exhaustion ; and that, standing between environmental
stress and symptom pattern, individual constitution is all-important.
At the direction of Air Marshal Sir Harold Whittingham, Director-General
of Medical Services, for some time all cases of neurosis in flying personnel have
been analysed on the basis of data collected by the neuro-psychiatric specialists
of the Royal Air Force. The inquiry was restricted to cases seen by the
specialists, with the knowledge that this would exclude some of the milder
cases ; but the restriction was necessary to obtain data of consistent value, and
it is certain that almost all flying personnel in this country and in the Middle
East in whom there was any question of unfitness for full duty on account of
functional nervous disorder were seen by the specialists, and are included in
this investigation. The specialist fills in a card for every case seen, sending
it to a central registry, where the data are extracted. The information recorded
in addition to the particulars of the man’s service, flying hours, and tactical
duties includes the reaction type of the illness and the main casual factors.
Three further questions are set. One is concerned with flying, and is in two
parts. First ; has the illness arisen from flying duties, and, if so, what were the
incidents responsible? Second ; what was the weight of flying stress to which
the patient had been subjected? Our instructions on this point are that the
assessment of flying stress as nil, slight, moderate, severe, or exceptional should
be made in relation to the average load carried by healthy persons in this
occupation. The problem was not whether the man in question had had to
carry more than he could manage, but whether the load had been greater than
that which the ordinary man could take. The next question asks for an
estimate of non-flying stress —for example, domestic worries—as nil, moderate,
or severe, with relevant data. The last requires an estimate of predisposition
to functional nervous disorder as nil, moderate, or severe, again with supporting
data if the assessment is positive. The agreed criterion for severe predisposition
is that the specialist considers that if he had seen the man as a candidate for
flying he would have advised rejection. A few case summaries will illustrate
the nature of the material collected.
3. Cases illustrative of predisposition and stress
Case 1 : Sgt. X., pilot, aged 23, flying hours 190, operational hours nil. His father
had suffered from an obsessional neurosis, and he himself had been away from school
for six months at the age of 9 owing to what he described as " a mania for tapping
things and screwing his eyes up.” He always tended to worry unduly over small


things. He had no unpleasant experience in training or any personal worries, but
when he began flying Hudsons the noise of the engine, he said, " got on his nerves.”
He could think of nothing else, and developed headache and insomnia. This is a
straightforward example of an obsessional neurosis in a man who would never have
been accepted for air crew had his history been disclosed. Although flying duties
had contributed to the breakdown, flying stress was nil. Non-flying stress was also
nil. Predisposition was severe.
Case 2 ; FI. Lt. Y., D.F.C., pilot, aged 23, flying hours 600, operational hours 120 in
day bombers (25 sorties). —This officer presented with headache, insomnia, anxiety,
depression, and loss of confidence for flying. There was no evidence of neurotic
predisposition. He had gone through an operational tour with distinction at a time
when casualties were heavy. He then married and had been flying on instructional
duties for a year. His symptoms developed when he himself was unfit (a fortnight
convalescent from appendicectomy) and his child died suddenly. The neurosis
(anxiety and depression) was not considered attributable to flying duties. He was
a man who had been submitted to a slight degree of flying stress. Predisposition
was nil, non-flying stress severe.
Case 3 : P/O Z., G.M., pilot, aged 27, flying hours 240, operational hours on day
bombers 100. This officer had since childhood been unduly sensitive to slights, easily
depressed, and lacking in confidence. His squadron suffered heavy casualties, and
eventually he was wounded in the leg on a sortie over the North Sea. He flew his
damaged aircraft home, but it blew up on landing. He won the George Medal for
pulling his air gunner out of the blazing wreckage. After two months in hospital
he was physically fit to fly, but was tense, anxious, depressed and self-reproachful.
The illness here was clearly attributable to flying duties. Flying stress was rated
as severe. Predisposition was moderate, non-flying stress nil.
Case 2 is representative of a group in which the neurosis, though resulting
in incapacity for flying duties, was due to causes unrelated to flying. Excluding
this group and confining our attention to neuroses which have arisen from flying
duties, we have asked ourselves among other questions what are the important
factors in causation, how the neurosis develops, and what are the commonest
reaction types. With this purpose the data recorded on a consecutive series of
2,000 cases have been analysed, and as a separate investigation representative
station and squadron commanders as well as medical officers in the Training
and home-based operational commands have been interviewed by Squadron
Leader Denis Williams and myself and asked these two questions : " What are
the things which get men down ? ” and “ How do you know when a man has
had enough ? ” It was hoped that this inquiry, systematically developed,
would give us a better idea both of causes and of early symptoms than can be
obtained from the evidence of men who have developed a neurosis. Actually
it did more than this, for many of the 200 flying personnel interviewed volun-
teered accounts of their own reactions to stress. Such introspective material
furnished by distinguished officers of great experience has been a valuable
addition to our knowledge. The records of cases of neurosis seen personally
have provided an additional source of information. Some of the conclusions
reached by these means will be briefly presented.
4. Distribution and causes of neurosis
There has been no difficulty in the classification of cases under the ordinary
clinical headings. Anxiety states occurred in 79 per cent of the cases, depressive
states in 9 per cent, and hysteria in 13 per cent; mixed forms were not in-
frequent—hysteria, for example, being often grafted upon an anxiety state.
Our tables, which cannot for Service reasons be published now, show that the
incidence of neurosis in different tactical duties varies directly with the amount
of hazard encountered, as measured by the casualty rates. It is thus lowest in
Flying Training Command, highest in night bombers. In duties which involve
long trips with relatively little hazard the incidence of neurosis is low, suggesting
that emotional tension is a more important factor than physical or skill fatigue.
That skill fatigue is probably an operative factor is shown by a rather higher


Percentages of patients with varying predisposition exposed to differing degrees of stress
Flying stress
Non-flying stress
Predisposition
No.
Nil
Slight
Mod.
Sev.
Exc.
Nil
MUd
Sev.
Nil ..
. 604
18
27
33
20
2
62
34
4
Moderate ..
1,173
30
30
28
11
1
64
33
3
Severe
423
47
32
15
6
0
64
33
3
incidence in pilots than.in all other members of air crew taken together; but
the highest for a specific duty is among rear gunners of heavy bombers, where,
skill fatigue is negligible but emotional tension high. Although causal factors
of a physical kind have been systematically inquired for—exhaustion, air
sickness, altitude effects, cold, physical injury, and illness—they have been
recorded in less than a third of the cases, and then generally as subsidiary
factors. Altitude and cold were in fact not recorded in any case. By contrast,
psychological factors have been present in 99 per cent of the cases.
We have found plenty of evidence to support Birley’s suggestion that
temperamental unfitness for the job was an important causal factor. More
than two-thirds of our cases show what he referred to as a family or personal
history of neuropathy, which in this investigation we have called predisposition
to neurosis. These men are vulnerable to stress, and the severely predisposed
often break down over flying duties without being exposed to any flying stress
as judged by average experience. At the other extreme stress may be severe
enough to cause a breakdown in men with no predisposition. In the inter-
mediate group the inverse relationship between flying stress and predisposition
is striking, so that it can be stated that the more flying stress a man has ex-
perienced before breaking down the less evidence of predisposition will be found
in his history.
This table shows that non-flying stress is almost indentical in the three groups, and
that it is the flying stress which is responsible for the reciprocal relationship between stress
and predisposition, since it falls steadily as predisposition increases in the three groups.
As would be expected, the amount of flying stress rises steadily with
the number of hours flown, pnd especially with the number of operational
hours. Corresponding with this, our figures show that the more flying
experience, and especially the more operational experience, a man has had
before breaking down the less likely we are to find predisposition. In
fact, the severely predisposed individuals tend to break down relatively early
in their flying career, leaving those with less or with no predisposition either to
succeed or to break down later as the result of greater experience and greater
stress.
Among the cases in which the neurosis was mainly attributable to flying
duties, factors included under non-flying stress had contributed in 36 per cent
These factors might of course be physical or psychological, but were in fact
almost always the latter and usually arose from domestic anxiety. In this
connexion it has been of interest to observe that the incidence of non-flying
stress is higher in married than in single men, and that among operational air
crew it has been highest in the Middle East Command, doubtless owing to the
anxieties inseparable from prolonged service abroad.
In our assessments of predisposition we have been guided by the principles
of general clinical experience and by the special experience of flying personnel


who have broken down. The importance of family and personal history in
relation to the risk of neurosis under conditions of active service has received
attention in papers published during the present war by Curran and Mallinson
(1940), Hadfield (1942), Love (1942), and Cooper and Sinclair (1942). Gillespie
(1942) has emphasized the frequency in childhood of a history of specific
tendencies indicating timidity and lack of aggressiveness in flying personnel
who have developed neurosis under the strain of flying duties, and our joint
experience has confirmed the value of his observations. As an example, the
avoidance of diving by a practised swimmer is evidence of a kind of timidity
often found in the past history of those with neurosis. The validation, by
follow-up, of the prognostic value of such traits is likely to be of practical value
for selection. We do not know yet what is their distribution among those who
succeed. We have nevertheless some ground for belief in the practical value
of our criteria, for the investigation of unselected air crew by the same methods
and by several observers working independently has shown the incidence of
predisposition to be four and a half times lower than among those who have
broken down.
The quantitative assessment of the abstraction flying stress proved less
difficult than was anticipated. Its success is shown by the striking uniformity
of the percentage of cases recorded as exposed to the different degrees of stress
in the various operational commands, and the consistency of assessments made
independently on the same case by different observers. The specialists had,
of course, already had considerable experience of Service flying conditions when
the investigation began.
5. Fear as an element of flying stress
Evidence has already been presented for the conclusion that the most
important element of flying stress as a cause of neurosis is exposure to danger.
This as confirmed by analysis of the psychological causes which were held
responsible in 99 per cent of the cases of the series under review; for the story
in most of them is that of a persistent state of fear resulting from either excessive
stimulation of this emotion in men without predisposition to neurosis or from a
lesser stimulus in the predisposed. This, again, simply confirms previous
observation in other combatants (Mapother, 1935 ; Dillon, 1940 ; Love, 1942 ;
Cooper and Sinclair, 1942). It is evident, therefore, that in the prevention of
neurosis in flying personnel serious consideration should be given to the subject
of fear.
Fear is a state of feeling which is only strictly ascertainable by intro-
spection, though it is often associated with behaviour indicating a tendency
towards flight and with bodily disturbances which have been extensively
studied by physiologists. The objective study of fear can never take us to the
heart of the problem, but studies of the reactions of young children to situations
of a kind which excite fear in adults are of value in tracing the origins of the fear
response. The observations of Valentine (1942) are of especial interest. It
appears that there are innate trigger mechanisms which provide for a constant
behaviour response to certain stimulus patterns. These triggers, however,
are not all present at birth. Most of them mature later. For example, a fear
response to the dark was not observed by Valentine before the age of two,
but was of common occurrence at later ages. There is considerable indi-
vidual variation in the number and selective response of these innate responses.
One child, for example, may show fear responses to fewer fear situations than
the average; another may show more than the normal sensitiveness to a
particular type of situation, such as a moving animal. This last observation
is of especial interest in connexion with the specific irrational fears or phobias


of adults, which may be associated with relative fearlessness in other
directions and appear in some cases to be inherited. Granted these trigger
mechanisms, it may be argued that fear responses to more complex situations
are built up in the manner of conditioned reflexes. This hypothesis leaves out
of account the question of the existeftce, as a part of the original trigger response,
of the effective quality which is fear. Valentine’s critical comment deserves
quotation. "We can,” he says, “ only distinguish these responses from mere
reflexes by saying that they are at least the first of a series of responses
which, remaining and developing within a corresponding series of external
conditions, are eventually known by adults to be accompanied by the
emotion of fear. ”
The experimental observation of fear in animals is obviously fraught with
greater difficulty, for there is never the opportunity of establishing the associa-
tion of behaviour with feeling. Nevertheless, as Bard (1939) remarks, we are
justified in asserting that a dog or a cat is displaying rage or fear without com-
mitting ourselves to the determination of its subjective state. Accepting this
limitation, we may take note of the spontaneous display of fear following experi-
mental lesion of the hypothalamus. Here is evidence suggesting that the
affective state of fear may exist independently of any perception or idea of
danger. There is clinical evidence to support this. In some cases of affective
disorder the patient’s complaint is that he feels afraid though there is nothing
either in fact or in imagination which should cause this feeling. There is
suggestion here of a central mechanism for the generation of affect, which under
certain abnormal conditions may result in a fear state arising or persisting with-
out activation by the stimuli which normally excite it.
The observation of bodily changes such as pulse rate or sweating is of
little value in ascertaining the presence of fear, for they are common to other
emotions. Physiologists in their analysis of these bodily changes have empha-
sized their value as preparation for adequate response to danger. Less
attention has been paid to the psychological value of fear. It is nevertheless
widely recognized that fear, within limits, is not only a natural but a healthy
emotion, stimulating attention, sharpening judgment, and evoking maximal
effort. I have frequently heard the opinion from distinguished pilots that
fear in due measure may be a vital asset in reacting to an emergency, whether
in flying or in combat, and that the absence of fear in a situation of this kind
may be fatal to success.
Fear of course is often felt in the absence of actual danger. The most
familiar example is anticipatory fear, or apprehension, either of real or of
imaginary dangers. This, again within certain limits, may be valuable. An
experienced squadron commander told me that he liked a man to have enough
imagination do fear the worst and hope for the best. Thus he would set forth
on his operational sortie prepared for every hazard, and would be more likely
both to succeed and to survive than the more phlegmatic types. Incidentally,
he added that this kind of man, though he was most likely to give good opera-
tional service, was most likely to suffer from the effects of stress. Another
common and interesting example of fear in the absence of actual danger is
that which, after danger is past, may be experienced by an imaginative person
when he reflects upon a narrow escape. Here it-seems that the magnitude
of the impending disaster has been such, or its passage so swift, that full per-
ception is delayed. The more time and opportunity there is for reflection the
greater the tendency to the development of this delayed fear reaction. Thus
the man who has been hurt in a flying accident and lies idle may be at a dis-
advantage by comparison with his comrade who after the same accident remains
on duty, his mind occupied with other matters. This does not mean that


retrospective fear is inappropriate or unhealthy. On the contrary, it may
be of value in pointing experience. The fighter pilot if he has the right spirit
gains in value from a narrow escape in combat. Fear within certain limits is
a stimulus ; only when it exceeds these limits is it a weakness.
The presence of fear after danger is past is not always to be explained by
reflection and rumination, for it may be recognized by the subject as irrational.
Mosso (1896) observed this point. After a fear response which has been due to
misinterpretation of a situation the individual discovers his mistake and is
glad; yet the ' perturbation and oppression do not at once subside, but continue
to annoy for some time. They are like the continued vibration of a cord that
has been shaken —like the echo of a sound reverberating in the nervous fibres
and slowly dying away’. This tendency for fear to perseverate may be
observed in many persons if the stimulus has been violent; but in relation to
stimuli of average intensity it is remarkable in certain individuals, suggesting
an innate propensity to react in this manner.
I have referred to the value of fear as a stimulus within certain limits.
It is necessary now to define these limits. They are set by standards deter-
mined not only by the heeds of the individual but also by those of his social
unit. For both these needs it is essential that emotions other than fear should
have free play—anger and loyalty, for example. It is when fear dominates
the mind to the exclusion of other emotions that it becomes harmful. “ The
phenomena of fear, which may be useful in lesser degrees, become morbid and
fatal to the organism as soon as they exceed a certain limit: for this reason fear
must be looked upon as a disease ” (Mosso). For the combatant group, whether
air crew, ship’s company, or platoon, fear in excess is of course a deadly disease
—so much so, that during the last war it must be camouflaged and called
“ wind up”. The ancients also felt it necessary to disarm fear, and used their
conventional method of appeasement. Alexander of Macedon offered up
sacrifices to Fear before he went into battle. In Naples there are two Roman
medals, one of which bears the impression of a terrified woman, the other of a
man with hair on end and staring eyes. They were struck in fulfilment of the
vows made by the Consuls before a certain battle to propitiate fear, which
threatened to invade the ranks of the soldiers, who after this measure had
been taken were led to victory. It is interesting to observe, in the books
and plays already produced by the present war, frank reference to fear,
and to speculate upon the reasons which have allowed this. Whatever these
may be, for us who study flying stress it is an advantage to discard the old
convention and to admit fear in excess as the kernel of our problem. As Mosso
remarks in his spirited introduction to this subject: " The time has come
when we must throw off our professorial robes, tie on our aprons, roll up our
sleeves, and begin the vivisection of the human heart according to scientific
methods”.
Although fear is frankly admitted by flying personnel individually in their
published records of combatant experience, and in serious discussion of flying
stress, official documents in the flying Services speak not of fear but of lack of
confidence. Doubtless there is here an underlying preference for meiosis, but
there is more in the term than this. It implies the lack of a virtue rather than
the presence of a vice. Confidence is a positive quality of inestimable value to
the airman. Without it he can never achieve ontstanding success, and despite
every effort he is likely to succumb sooner or later to the effects of flying stress.
Lack of confidence is a major cause of flying accidents, operational failures, and
psychological .breakdown in air crews. What, then, is meant by confidence?
It is, I believe, compounded of, if not identical with, fearlessness, and will be the
subject of my next lecture.


LECTURE H : THE FOUNDATIONS OF CONFIDENCE
1. Fearlessness
In this lecture I shall consider the nature of fearlessness, by which I mean
a state of mind in which fear is absent under circumstances which would
naturally be expected to arouse that emotion. I should make it clear at the
•outset that I distinguish fearlessness from courage. The latter is a state of
mind in which fear is present, but is endured for the sake of attaining an object.
Fearlessness, as the word implies, is a state in which there is no need for
courage because fear does not exist. Fearlessness in relation to a particular
stimulus pattern may be primary—meaning that no fear response has ever
occurred; or secondary —meaning that the fear response was at one time
present but has since been lost. Reverting to what has been said of the
origin and grown of fear reactions in children, we may postulate causes for
fearlessness of the first kind. First, certain trigger responses may be lacking
owing to constitutional variation. Secondly, the process by which the original
trigger responses normally develop, so that they respond to a wider range of
stimulus patterns, may be interfered with. This process may be called
learning, or in Pavlov's (1927) terms the development of conditioned responses,
and may be interfered with in a number of ways. Broadly speaking in terms
of conditioned response, we may distinguish between processes which depend
upon variations in the efficiency of the cerebral cortex as analyser and those
which result from variations in experience and training. For either of these
'reasons there may be failure to acquire those fear reactions which most people
do acquire as the result of conditioning.
Thus there is a kind of fearlessness which is associated with lack of
intelligence or imagination. Fearlessness of this origin may be a source of
strength in time of danger, but carries with it a source of weakness. The
same defect of brain or mind which prevents the acquisition of fear by
conditioning or experience prevents the inhibition of fear by conditioning or
experience. Thus the stupid man is fearless in the presence of remote or
complex danger, but in the presence of immediate obstrusive dangers he is apt
to be more overcome by fear for the moment than others of greater intelligence.
Nevertheless, the man whose lack of imagination prevents anticipatory fear is
thereby saved much stress.
That training and experience, or lack of experience, may affect the range
of fear reactions is theoretically obvious and commonly observed. The factors
involved are numerous and complex. Parental example and influence are
clearly of great importance, and begin to operate so early that it must be very
difficult to trace their origins. It is possible that an inhibitory process may
in some instances anticipate the development of a positive conditioned
response, or even, as Valentine (1942) suggests, that inhibition may be so well
established on some other foundation that an unconditioned fear response
destined to mature late never appears. The fearlessness of inexperience, due
simply to lack of opportunity for the development of the ordinary range of
conditioned fear responses, may be viewed separately. It is commonly
observed in children, but comparatively rarely in adults, except under novel
circumstances such as those of war. Then the noise of the approaching shell
may leave the novice unmoved while at once exciting fear in the man who is
aware from experience of its meaning. Unawareness of danger may also occur
(even in the experienced person) from narrowing of the field of consciousness.
A man may be so preoccupied with task or train of thought that there is no
room for the idea of danger. The direction of such preoccupation has probably
an emotional bias with inhibitory effect.


Apart from those varieties of fearlessness which depend upon the number
and specificity of innate tendencies and the capacity and opportunity for
acquiring conditioned reactions, both of a positive and of an inhibitory kind,
it seems not impossible that in some individuals—to borrow a physiological
expression—the threshold for fear is relatively high, as an innate quality.
Such innate variation in the threshold of the fear response would be com-
parable with the variation in the affective response to painful stimuli observed
by clinicians. The individual who is relatively insensitive to fear —using the
word ' insensitive' with this restricted meaning—may be fearless under
circumstances which would be expected to arouse fear in others, not for lack
of intelligence, imagination, experience, or attention, but because the
stimulus, whatever other effects it produces, fails to arouse the affective
response. Such a man might at the extreme react to danger with flight but
not feel fear, for the same kind of reason as a man insensitive to pain might
throw away a match which he saw was burning his fingers without feeling
pain.
Continuing with the same metaphor, fearlessness may be due to a low
threshold for some affective response which can inhibit fear. Most fear-
evoking situations are complex, and contain stimuli capable of evoking affects
other than fear. Just as there are persons who are by nature especially
sensitive to the evocation of fear, there are those in whom other kinds of
affective response are relatively easily aroused, more intense, and of longer
duration. Anger provides a good example, for many situations which are
capable of provoking fear are also capable of provoking anger. If a person
with a low threshold for anger be exposed to such a situation he may feel anger
when another person would feel fear. Fear in these circumstances is inhibited.
2. Inhibition as a basis for fear
I have already used the word ‘ inhibition ’ more than once in connection
with the absence of fear, and it becomes necessary at this juncture to discuss
its meaning, for I believe that inhibition, besides playing some part in primary
fearlessness, is the basis of all secondary fearlessness, the subject which I am
next going to consider. The neuro-physiological concept of inhibition is best
illustrated from the spinal or decerebrate animal. Here for a given muscle
an afferent nerve may be found whose stimulation causes reflex contraction ;
another, whose stimulation diminishes or abolishes contraction if already
present. Concurrent stimulation of excitatory afferent and inhibitory afferent
reveals gradation of effect according to the intensity of the stimuli. A strong
inhibitory stimulus will abolish, a weaker inhibitory stimulus will only
diminish, the effect of the same excitatory stimulus. But, as Sherrington
(1925) has said, there is more to be observed than this :
" Stimulation of the inhibitory afferent when the excitatory reflex is not in
operation may seem to produce no central effect. That this absence of central effect
is, however, only semblance can be shown in several ways. Thus precurrent brief
stimulation of the inhibitory afferent will lengthen the latency and diminish the
result of a closely following stimulus of the excitatory afferent. Again, stimulation
of the inhibitory afferent begun precurrently and continued concurrently with
stimulation of the excitatory afferent can prevent altogether or diminish the reflex
result of the latter.”
The inhibitory effect under these conditions is not manifested directly, but
indirectly by the absence of an expected contraction or an expected degree of
contraction.
Contraction of a skeletal muscle depends upon the excitation of the
motoneurone, and reflex contraction upon whether the flow of impulses
peripherally aroused reaches the motoneurone to excite it. Sherrington


conceives an interplay of central excitatory and cehtral inhibitory activities
at a point of confluence which he describes as “ upstream ” of the motoneurone.
Whether the motoneurone is set into activity or not depends upon the balance
here between central excitatory and central inhibitory states. The central
inhibitory state is as much a positive phenomenon as the central excitatory
state, and must itself be excited by appropriate impulses from without. When
thus excited it safeguards the motoneurone partially or wholly from excitation.
It seems that the hypotheses of central nervous function at the reflex level
Diagram to illustrate the balance between excitation and inhibition in the reflex arc.
C.E.S.=Central excitatory state.
C.I.S.=Central inhibitory state.
which I have outlined may be applied with profit and without any great
stretch of the imagination to physiological processes underlying the excitation
of affect. We may suppose a central inhibitory state for a given affect (for
example, fear), maintained by appropriate afferent stimuli, which would not
be manifest at all except when stimulation of the excitatory afferent for this
affect occurred. Then the inhibitory state would be revealed either by the
absence of any affective response or by a response of unexpectedly small
degree. We should then observe what we have described as fearlessness—the
absence or relative absence of fear in relation to situations which might be
expected to cause it.
The analogy of inhibition in a physiological sense has previously been
employed by Rivers (1924) with particular reference to fear or ‘ wind up ’ in
air crews during the last war. Rivers identified inhibition with the psycho-
pathological concept of repression, and assumed that when a reaction to danger
was unaccompanied by fear this emotion was present ‘ in the unconscious ’.
It is difficult to accept this concept for, as McCurdy (1925) remarks, “ repressed ”
or “ unconscious ” affect is a contradiction in terms. An affect as such cannot
have any existence unless it is conscious, because it is something that a person
feels: it does not exist until it is felt. The view which I have taken differs
in supposing inhibition to occur ‘ upstream ’ of the point of affective response.
The central inhibitory state is revealed by the absence of affect, as in the
motor system it is revealed by the absence of contraction in a given muscle.
The affect might be said to be potentially present in so far as nervous impulses
have been generated which would have excited the affect if they had not been
blocked short— ‘ upstream ’ of —the central point of excitation. But there
has been no experience of affect, no registration of affect in ‘ the unconscious ’.


There are two further points of reference for this analogy. An excitatory
impulse if blocked by inhibition has no apparent effect, but this again is only
semblance. It will have added an increment of excitation to the central
excitatory state, thus cancelling an equal amount of the central inhibitory state.
The balance in favour of inhibition is thus temporarily diminished, and a
further excitatory impulse arriving during this time will meet with less
resistance. This is in accord with the observation, which seems from intro-
spective account to be true, that a frightening experience which does not in
itself excite fear may have the result that for the time being fear is more easily
excited by another stimulus of the same kind. There is, in fact, at the
physiological or subconscious level central summation. The second point is
that inhibition may provide one explanation for the absence of fear at the time
of danger and its appearance later when the danger is past. The inhibitory
forces may be various—anger, sense of duty, self-regard, or what Rivers called
manipulative activity. These contribute to a central inhibitory state which
occludes fear for the time being. As the situation develops the strength of
these inhibiting stimuli becomes less. The occasion for anger is past, duty and
self-regard are satisfied, the central balance alters, inhibition is weakened, and
fear if still excited appears.
This attempt to describe certain aspects of fearlessness in physiological
language is made not without realization of the dangers of over-simplification.
Its excuse must be the desire to be explicit in applying the word ‘ inhibition ’
to affective processes.
3. Pavlov’s observations applied to fearlessness
I have already referred to the observations of Pavlov (1927) on the
development of conditioned responses in connection with the growth of fear.
His observations on inhibition are of equal value in understanding the growth
of fearlessness. He showed that by various means it was possible, after a con-
ditioned response had been established, to diminish or prevent the expected
flow of saliva. The main variations of Pavlov’s inhibitory responses, as will
be remembered, are as follows. If a positive conditioned reflex (salivation)
is established by the association of a stimulus—for example, the sound of a
bell, with subsequent feeding—and then the bell is sounded on several occasions
without feeding, salivation ceases to occur. The conditioned response is then
said to have suffered extinction. The extinction of conditioned fear is a matter
of common observation. A previously indifferent stimulus becomes by
association a danger signal and by itself produces fear. One may take as one
example the sound of a siren which has been followed by the fall of bombs. A
conditioned fear response has now been established. Now, if the same
stimulus is frequently repeated without subsequent bombing it ceases eventually
to elicit fear. The conditioned fear response has been extinguished.
A second variety, called conditioned inhibition, is induced thus. A well*
established conditioned stimulus is combined with a new (indifferent) stimulus,
and the combination is repeated without subsequent feeding. The new
combination soon becomes ineffective, though the original stimulus uncombined
is still effective. Conditioned inhibition is an important factor for the acquisi-
tion of fearlessness in any occupation which ar first excites fear. The instructor
makes use of it in training, combining with hazardous manoeuvre a trick or
ritual; the man who carries a mascot to support his confidence is using the
same method.
Differential inhibition is the name given to a third category of Pavlov’s
observations. A musical tone, for example, is used to establish a conditioned


response. It is then found that a second, neighbouring tone will also excite the
response (the phenomenon of irradiation). If subsequently the stimulus of
the second tone is several times repeated without feeding, it not only'fails to
excite but becomes inhibitory. Examples of differential inhibition are easily
found under conditions of war. For a man who has been exposed to shell-fire
the whistle of a near-approaching shell becomes a conditioned stimulus for fear.
By irradiation the whistle of any approaching shell, whether near or far, become
effective to produce fear. With frequent repetition the sound of a- shell which
will be harmless ceases to excite fear, while that of a shell near enough to be
dangerous is still effective. Fearlessness in relation to certain specific stimuli
has thus been acquired by differential inhibition.
A fourth variety of inhibition described by Pavlov was external inhibition.
This could be induced by an extraneous stimulus eliciting an unconditioned
response other than salivation if this were timed to precede the conditioned
stimulus. For example, an extraneous sound evoking what Pavlov called the
orienting or “ Where is it ? ” response will thus inhibit a well-established
conditioned response. The analogy between external inhibition and the
inhibition of one affect by another is surely a close one. Psychologists have
objected that Pavlov’s observations might have been recorded equally well —
they would say more accurately —in psychological terms. Pavlov (1941)
replied that in such an interpretation the psychologist has adopted the con-
ventional habit of thinking of the complicated activity of animals in terms of
his own feelings and thoughts. The merit of Pavlov’s observations is their
objectivity.
One general observation made by Pavlov (1941) relevant to the present
discussion was a relationship between the type of conditioned response most
easily established and temperament. In one group of dogs positive conditioned
responses were relatively easily established and well preserved, whereas
inhibitory responses were less easily established and more readily lost. These
animals he called specialists in excitation. In another group positive responses
were established with greater difficulty and were less stable; inhibitory
responses were established with relative ease and were more stable. This
group he called specialists in inhibition. He observed that his specialists in
inhibition were invariably of a timid, cowardly disposition, and concluded that
there was some inherent relationship between timidity and the preponderance
of inhibitory function. As an example he gives the story of a dog bom in the
laboratory and always gently handled but always timid and shrinking. After
some difficulty positive conditioned responses were established. Any
extraneous stimulus, however, would abolish the positive responses, leaving
the negative (inhibitory) responses. After the Leningrad flood, in which all
the animals experienced the threat of drowning, this animal lost all positive
responses. They were gradually restored when the original experimenter sat
with the animal with the food in the experimental room. Then a trickle of
water was allowed to flow under the door; again all positive responses were
lost, and had to be restored by the same means as before. This dog is described
as a specialist in inhibition. Surely this interpretation is wrong. The animal
was, in fact, a specialist in excitation for stimuli of a fear-evoking quality, and
the excitation of fear inhibited other forms of response. This interpretation
may be applied generally to the distinction between the excitatory and
inhibitory types as observed under the restricted conditions of Pavlov's
experiments. His specialist in excitation was a specialist of this type so
far as the response to food is concerned. His specialist in inhibition was.
primarily a specialist in excitation so far as the fear response was con-
cerned, and the excitation of the fear response caused inhibition of other
responses.


4. Courage and confidence
In the acquisition of fearlessness it is evident that courage—persistence
with the task despite fear —must play an important part. Persistence despite
fear implies emotional conflict. During the exercise of courage awareness of
the nature of the conflict and of the emotions involved on either side may be
more or less clouded by self-deception. The presence of emotional conflict is,
however, manifest by a feeling of tension from which courage is inseparable.
In this respect it is essentially different from fearlessness. Courage is generally
regarded as the quality most highly to be prized in the soldier, and rightly so,
for his duty is bound to lead him where persistence despite fear is indispensable
for success ; but the soldier’s courage is of even greater value in enabling him
to acquire fearlessness. This is what we mean when we say that the brave
man learns to conquer his fears. It is the fearlessness bom of courage which
is the greater prize than courage itself —the state of calm rather than the state
of tension. What the soldier fears is the anguish of being afraid and having to
exert a degree of courage which will absorb his attention and detract from his
efficiency. A man of good morale therefore will endeavour by every means to
acquire fearlessness, using his courage to this end.
From this discussion of fearlessness and courage I shall now return to the
consideration of confidence and loss of confidence in flying personnel.
Confidence may be regarded as being compounded of different lands of fear-
lessness. Many of these are of the acquired variety (for flying is ah initio
dangerous), and their acquisition therefore calls for courage. As also
experiences of an exceptionally frightening nature are common in flying, and
inseparable from operational flying, these various kinds of fearlessness, which
are, so to speak, the stones of which confidence is built, are often exposed to
stress and not infrequently dislodged: hence loss of confidence, more or less
severe according to the number of stones dislodged and their key value in the
structure. Courage is again necessary for repair. The amount of courage
which a man needs to acquire and maintain confidence depends upon many
factors. The most important of these are included in his pre-flying disposition
and his flying experience. Let us try for a moment to imagine some of the
fluctuations of confidence in an average pilot from the beginning of training to
the completion of an operational tour in heavy bombers. We must suppose
that he is by constitution neither exceptionally timid nor fearless. The
first time he is air-bome he probably experiences slight fear. Awareness of
the fact that flying is an offence against the law of gravity is, I have been told
by very experienced airmen, seldom absent from the fringe of attention. Fear,
however, is readily inhibited in the average person by the excitation of other
affects, such as those involved in professional keenness and by the conditioning
of experience. The first solo flight and the first performance of aerobatics
again excite fear, which is again readily inhibited by the factors mentioned.
In the course of training there are pretty certain to be other experiences of a
fear-exciting kind—experiencing or witnessing crashes, death of friends, getting
lost, narrow escapes of one kind and another. Most of these do excite fear,
though sometimes it may be inhibited. Every time fear is excited the
inhibitory state responsible for some kind of fearlessness is weakened. The
exercise of courage is then called for. Experience then reconditions inhibition,
and from further experience differential inhibition is developed. Meanwhile,
however, there is a progressive loss of the fearlessness of inexperience; for
the more flying a man has done the greater the number of things he knows
which may go wrong, so that with experience the number of situations that are
potentially fear-exciting increases, with a correspondingly greater demand upon
inhibition for the preservation of confidence. The balance at rest, so to speak,
between central excitory and central inhibitory states becomes more and more
in favour of the former. For this reason, even under the relatively harmless


conditions of civil aviation, when a man has flown long enough confidence
tends to wane. This has been emphasized by Armstrong, and the neurosis
which results from the effort to continue flying despite loss of confidence is,.
I think, what Armstrong (1939) has called aeroneurosis. Our hypothetical
pilot, however, will not have flown long enough for this. When he reaches
the operational training unit there are new dangers to be met arising from the
length of trips and bad weather, and at the same time greater stress from
fatigue. Now he embarks on his operational career to meet a whole series of
fresh hazards. It is certain that these will test his courage, and possible that
before the end of the tour the exercise of courage must be continuous, with
inevitable tension and strain. So long, however, as he can make use of courage
to conquer fears, and by this and other means can preserve his confidence,
tension and strain will be diminished, efficiency will be augmented, and he
will have courage in reserve to balance exceptional stress. What are the new
factors which assail and support confidence in this phase of the airman’s
career ? On the one hand are all the hazards of flying over enemy territory
to a target which he knows will be defended by flak, searchlights and night
fighters, new dangers of weather involved in the length of trips, and the risk
of bad visibility on return. There is also the effect of casualties. At first he
is protected to some extent by the fearlessness of inexperience and by the
inhibitory effect of curiosity upon fear. After the first few sorties this pro-
tection is lost. This is a critical point in the tour for confidence. As the tour
goes on the more stable fearlessness of experience grows, but further experience
adds to the number of conditioned fears which need to be inhibited if confidence
is to be maintained. The strain of anticipation consequently increases, and
the prolonged wait for a sortie cancelled at the last minute is almost as much
of a strain as an actual trip. Fatigue, physical and occupational, is an
additional factor weakening inhibition, and lack of sleep during periods of
intense operational activity operates in the same direction. On the other side
there are new factors which help to inhibit fear. High among these ranks
squadron and crew morale.
Our pilot, then, having lost the fearlessness of inexperience, finds other
sources of fearlessness to support his confidence, but towards the end of the
tour a number of factors conspire to weaken the inhibition of fear. There is
the increase in the number of conditioned fears resulting from the unpleasant
experiences which he must by now have had; there is the anticipation of
relief from strain, and of holiday, which sometimes of a sudden makes life
precious and fear insistent; and there is the effect of cumulative fatigue. For
all these reasons the structure of confidence tends to become weakened and the
call for courage greater. • I do not imply that at any time during the tour
there has been no demand upon courage. On the contrary, distinguished men
of great operational experience have told me that fear, especially before a trip,
generally calls for conscious control; but once the sortie has begun there is no
fear in excess, and relatively little tension. There is, however, enough tension
always, in most'men, to cause that fatigue which we are all aware follows a
prolonged effort to control emotion. There is reason, from clinical experience,
to suppose that the effects of this kind of fatigue are cumulative. For example,
a fighter pilot who had won the D.S.O. and D.F.C. and bar was observed by an
experienced medical officer to be becoming tense and irritable by contrast with
his normally good-tempered disposition. In this instance the suggestion that
he needed a rest was disregarded ; but later he reported sick, confiding that for
several months he had been aware of a conscious effort to control fear while
on operational flights. The need for this effort gradually increased, and it
was a greater strain to preserve his composure. He had good insight into his con-
dition, arguing that real courage was the ability to overcome natural fear in the
presence of danger, but had reached a point when he felt suddenly exhausted.


5. Lack of confidence
I have already referred briefly to the effect of a crash with injury in
weakening fearlessness and undermining confidence. Several factors operate
here besides the crash: there is the fact of being hurt; the opportunity for
fear to increase with reflection; and the absence from flying, which by itself
can impair confidence. The man who is able to fly again soon after a crash
is better placed. Here is the self-revealed story of a fighter pilot who crashed
and suffered a head injury and a fractured vertebra, with satisfactory recovery
from both. He was sent back to duty apparently keen to fly, but after a
short period returned to hospital with vague complaints of pain in his back.
He was, reassured, and returned to duty. A suspicion was entertained at the
time that he had lost confidence, but was dismissed on his own denial; and
there the story would have ended had he not unexpectedly written this letter
to his physician nearly two years later ;
" I can now fly and acrobat an aircraft in a way that fully satisfies me. In fact,
X shall now make a confession to you. All the time I was in hospital I was scared stiff
of flying. I definitely wanted to fly, but being in the air again just froze me with
fright. I kept all this entirely to myself because I thought it would be put down to
cowardice. Very stupid of me ! When the board eventually put me back on flying,
I told them I wanted to fly, when they asked me, for the same reason. I eventually
did about nine hours’ flying, and most of it was a complete nightmare to me. I was
simply scared stiff. But again I kept it all to myself. Then just when I was beginning
to overcome my fears, and at the very time when I ought to have been made to fly,
I was sent back to hospital. At that time I wondered whether I could continue on
with flying when I left hospital, because it meant starting all over again. After that
I did about 300 to 400 hours’ flying before I really felt an inclination to confidence
on just ordinary level flying. Now after 700 hours I have at last got full confidence
back for aerobating. When I look back now and think of the agonies I went through
it all seems rather amusing. However, the point now is that I am and feel perfectly
fit and confident. My back is well, and that is that.’’
I will now present an example of another kind—that of a sergeant air
gunner, a man of timid disposition in whom fear of flying was never inhibited.
He eventually reported sick with dyspepsia, and was told by his medical officer
that his symptoms were those of a neurosis, and of a kind which might be due
to fear. Next day he wrote to his medical officer as follows :
" Sir, —As you know, I have during the last three or four months been suffering
from, as I thought, some minor gastric disorder. This morning I was informed by
you that my health is O.K. ; and the probable cause of my disorder was mental, or
in other words some unconscious fear. After thinking very deeply on the subject
for some hours. Sir, I have come to the conclusion that you are right, but only partly
so, as you hadn’t the whole of the evidence.
You no doubt have the impression that this fear has only developed over the
past month or so. That is not the case. It goes right back to the very first time I
placed my foot in an aircraft. From the moment that craft left the ground I was
in the grip of fear and subject to extreme nervous tension. This was not the usual
feeling of uncertainty which I suppose everyone experiences on taking this step for
the first time. It was real and concrete. Every moment, every bump or bank filled
me, and still does, with breathless suspense, and the overwhelming desire to land and
get away from it at all costs. My mental impressions to-day have not changed from
those of my first flight. I still experience the same cold shivers and fears as I did then,
only now more accentuated. If, Sir, these gastric pains are from the aforementioned
trouble, I beg to point out that I have tried now for approximately twelve months
to overcome the nauseating fear to which I am subject when flying, but, as events
have borne out, so far unsuccessfully.
The only conclusion to which I can arrive is that the trouble is not caused by
temporary loss of nerve but by the gradual whittling down of the barrier I have
consistently tried to erect between my temperamental equipment and the job to
which I am assigned. No one has been more anxious than myself to overcome this
complex, because not only has it been a severe blow to my personal pride, but also
I have the same abhorrence as I suppose all persons have to being alluded to as
‘ yellow 1 ’ or some such designation by my acquaintances.”


Although the relation of these stories has occupied some time, I could not
without the aid of introspective accounts have illustrated the factors which
influence the development of fear and fearlessness in flying personnel. It is
to be observed that in none of these cases was there any lack of courage. One
of the problems with which the Air Force doctor must be confronted from time
to time is the distinction between lack of confidence and lack of courage. That
there is such a distinction to be made I hope I have shown. How far a man
must be expected to persist in the endeavour to conquer fear is a matter to be
decided not by the doctor but by those who face the dangers of operational
flying themselves. The principle is that which obtains for all combatant troops.
There is, however, a special aspect of the problem for flying personnel, for the
state of tension inseparable from the exercise of courage becomes sooner for
them a drag upon efficiency. There may come a point for some when, whether
they are to be judged medically sick or sound, they are no longer efficient.
Whether they are to be disposed of then as brave men or as lacking in moral
fibre must be left to the judgment of their peers. The severity of this judgment
is a reflection of morale. Severity does not imply lack of sympathy. The
distinguished leaders who have spoken to me of their own experiences have
often dwelt upon the pain of fear in excess. They have also dwelt upon the
happiness and satisfaction of fearlessness, with insight into the means by which
in their own case it has been obtained. A fighter pilot who had previously
flown light bombers in the Battle of France said that during this time he hardly
ever saw targets or the effect of his bombs. After a while he was so frightened
that he sweated every time he got into an aeroplane, and could not sleep. Later
in Hurricanes in the Battle of Britain, he found—these are his own words :
" Success in the game is the great incentive to subdue fear. Once you’ve shot
down two or three the effect is terrific, and you’ll go on till you’re killed. It’s
love-of the sport rather than sense of duty that makes you go on without
minding how much you are shot up”. This young officer was severely wounded
in combat, but after his recovery went on to destroy many enemy aircraft, win
several decorations, and command his squadron.
Here is a case in which the fighter job discovered an affective response
which easily inhibited fear. It is an example of that chance matching of
stimulus pattern with innate tendency upon which the foundations of confidence
are sometimes built.
6. Conclusion
In this brief view of the human response to flying stress I have dwelt
much on the psychological factors, because in the last war they were somewhat
obscured by uncertainty about the effects of anoxia and are now more easily
discerned. The analysis has led to a somewhat detailed discussion of fear and
fearlessness, and to the conclusion .that the emotional tension resulting from
the prolonged exercise of courage is the most important element of Stress. This
does not exclude the presence of other important factors which deserve con-
sideration. Skill fatigue in the pilot is one, and has been notably studied by
Bartlett (1943), who has shown that loss of emotional control and abnormal
behaviour may be prominent among its symptoms. Fatigue of vision and of
hearing, the effects of acceleration and decompression, and even to-day under
certain conditions anoxia, also play their part, and all may contribute to central
nervous disorder. There are, therefore, effects of flying stress which the
clinician will only see truly when he is guided by the psychologist and the
physiologist, who in their turn may profit from clinical observation. In the-
study of the human response to flying stress collaboration of this kind is
essential.


References
Armstrong, H. G. (1939)
Principles and practice of aviation medicine,
Baillifere, Tindall and Cox, London.
Bard, P. (1939) '
Proc. Ass. Res. Nerv. ment, Dis., 19, 190, Williams
Wilkins Co., Baltimore.
Bartlett, F. C. (1943)
Proc. roy. Soc., B, 131, 247.
Birley, J. L. (1920a)
Lancet. 1, 1147, 1205, 125J.
Birley, J. L. (1920b)
Med. Res. Cncl. Sp. Rep. Ser., No. 53, p. 141, London.
Cooper, E. L. & Sinclair, A. J. M. . .
Med. J. Austral., 2, 73.
(1942).
Curran, D. & Mallinson, W. P.(1940).
Lancet, 2, 738.
Dillon, F. (1940)
In The Neuroses of war, cd. E. Miller, Macmillan
& Co., London.
Flack, M. (1920)
Med. Res. Cncl. Sp. Rep. Ser., No. 53, p. 93, London.
Gillespie, R. D. (1942)
Psychological effects of war on citizen and soldier.
Chapman & Hall, London.
Hadfield, J. A. (1942)
British Medical Journal, 1, 281.
Love, H. K. (1942)
Med. J. Austral., 2 137.
McCurdy, J. T. (1925)
The Psychology of emotion, morbid and normal.
Kegan Paul, London.
Mapother, E. (1935)
Proc. roy. Soc. Med., 29, 858.
Mosso, A. (189S)
Fear, Longmans Green, London.
Pavlov, I. P. (1927)
Conditioned reflexes, Oxford University Press, London
Pavlov, I. P. (1941)
Lectures on conditioned reflexes, Lawrence & Wishart-
London.
Report of the War Office Committee
of Inquiry into Shell Shock (1922). H.M. Stationery
Office, London.
Rivers, W. H. R. (1924) ..
Instinct and the unconscious, Cambridge University
Press, London.
Sherrington, C. S. (1925) ...
Proc. roy. Soc., B, 97, 519.
Valentine, C. W. (1942)
The psychology of early childhood, Methuen, London.


CHAPTER IX
STATISTICAL SURVEY OF THE OCCURRENCE OF PSYCHOLOGICAL
DISORDERS IN FLYING PERSONNEL IN THE SIX MONTHS
FEBRUARY TO AUGUST, 1942
by
Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds, K.B.E., C.B./M.D., F.R.C.P. and
Wing Commander Denis J. Williams, D.Sc., M.D., F.R.C.P.
FPRC Report 412 (g) November, 1942
Introduction
The classification of psychological disorders is exceptionally difficult.
Between individual psychiatrists there may be discrepancies not only in
the nomenclature of these disorders but in the causal factors recognised.
Consequently when an attempt was made to determine the incidence and
causes of psychological disorders in flying personnel it was found that the
documents and case records accumulated before this investigation was begun
presented such a medley of clinical terms and psychiatric opinions that it was
impossible to subject them to statistical analysis. It was therefore decided
to establish a method of case returns which should be acceptable to the greatest
possible number of specialists and which would present in a manner as exact,
consistent and objective as is possible in psychiatry all the information which
seemed essential for this investigation. The work has been planned and the
statistics handled in such a way as to present the problem purely as it affects
flying personnel of the Royal Air Force, the medical and psychological terms
having been simplified to this end. The co-operation of all neuro-psychiatric
specialists was sought in reducing their observations to a common scale. That
this was given loyally and efficiently is proved by the rarity with which we
have encountered any discrepancy between the summaries of the same case
returned by different observers. For the student in search of greater detail
the full clinical records which constitute the foundations of this section of our
report are available. Previous chapters deal with personal investigations
into the factors contributing to and modifying the stress of flying and into the
early symptoms of breakdown.
1. Material
Sources
The subjects of this report were 1,197 flying personnel referred to the
Consultants in Neurology and the Specialists in Neuro-psychiatry at the Central
Medical Establishment and at the operational neuro-psychiatric centres. All
men who had been accepted for flying duties, whether they had begun flying
or not, were included, so that men from the Air Crew Reception Centres and
from all stages of training are included. It has not been possible, however,
to include all flying personnel with psychological disorders in the scope of this
investigation for there are some who are not referred to neuro-psychiatric
specialists, who may be dealt with :
(a) Directly by the squadron or station medical officers: many flying
personnel who report sick or who are referred to the unit medical
officer with complaints which have no physical foundation are
dealt with without reference to a specialist. The cases treated


in this way naturally include all the most promising and milder
cases.
(b) By the general duty officers : many flying personnel found unsuit-
able for their duty on constitutional grounds during training are
removed without medical advice; men found to be lacking con-
fidence may be disposed of by the executive without the opinion
of a neuro-psychiatric specialist.
[c] By other specialists: flying personnel with psychological illness
have symptoms which mimic those of physical disease or which
may be masked by them'. They are referred to general physicians,
otologists and ophthalmologists particularly. Only those sub-
sequently referred by these specialists to the neuro-psychiatrist
are included in this report.
Apart from closing these gaps in the investigation, the survey has been
made as inclusive as possible.
2. Method
(a) Collection of material
A Central Registry of Psychological Disorders in Flying Personnel was
established to which neuro-psychiatric specialists returned a card for every
case of psychological disorder in air crew (specimen in Chapter VII, pp. 97-98).
Except for the diagnosis, all details ,on the front of the card relate to exact
particulars of the man’s Service career. On the back the following observations
are made;—
(i) Assessment of the predisposition to psychological disorders, deter-
mined clinically from past record and family history under the
headings : nil, mild, severe.
(ii) Assessment of the degree of stress to which the man has been sub-
jected under flying stress in relation to the average experience of
flying personnel as nil, slight, moderate, severe, exceptional;
and non-flying stress, including all personal and domestic factors
associated with the illness, but not directly connected with flying,
expressed as nil, mild, severe.
All data on these cards were transferred to a punch-card system for the purpose
of statistical analysis.
(b) Presentation of material
The data were expressed, first, in absolute figures and then as percentages
of total strengths. The total figures for the whole Service were divided into
those for commands and into those for types of duty, air crew categories, com-
missioned and non-commissioned officers. Since the time of onset of the illness
bears no constant relationship to the time of reporting to a neuro-psychiatric
specialist the data obtained could not be exactly related to total command
strengths at any one time. The nearest approximation seemed to obtain from
the respective commands, average strengths for the six months under review.
The figures have formed the basis for calculating percentages of strengths.
3. Survey of the whole Service
The total of 1,197 patients comprises all cases referred to neuro-psychia-
trists at home in the six months February 3rd to August 3rd, 1942, and at
Headquarters, Middle East, from February 2nd to June 27th, 1942. The 125
cases from the Middle East were therefore seen in 21 weeks as opposed to 26


' TABLE I
Cases referred to the neuro-psychiatrist by the operational commands
Command
Total
Bomber
502
Fighter ..
108
Coastal . .
160
Flying Training
267
Army Co-operation
35
Middle East .. , .
125
Total
1.197
TABLE II
Referred cases analysed under types of duty
Duty
No.
Per-
centage
Under training
352
28-7
Instructor
136
11-1
Bomber, day
86
7-0
Bomber, night
350
28-5
Fighter, day
106
8-6
Fighter, night
17
1-4
Coastal, General Reconnaissance ..
114
9-2
Coastal, bomber
16
1-3
Coastal, boats
5
0-4
Army Co-operation
34
2-8
Photographic Reconnaissance Unit
5
0-4
Air Sea Rescue
4
0-3
Ferry . . . . . .
3
0-2
Total
1,228*
99-9
weeks for the other 1,072 cases (at time of writing returns for the last five
weeks from June 28th to August 3rd were not available). This means that the
figure of 1,197 is less than the total incidence by 30 cases if the weekly rate of
incidence in the Middle East is assumed to be constant. In relation to the annual
incidence and the total number of cases this discrepancy is not of serious
importance. Of possibly greater significance might be the distortion of the
figures in smaller groups in which Middle East cases might form a considerable
proportion. This possibility has been watched for and when it has appeared
necessary the point will be brought out in referring to the tables.
* In 31 cases from the Middle East Command two duties were performed by the same
patient during the illness.
It will be observed that nearly 30 per cent of the total cases arose during
training. No-such cases were returned from the Middle East and if this group
is subtracted the incidence of cases in those under training amount to 33 per
cent of those serving at home. The next highest figure of incidence is 28 per
cent in night bombers. Instructors make a large contribution and the re-
mainder were mainly divided between day fighters and bombers and coastal
general reconnaissance. It is to be noted (Table XI) that 42 of 86 cases (49 per
cent) among day bombers, and 38 of 106 cases (36 per cent) among day fighters
were from the Middle East.


TABLE III
Referred cases analysed under air crew categories
Category
No.
Per-
centage
Pilot .. . .
563
47-0
W.Op./A.G
293
24-4
Observer
159
13-3
Air Gunner ..
156
13-0
Radio Observer
14
1-2
Engineer
12
1-0
Total
1,197
99-9
TABLE IV
Referred cases analysed under types of flying
Type of flying
No.
Per-
centage
No flying
95
7-9
Non-operational flying
374
31-2
Under 100 operational hours
297
24-8
Over 100 operational hours
431
36-0
Total
1,197
99-9
TABLE V
Referred cases analysed under
Age Rank and civil status
No,
Age groups
Nn
Per-
centage
48
20
569
20-24 Commissioned
348
29
447
25-30 Married
436
36
133
30
Total 1,197
Approximately half of the cases occurred in pilots and a quarter in wire-
less operators/air gunners. The proportional significance of this, in relation
to total strengths of aircrew categories is discussed later.
Sixty-one per cent of the patients had been on operations before reaching
a neuro-psychiatrist; of these 59-3 per cent had completed more than 100
operational hours. Excluding Middle East Command, where the proportion
of men on operations was at that time high, 57 per cent of the home cases had
been on operations. Excluding Flying Training Command, 76 per cent of
the patients had been engaged on operations.


TABLE VI
Referred cases analysed under flying stress, non-flying stress and predisposition
Flying stress
Non-flying stress
Predisposition
Grading
No.
Per-
centage
Grading
No,
Per-
centage
Grading
No.
Per-
centage
Nil ..
459
38-3
Nil
708
59-1
Nil
386
32-3
Slight
318
26-5
Mild ..
440
36-7
Mild ..
622
51-9
Moderate
286
23-8
Severe ..
49
4-2
Severe ..
189
15-8
Severe
123
10-3
Exceptional
11
1-0
Totals ..
1,197
99-9
1,197
100-0
>
1,197
99-9
(a) Predisposition, flying stress and non-flying stress
As pointed out in the introduction, the grading of jpredisposition to
psychological disorders and of environmental stress which has been attempted
in this investigation is purely arbitrary, and can never, from the nature of the
factors being assessed, be accurate in any one case. In such a large series of
cases as these, observed in standard conditions by a group of observers whose
criteria had been standardised the validity of the grading is considerable, and
any statistically significant difference in the total figures obtained should have
psychiatric significance. Thus, if one group shows a high rate of predisposition
by the method adopted, the general tendency in the group may be accepted as
being towards abnormal predisposition, although individual variations in
predisposition in the group may be great.
Three facts of importance emerge from the table :
(i) Nearly two-thirds of the patients (64-8 per cent) had been subjected
to no more than a slight degree of flying stress and over a third
had been estimated to have had no stress.
(ii) Over a half (59-1 per cent) had not been subjected to non-flying
stress.
(in) Two-thirds (67-7 per cent) were considered to be predisposed to
psychological disorder. This surprisingly high figure, like all
other figures in this report, is based on the pooled opinions of all
neuro-psychiatric specialists in Royal Air Force Operational
Commands, and reflects directly upon the method of selection of
air crews. The figure is seen to have even greater importance
when it is considered that the criterion used to assess severe
predisposition, present in 15-8 per cent, was that the predisposition
was sufficiently marked, that had it been recognised at enlistment
it would have warranted rejection for air crews.
Two hundred and eighty-two patients were considered to have had no stress
of any sort. Twenty-one per cent of these had no evident predisposition, while
49 per cent were mildly and 30 per cent severely predisposed. Severe pre-
disposition was thus twice as common in those without stress as in the total
series of patients.
(b) Causes
In Table VII are tabulated only those factors which added to the
load which the individuals had to carry. They are recorded without regard for
the constitutional variation in the ability of the individual to carry that load,
which is assessed under “ Predisposition ” Table in VI. The psychological


TABLE VII
Total
Recorded causes of psychological disorders
psychological
disorder
Psychological
Exhaustion
Airsickness
Physical
injury
Physical
illness
1,021
1,017
19
21
158
99
►t)
3
►1
p
o
n
P
p+-
00
a>
to
Nil
Od
9-4
to
Slight
2
*<
B
4>>
cn
Moderate
CT9
o
tr
o
1 .
Severe
I
Excep-
>
cd
tional
r
w
Ol
4*.
vj
Nil
2
<
»— l
CO
O
P
HH
(—»
Pa
CO
to
4*
to
Mild
S'
05
CTQ
J
CO
CO
CO
Severe
CO
.
VJ
to
to
CO
Nil
3
o
4*.
<35
Bt
vj
Mild
"0
iw
w .
CO
•u
4t
cn
Severe
B *
p
00
causes of nervous breakdown are so varied, and depend to such an extent
upon the particular way in which they affect the individual personality, that
they have all, for the purpose of this report, been grouped under one heading.
All that is attempted is to divide the purely psychological causes, such as fear,
apprehension, worry or any form of conflict or psychological trauma, from the
more evident physical causes, which are tabulated. The effects of altitude
and cold were included, but in no case were these factors operative. It
should be understood that airsickness here is considered only as a cause, and
not an effect of the psychological disorder.
The total number of cases to which this table refers is 1,021, since in 176 of
the patients no evidence of illness was found, and they were returned for
Executive action with a full flying category.
A psychological cause for the illness was found to be present in all except
four of the 1,021 patients. In 280, physical causes for the illness were found
to be present in association with the psychological causes. In three others
more than one physical cause was found. In every instance where physical
injury, physical illness or airsickness were considered causes, psychological
causes for the illness were also found. Exhaustion and airsickness played a
part in only 1-8 and 2*o per cent of cases respectively, while physical injury
and physical illness together contributed to the illness in only 25 per cent of
the cases.
(c) Flying duties as a casual factor
In only 129 cases (12-6 per cent) was the illness not considered to be
related in any way to flying duties. Eighty per cent (103) of these 129 patients
were under training, 65 per cent (84) being in Flying Training Command.
Seventy-one (55 per cent) had done no flying and only 23 (17-8 per cent) had
been on operations. The majority of these had completed a tour. An
analysis of the degree of predisposition in this selected group of cases of
neurosis not attributed to flying duties and of the stress to which they had
been subjected is illuminating.


•tabLe IX
Reaction type
No.
Per cent of
' medical ’
cases
Anxiety
789
77-2 -
Depression
107
10-7
Hysteria
117
11-5
Fatigue
59
5-8
Obsessional
21
1-3
Schizophrenic
13
1-0
Elation
3
. 0-2
Organic acute
1
0-1
Organic chronic
1
0-1
Lack confidence
176
—
Total
1,197
107-9*
The degree of non-flying stress to which this group has been subjected is
not very different from that in the main group (Table VI), but flying stress
is almost absent, only 13-4 per cent having been subjected to even the milder
degrees. It is apparent that those patients who break down as the result of
personal worries or for no obvious cause are heavily predisposed, since 82-2
per cent show evidence of predisposition, and 35 per cent are severely pre-
disposed. It will be noted that although 13-4 per cent of cases had been
exposed to some degree of flying stress, this had not been considered a cause
of the illness. In these individuals constitutional predisposition with
exogenous factors unrelated to flying duties appear to have been more potent
causes of breakdown than the stress of flying duties.
♦ In 89 cases (7-4 per cent) more than one reaction type was recognised.
It will be seen that an anxiety state and a depressive illness, so often
associated and sometimes inseparable, constitute 88 per cent of the medical
diagnoses. Hysteria (11-5 per cent) was present alone in 70 cases. This
condition, with a fatigue state (neurasthenia) and an obsessive-compulsive
state constituted 18-6 per cent, the remaining diagnoses being rarely made
(2-7 per cent). Of the 89 cases in which more than one reaction type was
recognised, an anxiety state was present in 85 (95 per cent). The outstanding
feature of this table is that the distribution of diagnoses does not differ greatly
from that which would be obtained from any comparable group of patients
with psychological illnesses. Members of crews who break down under
stress, or as a result of predisposition appear to do so in the same manner as
other people in different circumstances. The table shows that there is no
necessity to postulate any psychological disorder peculiar to flying personnel.
Attempts have been made elsewhere to do this (pages 18-21), such names as
flying stress, aeroneurosis and acute pilots’ fatigue having been coined, but no
difficulty in describing the illness in accepted medical terminology was
experienced by any of the specialists who contributed to this series of 1,197
cases.
(d) Disposal
Final disposals were only available upon 741 cases, and temporary
disposals were given in 553 instances. In 94 of the latter a final disposal was
given at a later interview. Until more is known about the ultimate disposal
of the 553 still under observation, conclusions drawn from Table X should be
made with reserve.


TABLE X
Disposals
Categories
Final
temporary
temporary
(total)
only
Full flying
202
_
Limited flying
41
266
227
Grounded
321
287
235
Invalided
10
—
—
Executive
167
—
—
Total
741
553
432*
TABLE XI*
Referred cases analysed under types of duty
Command
Total
Under training
Instructor
Fighter, day
Fighter, night
Bomber, day
Bomber, night
Coastal, general
reconnaissance
Coastal, bomber
Army Co-operation
Photographic Recon-
naissance Unit
Air-Sea Rescue
Ferry
Coastal boats
Bomber Ops.
348
44
304
Bomber O.T.U.
154
94
60
Bomber Command
502
94
60
44
304
—
—
—
—
Fighter Ops. ..
82
-
68
14
Fighter O.T.U.
26
15
11
Fighter Command
108
15
11
68
14
Coastal Ops.
125
103
16
o
1
3
Coastal O.T.U.
35
23
12
Coastal Command
160
23
12
103
16
2
1
3
Middle East
125
38
3
42
46
11
5
3
3
3
2
Flying Training
267
215
52
Army Co-op. ..
29
29
Army Co-op. O.T.U. ..
6
1
1
-
Army Co-op. Command
35
5
1
29
Total
1,197
352
136
106
17
86
350
114
16
34
5
4
3
5
♦3O of these had two categories.
Sixty-three of the 121 patients in whom a final followed a temporary
disposal returned to flying (55 full and 8 limited), but in 31 instances the
patient was permanently removed from flying duties. In 53 the final disposal
was the same as the temporary disposal. It is interesting to notice that 321
out of 331 patients (97 per cent) permanently grounded for non-physical
reasons were considered fit to continue on ground duty in the Service. In 432
cases the final disposal is still unknown, and in 24 no disposal at all had been
arranged. Of the 741 cases in whom a final disposal was known, 33 were
removed from flying for medical reasons and 243 returned to flying, 41 with
limitations. If the temporary and final figures are grouped, 47 per cent of
the medical cases returned to flying duty. In appraising this result it must
be remembered that many of the 235 who were temporarily grounded were in
fact in hospital or on sick leave ; they would later receive a flying category.
4. Survey of commands


TABLE XII
Flying Training Command
No.
Per-
centage
Pilots
114
53
Observers ..
34
16
Wireless Operators/Air Gunners
53
25
Air Gunners
13
6
Radio Observers ..
1
—
Total
215
100
TABLE XIII
Under training at O.T.Us.
No.
Per-
centage
Pilots
53
38
Observers
30
22
Wireless Operators/Air Gunners
34
25
Air Gunners
19
14
Radio Observers ..
I
—
Total
137
100
The total number of duties in the Middle East Command is 31 more than
the total cases. This is due to the performance of several forms of duty by
some of the patients during the period of onset of the illness. For instance,
a pilot may have been engaged upon day fighting and photographic recon-
naissance. In the other commands the last duty performed before the illness
is recorded.
Bearing in mind that actual strengths are not being taken into account,
the more striking points in Table XI are :
(i) That the largest contribution (42 per cent) is made by Bomber
Command, the next being by Flying Training Command (22-3 per
cent). Fighter, Coastal and Middle East Commands make con-
tributions of the same order, about half that of Flying Training
Command.
(ii) The greatest number of cases in any one category is that for air crew
under training (353 —30 per cent of the total and 33 per cent
of those serving at home). Nearly two-thirds of these are from
Flying Training Command, the remainder being from operational
training units of the four operational commands at home. Air
crew under training in Flying Training Command were in the
following categories:—
The 137 flying personnel under training at O.T.Us. were in the following
categories:
(iii) The largest single group of operational air crews were those from night
bombers (350 —29 -2 per cent). This number is further increased
by the instructors at Bomber O.T.Us. and in Flying Training
Command, 48 of whom had been on operations as night bombers
before beginning all their duties as instructors. This brings the
propoition of the total cases who had operated as night bombers
to 33*3 per cent. These were in the following categories:—
76642) E


TABLE XIV
In night bombers
No.
Per-
centage
Pilots
125
31
Observers ..
54
14
Wireless Operators/Air Gunners
123
31
Air Gunners
93
23
Engineers
3
1
Total
398
100
TABLE XV
Crew categories
-
Command
u
<3
u
t
o C
J3 So
a
D
O
£
o «
in
O
a
•2
o
w
u
XJX)
to
-
H
S
o
<
S°
w
Bomber Ops.
348
105
46
109
81
7
Bomber O.T.U.
154
53
35
40
26
Bomber Command
502
158
81
149
107
7
Fighter Ops.
82
69
1
—
5
7
Fighter O.T.U
26
23
—
—
—
3
Fighter Command
108
92
1
—
5
10
—
Coastal Ops.
125
47
14
47
12
1
4
Coastal O.T.U.
35
19
5
9
1
1
Coastal Command ,.
160
66
19
56
13
2
4
Middle East
125
68
19
28
8
1
1
Flying Training
267
157
37
56
16
1
Army Co-op. Ops.
29
19
2
2
6
—
—
Army Co-op. O.T.U.
6
3
—
2
I
—
Army Co-op. Command ..
35
22
2
4
7
—
Total
1,197
563
159
293
156
*
14
12
Operational aircraft in Coastal Command contributed approximately the
same number as day fighters (125 and 106), but whereas all the fighters were
pilots, only 47 of those from crews of coastal aircraft were pilots. The relative
significance of the figures in this table is discussed in relation to crew strengths
in the final section of this report.
It will be observed from Table XV that in every command and JO.T.U
the pilots exceed any other air crew category. In Bomber and Coastal Com-
mands the Wireless Operator/Air Gunners are nearly equal in number. This
is discussed later in relation to total strengths.
It is evident from Table XVI that the stress of operations alone is not
the sole factor in causing psychological breakdown, since a large number of cases
occur in the O.T.U. as well as in Flying Training Command. In these training
units 402 patients had not been on operations while only 86 (17-5 per cent)
had. It is interesting to notice that in Bomber, Fighter, Coastal and Middle
East Commands, 7-7,10-5,3*4 and 8-8 per cent respectively of flying personnel
who broke down after reaching an operational squadron, did so before flying
on operations. This group of people, who are unable to face the final reality


TABLE XVI
Command
Total
No
flying
Percen
Non-op.
• flying
tages
Under
100 op.
hours
Over
100 op.
hours
Bomber ops.
348
8
60
33
Bomber O.T.U.
154
—
70
6
24
Bomber Command
502
—
27
43
30
Fighter ops.
82
—
12
52
38
Fighter O.T.U
26
—
79
7
14
Fighter Command
108
—
28
41
32
Coastal ops.
125
—
3
40
57
Coastal O.T.U.
35
—
58
9
24
Coastal Command
160
—
18
33
50
Middle East
125
—
9
41
50
Flying Training
267
35
56
1
7
Army Co-op. ops.
29
45
35
21
Army Co-op. O.T.U.
6
—
100
—
—
Army Co-op. Command ..
35
—
54
29
17
Total
1,197
8
31
32
29
TABLE
XVII
Percentages
-
Total
No
flying
Non-op.
flying
Under
100 op.
hours
Over
100 op.
hours
Predisposition — «
26
30
46
NU
386
14
Mild
622
45
54
56
48
Severe
189
42
20
14
6
Total
1,197
101
100
100
100 .
Non-flying stress —
57
52
NU
708
67
66
MUd
440
26
30
40
43
Severe
49
8
4
3
4
Total .. „ ..
1,197
101
100
100
99
Flying stress —
NU
459
100
63
25
11
Slight
318
—
25
37
24
Moderate
286
—
10
28
41
Severe
123
—
2
10
23
Exceptional
11
—
—
1
2
Total
1,197
100
100
101
101
of operational flying, has already been described in the report of visits to opera-
tional stations (pp. 33-36). Of these, 51 cases (79 per cent) were
predisposed, compared with 453 (62 per cent) of those on operations, and 28
(55 per cent) were considered to be lacking confidence. Some indication
of the factors concerned can be obtained by analysing the predisposition and
degrees of stress in these different groups.
(76642)
E 2


TABLE XVIII
Command
Total
Percentage
Com-
missioned
Married
Bomber ops.
348
24
41
Bomber O.T.U.
154
26
46
Bomber Command
502
25
42
Fighter ops.
82
48
32
Fighter O.T.U.
26
39
43
Fighter Command
108
46
35
Coastal ops.
125
28
40
Coastal O.T.U.
35
56
41
Coastal Command
160
34
41
Middle East
125
42
27
Flying Training
267
20
26
Army Co-op. ops.
29
38
31
Army Co-op. O.T.U. ..
6
33
50
Army Co-op. Command
35
37
34
Total
1,197
29
36
Table XVII shows that there is an inverse relationship between the
severity of predisposition and the degree of flying stress to which the patients
have been subjected. There is a steady decrease in the proportion of those
severely predisposed, with increase in the length of the flying career. On the
other hand, there is an inverse relationship between the distribution of those
without evident predisposition and those severely predisposed. The number
of mildly predisposed individuals is similar in each group. As might be
expected, the degree of flying stress varies directly with the flying experience,
but the proportion of those subjected to mild non-flying stress rises steadily
with an increase in the flying stress. It is difficult to explain this on the basis
of a direct relationship between the two. The age distribution, the marriage
rate, and the proportion commissioned is lower in Flying Training Command
and the O.T.Us. than in the operational groups, and that these three factors
are highest in Bomber and Coastal operational groups. It is probable that
this results in a greater proportion of senior men being present in the operational
groups. The likelihood of experiencing domestic marital and financial worries
would be greater in these individuals by sheer weight of years and exposure
to domestic stress.
The proportion of commissioned officers is higher in Fighter Command
than in the others, presumably because the majority of the patients are pilots.
In the operational fighter stations the proportion reaches 50 per cent. The
average age is highest, and the proportion of married air crews highest, in
Bomber Command, Coastal Command being very similar in this respect.


TABLE XIX
Percentages of total in grades of
Flying stress
Non-flying
stress
Pre-
disposition
Command
Total
aa
fc
Slight
Moderate
Severe
Exceptional
aa
£
Mild
Severe
as
£
•0
aa
S
Severe
Bomber Ops. ..
348
19
31
32
16
1
56
41
3
37
53
10
Bomber O.T.U.
154
49
16
24
9
1
70
30
1
24
62
15
Bomber Command
502
30
27
29
12
1
60
38
2
33
56
11
Fighter Ops. ..
82
23
32
32
10
1
68
27
2
35
49
13
Fighter O.T.U.
26
46
46
15
—
—
85
23
—
31
46
31
Fighter Command
108
29
35
28
7
1
72
26
2
34
48
18
Coastal Ops.
125
23
33
31
12
2
55
41
4
33
53
14
Coastal O.T.U.
35
56
23
21
—
59
33
9
21
56
24
Coastal Command
160
30
31
38
9
1
56
39
5
31
54
15
Middle East
125
20
31
29
18
2
43
51
7
51
46
4
Flying Training
267
75
16
6
2
—
64
30
6
22
48
30
Army Co-op. Ops.
29
35
35
28
4
45
45
10
38
55
7
Army Co-op. O.T.U. ..
6
17
67
17
—
—
67
33
—
33
50
17
Army Co-op. Command
35
31
40
26
3
49
43
9
37
54
8
Total
1,197
38
27
24
10
1
59
37
4
32
52
16
{a) Predisposition and stress
For greater facility the groups are now compared as percentages of the
totals:—
Interesting facts emerging are :
(i) As would be expected, the degree of flying stress encountered in
the O.T.Us. is much less than in the operational stations.
(ii) Complementary to this first point, predisposition to psychological
disorders is invariably higher in the O.T.Us. than in the operational
stations. It is slightly higher in Flying Training Command than
in the O.T.Us. The lowering of the degree of predisposition as
training advances and operations are reached is presumably due
to the more heavily predisposed dropping out earlier in their
flying career, without having been subjected to much stress.
Those who remain are consequently a selected group with relatively
less predisposition. The earlier in training the breakdown occurs,
(7664 C) E 3


Command
O.T.U.
Operational
Bomber • ..
15
10
Fighter
31
13
Coastal
24
14
Array Co-operation
17
7
Flying Training ..
30
—
the more evident is the factor of predisposition. Thus the figures
for severe predisposition in the O.T.Us. contrasted with operational
sections of the commands are ;
At the other extreme the Middle East command, composed
at that time of seasoned personnel, had by far the lowest incidence
of predisposition, half the cases showing none, and only 4 per cent
being severely predisposed.
(iii) The proportion of patients subjected to each of the grades of flying
stress in the operational stations of each of the four Commands,
Bomber, Fighter, Coastal and Middle East, show a striking
similarity. The assessment of the degree of stress of operational
flying by the neuro-psychiatrists for the Central Registry
appears to have been consistent in spite of the varied duties of all
the patients in these commands. There is no evidence of one
form of stress peculiar to one duty. This being so, the degree of
predisposition to psychological disorder of patients in each of
these commands should be similar. This is in fact the case,
except that in the Middle East Command where severe stress
is rather more frequent than in the other commands, the absence
of predisposition is higher.
(iv) Non-flying stress is slightly less common in the O.T.Us. than in the
operational stations. It is least common in Fighter Command,
which has the lowest marriage rate of the operational commands.
It is highest in the Middle East Command, where the factor of
expatriation is so potent. Compared with the degree of flying
stress, which varies greatly between training and operational units,
the degree of non-flying stress is relatively constant throughout
the commands and stations.
(v) A study of the trends of the percentages of cases in Table XXI
shows that there is a striking inverse relationship between the
degree of flying stress and the amount of predisposition to psycho-
logical disorders in the different commands.
(vi) It follows that the likelihood of breakdown does not depend upon
the degree of stress alone, since Table XIX shows that the number
of cases with different degrees of flying stress are very similar in
the operational sections throughout the commands, although the
incidence of cases varies greatly (see Table XXX). It has been
shown that predisposition varies roughly in inverse proportion to
this stress, and in the training stations it is seen to be a major factor.
It is probable that the amount of flying stress cannot be greatly
reduced since it is an integral part of the life of operational air crews.
Predisposition to psychological disorders can, on the other hand,
be reduced by removal of the predisposed. Scrutiny of the figures
for severe predisposition shows how profitable this may be, since,
by the definition of severe predisposition (page 121) 189 (15'8 per
cent) would have been eliminated if this predisposition were
recognised in a single psychiatric interview on enlistment.


TABLE XX
Causes
Command
Total
Psycho-
Ex-
Air-
Physical
Physical
logical
haustion
sickness
injury
illness
Bomber Ops.
348
315
7
7
55
32
97
Bomber O.T.U. ..
154
126
2
6
18
14
39
Bomber Command
502
441
9
13
73
46
136
Fighter Ops.
82
71
1
1
11
9
21
Fighter O.T.U.
26
23
—
—
6
—
6
Fighter Command ..
108
94
' 1
1
17
9
27
Coastal Ops.
125
106
4
3
18
9
32
Coastal O.T.U.
35
31
—
—
2
1
3
Coastal Command ..
. 160
137
4
3
20
10
35
Middle East ..
125
89
2
2
20
7
29
Flying Training
267
245
1
2
26
19
48
Army Co-ops.
29
24
—
—
3
7
10
Army Co-op. O.T.U.
6
5
—
—
2
2
3
Army Co-op. Command
35
29
—
—
5
9
13
Total
1,197
1,035
17
21
161
100
288
TABLE XXI
Command
Reaction type
Total
Elation
Anxiety
1 Depression
Fatigue
Hysteria
Obsessional
Schizo-
phrenic
Organic,
acute
Organic,
chronic
Lack of
confidence
Mixed*
Bomber Ops.
348
249
18
21
27
2
1
_
52
22
Bomber O.T.U.
154
101
13
9
12
5
1
1
1
28
17
Bomber Command
502
—
350
51
30
39
7
2
1
1
80
39
Fighter Ops
82
1
60
8
5
2
2
—
—
—
10
4
Fighter O.T.U.
26
—
18
2
1
1
1
—
—
—
4
2
Fighter Command
108
1
78
10
6
3
3
—
—
—
14
6
Coastal Ops.
125
—
90
11
6
8
1
—
—
16
8
Coastal O.T.U.
35
—
21
5
4
4
—
—
—
—
4
3
Coastal Command
160
111
16
10
12
1
—
—
—
20
11
Middle East
125
1
72
20
2
9
—
—
—
—
35
14
Flying Training
267
1
154
26
11
52
9
11
—
—
21
18
Army Co-op. Ops.
29
—
20
3
—
1
1
—
—
—
6
1
Army Co-op. O.T.U. ..
6
—
4
1
—
1
—
—
—
—
6
—
Army Co-op. Command
35
1
24
4
1
2
1
—
—
—
6
1
Total
1,197 _
3
789
107
59
117
21
13
1
1
176
89
(b)
Causes
* Mixed refers to more than one cause being recognised in these cases (see pp. 125 and 126).
The cases, therefore, appear in two or more of the columns.
Table XX confirms the observation made previously that psychological
factors are the most important causes of breakdown in air crews. This observa-
tion holds for all commands. The other factors are evenly distributed through-
out the commands and O.T.Us.
(«)
Reaction types
• Mixed indicates that more than one reaction type was present in these cases. They,
therefote, are included in two or more of the columns.
(76642)


TABLE XXII
Command
Total
Final disposal
Temporary
disposal
Full flying
Limited
flying
Grounded
Invalided
Executive
Limited
flying
Grounded
Re-
examined
Bomber Ops.
348
38
10
92
1
52
99
88
84
Bomber O.T.U.
154
24
6
40
1
24
24
29
25
Bomber Command ..
502
62
16
132
2
76
123
117
109
Fighter Ops.
82
14
7
11
—
9
14
31
14
Fighter O.T.U.
26
4
—
3
—
4
10
6
5
Fighter Command
108
18
7
14
—
13
24
37
19
Coastal Ops. ..
125
19
6
27
—
13
29
34
27
Coastal O.T.U.
35
7
1
11
1
3
4
7
7
Coastal Command
160
26
7
38
1
16
33
41
34
Middle East ..
125
46
5
6
—
29
49
53
52
Flying Training
' 267
42
4
124
5
29
33
32
35
Army Co-op. Ops.
29
7
2
4
1
4
4
6
7
Army Co-op. O.T.U.
6
1
—
3
1
—
'
1
—
Army Co-op. Command
35
8
2
7
2
4
4
. 7
7
Total
1,197
202
41
321
10
167
266
287
256
The observation that there is nothing specific in the character of psycho-
logical disorders in air crews has support in the data in Table XXI, since the
incidence of the different psychiatric reaction types is similar throughout the
commands, operational and operational training units, in spite of the multi-
farious duties undertaken in all these units. The proportion of cases in whom
the onset was not in any way determined by flying duties is, as might be
expected, much higher in Flying Training Command than in the operational
commands, and in the O.T.Us. than in the operational units.
In Table XXII the column ‘ temporarily grounded ’ strikes an unjustifi-
ably pessimistic note, for it includes all patients who were sent on sick leave
prior to return to flying duty. It therefore has little practical significance.
An interesting point arises in regard to the problem of predisposition, which
has already been discussed. In Table XXII it will be seen that in Flying
Training Command, 129 patients were removed from flying and only 51 returned
to flying (15 of these were instructors). In the O.T.Us. 60 were removed and
43 returned to flying, and in the operational stations 142 were removed and
154 returned to flying. In Middle East Command particularly, 51 returned
to flying and'only 6 were grounded. From previous data presented this
means that the greater the flying stress the higher the proportion of men
returning to that stress after a psychological illness. In other words, pre-
disposition is highest and the prognosis is worst in the safety of training units.
This illustrates again the important part played by predisposition in
determining these illnesses.
5. Lack of confidence
When the 176 flying personnel (15 per cent of the total) who were not
considered to be medically ill are contrasted with the total series, several


TABLE XXIII
Predisposition
Lack of
confidence
per cent
All cases
per cent
Nil
45
32
Mild
52
51
Severe ..
3
15
TABLE XXIV
Flying stress
Lack of
confidence
per cent
All cases
per cent
Nil
39
38
Slight ..
36
27
Moderate
20
24
Severe ..
5
10
Exceptional
—
1
interesting points emerge. In the main there is similarity between the two
groups and the differences are as follows :
(i) In the group ‘ lacking confidence ’ the proportion of subjects with
commissions is less than that in the large series—l 9 per cent
compared with 29 per cent.
(ii) The marriage rate was 44 per cent compared with 36 per cent in
the whole group. This slight difference may be a reflection of the
observation that in some cases the wives persuade the man against
flying intentionally or subconsciously.
(iii) Predisposition to psychological disorder was rather less evident in
this group.
Those mildly predisposed form just half of each group, but those severely
predisposed are five times less common in the group ‘lacking confidence.’
Nevertheless, a high proportion of those considered medically fit at the time of
examination and subsequently referred for executive action, were in some
degree predisposed to psychological disorder.
In the group of those ' lacking in confidence,’ however, there are half as
many again who have no evidence of predisposition to psychological disorder.
As in the total series this extra number probably represents those men who,
although apparently normal in all respects, have for personal safety or gain
decided that they will not fly again. From a clinical point of view these men
stand out in contrast to the others, since there is less justification for their
behaviour.
Table XXIV shows that a greater number of patients with a psychological
illness have been subjected to the more severe degrees of flying stress than
those who lack confidence, but an equal proportion of each group have been
subjected to no stress at all. There is very little difference between the two
groups, in the numbers who have experienced the lesser degrees of stress, in
tact in this table also it is the similarity rather than the difference between the
groups which is striking.


TABLE XXV
Non-flying stress
Lack of
confidence
per cent
All cases
per cent
Nil
77
59
Mild
23
36
Severe ..
4
TABLE XXVI
Duties
Number of cases
Percentage
lack of
confidence
Lack of
confidence
All cases
Flying training
21
267
7-9
O.T.Us
36
221
16-2
Bomber operations ..
52
348
13-6
Fighter operations ..
10
82
12-2
Coastal operations ..
16
125
12-8
Middle East operations
35
125
28-0
Army Co-op. operations
6
29
20-6
Total
176
1,197
14-7
TABLE XXVII
Crew
Number c
f cases
Percentage
lack of
categories
Lack of
confidence
All cases
confidence
Bilot ..
76
563
13-4
W.Op./A.G
60
293
20-5
Observer
18
154
11-2
Air Gunner ..
12
156
7-7
Radio Observer
14
Engineer ...
—
12
—
Total
176
1,197
14-7
Table XXV shows that those who develop psychological disorders have
been subjected to greater domestic and personal worries than have those
lacking confidence, three-quarters of whom had no appreciable stress of this
sort.
The relative number of cases lacking confidence is low in Flying Training
Command and high in Middle East Command. It is interesting that in the
former, flying stress is low and in the latter it is high. In the other Commands
and O.T.Us. the proportion is similar to that of cases of psychological disorder.
(vii)
The relative incidence of lack of confidence appears to be higher in wireless
operator/air gunners than in pilots. The number of cases lacking confidence
in observers and air gunners is probably not great enough to warrant definite
conclusions.


TABLE XXVIII
Flying and
operational hours
Number of cases
Percentage
lack of
confidence
Lack of •
confidence
All cases
No flying
7
95
7*4.
No operations
55
374
14-7
Less than 100 op. hours
81
297
27-1
Over 100 op. hours
33
431
7-6
Total
176
1,197
14-7
(viii)
It seems that lack of confidence is more likely to arise in the early stages of
an operational tour than at any other time and as operational experience
accumulates the individual is likely to continue in his duties until he develops
a psychological illness rather than throw his hand in. This only will be a
reflection of the higher morale of those reaching the later stage of their
operational duty.
6. Relative incidence of flying stress
Owing to the different rates of expansion of the commands, and of the
personnel in different duties and air crew categories in those commands, it has
so far proved impossible to calculate an index by means of which accurate
comparisons can be made. Some idea of the number of persons exposed to
risk in each command, or in its component parts could be obtained if the
monthly average strengths were known, as well as the monthly intake and
output. This information could be used to calculate an index which would be
roughly comparable from command to command. It is obvious that the
usual figure of the annual incidence expressed as a percentage of the average
strength has no value in this connection either in itself or for comparison.
For instance, it was found that the cases coming to notice in the past six
months first began to break down not only in these six months but during
1941 and even 1940. The large number of pilots involved consequently includes
a large legacy from the previous two years, but the incidence in a new category
such as radio observer is not similarly loaded. Any comparison of pilots and
radio observers bn the basis of a simple index would therefore be grossly mis-
leading. Similarly, comparison of a fairly stable command with one which is
rapidly expanding might lead to misinterpretation of the results.
All the information needed to calculate a reasonably accurate figure of
incidence of psychological disorder in flying personnel in the different duties
and categories in the commands is not at present available. For the purpose
of this interim report an arbitrary index of the incidence has therefore been
adopted to give a rough guide the relative incidence in commands, operational
stations and O.T.Us., but it does not indicate the actual incidence. To this
end the index for the whole service is taken as unity. The index is based upon


TABLE XXIX
Indices of incidence of neurosis in air crews
Total
Operational
units
O.T.U.
Hoyal Air Force
1-00
—
—
Bomber Command ..
1-85
2-77
1-02
Fighter Command ..
—
1-24
Coastal Command ..
0-93
1-82
0-44
Army Co-op. Command
1 ■ 15
—
—
Flying Training Command
0-41
—
—
TABLE XXX
Indices of incidence of neurosis in air crews at operational stations and
Flying Training Command
Bomber
Fighter
Coastal
Army
Co-op.
Flying
Training
Command
All air crew
2-77
1-25
1-82
1 • 15
0-41
Pilots
3 03
1-67
2-20
1-10
0-39
Observers
2-01
—
1-10
0-31
W.Op./A.G.
2-74
—
1-72.
—
0-33
Air Gunners
3-67
0-46
—
—
TABLE XXXI
Indices of incidence of neurosis in air crews at O.T.Us. and Flying Training Command.
Crew categories
Flying
Training
Command
Bomber
Command
Coastal
Command
All air crew ..
0-41
1-02
0-44
U.T. Pilot
0-39
0-54
■j
U.T. Observers
0-31
0-86
U.T. W.Op./A.G
0-33
0-67
>■ 0-42
U.T. Air Gunners ..
0-55
J
Instructors ..
0-90
1-52
0-45
the ratio of the cases to the average monthly strengths.' The proportional
incidence in commands, operational units and O.T.Us. is as follows:
The relative index of incidence in the larger air crew categories in operational
stations and in Flying Training Command is shown in Table XXX. The
figures for the newer and smaller categories are not large enough to be reliable.


TABLE XXXII
Approximate relative index of incidence in duties
Duties
Index
Royal Air Force ..
1-00
Coastal G.R. and offensive
2-30
Bomber, day and night .. .. .. ..
2-27
Fighter, day .. ..
1-80
Army Co-op.
1-17
Fighter, night
1-07
P.R.U
1-07
Instructing (Flying Training)
0-85
Under training (Flying Training)
0-4X
Coastal boats
0-31
Air-Sea Rescue
0-31
For convenience the word incidence will mean the index already described,
but it must be borne in mind that it is only absolutely comparable in commands,
duties and crew categories if tho rate of flow of flying personnel in these
groups is similar. In Table XXIX it will be seen that Bomber Command
has the highest incidence of psychological disorder in flying personnel; that
for Flying Training Command is much lower than the others. The incidence
in operational units is much higher than in O.T.Us., in Bomber and in Coastal
Commands.
The incidence in operational stations in Bomber Command is over five
times that in Flying Training Command. This confirms the evidence already
presented of a direct relationship between the degree of flying stress encountered
and the incidence of psychological disorder in air crews. When the crew
categories of the commands are studied it is seen that in each the highest
incidence is amongst the pilots except in Bomber Command where the incidence
in pilots is second highest, being exceeded by air gunners. The highest incidence
in all categories is in Bomber Command, with Coastal Command next and Fighter
third. In Flying Training Command the highest incidence is in instructors,
the majority (85 per cent) of whom are pilots, but there is no significant difference
between the categories of those air crews under training, pilots being the same
as the others. The incidence in these pilots under training is low. It seems,
therefore, that the high incidence in pilots in operational units is due to some
special stress to which they are subjected. Some of the factors which may
contribute to this stress have been discussed on pages 47-54 and include the
psychological strain of responsibility for the aircraft and its crew for the captain
and the bodily fatigue of prolonged flights. To these must be added the
possibility of central nervous fatigue following long continued and perhaps
too frequently repeated skilled performance. It has been suggested that the
high incidence in Bomber Command air gunners is due to lack of personnel
selection on enrolment in this air crew category.
Although the incidence is low in personnel under training, it is higher in
instructors, and whom it approaches the level of the operational crews. It was
shown that 15 of 52 instructors who broke down in Flying Training Command
had experienced the stress of operational flying before breakdown. This may
be a factor in causing breakdown, but as the incidence is also high in the other
instructors it appears that the nature of their duties, whether as the result of
boredom, staleness, or anxiety, may increase the likelihood of psychological
disorder. It is interesting that there is a uniform rate of breakdown in air crew
under training, irrespective of their categories, suggesting that the nature of


the basic duty, per se, does not contribute to the discrepancy between the
incidences of breakdown in air crew categories in operational 1 stations.
The incidence in different duties shows great variation. Coastal general
reconnaissance and offensive duties have the same high incidence as bombing.
Day fighting is slightly lower and is much greater than night flying. The
distribution suggests that in the operational duties the incidence of psychological
disorder is related to the amount of hazard involved.
7. SUMMARY
In a statistical survey of psychological disorders in flying personnel
in the Royal Air Force in the period February 3rd to August 3rd, 1942, the cases
have been analysed on the basis of commands, duties, air crew categories,
flying hours and operational flying hours, time of onset, ages, proportion
commissioned, psychiatric reaction types, causes, psychological stress related
to flying and other factors, and of predisposition to neurotic illness. Finally
the number of cases has been related to the average strengths in the commands,
and the relative incidence determined, as far as possible, for commands, duties,
air crew categories, and the proportion commissioned.
Points are worthy of note :
(i) The number of cases of psychological disorder referred to neuro-
psychiatrists in the six months was 1,197, 176 of these were
considered to have no medical disability and were referred for
executive disposal.
(ii) There were twice as many cases in Bomber Command (502) as in
the next highest. Flying Training Command (267).
(iii) The duties contributing the greatest number of cases were air crews
under training (30 per cent), and night bombing (29 per cent)
Instructing was third (11 per cent).
(iv) Pilots made up nearly half the total (47 per cent) ,J wireless operator —
air gunners contributing a quarter (24 per cent).
(v) Nearly 40 per cent of the personnel had not reached operational
duties, and 8 per cent had not flown at all.
(vi) An anxiety state or depression were present, alone or together, in
88 per cent of the cases. Hysteria was present in 12 per cent.
(vii) In all except 4 cases psychological causes were thought to have
contributed to the illness. In 24 per cent physical causes were
also present.
(viii) 42 per cent of those patients who had been given a final disposal
returned to flying duties. 97 per cent of those permanently
grounded were fit to continue in ground duties.
(ix) Nearly two-thirds of the patients (65 per cent) had been subjected
either to slight flying stress or to no flying stress at all, and over
a third were considered to have had no such stress. In 13 per cent
the illness seems to have been unrelated to flying duties.
(x) Over a half (59 per cent) gave no history of contributory domestic
or personal worries.
(xi) In two-thirds (67 per cent there was evidence of predisposition to
neurotic illness. This was mild in 52 per cent and severe in 16 per
cent. There was an inverse relationship between the incidence of
severe predisposition and the flying stress to which the patients had


been subjected. This latter was directly related to the amount of
flying, and especially of operational flying, done by the patients.
The incidence of severe disposition as high (42 per cent) in those
who had not flown. In those who had begun their flying career the
highest incidence of.severe predisposition was in Flying Training
Command (30 per cent), with a steady decrease with increasing
experience. Thus, in each command it was higher in the O.T.Us.
than in the operational units, reaching its lowest point (6 per cent)
in those who had completed over 100 operational flying hours.
The greater the predisposition the less is the amount of flying stress
required to cause breakdown.
(xii) An approximate index of the incidence was calculated from the
average monthly strengths. The severe limitations of this index,
and the-impossibility of determining the true incidence in view
of the different rates of expansion of different commands, and of
duties and categories in those commands, has been emphasised.
On the basis of a hypothetical index of 1-00 for the whole Royal
Air Force, the relative incidence of psychological disorder in air
crew in different commands, duties and categories has been
estimated. This was highest (2 • 27) in bomber operational units
and lowest in air crew under training (0-41). In the operational
commands it was invariably higher in the squadrons* than in the
O.T.Us., and in pilots higher than in any other air crew categories
in the commands. In Flying Training Command, on the other
hand, the index was roughly the same for each air crew category
under training.
The duties with the highest incidences were Coastal G.R. and offensive
duties (2*30) day and night bombing (2-27) and day fighting (1-80). The
lowest were in Coastal boats and in the Air Sea Rescue Service (0-31).


Cases
Neurosis arising mainly from flying duties ..
.. 2,200
Neurosis not directly caused by flying duties
.. 303
No neurosis, but lacking in confidence
.. 416
Total
.. 2,919
CHAPTER X
CLINICAL AND STATISTICAL STUDY OF NEUROSIS PRECIPITATED
BY FLYING DUTIES
by
Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds, K.B.E., C.B., M.D., F.R.C.P., and
Wing Commander Denis J. Williams, D.Sc., M.D., F.R.C.P.
FPRC Report 547 August, 1943
Introduction
In 2,200 of the 2,919 cases of psychological disorder in flying personnel
seen by neuro-psychiatrists in the Royal Air Force in the year ending February
9th, 1943, the physician considered that the neurosis had arisen mainly from
flying duties. This report is based upon an analysis of the data recorded
for each of these cases by the neuro-psychiatric physicians who saw them,
but it will take into account for purposes of comparison data recorded in the
same way ans during the same period, for cases of neurosis in air crews which
were not attributed to flying duties. Reference will also be made to individual
case histories and to observations made during visits of the two investigators
to stations-in the commands, reports upon which have already been presented
(Chapters IV, V and VI). It is emphasized that the present report does not
deal with the total incidence of neurosis in flying personnel during a year,
but is confined to the problem of neurosis resulting from flying duties.
1. Method
The method of collection and sorting of data, with samples of the cards
used and the instructions issued to the physicians who used them, is described
in Chapters VII and IX. Briefly, every physician returned a card for each case
of psychological disorder in flying personnel seen by him, to the Central Registry.
On this card were recorded details of the patient’s Service career, including
flying hours, type of duty, the aircraft used, diagnosis, and an assessment of
what in the physician’s opinion were the most important factors in causation,
with especial reference to the degree of stress to which the patient had been
subjected in his flying, and in his life apart from flying, and to his constitutional
liability to breakdown in the face of stress. Instructions upon definition
and documentation were explicit. All the information, which was collected
in as consistent a manner as possible, was transferred to a punch-card system
and subsequently analysed. The sources of the material are described in
Chapter IX, cases being unselected, and including all air crew categories and
duties in the Royal Air Force. Altogether 2,919 flying personnel were referred
to neuro-psychiatrists for a psychiatric opinion during the year, and were
divided as follows ;


The decision whether or not a neurosis has been caused mainly by flying
duties has, of course, to be made by the physician on the basis of his interview,
and it depends upon his clinical judgment. In most cases the decision is a
simple one, but all cards were scrutinised at the Central Registry, doubtful
cases being referred back for reconsideration. The physicians were instructed
to include in this group all neuroses resulting from experiences peculiar to air
crews, and to list these experiences in each case. The instructions stated that
these experiences
‘ may include, for example, anticipation of flying before flying has begun, witnessing
unpleasant incidents, death of friends: actual experience of mishaps, shaky-dos,
crashes, flak, immersion, exhaustion, altitude effects, cold, air sickness, physical
injury. Effects of physical injury will, however, only be included if the resulting
psychological disorder is not purely of the organic type. For example, a man
suffering a head injury in a crash may be confused ; a man with an infected wound
may become delirious. The symptoms in such cases, though they are symptoms of
psychological disorder and have arisen from flying duties, are of the organic reaction
type, therefore no card need be returned. A man who has suffered injury to the
head, however, or any other part of the body in a crash may develop a state of
anxiety because he has been hurt and fears being hurt again. This is psychological
disorder not of the organic type, and a card will be required.’
Although this report is concerned with the group of cases arising mainly
from flying duties the other two groups will be referred to in order to illustrate
points in the arguments presented. These are based on figures giving the actual
number of cases of neurosis ; the incidence of neurosis per 100 man-years.
The conception man-year has been adopted on the advice of Professor A.
Bradford Hill, because the conditions in the commands vary so much that a
comparison of incidence in terms of average strength may be misleading.
This is so because the rate of intake and the rate of outflow from commands,
whether due to casualties or postings, varies so greatly that the actual number
of men who pass through the command may have little relationship to the
average strength. For example, using hypothetical figures, suppose that;—
1,000 cases .occur in Bomber Command with an average strength of 10,000 men
and a flow of 50,000 men through the command in the year, while 500 cases occur
in Fighter Command with an average strength of 5,000 and a flow of 7,500 men in
the year. The incidence would be 10 per cent of the average strength in each case,
but it would be 2-0 per cent of the total men in the first and 6-6 per cent in the
second. As the average time a man stayed in Bomber Command would be
50 000 x 12 = 2-4 months and in Fighter Command x 12 = 8-0 months,
the time available for each man to break down in Bomber Command being only
about a third of that in Fighter Command, very many more men have been exposed
to the risk of breaking down in Bomber Command than in Fighter Command in
the same year. If number of individuals and duration of stay are combined in the
conception of man-years, we have a unit which covers both average strength and
rate of flow and provides a basis for comparison of the relative incidence in com-
mands, duties and crew categories, with varying strengths and times of stay of
the personnel. A hundred man-years may be made up by a hundred men staying
in a command for a year, or by 400 only staying for an average of 3 months, but a
moment’s thought shows that if all other factors are equal the number of illnesses
occurring in the two groups would be equal, since the 100 men were exposed to the
chance of illness for four times as long as the .400.
The simple calculation in the previous paragraph shows that both the
average strength and the rate of flow through the command are used to calculate
the number of man-years. The incidence in man-years has been calculated
from the number of cases, the strengths at the beginning of each quarter,
and the total intake in each quarter during the year of inquiry. From these
data the statement that the incidence of neurosis in X men with an average
stay in the command of Y months was Z per 100 man-years may be completed.
It was subsequently found that incidence expressed as per cent man-years
was roughly the same as if it had been expressed as per cent average strength.
For comparison, however, per cent man-years is more reliable.


TABLE I
Distribution in crew categories resulting from flying duties in a year
Category
No.
Per cent
of total
Pilot
1,016
46')
W.O.P./A.G
455
15 [ 96
Air Gunner
319
Navigator ..
311
14 J
Flight Engineer
30
1-4
Navigator, H.
21
1-0
Bomb Aimer
19
0-9
Navigator, W.
16
0-7
P.N.B
10
0-5
Navigator, B.W., etc.
3
0-1
Total
2,200
TABLE II
Percentage of cases analysed in crew categories
Command
Total
Pilot
Navigator
WOP/AG
A/G
Other
categories
Bomber ..
942
29
18
26
22
5
Middle East
299
59
10
17
12
2
Coastal ..
271
44
12
31
9
4
Fighter ..
197
84
3
1
8
4
Army Co-operation
46
67
9
11
11
2
Flying Training
445
55
17
15
8
—
Total
2,200
46
14
21
15
4
TABLE III
Incidence in crew categories as a percentage of man-years
Category
Incidence per
100 man-years
Air Gunner
5-2
W.Op./A.G
4-4
Navigator
2-8
Pilot ..
2-8
Other categories
2-0
All categories ..
3-2
2.
Incidence
This shows that nearly half of all cases arise in pilots and that 96 per cent
were confined to pilots, wireless operators, airgunners and navigators. The
other eight crew categories together only contributed 99 cases (4 per cent),
so they will be grouped together and the discussion limited to the first four
categories. (See also Fig. 1, page 143.)
Table II shows that in all commands except Bomber, pilots made up the
bulk of the cases and that they represented 84 per cent in Fighter Command.
In Bomber Command the distribution of cases was much more uniform, and
pilots made up just under 30 per cent of the total.


It is apparent from Table 111 that the high percentages of pilots shown in
Tables I and II gives a false impression of the relative incidence which is actually
lower in this category than among air gunners and wireless operators.
As conditions to which air crew under training are subjected in Flying
Training Command are quite different from those found in the operational
Commands, and as air crew under training are so numerous as to affect the
total incidence materially, it is best to consider the position in Flying Training
Command separately, as in Table IV.
FIG. I
INCIDENCE IN CREW CATEGORIES
CREW CATEGORIES


TABLE IV
Incidence in air crew categories per 100 man-years in Flying Training Command
Category
Operational
Commands
(per 100 n
Flying
Training
Command
tan-years)
Air Gunner
6-7
1-5
Pilot
5-4
0-9
Navigator ..
4-7
1-3
W.Op./A.G
4-3
1-4
Other categories ..
2-3
0-9
All categories
5-0
1-3
TABLE V
Incidence (per 100 man-years) in commands analysed in air crew categories
Category
Bomber
Middle
East
Fighter
Coastal
Army
Co-op.
Flying
Training
R.A.F.
Air Gunner ..
8-0
7-0
5-8
5-5
5-3
1-5
3-2
Pilot
6-8
5-8
4-9
5-0
3-6
0-9
2-8
Navigator
5-8
2-6
2-3*
2-7
2-4
1-3
2-8
W.Op./A.G
5-5
3-6
—
2-9
2-4
1-4
4-4
Command
6-5
4-8
4-0
3-9
3-5
1-3
3-2
This table shows that in the operational commands, i.e., • the Royal Air
Force apart from Training Command, the incidence of neurosis attributed to
flying duties is higher in air gunners than in any other category, and that
pilots, in whom it is next highest, have an incidence slightly above the mean,
which is exactly 5 per 100 man-years. It should be remembered that this
refers only to neurosis resulting from flying.
The distribution of cases in air crew categories in each command is shown
in Table 11, the incidence in air crew categories in the Commands in Table V.
As the categories Bomb Aimer, Flight Engineer, Navigator R. and Navigator
B.W. had only recently been instituted, the number of man-years represented
by them as well as the total number of cases contributed by them (99) is so
small that the incidence figures are unreliable. They have therefore been
excluded from this table. When the figures for pilots, navigator, wireless
operator and air gunner are compared, it is seen that in every operational
command, the breakdown rate is greatest in air gunners and is next greatest
in pilots, while it is lowest for navigators and wireless operators.
♦ Navigator Radio
The breakdown rate for all air crew categories is higher in Bomber Command
and is lower in Army Co-op. Command than in any other operational command.-
The low figures for Training Command are in striking contrast to those for the
operational commands. A discussion of the causes of these varying incidences
will be deferred until further facts are presented.


TABLE VI
Distribution of the cases analysed under duties
Duties
No. of
cases
Percentage
of duties
Bomber, night
791
33
Under training
584
24
Instructor ..
264
11
Fighter, day
237
10
Coastal, General Reconnaissance ..
170
7
Bomber, day
158
7
Fighter, night
56
O
Army Co-operation..
37
2
Coastal boats
33
1
Coastal strikes
29
1
Ferrying
14
0-4
Photographic Reconnaissance Unit
9
0-3
Air Sea Rescue
5
0-2
Test pilot
3
0-1
Other duties
26
1-1
Total cases
2,200
100
TABLE VII
Incidence in duties in operational units of commands
(per cent man-years)
Day
Night
Day
Night
Army
Command
Fighter
Fighter
Bomber
Bomber
Coastal
ation
Bomber
11-2
12-1
Middle East
10-4
8-9
8-8
2-4
—
Fighter ..
6-0
3-4
—
—
—
—
Coastal ..
—
*
—
—
3-9
—
Army Co-operation
—
—
—
—
—
5-4
(a) Duties
The number of duties in Table VI is greater than the number of cases
because in 216 instances, or 10 per cent of the total, the patient performed two
duties before he broke down, both of which were considered causal and both
recorded.
In operational duties the largest contributions are made by night bombers,
day fighters, coastal central reconnaissance and day bombers, but it is obvious
that the size of these figures depends largely upon the populations at risk.
The contribution from training units, made up by the men under training and
instruction, is 35 per cent of the total duties. More detailed analysis shows
that the proportion contributed by the O.T.Us. is rather smaller and ranges
from 21 to 31 per cent throughout the commands.
Table VII shows the incidence per cent of man-years in the principal
operational duties in each of the commands. Those duties which had an
insignificant representation in the command and consequently gave an
unreliable figure of incidence have not been included. It is instructive to
compare the figures with that for all the operational commands, namely 5 per
cent. It will be seen that in the conditions which existed in 1943, the incidence
per cent of man-years in operational units of Bomber Command was higher
than that for any other operational duties, and that night bombing produced
nearly two and a half times the neurotic illness experienced on an average in


all operational units, twice that of day fighting, and three times that of Coastal
operational duties. The low breakdown rate in night fighters compared with
day fighters is striking, but the actiological significance of these differences will
be discussed in detail later.
A comparison between the incidence of neuroses attributed to flying duties
for the whole Command and for the operational and training sections is shown
in Table VIII. In all Commands this breakdown rate is highest in operations,
and it is consistently lowest for personnel under training, being just 1 per 1,00
man-years for air crew under training in Flying Training Command—(Figure 2).
FIG. 2
INCIDENCE IN COMMANDS
COMMAND


TABLE VIII
Comparison of incidence in the whole command with those in the operational and training
sections (per cent man-years)
Command
Whole
command
On
operations
Under
training
Bomber
6-5
12-0
2-7
Middle East
4-8
8-4
1-2
Fighter
. 4-0
5-0 ‘
2-5
Army Co-operation
3-5
5-4
1-8
Coastal
3-9
—
—
Flying Training .. ' ..
1-3
1-1
TABLE IX
Neuroses apparently unrelated to flying duties in commands
(per cent of total cases)
Command
Total
cases
Under
train-
ing
In-
struct.
Day
Fighter
Night
Fighter
Day
Bomber
Night
Bomber
Coastal
Other
duties
Middle East
29
10
7
34
14
24
7
6
Bomber ..
30
33
27
—
3
53
—
3
Fighter ..
19
32
16 •
21
32
—
•
—
5
Coastal ..
13
31
—
62
8
Army Co-operation
7
14
—
—
—
—
—
—
100
Flying Training ..
205
93
5
0-5
2
Total
303
71
8
5
2
' 1-7
8
3
4
TABLE X
Incidence of neuroses unrelated to flying
Incidence
Personnel
(per cent
man-years)
Under training in Training Command ..
0-64
All under training
0-50
All operations
0-30
Bomber operations
0-27
It is of interest to compare in Table IX the distribution of neurosis
occurring in flying personnel but not attributed to flying duties. This shows
that nearly three-quarters of these cases occurred in men who were under
training. Samples of the incidence of the neuroses which were apparently
unrelated to flying are shown in Table X.
This table shows that the actual incidence of neurosis considered by the
physician to be unrelated to flying duties tends to diminish with increasing
flying experience. If the opinion of the physician is reliable it may be that
preoccupation with the hazards of operational flying may in some way protect
the individual from the effect of worries unrelated to flying.


TABLE XI
Comparison of the marriage rate in the groups related and unrelated to flying duties
(per cent of cases)
Neurosis and flying duties
Command
Related
Unrelated
Middle East
29
55
Bomber ..
40
53
Fighter
35
57
Flying Training ..
36
23
TABLE XII
Operational and
non-operational flying experience before cases reported sick
Flying experience (per cent of total cases)
Category
1 uldi
None
No ops.
Under 100 ( Over 100
operational hours
Pilot
1,016
4
32
28
35
Navigator
311
7
42
26
25
W.Op./A.G. ..
455
5
23
33
39
Air Gunner ..
319
2
26
39
33
Other categories
99
11
32
41
15
Total
2,200
5
31
31
33 .
(b)
Marriage
Coastal and Army Co-operation commands were not included in Table XI
as too few cases were available in the second column. It is apparent that in
the operational commands marriage plays a more important part in the
neuroses unrelated to flying duties than in those related to them, while the
reverse obtains in Flying Training Command. The explanation which occurs to us
is that in the squadron the man is not only for the time being cut off from his
family life, but he is so imbued with the squadron and crew spirit and is so
preoccupied with the job in hand that the anxieties and cares of his private.life
are relatively unimportant. Thus, during his period of greatest hazard he is
protected from many of the stress factors of civil life.
(c) Flying hours and operational experience
It shows that neuroses caused by flying duties are equally distributed
between men who have not flown on operations, who have started their tour,
and who have had considerable experience of operations. This is not to say
that the experience of operations does not play a profound part in causing the
neurosis, for it must be remembered that the population of men under training
is much greater than that on operations, and the casualties in the first 100 hours
of operations have materially reduced the number surviving to experience the
risk of breakdown in the second part of the tour. This is shown by the figures
of incidence in Table VIII which indicate that in each command the proportion
of men who break down while on operations is invariably higher in those who


TABLE XIII
Time of breakdown in relation to flying and operational experience in commands
(percentage of cases)
Command
Total
None
No ops.
Under 100
operatic:
Over 100
al hours
Bomber .. • ..
942
—
25
41
36
Fighter
197
—
20
42
37
Coastal
271
— '
15
30
55
Middle East ..
299
—
10
38
53
Army Co-operation ..
46
—
59
26
15
Flying Training
445
23
67
3
6
TABLE XIV
Comparison of average time of onset of neuroses caused by flying duties in Bomber
Command, with the time when those lacking in confidence ceased flying
Flying experience
(per cent of cases)
Group of cases
No.
Operational hours
None
Under 100
Over 100
NeurSses due to flying
942
25
41
35
Lack of confidence
156
27
56
17
are under training in. the Command, and much higher than in Flying Training
Command. Thus, although each of these three stages of duty contributes
about the same number of cases, the incidence rises steadily and steeply as
experience of operational flying increases.
Although the proportion of navigators in healthy air crews is the same under
training in Flying Training Command, at the O.T.Us. and on operations, half
the cases of psychological disorder which occur among navigators arise before
reaching operations, compared with a third or less in pilots, wireless operators,
and air gunners. This difference is possibly related to a special form of stress
to which navigators are subjected which is discussed on page 151.
Table XIII shows the time of breakdown in relation to flying and
operational experience in each command. Bomber and Fighter Command, in
which the estimated stress of operations as indicated by the operational limit
in hours is rather similar, show almost identical proportions of cases both early
and late in the operational tour. In Coastal Command, on the other hand, in
which the operational limit for the majority of duties is two or three times as
long as in the other two commands, the peak period for breakdown occurs late
in the tour.
The point which emerges from this comparison is that when a man is unable
to continue flying through fear, without a neurosis, he is most likely to report
bis fear after a little operational experience.


TABLE XV(a)
Category
No.
Flying stress (per cent)
Nil
Slight
Moderate
Severe
Excep-
tional
Pilot
1,016
27
33
28
12
1
Navigator
311
42
25
22
11
1
W.Op
455
27
26
29
17
1
Air Gunner
319
27
27
30
14
2
Others ..
99
46
29
18
4
2
Total
2,200
30
•29
27
13
1
. TABLE XV(b)
Category
No.
Non-flying stress
(per cent)
Nil
Mild
Severe
Pilot
1,016
63
34
3
Navigator ..
311
68
29
3
W.Op
455
60
37
3
Air Gunner
319
66
31
3
Others
99
64
31
4
Total
2,200
63
34
3
TABLE XV(c)
Pre-disposition
Category
No.
(per cent)
Nil
Mild
Severe
Pilot
1,016
32
52
J6
Navigator ..
311
25
54
21
W.Op
455
25
55
21
Air Gunner
319
22
55
23
Others
99
18
51
30
Total
2,200
27
54
19
3. Stress and predisposition to breakdown
In order to assess the factors which are responsible for the relationship of
operational experience to the likelihood of breakdown, the part played by the
stress of flying, by other psychological factors, and by the individual's own
liability to breakdown should be investigated. In Table XV (a), (6), and (c)
these three groups of factors are considered for the 2,200 cases of neuroses due
to flying duties. In these tables, flying stress means the amount of hazard
encountered, the hazard being measured against the usual expectation of danger
in wartime flying. It was shown on page 129 that the assessments, which
fell into five grades: nil, slight, moderate, severe, exceptional, showed great
uniformity and that it was quite possible with experience to make a practical
measure of this stress, irrespective of the duty involved. Non-flying stress
refers to all the other types of stress, domestic, monetary and personal, to which
the patient has been subjected, and predisposition which has already been the
subject of other reports by Gillespie, Symonds, Williams and others, is the
estimated liability to breakdown while serving as a member of an air crew.


The points which emerge are ;
Flying stress. —Although in all these cases the neurosis was thought
to be due to flying duties, in nearly a third the patients had not been
subjected to any flying stress, and in less than half the cases was it more
than slight. It will be seen that the percentage of those exposed to
stress is about the same for pilots, wireless operator and air gunner, but
is much less for navigators.
Non-flying stress. —Evidence of extraneous causal factors unrelated
to flying were only present in a third of the cases, again the navigators
experienced least, but on the whole this form of stress was uniformly
distributed throughout the air crew.
Predisposition. —Seventy-three per cent of all the cases showed
evidence at a short interview of constitutional liability to breakdown
and 19 per cent were so heavily predisposed that had their short-
comings been recognised on entry it would have been reasonable to
reject them since, as explained on page 121, this was laid down as
the criterion of severe predisposition. This figure compares with 3 per
cent, and the total of 73 per cent predisposed compares with 15 per
cent in normal air crews (page 187). For this purpose normal air
crews, men who had been admitted to hospital as a result of physical
injury, and who had shown no evidence of a neurosis during their flying
careers. The amount of flying experience which these men had had was
comparable with that in the present series of cases. Men whq break
down as a result of their duties are consequently five times as likely to
show evidences of contributional liability to breakdown as are normal
members of air crews. Pilots who have broken down show the lowest
incidence of predisposition and air gunners the highest.
Tables XV and XVI (a), (b) and (c) show that when the stress figures are
similar, predisposition is also similar, but when stress is high, predisposition is
low. This reciprocal relationship is well seen when the figures for Flying Training
Command are contrasted with those for the Middle East. In Table XV
however, predisposition for navigators is no higher and yet non-flying stress
slightly lower, and flying stress is also considerably lower than for other categories.
This category therefore furnishes an exception to the general rule. This
anomaly indicates that a causal factor has been ignored for navigators and that
the factor is not directly related to flying stress, non-flying stress or predis-
position. Clinical impression suggests that this factor may be a combination
of anxiety and fatigue arising from the continued intellectual effort which is
the distinguishing feature of the navigator’s duty.
Contrasting air gunners with pilots, the higher rate of predisposition in
air gunners may be causally related to the higher incidence of breakdown
among them. This higher percentage of predisposition may in turn be related
to the method of selection which results in the acceptance as air gunners of a
number of men who have been rejected as pilots. On the other hand, the air
gunner is more exposed to anxiety in his duty on account of his relative isolation
from the rest of the crew, and the opportunities for anticipation and reflection
which are provided by long periods of inactivity. Because of this the-psycho-
logical effects of danger may be greater in air gunners than in air crew of other
categories.
It was shown on page 128 that there tends to be an inverse relationship
between the stress encountered before breakdown and the predisposition to
breakdown, those heavily predisposed withstanding little stress, those showing
no predisposition often withstanding severe stress before the onset of a


neurosis. This is, of course, only true in a large series of cases, the individual
variation being enormous. (Figs. 3 and 4.)
FIG. 3
FLYING STRESS WITH DIFFERENT
DEGREES OF PREDISPOSITION


FIG. 4
NON-FLYING STRESS WITH DIFFERING DEGREES OF PREDISPOSITION


TABLE XVI{a)
Command
No.
Flying stress (per cent)
Nil
Slight
Moderate
Severe
Excep-
tional
Bomber ..
942
23
30
30
16
1
Fighter ..
197
22
32
34
11
1
Coastal ..
271
21
36
31
10
1
Army Co-operation
46
28
52
19
0
0
Middle East
299
11
25
35
25
4
Flying Training
455
67
22
9
2
0
Total ..
2,200
30
29
27
13
1
The proportion of cases showing the five different degrees of stress is similar
in the three operational commands at home, but the stress required to cause
breakdown in the Middle East is much greater and in Flying Training Command
is much less (Table XVI (a)). On the other hand, other stress factors in the
columns for non-flying stress presumably due to family separation and service
overseas, are seen to play a greater part in the Middle East. The inverse
relationship of predisposition to flying stress is clearly seen if Middle East
Command, the home operational commands and Flying Training Command
are compared (Tables XVI (a), ( b ) and (c)).


TABLE XVI(b)
Non-flying stress (per cent)
Command
No. ‘
Nil
Mild
Severe
Bomber
942
67
31
2
Fighter
197
65
28
6
Coastal
271
61
36
3
Army Co-operation
46
50
48
1
Middle East
299
48
46
6
Flying Training
455
69
29
3
Total
2,200
63
33
3
TABLE XVI (c)
Pre-disposition (per cent)
Command
No.
Nil
Mild
Severe
Bomber
942
27
56
16
Fighter
197
34
45
20
Coastal
271
26
57
17
Army Co-operation
46
28
52
20
Middle East
299
40
46
13
Flying Training
455
17
53
31
Total
2,200
27
53
19
TABLE XVII (a)
Group of cases
No.
Flying stress (per cent)
Nil
Slight
Moderate
Severe
Excep-
tional
Neurosis due to flying ..
2,200
30
29
27
13
1
Neurosis not due to flying
303
84
10
5
1
0
Lacking confidence
416
38
37
20
4
0
TABLE XVII (b)
Group of cases
No.
Non-flying stress (per cent)
Nil
Mild
Severe
Neurosis due to flying
2,200
63
33
3
Neurosis not due to flying
303
51
36
13
Lacking confidence
416
69
30 •
1
Further information about the causal role of these factors can be obtained
by comparing this group with that of neurosis unrelated to flying duties and
with the group lacking confidence as in Tables XVII (a), (&). (c).


TABLE XVII(c).
Pre-disposition (per cent)
Group of cases
No.
Nil
Mild
Severe
Neurosis due to flying
2,200
27
53
19
Neurosis not due to flying
303
20
49
31
Lacking confidence
416
39
57
4
TABLE XVIII
Stress in groups with differing degrees of predisposition
Percentage of total
Pre-
No.
Flying stress
Non-flying stress
disposition
Nil
Slight
Moder-
ate
Severe
Excep-
tional
Nil
Mild
Severe
Nil
604
18
27
33
20
2
62
34
4
Mild
1,173
30
30
28
11
1
64
33
3
Severe
423
47
32
15
6
0
64
33
3
A note of warning is necessary when drawing conclusions from these tables.
The physicians were instructed to make their assessments of each, of the factors
of stress and predisposition against a fixed standard, irrespective of the degree
of prominence of the other two factors. Their diagnosis should similarly not
have been affected by the weight of these factors, so that, for example, a man
who showed no evidence of medical illness should have been called AIB lacking
confidence whatever the stress or predisposition. Again, a man might well be
considered to have developed an illness unrelated to flying duties, in the
presence of considerable flying stress, and Table XVII (a) shows that this in
fact occurs. Nevertheless the physicians are to some extent influenced by the
prominence of any one of the causal factors both in assessing the other causes
and in establishing the diagnosis. Although the flying stress factor is naturally
of little moment in the group unrelated to flying duties, predisposition is severe
in nearly a third of these cases, and the percentage of the cases with the more
severe degrees of non-flying stress is higher than in the other two groups. In
the columns for all three factors, the neuroses related and unrelated to flying
duties make an interesting contrast, but the group of men lacking confidence
shows a slightly lower rate of occurrence of flying and non-flying stress and a
much lower rate of severe predisposition. There is, in fact, less reason to be
found for the failure of these men to fulfil their duty than in cases of neuroses.
If there is indeed an inverse relationship between stress and predisposition,
this should be apparent when comparing the degrees of stress of those with
severe, mild and no predisposition (Table XVIII and Figs. 3 and 4).
The table shows that total stress apart from flying is almost identical in the
three groups, and that it is the flying stress which is responsible for the
reciprocal relationship between stress and predisposition, since it falls steadily
as predisposition increases in the three groups. A curve of the relationship of
flying stress to predisposition based upon the data in Tables XV (a) and (c),
and XVI (a) and c) is shown in Fig. 5.
This same relationship is also seen when tile flying experience is compared
with stress and predisposition (Table XIX).


TABLE XIX
Flying experience compared with stress and predisposition
Percentage of total
Flying
No.
Flying stress
Predisposition
Nil
Slight
Moder-
ate
Severe
Excep-
tional
Nil
Mild
Severe
No flying
106
100
14
50
36
No opera-
tions ..
676
56
29
12
3
20
53
27
Under 100
op. hours
688
18
39
29
12
1
26
56
18
Over 100
op. hours
730
8
24
42
26
3
37
52
11
_
1
FIG. 5
CURVE SHOWINGTHE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN STRESS AND PREDISPOSITION
It is obvious from this table that the inverse relationship again holds.
There was again no such relationship between non-flying stress factors and pre-
disposition, but the figures have not been included in Table XIX. A slight
rise in the non-flying stress figures with an increase in flying experience has
been shown to be related to the increasing age, and consequently the increased
marriage rate (page 128 and again in Table XX, page 158).
(76642) F


TABLE XX
Relation of flying stress to increasing flying experience, age and marriage rate
(percentage of total)
No.
(Percentage of total)
Flying stress
Non-flying
stress
Predisposition
Nil
Slight
Mod.
Severe
Ex-
cep-
tional
Nil
Mild
Severe
Nil
Mild
Severe
Married
Unmarried
817
1,383
28
31
•
34
26
26
27
10
14
1
2
56
68
41
29
3
2
25
28
55
S3
20
19
Flying stress and predisposition are the same in the married and unmarried
groups, but the number of those with environmental stress not due to flying
is higher in the married men.
Figure 5 repays closer study. There is an inverse relationship between
the proportion of subjects without evidence of predisposition or of flying stress,
which in the middle range of subjects is roughly linear. At both ends of the
curve, however, the degree of relationship changes, for at the end where the
number of predisposed subjects is high, the proportion without stress rises very
steeply with a slight rise in predisposition rate, and at the other end where
stress is frequently encountered, the proportion of predisposed subjects falls
rapidly with a slight rise in stress. Here the ordinate is cut at 85 per cent,
that is, 15 per cent show evidence of predisposition. Thus, according to
this graph even if every member of a group of neurotic flying personnel
has been subjected to flying stress, the number predisposed will be 15 per cent
of the total. It is obvious that at the very best the proportion of neurotic
subjects predisposed to breakdown cannot be lower than that of normal
subjects who have not broken down, and it is interesting that the theoretical
continuation of the curve in Fig. 5 cuts the ordinate at a figure previously
obtained by experimental observation. It is already stated (p. 151) that this
15 per cent predisposed is obtained by the same standards in normal
men. Expressing these observations in terms of the clinical experience
upon which they are based, groups of subjects with milder degrees
of predisposition or of stress are equally likely to break down if either of these
factors is increased, whereas the severely predisposed tend to break down,
however slight the stress, and those exposed to great stress may break down,
however small may be their degree of predisposition.
4. Causes of neurosis
The stress factors will now be analysed in further detail. The physicians
were asked to enumerate the main causes of the illness in each case, the causes
being psychological or physical. Physical causes were divided as they are in
Table XXI, but the psychological causes were not divided because they are
so many and overlap so much that statistical analysis cannot reasonably be
applied to them.
It is strikingly shown in Table XXI that in virtually every case of neurosis
arising from flying duties a cause (in nearly every case the main cause) is
psychological. In only 9of the 2200 cases was this not so, and in these 9 the
illness arose directly from exhaustion, physical illness or injury. The nature of
the psychological causes will be discussed later but since they are almost
universally present their distribution need not be studied further.


TABLE XXI
Causes of neurosis arising from flying duties
Causes
Number
Percentage of
Causes
Cases
Psychological
2,191
76
99-6
Physical injury'
399
14
18-1
Physical illness
212
7
9-2
Air sickness ..
52
2
2-4
Exhaustion ..
43
1
2-0
Cold ..
—
Altitude
More than one cause >.
676
23
—
(а) Physical causes
It is noteworthy that neither cold nor altitude were recorded as causal
factors. From the introspective accounts of healthy men extreme cold
appears to have a numbing effect upon the emotions as upon the senses and,
as a result, anxiety gives way to apathy and mental strain is reduced.
Reflection upon the painful experience of cold, and fear of its recurrence, and of
impaired efficiency with resulting disaster have been reported in a few instances
in Coastal Command, page 76, and Fighter Command, page 66, but we are not
aware of any case in which this factor has appeared in the aetiology of a neurosis.
(б) Altitude
Altitude in the list of causal factors was intended to cover the effects of
anoxia and decompression. As previously reported on page 66, it has been
suggested by others that altitude may be contributory to the develop-
ment of neurosis but experiment has failed to confirm the hypothesis that
cumulative changes take place with repeated flights at high altitude (Matthews,
1941) and Table XXI shows that clinical observation supports this negative
conclusion. Altitude may, however, operate in rare cases as a psychological
factor, and when it does the occurrence is distinctive. There are some
individuals who have a specific, irrational fear of height. This may appear in
a pupil when he first does high flying or in an experienced man previously
immune from such a fear under conditions of fatigue and worry. Examples
as follows:
Case 1 : P/OA. Aged 22, pilot. Day fighters, Spitfires. Flying hours 190, operational
hours 25. His only complaint was fear of high flying. His mother had had two
nervous breakdowns. Of his four siblings one was an artist, another a professional
musician. His past history showed nothing suggestive of neurotic predisposition.
He had led an active adventurous life, which included riding as an amateur jockey
in Hong Kong for over a year. He had many falls but his nerve was unimpaired.
He came home at the outbreak of war to fly, and enjoyed it until he began to fly at
altitudes above 25,000 feet. He found that above this height he had a feeling of
intense fear with an irresistible desire to get down.
Case 2 : S/Ldr. T. Aged 37, pilot. Instructor at a Flying Instructors’ School. Flying
hours 4,500. No operational hours. His only complaint was fear of altitude. His
father when worried or tired was subject to feelings of unreality. His past history
showed no evidence of neurosis. He had held a short service commission in a
fighter squadron before the war, had stood up to average stress normally and had
done a good deal of high flying without discomfort. He was called up from the
reserve at the outbreak of war and has been instructing since. His symptom first
appeared in March, 1940. While flying at 6,000 feet he had a sudden feeling of
unreality and fear with an intense desire to get down. At this time he was separated
from his wife because he could find no accommodation for her and, being lonely, was
PM42) F 2


drinking more and sleeping less than usual. The feeling of unreality persisted ' as
if I were dead and watching it all He was given a month’s sick leave, returned to
duty and has continued with it to the present time (3J years) without complaint.
The fear of heights has persisted. The feeling begins at about 2,000 feet, but its
severity varies, being much greater if he is overtired or short of sleep. He is quite
at ease on a low cross-country flight in bad weather, and unaffected by the ordinary
mishaps. He recognises the irrational nature of his fear.
(c) Physical injury
Physical injury appears as a cause in 18 per cent of the cases. It may
operate in several different ways. First, for the man who has been injured
in a crash and admitted to hospital there is a greater tendency to reflect and
ruminate upon his experience than in the man who is normally occupied.
This factor which is of common occurrence needs no illustration. Second, the
memory of an injury involving prolonged pain or residual disfigurement becomes
a conditioned stimulus for anxiety. This is especially true of bums which are
painful and disfiguring. Third, prolonged absence from flying may per se
impair confidence; it is all the more likely to do so when the last experience
of flying has been a crash. Fourth, the physical injury may provide the
individual with a foundation for hysterical symptoms and, lastly, the physical
effects of the injury, particularly if it is a head injury, may .so lower the man’s
efficiency that he is unable to stand up to the stress of his occupation. The
following case illustrates the third and fourth modes of operation ;
Case 3 ; F/O E. Aged 21, pilot. Under instruction at Day Bomber O.T.U. Flying
hours 170. No operational hours. This officer was so overcome by fear in the air
that he was unable to concentrate and his instructor reported him unfit to go solo.
There was evidence of mild neurotic predisposition in the family and personal
history. He passed through his training average or below average without mishap
until he had a crash with minor head injury (traumatic amnesia 10 minutes) and was
off flying for a month. On starting again he found he had lost his confidence. He
also had slight dizziness. This was attributed to his head injury, and he was taken
off flying holding a ground job for 18 months before he was returned to flying
duties. Dizziness was included in his present complaints but there was no doubt
that it was a hysterical symptom.
(d) Physical illness
Physical illness was recorded in nearly 10 per cent of the cases, operating
by causing prolonged absence from flying with resulting loss of confidence;
by causing symptoms which became the foundation of hysteria; or by
contributing to fatigue and loss of confidence, as in Case 4.
Case 4 : Sgt., pilot. Aged 21. Day fighters, Spitfires. Flying hours 300, operational
hours 120. This pilot had remained well throughout his tour, which was highly
concentrated into a short time, i.e. 120 hours in three months, and which included
a number of combats with four enemy aircraft probably destroyed. He was begin-
ning to feel the strain of three sweeps a day, and found that he was easily fatigued,
was jumpy and tense. His wife had told him that he was stammering occasionally,
and he said he was definitely looking forward to having a winter’s rest and to coming
off operations which he did not really like. At the end of November he developed
pneumonia, was in bed for three weeks, and given 14 days’ sick leave which he spent
at home. He went to Central Medical Establishment and was given a further four
weeks’ leave. He then returned to four weeks’ light duty at his station, on the ground.
He had to report sick because he was nervy, he worried over trifles, found driving
a car a strain, was easily tired, could not concentrate and was depressed. He did not
feel that he would get back to operations. His past history showed that he was
liable to get depressed for a day or so without cause, that he had been a nailbiter
until 16, used to have frequent nightmares, and had always been unusually timid.
His father was an unstable intellectual depressive, and his paternal grandmother
had ' died of melancholia'. He was an only child. This pilot was already developing
signs of a neurosis as a result of concentrated stress in the second half of his tour,
but was unable to continue with his duties. His symptoms became worse, after a
period away from flying, through physical illness, and led him to being permanently


grounded. Having a personal and family history with evidence of liability to
•depression he was severely predisposed. It is likely that had he not developed the
pneumonia he would, with careful handling, have been able to continue flying and
may well have finished his tour. Flying stress was slight. Non-flying stress of his
illness, mild.
(«) Airsickness
Airsickness may be a cause or a symptom of neurosis. It was recorded
as one of the causes in 2-4 per cent of cases. The story was invariably that of
a man who had experienced the trouble in the early stages of his training, with
a persistent liability to airsickness under adverse conditions, which was not in
itself disabling. This state may contribute to a neurosis of the affective type
when the man has to face the strain of arduous flying duties and especially the
stress of operations. He is aware that he is unable to give his best to the job
when feeling airsick, and that he may therefore prove unequal to a critical task.
His confidence in the air is undermined and even the prospect of rough weather
is cause for anxiety and depression. In another group of men, airsickness
which has been accepted and endured in the earlier stages of training is later
presented in exaggerated form as an hysterical symptom. The motivation
behind this is a desire to escape from flying, resulting perhaps from some
unpleasant experience, or from the realisation at the O.T.U. of the imminence of
the operational hazard. Sickness in the air, of course, may be a neurotic
symptom, and anxiety may aggravate genuine airsickness. The distinction
between cause and effect is sometimes difficult, but the criteria stated above
for airsickness as a causal factor were those used by all observers in the present
investigation. It is worth noting that airsickness as a cause of neurosis appears
in only 0-5 per cent of pilots as compared with 5-0 per cent of other crew
categories taken together, an observation which confirms the impression that
in the air or on the land the driver of the machine is less vulnerable to sickness
than his passengers.
(/) . Exhaustion
Exhaustion appearing in 2 per cent, of cases included such causes as a spell
of intense operational activity with short sleep, a prolonged period during which
flying hours were excessive, or the physical effect of hardship and exposure
following a forced landing in the desert or in the sea. Such experiences were
sometimes the main precipitating cause of affective disorder, of which the
following is an example:—
Case 5 : F/Lt. W. Aged 23, pilot. Flying hours 600, operational hours 80 on day
bombers. His complaint was of sleeplessness and depression. The family history
showed a liability to depressive illness of mild type. The personal history was
normal, but his reserve of confidence in the air had never been high. He had a repu-
tation for going through any kind of weather, which was deserved. He was, in fact,
frightened of it but extremely conscientious. His symptoms began after a ppriod
of intense operational activity, during which he did not have his clothes off for
five days and had very little sleep. At the end of this, in a state of fatigue, he forgot
his flaps coming in to land and piled up his aircraft with full bomb load, fortunately
without loss of life. After this he lost confidence in his ability to fly, was frightened
and uncertain when he attempted to do so, and when grounded was depressed and
sleepless and self-reproachful.
In persons with no evidence of predisposition, exhaustion usually results in
symptoms of fatigue, but this relationship will be considered further under the
heading of Fatigue Syndrome, pages 166-167.
is) Psychological causes
The main psychological causes, which were present in almost every case,
Were by the method of selection of this group of cases outlined on page 140
related to flying duties. Clinical and executive experience agrees in the conclusion
that the most important single psychological cause of neurosis in air crew is fear.
(76842) ,F 3


TABLE XXII
The relationship between breakdown and xisk
Duty
Incidence
of neuroses
Safety
factor*
Bomber operations
12-0
160
Fighter, day
6'0
188
Fighter, night
3-4
231
Coastal Command
3-3
360
Training
M
1,960
Skill fatigue (Bartlett 1941) is a factor of secondary importance and when it
contributes to neurosis usually acts by undermining that confidence which
ridrmally affords protection from mental strain. The development of a neurosis
from fear in flying personnel has been discussed in some detail (pages 104-106)
(Symonds 1943). The main points which arose were as follows. Flying and
especially operational flying contains so many hazards that fear is to be
expected, but as the result of a number of factors which include innate
tendencies, past education, flying training, experience and especially group
morale, fear is inhibited, so that the normal individual is relatively fearless
under average conditions of stress. To this extent he is spared the strain of
emotional conflict, but when as the result either of constitutional defect
(predisposition) or greater stress, inhibition is weak and there is excess of fear,
emotional conflict reaches a point at which one of two things happens. Either
the man gives up the struggle and so he falls into the Lack of Confidence group
(or as the result of inefficiency he is discarded) or he goes on to develop a
neurosis.
The pattern of the neurosis depends upon factors which will be discussed
under Reaction Types, pages 163-164, but the cetiology is remarkably constant.
Fear of flying or of some particular aspect of operational or non-operational flying
is the start. This may have been present ab initio but has more commonly
developed as the result of some unpleasant experience. An attempt is made
to carry on with flying duties, but excessive fear persists. The neurosis develops
as the result of the intensity and extent of the fear state and the tension
of the emotional conflict. Since psychological causes were present in almost
all the cases of this series, the relationship of the incidence of neurosis and the
time of its onset to the hazards should illustrate the part played by fear. There
should for example be a direct relationship between incidence and hazard of duty.
This is so. In Table VIII, page 147, it was shown that in 1942-43 the incidence
of neurosis in bomber operations was over twice that on fighter operations,
and in Table VII that it was nearly twice as high in day fighters as in night
fighters and as in Coastal Command. The actual casualty rates are not available,
but a factor showing the relationship of flying hours per casualty has been
obtained for five duties. This is shown against the neurosis rate in Table XXII.
These duties are taken as samples, but they indicate what is apparent
throughout the results, that there is a relation between the likelihood of
breakdown and the hazards encountered. If fear of these hazards is the most
potent cause of breakdown it might be expected that the rate of breakdown will
increase steadily as the flying career advances from elementary training, through
operational training, to the ultimate hazard of operations. That this is so for
all commands is shown in Table VIII, page 147, and that the breakdown rate
is related’to the hazard of the job is shown in Tables VII and XXII.
* The safety factor represents an indication of the relative flj’ing
hours per casualty in these duties.


TABLE XXIII
Proportion of different reaction types (2,200 cases)
Reaction types
Percentage
of cases
Anxiety state
79-1
Hysteria
12-8
Depression
9-6
Fatigue state (neurasthenia)
6-9
Obsessional
2-2
Schizophrenic
0-4
Elation (mania) ..
0-3
Chronic organic reaction
0-2
Acute organic reaction ..
0-2
Mixed forms
11*1
{h) Fatigue
It has been asserted that fatigue plays a secondary part in the aetiology
of neurosis in air crews. This is supported not only by clinical experience and
by the views of general duties officers in commands but also by the figures of
incidence of neurosis, which are lower in Coastal Command and in night fighters
than in other more hazardous but less tiring duties. One per cent of the
present cases arose in crews of flying boats in Coastal Command and it was
shown (page 137) that the incidence of all neuroses among crews in this
arduous duty was lower than in other operational duties.
So far only the exogenous factors, such as leadership, pages 53-54, and
76-78, discipline, pages 57-58 and 67, and crew spirit, pages 51-52, which
fortify the individual against breaking down under the stress of his duties
have already been dealt with.
As the exogenous factors unassociated with flying—domestic worry,
financial difficulty, sexual maladjustment and the restrictions of Service life
in wartime—have been shown in most cases to play an insignificant part in
causing neurosis arising in air crews as a result of their duties, they will not be
analysed further. The figures from the Middle East show, however, that in
special circumstances they may play an important precipitating part
(see page 154).
The endogenous factor in the causation of neurosis is discussed, in
this and on page 122 and pages 193-194. In nearly three-quarters of the
2,200 cases of this series there was evidence in either the personal or family
history or both, of predisposition to neurosis. As already explained, by the
same standards that have been applied to these cases 15 per cent of normal
flying personnel are similarly predisposed to breakdown, 3 per cent severely'
so, and it seems that when exposed to the stress of fear and fatigue these
individuals are more vulnerable than the rest, since the predisposition rate is five
times as high in men with neurosis as in normal men.
5. Reaction types
Another aspect of neurosis arising from flying duties is the clinical pattern
presented. In this series it was found possible to place every case into
a restricted set of diagnoses based entirely upon accepted psychiatric
nomenclature, so that although special causal factors may be present the
actual types of psychological disorder to which they give rise are the same as
those encountered in civil practice.
(76012)
T 4


The classification adopted follows conventional lines. Neurosis for this
purpose is interpreted as minor mental disorder, so that a mild schizophrenic
or hypomanic case is included. No heading was allowed for psychopathic
personality, the omission being deliberate, for it was considered that such a
pigeon-hole might be variously used by different observers and that the
psychopath with a neurosis caused by flying duties would probably develop
symptoms falling under one of the other headings. This expectation was
fulfilled in the few cases of this type which were reported. It is to be noted
that an anxiety state was recorded in 79 per cent of the cases. Comparing this
with other figures for Service patients, we note that Cooper and Sinclair (1942)
dealing with neurotic casualties in the field, found 64 per cent of anxiety
states. Love (1942) in Tobruk found anxiety states with or without hysteria
in over 90 per cent. Dillon (1940) records a7O per cent incidence of anxiety
states among neuroses seen at casualty clearing stations in the last war. These
figures from comparable material—for exposure to flying stress is fundamentally
little different from exposure to battle stress —correspond nearly with our own.
In the cases admitted to a psychiatric hospital the incidence of anxiety states
is lower.* Hadfield (1942) found it 53 per cent and remarks that among the
conditions seen near the battle zone there are probably many cases of ordinary
anxiety and panic which should not be classified as neuroses. In the present
series of cases this objection cannot be upheld for in the first place cases of non-
persistent anxiety in air crew are treated by unit medical officers either as out-
patients or in station sick quarters, and are not referred to the neuro-
psychiatrists at all; and of those referred to a neuro-psychiatrist one in seven
(see page 140) is held not to be suffering from a neurosis despite lack of
confidence.
An alternative explanation for the high incidence of anxiety near the
battle zone and in flying personnel is that there is a direct relation between the
nature of the stimulus and the pattern of reaction. The distinctive feature of
an anxiety neurosis is a morbid state of fear, and fear is more likely to be excited
in the air than on the ground, and in the battle zone than behind it. The
suggestion of such a relationship between natural fear and morbid fear involves
the discussion of thorny questions. What is the definition of an anxiety
neurosis ? What is the distinction between morbid fear and natural fear ?
These questions deserve careful consideration in the light of clinical
experience gained in the present war and have been discussed in Chapter VIII
(Symonds 1943). It must suffice to state some of the difficulties encountered
in the classification of cases and the ways in which they have been met.
Broadly speaking, there are two possible definitions of anxiety neurosis. One
is descriptive, the other in terms of psychopathology. The former defines
anxiety neurosis as a state of morbid, exaggerated or unjustified fear: the
latter requires evidence of mechanisms such as unconscious conflict, repression
and displacement of effect. Acceptance of the definition in terms of psycho-
pathology would certainly exclude a large number of the cases accepted in this
report as anxiety neurosis. In our experience the subject is more often than
not fully aware of the nature of his disability and its causes. He is frightened
of flying, or it may be of flying under certain conditions, or in certain aircraft.
He may at one extreme always have been frightened of flying : or at the other
extreme he may have developed his fear only after a succession of appalling
catastrophes. He is aware that it is his duty to carry on and attempts to do
so ; usually he succeeds for a time despite his fear. The anticipation of flying
then becomes a constant preoccupation: the very sight or sound of an
aeroplane may aggravate or excite fear. The liability may extend further so
that the sound of a siren, driving in a motor car, or riding a horse excites fear
where none existed before. This state of fear is associated with the usual


bodily symptoms of fear and tension and with insomnia. The effort for the
man to carry on despite his fears becomes more and more exhausting.
Eventually he either reports sick, tells his commanding officer he cannot
continue, or is sent to the doctor because his comrades or superiors have
observed inefficiency or alteration of behaviour.
When seen by the doctor some of these men over-emphasise their physical
symptoms as an excuse for failure, but a great many are perfectly frank in
admitting that the root of the matter is their fear of flying. In terms of the
descriptive definition it is easy to take the first step towards the diagnosis of
anxiety neurosis. These men are obviously suffering from a state of fear.
The difficult question to decide is whether their fear is morbid (exaggerated,
unjustified) or within normal limits. This question has been often posed
before for combatants of all arms and was discussed freely before the War
Office Committee of Inquiry into Shell Shock, 1922, who could only arrive
at the conclusion that if a man had exercised self-control, and tried his best to
face up to the danger he should not be regarded as a coward, though there was
but an ' indefinite line which divides normal emotional reaction from neurosis
with impairment of volitional control.’ Undue persistence of fear reactions
after danger had passed, and recurrence with inadequate stimulus were con-
sidered evidence in favour of a pathological state. We believe that in fact
there is no stable line of distinction between anxiety neurosis and normal
emotional reaction, but that in the interests of morale, a line must always be
drawn. Its position will vary with the group attitude tow r ards danger. If a
civilian in time of peace suffered injuries in an air crash, which had involved
the death of others, including his friends, and thereafter became permanently
afraid of flying, no one would regard that fear as unnatural. In an operational
squadron, however, an episode of this kind is accepted by the majority as
within the limits of normal experience. A persistent fear reaction therefore
against this background would be morbid. Even so, whether it should be called
neurosis depends upon the further question whether the man had tried hard
enough to satisfy group standards. Every medical officer who has had to
deal with these cases has realised the necessity of an arbitrary distinction of
some kind. The report by Cooper and Sinclair from Tobruk provides a good
example. Of the soldiers seen with anxiety states rather more than half were
returned to their units with the diagnosis of fear state and a recommendation
that if necessary they should be evacuated through channels other than medical.
The remainder were accepted as cases of anxiety neurosis.
In the R.A.F. the majority of cases in which there is need for distinction
are referred to the neuro-psychiatric specialists who, before accepting the case
as an anxiety neurosis, require evidence first that the fear state is so persistent
or recurrent that it is disabling. Objective evidence such as loss of weight,
pallor, tachycardia and tremor are held important, as also a report from the
unit medical officer of abnormal behaviour. The report of the commanding
officer (which is always required in these cases) is given due weight, for it will
indicate whether the man is considered to have tried his best. The attitude of
the man towards his situation is also regarded as important. If he is willing to
continue with flying duties if found fit this is a point, other things being equal,
m favour of accepting the case as one of neurosis. In the distinction between
anxiety neurosis and cowardice expediency usually in the end counts more
than scientific judgment. This should surprise no one who has reflected upon
the part played by group opinion in deciding when individual behaviour should
he regarded as pathological.
Depressive states were recorded in 9-6 per cent of the cases. As this
series was limited to neurosis attributed to flying duties the cases were
naturally more reactive than endogenous. We agree with Curran and


TABLE XXIV
Comparison of proportion of anxiety, hysteria and depression in the neuroses related to
flying duties with those not so related
1
Percentage
Reaction
Related
to flying
Unrelated
; duties
Anxiety ..
79
55
Hysteria
13
21
Depression
10
16
Total
102
92
TABLE XXV
Percentage of cases with anxiety states under commands
Command
Percentage of
cases with
anxiety states
Middle East ..
83
Bomber
82
Coastal
82
Fighter
, , , . , , , ,
76
Training
71
Mallinson (1941) that there is no sharp line of distinction between these types.
The common story is that of fear unsuccessfully resisted by a conscientious
individual with subsequent self-reproach.
The incidence of hysteria —l 2-8 per cent —agrees nearly with the
experience of Love (11 per cent) and Cooper and Sinclair (16 per cent) in the
battle zone of Tobruk. Whereas the distribution of the affective disorders in
the different crew categories shows practically no variation, the figure for
hysteria in pilots (11 per cent) is slightly below the mean of 12-8 per cent
and that for air gunners (16-9 per cent) well above it. This difference may be
causally related to the different standards of selection of these two categories.
Forty per cent of all the cases of hysteria in men under training as compared
with 25 per cent of the cases of anxiety and 23 per cent of the depressions,
indicating that the man who is going to develop hysteria does so relatively
early in his flying career.
It is seen that anxiety states are more commonly encountered when the
neurosis is related to flying duties. It may well be that this is brought about
by the important part played by fear in causing these neuroses. This is
supported by the observation that although the incidence of anxiety states is
very high in cases of neurosis arising in all duties, it is higher in the operational
commands than in Flying Training Command.
The fatigue syndrome for purposes of this investigation was defined in
terms of symptoms —complaint of mental or bodily fatigue and other symptoms
which could not be satisfactorily explained in terms of any other neurosis;
it was practically synonymous with neurasthenia, and of equally doubtful


TABLE XXVI
Percentage of fatigue syndrome for different duties compared with that of all neuroses
Duties
Percentage of
Percentage of
Ratio fatigue to
fatigue states
all neuroses
all neuroses
Bomber, night
35
36
1-0
Instructor
24
12
2-0
Fighter, day
16
10
1-6
Under training ..
7
27
0-25
Coastal operations
7
10
0-7
Bomber, day
5
7
0-7
Fighter, night
2
3
0-7
Total cases
151
2,200
TABLE XXVII
Final disposals by the Central Medical Board
Final disposals
Percentage of
1316 cases
Full flying ..
2 o’nl» 3S-4
Limited flying
8-9/
Ground duties
60-5
Invalided ..
11
value. The state of exaggerated fatigue appears generally to be the result
of prolonged emotional conflict, although it may not as first be admitted. In
seme cases skill fatigue or physical exhaustion have contributed, but the main
cause is usually psychological. Thus of the cases of fatigue syndrome 97 per
cent showed a psychological cause, II per cent exhaustion. That skill fatigue
does, however, play a part in this syndrome is suggested by the fact that the
fatigue syndrome is twice as common in pilots as in other air crew categories
taken together.
Fatigue states show no great difference in distribution, from that of all
neuroses except in instructors, where fatigue is twice as high and in pupils
where it is four times as low. The syndrome in instructors, besides being more
frequent, is more clearly defined. The story is that of prolonged employment
on this duty with first loss of interest in the job, then a lowered threshold of
fatigue, and irritability. It is usually because he finds himself becoming
unreasonably angry with his pupils that the instructor reports sick.
The causal relationship of exhaustion to the reaction of a fatigue syndrome
is shown by the ratio of the proportion of neuroses with exhaustion as a cause
to all other neuroses in the different duties. This ratio is two in the cases of
Instructors and a quarter in pupils. It appears, therefore, that the fatigue
syndrome is most likely to be produced by a kind of exhaustion which is most
common in Instructors and least common in pupils.
9. Prognosis of neuroses
Some idea of the prognosis of neuroses resulting from flying duties can be
obtained from the disposal recommended by the Central Medical Board after
the physicians had seen the cases. The Board disposals were divided into
temporary and final. Sixty per cent of the 2,200 cases were given a final
disposal as in Table XXVII.


TABLE XXVIII
Final disposals in cases having a temporary disposals
Per cent
Full flying ..
45 ' 2 1.56
Limited flying
10-7/ ob
Grounded ..
44-4
Invalided ..
0-6
TABLE XXIX
Prognosis in relation to air crew categories
Percentage with
Category
final flying category
Cases with
temporary
disposal
All cases
Pilot
54
70
Navigator
27
42
Wireless Operator
25
44
Air Gunner
25
45
Of the 501 men who returned to flying duties 27 (5-4 per cent) had relapsed
during the year covered by the investigation. Thus, in this group approxi-
mately one-third of the men with neurosis due to flying duties severe enough to
warrant consultation with a neuro-psychiatrist returned to duty and remained
well during the time covered by this investigation, while two thirds were removed
from flying duties.
During the year, 1293 cases (58 per cent) were given a temporary disposal,
as follows:
Temporarily limited flying .. .. .. 27 per cent
Temporarily grounded .. .. ... .. 31 per cent
In many of these cases the temporary disposal was merely a step in the
man’s progress to flying duties, and in many instances temporary ground duties
represented a period of hospital treatment or of sick leave. Twenty-eight
per cent (356) of these, two thirds of whom had had a period of temporary
employment on the ground, usually sick leave, went on to be given a final
disposal, as in Table XXVIII.
Further investigation showed that only 17 per cent of patients who are given
a final disposal without any of these intermediate steps attain a full flying
category, so that Table XXVIII shows that the prognosis is nearly three times
as good in those who have had a temporary disposal. This simply means
that the physicians decided in some cases at one interview that the man was
unfit for any further flying and in other cases that with a period of rehabilitation
the chances of his returning to flying were reasonable. As the relapse rate for
all the patients returned to duty within the year was only 5 per cent, their
judgment was usually sound. It is important to observe that although 60 per
cent of the patients were grounded, only 1 per cent were invalided. This means
that when a member of a crew develops a neurosis as a result of flying duties
the prognosis, once he is removed from those duties, is such that he is thought
to be able to assume new duties in the Service, and experience shows that
recovery is usually so complete that he can assume full ground duties.
Table XXIX shows that pilots who have developed a neurosis are twice
as likely to return to flying duties as are other members of air crew.


TABLE
XXX
Relation of flying experience to prospect of returning to flying duties
Experience
No.
Final disposal (percentage)
Full
flying
Limited
flying
Grounded
No flying
87
9
1
84*
No operations
475
22
5
73
Under 100 op. hours
415
29
12
59
Over 100 op. hours . . ' . .
339
45
12
43
TABLE XXXI
Prognosis in relation to predisposition
Pre-disposition
No.
Disposal percentage
Full flying
Grounded
Nil
317
57
31
Mild
677
26
63
Severe
335
8
85
TABLE XXXII (a)
Prognosis in relation to flying stress
Disposal percentage
Flying stress
No.
Full flying
Grounded
(385)
(813)
Nil
493
21
73
Slight
401
27
61
Moderate
290
37
48
Severe
133
45
46
Exceptional ..
12
41
33
* 5 per cent invalided
There are two factors, the first that the man who breaks down early
in his flying career is likely to be more heavily predisposed than his fellow who
has been able to withstand greater flying stress before breaking down, and
consequently has a better prognosis, and the second that, as experience has
shown that the chance of ultimate success in a man who has broken down
early in training is small, the physician tends to advise rejection more readily
in a case of this type.
The last factor to be considered in relation to prognosis is that of the
stress to which the man has been subjected. This is shown in Tables XXXII(a)
and (b).


TABLE XXXII (b)
Prognosis in relation to non
flying stress
-
No.
Disposal percentage
Non-flying stress
Full flying
(385)
Grounded
(813)
Nil
874
28
62
Mild
421
30
59
Severe
34
50
50
These two tables show that in cases of neurosis arising from flying duties
the greater the stress to which the patient has been subjected, the greater the
chance that he will be able to return to full flying, and the less likely is he to be
permanently grounded.
10. SUMMARY OF RESULTS
(1; 2,200 out of 2,919 cases of neurosis in flying personnel seen by neuro-
psychiatrists were thought to have neurosis arising mainly from flying duties.
Such cases have formed the basis of this report.
(2) In the same period of time the neuro-psychiatrists saw 303 flying
personnel with neurosis not considered to be due to flying duties and 416
personnel without neurosis but lacking in confidence.
(3) 46 per cent of the 2,200 cases occurred in pilots, 21 per cent in wireless
operator/air gunners and 14 per cent in navigators (Table I, page 142).
(4) 43 per cent arose in Bomber Command and 20 per cent in Flying
Training Command, while Fighter Command only contributed 9 per cent.
A third of the cases occurred in night bombers, a quarter in pupils and a tenth
each in instructors and day fighters (Tables II and VI, pages 142 and 145).
(5) The incidence of neuroses attributed to flying duties was calculated
for all commands, duties and crew categories, from the average crew
strengths and the rate of flow of crews during the year, the incidence being
expressed in each instance per hundred man-years. A hundred man-years
might represent a hundred men exposed to risk for one year, or four hundred
for three months each, and so on. This provides a unit which is reasonably
applicable to any command, duty or crew category, and enables the incidence
figures to be compared with each other. The incidence, per hundred man-
years, was 3-2 for the whole Royal Air Force : air gunners with 5-2 having the
highest incidence, and pilots and navigators with 2-8 the lowest (Table 111,
page 142).
(6) In operational commands the average incidence was 5 per cent man-
years, air gunners having 6-7 and pilots 5-4, navigators and wireless operator/
air gunners being almost equal. This relationship obtained for all these
Commands. By contrast the incidence was 1-3 in Flying Training
Command, the figures for crew categories being more uniform. (Tables IV
and V, page 144.)
(7) In duties the incidence in night bombing was 12 per cent man-years,
in day bombers 11-2, and Middle East operations 9to 10-4 : while in day fighters
it was only 6, in night fighters 3-9 and Coastal Command 3-4 per cent. (Table
VII, page 145). Thus the incidence of neurosis attributed to the duties of
bombing was nearly four times that for the whole Air Force, it was twice that
of day fighting and nearly four times that of night fighting. The incidence of
about one per cent, for trainees was a fifth of that for operational Commands
(Table VIII, page 147).


(8) There appeared to be a direct relationship between the incidence of
neurosis attributed to flying duties and the degree, of danger of the duty. The
opposite appeared to be the case when the neuroses are not attributed by the
physicians to flying (Table X, page 147).
(9) Neuroses arising from flying duties were equally distributed between
men who had not flown on operations, who had started their tour and who had
had considerable experience of operations. Five per cent of cases arose in
men who had not flown at all. By contrast more men ceased flying without
neurosis, lacking confidence, at the beginning of the tour than at any other
time (Tables XII and XIV, pages 148 and 149).
(10) Over half of the patients had not been exposed to more than slight
stress while flying, and nearly a third to none at all; two thirds had experienced
no psychological stress apart from flying (Tables XV (a) and (b), page 150).
(11) Three-quarters of the patients showed evidence at a single interview
of predisposition to neurosis and a fifth were so heavily predisposed that in
the opinion of the physicians they should have been rejected had their disability
been recognised on entry (Table XV (c), page 150).
(12) A higher rate of predisposition in air gunners than pilots was associate
with a higher breakdown rate. Predisposition was least evident in patients
from operational duties or in those who had been exposed to great flying stress
(Tables XVI (a), (b), (c) and XVIII, pages 154-156).
(13) A contrast in the incidence of predisposition and stress was found
between the group of patients under review and the group lacking confidence
and having neuroses not due to flying duties.
(14) When the incidence of flying stress and predisposition was compared
in different groups of subjects, an inverse relationship was found to exist
between these two factors. In groups where one of these factors was pre-
ponderant, the causal significance of the other factor was slight. (Tables
XVIII, XIX, XX and Fig. 5. pages 156-158).
(15) The main cause in almost every case was psychological and the most
important single cause was fear, fatigue playing a subsidiary part if present
at all. Physical injury contributed to the neurosis in 18 per cent and illness
in 9 per cent. Airsickness and exhaustion were each contributary in only
2 per cent, and cold and altitude were never considered causal (Table XXI,
page 163). As fear is the most important single cause it follows that there
is a direct relationship between the incidence of the neurosis and the
degree of risk encountered. (Table XXII, page 162).
(16) Nearly 80 per cent of the patients had anxiety states, but the occurrence
of anxiety appeared to be related to the degree of danger encountered (Tables
XXIV and XXV, page 166). 13 per cent had hysteria, 10 per cent were
depressed and 7 per cent had a fatigue state (Table XXIII, page 163). The
incidence of fatigue states was related causally to exhaustion.
(17) 38 per cent of all cases of neurosis in flying personnel who see a neuro-
psychiatrist are returned to flying, but in those cases for whom an intermediate
category of temporary ground duty or limited flying was recommended, 56 per
cent to flying duties. The relapse rate during the year in which the patients
were seen was 5 per cent (Tables XXVII and XXVIII, pages 167-168).
The chances of returning to flying duties are greatest in pilots (Table XXIX,
page 168), experienced air crews (Table XXX), those with little predisposition
to neurosis or who have experienced considerable stress (Tables XXXI and
XXXII (a) and (b), pages 169-170).


References
Bartlett, F. C.
Fatigue following highly skilled work. 1941, Fender
Lecture.
Cooper, E. L. & Sinclair, A.
J. M...
Neurosis in Tobruk. 1942., Med. J. Austral., 11,73.
Curran, D. & Mallinson, W.
P. ..
Depressive states in war. 1941. Brit. Med. J. i. 305.
Dillon. F.
.
The treatment of neuroses in the field. 1940, Chap. 6,
Neuroses in War. Ed. by E. Miller.
Gillespie, R. D.
Report on the R.A.F. Hospital, Matlock. 1940
(Unpublished report).
Hadfield, J. A.
War Neuroses. 1942. Brit. Med. J. i. 281.
Love, H. R. ..
Neurotic casualties in the field. 1942. Med. J.
Austral, ii, 137.
Matthews, et al.
Fatigue at high altitude. 1941, (Unpublished re-
port). FPRC 272.
Symonds, C. P.
Series of cases with psychological disorder in the
R.A.F. . examined in relation to the problem of
selection of flying personnel. 1942, FPRC 412a
(see Chapter III).
The human response to flying stress. 1943, Brit.
Med. J. ii, 703 and 740 ( see Chapter VIII).
„
Anxiety neurosis in combatants. 1943, ■ Lancet ii,
785.
Symonds, C. P. St Williams,
>* »»
D. J...
Investigation into psychological disorder in flying
personnel.
(a) Personal investigation in Bomber Command.
1942. FPRC 412 (e), {see Chapter IV).
(b) Personal investigation in Fighter Command.
1942. FPRC 412 (f), ( see Chapter V).
(c) Personal investigation in Coastal Command.
1942. FPRC 412 (h), {see Chapter VI).
(d) Statistical survey of the records in six months.
1942. FPRC 412 (g), {see Chapter IX).
Williams, D. J.
Predisposition to psychological disorder in normal
flying personnel. 1943. FPRC 516 {see Chap-
ter XIV).
(18) These observations have been related to clinical psychiatric experience
and discussed with examples from patients interviewed personally. It is
apparent from the results obtained that the problem of neuroses arising as a
result of flying duties only differs from the problem of neuroses encountered in
civil life in the kind and degree of psychological stresses encountered, which in
turn depend upon the specialised and hazardous nature of the patients’ duty.
Acknowledgments
The case reports upon which this survey is based were all made by the
neuro-psychiatrists in the Royal Air Force. The consistently high standard
of documentation which they maintained is reflected in the statistics which
have been presented. The total strengths of aircrew were obtained from the
Commands through the kindness of the Principal Medical Officers, and Flying
Personnel Medical Officers.


TABLE I
Distributing cases of neurosis under commands (all crew categories, including those
under training)
Command
No.
Percentage
of total
Percentage
1942
(page 119
Table I)
Bomber
1,022
34-1
41-9
Flying Training*
969
32-4
22-3
Middle East ..
402
13-5
10-4
Coastal
316
10-6
13-3
Fighter
270
9-0
9-0
Maintenance and Transport
10
0-4
CHAPTER XI
OCCURRENCE OF NEUROSIS IN ROYAL AIR FORCE AIR CREW IN
1943 AND 1944
by
Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds, K.B.E., C.B., M.D., F.R.C.P. and
Wing Commander Denis J. Williams, D.Sc., M.D., F.R.C.P.
FPRC Report 412 (i) September, 1944
Introduction
This chapter deals briefly with the main facts relating to neuroses which
have arisen in flying personnel in the past year. Detailed analyses of the
incidence, nature and causes of neurosis in air crews are presented in Chapters
IX and X)’ and the present chapter should be supplemented by reference to
the earlier ones if a fuller study of the subject is intended. When it has seemed
useful, however, figures relating to neurosis in the air crews in 1942 have been
included here for comparison. The figures are obtained from a statistical
survey of psychological disorder in 1,197 flying personnel which occurred in
the six months beginning February 3rd, 1942 (Chapter IX). The general
conclusions deduced from the present statistics support those expressed in the
previous chapters. The method of collecting and assembling the data has
already been described (pages 118-120).
1. Cases with a frank neurosis
In the year beginning February 10th, 1943, Royal Air Force neuro-
psychiatrists thought that 2,989 flying personnel seen by them were suffering
from a neurosis, and that another 307, although not suffering from neurosis
lacked confidence for their flying duties. Thus a total of 3,296 men (compared
with 2,919 in 1942-43) were seen who were either unable or unwilling to carry
out their flying duties. This number, representing nine a day, does not include
those dealt with directly by the unit medical officer, or those who because of
psychological disorders are handicapped in their duties, and though inefficient
do not reach the medical branch. Those with a frank neurosis, 2,989, will
form the substance of the report. They came from the following commands :
(♦ This includes 26 wireless operators under training in Signals Schools of Technica I
Training Command.)


TABLE
II
Cases of neurosis in operational commands at home (including air crew under training,
instructors and those employed on staff and other duties)
Command
Units
Operational
Training
Bomber
727
295
Coastal
226
90
Fighter
200
70
TABLE III
Distribution of cases of neurosis under crew categories
Category
No.
Percentage
of total
Pilot
1,054
35-1
Navigator*
577
19-2
Wireless Operator!
541
18-4
Air Gunner
450
15-0
Air Bomber
136
4-6
Flight Engineer ..
128
4-3
, P.N.B
103
3-4
In each of the operational commands at home, over a third of the cases
came from training units, as follows :
♦[includes ; t includes :
Navigator .. .. 380 Wireless Operator .. .. 525
Navigator 8., W., and B.W. 155
Navigator Radio .. .. 45 W/Operator-Mechanic .. 16
577 54.1
It will be seen from Table IV that although the order in which the various
duties contributed has remained similar, the relative proportion of neurosis
recognised in men under training has risen appreciably. As the figures
represent occurrence of neurosis, and not incidence, these changes may possibly
be due to an increase in the number of men at risk in the various duties. From
the evidence available it is, however, unlikely that this factor has affected the
number of cases of neurosis under training to the degree shown in the table.


TABLE IV
Duties considered chiefly responsible for the illness, or which were
at time of onset of symptoms
being performed
Percentage
Percentage
1942
Duties
No.
of total
duties
(page 119
Table II)
Under training ..
1,117
35-9
28-7
Night bdmbing ..
829
26-7
28-5
Instructing
266
8-6
11-1
Coastal General Reconnaissance
232
7-5
9-2
Day fighting
214
6-9
8-6
Day bombing ..
107
3-4
7-0
Staff and other duties ..
101
3-4
—
Coastal boats
60
1-9
0-4
Night fighting
60
1-9
1-4
Coastal offensive duties ..
47
1-5
1-3
Ferrying ..
30
1-0
0-2
Army Co-op. (Middle East)
21
0-7
—
Air Sea Rescue ..
11
0-3
0-3
Photographic Reconnaissance ..
7
0-2
0-4
Test pilot . .
6
0-2
—
Total
3,108*
100-1
97-If
TABLE V
Relationship of flying experience to the time of breakdown
Percentage
Flying experience
No.
Percentage
of total
1942
(page 120
Table IV)
No flying ..
284
9-6
7-9
No operational flying .. ..
1,109
37-0
31-2
Under 100 hours ops.
816
27-3
24-8
Over 100 hours ops. ..
780
26-0
36-0
*ln 119 cases two successive duties, usually instructing and an operational duty, were
together thought to have been responsible for the neurosis.
f Duties in Army Co-operation Command contributed 2-8 per cent.
2.
Flying experience
Table V shows a clear difference between the present figures and those
for 1942 in the percentage of men who have had considerable operational
experience, since there has been a fall of 10 per cent from 36 per cent. In
contrast, the percentage who have had no operational experience has risen in
the same time by 7'5 per cent from 39-1 per cent. These differences are highly
reliable statistically. They may be related to the significant increase in the
proportion of case which arose under training (Tables I and IV).. It must be
borne in mind that these figures are simply proportions which will be influenced
by the number of men exposed to the possibility of neurosis. Nevertheless
from all these facts it appears that there is a tendency for men who are suffering
from a neurosis to reach a neuro-psychiatrist earlier in their flying career than
they did previously. It also seems that the neuroses are less frequently arising
as a result of operational experience. Although this comparison is a rough one,
and although many factors may be responsible for such a change, we hope that
the responsible factors include those which it has been our aim to foster
since 1942: —
(i) the earlier recognition of temperamentally unsuitable air crew under
training;
(ii) the more efficient prevention of neurosis in squadrons.


TABLE VI
Reaction types recognised in the 2,989 cases of neurosis arising in the year
Percentage
Percentage
)Q4?
Reaction types
No.
of total
(page 123
Table IX)
Anxiety state
2,210
77'0
77-2
Hysteria ..
410
14-3
11-5
Depression
255
8-9
10-7
Fatigue state
124
4-3
5-8
Obsessional
45
1-6
1-3
Schizophrenic
24
0-8
1-0
Other diagnoses ..
5
0-2
0-4
Mixed syndromes
205*
7-3
7-4
TABLE VII
Main causes of the neuroses recognised by the specialists
Percentage
Causes
No.
Percentage
1942
of total*
(page 122
Table VII)
Psychological causes
2,839
98-8
99-6
Physical causes ..
558
19-4
29-0
Injury ..
275
9-5
15-2
Illness ..
205
7-1
9-7
Air sickness
43
1-5
2-0
Exhaustion
Mixed psychological and physical
35
1-2
1-8
causes ..
524
18-3
29-0
3.
Diagnosis
The distribution of diagnoses in Table VI has changed so little that comment is
unnecessary.
* In 57 cases the presence of a neurosis was doubtful at the time of examination, and
in 59, where the man had completed less than 12 hours flying and was handicapped tempera-
mentally, a diagnosis of unsuitable for flying duties was made. These cases have been
excluded from Table VI so that the diagnoses were made upon 2,873 cases. The percentage
is based upon this total. In 205 cases more than one reaction type was recognised—so that
there are more reaction types than cases.
4. Causes of the neuroses
It will be seen from Table VII that in many cases the causes were multiple.
In all except 34 (I*2 per cent) of these, one of the causes was thought to be
psychological. The contribution of the different causes which were considered
to be responsible for the neuroses shows the same order as before. Physical
factors have, however, been recognised as casual in an appreciably smaller
number of cases than in the preceding year. This applies especially to physical
injury. This probably means that there has been a progressive tendency to
place a greater emphasis upon the causal importance of psychological factors.
In some cases physical factors may well have been present but considered of
minor importance by the psychiatrist.
• The total is 2,873 as in Table VI, for it only includes the cases where a reaction type
was recognised.


TABLE VIII
Final disposal by a medical board in 1,184 of the 2,989 cases
Percentage of cases with
Category
final disposal
1943-44
1942
Full flying
32-3
35-1
Limited flying
5-3
7-1
Grounded
60-2
55-9
Invalided ..
' 2-1
1-8
References '
Reid, D. D
The prognosis for a return to .full flying duties after
psychological disorder. FPRC 535 (see Chapter
XVIII).
Symonds, C. P. & Williams, D. J...
Investigation of psychological disorders in flying
personnel: statistical survey of the records for six
months, 3rd February to 3rd August, 1942. FPHC
412 (g) (see Chapter IX).
Clinical and statistical study of neurosis precipitated
by flying duties. 1943. FPRC 547 (see Chapter X).
Disposal of cases
In each case the nemo-psychiatrist recorded his opinion upon disposal
but only the actual medical board’s disposals have been accepted for the
present purpose. In an appreciable number of cases the neuro-psychiatrist
was unable to give this information; in many others a disposal had not been
made at the time the data were collected. Altogether, board disposals were
known in 2,113 cases (70*5 per cent). The data presented below are based
upon these cases.
Information upon the final disposal which had been made by a medical
board was available in 1,184 of the 2,989 cases during the year under review.
Of these, 392 (32*3 per cent) were returned to full flying duty, 64 (5-3 per
cent) to limited flying duty, 728 (60*2 per cent) grounded, and only 26 (2-1 per
cent) were invalided. It has been explained elsewhere that the number of
men who ultimately return to flying duties is higher than this, for many who
have a temporary category will subsequently be given a permanent flying
category. It will be seen in Table VIII that the figures are very similar to those
for the first six months of 1942.
Information concerning temporary disposals given by medical boards was
available in 833 instances. In 424 (50 • 9 per cent) of these the man was directed
to limited flying duties and in 409 (49-1 per cent) to ground duties. The
disposal of men temporarily grounded of course includes hospital treatment,
convalescence and sick leave, as well as temporary ground duties on a station.
The disposal of cases is critically examined on pages 167-170 and 239-242.
Tables giving more detailed information upon data from individual Commands,
in Chapters X and XVIII, have been omitted here.


Cases of neurosis
Cases not having
neurosis but considered
lacking in confidence
1942-3
2,503
■ 416
1943-4
2,989
307
1944-5 ..
2,910
306
TABLE I
Distribution under commands
Number of cases
Percentage of total
1943-4
1944-5
1943-4
1944-5
Bomber
1,022
890
34-1
30-3
Flying Training Command
969
849
32-4
29-1
Middle East
402
497
13-5
17-1
Coastal
316
264
10-6
9-1
Fighter
270
279
9-0
9-6
India
—
67
—
2-3
Other Commands ..
10
74
0-4
2-5
Total
2,989
2,910
100-0
100-0
CHAPTER XII
OCCURRENCE OF NEUROSIS IN ROYAL AIR FORCE AIR CREWS IN
1944 AND 1945
by
Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds, K.B.E., C.B., M.D., F.R.C.P., and
Wing Commander Denis J. Williams, D.Sc., M.D., F.R.C.P.
FPRC Report 412 (L) April, 1945
Introduction
This statistical survey of the occurrence of neurosis in flying personnel, in
the year ending February 10th, 1945, is similar to that of the corresponding
report for the previous year (Chapter XI), so that the data in the two reports
can be easily compared. When it has seemed profitable figures for the previous
year have been included for comparison. The method of collecting and
assembling data is described on page 118. This chapter is confined to the
cases of recognised neurosis.
1. Cases referred for psychiatric opinion
The neuro-psychiatric specialists in the R.A.F. at home and in all overseas
commands submitted cards to Central Registry upon 3,453 new cases of flying
personnel referred to them on account of psychological disorder during the
year, made up as follows ;
Recognised neurosis .. .. .. .. .. .. 2,910
Not having a neurosis but lacking in confidence .. .. 306 .
Not having a neurosis but unsuitable for flying duties.. .. 108
Considered normal and returned to duty 129
All cases .. .. .. .. .. 3,453
The number of cases of neurosis has been stable in the past two years.
Figures for the past three years were :
2. Distribution of cases of recognised neurosis
The contribution of each command has remained roughly the same.


TABLE 11
Distribution under operational and training units
Units
Command
Operational
Training
Bomber
673
207
Fighter
229
50
Coastal
181
83
Others
57
17
TABLE III
Distribution under air crew categories
Category
Number
of cases
Percentage
of total
Percentage
1943-4
Pilot
1,001
34-5
35-1
Navigator
519*
17-8
19-2
Air Gunner
519
17-8
15-0
W/Op
463f
15-9
18-4
Air Bomber
163
5-6
4*6
F/Engineer
167
5-6
4-3
P.N.B.
78
2-7
3-4
TABLE IV
Distribution under duties
*
Percentage
Percentage
Duties
Number
of total
of total
of oases
duties
duties
1943-4
Under training .. ..
961
32-0
35-9
Night bomber
844
28-1
26-7
Instructor
262
8-7
8-6
Coastal General Reconnaissance
256
8-5
7-5
Day fighter
173
5-8
6-9
Day bomber
113
3-8 -
3-4
Night fighter
84
2-8
1-9
Staff
78
2-6
3-4
Ferrying ..
69
2-3
1-0
Coast oSence
51
1-7
1 *5
Coastal boats
28
0-9
1-9
Air Sea Rescue ..
28
0-9
0-3
Army Co-operation
22
0-7
0-7
Test pilot
19
0-6
0-2
Photographic Reconnaissance ..
17
0-6
0-2
Total duties
3,005*
100-0
100-1
In the past year, as in the preceding, about a third of the cases from
operational commands have arisen in training units.
* Includes : t Includes :
Navigator .. .. .. 323 Wireless Operator .. .. 447
Navigator 8., W., and B.W. 150 WOP/M., F.M.A.E. .. .. 16
Navigator Radio .. .. 46
463
519
These proportions are similar to those in the previous year.
♦ la 95 cases two successive duties, usually instructing and an operational duty,
were together thought to have been responsible for the neurosis.


TABLE V
Distribution under flying experience
Flying experience
Number
of cases
Percentage
of total
cases
Percentage
of total
1943-4
No flying ..
178
6-2
7-9
No operational flying
1,012
34-7
31-2
Under 100 hours ops.
836
28-7
24-8
Over 100 hours ops.
884
30-4
36-0
TABLE VI
Diagnosis of reaction types
Reaction types
No. of
cases
Percentage
of total
cases
Percentage
of total
1943-4
Anxiety
2,164
74-7
77-0
Hysteria ..
469
16-1
14-3
Depression
289
9-9
8-9
Fatigue
99
3-4
4-3
Obsessional
47
■ 1-6
1-6
Schizophrenic
32
1-1
0-8
Others
11
0-4
0-2
Mixed syndromes*
224
7-7
7-3
Table V provides a rough idea of the hours flown before breakdown
occurred.
It will be seen that the proportion who broke down before commencing
operations has not changed materially in the past two years.
3.
Diagnosis
* As the number of diagnoses is greater than the number of cases—since a double
diagnosis was made on 224—the total of the percentage exceeds 100.
Since we are considering neuroses only no analysis has been made of
543 cases in which the neuro-psychiatrists found no evidence of such a disorder.
In 129 of these cases no evidence of any abnormality could be found and the
man was returned to flying; in 306 a diagnosis of lack of confidence was made ;
and in 108 the man was considered temperamentally unsuitable for flying
duties although there was no evidence of a neurosis at the time of examination.
Ninety of the 108 men considered temperamentally unsuitable for flying duties
came from Flying Training Command. This increases the number of men
referred to the neuro-psychiatrist with symptoms of a nervous disorder in that
comrfiand in the past year to 939.


TABLE VII
Main causes recognised by the specialists
No. of
Percentage
Percentage
Causes
cases
of total
of total
cases
1943-4
Psychological causes
2,864 -
98-4
98-8
Physical causes ..
516
17-7
19-4
Injury ..
236
8-1
9-5
Illness ..
212
7-3
7-1
Air sickness
38
1-3
1-5
Exhaustion
30
1-0
1-2
Mixed psychological and physical
causes ..
499
17-1
18-3
TABLE VIII
Disposal of cases
Percentage of cases with final disposal
-
1944-5
1943-4
1942
Full flying
22-5
32-3
35-1
Limited flying
3-5
5-3
7-1
Grounded ..
72-T
60-2
55-9
Invalided ..
1-9
2-1
1-8
In this table the number of causes naturally exceeds the number of cases,
since in many patients more than one cause for the illness was discovered.
It is obvious that there has been little change in the occurrence of the causal
factors. It will be noticed that the table omits a cause for 29 cases. This is
explained by the fact that in some instances, especially among the 32
schizophrenic patients included in the series, no environmental cause was
recognised.
4. Disposal
Only the actual medical boards’ disposals have been accepted for the
purpose of appraising prognosis in this and preceding reports. This information
was often unknown to the neuro-psychiatric specialist, but it is known in 1,908
instances (65-6 percent of the total). In 841 of these cases only a temporary
disposal had been given, but in 1,067 the final dispositions were known. In
these 1,067 the dispositions were distributed as in Table VIII.
It will be seen that there is a tendency for the specialists to return fewer
men to flying duties. As has already been explained, these figures do not
indicate the percentage of all the cases ultimately returning to flying duties.
Of the 841 cases in which no final disposal had been made, 376 had already been
given limited flying duties temporarily and it is probable that most of these and
many of the others with a temporary disposal will eventually return to flying.
Nevertheless of the men given a final disposal by the end of the year, the per-
centage removed from flying rose from 57-7 in 1942 to 62-3 the next year and
74-0 in the year now under consideration. The reasons for this increase cannot
be stated with certainty but there is no doubt that one of them has been the
experience of neuro-psychiatrists that the ultimate prognosis for full flying
duties in most men who have had a neurotic illness is unfavourable.


References
Symonds, C. P. & Williams, D. J... Investigation of psychological disorders in flying
personnel: statistical survey of the records for six
months. 1942, FPRC 412 (g) (Chapter IX).
„ The occurrence of neurosis in air crew, 1943-
1944, FPRC 412 (i) (Chapter XI).
It has also been realised that there is little employment available in war
for men with a limitation of flying category for neurotic disability, whether
this limitation be temporary or permanent. The limitation appropriate for
these cases is usually non-operational flying only. The only large-scale
employment open to such men is on instructional duties and there have been
several indications that they are generally unsuitable for such work owing to
the effect which their uncertain behaviour may have upon pupils. Another
factor may have been the impression that the number of air crew under training
has been relatively higher in relation to wastage than in previous years.
For these reasons the neuro-psychiatrists have tended to select only the
most favourable cases for rehabilitation for flying duties, and to advise
permanent grounding earlier and more often than in the past.


TABLE
I
Duties
No. of cases of neurosis
1942-1943
1943-1944
Under training—Flying Training
Command
520
738
Night bomber squadrons
682
575 '
CHAPTER XIII
TIME OF RECOGNITION OF NEUROSIS IN FLYING PERSONNEL
by
Wing Commander Denis J. Williams, D.Sc., M.D., F.R.C.P.
FPRC 412 ( j) January, 1945
In comparing the occurrence of neurosis in flying personnel in the years
beginning in February, 1942 and 1943, it was evident that many more men
had reached a neuro-psychiatrist while under training in 1942-43 than in 1943-
44, and that fewer had been referred from squadrons (pages 119, 120).
The implications of these observations were discussed, but definite conclusions
oould not be drawn from them as the actual incidence of neurosis under
training and in squadrons was not known. Further evidence on this incidence
has now become available.
By far the biggest contribution to the total number of flying personnel with
neurosis was made by men under training in Flying Training Command and
by men in night bomber squadrons in this country. These two duties together
made up nearly half the total cases from the 15 forms of duty under which
the cases are classified. As these two duties also represent the two extremes
of the flying career they have been selected for comparison ; it is impracticable
to ask commands for the necessary data for every duty separately.
The number of cases of neurosis which occurred in these two duties in
1942-43 and 1943-44 are shown in Table I. They include all flying personnel
considered by the neuro-psychiatrist to be suffering from a neurosis. They do
not include those showing no evidence of a neurosis, but considered to be
lacking in confidence.
The incidence of neurosis was calculated as a percentage of the average
strength (obtained from the respective commands) of the air crews engaged in
those duties in each of the two years. As the comparison is made between
men in the same commands and duties, a figure of incidence based upon the
Percentage of average strength is a reasonable one. This basis does not differ
greatly from that employed on page 141.


TABLE II
Duties
Percentage of average strength
. referred with a neurosis
1942-1943
1943-1944
Under training—Flying Training
Command
1-67
2-32
33-5
Night bomber squadrons ,.
12-00
8-50
27-9
References
Symonds, C. P. & Williams, D. J.. .
Investigation of psychological disorder in flying
personnel: clinical and statistical study of neurosis
precipitated by flying duties. 1943, FPRC 547
{see Chapter X).
Occurrence of neurosis in R.A.F. air crew, 1943-1944.
FPRC 412 (i), {see Chapter XI).
These tables show that there has been a significant increase in the number
of men suffering from a neurosis referred for a psychiatric opinion while
under training in Flying Training Command and a significant fall in the same
kind of case from night bomber squadrons. It seems, therefore, that there is
a tendency for men who are suffering from a neurosis to reach a neuro-
psychiatrist earlier in their flying career than previously, while neuroses are
less frequently arising as a result of operational experience. There is reason
to believe that the incidence of neurosis in squadrons has fallen still further
since D-Day, and has now reached an unusually low level, but it should be
appreciated that the figures here presented relate to the two years before
February, 1944, when the factors responsible for the more recent decrease
were either not operating or less potent.
Summary
Facts are presented which show that there is a tendency for the men
suffering from a neurosis to reach a neuro-psychiatrist earlier in their flying
career than previously and that neuroses are less frequently arising as a result
of operational experience.


TABLE I
Assessment of different groups of unselected cases by six different specialists
Assessment of pre-disposition
(percentage)
Observer
Cases
examined
Nil
Mild
Severe
1
100
40
60
0
2
100
10
65
25
3
100
19
56
25
4
100
27
61
12
5
100
15
56
29
6
83
33
60
7
Total
583
24
60
16
CHAPTER XIV
PREDISPOSITION TO PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDER IN NORMAL FLYING
PERSONNEL
by
Wing Commander Denis J. Williams, D.Sc., M.D., F.R.C.P.
FPRC Report 516, February, 1943
Introduction
It is described in Chapter IX that 1,197 cases of psychological disorder
in flying personnel were seen by neuro-psychiatrists in the six months February
to August, 1942. Sixty-eight per cent of these showed evidences of predisposi-
tion to psychological breakdown. This figure would be more valuable if the
proportion of normal flying personnel without signs of psychological disorder
who were found to be similarly predisposed were known. To achieve this, a
control group would have to be examined under the same conditions,
using the same methods of clinical assessment and similar standards of judgment.
This has been attempted.
1. Method
In the group of 1,197 patients, predisposition was assessed as follows.
The patients were seen by R.A.F. neuro-psychiatrists who forwarded their
individual assessment of predispoition as nil, mild, severe to the Central Registry
of Psychological Disorders in Flying Personnel, with notes on the observations
upon which the psychiatrist’s opinion had been based. At the Registry it was
noticed that there were individual differences in the standards used by the
neuro-psychiatrists, depending to some extent upon their past training and
present approach to the subject. Thirty-one psychiatrists made returns.
While the percentage of mildly predisposed subjects is similar in the
assessments of the six psychiatrists, it will be seen 'that differences are present
m the numbers in the severely predisposed group. The six observers found


some evidence of predisposition in from 60 to 90 per cent of their cases, the
average being 76 per cent. From the figures in this table it is clear that the
observers did not differ so much in eliciting signs of predisposition as in grading
the degree of the predisposition discovered into the two groups of mild and
severe. This division is of course arbitrary and artificial, since no sharp
distinction can be made between the degrees of predisposition encountered in
a group of subjects. As a guide to the observers it was suggested that if
predisposition was so marked that had it been recognised at the time of enlist-
ment it would have been sufficient to warrant rejection for air crew, should be
considered severe. All other cases in which there was evidence of predisposition
were to be considered mildly predisposed.
The relative importance which is attached to predisposition and to environ-
mental factors in the aetiology of neuroses varies among psychiatrists, and
it might be expected that those who laid great weight upon predisposition
would search for it with the greater diligence. Their assessment of predisposition
as mild and severe might also be influenced to some extent by their approach
to the psychiatric problem in hand. From a survey of the data at the Central
Registry there is little doubt that such individual differences exist, and that
one psychiatrist will elicit greater evidence than another of predisposition
in a case. It might be argued that the most useful information would be
derived from the clinical notes of the observer who was most successful in
eliciting signs of predisposition. As it is the present purpose to compare two
groups of cases, examined under similar conditions, the average assessment
of the thirty-one psychiatrists in the Royal Air Force, who between them
interviewed 1,197 cases, probably gives a better impression of the proportion
of predisposed individuals than would data from one or two selected observers.
As the control group of cases was examined by a number of neurologists and
psychiatrists, the comparison is closer if the former course is adopted.
As there is an admitted disparity between the views of individual psychia-
trists, they were all asked to record the clinical evidence upon which their
assessment had been based in each case. Notes on these were forwarded to the
Central Registry, where, on the basis of the clinical data, the individual assess-
ments were modified where necessary, to conform to the average, so that for
instance the number of patients classed as severely predisposed in 1, 4 and 6
would be raised, and in 2, 3 and 5 would be lowered.
Evidence of predisposition to neurosis was based on an account, of the
patient’s personal story, and upon evidences of instability in near relatives.
In the personal story the patient’s reactions to the stresses encountered at school,
in his home life, his employment and in the Service were taken into account,
as well as an introspective description of his personality, including any evidences
of overt psychological disorder. The personal factors ranged from nervous
traits in childhood such as nail-biting or timidity, to severe affective disorder
requiring medical care. In the family history the factors included obviously
abnormal personality traits, neurotic illnesses and even frank psychoses.
Short desciptions of the methods of assessment of predisposition to neurotic
illness have already been given by Gillespie (1941) and by Symonds (1942).
The standards used in this investigation may be judged by reference to the
case summaries on pages 188-189.
Table II shows that over two-thirds of all men who break down are
considered to be predisposed by this method of assessment, which is purely
empirical and has been used arbitrarily by different workers on the tacit
assumption that its validity has been established. As this assumption is at
present unfounded, examination of a control group of subjects would be valuable.


TABLE II
Degree of predisposition in the whole series of 1,197 cases
Percentage
Total predisposed
68
Evidence of mild predisposition
52
Evidence of severe predisposition ..
16
No evidence of predisposition
32
TABLE III
Assessment of degree of predisposition in the series compared with that of a
control group
100 normal
1,197 flying personnel
Predisposition
flying personnel
with psychological
(control group)
disorders
(percentage)
Nil
85
32
Mild
12
52
Severe ..
3
16.
Total predisposed
15
68
Material
The control series of normals consisted of a hundred flying personnel
admitted consecutively to the Military Hospital (Head Injuries), Oxford, with
an acute head or spinal injury resulting from a plane crash, car accident or
enemy action. It included only patients admitted to the hospital in the earliest
stages after the injury; and subjects with open gunshot wounds, compound
fractures, or gross damage to the central nervous system. They had all been
performing full flying duties efficiently and well until the time of the accident.
Forty-five per cent had been on operations, 21 per cent were from O.T.Us.,
and 33 per cent were under training in Flying Training Command. They
consequently represented a rough cross section of the Royal Air Force and were
comparable with the flying personnel with psychological disorders, of whom
60 per cent had been on operations, 18 per cent were from O.T.Us. and 22 per
cent were from Flying Training Command. All these normal men had been
interviewed while in hospital by an Army neurologist or psychiatrist and also
by Air Vice Marshal Sir Charles Symonds, or in his absence by the author, as it
was necessary in each case to study the personal background and family history
before advising disposal. Full data upon predisposition consistent with that
obtained in the 1,197 cases with psychological disorder was therefore available
in all cases. The notes were finally collected and predisposition in the control
group was assessed at the Central Registry in exactly the same way, and with
the same standards as for the group of cases oL psychological disorder.
3.
Results


(a)
Mildly predisposed
Case No. 731: Pilot, under training, aged 19. Admitted after a plane crash. Family
history: good, except that his father was described as a ' restless type of man.’
Personal history : did very well at school; was captain of the school and captain
of games. Mother said that he was restless or excitable like his father, and in hospital
he showed rather hypomanic behaviour.
Case No. 769; Pilot, under training, aged 20, married. Admitted immediately after a
crash landing through fuel shortage. At school he did not take matric. because he
thought it did not matter, and on leaving he held a series of different jobs and could
not settle down. In the R.A.F. he has been impatient at the length of training.
Says he has "always had a wandering type of temperament,” prefers solitude, has
no close friends, and worries over things he thinks important. There was no family
history of neurosis.
Case No. 888: Pilot, under training, single, aged 19. Admitted immediately after a
crash in which he sustained bums, cuts and a trivial head injury. Had a normal
school life and was a clerk before joining the R.A.F. Had always been subject to
mood changes which had no apparent cause, either depression lasting a few hours,
up to a day or two, or of unusually high spirits of briefer duration. The mood swings
were more evident after the crash, depression predominating. He was consequently
removed from flying training. Mother had had two attacks of depression, not
requiring treatment.
Case No. 937: Pilot, under training, aged 23, severely injured in an airraid. Family
history: seven siblings are normal but one used to sleep walk. The patient left
school at 18 and had held one job since. He is subject to extreme mood changes,
becoming depressed frequently since the age of 18. The attacks of severe depression
have no apparent cause, occur two or three times a year and last one to two days.
Normal in school and has remained well in the R.A.F. Has a violent temper and tends
to be solitary.
Case No. 1063: Flying Officer, instructor, aged 29, with 1,000 flying hours, including
an operational tour, was run into by another plane, on the ground. Admitted
immediately afterwards. Family history was good. Personal history: Did well at
school and held the same banking job for 10 years until the war. Single, a non-
smoker and teetotal. He is very shy and consequently solitary. Hardly mixes at
all. Hates mixing with new people and uses subterfuges to cover his embarrassment.
During his operational tour he slept badly and had nightmares of flying.
Case No. 1096 : Pilot, under training, aged 19, sustained a head injury with a lacerated
scalp in a forced landing. Family history: Mother had a nervous breakdown,
aged 40, as a result of air raids, but also had one 10 years previously, otherwise the
history is clear. Personal history : Normal school life. Held one job before joining
the R.A.F. Plays football and swims a lot and shows no neurotic traits.
Case No. 2025 : Pilot, aged 25, in nearing the end of his tour on Coastal G.R., was a
passenger in a car which skidded. Had a minor head injury and returned to full
flying. Family history : Says mother suffers from nerves because she has not enough
to do; always complains of pains which the family think she simulates; never had
a ' nervous breakdown ' but is called neurotic. Father and sister are stable. Patient
did well at school and won a scholarship to Cambridge. Subject to mild mood swings;
is easily irritated by trifles, if thwarted, or if his plans have to be changed.
Case No. 3155: Pilot, under training, aged 19, single, with 160 flying hours.
Admitted with abrasions and concussion after an air crash. He plays team games
and mixes well. Has had headaches in hot weather for years and occasionally gets
depressed for no apparent cause. Family history; Good, except that one sister has
fainting attacks in hot weather.
Case No. 3419 ; Pilot Officer, Observer, aged 21. with 250 flying hours. Admitted with
an acute but slight head injury. Had an uneventful past and no abnormal traits.
Played first-class Rugby. After the head injury, developed a mild anxiety state from
which he recovered. One brother had a nervous breakdown lasting for several
months, attributed to overworking for an examination, otherwise the family history
was good.
Ca.se No. 3477 : Pilot, single, aged 20. 100 hours operational in Stirlings. Severe head
injury following crash (he was second pilot). Family history : Mother had a nervous
breakdown, aged 24, but has been well ever since. Grandfather suffered from in-
frequent faints. Personal history ; Conscientious and sensitive type, though cheerful.


who did well at school, getting school certificate at 16. Went into a bank, and after
six months joined the R.A.F., aged 17. Did well in flying, was keen on games and
mixed well. “ Operational work affected him a little, but he never allowed himself to
show it.”
Case No. 3534 : Pilot Officer, Observer, aged 26, 187 flying hours with 5 operational
sorties in Bostons, severely injured in a crash returning from operations. Family
history : Father, suffering from melancholia, has been in a mental hospital for 5
years ; not improving.. No other evidence of instability in the family. Patient did
well at school and in civilian employment, but his brother said that he was highly
strung and inclined to stutter.
Case No. 3584 : Canadian pilot instructor with 230 hours. Admitted with an acute
head injury caused by engine failure at night. Family history : Mother is nervous
type of woman, who has migraine. Father drank heavily. Personal history ; Did
well at school and studied pharmacy afterwards. He adjusted well to Service life
and to living in England. Conscientious and always worrying about something.
Dreads examinations and failed the pharmacy final. Plays ice hockey and baseball.
After the war he intends to take up farming " as it is a quiet life."
(b) Severely predisposed
Case No. 711 : Pilot, under training, aged 21, with 150 flying hours, sustained a severe
head injury by crashing in take-off. He is an only child who did badly at school
and did not get matric. till 19, he then went to the University and failed inter B.A.
He had a severe depressive illness, aged 18, lasting 9 months, attributed to overwork.
During this he was prevented from attempting suicide by his parents’ timely inter-
vention. His father had a similar depression 12 years ago after a period of mental
strain, and his father’s mother had a similar illness. In hospital after the head injury
he again became depressed and had suicidal thoughts. He was consequently removed
from flying. '
Case No. 918 : Bomber Squadron Leader with 1,200 flying hours, who had completed
an operational tour, and been awarded the D.F.C. Married. Had fallen and hit his
head on a concrete floor. Family history : No evidence of nervous or mental in-
stability, but his father was timid and irritable. The patient showed very many
marked obsessional traits, and had obsessional fears while flying, although he had
absolute confidence in his flying, and had no great fear of operations. His obsessional
habits were severe enough to embarrass him at times and to decrease his efficiency
in the air.
Case No. 4087: Air Gunner, aged 22, married 9 months. 150 flying hours. Admitted
with a very severe head injury, necessitating operation, from which he made a full
recovery and returned to flying. Family history : Father went to Canada in 1920
to find work, and after a year ceased to write and has not been heard of since. His
mother is slightly anxious. He is an only child. Personal history : Before joining
the R.A.F. he had held over 20 jobs of all kinds, and had been dismissed for petty
offences and insubordination on many occasions. Frequently put on charges as a
flight mechanic, but after remustering as air gunner he seems to have found his
niche, and had no further trouble.
4. Discussion
From Table 111, 15 per cent of the controls and 68 per cent of the abnormal
group are predisposed it follows that any member of a crew who breaks down
is 4| times as likely to have been predisposed to psychological disorder as is
his apparently normal colleague. Also from Table 111 it follows that evidence
of predisposition sufficiently severe to warrant rejection on enlistment is over
5 times as common in those who broke down. It might be argued that the high
proportion of predisposed air crew among those who broke down would warrant
rejection of the 3 per cent of normals who were severely predisposed, and even
perhaps of the other 12 per cent who were mildly predisposed. Symonds
(1942) estimated the contribution made to the war effort by the patients
showing evidence of severe and mild predisposition in 100 air crew referred to
him with psychological disorders. He concluded that although the results
showed that it would probably have been profitable to reject those severely
predisposed on enlistment, the total contribution made to the operational
effort by the mildly predisposed before they broke down amply repaid their
acceptance.
(76642) ' G


Although two-thirds of those who break down are predisposed, the
proportion of this sample of normal men who are predisposed, and who will
also break down is not known. As the incidence of the predisposed is nearly
five times as high in the abnormal group it is obvious that apparently normal
predisposed men are in fact more likely to break down than their normal
colleagues. The exact proportion could only be determined if the true incidence
of psychological disorders were known. As all the predisposed normals
are unlikely to break down it is even less likely that rejection of this group of
predisposed individuals would be profitable than was the case in Symonds’
series, all of whom had already broken down.
Although the exact incidence of psychological disorders in flying personnel
cannot be calculated, the figures which are so far available show that the
incidence is certainly less than 5 per cent, so that it is less than a third of the
percentage of normals found to be predisposed. Thus, at best, for
each breakdown prevented by rejection two efficient men would also be rejected.
Again, one-third of those who break down show no evidence of predisposition
in retrospect (Table II), so that the adverse balance against wholesale rejection
of the predisposed is increased.
Against this argument must be placed Reid’s evidence (1942) that the
predisposed show greater accident proneness and are more likely to show
inefficiency or failure in operations, so that the duration of their operational
effort may be a spurious measure of its value. Some of the control group had
been responsible for the accident which caused their injury, so that it may well
be that the porportion of them who are predisposed is, on the basis of Reid’s
work, a shade higher than it would be in fully efficient flying personnel. This
factor is, however, likely to be a very small one, and to have an insignificant
effect upon the results presented.
It was shown at the beginning of this chapter that there are individual
differences in the assessment of predisposition which are standardised at the
Central Registry. Since only 100 normal men have been examined, and
compared with 1,197 with psychological disorders, it would be well to
compare the results obtained with those of other workers. Campbell assessed
predisposition in 60 flying personnel who were surgical patients in the R.A.F.
Officers’ Hospital, Torquay, in the same way as has been done in this investiga-
tion. None of his patients showed signs of psychological disorder. He found
15 per cent to be mildly predisposed and 3 per cent to be severely predisposed.
Unfortunately the documents upon which these observations were recorded
have since been destroyed by enemy action. Reid similarly assessed pre-
disposition in two heavy bomber squadrons on his station by means of a short
informal personal interview. As he was comparing different groups of men
within the squadrons, he did not claim any absolute accuracy for his method
of assessment, which through necessity could not be based on a full clinical
psychiatric interview. Nevertheless, he estimated that 16 per cent in one
squadron and 20 per cent in the other showed some evidence of predisposition.
He went on to show that the subsequent performance of those whom he con-
sidered to be predisposed was inferior to that of the rest of the squadron, since
in them the operational efficiency was lower, the accident proneness greater,
and the rate of psychological disorder higher. Lastly, Gillespie on the basis
of a short interview of 600 men has found that 16 per cent of flying personnel
under initial training show evidence of predisposition of the type described by
him earlier.


TABLE IV
Summary of assessments of predisposition by four observers
Observer
Flying personnel
Predisposed
(percentage)
Williams ..
100 healthy men at all stages of
experience
15 (3 severe)
Campbell . .
60 officers in a surgical ward ..
18 (3 severe)
Reid
200 men in two bomber squadrons
.. ,,
18
Gillespie . . • ..
600 aircrew entrants
960 normals
average
16 (2-8 severe)
16-4 (2-9 severe)
1,197 psychological disorders ..
68-0 (16 severe)
All these observers may not have used identical methods in assessing
predisposition, and, although the percentage of subjects considered to be
predisposed by them is very similar, there is really no evidence that had they
examined the same group of cases they would each have found evidences of
predisposition in exactly the same individuals. Nevertheless, in many hundreds
of cases of psychological disorder returns have been made to the Central Registry
by more than one observer, and in these cases agreement is close. Of 300 cases
in which an opinion had been given by more than one psychiatrist, there was
agreement as to the presence or absence of predisposition in 75 per cent and
there was absolute agreement as to the degree of predisposition—nil, mild or
severe—in 58 per cent. It is consequently likely that there would be close
agreement between the observers quoted in Table IV as to the actual subjects
who showed predisposition.
These groups are obviously not strictly comparable : the present series is
a rough cross-section of all flying personnel; Reid’s was drawn from operational
crews only; Campbell’s were all officers; Gillespie’s were untried entrants. In
addition, the standards of assessment were those of the individual investigator.
Nevertheless the proportions considered to be predisposed are all of the same
order and the average of the assessments of the four workers confirms that
air crew with psychological disorder are over four times as likely to show
evidences of predisposition to these disorders as are normal flying personnel.
The results of this investigation consequently justify the assumption that
predisposition to psychological disorders in flying personnel can be assessed by
competent observers using a method of personality study based on a short
interview which includes a survey of the subject’s personal and family history.
Although this method has been employed in the Service empirically since the
outbreak of war it appears that the estimated predisposition has not previously
been related to the actual liability to break-down.
This report shows that there is a direct relationship between the incidence
of demonstrable traits assumed in the past to indicate predisposition to
psychological disorder and the actual liability of flying personnel to these
disorders. It does not necessarily follow that this method of personality selection
can with benefit be directly applied to the problem of selection, since many who
show evidence of predisposition will not necessarily break down during their
active Service career, and some who do break down will previously have made
an adequate contribution. Symonds (1942). The extent to which personality
selection can implement the present methods calls for special investigation.
(76642) 0 2


References
Campbell, A. M.
Personal communication.
Gillespie, R. D.
Predictability of break-down under war conditions,
1941.
»* • • • • • •
Personal communication.
Reid, D. D. ..
The influence of psychological disorder on efficiency in
operational flying. 1943, FPRC 508 (quoted in
Chapter XYII).
Symonds, C. P.
A series of cases with psychological disorder examined
in relation to the problem of selection of flying
personnel. 1942, FPRC412—412 (a) (see Chapter III)_
Symonds, C. P. & Williams, D. J.
Investigation of psychological disorder in flying
personnel: statistical survey. 1942, FPRC 412(g)
(see Chapter IX).
5. Summary and conclusions
In Chapter IX it was shown that neuro-psychiatrists in the R.A.F. con
sidered that 68 per cent of flying personnel with psychological disorders showed
evidences of predisposition to these disorders. Exactly the same methods of
assessment have now been applied to 100 normals. The results obtained
have been compared with those of other workers. As a result it may be
concluded: —
(a) That the method of assessment of predisposition to psychological
disorders in flying personnel used extensively by neuro-psychiatrists
in the R.A.F. is capable of indicating a positive liability to these
disorders.
{b) That approximately 15 per cent of normal flying personnel show
evidence of this predisposition. In 3 per cent the predisposition is
so marked that had it been recognised, it would probably have
led to the candidate’s rejection at enlistment.
(c) That upon the same standard of assessment 68 per cent of flying
personnel who have developed psychological disorders show
similar' signs of predisposition, in 16 per cent severely. The
ratio of the predisposed in normal and psychoneurotic air crew is
consequently 1 to 4£.
{d) That this high ratio does not necessarily warrant rejection of the
predisposed. The evidence available suggests that it would be
uneconomical to reject any except the severely predisposed
individuals—a rejection rate of 3 per cent or less.


CHAPTER XV
SIGNS OF TEMPERAMENTAL UNSUITABILITY IN AIRCREW UNDER
TRAINING
by
Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds, K.B.E., C.B., M.D., F.R.C.P., and
Wing Commander Denis J. Williams, D.Sc, M.D., F.R.C.P.
Based on FPRC Report 518 and other material April, 1943
Introduction
In April 1943, as the result of investigations in Flying Training Command
we submitted a report on the signs of temperamental unsuitability in pilots
under training. Shortly afterwards one of us (C.P.S.) visited training schools
for pilots and navigators in Canada and the U.S.A. and submitted a further
report (unpublished) covering stages of training which at that time were poorly
represented in the United Kingdom. Subsequent discussion of these two
reports with the Directorate of Flying Training led to the Medical Directorate
issuing in June 1943, a brief memorandum entitled Notes for Instructors on
the Recognition of Nervousness in Pilots to all instructors and instructors under
training at home and abroad. The two reports are now re-edited and combined
into one for this volume. The memorandum is reproduced as an appendix.
The possibility of the better elimination during training of men likely for
temperamental reasons to break down under the stress of operations followed the
conclusion that of all flying personnel who have been seen by a neuro-psychiatrist
on account of psychological disorder 16 per cent are so severely predisposed to
neurosis that, in the opinion of the specialists who saw them, they might have
been rejected on entry (page 121). The number of men with this degree of
predisposition in the total population of flying personnel is probably not higher
than 3 per cent (page 189), but Symonds (page 29) has shown that it
would probably be profitable to reject these men on entry, since if they
break down, their contribution to the war effort is not worth the man hours
spent in their training. There are, moreover, other important reasons
rejecting these predisposed individuals, which include the harm they do in
affecting the morale of others, and the wastage of operational effort which may
result from the inefficiency of a single heavily predisposed member of air crew
(page 35). The possibility of eliminating these men on entry has already
been considered. As matters stand at present it must be recognised that among
the men accepted as air crews there will be a proportion—about 3 per cent —who
are severely predisposed to breakdown, and in addition a larger number, about
12 to 15 per cent, who are also predisposed but not so severely as to warrant
rejection.
In the analysis of men who had broken down, it was found (pages 164-166)
that predisposition generally took the form either of a tendency to develop excess-
ive fear reactions to the anticipation or reality of danger, or unusual difficulty in
controlling or enduring such reactions. Predisposition of the severe degree
appeared progressively less as a cause of break-down as flying experience and
flying stress increased. The conclusion drawn was that there was a tendency
for those with severe predisposition to break down during training, leaving
those with less predisposition to break down, if at all, under the greater stress
(76642) G 3


Combinations of reasons for reclassification
Reasons
Cases
Fear or other personality, temperament or interest characteristics
without mention of other deficiencies ..
36
Fear or other personality traits, plus lack of proficiency in flying..
29
Fear or other personality traits, plus lack of proficiency in flying, plus
defective intellectual or perceptual ability ..
21
Lack of proficiency in flying without mention of other deficiencies
6
Lack of proficiency in flying, plus defects of intellectual and/or perceptual
ability, without personality defects .. ..
8
Total
100
of operations, the most important factors throughout the whole series being
either timidity or danger. If this assumption is true there should be opportunity
for making use of the relatively slight dangers of flying training to detect
excessive timidity, thus bringing to light and eliminating the predisposed.
That a liability to excessive or uncontrollable fear may be brought out in
training and recognised by instructors is shown in an analysis of the instructors’
reasons for rejection in a sample of 100 pilots of the American Army Air Force
who had graduated from Advanced Flying Schools but were reclassified
(suspended) at Operational Tactical Units. The analysis made by psychologists
broke down the causes for suspension into 20 categories grouped under the
headings:—
Intelligence and judgment.
Alertness and observation.
Co-ordination and technique.
Personality and temperament.
It was found that factors coming under temperament were mentioned
with much greater frequency than any other reasons as the primary cause for
suspension. The following table taken from the American report shows the
relative importance of excessive fear;
!. Method
In the course of visits to training schools, 93 flying instructors (all having
at least 1,000 hours of experience in flying instruction) were separately inter-
viewed, the time allowed for the interview being half an hour. Seventeen
officers with comparable experience of instructing at Air Navigation Schools
were interrogated in the same way. Each instructor was first asked whether
he considered that among the pupils graduating from the schools there were any
who were so nervous that they were unlikely to succeed in the operational task.
The next question put was whether the instructor should be able to detect
nervousness of this kind and degree. Most of them said that they could do so,
but had difficulty in describing the exact signs upon which their impression was
based. It was evident that they usually formed a total impression in much the
same way as does the experienced physician, but they had not had occasion
to define their diagnostic principles in the same way as the physician has been
obliged to do. By careful questioning it was possible in most of the interviews
to obtain information upon the ways in which this impression was built up.
The observations were then pooled, and the material subdivided under headings.


2. Results
The 93 flying instructors with very few exceptions considered that among
the pilots who graduated were some so nervous, apprehensive or timid that
they were unlikely to succeed. Their opinion was usually based upon the
memory of individual cases which were quoted. Instructors with operational
experience were usually the most emphatic in their opinions. A few instructors
had verified their impressions by following up the careers of certain pupils.
Many regretted the lack of opportunities for such follow-up. Independent
estimates of the incidence of temperamental unsuitability among graduates,
spontaneously offered, varied from 1 to 5 per cent.
3. Signs of nervousness in pilots
It was evident that some instructors believed that they could detect the
nervous pupil but had made no attempt to analyse their impressions ; others
relied on a few special features which they had come to recognise as of importance
individually, though not always agreeing with one another in what they thought
was important; others had made use of their experience to provide themselves
with a comprehensive list of questions they would ask themselves about a pupil
whose temperamental suitability was in doubt. Their observations fall naturally
under two headings : behaviour in the air and behaviour on the ground.
(a) Behaviour in the air
This was considered to provide the most important evidence.
(i) Direct observation. —Nervousness may be noticed in a man’s facial
expression, posture and movements, or speech, in relation to exercises or situa-
tions which contain real or imaginary danger. If the face can be seen it is the
most valuable guide. One nan tell from the expression whether the man is
relaxed, comfortable, looking round, taking things in, enjoying his aerobatics ;
and notice such things as closing the eyes when aerobatted, clenching the teeth,
gasping, holding the breath, apprehensive look round, or a set, strained or
anxious expression. A man may show nervousness in posture or movements :
shrinking into the cockpit; holding himself away from a spin; or actually
holding on to the side of the aircraft. A general attitude of bodily tension was
also mentioned. A few instructors took notice of excited or incoherent speech
or a strained tone in the voice. Tremor, fidgeting and unjustified sweating were
also mentioned. It was generally held that direct observation was much easier
when sitting by the side of the pupil, as in an Oxford, and that in tandem-seated
aircraft full use should be made of the mirror. It is difficult to! watch the man’s
expression if he is wearing goggles, but neither in aircraft used for elementary
training overseas which are fitted with hoods nor in the Harvards at Service
Flying Training School are goggles usually worn.
(ii) Handling the controls. —The nervous man is inclined to be tense, holding
the stick tightly and moving the rudder bar jerkily and uncertainly. This
shows up early in training during mild aerobatics and on landing. Tightness
on the controls was commented upon by a quarter of the instructors, some
saying that the man tries to hold himself in the aircraft by the stick, and that
through hanging on, when he is asked to move the controls he does so jerkily
and erratically. This tenseness may be induced by doing tight turns, and it
may be so evident that the instructor has physical difficulty in overcoming it.
(iii) Flying -performance. —The information given under this heading
naturally varied with the stage of training with which jthe instructor was
concerned. At Grading School it was remarked that the timid, apprehensive
(76642) G 4


man failed to use the rudder bar properly, lacking the confidence to do what
he was told and showing hesitation and uncertainty. The nervous pupil in
the early stages of his training is loth to take over the controls, especially
when trying a new manoeuvre; has to be asked twice and encouraged and
finally carries it out in a half-hearted manner. He will ask unnecessary
questions and when given the. answers hasn’t the confidence to put them into
practice. In the later stages of training the sign of nervousness most frequently
mentioned in this connection was hesitation in the commencement of a
dangerous manoeuvre and hurry in coming out of it. The manoeuvre of choice
for the detection of nervousness was a spin in the Harvard or a stall in the
Oxford. The nervous man, instead of putting his aircraft firmly into a spin,
will delay matters until it has got to go, and will be reluctant to continue
spinning for the prescribed number of turns. He will put the Oxford into a
stall as gently as he can and begin to correct at once. Similar reluctance may
be seen in doing steep turns, in aerobatics and in low flying : the pupil when
told to take over at once starting to climb, or when told to do a forced landing
from 200 feet suggesting that he should first gain some height. Erratic flying
immediately after a spell of aerobatics or low flying is another sign of nervous-
ness. The nervous man, though usually proficient, may make silly mistakes.
Failure to make the expected degree of progess in a man who is neither clumsy
nor unintelligent should arouse suspicion of nervousness, especially if there is
failure to learn aerobatics. It is sometimes possible to conclude that a man
has not been practising his solo aerobatics as instructed. Failure of the pupil
to take in instruction during' aerobatics is often a sign. ‘ The pupil who is
nervous because of fear will be preoccupied and ask you what you said.’ In
general, the response to unexpected or difficult situations is likely to show
nervousness. One instructor put it: “ One should be testing the man’s
ability to think methodically and clearly in situations containing an element
of danger.”
(iv) Evasion of exercises. —Many instructors said that some men showed
their timidity in trying to evade their flying training. There are several ways
in which they do so. They make excuses for not taking-off, saying their equip-
ment and clothing is faulty or mislaid, or that they cannot find the right maps.
They may be late for instruction or ask for its delay. When they do go up
they come back earl}', making excuses that their engine was faulty, .they mistook
the time, had completed the exercise, were tired or had physical complaints.
The instructor may notice that they did not carry out the prescribed exercises
at the Elementary Flying Training School, and some make a point of assigning
a particular part of the sky to a doubtful man so that they can keep their eye
on him from the ground. The man may say that he has completed his prescribed
aerobatics but from his performance on testing aftenvards he obviously cannot
have practised them. When flying with an instructor he does the minimum
number of manoeuvres, or even asks to be excused them. A man will sometimes
even deliberately fail his examinations, or feign backwardness in flying to
escape from it.
(b) Behaviour on the ground
(i) Request to cease training. —lt is unusual for a man to ask to be taken off
flying duties with a frank admission of nervousness, but many instructors
had had experience of such cases. They observed that this would sometimes
develop in the course of a confidential talk with a pupil showing lack of aptitude,
who, when given a lead, would admit to lack of enthusiasm, nervousness, or
actual distaste for flying. The general opinion was that these men should
discontinue training immediately.


(ii) Lack of keenness for flying is shown by absence of the normal amount
of curiosity both before and after flights. The nervous man does not look for
opportunities for more flying. Instead of hanging about on the chance of
an extra flight it will be noticed that he is out of sight and difficult to find on
these occasions. A man who is boisterous in the crew room may suddenly
go quiet after he has been told to spin solo. He may spend unnecessary time
on the ground before take-off, especially in instrument flying, or complain
unnecessarily of minor defects in the aircraft.
(iii) Reporting sick repeatedly. —The nervous man or the man lacking
keenness to fly may report sick repeatedly with trivial complaints such as
headache, colds, or pains in the stomach. Sometimes unusual concern is shown
about air sickness of minor degree. These complaints may be due to a genuine
physical abnormality, or directly produced by the man’s anxiety about flying,
but any man whose flying training is repeatedly interrupted by frequent visits
to the medical officer should be suspect.
4. Method of investigation in cases of suspected nervousness
All instructors were asked what steps they would take, if the suspicion
of nervousness had been aroused, to investigate the matter further. Their
replies showed that with a very few exceptions they had practical methods
available. The general principle was to fly with the man and put him into
situations containing an element of danger. A minority were in favour of a
preliminary interview with the purpose of enquiring into the man’s attitude
towards flying. Others emphasised the necessity of making the test appear
routine and would ask no questions beforehand, not wishing to make the man
self-conscious. Many of them stressed the importance of deciding whether
a man’s nervousness was due to faulty instruction. For this reason they
thought it would be necessary to do some ordinary flying with the pupil before
embarking on any special test. The nature of the tests recommended naturally
varied with the stage of training and the type of aircraft. At Grading Ele-
mentary Flying Training Schools the man’s response to a simple command may
give a lead to his attitude to flying. Before any instruction a man may be
asked to try to fly straight and level towards a cloud on the horizon. A little
later he may be -asked to copy a steep turn or to correct from it. After about
six hours he may be asked if he would like to be aerobatted. If the man
says he would rather not, or would like to leave it over till to-morrow, if he
makes no reasonable sort of attempt at the manoeuvre, or if in the mirror
or by the feel of the controls he is found to be tensed up and very apprehensive,
he is showing signs of nervousness. The good average man will accept these
situations as steps in his training. Many instructors remarked that at first
many men have difficulty in absorbing instructions due to their preoccupation
with their new experiences, but that after a few hours they get used to flying
and learn readily. Other pupils are persistently preoccupied with their fear,
however, and they show this in the irresponse to instruction, replies to questions
and failure to leam. These men are especially likely to fail to attend to
instruction on turning, stalling or spinning. The following are examples of
special manoeuvres stated by instructors to be of value in eliciting timidity
in the face of stress. As one of them remarked : “ What you look out for is
how the man reacts to the stimulus, whether he dislikes it, and if he persists
in spite of disliking it.” Take the man to a strange airfield and suddenly ask
him to land, or tell him suddenly when coming in to land to open up and go
round again as if there were some danger or obstruction ; cut his throttle for
a forced landing ; give him a snap forced landing from low altitude ; at the end
of a series of aerobatics or steep turns put the aircraft into an unusual position
and ask him to take control; give him turns at low altitude when nervousness


will show up in bad turns at this height in contrast to his ordinary performance ;
take him up under the hood into cloud, uncover the hood without telling him
he’s in cloud and watch his face and whether he at once proceeds to fly on
instruments; in a Harvard put him into a spin and give him the controls, or
tell him to do spins, ending with an order to do a spin off a steep turn and hold
it for six turns ; in an Oxford put him into awkward stalls, or cut one engine
without warning.
It is not to be supposed that the instructors recommended a battery of
such tests. Each instructor had his own one or two methods which he would
employ when he wanted to elicit nervousness in a doubtful case. There was
general agreement that any one of the tests mentioned might provoke a nervous
reaction in normal men but it was thought that the experienced instructor
should know how the normal man would react.
5. Difficulties in the detection or elimination of the temperamentally unsuitable
Many instructors volunteered information under-this heading.
( a) Lack of experienced instructors. —The major difficulty in detection was
generally considered to be the dearth of fully experienced instructors. Inex-
perienced men were unreliable observers because they were a good deal pre-
occupied with their own flying difficulties, were often at fault in their interpreta-
tion of behaviour, and sometimes themselves responsible for lack of confidence
in their pupils.
(b) Insufficient opportunity for observation. —At the Grading School and to
a lesser extent at the Advanced Flying Unit the length of time a pupil remains
under observation is short; the pupil does not always continue with the same
instructor and opportunities for personal contact are limited by the pressure
of work.
(c) Different kinds of nervousness. —There is a difficulty in distinguishing
between the nervousness of the man who is over-anxious to succeed and that
due to timidity. The former was considered to be much commoner than the
latter and the symptoms might appear the same to all but the very experienced
and critical observer. Examination funk often confused the issue at the first
air test; more than one such test by the same observer would therefore usually
be necessary. When timidity is discovered it is not always easy to decide
whether it is present in excess. Some instructors of great experience state
that nearly all men are frightened of the air at certain phases of their training
and therefore temporary loss of confidence is not uncommon. As evidence
of this, if one man in a course volunteers that he is nervous and asks to cease
training two or three others may do the same in the next few days, whereas
in most courses there are no such cases at all. Most of these men are going
through what may be regarded as a normal phase in which they have either
lost confidence or failed to acquire it, not because of excessive timidity, but in
the ordinary run of training. Excessive fear reactions therefore must be
judged critically in relation to the stage of training, the quality of instruction,
and any special incident which has shaken confidence. In spite of these
difficulties it was considered possible by almost all instructors to recognise
excessive timidity by the methods already described.
(d) Inadequate mirrors. —Nearly all instructors in single-engined aircraft
stressed the value of the mirror for observation of posture and movement
as well as facial expression ; several complained about the supply or quality
of what they considered to be an essential instrument for instruction. The
Manager of an Elementary Flying Training School said that mirrors were not
fitted to all the Moths and those which he purchased himself were unsatisfactory.


Other instructors at the same school complained that the mirror on Moths
was badly placed, and liable to excessive vibration, comparing it unfavourably
with the solid, built-in mirror of the Stearman which they had been using.
Some criticism of the same kind was heard of the mirror on the Harvard.
(e) Limitation of stress. —Several instructors complained that there was
not enough stress in training to elicit nervous reactions. This was partly
ascribed to favourable weather conditions and in the case of Moths to the
foolproof nature of the aircraft. They also criticised a policy which they said
valued a low crash rate in a school more than the quality of its graduates.
It was considered that there should be less limitation in such matters as the
steepness of turns, flying in bad weather, or night flying.
(/) Quantity versus quality of graduates. —lnstructors were under the im-
pression that the trend of present policy was in favour of quantity rather than
quality. It was said that the natural reluctance of station commanders to
have wastages discouraged instructors from mentioning nervousness. One
Station Commander considered it important that neither he nor the Chief Flying
Instructor should be held in blame for the detection of temperamental unsuita-
bility late in the course : it might have taken that time to bring it out.
(g) Difficidty in failing temperamentally unsuitable men was emphasised
by a quarter of the instructors at Service Flying Training Schools. One
(Harvards) said : “ It is extremely difficult to discontinue a pupil for tempera-
mental unsuitability because the rules and regulations relate to flying ability
only. I have on several occasions put men up for rejection, but they have been
put through because they have been proved able to handle the machine ”.
A Chief Flying Instructor (Oxfords) said that there were no instructions under
which he could get rid of a man who was temperamentally unsuitable. He
thought there was about one man in each course of this type who got through
because he could not be turned down under existing regulations. The other
opinions were comparable.
( h ) Lack of opportunity for following ttp pupils. — A few instructors at
Service Flying Training Schools said it was impossible for them to check their
assessments of temperamental suitability for operations without follow-up
reports. They suggested that these should be forthcoming from A.F.Us v
O.T.Us. and operational units.
6. Guidance for Instructors
Many of the instructors questioned volunteered the wish that some guidance
should be given to them in the detection of temperamental unsuitability.
This would be especially useful in the education of junior instructors. They
considered that such guidance should include specific instructions for the
detection of nervousness and lack of keenness at the Elementary and Service
Flying Training Schools on the lines indicated above.
7. Signs of nervousness in navigators
It was generally acknowledged that men passed through the schools
who were unlikely to prove temperamentally suitable for operations. Some
had no heart for the job and had chosen flying for the rank; some found
themselves persistently frightened in the air; others found the prospect of
operations too much for them after getting married. Independent estimates
by three instructors put the number of these men at between 2 and 4 per cent.
The suspicion of nervousness might be aroused in the following ways :


(a) Lack of ability to do work in the air which could be done easily
on the ground was most commonly mentioned. If a man’s work
on the ground was very fair, and if in the air he became flustered
so that his work fell off and the discrepancy was persistent (more
so if it was progressive), there was ground for suspecting timidity.
A good plan was to check up the logs and see if men made mistakes
in the air in work they could do on the ground without thinking.
Allowance had to be made for a certain amount of natural anxiety to
be correct in the air, which caused some men to work more slowly.
(b) Occasionally behaviour in the air might indicate timidity; for example
hanging on to the aircraft as soon as it left the ground ; persistent
back-seat-driver behaviour such as looking out instead of doing
the job; holding himself in when landing to avert the expected
shock; a tendency to flap in any kind of situation which might
involve danger, such as getting lost, or in night flying, or to panic
in changing over the petrol tanks if the engine coughs.
(c) Apart from an actual request to cease training, which was rare,
reluctance to continue might be shown by a man’s frequently
reporting sick, or in some cases failing in his examinations so
unexpectedly as to arouse the suspicion of intent to do so.
One-third of instructors used methods of their own for investigating a
suspicion of temperamental unsuitability in navigators, attempting to suggest
a dangerous situation in the air by telling the man that one of the engines was
unreliable and he must do his map reading carefully, getting him lost, or cutting
an engine. Most of them would fly with the man personally on such a test
to observe his reactions; one made use of a reliable staff pilot to avoid the
complicating factor of examination funk. (In Air Navigation Schools the
instructor rarely has an opportunity to fly with pupils.) Two instructors,
if they suspected nervousness, would in the course of conversation suggest
to the man that he might not pass the navigator’s course and discover what
his attitude would be to remustering for other air crew duties.
Difficulties in the detection and elimination of temperamentally unsuitable
pupils were discussed by the majority. The first difficulty in detection arose
from lack of opportunity for observing men in the air. It was stated that the
instructor probably did not sit alongside the pupil in the air more than once
during the course. He had therefore to depend upon the routine reports of
staff pilots, which were generally regarded as of little value. The second
difficulty was that actual situations which offered a chance of observing a man’s
reactions to danger were extremely rare. It was most unlikely that the
instructor would ever have a chance of seeing the man under adverse conditions.
For these reasons latent timidity might never be brought out, or if it were,
might not be noticed. A man who was dead afraid in the air could in the
ordinary way pass through an Air Navigation School without being suspected.
Another difficulty was that of distinguishing between the nervousness of timidity
and anxiety to succeed. Owing to the-paucity of tests it was generally difficult
to prove temperamental unsuitability, except by the man’s own admissions. A
Chief ■ Instructor complained that there were no grounds for failing a man
because of temperamental unsuitability, and that this was why some got
through. He thought that a Chief Instructor should have authority to fail a
man on this account.
8. Discussion
It is evident that in flying training the more experienced instructors, and
especially those with operational experience, recognise that among those at
present graduating from the schools there is a small number who are
temperamentally unsuitable for the job for which they are being trained, on


account of excessive <sr uncontrollable fear reactions. This corresponds with
the clinical observations quoted in the introduction to this report. Individual
instructors have their own reasons for suspecting timidity and their own
methods for investigating cases under suspicion. Their experience and ideas
might usefully be crystallised in the form of a memorandum for guidance to all
instructors on this subject. This would need to be supplemented by verbal
advice. Some of the difficulties in the way of detecting temperamental
unsuitability seem to be inherent in the problems, others remediable. As one
practical measure, an adequate supply of suitable mirrors should be ensured
for training aircraft.
The judgment and confidence of instructors in recognising the tempera-
mentally unsuitable would gain if they could leam which of their graduates had
subsequently failed for temperamental reasons. This might possibly be
achieved by the preparation of a monthly nominal roll of all cases of lack of
confidence, neurosis, or cessation of training from Advanced Flying Units,
Operational Training Units and operational units in the United Kingdom, circu-
lated confidentially to training units in Canada and the U.S.A. Measures of
policy which deserve consideration are insistence upon the importance of
quality rather than quantity of graduates and provision of simpler means of
eliminating men on grounds of temperamental unsuitability alone.
Conversation with senior instructors revealed in them a healthy bias
towards optimism in cases exhibiting timidity, their first concern being to
build up confidence in need of repair. Their awareness of the other aspect of
the problem and their balanced view of its proportions warrants the conclusion
that they could look after the elimination of the temperamentally unsuitable
without any confusion of aim. The education of junior instructors in this
matter would probably be best left to their senior instructors by word of
mouth, any written memorandum being directed primarily to flight
commanders. The reference of cases for neuro-psychfatric opinion raises two
issues of practical importance. The first is the possibility of harm to the
pupil whose lack of confidence is transient. There is no doubt that this exists
and that unless a substantial proportion of the cases so referred (for example
50 per cent.) proved suitable for elimination, the plan might cost more than it
was worth. The second is the difficulty of providing neuro-psychiatrists with
suitable experience to be available for schools in Canada and the U.S.A. In
the latter, except at Pensacola where provision is already made, this would at
present be impossible. In Canada, Service neuro-psychiatrists are available
at Regina and Toronto and their procedure could be brought into line with
R.A.F. experience if an experienced man were sent over to guide them for a
period of three months. The provision for neuro-psychiatric reference, though
not an essential part of any plan for the better elimination of the tempera-
mentally unsuitable by instructors, should be of value in assisting them with
doubtful cases and in helping them to profit from their experience.
Instructors at Air Navigation Schools evidently believe that a certain
number of their graduates are temperamentally unsuitable for operations,
but their opinions are less well founded and their criteria fewer and weaker
than at Flying Training Schools. This is mainly due to lack of opportunity
both for testing and observing reactions to danger. More use might possibly
be made of the staff pilot for observation, a question being included in the
pro-forma report made on each flight asking for information upon the pupil’s re-
action to any emergency; and it might be of advantage to allow Chief Instructors
to recommend pupils for elimination on grounds of temperamental unsuitability
alone, but the difficulties in detecting and eliminating the unsuitable navigator
during training are likely to remain much greater than for pilots. It would
appear therefore all the more important that in the selection of navigators at
intake the most careful attention should be given to temperamental suitability.


References
Symonds, C. P
A series of cases with psychological disorder examined
in relation to the problem of selection of flying
personnel. 1942, FPRC 412 (a) {see Chapter III).
Symonds, C. P. & Williams, D. J...
»> If • •
Investigation into psychological disorders in flying
personnel ■' personal investigation in Fighter Com-
mand. 1942, FPRC 412 (e) [see Chapter IV).
Personal investigation in Bomber Command. 1942,
FPRC 412 (f) [see Chapter V).
»l • •
A statistical survey of the records for six months, 3rd
February to 3rd August, 1942, FPRC 412 (g),
[see Chapter IX).
Reid, D. D. ..
Influence of psychological disorder on efficiency in
operational flying, 1943, FPRC 508 (quoted in
Chapter XVIII).
The Air Surgeon’s Office, Research
Division, Psychological Section.
A study of one hundred re-classified pilots. Analysis
of the duties of air cre\f personnel. Bulletin No.
14. December 23rd, 1942. (By permission of
H.Q. American Air Forces, Office of The Air
Surgeon, Washington).
9. Summary
(1) It has been shown in previous reports that predisposition plays an
important part' in the causation of neurosis in air crew and that the most
common factor in this is excessive timidity. This is true of neurosis occurring
during training. Evidence is presented from a recent American report to show
that timidity may be an important reason for elimination during training, apart
from the occurrence of neurosis.
(2) Signs of timidity or nervousness as observed during the training of
pilots and navigators by over 100 experienced Instructors have been described
and discussed.
(3) Suggestions are made of measures which might be taken to improve
the present means of eliminating from training members of air crews who are
temperamentally unsuitable for operational flying and therefore likely to break
down or fail under stress.


APPENDIX TO CHAPTER XV
NOTES FOR FLYING INSTRUCTORS ON RECOGNITION OF NERVOUSNESS
IN PILOTS UNDER TRAINING
Issued by the Director-General of Medical Services, R.A.F.
June, 1943
Introduction
Before men are accepted for training, they are interviewed by general
duties and medical officers who reject any who seem' unsuitable for flying
duties. It is impossible, however, to eliminate all who are unsuitable by means
of an interview. There are some signs of unsuitability which only appear
during training. We are not concerned here with men who fail to make
progress because of lack of intelligence or skill, but with those who are
fundamentally timid and nervous. Such qualities may not have been apparent
in civil life because they were never put to the test. In the course of training a
man has to accept new risks. Most pupils take these for granted, and savour
each new experience, whether of the first solo, aerobatics, night flying or
conversion to operational types with a certain relish. Most men have some
qualms before a new experience of this kind, but are able to take their training
in their stride, progressing from one stage to the next without persistent
nervousness and without loss of keenness for their job, but each course may
contain one or two who are below the normal standard, and carry, on with a
struggle or evade duties which contain an element of danger. Most of these
men prove a bad investment since they are unlikely to stay the course when
they reach their squadrons. In addition, they may have a bad effect upon the
morale of others..
A careful enquiry at all stages of training has shown that it is generally
possible to recognise these individuals and that the Instructor who is with the
man in the air is in the best position to do so. Provision is made in the first
column of paragraph 14 of Form 5019 for reporting such faults, and it should
be recognised that they may be present in a man who is in other respects
satisfactory. In order to detect them the instructor must be methodical in
his observations. These are the methods which are generally used.
1. Behaviour in the air
{a) Direct observation. —Nervousness may be noticed in a man’s facial
expression and the ways in which he holds himself and moves in relation to
exercises which contain real or imaginary danger. If his face can be seen it
is the most valuable guide. One can tell from the expression whether the man is
relaxed, comfortable, looking around, taking things in, enjoying his
experiences; and notice such things as closing the eyes when aerobated;
clenching the teeth, gasping, holding the breath, apprehensive looking round,
or a set, strained or anxious expression. A man may show nervousness in his
posture and movements, shrinking into the cockpit, holding himself away from
a spin, or actually holding on to the side of the aircraft. Direct observation
is easier in twins. Full use should be made of the mirror in the tandem seated
aircraft. Remember the symptoms must be of unusual degree or persistence
to be considered seriously (see paragraph 3).


(b) Flying performance
(i) In routine flying the nervous man shows hesitation in the commence-
ment of a dangerous manoeuvre and hurry in coming out of it. Instead of
putting his aircraft firmly into a spin he will delay matters until it has got to
go and will be reluctant to continue spinning for the prescribed number of turns.
He will put a twin into a stall as gently as he can and begin to correct at once.
Similar reluctance may be seen in low flying, the pupil when told to take over
at once starting to climb. The same tendency may be noticed in steep turns
and aerobatics. Erratic flying immediately after a spell of aerobatics or low
flying, may show that the man has been feeling unduly nervous during these
manoeuvres. Silly mistakes in flying made by a man who is usually proficient
are sometimes evidence of nervousness. Failure to make the expected degree
of progress in a man who is neither clumsy nor unintelligent should arouse the
suspicion of nervousness especially if there is failure to learn aerobatics. It is
sometimes possible to conclude that a man has not been practising his solo
aerobatics when told to. Inability to grasp what is said to him during exercises
which contain an element of danger may be due not to dullness but to pre-
occupation with fear.
(ii) In looking for evidence of undue nervousness in flying the instructor
should be testing the pupil’s ability to think methodically and clearly in
situations containing an element of danger, e.g., shut the engine off suddenly
in simulation of a forced landing and note the reactions. Don’t be too drastic,
for anyone can be frightened if you try hard enough, even yourself.
2. Behaviour on the ground
Apart from the small number of men who volunteer or admit that they
are frightened, there are those who betray their nervousness by their behaviour.
Lack of keenness for flying is shown by absence of the normal amount of
curiosity both before and after flights. .The nervous man does not look for
opportunities for more flying. Instead of hanging about on the chance of an
extra flight it will be noticed that he is out of sight and difficult to find on these
occasions. He may show a persistent tendency not to stay in the air as long
as he has been told, or to spend unnecessary time on the ground before take-off,
especially in instrument flying. Reluctance to fly may be shown in frequent
complaints of minor defects in the aircraft. Reporting sick with exaggerated
concern about minor ailments or air sickness is another sign: when a man’s
training is frequently interrupted by visits to sick quarters, the medical officer
will be able to say whether there is adequate reason for this or whether he
suspects nervousness as the cause.
3. Difficulties encountered in the assessment of nervousness
Up to a point nervousness is harmless and natural. Most men are
frightened at the prospect of taking risks of which they have had no previous
experience. Many are not so much afraid of danger as of failure to satisfy
their instructors. These kinds of nervousness, if not excessive, may be of
value in stimulating a man’s wits and sharpening his judgment. The ordinary
man as the result of experience overcomes his nervousness and without undue
effort progresses from one stage of his training to the next, ready for the stage
in front of him. This progress usually has its ups and downs. Many men pass
through temporary phases of lack of confidence owing to some episode by which
they have been shaken, or slowness in obtaining a sense of mastery of the aircraft.
These men need to be understood (often best without remark) and encouraged.
It is only when nervousness is persistent and without apparent cause that it
is to be regarded as a reason for suspension. It must, however, be realised
that among the men who do well enough in other respects to pass, there are a
few who are so handicapped by nervousness that they will never succeed in
operations even if they try their best, and that paragraph 14, Form 5019,
contains headings which provide for their suspension.


CHAPTER XVI
ASSESSMENT OF TEMPERAMENT IN CONNECTION WITH SELECTION
OF AIR CREWS
THE PSYCHIATRIC METHOD EMPLOYED
by
Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds, K.B.E., C.B., M.D., F.R.C.P., and
Wing Commander Denis J. Williams, D.Sc., M.D., F.R.C.P.
FPRC Report 529 (o) July, 1944
Introduction
The Flying Personnel Research Committee initiated an experiment under
the direction of a Sub-Committee on Assessment of Temperament in Connection
with Selection of Air Crews, the ultimate aim of which was to detect
temperamental unsuitability for operations. The experiment is in two
parts—first, the assessment by psychiatrists and psychologists independently
of a large group of pilots who had completed their preliminary training and,
second, a detailed follow-up of these men through their more advanced training
and throughout an operational tour. The first part of the experiment has been
completed and the psychiatric assessment extended to include a number of
pilots who had already completed an operational tour. It is possible, therefore,
to give a full account of the methods employed, and some results which suggest
lines along which these methods might profitably be developed. The report
relates, it will be noted, only to the psychiatric part of the investigation.
1. Form of investigation
(a) Material
Two groups of subjects were examined :
(i) One thousand and nine pilots under training, after completion of
Service Flying Training School training, at the Personnel Reception
Centre, Harrogate.
(Though desirable, it was impracticable to examine a group of
men who had not commenced flying training owing to the very
long time that would have to elapse between preliminary assess-
ment and results of operational work.)
(ii) Three hundred and thirty-five tour-expired night bomber pilot
Instructors at O.T.U. and H.C.U. chosen at random.
The two groups of subjects were, therefore, differentiated by the fact that
the first had not yet begun advanced flying and operational training, while the
second had completed a full tour of operational flying. The first group were
men returning from twin-engined Service Flying Training School abroad and
were representative of the total population of graduated twin-engined Service
Flying Training School pilots. The second group was taken to represent the
total population of tour-expired night bomber pilots. For the latter purpose,
since selection may take place within Groups, a proportion were taken from
P-T.Us. selected at random, and a smaller proportion, representing the ratio
m the whole Command, from H.C.Us.


W/Cdr. Flind
S/Ldr. Cates
Harrogate (graduated)
504
505
O.T.U. and H.C.U. (tour-expired)
169
166
Total ’ ..
673 '
671
Psychiatric interview (pro forma)
Name: Number: Rank: Age: Date :
Crew category :■ •
1. Predisposition. —NIL SLIGHT MODERATE SEVERE
(Delete the degrees of predisposition which are not applicable.)
2. Tick each of the headings which refer to any predisposition found in this case.
(i) Family history.
(ii) Previous nervous breakdown.
(iii) Morbid fears : anxiety.
(iv) Physiological instability.
(v) Timidity.
(vi) Lack of aggressiveness.
(vii) Lack of persistence.
(viii) Affective lability.
(ix) Obsessional.
(x) Psychological immaturity.
3. In the space provided below
(a) Give the evidence for each positive finding, indicating the heading to
which each item of evidence belongs by its number.
(b) State the reasons for which you assign the particular degree of predis*
position, with special reference to any factors which counter-balance
items ticked off as positive under 2.
(b; Examiners
Two representative psychiatrists were selected from the neuro-psychiatric
service of the Royal Air Force —Wing Commander James Flind, M.D., D.P.M.,*
and Squadron Leader Bernard Cates, M. 8., D.P.M.; each examined half the
cases.
2. Psychiatric method
The method as laid down by the Committee on Assessment of Temperament
of the Flying Personnel Research Committee was ;
To carry out a psychiatric interview, lasting approximately three-quarters of an
hour on each candidate, consisting essentially of a life history taken along the
customary psychiatric lines. It is not a questionnaire, but an attempt to get the
individual to recount his history in such a way as to bring out naturally the kind
of characteristics that are considered in the light of general psychiatric experience
and of war experience, on the one hand to make break-down in flying or some form
of failure from psychological reasons more likely, and on the other hand, to counter-
balance any tendency of that kind. Enquiries are directed to the record at school
and at work afterwards, both as regards achievement and perseverance, including
persistence in the face of difficulties. The survey naturally covers achievement
at games, and pays special attention to the reasons why particular games may have
been avoided or given up, and to the type of game and spare-time interest preferred.
The social qualities of the candidates are judged on the basis of such things as
membership of clubs, captaincy and so on. The health record of the candidate
is gone into in some detail, from an early age, and certain aspects of temperament
which are thought to bear on capacity to fly and fight successfully are assessed.
Some enquiry also is made into the family history as regards illness in general, with
special reference to anything suggesting a psychological type of ill-health, which
often disguises itself as various forms of physical illness, the training of the psychia-
trist making him able to recognise the true nature of the condition underneath its
physical appearance.
•Owing to posting overseas Wing Commander Flind was unable to complete the
interrogation of tour-expired pilots, so the last 38 of his series of cases were seen by Wing
Commander Denis J. Williams.


TABLE I
Psychiatric assessment of groups of graduated and tour-expired aircrew
No. of cases
Percentage of cases
Predisposition
Graduated
Tour-expired
Graduated
Tour-expired
Nil
421
240
42
72
Slight
470
88
46
26
Moderate ..
97
5
10
1-5
Severe
21
2
o
0-6
Total
1,009
335
100
100
It will be observed that considerable latitude was given to the observers
to adopt any psychiatric approach which they thought most suitable, but they
were instructed to base their assessment upon the man’s life story only up to
time commencing flying training. There seemed no way of withholding the
subsequent life story from the observers, although this would obviously have
been desirable for purposes of comparison between the two groups. Never-
theless in their examination of the group who had completed a tour the
psychiatrists made it their object to frame the interview as if the man were
attending for his initial examination at entry and to disregard known perform-
ance in making their assessment.
The ten groups of personality traits were based upon an analysis by
Gillespie (1941 and 1944) of features observed in flying personnel who had
developed neurosis. From this it was concluded that a point score obtained
by giving a positive mark for each item of a schedule of unfavourable
characteristics, might, as part of an interview in the hands of an experienced
psychiatrist, be of significant value in assessing the probability of break-down
under Service conditions. This conclusion was, however, qualified by the
reservation that there was evidence of other factors of a positive or counter-
balancing kind which in exceptional cases might result in a successful adaptation
to war flying by men with considerable degree of predisposition as ascertained
by this method. The limitation of the number of traits to ten for purposes of
this experiment was dictated by the need to give the observers time to take the
routine psychiatric history in an interview restricted to three-quarters of an
hour. For the same reason they were not asked for any schedule of counter-
balancing traits.
3. Results
(a) Psychiatric assessment
The results of the psychiatric assessment of the two groups are shown in
Table I. The probability of the differences in these two contrasted groups
being due to chance is less than 1 in 100.
It will be seen that the proportion of men considered predisposed was
significantly greater before advanced flying training then after a tour of
operations. Considering those with moderate or severe predisposition the
proportion was six to one and considering all with even the slighter degrees
of predisposition it was two to one. Provided that the psychiatric procedure
and standards of assessment of predisposition were kept uniform this means
that a proportion of predisposed individuals is somehow eliminated in the


TABLE II
Psychiatric assessment of severe predisposition in different groups
Subject
Examiner
No. of
cases
Percentage
severely
predisposed
Tour-expired pilots
Present
335
0-6
Pilots u/t (S.F.T.S.)
Present
1,009
2
Unselected flying personnel
Williams
(Chap. XIV)
100
3
Flying personnel entrants
Gillespie
600
3
,, ,, broken down late in ops.
H.A.F.
psychiatrists
(Chap. X)
730
11
„ „ ,, ,, early in ops.
688
18
„ „ m flying
training
»>
676
27
, „ ,, ,, before flying
training
106
36
TABLE III
Reliability of individual assessment in the case of graduated pilots (Harrogate)
No. of cases
Percentage of cases
Graduated pilots
(Harrogate)
Observer I
Observer 2
Observer 1
Observer 2
Nil
218
203
’ 43
40
Slight
221
249
44
49
Modern
57
40
11
8
Severe
8
13
1-6
2-6
Total
504
505
100
100-
course of late training and on operations. The possible ways in which this can
be brought about include the wastage from technical inefficiency, accidents,
physical shortcomings, neurosis, or forfeiting the confidence of the commanding
officer, and the losses in operations due to enemy action.
The assessments in Table I may with advantage be considered against
similar assessments in other groups of flying personnel. For this purpose severe
predisposition will be considered alone, since in this and other investigations
the criteria for severe predisposition were similar —they were the presence of
psychiatric signs which would have led the examiner to advise rejection had
they been recognised on entry.
Before taking these highly significant figures at their face value, it should
be realised that not onty is it impossible for different observers to maintain
exactly the same standards of assessment but it is impossible for the examiner
not to be influenced by the man’s performance in making the assessment.
As will be shown neither of these factors are considered to have affected the
figures greatly in the present enquiry.
(b)
Reliability of individual assessment


TABLE IV
Reliability of individual assessment on the case of tour-expired pilots
Tour-expired pilots
No. of cases
Percentage of cases
Observer 1
Observer 2
Observer 1
Observer 1
Nil
120
120
71
72
Slight
46
43
27
26
Moderate
1
4
0-6
2-4
Severe
2
0
1-2
0-0
Total
169
166
100
100
TABLE V
Comparison of individual assessment of moderately and severely predisposed pilots
Pilots
Percentage moderately
and severely predisposed
Observer 1
Observer 2
Graduated
12-6
10-6
Tour-expired
1-8
2-4
All Pilots ..
10-1
8-5
TABLE VI
Percentage of graduated pilots who revealed a given number of traits
Grade of
predisposition
No. of
cases
Percentage with given No. of traits
Average
No. of
traits
per case
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Nil
421
70
22
6
2
0-4
Slight
470
20
29
31
17
2-4
—
—
1-5
Moderate
97
12
28
28
18
10
3
, 3-0
Severe
21
—
—
5
14
38
29
14
4-3
Total
1,009
39
24
20
12
3-6
1-6
0-6
1-2
These tables show that there is very close agreement between the distribu-
tion of the assessments made by the two observers in similar groups of subjects.
There is a difference in this table of 1 : 6 ± 1 *6.
?
(c) Score of personality traits
Tables VI and VII show for each grade of predisposition the proportion of
men who revealed 0, 1,2, 3, etc. of the ten traits listed on page 210. Thus of the
421 pilots under training who were assessed as nil predisposition, 70 per cent
had no traits, 22 per cent had 1, 6 per cent had 2, 2 per cent had 3, the
average number for the group being 0-4 per man.


TABLE VII
Percentage of tour-expired pilots who revealed a given number of traits
Grade of
predisposition
No. of
cases
Percentage with given No. of traits
Average
No, of
traits
per case
0
1
2
3
4
5
Nil .. ‘
240
30
37
22
10
0-4
1-1
Slight
88
—
16
39
41
5
—
2-3
Moderate ..
5
—
—
40
20
40
4-0
Severe
2
—
—
50
—
— '
50
3-5
Total
335
22
31
26
18
2
1
1-5
Table VI relating to the 1,009 pilots under training shows that there is a
direct relationship between the score of traits and the psychiatric assessment
{vide the average numbers). There is, however, a considerable amount of
overlap between the different degrees of predisposition. For instance, although
43 per cent of the 21 men assessed as severely predisposed had 5 or more traits,
19 per cent had 3 or less, compared with 13 per cent and 68 per cent of the
moderately predisposed. Putting it another way, if a score of 5 traits or more
were used as a criterion for rejection, only 9 of a possible 21 severely predisposed
would be rejected and 13 of those not so predisposed would also be rejected ;
in absolute numbers the potential wastage would be greater than the saving.
Although there is this direct relationship between score and assessment
the differences between them warrant two conclusions ;
That a simple addition of the number of handicapping traits
revealed by a man does not necessarily give the same measure as a
psychiatric assessment on the basis of an interview, i.e. factors other
than those in the score of traits must have been considered by the
assessors.
Rejection on the basis of this total score would 'be unprofitable,
assuming that evidence of severe predisposition warrants rejection.
Comparison on the score of traits tabulated against psychiatric assessment
shows that discrepancies exist between Tables VI and VII. The most serious
of these discrepancies are all in the same direction (indicated by the average
number of traits) which is to relate a higher trait score to the same assessment
of predisposition in the tour-expired pilots than those under training. Thus in
Table VI, 70 per cent of nil assessments had a trait score of 0 compared with
30 per cent in Table VII, while of those with slight predisposition there are 20 per
cent with no traits in Table VI contrasted with 0 per cent in Table VII.
The immediate explanation is that the assessors tended to ignore the
measure of handicapping traits in the personalities of the successful pilots in
making their assessments. In reports on the method which the investigators
presented independently, and which form the basis of the Appendix to this
chapter, it was stated that this was unlikely to be the main cause of the dis-
crepancy ; on the contrary, the investigators, aware of this possibility, thought
that they may’have erred in the opposite direction. They thought that the
tried and successful man was more likely to disclose minor personality traits,
of little moment for the observer, in making an assessment, but worthy of note
when recording traits.


TABLE VIII
Comparison of percentage distribution of traits in pilots u/t and tour-expired
Predis-
position
Percentage distribution of traits
(The figures i to x refer to traits enumerated in the pro forma (page 206)
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)
W
u/t op.
u/t op.
u/t op
u/t op.
u/t op.
u/t op
u/t op.
u/t op.
u/t op
u/t op.
Nil
Slight ..
Moderate
Severe ..
Total
6 13
27 52
50 60
76 100
1-5 —
4 20
5 50
6 29
41 56
67 80
86 50
14 34
45 67
58 100
86 —
0-2 2
1 2
29 20
38 —
7 2
30 20
52 —
0-5 0-4
2 1
6 —
5 50
— 0-4
6 7
21 40
23 50
13 35
22 45
21 60
43 —
1-5 1
8 —
19 —
22 25
1 0-3
30 38
34 44
4 2
7 1
1-5 1
5 3
18 38
2 0-3
TABLE IX
1,009
pilots u/t
No.
Representation of each trait
(For identification of traits see page 206)
(i)
(a)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)
W
Severely predisposed
21
17
1
18
18
8
11
1
5
9
4
AH others ..
988
204
11
272
323
32
59
15
45
171
15
TABLE X
1,009
pilots u/t
No.
Percentage representation of each trait
(For identification of traits'see page 206)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)
(x)
Severely predisposed
21
76
4-8
85-7
85-7
38-1
52-4
4-8
23-8
42-9
19-0
All others ..
988
20-6
M
27-5
32-7
3-2
6-0
1-5
4-6
17-3
1-5
Ratio Severe/Others
0-02
3-6
4.4
3'0
2-6
11-6
8-5
3-1
5-1
2-5
12-6
4. Distribution o! traits
(a) Relation of single traits to assessment of predisposition
In Table VIII the distribution of each of the traits in the two groups of
pilots is presented against assessment of predisposition, considering the traits
in two ways : contrasting their distribution in the two groups, i.e. their relation
to actual success: considering their distribution against predisposition, i.e.
their relation to assessment of potential success. In Table IX the actual
number of traits present in the severely predisposed group and in all the others
is shown. Only the u/t pilots are considered since there were only 2 severely
predisposed in the tour-expired group.
To simplify the comparison, the representation of the individual traits
in the severely predisposed group and in the others is expressed in a different
form in Table X. Here it is shown as a percentage of the cases in each group
and as a ratio of the percentages to each other.


This table shows which single traits relate most closely to severe predis-
position and least closely to other assessments of predisposition in this group
of cases. It consequently throws some light upon one aspect of the psychiatric
method which was used by the two investigators. Similar tables may also be
constructed for the other three grades of predisposition, by referring to Table
VIII. The following points emerge from a study of Tables VIII, IX and X.
(1) No single trait indicates failure to survive on operations.
(2) Some traits—(iv) (iii)'(ix) (i) —( physiological instability, anxiety and
morbid fears, obsessional and positive family history) are heavily
represented in that order in both groups ot pilots and in each
grade of predisposition and consequently relate least closely either
to the assessment of predisposition or to the likelihood of failing
to complete a tour.
(3) The other six traits are infrequently represented in both groups,
so that although they may relate closely to either assessment or
survival on operations, their representation in the total popula-
tion may be so sparse as to reduce their value. It may be of
course that success to the end of Service Flying Training
School (in the u/t group) has reduced their incidence to its
present level, for example, that the rarity of trait (ii) (previous
nervous breakdown) is explained by the failure of men with this
trait to stay such an arduous course.
(4) The loose direct relationship between traits and assessment again
shows that although each trait was taken into account, the assess-
ment was heavily influenced by other factors.
(5) The traits which seem to relate most closely to the psychiatric
assessment and to survival on operations are in order (vi), (v), (x)
and (viii) ( lack of aggressiveness, timidity, psychological immaturity
and affective lability). Although a previous nervous breakdown and
lack of persistence are so rare in these groups of selected and tried
men, their very rarity may have importance. Unfortunately
no data are available upon this point.
(b) Relation of pairs of traits to severe predisposition
It is obvious!} 7 of greater value to consider the relationship to assessment
of groups of traits rather than single traits. The combinations of traits which
relate most closely to the three grades of predisposition in the pilots u/t will
be analysed. First, pairs of traits will be considered and then groups of three
traits.
The occurrence of any combination of two of the ten traits in the four grades
of predisposition is laid out in the following Tables (XI (a), ( b), (c). (d) and (e)).
In these tables any trait read horizontally has occurred in association with
any trait read vertically the number of times given in the appropriate position.
For example, from Table XI (a) trait (iii) (morbid fears: anxiety) and trait
(iv) ( physiological instability) occurred together 15 times in 21 severely pre-
disposed subjects.


TABLE XI (a)
Combination of two traits in 21 severely predisposed subjects
In this and the following tables the figures (i) to (x) refer to traits enumerated
the pro forma on page 210
in
Traits
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(Vi)
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)
(x)
W
17
1
14
13
5
9
—
4
7
2
( U )
(iii)
18
15
7
9
1
3
9
4
(iv)
18
6
9
1
4
7
3
(v)
8
5
1
1
4
4
(Vi)
11
1
2
3
3
(vii)
1
—
—
1
(vill)
Total cases
: 21
5
2
1
(ix)
Total with more than one trait
21
9
1
(X)
4
TABLE XI (b)
Combination of two traits in 97 moderately predisposed subjects
Traits
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)
W
(i)
50
2
37
29
15
14
3
10
10
7
(ii)
4
1
2
1
1
—
2
1
—
(iii)
65
39
17
20
3
13
15
7
(iv)
56
14
14
4
10
11
7
(v)
29
9
1
5
4
1
• (vi)
30
3
4
4
3
. (vii)
Total cases
: 97
6
1
0
0
(vm)
Total with more than one trait;
97
20
5
2
(ix)
20
1
(X)
8
TABLE XI (c)
Combination of two traits in 470 slightly predisposed subjects
Traits
(i)
(«)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(Vi)
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)
W
(i)
123
1
48
67
7
1
9
27
1
(ii)
' 7
3
3
—
—
—
—
1
—
(iii)
191
106
3
10
1
11
52
4
(iv)
214
3
9 •
3
14
39
2
(v)
4
1
1
1
1
—
(Vi)
41
—
1
7
1
(vii)
•
8
I
—
—
(vm)
Total cases
: 470
26
5
1
(ix)
Total with more than one trait
234
x
101
—
(X)
7


TABLE XI (d)
Combination of two traits in 421 subjects with no
predisposition
Traits
(i) (»)
(iii)
(iv) (v) (vi)
(vii) (viii)
(ix)
W
(i)
25 —
3
4 — —
7
—
(ii)
(iii)
25
8 — —
— —
8
—
(iv)
61 — —
— —
17
—
( V J
(Vi)
—
—
—
(vii)
2 —
—
—
(viii)
Total cases
; 421
—
—
—
(ix)
Total with more than one trait: 31
54
—
M
—
TABLE XI (e)
Combination of two traits in 988 subjects with all grades of predisposition
other than severe
Traits
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(Vi)
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)
W
(i)
208
3
88
100
15
21
4
19
44
8
(ii)
17
4
5
1
1
—
2
2
—
(Mi)
281
153
20
30
4
24
67
11
(iv)
231
17
23
7
24
67
9
(v)
33
10
2
6
5
1
(Vi)
61
3
6
5
1,
(vii).
16
2
—
—
(viii)
Total cases
i 988
46 ■
10
3
(ix)
Total with more than one trait
362
175
1
W
.15
’ln these contingency tables, the pairs of traits which are associated most
frequently with the different degrees of predisposition can be determined.
From Tables XI ( a) and ( e ) it is possible to recognise the combinations of traits
which are encountered most often in the severely predisposed and least often
in the others. The results of this search are shown in the following tables-
(Xll and XIII).


TABLE XII
The percentage occurrence in each grade of predisposition of all pairs of traits
encountered in at least 1 in 10 of the severely predisposed
Pairs of traits
Percentage occurrence in different grades of pre-disposition
Severe
Moderate
Slight
Nil
All except
severe
(iii) and
(iv) ..
71
40
22
1-9
15-5
(i) and
(iii) ..
67
38
10
0-7
8-8
(i) and
(iv) ..
62
30
14
1-0
10-0
(i) and
(vi) ..
43
14
1-5
—
2-1
(iii) and
(vi) ..
43
21
2
—
3-0
(iii) and
(ix) ..
43
15
11
1-9
6-7
(ivj and
(vi) ..
43
14
1-9
—
2-3
(i) and
(ix) ..
33
10
5-7
1-6
4-4
(iii) and
(v) ..
33
18
0-6
—
2-0
(ivj and
(ix) ..
33
11
8-3
4-0
6-7
(i) and
(v) ..
24
15
—
—
1-5
(i) and
(viii) ..
19
10
1-9
—
1-9
(ivj and
(viii) ..
19
10
3
—
2-4
(v) and
(ix) ..
19
4
0-2
—
0-5
(iii) and
(x) ..
19
7
0-8
—
1-1
(v) and
(x) ..
19
1
—
—
0-1
(vi) and
(ix) ..
14
4
1-5
—
0-5
(vi) and
(x), . .
14
3
0-2 ,
—
0-1
(iii) and
(viii) ..
14
13 '
2-3
—
2-4
(ivj and
(x) ..
14
7
0-4
—
1-0
(i) and
(x) ..
10
7
0-2
—
0-8
(vi) and
(viii) ..
10
4
0-2
0-6
TABLE XIII
Percentage occurrence
in severely predisposed
Ratio of this percentage
Pairs of traits
to percentage in all
other grades
(v) and (x)
19
190-0
(vi) and (x)
14
140-0
(i) and (vi)
43
20-5
(iv) and (vi)
43
19-0
(iii) and (vi)
43
14-3
(v) and (ix)
19
38-0
(vi) and (ix)
14
28-0
(iii) and (v) ...
33
16-5
(i) and (v)
24
16-0
(iii) and (x)
19
17-0
(iv) and (x)
14
14-0
(vi) and (viii)
10
16-5
The 12 pairs of traits which seem to have the most exclusive representation
in the group of severely predisposed subjects are shown in descending order
in the following table, against their percentage occurrence in the 21 severely
predisposed, and against the ratio of that percentage in the severely predisposed
to the percentage occurrence in all other cases. It will be seen that these'
combinations are, broadly, made up of the commonly occurring traits (i), (iii),
(iv) and (ix) with the rarer ones (vi), (v) and (x) in that order, or of any two
of the uncommon traits. It can be concluded from this that a pair of the traits
(i), (iii), (iv) and ix) have*little value per se, that one of these traits with any
■other trait has importance, while pairs of any of the other traits are likely to
lead to the assessment of severe predisposition. The association of pairs of
traits with severe predisposition alone is not, however, very close except when
made up of traits (v), (vi) and (x). The occurrence of three traits should
therefore be examined.


Selective importance of the traits
Single traits
.. .. Little value alone.
Paired traits
.. Previous nervous breakdown, timidity, lack
of aggression or persistence, affective
lability or psychological immaturity in any
pair.
Three traits
.. Any three of the above or positive family
history, morbid fears and anxiety, physio-
logical instability or obsessional tempera-
ment in approximately that order with any
pair in 2.
(c) Combination of three traits'
The occurrence of three traits in each grade of predisposition was
determined : all groups of three traits which were met in the 21 severely pre-
disposed subjects were included. There were 58 of them. A digest of the
results which follows simply elaborates the conclusions reached for pairs of
traits. Combinations of three traits from (i), (iii), (iv), and (ix) are so often
met in assessments of less than severe predisposition that they have little
value. Two of these traits with traits (vi), (v), (x), (viii), (vii) or (ii) in that
order have an increasingly close relationship to severe predisposition while
one of them, with two of the others, in that order have a much closer relation-
ship. Three of these less frequently encountered traits occurring together
make the assessment of severe predisposition practically certain. Six of these
groups of three traits occurred eight times in the 21 severely predisposed,
only once in the 93 moderately predisposed and never in the 895 other cases.
It must be remembered that these 1,009 men have already been highly selected
and have successfully reached a late stage of pilot selection so that the relative
absence of such traits as (ii) ( previous nervous breakdown) may be due to the very
high selective value of such a trait. This, from general experience, is most
likely, to be the case, and it is certain that a psychiatrist would require strong
reasons for accepting a man who had already had a neurosis. It is probably
best, therefore, to neglect the fairly constant order in which the traits are
encountered in this series of cases and to state that those which have the closest
relationship alone or in combination to the assesments of severe predisposition
and the least to other assessments are (ii), (v), (x), (vii), (viii), and (x) {previous
nervous breakdown, timidity, lack of aggressiveness, lack of persistence, affective
lability and psychological immaturity) while the others (i), (iii), (iv) and (ix)
{family history, morbid fears and anxiety, physiological instability and
obsessional) are so diffusely scattered throughout all the subjects that they
have an ancillary 7 value only in assessment.
From all this it is clear that although the direct relationship between a
simple score of traits and psychiatric assessment is not a very close one, it can
be rendered very close indeed by suitable selection of traits and for practical
purposes the score and the assessment may be considered almost identical if
a score based on certain groups of 3or more traits is used. It may be concluded
that, although other factors are used to form an assessment, certain combina-
tions of traits are so frequently found in the severely predisposed, that they can
be used as a framework upon which a total assessment may be based.
In using the traits in this way it is useful to have some idea of their
selective importance, either alone or in groups. The following scheme shows
their relative value on the basis of the correlations found in this investigation,
but the order should not be considered to be hard and fast. As will be seen
from the subsequent discussion its application depends upon the assessor as
well as upon the subject being assessed. The direct relationship to severe
predisposition in the list increases from above downwards.
5.


Four traits
.. Not more than two of the traits in three with
any others, of greatest value roughly in the
order shown.
Five traits or more
.. Any combination following the order already
outlined.
TABLE XIV
Comparison of percentage distribution of traits in pilots u/t and tour expired
(Observer 1)
Percentage distribution of traits
[The figures (i) to (x) refer to traits enumerated in the pro forma, page 206)
(i)
(U)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)
(x)
u/t op.
u/t op.
u/t op.
u/t op.
u/t op.
u/t op.
u/t op.
u/t op.
u/t Op.
u/t op.
Nd ..
3 10
2 12
5 23
0-4 —
— 1
8 29
Slight ..
17 46
0-4 —
31 37
35 70
0-4 2-0
8 2-0
— 2-0
7 4
19 52
— 1-0
Moderate
47 100
5 —
58 —
52 100
28 —
21 —
5 —
14 —
21 100
2 —
Severe
77 100
75 50-0
87 50
87 —
38 —
—
25 50
25
—
Total
15 20
2 0-5
23 20
25 36
4 0-5
6 0-2
1 0-2
3 2
15 36
- 0-5
TABLE XV
Comparison of percentage distribution of traits in pilots u/t and tour-expired
(Observer 2)
Nil
Slight ..
Moderate
Severe
Total
Percentage distribution of traits
(The figures (i) to (x) refer to traits enumerated in the proforma page 206)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)
W
u/t op.
u/t op.
u/t op.
u/t op.
u/t op.
u/t op.
u/t op.
u/t op.
u/t op.
u/t op.
9 18
35 59
57 50
77 —
2 —
3 25
8 —
10 46
50 78
79 100
85 —
»
25 44
55 64
65 100
85 —
1 —
32 25
62 —
7 —
43 25
62 —
— 11
3 —
8 —
8 —
8 10
30 50
23 —
18 40
23 38
20 50
54 —
3 —
18 —
31 —
28 28
1-6 0-6
39 55
44 51
4-7 0-6
8-5 0-6
3 0-6
7 3-5
22 39
4 —
6. Reliability of individual psychiatric scores
It has been shown that a ocore of traits is directly related to assessment
of predisposition to breakdown but that it is not closely related either to this
or to survival in operations. The relationship does not appear to be close
' enough to enable a simple score of this sort to be used per se, although the
traits in the score have been shown to be valuable in framing a psychiatric
assessment. It remains to be seen how reliable aije the scores of different
examiners.
A comparison of the results of both observers in both groups is given in
Tables XIV and XV.


It will be remembered that the assessments of each observer (Tables 111 and
IV) were practically identical. The following points emerge from a study of
Tables XIV and XV. .
(1) The relationship between assessment and distribution of traits
differs between the two observers, so that their assessments,
which agreed so closely, were reached by different methods.
(2) The incidence of the traits also differs, so that the observers’ standards
of observation, measurement, or recording differed —indicating
that they applied the method of psychiatric scoring differently.
(3) The comparative distribution of traits made by the two observers
in the two groups of subjects differed, indicating further lack of
consistency in the score, although their assessment was similar.
(4) The total number of traits was consistently higher in one observer’s
results (3 : 2) but the assessment was not affected by this.
7. Discussion
The object of the investigation was to assess certain personal qualities
which contribute towards failure —or putting it another way, lack of success —
in operational flying. The psychiatric claim to predict failure is based upon
the temperamental features observed in men who had broken down in such a
way that they had been referred for a neuro-psychiatric opinion, that is to say
they had developed neurotic illness of disabling degree, or persistent loss of
confidence for full flying duties with out'medical disability. The prediction of
psychological breakdown under conditions of civil life is no new problem.
It is frequently encountered by psychiatrists, but as a rule only when there has
already been an episode of illness, and advice is given on the mode of life needed
to prevent recurrence. The Service problem begins at the same level, that of
giving a prognosis for men who have already broken down, but with the
important difference that the prognosis is related to a very special kind of
life situation. The neuro-psychiatrist in the Royal Air Force should be, and
generally is, familiar with the details of this situation, and it has been shown
in Chapter X that his ability to rate the degree of flying stress to which a man
has been exposed is reasonably reliable. It has also been shown that his pre-
dictions for the future of those who after breakdown returned to full flying
duty are reasonably accurate (Chapter XVII).
The neuro-psychiatrist may apply the knowledge thus gained to the
problem of selecting candidates for air crews in one of two ways. Fiist, he may
rely upon the method of clinical impression basing his assessment upon an
intuitive balance of all the traits, good and bad, which he is able to elicit in
the course of a personal interview. The number of these traits will probably
be very large. Sometimes one or two of them may load the scale heavily in
one or other direction. Sometimes the balance may be decided by the sum
of a great many small items. He is unlikely to claim that his interview has
exhausted all the available items, and will probably admit that his choice
has been partly determined by the relation of his own personality to that of
the examinee. This is the method employed in all clinical history-taking,
and, in so far as the experienced clinician proves right in his diagnosis and
prognosis much more than the less highly trained observer, the method is of
undoubted value. It is, however, unsatisfactory in so far as the observer is
unable to give reasons for his opinion sufficiently detailed and complete to be
assimilated by others. It is the aim of every clinical teacher to achieve this
ideal of self-explanation, but it may sometimes be impossible to explain
precisely how a given opinion has been reached, although it can be shown
by confirmatory evidence that it was more than mere guess work. It appears


that in the rapid assortment of a very large number of items, allowing for
cancellation of one by another, arranging those which remain in order of their
importance, and repeating the performance many times before the final balance
is arrived at there are many processes of which the manipulator is unaware,
and it may be as Bartlett has suggested (1943) that the capacity for this kind
of automatic sifting of data depends upon a species of intelligence which is an
essential ingredient of success in clinical work. If this is true there is no field
of clinical work in which this faculty is likely to be so important as in psjxhiatry
where the complexity and number of the data obtained from the history, and
the lack of objective evidence are so baffling. One way then of setting about
the problem of temperamental assessment is to tell the clinician to apply his
experience in any way he likes and to give for his judgment all the reasons that
he can without expecting that these reasons will be complete, or that two
ps3'chiatrists arriving at the same assessment in the same patient will necessarily
give the same reasons. This is not a plan which will appeal to the scientific
worker who has no personal experience of the clinical method, for he is asked
to take a good deal on trust. We can only expect him to believe in the method
if it works, and even then he will naturally and rightly press for an explanation
of how it works. Nevertheless this is the traditional clinical method, which
has proved itself again and again in disease. Therefore, in the present experi-
ment which started from the observation of disease and aims at the prediction
of failure the method of clinical impression was given first place.
The second method is based not upon the impression but upon the reasons
given for arriving at it. It was guessed that these might be recognised in
sufficient quantity in each case and classified qualitatively with enough accuracy
to express a temperamental rating or score. The advantages of such a method
are obvious. It might provide a standardised means of instructing in the
selection of air crews any psychiatrist with the necessary technical knowledge
without being unduly dependent upon his clinical or Service experience.
An investigation based upon Gillespie’s suggestion of a Schedule of Points
for Rating of Temperament (1944) has already been concluded under the
auspices of the Director of Medical Services (Air) of the R.C.A.F. This, as
far as we are aware, is the only previous large-scale attempt at a combined
assessment of temperament in flying personnel in terms of the impression gained
from the interview and a score of loading traits. The method adopted was as
follows. Over 3,000 candidates for flying were interviewed by a psychiatrist
as well as by the medical officer who performed the routine Medical Selection
Board tests. Three kinds of assessments were made :
[a) A numerical score of handicapping personality traits under
25 headings; (6) an assessment in 10 grades based on a psychiatric
interview ; (c) an assessment made by the medical officer at the Medical
Selection Board in 16 grades.
These three scores were related independently to grading by the Selection
Board at the end of Initial Training School and to the man’s subsequent
performance under training as pilot or navigator. They were compared for
consistency, the 25 traits were analysed item by item, and the results of an
independent psychiatric assessment made after suspension in 100 candidates
was compared with the initial assessment. The more pertinent conclusions may
be summarised as follows :
(i) Although there was variability in the distribution of all three scores
between the three centres of examination, there was a significant
relationship between the decisions of the Selection Board at the
end of Initial Training School and the psychiatric and Medical
Selection Board assessments at all, and with the psychiatric trait


score at two centres, showing that there are common factors
influencing all personal estimates of suitability for flying duties,
as judged by success or failure at the Initial Training School.
(ii) The psychiatric assessment was significantly related to success in
pilot and navigator training, although there was only a 20 per
cent difference between the failure rates of the best and worst.
The psychiatric trait score showed no such relationship, but the
Medical Selection Board assessment did so for pilots only at two of
the schools.
(iii) Only three items in the 25-point scale ( stammering , vocational'
instability and motivation) were significantly related to pilot success,
and the scores of the re-examined airmen differed greatly from the
initial ones.
Although the results showed that valuable information might be obtained
from a psychiatric assessment, the chief obstacle to its use seemed to be the
lack of uniformity of different judges in giving a numerical assessment.
Consequently it was recommended that more well-defined criteria should be
adopted and that the study should be followed to the operational level.
-The lack of close relationship of the psychiatric assessment to the trait
score shows that the psychiatrist’s final assessment took into account many
more factors than were revealed in the trait score, furthermore, although there
was a consistent relationship between psychiatric assessment and success at all
three centres, this was only so for the medical officer’s assessments at two of
the centres, indicating that some of the medical officers have ‘ highly
developed intuitive faculties which enabled them to perceive certain difficult-
to-define qualities that proved to be related to pilot-training success.’ The
failure of correlation between psychiatric trait score and success, in training
must be linked with a similar lack of significant relationship between 22 of the
25 traits. Although there was a significant correlation for the other three, it
was not close enough to have practical value in selection by considering the
traits separately or as a group. Finally there was so much divergence in the
individual interpretation of the 25-point score of traits that it was robbed of
any practical value per se. It is, however, important to realise that the traits
described by Gillespie were assumed to relate rather to failure in operational
flying than in flying training, and that both the psychiatric assessment and
score might have a different degree of relationship to operational performance.
The immediate outcome of the investigation was that the point-score of
psychiatric traits which was used had no practical value alone, although the
psychiatrist might use these traits in arriving at an assessment. This assess-
ment was, however, dependent upon many other traits, loading and counter-
balancing, which had not been defined. If a candidate was assessed at the
lowest rating by either a psychiatrist or another medical examiner, his chances
of success in flying training were very slim indeed, but above this level the
correlation with success was not close enough to have practical value.
Some of these observations and conclusions are especially relevant to our
own. It is to be noted first that the extension of the number of traits looked
for from 10 to 25 did not result in any closer agreement between trait score and
assessment nor did any of the traits not included in the list of 10 prove to have
any outstanding value in this respect. As in our own observations the
psychiatric assessment failed to agree with the point-score showing that the
observers took into account any factors not covered by the score. These
may have been other loading factors, or counterbalancing factors. There is,
moreover, evidence which suggests that a personal factor in the observer,


independent of psychiatric training, contributes to the assessment. So far
the results are parallel with our own. Our investigation has gone further in
revealing that two observers working under similar conditions and with
similar material and arriving at an almost identical distribution of assessments
have been guided in making their assessments by certain combinations of the
traits listed, and that they have been so guided without being fully aware of
the process. These combinations of traits seem to have provided the observers
with an indicator in selecting what is significant from a very large number of
variable factors. That such indicators form the basis of the clinical method
of diagnosis is evident in the definition of syndromes in terms of objective
phenomena. It is further evident in the classification of symptoms, subjective
phenomena which can be assayed only by the elicitation of an introspective
history. The clinician by this method can frequently select from a mass of
irrelevant material data which have absolute value for the predication of
objective findings. The psychiatrist is largely dependent upon the interpreta-
tion of subjective evidence in attempting to predict behaviour under given
conditions. In normal practice he has available a historical record of the
subject’s behaviour from friends or relations, the subject’s introspective account,
and his own observations of the subject’s reactions to the interview. In all
respects and especially the the last relationship of his own personality to that of
the witness is important. This of course applies to the interpretation of
symptoms in all branches of medicine. There must be opportunity for com-
parison between the sensations of the subject and those of the observer. It is,
however, more important in psychiatry than in any other field because of the
complexity of thought, feeling and behaviour in relation to extremely variable
conditions. The psychiatrist has often to imagine' how he himself would
have felt or behaved under these conditions before making the necessary
correction for what he believes to be his own divergence from the normal and
so arriving at a dispassionate evaluation.
In the psychiatric assessment of personality, therefore, it must be conceded
that the personality of the assessor is one of the variables which must always
be considered. In so far as this can be balanced by methods which are more
objective the general reliability of psychiatric assessment will gain. It may
be claimed for the method which has been used in this investigation that it
seeks to isolate among a host of variables a variety of patterns which may
serve as separate but inter-dependent structures in the general framework of
assessment. The qualitative value of the traits studied is, of course, of critical
importance for upon this depends the value of the statistics presented. At the
end of the experiment the two observers were asked to present separately their
comments on the way in which they had used the headings given to them,
and their appraisal of the value of individual traits. After this had been done
their reports were discussed at a meeting between the two observers, the
compilers of this report and Air Commodore R. D. Gillespie, and it was decided
to enquire further into the relationship of certain traits to one another.
Typescripts of this part of the investigation are available on application to the
authors. (See Appendix of this Chapter.) It was found that although there
was some vagueness concerning the delimitation of the traits there was complete
agreement upon central meaning and value. One further comment should be
recorded. Under present conditions of air crew selection the historical record
of the personality from others is lacking. This is a serious defect which we
believe could and should be repaired whenever possible. Records of school
life, work and past health should be forthcoming, and the attendance of a
responsible relative for interview should be a condition of the examination.
The results of this investigation suggest that the method of using specific
traits in the assessment of temperamental suitability for air crew duties might
(76642) H


profitably be carried further, taking into account both loading traits and
counter-balancing traits, and looking for significant combinations. The
number of such combinations of both negative and positive traits would be
enormous and would make the use of a numerical score unwieldly, but this
does not exclude the application of the principles of the method to the form of
psychiatric enquiry. It is probable for the reasons already stated that the
final assessment will be most valuable when influenced by the observer’s general
impression. Any method which tends to fix attention upon a limited number
of traits detracts from that freedom of movement and range of attention
which is necessary in covering so large a field. Freedom to consider the problem
as a whole and to swing rapidly and automatically from one point to another
is probably essential to accuracy of clinical judgment. The attempt to think
in terms of headings may have an adverse effect upon this skill comparable
with that observed in a manual skill when the performer concentrates upon
its separate components. Therefore, the aim should be to discover a small
number of highly significant combinations which will serve as a guide to the
total clinical appraisal.
8. Summary
Two groups of bomber pilots : 1,009 pupils at the end of Service Flying
Training School; and 335 instructors who had completed an operational
tour—were examined by two psychiatrists, each of whom independently
interviewed half of each group. The interviews lasted about three-quarters
of an hour, and were aimed at; assessing in four grades the man’s predis-
position to breakdown under conditions of operational flying, using evidence
which included the man’s life story to the time of commencing flying; and
making a score of handicapping personality traits upon a ten-point scale which
had previously been defined. The assessment and the score were to be made
separately.
The data obtained by the observers were collected and analysed.
Comparison was made between :
(a) The assessments of predisposition in the two groups of pilots.
[h) The score of traits in the two groups of pilots.
(c) The assessments of predisposition of the two observers.
(i i ) The scores of traits of the two observers.
(e) The relationship of assessment to score in each group of pilots and for
each observer.
(/) The distribution of each of the 10 traits, singly and in association
with others, for each grade of predisposition assessed by each
observer in the two groups of pilots.
From all this information an analysis was made of the methods used by
the observers, and the place of each of the traits in relation to assessment and
to the total trait score was determined. The investigators independently
submitted reports upon their method. An abstract of these reports forms the
substance of the Appendix to this chapter.
9. Conclusions
(1) The psychiatric assessment of two large groups of pilots shows that
there is a significantly greater proportion of individuals considered to be
predisposed to breakdown among pilots under training than among those who
have completed a tour of operations. Two per cent of the first and 0-6 per


cent of the second showed predisposition of a degree which would have led the
psychiatrist to reject them for air crew training.
(2) The agreement in the distribution of the assessments made by two
independent observers was very close in each group of pilots.
(3) Although the number of pilots with a score of more than three
handicapping traits was slightly higher in those under training than in those
who had completed a tour, there was not a significant difference between the
average score of the two groups.-
(4) There was a direct relationship between psychiatric assessment and
score, but this relationship was not very close.
(5) The observers considered factors other than those in the score in making
their psychiatric assessment and wide discrepancy existed between score and
assessment in some instances.
(6) It is not practicable to use a' simple form of scoring to replace a
psychiatric assessment, but the results warrant further investigation of the
importance of other handicapping traits, and counter-balancing and supporting
traits.
(7) If the highest grade of predisposition— severe —were used as a
basis for rejection, 21 (2 per cent) under training and 2 (0-6 per cent) tour-
expired pilots would have been eliminated. If a score of five or more traits
had been similarly used the figures would be 22 (2-2 per cent) and 3 (0-9 per
cent). Although the number of pilots who would be rejected is so similar, more
than half rejected by one method would have been accepted by the other and vice
versa ; that is to say that there is only an even chance of the same case being
rejected by both methods.
(8) When the score of personality traits and the distribution of these traits
is compared with the assessments of predisposition, considerable disagreement
is found between the two observers. This is true not only on comparing the
findings of the two observers in one group but also on comparing the findings of
a single observer in the two groups.
(9) Analysis of the distribution of traits showed that—
No single trait indicates failure to complete an operational tour.
The traits which seem to relate most closely to the psychiatric assessment of
severe predisposition are : Previous nervous breakdown, timidity, lack of aggression
or of persistence, affective lability and psychological immaturity.
Some traits, particularly psychological instability, anxiety and' morbid fears,
obsessional features, and an abnormal family history, are so heavily represented
in both groups of pilots that they would have a very limited value per se in selection.
Certain combinations of three or more traits, which have been described, almost
invariably lead to the assessment of severe predisposition.
(10) Combinations of traits enumerated in (9) have been related to assess-
ment of predisposition to breakdown in flying and these combinations should
serve to simplify the method of assessing the likelihood of such failure.
Finally, taking all the results into consideration, the broad conclusions
may be drawn that a method of elimination on the basis of assessment of ‘ severe
predisposition ’ might be practicable and profitable. The personality traits
investigated can be used with others to simplify and elucidate this assessment,
although it would not be practicable or desirable to replace the assessment by a
trait score. The final evaluation of the method which has been analysed
awaits the results of the main experiment.
(76642) H 2


References
Bartlett, F. C.
Current problems in visual function and visual per-
ception. XHIth Thomas Young Oration, 1943.
Proc. Phys. Soc. LV, 417.
Gillespie, R. D.
Assessment of predisposition to psychological break-
down in flying, 1944. Unpublished report to the
Flying Personnel Research Committee. Type-
script.
I» • • • •
Personal communication in Chapter XIV.
Royal Canadian Air Force..
Factors in air crew selection. Special Study No. 1.
The value of the 25-point psychiatric appraisal scale,
the psychiatric assessment and the Medical Selection
Board assessment for predicting success in pilot and
navigator training, 1944.
Symonds, C. P. & Williams, D. J...
Investigation of psychological disorders in flying
personnel : clinical and statistical study of neurosis
precipitated by flying duties, 1943, FPRC 547
(see Chapter X).
The probability of return to full flying of men who have
broken down under the strain of operational duties.
FPRC 561 (see Chapter XVII).
Williams, D. J.
Predisposition to psychological disorder in normal
flying, personnel, 1943. FPRC 516, (see Chap-
ter XIV).


APPENDIX TO CHAPTER XVI
NOTE ON THE OBSERVERS ANALYSIS OF THEIR METHOD
Introduction
Each observer has presented a full and critical report of his method which
is available in typescript but as much of the material has been dealt with in the
body of the report only information of special interest is abstracted below.
1. Psychiatric assessment
Both observers emphasised that they made their assessment irrespective
of the score of traits they obtained, a contention which is supported by their'
results. Nevertheless, the fact that they were instructed to use a ten-point
score just have kept those ten groups of traits before them, and it must to
some extend have modified their method of interview. The form of interview
adopted by each was quite different. For instance, one established rapport
by talking about service life and then proceeded to obtain a detailed account
of performance in the Service before enquiring into the personality before
service, while the other did just the opposite, obtaining a chronological life
story which ended with the service experiences. Yet the distribution of
psychiatric assessments by each was the same. Again, one scored many small
traits which he ignored in making an assessment, while the other did not
include them either in his score or his assessment. It was clear that they both
arrived at the same conclusion by different methods. As so many subjects
from the same selected populations were examined by each, the results they
obtained are strictly comparable.
In addition to an appraisal of his life story, the subject’s appearance,
behaviour and reactions during the interview were all used by both observers
in arriving at an assessment. Both drew attention to the relative paucity of.
predisposing factors in the populations examined by them and pointed out
that the subjects had already been tested and tried under training or on
operations. They, therefore, considered it likely that some traits which they
considered to be closely related to severe predisposition, but which were
infrequently encountered ( previous nervous breakdown, timidity, lack of aggression
or persistence, or psychological immaturity) might be met much more frequently
in the examination of air crew on enlistment.
2. Psychiatric score
Some of the observers’ views upon the score of traits have already been
quoted. Criticisms were: —
(a) Counter-balancing factors such as energetic disposition, habitual
cheerfulness especially when under stress, a stable vyell integrated
personality, high' motivation, proved courage, a well developed
group-sense, and in the face of difficulty were taken into con-
sideration in making the psychiatric assessment but were not
included in the method of scoring.
{b) Even if counter-balancing factors were enumerated a score could not
take account of the matching of counter-balancing traits. For
instance, a timid man might be fortified by a limited capacity for
imagination, stubbornness and an ability to persist.
(76642) H 3


‘ It was felt that a schedule of unfavourable traits, without taking
into careful consideration the good assets present, did not give a true
picture of the total personality, or serve as a safe guide in the estimation
of predisposition to breakdown or failure later on. Thus in a number
of cases adverse features could be found under three or four of the
headings of the pro forma used in the assessment of the pilots studied,
yet due consideration to the good assets that were present resulted in
a final assessment of nil or slight in many cases, as whatever demerits
were found, were counter-balanced or outweighed by the good assets
also present.’
(c) Other handicapping traits are encountered.
(d) The score to be equable should be weighted in favour of the more
incapacitating traits. For instance, timidity should be scored
more heavily than physiological instability.
(e) Some traits overlap, others tend to be linked, and combinations of
others tend to accentuate the effect of each. For example,
anxiety might overlap with timidity. Timidity is linked with lack
of aggression, and anxiety is particularly disturbing to an obsessional
personality.
(/) There is difficulty in finding for each trait a definition which has
universal application, as for example in distinguishing between
morbid and non-morbid obsessional features, which ‘ might prove
an asset if present in small degree in one type of individual, but a
liability if in excess in another.’
[g) There is similar difficulty in setting a standard for the actual scoring.
' One sometimes suspected a personality defect but considered
there was insufficient evidence to warrant the recording of a mark
under the appropriate heading in para, (a) on the pro-forma on page 210
with the result that frequently under para. (6) may be found such
remarks as suspect for timidity, persistence uncertain, unaggressive
type or somewhat immature. One result of this state of affairs was that
an individual pilot might be considered to be near to moderate and
not marked off under any of the headings.’
3. Outline of the standards adopted by the two observers in scoring the traits
{a) Use of individual traits
(i) Family history. —Both included first degree relatives who had either
had frank psychological illness of any kind, or who had a personality defect
which was obvious to others. This second group included the nervous, over-
anxious, unstable and eccentric. One urged consideration of counter-balancing
traits in the members of the family but had not used it.
(ii) Previous nervous breakdown. —The minimum standard for scoring was,
to have been under medical care or absent from school in childhood, or a
definite psychological illness in adult life, even though it did not mean ceasing
work. Care was taken to accept very cautiously nervous breakdown before
10 years of age and to relate it to the family situation. On the other hand,
attempts were made to recognise nervous illness simulating physical disorder.
(iii) Morbid fears and anxiety. —Both agreed that there should be a
distinction between these two traits and that morbid fears alone, unless
numerous, did not warrant a score. -
‘An appreciable number of otherwise satisfactory pilots had always entertained
a fear or dislike of water, which had usually been brought about by some childhood
experience of nearly drowning ; such pilots were in consequence either non-swimmers
or timid swimmers who could not dive. Many tour-expired pilots were found to have
a neurotic fear of blood, showing itself to a sufficient extent in some cases as to cause
them to leave a first-aid lecture which was in progress : quite a number of these
pilots were able, however, to cope quite well in real situations and to deal with
casualties.’


TABLE XVI
Relationship of morbid fears to anxiety, to an obsessional temperament and to an
abnormal obsessional personality
Total number of patients with
Number of patients with
phobias having in addition
Subjects
Obsessional
Obsessional
Anxiety
and
-
Phobias
Anxiety
Tem-
pera-
ment'
Person-
ality
Anxiety
Tem-
pera-
ment
Person-
ality
obses-
sional
tem-
pera-
ment
Tour-expired
Observer 1 (169)
Observer 2 (166)
23
67
3
60
51
65
3
4
36
13
20
2
13
U/t
Observer 1 (504)
Observer 2 (505) . ..
66
122
42
165
42
120
8
6
9
67
4
38
1
2
3
2
Total (1,344)
278
270
278
21
112
75
5
18
The intensity of the anxiety reaction was thought to be more important
than its presence, since many ‘ mildly anxious tour-expired pilots had done
well.’ On the other hand, mild anxiety in an obsessional was thought to
constitute a handicap.
From this table—
-41 per cent of subjects with morbid fears showed anxiety.
41 per cent with anxiety had morbid fears.
27 per cent with morbid fears were also mild obsessionals.
27 per cent of abnormal obsessionals had morbid fears.
1 -7 per cent'with morbid fears were also abnormal obsessionals.
The results indicate that morbid fears more often overlap with anxiety
than obsessional features and that the two traits are sufficiently independent to
justify separate scoring.
(iv) Physiological instability. —Both observers included disturbances of
sleep, sleep walking, nightmares or night terrors, stammering, nail-biting, tics,
twitchings, bed-wetting, faints and headaches. One also included teeth-
grinding. A history of allergy was also looked for but was rare. Again the
age of onset and cessation, the severity and cause were taken into account
when making the score. They both quoted examples of successful operational
pilots who showed abundant evidence of such instability, but reference to
Table VIII showing the widespread representation of this group of traits
makes further discussion unnecessary.
(v) Timidity. —Both observers emphasised the importance they placed
upon evidences of timidity, and the results showed that this was closely related
to their assessment of severe predisposition, and that it was rarely seen in
successful pilots. They' both thought that timidity was often * associated
with lack of aggressiveness. The actual relationship is shown in Table XVII.
(76642) H 4


TABLE XVII
Comparative incidence of timidity
Subjects
Total with
timidity
Total with
lack of
aggressiveness
No. of these
cases showing
both
Tour-expired
7
3
2
U/t
41
70
15
Total
48
73
17
From this table it is seen that 35 per cent of timid people lacked
aggression, 23 per cent of people with lack of aggression were timid.
The two traits of timidity and lack of aggressiveness are consequently
sufficiently independent to be considered separately as single traits. Timidity
was only scored when it was evident in many forms of activity, and not when
associated with a single specific situation as might be the case with a phobia.
In order to unmask timidity an account was obtained of:—
' The order of preference for games, participation in the rougher sports and in
fights, his response to injuries (had they made him give up ?), interest in special
sports, e.g. motor cycling and speeding, accidents he had had and his response to
them, response to dissuasion by parents, particularly if he had continued in spite
of it. His ability to take the usual physical risks.’
(vi) Lack of aggressiveness. —Distinction was made between the unaggressive
types of individual, particularly those with compensating qualities, and those
who showed a neurotic attitude to the subject to aggression, as for instance a
strong disapproval of blood sports. Many unaggressive men proved successful
pilots, and simple avoidance of the rougher forms of sport was not considered
sufficient to justify a score. Furthermore many had never met situations that
aroused hidden aggressive tendencies before flying, but when they did so they
were found to be adequate. This was well seen in the apparently unaggressive
pilots who became exceedingly angry when exposed to heavy flak and who were
consequently happy in releasing their bombs on the enemy. The group with
neurotic lack of aggression was a small one, but there was another small group of
abnormally aggressive, psychopathic individuals who were considered to be
handicapped. It follows that the score was made by an appraisal of intensity
of the trait, rather than its presence.
(vii) Lack of persistence was scored when there was an unsatisfactory
civilian employment record, absence of hobbies and interests and a tendency to
tire easily, or to give up without trying to overcome difficulties. Both observers
commented upon the lack of evidence of this trait, which they attributed to two
causes:
That many of the men had had little chance of showing it, for
they were only 14 years old when the war began, and their lives had been
greatly modified by it.
That the two groups studied had necessarily had to show
persistence to succeed in flying training, so that many of those lacking
persistence had probably been eliminated.
(viii) Affective lability. —This trait excluded those with simply a mild
cyclothymic temperament and with transient depressive moods, unless the
depression was intense enough to interfere with social relationships or work.
The duration, intensity, frequency and precipitating causes were all considered
in making the score. The trait was thought to be ominous when associated
with obsessional tendencies.


(ix) Obsessional. —Both observers included not only men with obsessional
personalities, but those with milder obsessional temperaments, who were
' tidy and meticulous to the point of being fussy.’ Consequently the propor-
tion of tour-expired pilots scored as obsessional was high, for ‘ the quality of
persistence with which such individuals are usually endowed enables them to
carry on for a long time in the face of stress, before breaking down.’ It seemed
that the milder degrees of obsessional behaviour were an asset, so long as the}'
were not associated with anxiety. Compulsive features were rarely encountered,
but were considered to be heavily loading when present. The relationship of
anxiety and of phobias to normal and morbid obsessional features has been
outlined earlier.
(x) Psychological immaturity. —This trait included men who were still
bound to the family and who had not yet become separate individuals. The
results suggested that these men could not survive training to the end of
Service Flying Training School. The individuals seem also tended to be
timid, immature, sensitive and unaggressive.


CHAPTER XVII
PROBABILITY OF RETURN TO FULL FLYING OF MEN WHO
HAVE BROKEN DOWN UNDER THE STRAIN OF
OPERATIONAL DUTIES
by
Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds, K.B.E., C.B., M.D., F.R.C.P., and
Wing-Commander Denis J. Williams, D.Sc., M.D., F.R.C.P.
FPRC Report 561, November, 1943
Introduction
The efficacy of different forms of treatment of flying personnel who have
shown psychological disorder under the strain of operational duties has
recently been under discussion. The ultimate aim of any form of treatment
is to return the man to his duty fully efficient and confident. The policy in
the Royal Air Force has aimed at maintaining efficiency and confidence not
merely for an operational tour, but for a period of instructional duties and
then for a further operational tour after this. As a result of this policy provision
is made in several ways for giving tired men a break without admission to
hospital or removal from duty. Thus under an Air Ministry letter a squadron
commander has power to terminate a man’s operational tour early if he has
been exposed to exceptional stress, or if his stamina appears to be subnormal,
by posting him for instructional duties before being called upon for further
operational duty. Parallel with this, the policy has been adopted of encouraging
the unit medical officer to take the responsibility of handling cases of incipient
neurosis in flying personnel, and to foster a close liaison between himself and the
executive officers responsible for the welfare of flying personnel. The squadron
commander and the squadron medical officer therefore deal with these cases
on the station with the least possible delay and very often without reference
to the neuropsychiatrist, who only handles cases which are beyond the capacity
of the unit medical officer ; those unlikely to return to operational flying;
those referred because it is uncertain whether disposal should be through
medical or executive channels. The proportion of cases dealt with by the
unit medical officer without having been referred to a specialist seems to vary
directly with his sagacity and enthusiasm.
The time factor has to be considered in assessing the results of treatment.
Under present policy, if a man has to be removed from operational flying for
more than a few days, the executive are not so much concerned with the time
taken to get him back to operational flying as with getting him back to it in
the end fit and keen for a second tour. As the need for instructors in Operational
Training Units is great, a man can be fully and usefully employed during a
period of non-operational flying, but if he is to be so employed it should be
for a period of at least six months to allow for apprenticeship to the new task.
It thus happens that the demands of the service and the needs of the medical
branch in rehabilitating these men coincide closely.
Because of the policy which has been outlined, the results of treatment
must be considered in relation to the squadron medical officer and the neuro-
psychiatrist. The following data are derived from a card return system already
described on page 118, which has been extended to include some repre-
sentative squadron medical officer.


* TABLE I
Disposal of 730 flying personnel referred to neuro-psychiatrists with symptoms of a
neurosis after more than 100 operational flying hours, related to flying stress
Percentage returning to
Total
Hying stress
cases
Operational
Other flying
All forms
flying
duties
of flying
Nil
56
48
13
61
Slight
173
44
15
58
Moderate
302
46
11
57
Severe
179
56
8
64
Exceptional
19
38
15
53
Total
730
45
12
60
1. Data obtained on cases from representative
squadron medical officers
The medical officers concerned were instructed to report the details of
every case.handled by them in the course of their duties in which there was
evidence or suspicion of psychological disorder, whether or not the case was
subsequently referred to the neuro-psychiatrist.
Of 72 such cases in operational aircrew 51 (70 per cent) were thought to
be suffering from a neurosis and the remainder were considered simply as
lacking in confidence. This second group was then referred for executive
disposal, as the problem was not considered to be medical. Of the 51 cases
of neurosis, 41 (80 per cent) returned to full operational flying, 38 after a
short period of treatment by the squadron medical officer, and 3 after reference
to a neuro-psychiatrist. The medical officers referred 21 per cent of all their
cases for a second opinion.
2. Data obtained on cases referred to the neuro-psychiatrist
Seven hundred and thirty flying personnel who had completed more than
100 operational hours and who were referred to neuro-psychiatrists for an
opinion in the year February 1942-43 were considered by them to be suffering
from the effects of the strain of operational flying. The neuro-psychiatrist
ultimately referred the cases to the Central Medical Board for final disposal.
The board considered 48 per cent fit for full flying duties including operational
flying, and 12 per cent fit for flying duties other than operational. Thus a
total of 60 per cent were found fit for flying duties.
The efficiency of a sample of 200 of the cases found fit for full flying duties
after recovery from a neurosis followed over a period of nine months after
return to‘duty, is described on pages 240-243. The results were favourable,
since 82 per cent returned to flying and 46 per cent to operational flying,
while 70 per cent of the total were still employed on flying duties at the
end of the period.
The probability of return to flying duty after psychological disorder has
also been examined in relation to the degree of stress to which the subjects
had been subjected'in their operational tour, and the extent to which they
were predisposed to neurosis. An account of the conception of flying stress
and predisposition and the way in which they are assessed has been given in
Chapters I, IX and X. The results of such a division of the cases are seen
in the following two tables.


TABLE II
Disposal of 730 flying personnel referred to neuro-psychiatrists with symptoms of a
neurosis after more than 100 operational flying hours, related to predisposition
Percentage returning to
Total
Predisposition
cases
Operational
Other flying
All forms
flying
duties
of flying
Nil
272
71
10
81
Moderate
381
43
12
55
Severe
77
14
10
24
Total
730
48
12
60
It appears from these tables that the factor which decides whether a man
can return to operational flying is not the degree of hazard he has met on his
tour but the kind of stuff he is made of. Table I shows no material difference
between the chances of returning to operational or non-operational flying,
with different degrees of flying stress. Table II shows by contrast that whether
or not a man returns to operational flying is profoundly affected by the degree
of his predisposition, since the man without predisposition is five times as likely
to go back to full flying as one severely predisposed.
A criticism which may be levelled at the results in Table II is that the
neuro-psychiatrist who has assessed the predisposition to breakdown is
influenced by this assessment in advising upon the man’s return to duty, so
that the proportion returned to full flying may be merely a reflection of the
observed predisposition. Although this may be true for men under training,
it is much less likely to be so for men who have completed 100 operational
hours. The final disposal of these men is guided less by the neuro-psychiatrist’s
assessment of predisposition than by his appreciation of the performance they
have achieved. He is also influenced by the fact that they have completed
their training and have acquired operational experience of potential value.
His bias therefore is towards sending the man back to full flying duty if his
clinical state is satisfactory predisposition notwithstanding.
3. Summary
(1) The chance of men who have broken down under the stress of opera-
tional flying returning to operational duties after treatment has been discussed.
The results are those of the psychiatric methods used at the present time in
the framework of the general policy laid down for the maintenance of efficiency
of operational flying personnel in the Royal Air Force.
(2) Eighty per cent of a small group of men treated on the station by
squadron medical officers returned to full operational duties.
(3) Forty-eight per cent of a large group of men who had completed more
than 100 operational hours and who were referred to a neuro-psychiatrist
returned to full flying duty, and a total of 60 per cent returned to some form
of flying duty. Of 272 men in this group who did not show evidences of
predisposition to neurosis. 81 per cent returned to flying duties and 71 per cent
to full operational flying.
(4) The most potent factor affecting return of these experienced men to
operational flying appears to be their degree of predisposition to neurosis,


References
Reid, D. D. ..
Prognosis for a return to full flying duties after psycho-
logical disorder. 1943. FPRC 535 (see Chapter
XVIII).
Symonds, C. P.
Use and abuse of the term ‘ Flying Stress.' 1942,
FPRC 412 (see Chapter I).
Symonds, C. P. & Williams, D. J...
Investigation of psychological disorders in flying
personnel : statistical survey of records for six
months, 3rd February to 3rd August, 1942, FPRC
412 (g) (see Chapter IX).
Clinical and statistical study of neurosis precipitated
by flying duties. 1942, FPRC 547 (see Chapter X).
since 71 per cent who showed no evidence of this predisposition returned to
full flying contrasted with only 14 per cent who were considered severely
predisposed.
(5) Although the degree of hazard and stress encountered in the operational
tour appeared to have precipitated the breakdown, it did not affect the
prognosis for full flying duties.


CHAPTER XVIII
PROGNOSIS FOR A RETURN TO FULL FLYING DUTIES
AFTER PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDER
by
Squadron Leader D. D. Reid, M.D.
FPRC Report 535, June, 1943
- Introduction
It is important to know the prognosis for a return to full flying duties of
cases who have recovered from psychological disorder, and who have been
assessed as fit for operational flying duties by neuro-psychiatric specialists.
The proportion of all cases referred for neuro-psychiatric opinion who are
eventually recommended for a return to full duty is difficult to determine,
since many are given a full medical category after a period of limited flying
which may extend up to a year. All cases who have been passed fit for
operational duty, either at the end of a short course of treatment or a long
period of alternative employment, must be included in the total of neurosis
cases eventually gaining a full category. Unfortunately, no accurate figure
exists for the whole war period to date. In a personal communication Williams
states that of 511 consecutive cases of psychological disorder in flying personnel
338 were given a final disposal within a year of the time of first interview,
while 173 still had a temporary disposal. Of those given a final disposal,
100 or 30 per cent were assessed as fit for operational flying. A minimum of
100 out of the total 511, or 20 per cent, had thus achieved a full operational
category. Since the prognosis in those cases whose disposal was still undecided
at the end of the year is unlikely to be better than average, the proportion of
all cases eventually becoming fit for full flying duties probably lies between
20 per cent and 30 per cent. The aim of the present investigation was to
determine the quantity, and if possible the quality, of service given by crews
on their return to duty after recovery by cases of psychological disorder
accorded a full category by neuro-psychiatric specialists. The method employed
was to follow up the flying careers of a series of cases who had been seen by
specialists either at N.Y.D.N. centres or medical boards during a period of
ten months, and recommended for a return to full • flying duties. Their
subsequent performance was then compared with the normal standards of
personnel wastage in training and in operations during the period under review.
1. Detail of Method
(a) Selection of material
The case records available at No. 1 Central Medical Board and at the N.Y.D.N-
Centres at Littleport and Rauceby were scrutinised. All cases of individuals classified
AIB ( fit for operational flying as pilot) or A3B (fit combatant passenger) were reviewed
and those cases of psychological disorder of the various reaction types detailed in
Chapter IX were noted for follow up. Psychological disorder of the organic type
following head injury, epilepsies, migraine and organic nervous lesions were not
included. Cases in which symptoms of anxiety or depression or lack of confidence
followed head injury, and borderline cases of physical injury or disease with a definite
neurotic factor, were included. In doubtful cases, the assistance of the specialist
concerned was obtained. Some of the cases marked as fit for duty are labelled
AIB but lacking in confidence. Such cases may be divided into those referred for
psychiatric opinion for the first time and given this category, when it is implied
that there is no medical reason why the individual should not be fit for duty ; and


those who have recovered from their psychological disorder but who still lack
confidence. In the latter group, where there is some doubt implied about the fitness
for duty, the decision about air crew employment is left to the executive, who base
that decision on performance in the air. Only the second group have ever been
accepted as medical cases and lack of confidence cases of this type alone have been
included in the follow-up series. With these exceptions, all cases dealt with during
the ten-month period were followed up, and an unbiassed sample was thus obtained
of cases of psychological disorder as thus defined which were recommended for a
return to full flying duties by neuro-psychiatric specialists.
(b) Method of follow-up
The present location of all the personnel concerned was obtained through the
co-operation of the Directorate of Postings, Air Ministry, and Records Office, and
cases were divided into :
(i) those still surviving and employed on flying duties, operational or otherwise,
at home or abroad ;
(ii) those who had become casualties ;
(iii) those not employed on flying duties ;
(iv) those who had been remustered ;
(v) those whose psychological disorder had recurred with sufficient severity to
warrant lowering of the medical category by another board ;
(vi) those whose career after return had been affected by intercurrent disease.
Method of collecting data on these groups :
(i) Survivors. —Special forms made out for each case still surviving and employed
on flying duties in this country were sent, with an explanatory letter, to
the Senior Medical Officer of the Group administering the units at which
the cases were serving. The forms were completed by the unit medical
officers from particulars available in the man’s flying log-book and medical
history as noted in the Form 48 and Daily Sick Book, then returned to Air
Ministry by the Senior Medical Officer with any additional comment which
he cared to make. It was impracticable to obtain similar returns for cases
serving overseas, but it was assumed, unless there was anything on their
personal records to the contrary, e.g. remustering or reboardirig, that they
were employed in the capacity of the post to which they had been drafted.
It is reasonable to assume that some element of selection on grounds of
efficiency and suitability for prolonged operational effort comes into overseas
postings. The exclusion of those posted overseas might therefore give a
pessimistic bias to the general prognostic picture and the outcome of those
cases is included under a separate heading in the general statement given
below.
(ii) Casualties. —It was impossible to obtain much information about those who
had become casualties, but records of the totals of flying hours, operational
and otherwise, done before loss, were extracted from their log-books, which
were obtained from the Central Depository. In some of the operational
casualties where no log-book was available, the number of operational
flying hours was obtained from the squadron operational histories (Forms
540).
(iii) Ground Duties.- —ln the case of individuals employed exclusively on ground
duties at the time of survey, it was difficult to decide whether such em-
ployment implied a previous failure to perform efficiently in the air. One
man in the series was found to be employed for no apparent reason as an
orderly room clerk, while another, a senior officer with much operational
experience, was on the staff of Combined Operations. The two cases are
similar only in the fact that they are both employed on ground duties.
For the present purpose it is probably safer to class all those employed
exclusively on ground duties together, irrespective of their ability and desire
to serve in the air, but to remember the wide range of possible explanations
for such employment.
(iv) Remusterings in the cases of N.C.Os., and transfers to the Administrative
and Special Duties Branch in the case of officers, are dealt with in the
medical history file held at Air Ministry of each individual, from which
the details of executive disposal were extracted.
(v) Recurrence. —Any recurrence of psychological disorder can be graded according
to the severity of the symptoms. These may be present but either not
complained of or not being severe enough to warrant boarding, or so disturbing


to mental equilibrium and flying efficiency that a lowering of the medical
category or repatriation on medical grounds has become necessary. A note
of all boards held is made on the individual's personal card in the Directorate
of Postings, and each case has been cross checked by reference to the clinical
notes held at No. 1 Central Medical Board. In the analysis of cases still
employed on flying duties, reference is made to those with continuing or
recurring symptoms which have not necessitated reboarding.
(c) Recording of data
All cases in the series were followed up for a period of nine months after gaining
a full category, the collection of data being spread over a period of three months.
RECORD CARD
Service No Rank Name Crmv duty
Stage in training or type Unit Operational or
of operational flying at Training Command
time of breakdown
Date of being given Neuro-psychiatric specialist con-
' full flying category cerned
No. of hours flown non-operational
and operational before breakdown
Brief clinical note on case :
Summary of flying duties done since board
Type of aircraft Group Non-operational Operational
Day.... Night.... Day.... Night....
Medical officer’s remarks on present psychological condition and general behaviour :
I
(d) Control material
Cases were grouped according to their eventual outcome to present a general
picture, and then analysed from different viewpoints to elicit the prognosis of certain
broad categories. The series was controlled, firstly by comparison with the level of
flying performance attained before breakdown, and secondly by comparison with
standards of normal expectations for the completion of training and survival on
operations. These standards were based on statistical data supplied by the appro-
priate sections of the Training and Operational Forecasting Departments of Air
Ministry. The details of the calculation of the control material are given where the
comparisons with the follow-up group are tabulated.
2. Results
(a) Level of flying performance after return
From the practical point of view it is important to know what proportion
of men return to the level of flying performance attained before the onset.of
psychological disorder and whether they have maintained that level, or
regressed or progressed from it. Progress is applicable, of course, only to the
training stages. The general outcome after the period of nine months may be
classified by nature of air crew service, operational or non-operational, given
after return. All who gave operational service after return, although now
employed non-operationally or on ground duties, are included under the
heading operational since they may have been relieved in the natural course of
events. Of the 211 cases available for follow-up, full details of the type of
duty performed were gathered for 204 or 97 per cent.


Table I
Type of duty being performed nine months after returning
Number Percentage
'Survivors at home
38
19
(i) Operational flying*
Casualties
21
10
Overseas
20
— 79
10
— 39
(ii) Non-operational
r Survivors at home
40
20
Casualties
3
1
flying
__ Overseas
7
— 50
• 3
— 24
'Operational flying after return
0
0
Non-operational flying
after
(iii) Ground duties .. ■<
return ..
2
1
No flying..
. .
12
6
Overseas
2
1
— 16
— 8
'Operational flying after return
4
2
(iv) Remustered . ...
Non-operational flying
return
after
1
1
.
flying..
17
— 22
8
— 11
'
'Operational flying after return
6
3
(v) Recurrences
Non-operational flying
after
(boarded)'
return ..
14
7
_No flying
5
— 25
2
— 12
'Operational flying after return
5
2
(vi) Under treatment for
Non-operational flying
after
other diseases.
return ..
, ,
6
3
__No flying
1
— 12
1
—■ 6
Total
204
100
Summary
Total number who did
operational flying after
return
(including casualties)
94
46
Total number who did non-operational flying after return
73 or
36
Total number who did no
flying after return
37 or
18
Total ..
204
100
Recurrence rate, 12 per cent
Total employed on flying duties at end of period (including
casualties and other diseases)
140 or
70
per cent


TABLE II
Type of duty being performed before breakdown and after test period
Before breakdown
After test period
Duty
No.
Percentage
Duty
No.
Percentage
Operational
144
75
Operational ..
80
42
Non-operational
10
5
Non-operational
47
25
Under training
37
20
Grounded
64
33
Total
191
100
Total
191
100
TABLE III
Percentage of subjects under training normally expected to reach operational level
Training stage
Percentage expected to reach
operational level
Initial Training Wing
53-5
Elementary Flying Training School
57-8
Service Flying Training School
77-0
Advanced Flying Unit
90-0
Operational Training Unit
92-5
From this it will be seen that although over three-quarters of the cases
went back to flying duties, one-third of the original number became non-effective
as members of operational crews within the period of follow-up. This trend may
also be seen in the comparison made below between the level of duty performed
before breakdown and after the nine months’ interval. (In this and other
tables, all 12 cases with intercurrent disabilities and 1 case who had not had
time to complete training have been omitted.)
Table II has clearly shown that there has been a deterioration in the level
of flying activity, for 33 per cent of the total number have been grounded
for one reason or another, and this one-third decrease in effectiveness is also
reflected in the decrease of the number doing operational flying.
(b) Progress in training
This deterioration may also be seen in the proportion who fail to complete
their training. The normal expectation for the completion of training, i.e. of
reaching the operational level, can be obtained for each crew duty from the
statistical records of the Training Research section. Available figures for the
period before Grading was introduced when the men in the series were under
training give the following proportions for pilots:—
Thus, for example, of 7 men at the Elementary Flying Training School,
58 per cent or 4, might normally be expected to complete training. Applying


TABLE IV
Comparison between expected and actual percentage of pupils reaching operational level
Stage reached
No. of
Percentage
normally
No.
expected
to reach
No.
actually
cases
reaching
Ops. at
reaching
Op. level
rates in
Col. 3
Ops.
Air Gunnery School
i
89-0
•9
1
Signals School
3
87-5
2-6
1
Elementary Flying Training School
7
58-0
4-0
—
Service Flying Training School ..
3
77-0
2-3
2
Advanced Flying Unit
3
90-0
2-7
3 .
Operational Training Unit
20
92-5
18-5
17
Total
37
84
31
24
these proportions to the observed pilots at each stage and similar appropriate
proportions for other numbers of crews, the following results are obtained :
From Table IV it appears that although 6 men might have been expected
to fail to reach the operational level, 13 in fact failed to do so. This might be
expressed by saying either that the number of failures was twice normal
expectation, or that the percentage of successes in the returned cases was
fx or 77 per cent of normal expectation.
(c) Predisposition and prognosis
Before making a decision on the basis of this general picture, it is important
to assess the prognosis in different groups within the whole series. There is
reason to believe that the neurotic predisposition of the individual is the main
determinant in prognosis. It has been shown by Symonds and Williams (1942)
that predisposition varies inversely with the amount of flying done before
breakdown. ‘The percentage of severe predisposition falls from 42 per cent
in groups who break down before starting flying training, to 6 per cent in those
who have completed more than 100 hours of operational flying. To determine
the influence of predisposition in prognosis, a comparispn was made between
the eventual outcome in a group who broke down during training and
a group who had completed more than half the operational tour normally
expected in the tactical groups to which they belonged. These groups being
at opposite ends of the spectrum of predisposition, any difference in performance
can be taken as a measure of the influence of predisposition in prognosis. It
is likely, however, that the under training group who have been allowed to
go on with their course were probably selected on the grounds of lack of
predisposition. The numbers involved, too, are very small, but the comparison
made below is suggestive of a more unfavourable prognosis in the more heavily
predisposed groups.


TABLE V
Comparison between the outcome in cases occurring during training and the outcome
in experienced operational air crews
-
Under training
More than half tour
completed
Duty
No.
Percentage
No.
Percentage
Operational
16
44
36
44
Non-operational
8
21
20
25
Ground duties
1
3
11
14
Kemustered
9
24
5
6
Recurrence
3
8
9
11
Total ..
37
100
81
100
TABLE VI
Comparison between outcome in two similar groups seen by different psychiatrists
Duty at date of
P
Average
Duty after test
Average
breakdown
others
period
others
More than half tour
46
48
40
Operational . .
51
48
37
Less than half tour
31
32
34
Non-op.
25
22
25
Non-op.
8
3
5
Ground duties
8
13
9
Under training
15
17
21
Recurrence and re-
mustered ..
16
17
29
Although the proportion who return to do operational flying is the same,
the number who are lost to the Service either by remustering or recurrence
is almost twice as many in the ‘ under training ’ group (32 per cent to 17 per cent).
The proportions employed on non-flying duties are not strictly comparable
in this case since many of the more veteran air crew would have been employed
on staff duties in the normal course of their Service careers.
(d) Consistency of psychiatric opinion
Although cases may be divided into degrees of predisposition by the
stage in their flying service at which breakdown takes place, such a division
would be purely arbitrary and likely to lead to gross errors in prognosis in
cases .in the intermediate groups which break down early in their operational
tour. Here, accuracy in prognosis must depend upon the estimate made by
the psychiatrist of the relative influence of neurotic predisposition in the whole
personality. There has been considerable discussion on the consistency and
reliability of such estimates, although there is some evidence to suggest that
with service psychiatrists whose methods can be to some extent standardised,
a fair measure of agreement can be achieved (Williams 1943). In the present
study it was not found possible to find an adequate series of individuals on
whom a final assessment on disposal had been made independently by two
psychiatrists. The end results in two groups, whose composition, measured
on the basis of time of breakdown, was similar and who had been seen at
the same medical board by one of the two specialists working there, were
compared with the average outcome for the rest of the series studied. The
results are summarised in the table below.
Note. —No. seen by neuro-psychiatrist A, 39.
No. seen by neuro-psychiatrist B, 31.
No. seen by other neuro-psychiatrists, 121.
Results are expressed in percentages of these totals.


From Table VI it may be inferred that the end results in similar groups of
cases seen by Service psychiatrists who have collaborated to standardise their
methods of assessment, will fall into very similar groups. It would appear
from these results that the eventual outcome will depend on the calibre of
the human material and that the assessment of the factors of temperamental
handicap and personal morale by Service psychiatrists is at least consistent.
Although this prognostic opinipn is consistent in its degree of accuracy, there
remains over 20 per cent of those marked fit for full flying duties who become
non-effective as operational air crews. It must be remembered, however, that
nine cases in the series were marked down as AIB but lacking in confidence,
it being implied, as already explained, that although they had recovered from
their psychological disorder, the decision on their fitness in the wider sense
for flying duties must lie with the executive. Of the nine, seven were removed
from flying duties by the executive. Two men did in fact continue on flying
duties and in these and other doubtful cases, e.g. where some predisposition is
evident, psychiatrists no doubt feel impelled to give these individuals the
opportunity of regaining their previous level of flying duty.
(e) Quantity of service given
The quantity of flying service given can be simply expressed by noting
the average number of flying hours done by the operational and non-operational
groups for whom full details are available.
The operational group did on an average 25 • 5 operational hours.
The non-operational group did on the average :
231 non-operational hours (day).
42 non-operational hours (night).
Total .. 273 non-operational hours in the 9 months’ period.
These figures, although giving a broad indication of the quantity of
service given, are difficult to assess in the absence of a suitable control group.
In the non-operational group at least, an adequate return in service as air crews
has been given.
(f) Quality of service given
From the operational point of view, it is important to assess by comparison
with suitable standards of performance in action, the efficiency of those who
have returned to operational flying. Such a yardstick is difficult to construct,
particularly for so varied an assortment of tactical functions as are included
in the present series. A rough assay has been attempted by calculating the
casualty rate, the frequency of neurotic symptoms and by investigating pilot
error accidents. In view of the inadequacy of the control material and the
smallness of the numbers, no statistically definite result can be obtained, but
the material available is given and possible inferences discussed.
(i) Casualty rate. —It is reasonable to assume that the risk of becoming
a casualty is increased by inefficiency. One measure of the
efficiency with which the returned cases carried out their opera-
tional duties may therefore lie in a comparison of the actual
casualty rate they suffered during the operational work they
performed after return, and the average casualty rate of the
squadrons to which they were posted. Taking 38 cases who went
back to night bomber units (the only homogeneous group of any
size available), it is found that they actually suffered 17 casualties
while at the average rates of their squadrons during the same


TABLE VII
Frequency of neurotic symptoms among returned cases while employed on flying duties
Total
No symptoms
Symptoms
Boarded
No.
Per cent
No.
Per cent
No.
Per cent
Non-operational
52
26
50
12
23
14
27
Operational ..
44
29
66
9
20
6
14
Total
96
55
57
21
22
20
21
period 15 would have been expected. Clearly such a small excess
might be due to chance and the most that can be said is that the
return cases in this type of duty suffered no grossly disproportionate
casualty rate.
(ii) Frequency of symptoms. —The association of neurotic symptoms and
lowered operational efficiency has already been pointed out
(Reid, 1942). The proportion of the group who have symptoms
might therefore be taken as a measure of the residual effects of
psychological disorder on health and efficiency. As before, the
severity of these symptoms may be assessed by noting whether or
not a lowering of the medical category was required. In a group
of 96 who survived after returning to flying duties in this country
and for whom full medical reports are available, the classification
of the frequency of neurotic symptoms for those employed on
operational and other flying duties, may be tabulated thus
This table would suggest that of those who do in fact return
to flying duties, 57 per cent will continue free of symptoms, 22 per
cent will have some symptoms but will continue with flying
duties, while 21 per cent will break down again. In operational
flying alone, the outlook seems better but the lack of information
on those who become casualties renders comparison invalid. The
breakdown rate of 14 per cent may be compared with the usual
expectation of breakdown in a period of nine months of opera-
tional flying which is probably about 5 per cent. There is
unfortunately no reliable standard of comparison for the frequency
of minor neurotic symptoms in the normal operational crew
population. If the proportions of those with symptoms and those
who break down are roughly equal, as in the returned case group,
then the ratio of symptom-free and presumably efficient propor-
tions in returned case and normal population is fg, or 73 per cent,
(iii) Accident histories. —This association between symptoms and efficiency
has been traced in a series of accidents which have been investigated
in connection with the pilots among the returned cases. The
accident records of 72 pilots of the series for the period following
their return from the medical board were scrutinised. The 72 pilots
had 26 crashes during the nine-month period, of which 8 were
definitely pilot error in origin. Unfortunately, these numbers are
too small and the types too diverse for statistical analysis,
particularly in the absence of control material. Some of the
histories are suggestive from the viewpoint of the association
already mentioned between symptoms and flying and operational
efficienc}'.


Case 1 : Squadron Leader B. had been awarded the D.F.C. during his first operational
tour. Later he developed an anxiety state from which he recovered and then went
back on operational flying in Bomber Command. He appears on the accident record
because of a taxying accident, and on checking his operational performance from
his squadron’s Operations Record it was seen that he had abandoned five sorties
for various reasons before breaking down again with complaints of visual fatigue.
Case 2 : P/O M. appears on the accident record because he had landed his Wellington
with the undercarriage retracted. He was an experienced pilot who had been
referred for an opinion after two crashes towards the end of his tour. He had been
employed on instructional duties since seeing the psychiatrist. His medical officer
says that he is now being investigated by an ophthalmologist for his complaints
of headache and eyestrain.
In the case of casualties, where no full medical details are available, inefficiency
which might have been due to a recurrence of psychological disorder can only be
inferred. Case 3is typical.
Case 3 ; P/O H. had been seen when on fighter operations, and it had been decided,
with some misgivings because of his severe degree of predisposition, to allow him
to become operational again. He went to a meteorological reconnaissance squadron,
where he seemed to do quite well for a time, until he was despatched on a practice
flight across to Ireland. He was next heard of as a prisoner of war in Germany,
and it was presumed that he had flown a reciprocal course by failing to adjust his
compass.
Despite such examples, it would be unwise to assume that the absence
of symptoms necessarily implied efficiency and vice versa. Case 4 illustrates
the difficulties of assessment of efficiency by such a criterion.
Case 4 : P/O B. had been seen while a pupil at O.T.U. He was thought to be mildly
predisposed, with excessive visceral responses, but his personal morale was good
and he was given a full medical category. Nine months later he had done 99 hours
operational flying, was a flight commander and his medical officer reported him " as
one of the best pilots—very keen, courageous and twice has exhibited extraordinary
quick thinking in doing the proper things”. On going into his accident record, it
appeared that he had had four crashes in succession, only one of which, however,
could be definitely labelled pilot error.
An example of ultimate success in a case with doubtful prognosis is Case 5.
Case 5 : Sgt. K. was a borderline case—an anxious type of individual with ob-
sessional trends who had been suspected by the psychiatrist concerned of some
exaggeration of his symptoms. He was handled firmly and returned to complete
47 sorties, 25 of them with the Path Finder Force. He was decorated and com-
missioned and had no recurrence of symptoms of psychological disorder.
3. Conclusions
(1) 82 per cent of the cases went back to some form of flying duties after
recovering from psychological illness. Only 70 per cent of the original series,
however, are still employed on these duties at the end of nine months.
(2) The training wastage in returned cases is twice normal expectation.
(3) The neurotic predisposition of the individual is an important deter-
minant in prognosis.
(4) The prognostic opinions of service psychiatrists are consistent in
the degree of accuracy.
(5) An adequate quantitative return, at least in non-operational flying,
is given by returned cases.
(6) The quality of service is difficult to estimate but the casualty rate
among returned cases is not grossly disproportionate. On the other hand,
the breakdown rate is three times normal expectation, although the efficiency
of 66 per cent of those surviving on operational duties is not effected by
neurotic symptoms.


References
Williams, D. J
Predisposition to psychological disorders in flying
personnel. 1943, FPRC 516 (see Chapter
XIV).
Symonds, C. P. & Williams, D. J...
Investigation of psychological disorders in flying
personnel : statistical survey of the records for six
months, 3rd February to 3rd August 1942. FPRC
412 (g) (see Chapter IX).
Reid, D. D
The influence of psychological disorder on efficiency
in operational flying. 1942. (Unpublished report)
FPRC 508.
(7) Specific examples are quoted of cases where it might be inferred from
a liability to accidents that reduced efficiency has been either a residual effect
of psychological disorder or an expression of • permanent temperamental
unsuitabilit}'.
These results might be summed up by saying that a process of progressive
selection goes on. This progressive selection may be linked with the observa-
tions on predisposition as a determinant in prognosis. If the factors of personal
and group morale remain constant, the prognosis in the individual case must
depend on the loading of neurotic predisposition. In practice this means that
while it is doubtful whether it is justifiable to return the more heavily
predisposed, e.g. those who break down early in training, it probably is
worth while to persevere with cases where the psychological disorder is the
result of severe stress in an individual of stable personality. In the inter-
mediate cases, where a rule of thumb method is even less applicable, service
psychiatrists can be expected to be consistent in the standards set to determine
fitness to return to full flying duty. At the present moment the setting of
this standard of nervous stability required is too low to prevent a proportion
of psychiatric and operational failures among the returned cases. On the
other hand, too precise and rigid a criterion might result in the loss to the
service of potentially valuable flying personnel. In border-line cases, where
some nervous predisposition is balanced by positive temperamental assets such
as persistence and determination, the psychiatrist may decide to recommend
a full operational category. In that event, full weight must be given to failing
efficiency and minor symptoms during the after-care of these cases, if the
anticipation and prevention of a recurrence of psychological disorder is to be
attained.
This survey was carried out on the instructions of the Director-General
of Medical Services of the Royal Air Force, under the direction of Air Vice-
Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds and Professor A. Bradford Hill.


CHAPTER XIX
SOME MEASURES OF THE EFFECT OF OPERATIONAL STRESS ON
BOMBER CREWS
by
Squadron Leader D. D. Reid, M.D.
FPRC Report 605, November, 1944
Introduction
Much stress has been laid throughout the war on the determination of
the optimum length of the tour of duty for flying personnel of the operational
commands. The limit set must ensure that the average individual gives as
adequate a contribution to the total effort of the force, as is compatible with
the maintenance of his operational efficiency and his physical and mental
well-being. One must also take into account the fact that he may be required
subsequently to complete a period of instructing at an Operational Training
Unit and return for a second tour of operational duty. The present study was
undertaken in the hope that precise indications of fatigue and strain might
be found for the group concerned. Three features were taken as possible
indicators of changes occurring in the flying personnel employed operation-
ally in Bomber Command due to the stresses imposed by a tour of duty limited
to thirty sorties. These features were :
{a) Changes in weight during a tour.
(b) Relative liability to psychological disorder at various stages of the
tour.
(c) Sickness rate at various stages of the tour.
1. Method
Variations in weight. —ln assessing, through numerous observers, the physical
condition of a large group, as opposed to that of an individual, only the simplest and
most objective measurements such as height and weight are feasible. Even with
these simple measurements there are serious administrative difficulties in taking
them from the same individuals at repeated intervals during their tour. This pro-
cedure was, in fact, not found practicable on any worth-while scale. An alternative
approach was suggested by Wing Commander Denis J. Williams, namely, that all
operational flying personnel in the command should be weighed at one point in
time and a record of the number of sorties they had completed bo taken at the
same time. These figures would show whether there were differences in the average
weight between those who had completed 0,1, 2, 3 and so on up to 30 sorties in
the main force, and more for those in the Path Finder Force. This method is ad-
mittedly open to one objection ; although the sample of men who have completed
these different numbers of sorties gives a cross-section of the flying population
operating at the time of the experiment, those who have completed a large number of
sorties are a selected group who have survived the operational hazards of the first
part of the tour. It might well be that there is a selective loss in action of those
whose failure in adaptation to air warfare was shown not only in their deteriorating
efficiency, but also in a loss of weight. Owing to the numbers involved in each aircraft
missing in action, this factor is probably of little importance. The method was
therefore applied, by permission of the Air Officer Commanding-in-Chief, Bomber
Command, with the co-operation of his Principal Medical Officer and medical officers.
a period of 14 days in April, 1944, all available aircrew personnel were
weighed wearing Aircrew Service Dress (with empty pockets) underclothes, 'shirt
and socks. Their standing height in socks was taken at the same time. These
measurements, together with the number of operational sorties they had carried
out, divided if necessary into first and second tour, were recorded on a self-coding


form by the unit medical officer together with personal data required for other
investigations. Weight was noted in pounds, to the nearest pound, height in inches,
to the nearest inch. When these forms were returned to Air Ministry the data were
transferred to punch cards which were mechanically sorted, and the results tabulated
in the statistical section of the Directorate-General of Medical Services. During the
same 14 days all available aircrew under training in the Operational Training Units
of Bomber Command were similarly measured ; the number of hours flying done
since the start of their operational training unit course was also recorded on the
self-coding forms. Thus was provided a control group who were subject to the
effect of a period of flying without the stress associated with the operational hazard.
Height and age were included in the records as additional control material in case
some selective elimination in action, due to either of these causes, was operating
which might have had a secondary effect on the average weight. Such an eventuality,
although possibly remote, must be taken into account before attributing any changes
in average weight to the result of operational stress. It should be noted, too, that
every man on the strength of the operational squadrons at the time could not be
examined owing to absences on leave or on courses or on account of illness. The
data for those who were on their second tour have not been used in this study as
the investigation was primarily concerned with the limits of duty for the first tour.
Despite these omissions the number examined was so large as to be acceptable as a
very adequate sample of the total population exposed to operational and non-opera -
tional stress in Bomber Command.
Variations in the relative liability to psychological disorder. —lt would be reason-
able to expect that the effects of stress on a group would be revealed in a differing
incidence of psychological disorder at different stages of the tour. So far, it has not
been possible to measure the incidence at various points. For the present purpose,
however, the real incidence at any and all stages is not essential ; what is required
are figures which will reveal the relative incidence between one part of the tour and
another. In this study a measure of this relative liability, as distinct from the
absolute incidence, has been calculated. For convenience and brevity, and to
stress the point that it is merely an indicator of the relative risk of breakdown at
different stages of the tour, this measure is called an ‘ index ’ of psychological
disorder. Its calculation is made clear in the working details given below and in
Tables V and VI.
Since the number of sorties completed by each man involved in the weight
investigation was known, the total crew population could bo portioned into groups
of men of similar operational experience, e.g. 1-4, 5-8 sorties, etc. It was assumed
that the population exposed to the risk of psychological disorder at any time during
a period of three months on either side "of the date of the investigation, would be
similarly divided into groups of like operational experience. In other words, it was
assumed that the proportions of total crew population in these various experience
groups would be stable over such a period. Next, the number of cases of psychological
disorder occurring in Bomber Command squadrons, and referred for neuro-psychia-
tric treatment during the same period, were divided into the same groups according
to their experience before breakdown. Then, a comparison of the ratios in each of
these experience groups given by the number of cases as numerator, and the number
exposed to risk as given by the size of the sample in the same experience group as
denominator, should reveal the relative liability to breakdown within these various
groups of operational experience.
A similar calculation was made from data given by an earlier study on the
crews engaged in a very big operation done by Bomber Command, in 1943, when
the operational experience of every man who flew on the operation was ascertained.
Again, the numbers of cases of psychological disorder occurring in each experience
group during a period of three months on either side of the date of the operation,
were divided by the number in the sample in the corresponding experience group.
Since, as stated, these ratios do not measure the absolute incidence of breakdown,
comparison is only possible between the two years, if the ratios in each experience
group are expressed as a proportion of the mean ratio (total cases to total population)
for the relevant six-month period. It is this proportion which is referred to in this
study as the index of psychological disorder. (The records of the cases of psycholo-
gical disorder were provided on both occasions by the staff of the Air Crew Research
Detachment of the Central Medical Establishment of the R.A.F.)
Sickness incidence. —The third method used for assaying the effects of stress
during the tour was the Sickness Index. As part of the study of the flying personnel
involved in the large operatjpn of April, 1943, records were obtained of the number
of attendances on sick parade for all complaints, psychological or otherwise, made
by each man during the month previous to the operation in question. It was thus


TABLE I
Mean weight at successive stages in tour
Sorties :
0
1-4
5-8
9-12
13-18
19-30
31 +
No. of men ..
1,032
1,613
1,370
1,164
.1,377
1,577
143
Mean weight (pounds)
154-22
±•48
152-90
±■39
152-54
J--43
'
152-45
±■43
152-87
±■42
152-84
±•40
152-60
±1-39
possible to compute a Sickness Index showing the relative liability to sickness, as
measured by attendance on sick parade, for each stage of the tour. If the stress of
operational flying produced any increase in the amount of total sickness, this rise
might be adjudged, in the light of industrial experience, to be of some import. The
amount of data obtained under this heading is limited as it was unfortunately
impracticable to obtain similar records at the time of the physical survey of this
year. This index of sickness liability can be put in the same form as the index of
relative liability to psychological disorder by expressing the values at different
points of the tour as proportions of the mean incidence of sickness over all stages
combined. In this form it can be compared with the index of psychological disorder
for both the same period in 1943 and the period in 1944.
2. Summary of results
(a) Physical measurements
The mean weights for men in each air crew duty, grouped by the number
of sorties performed to give adequate numbers at different points of the tour
are tabulated in full in Table Aof the Appendix. Operational wastage entails
an increased compass of experience to give adequate numbers in the more
experienced groups. The numbers of men in each crew duty at each stage of
operational experience are very similar since losses mainly occur as complete
crews. The only exception to this generalisation is a rather small proportion
of pilots in the group who had not yet started their tour. This was presum-
ably due to the practice of potential captains doing a sortie as second pilot
before taking their crew on their first sortie. The comparison made in this
study, however, has been made between the weighted means of men at each
stage of the tour totalled over all air crew duties, for three reasons.
(i) Within each air crew duty, the mean weight shows a consistent
tendency to fall below its initial level.
(ii) Weighted and unweighted means for all air crew duties together
show substantially the same trend.
(iii) The relatively smaller proportion of pilots in the initial group gives
a conservative estimate of the mean weight before the tour is
commenced, since pilots are the tallest and heaviest members of
crews. (Table IX)
The broad picture of the changes in average weight during the tour is
then given in Table I and in Fig. 1.
From this table and Fig. 1 it is clear that for all air crews combined there
is, during an operational tour, an average loss of rather less than two pounds
in weight during the first twelve sorties. It is possible that there is subsequently


OPERATIONAL EXPERIENCE IN SORTIES
Mean heights and weights at successive stages of operational tour
FIG. 1


TABLE II
Mean height at successive stages in tour
Sorties
0
1-4
5-8
9-12
13-18
19-30
No. of men
1,022
1,610
1,359
1,152
1,366
1,561
Mean height . . .
68-77
-•07
68-69
±0-6
68-78
±•07
68-70
±•07
68-77
±•07
68-75
±•06
TABLE III
Mean age at successive stages in tour
Sorties ..
0
1-4
5-8
9-12
13-18
19-30
No. of men
1,031
1,609
1,371
1,163
1,378
1,577
Mean age
24-05
±•13
24-15
±•10
23-91
±•11
23-96
±•12
23-89
±•10
24-11
±•10
a slight gain but the figures are insufficient to prove it. At each point the
average is significantly below the initial level. (The over 31 sortie group can
be disregarded because of the small number upon which the mean is based.)
Before assuming that this fall in average weight is due to the stresses
imposed by operational flying, adequate controls are required. The possibility
of selective elimination on the grounds of age or of height has already been
mentioned. To control these factors, the mean height for each aircrew duty
divided into the same classes of operational experience as before were computed
and are given in a similar fashion to the mean weight in Table X.
This table and the Fig. 1 show that there are no significant changes in the
mean height in serial stages of the tour, which would be sufficient to account
for the fall in the mean weight. (This was confirmed by correcting the mean
weight at each stage to correspond to a standard height using a regression
coefficient calculated from the data. This made no material difference to the
trend of mean weights throughout the tour.)
Here, too, there is no evidence that age plays a significant part in the
changes in mean weights.
There remains the possibility that the changes observed are the result of
stress not specifically associated with operational strain but may be observed


FIG. 2
NON-OPERATIONAL FLYING HOURS AT O.T.U.
Mean heights and weights at successive stages of pre-operational training


TABLE IV
Mean height at successive
stages in pre-operational training
0
1-49
50-99
No. of men
2,783
- 3,766
1,847
Mean height
68-50
68-52
68-64
TABLE V
Mean weight at successive stages in pre-operational training
0
1-15
16-30
31-45
46-65
66-99
No. of men
2,775
1,354
1,087
1,194
1.055
1,067
Mean weight ..
153-71
153-26
153-59
153-92
154-52
154-01
during a period of adaptation to the more ordinary experience of a period of
flying not associated with the hazards of action. This latter possibility,
however, is not evident in the table of mean weight of aircrew during the
various stages of their operational training. Tables IV and V show that there
is no evidence of selective elimination on the grounds of height during opera-
tional training; and that there are no significant fluctuations in mean weight
between serial stages of the Operational Training Unit course. The Operational
Training Unit observations for weight were classified into groups of flying
hours roughly comparable with the groups of operational flying experience.
These conclusions are illustrated graphically in Fig. 2. (It may be noted that
the average weight of those nearing the end of their training is almost the same
as that of the men in the squadrons who have not embarked on their tour.)
(6) Index of the relative liability to psychological disorder
The steps of the method described above are given in detail in Tables VI
and VII where the index of relative liability to breakdown during the various
stages of the tour for the two periods of six months in 1943 and 1944 is set out.
Owing to the small numbers in each case who had completed more than 30
sorties only the experience classes up to 30 sorties are analysed.


TABLE VI
Psychological disorder index at successive stages in tour (1944)
Sorties
1-4
5-8
9-12
13-18
19-30
Total
(1) No. of cases of P.D.
60
55
39
24
26
204
(2) Sample population
1,613
1,370
1,164
1,377
1,577
7,101
(3) Ratio (l)/(2) .. /:
•0372
■0401
•0335
•0174
•0165
•0287(A)
(4) P.D. index (3)/A
1-296
1-397
1-167
•606
•575
1-00
TABLE YII
Psychological disorder index at successive stages in tour (1943)
Sorties
1-4
5-8
9-12
13-18
19-30
Total
(1) No. of cases of P.D.
69
73
30
24
29
225
(2) Sample population
836
847
502
606
591
3,382
(3) Ratio (l)/(2)
■0825
•0862
•0598
•0396
•0491
•0665(A)
(4) P.D. index (3)/A
1 '241
I -296
•899
•595
•738
1-00
TABLE VIII
Sickness index at successive stages in tour
Sorties
1-4
5-8
9-12
13-18
19-30
Total
(1) No. sick in previous
month
143
175
108
124
114
664
(2) Sample population
836
847
502
606
591
3,382
(3) Ratio {1)1(2)
•171
•207
•215
•205
•193
•196 A)
(4) Sickness index (3)/A
•872
1-056
1-097
1-046
•985
1-00
This result may be compared with the result of the 1943 study in Table VII.
If it be assumed that conditions in the two periods were roughly comparable
then the similar results in the two instances would suggest that the psychological
disorder index is measuring fairly consistently the relative effects on mental
health of operational stress at various stages of the tour.
(c) Sickness index
The relative liability to sickness during different stages in the tour for the
1943 period is derived as shown in Table VIII. There is a suggestion of a rise
in the proportion of the strength attending sick parade during the first part
of the tour but the differences are not more than might easily be due to chance.
There is certainly no indication of any rise in the sickness rate in the latter part
of the tour.


FIG. 3
OPERATIONAL EXPERIENCE IN SORTIES
NOTE : THESE CURVES HAVE BEEN DRAWN BETWEEN POINTS BASED ON THE VALUES
FOR GROUPS OF MEN OF SIMILAR OPERATIONAL EXPERIENCE, PLOTTED AT
THE MID-POINTS OF THE GROUPS, eg—at 2 EOR THE SORTIE GROUP—
Values of psychological disorder and sickness indices compared with mean weight at
successive stages in tour.
(76642)
1


In Fig. 3 this sickness index is compared with the index of psychological
disorder derived from summing the experience of two years (since they have
been shown to be very similar). The sickness and psychological indices have
both been calculated as deviations from their own means and are thus on the
same scale. Fluctuations in weight are too slight compared with the size
of the mean weight for a similar index to be clearly graphed; the variations
in weight have therefore been superimposed on Fig. 3 against a separate scale,
in pounds. The three possible indicators of the effects of operational stress
studied are thus brought together so that the consistency of the evidence which
they provide can be examined and their applicability assessed. It is apparent
that the variations in the three indicators can be interpreted as expressing in
different fashions simultaneous effects of stress on the personnel of the whole
group. In the early stages of the tour, between the first and eighth sorties
there is a significant drop in the average weight, a suggestive, though not
technically significant, rise in the proportion of men reporting sick, and a
relatively high index of psychological disorder. At the 9-12 sortie group signs
of improving adaptation to the new environment appear in those who survive.
Mean weight shows no further appreciable decrease, the sickness rate reveals
only a slight and not significant rise, and the psychological disorder index falls
below the average level for the tour as a whole. At the 13-18 sortie group
and beyond the three indicators remain fairly stable, suggesting that the
adjustment to the environment of operational flying and its associated hazards
has been stabilised, again in those who survive, at a new level.
These findings suggesting that the effects of stress are greatest at the
beginning of the tour, accord well with the varying criteria of operational
performance such as losses in action and accidents found in Bomber as well
as other operational Commands. They do not exclude, however, the
possibility that in individuals with sub-normal powers of endurance, the
effects on efficiency of accumulative fatigue may reduce the chance of survival.
Further, the figures given in this study give no indication of the upper limit of
the length of tour in night bombers, they merely indicate that, as far as can be
ascertained on the basis of the medical data presented, there is no evidence
that a tour of thirty sorties under present conditions is incompatible with the
maintenance after a period of adjustment of a steady level of mental and
physical health.
3. Discussion
This study was concerned not only with the immediate problem of the
operational limit for bomber operations but also more generally with the
devising of techniques of objective assessment of the effects of operational
stress on groups of flying personnel which might have more extensive
application in similar enquiries. The three methods tested may be discussed
separately from this point of view.
(a) Variations in mean weight during operational and non-operational
flying. —The results obtained in this part of the investigation are probably most
important in relation to the possibility that undue loss of weight might be of
value in the early diagnosis of neurosis. There is no doubt that for most men,
an operational tour in heavy bombers involves emotional tension and fatigue,
and one of the problems of the medical officer is to decide whether a man
suffering from such symptoms should be encouraged to carry on with his duties
or should be rested. A reliable objective measure of the effects of stress on
the individual would be of considerable value in aiding clinical impression.
Knowing from Table IX that the loss in weight to be expected during the


first part of the tour in the average man weighing 154 lb. is about 2 lb.,
any gross deviation from this expectation can be taken as a departure
from normal health and when other causes of weight loss have been excluded
and anxiety symptoms are present, the combination may prove significant
as a measure of illness. If the routine of weighing all members of air crew
on posting to a squadron were strictly enforced, and if all men, whether present-
ing with anxiety symptoms or not, were weighed at a later stage, it would be
possible to see what individual loss in weight may be and how many men with
excessive loss have an anxiety state.
(b) Sickness incidence. —As has already been pointed out, the differences
in the percentages going sick in each succeeding operational experience class
are not significant although the general trend is consistent with the indications
of weight loss and psychological disorder incidence. From this it may be
inferred, though the evidence is admittedly limited, that the index provided
by the amount of sickness is less sensitive and thus less useful than either of the
other two, particularly as the collection of data is no less difficult than in
the weight project.
(c) Psychological disorder index. —The third possible measure of the effects
of stress provided by medical data is the index of the relative liability to
breakdown at various parts of the tour. It has been shown that the indications
given by this index are valid in that they are consistent with the other medical
criteria, and reliable in that they are comparable when repeated twice within
the same command under similar circumstances, while the size of the variation
suggests sensitivity. Its use in practice depends on the availability of a record
system of cases of psychological disorder for all commands and a means of
sampling the proportions of the total air crew population at risk in the various
classes of operational experience. The record system is already in operation
at the Air Crew Research Detachment of Central Medical Establishment, while
the practice of recording the number of sorties already performed by the
captain on the punch card version of the Raid Report may be extended beyond
Bomber Command. Since the experience of captain and crew are inevitably
very highly correlated, the distribution of the captains in the various experienced
classes will give an accurate measure of the total numbers exposed to the risk
of breakdown at any time, e.g. on a series of large raids. Given tho ready
availability of such information the use of this index in the detection of the
effects of undue operational strain will acquire the additional asset of
convenience.
4. Conclusions
( а ) There is a significant loss in average weight during the first third of an
operational tour in Bomber Command. There is no further significant decrease
but to the end of the tour, the average remains below the initial level.
(б) This loss cannot be explained by selective elimination in action on
grounds of height or age.
(c) The suggestion that this weight loss is specifically due to the anxiety
associated with operational stress is supported by the steady mean weight of
air crew during the pre-operational flying training.
(d) There is a suggestive but not significant rise in the proportion in
successive classes of operational experience of men reporting sick, coincident
with the drop in mean weight in the first part of the tour.
( e ) There is also a significant increase in the relative liability to psycho-
logical disorder during the same period of adaptation to stress.
(76642) 12


(/) The three measures are consistent in their indications of fluctuations
of health during the first part of the tour. Their stability in the latter part of
the tour suggests that the present tour limit of thirty sorties in bomber opera-
tions ensures removal from operational duties while the average man is still
maintaining a steady level of physical and mental health as measured by these
criteria, although individual cases will still require special consideration.
(g) The average weight finding is important in providing a baseline against
which larger deviations may be measured. Such deviations may prove of
value in the early diagnosis of anxiety states.
5. Summary
(1) Three possible techniques using medical data for the assessment of
the optimum limit for an operational tour have been studied.
(i) Comparison between the average weight in groups of flying
personnel in different classes of operational experience from 0 to 30
sorties.
(ii) Comparison between the proportion of men in those classes of
varying operational experience attending sick parade during a
period of one month.
(iii) Comparison of the relative liability to psychological disorder at the
various stages of the tour.
(2) The results of these comparisons suggest—
, (i) That there is a definite loss in weight, which is probably a specific
physical effect of operational strain, during the first part of the tour.
(ii) That there is a slight but not significant increase in the proportion
of men reporting sick in the classes of men still in the first third
of their tour, i.e. coincident with the loss in weight.
(iii) There is a considerable increase in the relative liability to psycho-
logical disorder during the first part of the tour.
fiv) After this initial period of adaptation, the levels of these there
indicators remain fairly stable throughout the remainder of the tour.
(3) From these observations it is deduced that—
(i) The first tour in Bomber Command under the conditions existing at
the time of this investigation is on the whole no longer than can
be performed without any proof of continuing deterioration in
health by the measures used.
(ii) Weight loss in individual cases referred for medical opinion can be
compared with the average weight loss as found in this study,
and can be used in ascertaining the reliability of weight loss as
an early sign of anxiety states.
Acknowledgments
I am indebted to Air Vice Marshal Sir Charles P. Symonds and Professor
A. Bradford Hill for their advice on the treatment and interpretation of the
results. I am also grateful to Wing Commander G. 0. Williams for his
collaboration in the sickness study, and to Dr. G. M. Morant for help with the
anthropometric data.


TABLE IX
Mean weights of operational flying personnel
Sorties
Pilots
Navigators
B/Aimers
W / Operators
F/Engineers
M/U Gunners
R/Gunners
No.
Mean
No.
Mean
No.
Mean
No.
Mean
No.
Mean
No.
Mean
No.
Mean
0
1- 4
5- 8
9-12
13-18
19-30
31t
103
216
204
175
207
236
21
157-04
157-
156-38
156-
158-
157-
153-71
159
234
203
164
199
235
26
156-17
156-80
155-99
154-
155-
154-07
151-64
148
231
197
163
201
230
17
157-
154-
155-
154-
155-
155-63
158-
140
241
188
161
199
230
17
152-72
151-04
148-
149-
150-
150-80
148-46
168
235
197
160
194
225
25
153-44
149-36
149-
147-92
150-
150-65
156-32
147
223
188
173
184
201
16
154-04
150-
151-
151-61
150-62
149-57
148-64
167
233
193
168
193
220
21
151-58
150-
151-
152-
148-34
150-80
150-26
Totals
1,162
157-22
1,220
155-39
/
1,187
155-39
1,176
150-35
1,204
150-32
1,132
151-07
1,195
150-71
TABLE X
Mean heights of operational flying personnel
Sorties
Pilots
Navigators
B/Aimers
W/Operators
Engineers
M/U Gunners
R/Gunners
No.
Mean
No.
Mean
No.
Mean
No.
Mean
No.
Mean
No.
Mean
No.
Mean
0
1- 4
5- 8
9-12
13-18
19-30
31f
100
214
200
171
204
233
17
69-76
69-67
69-67
69-77
69-61
69-66
68-59
156
236
203
162
198
230
23
69-27
69-35
69-37
69-26
69-41
69-20
68-83
148
231
195
163
197
229
17
68-90
68-
69-
68-88
69-27
69-04
68-88
138
241
188
158
200
228
17
68-57
68-32
68-22
68-23
68-13
68-26
68-76
167
233
195
159
191
225
25
68-38
68-13
68-15
68-13
68-43
68-29
68-84
147
222
187
171
184
198
16
68-52
68-41
68-51
68-32
68-25
68-28
68-44
166
233
191
168
192
218
21
68-37
68-34
68-09
68-29
68-20
68-44
68-48
Totals
1,139
69-66
1,208
69-30
1,180
69-02
1,170
68-28
1,195
68-26
1,125
68-38
1,189
68-30
(76642)


TABLE XI
Mean ages of operational flying personnel
Sorties
Pilots
Navigators
B/Aimers
W/Operators
F/Engineers
M/U Gunners
R/Gunners
No.
Mean
No.
Mean
No.
Mean
No.
Mean
No.
Mean
No.
Mean
No.
Mean
o
102
26-59
159
25-01
147
24-66
140
23-37
168
23-86
. 148
24-03
167
23-06
I- 4
214
24-96
235
25-80
231
24-59
240
23-58
235
23-96
222
23-52
232
23-63
5- 8
205
24-34
203
25-03
197
24-61
188
23-59
197
22-75
188
23-56
193
23-53
9-12
174
24-71
164
24-68
163
24-50
161
23-51
160
23-44
173
23-31
168
13-18
207
24-46
199
24-86
202
24-90
199
23-60
194
23-07
184
23-40
193
23-83
19 30
236
24-26
235
25-41
230
24-48
230
23-63
225
23-25
201
23-57
220
24-04
31|
22
26-23
26
26-08
17
26-15
17
24-15
25
26-26
16
25-94
21
25-40
Totals
1.160
24-57
1,221
25-20
1,187
24-65
1,175
23-99
1,204
23-27
1,132
23-56
1,194
23-52
TABLE XII
Standard deviations of heights and weights of operational flying personnel
Weight ' Height
Sorties
Pilot
Nav.
B/Aimer
W/Ops.
F/Eng.
M/Gnr.
R/Gnr.
Pilot
Nav.
B/Aimer
W/Op.
F/Eng.
M/Gnr.
R/Gnr.
0
1- 4
5- 8
9-12
13-18
19-30
14-
16-22
15-
14-
15-
15-45
15-
16-
18-33
14-
15-
17-
15-
16-
15-
16-
15-
16-
14-07
14-78
14-
15-
14-
15-
15-14
15-09
14-
15-
15-45
15-26
16-22
13-29
15-10
15-13
13-
14-
14-
15-
14-31
14-
15-
14-12
2-28
2-10
2-26
1-
2-
2-39
2-37
2-44
2-80
2-12
2-31
2-59
1-
2-
2-26
2-60
2-26
2-52
2-27
2-32
2-14
2-49
2-30
2-13
2-73
2-53
2-45
2-55
2-45
2-58
2-33
2-39
2-40
2-32
2-32
2-15
2-14
2-40
2-05
2-23
2-41
2-31
Note. The small discrepancies in numbers of subjects in Tables IX f X, XX are due to non-completion of the self-coding form in respect of the
measurement concerned. The standard deviations in Table D are based upon the same numbers as in Tables IX and X.


CHAPTER XX
EPISODES OF UNCONSCIOUSNESS CONFUSION, AND AMNESIA
WHILE FLYING
by
Wing Commander Denis J. Williams, D.Sc., M.D., F.R.C.P.
FPRC Report 562, November, 1943
Introduction
There has been a natural tendency to attribute impairment of consciousness
in the air to the special physical conditions of wartime flying. Many cases
have consequently been referred to the R.A.F. Institute of Aviation Medicine,
Farnborough, but as a rule the investigations there have given negative results
and reconstruction of the physical conditions have failed to reproduce the
symptoms described by the patient. The effects of altitude, especially anoxia,
and of centrifugal acceleration -have been explored but more often than not
the subjects’ responses have been perfectly normal. The patients have then
been referred to the clinical specialists, but again many have remained
undiagnosed, when no physical cause has been found. This is disquieting, for
periods of impaired consciousness, confusion, or amnesia while flying are by
no means uncommon and their results may be catastrophic.
It seems that the difficulty in diagnosis rests mainly on four curcuma
stances
{a) The syndromes are obscure and do not fit into a clear-cut clinical
picture.
(6) There are often no witnesses and what evidence is available is
circumstantial.
(c) Since the man who has lost consciousness is usually removed from
flying, the exact aetiological diagnosis does not affect the practical
issue of the disposal.
[d) Attention has too often been directed to special conditions and to
special investigations, and away from a consideration of the whole
patient in relation to his total physical and psychological environ-
ment.
It is the purpose of this report to examine the last cause in some detail and
to consider all the factors responsible for impairment of consciousness in a
consecutive group of patients.
1. Material and method
When known environmental causes such as anoxia, carbon monoxide or
increased ‘ g ’ had not operated, and special investigations had given negative
results there often seemed so little evidence upon the cause of the urisconscious-
ness that such generic titles as syncope of unknown origin or observation
unconsciousness were accepted. In a few of these cases, where other methods
had failed* the electro-encephalogram had helped in establishing the diagnosis
when the attack resulted from epilepsy, so Air Ministry instructions were
issued to all commands in July, 1942 that “ in the case of a pilot or other member
of aircrew who has an attack of faintness or disturbance of consciousness in the
air, as evidenced by his own description of the attack, the account of witnesses, or
(76642) , I <


the unexplained loss of height, the station medical officer concerned should arrange
an appointment for the individual to have an electro-encephalogram before any
other executive action was taken." This presented an ideal opportunity for
studying in detail a large and unselected series of cases of impairment of
consciousness while flying.
This report is based on the examination of 100 consecutive cases of flying
personnel who had an episode of unconsciousness, confusion, or amnesia while
flying. The patients were referred by the unit medical officer shortly after the
attack in the air had been brought to his notice. This usually preceded any other
investigations. The subjects were consequently drawn from all stages of
training, all duties, and had all degrees of experience of operations, in fact,
they were quite unselected. A third were commissioned, 9 per cent were
instructors or staff pilots, 15 per cent were under training, and 76 per cent
were from squadrons. Each patient was interviewed and examined by me
within a few days of the impairment of consciousness. The interview followed
the usual clinical psychiatric lines and included a complete physical examination.
The patient was investigated by electro-encephalography, further information
was sought from his station when necessary, and where possible witnesses’
accounts and executive reports were obtained. In some cases the investigations
included high altitude testing with anoxia-meter readings, blood-gas estimations
and clinical observation and in many other instances the patient was subjected
to a decompression test at his station. After the interview the patients were
referred to No. 1 Central Medical Board and the results of subsequent
examination scrutinised.
The patients are divided according to diagnosis; the symptom pattern,
"diagnostic features and aetiological factors of each of the diagnostic groups are
discussed. Short notes of cases illustrating the groups are contained on
pages 275-281, only the most brief account appearing in the text.
2. Results
The 100 cases are divided according to diagnosis in Table I. It will be
seen that this division is made entirely upon an aetiological basis, and Table II
shows that in 10 cases two mechanisms were recognised. It will be shown
later than in other cases such a dual mechanism may have been present but
not recognised. The most profitable way in which to divide states of impaired
consciousness or of amnesia is upon the basis of causation, for the most
significant clinical features of the syndromes are negative ones—the absence
of consciousness, the absence of awareness, or the absence of recall—so that
conditions of very different origin may simulate each other closely. For
instance, it may be quite impossible upon the evidence available to distinguish
between a fugue state caused by epilepsy and one caused psychologically;
and states of unconsciousness or confusion caused by anoxia, epilepsy, or even
a head injury may at the time be indistinguishable. Knowledge of the difficulties
of diagnosis in this particular field make it evident that all these diagnoses
are not necessarily correct, and indeed in 12 of the 100 cases an absolute
diagnosis was not made, for nine were considered to be probably epileptic and
three to be probably due to cardiovascular instability, although evidence was
not sufficiently strong to make a diagnosis certain. In the 23 cases in which
an absolute diagnosis of epilepsy was made, the evidence was strong and was
in most instances supported by a past history of fits or by a witness’s account
of the attack.
In the group of 55 patients with neuroses the diagnosis was in each case
reasonably certain, for, as all the cases were seen within a few days of the
attack, recovery had not taken place and symptoms of the disorder were still


TABLE I
Aetiological classification
Diagnoses
No. of cases
Psychogenic :
Fear or anxiety state
Panic state .. . . . . -
Hysteria
Fatigue state ..
43
2
10
2
57
Epileptic :
Epilepsy (including symptomatic)
Probable epilepsy
23
9
32
Oxygen lack :
Oxygen lack (true)
Oxygen lack (susceptibility) ..
4
4
8
Cardiovascular :
Cardiovascular
Probable cardiovascular
Blackout at low ‘ g ’
Severe pain (barotrauma)
1
3
3
2
9
Vertigo of aural origin ..
Carbon monoxide poisoning
3
1
Total cases
110*
present. Although the psychiatric diagnosis could therefore be made with
some confidence, it should not be inferred that the neurosis was necessarily
the direct cause of the impairment in consciousness. This point will be dealt
with later and indeed it forms the nucleus of the report. Conversely, although
in 57 per cent a psychological disorder was discovered it may well be that in
other cases a mild neurosis was present but was not discovered during the
single interview. '
In the subjects of anoxia due to mechanical failure and of carbon monoxide
poisoning, technical reports supported the diagnosis.
Table I shows that the most common single disorder related to the
impairment of consciousness or of memory was a psychological one, since this
was recognised as causal in 57 cases. It is important to observe that in only
10 instances was the explanation to be found in a period of hysterical amnesia,
for the nature and causes of the disturbance in the other cases of this group of
psychological disorders provide the main problem for discussion. As it will
be shown that in many of these cases there are several contributory causes
resulting in a complex aetiological picture, it will be best to consider the groups
of cases with more simple causation first. In this way a foundation will be
laid for the discussion of the larger and most important group, since some of
the single factors arising in the smaller groups will also be found to be operative
in a more complex manner in the cases with psychological disorder.
• 10 of these were mixed


TABLE II
Mixed syndromes
Fear or anxiety states witfi epilepsy ..
8
Fatigue states with vasomotor instability
2
Total
10
Fear or anxiety states with hyper-ventilation
15
3. Epilepsy
It is more difficult to diagnose epilepsy in the Services than in civilian
practice since reliable witnesses’ accounts are often absent and relatives cannot
be interrogated. The difficulties of witnessing an attack in the air are obvious.
Nevertheless, the diagnosis was made confidently in a quarter of all the cases,
and tentatively in another 9, bringing the number in which epilepsy was
present or suspected to a third of the total.
Although the diagnosis of epilepsy in general need not be discussed, there
are some guiding signs which can be used in diagnosing epilepsy in the air,
in addition to the accepted criteria of the pattern of the attack, such as its
sudden onset, incontinence, tongue biting and so on, which are worth mention.
First, there has often been more than one attack, the earlier ones which were
perhaps less serious being concealed by the patient. Secondly, they often
appear in a man who is well adjusted to his job in whom no extraneous
psychological, physical or mechanical cause can be found. Thirdly, they tend
to have catastrophic results and the man only survives by sheer good fortune
since he is quite unable to control the time of onset of the attack. Fourthly,
they are not necessarily related to high altitude flying but are the most common
cause of unconsciousness in the air in men under training. Fifthly, the electro-
encephalogram (E.E.G.) will support the diagnosis in nearly half of the cases.
Epilepsy is the cause of unconsciousness in an alarmingly high proportion
of cases, considering the efforts which are made by medical selection boards to
reject the epileptic. As several cases of loss of consciousness in the air have
been seen each week, the impression has been gained that the incidence of fits
in the air is unexpectedly high. Applying statistics derived from the total
population one would not expect more than one epileptic in about 500 healthy
aircrew, since the incidence of epilepsy in an unselected population is about
1 in 200 (Lennox, 1941). All things being equal, most would have their fits
on the ground, since the relative time in the air is very short, and the attacks
which lead to a catastrophic end would not come to the notice of the medical
branch. The ease with which 32 cases of fits in the air have been collected in a
few- months consequently suggests the operation of some special precipitating
factors. This view is supported by the observation that the cases of epilepsy
fall into two groups : first, those with a previous history of attacks, and second
those who through special conditions encountered in their duty have their first
attack while flying. The special precipitating factors in the second group may
be physical ones such as the conditions found at high altitude, or psychological,
as in the case of men who are acutely afraid. ( There may well be no previous
history of epilepsy in these patients, for a special sequence of events was
required to produce the fit they had. A single fit may occur in normal men
on ground duties as a result of special circumstances arising in war, for examples
are seen in the apparently normal men who have a convulsion after fatigue and
prolonged hunger.' This is particularly common in infantry duties and is seen
in men who remain awake for 36 hours with night guard duty.


The circumstances in which the attack occurs in the air depend upon the
duties of the man and his place in the crew and the sequels are quite different
in single and multi-engined aircraft. In single seaters a period of unconscious-
ness usually results in an unexplained loss of height (Case 7 of the Appendix),
or in an unexplained crash and in these the only kind of attack compatible
with survival is petit mal or any other short-lived attack. As a quarter of
those who survive a period of unconsciousness iii the air have had an
epileptic fit, one may reflect upon the number of unexplained crashes which
may have been Hue to an epileptic attack which lasted too long. In multi-
engined aircraft, the attention of the crew may be drawn to the pilot by the
unusual behaviour of the aircraft, and a common story is that of the bomb
aimer or navigator having to take over the controls, often pulling the pilot
away from the control column over which he had slumped. Other members
of the crew are less likely to be observed in the attack itself and they are usually
found unconscious after failing to reply over the intercomm. A typical short
attack in a fighter pilot was seen in Case 7.
Case 7 : Brief epileptic attacks in a fighter pilot (page 275). Four brief periods of
interruption in consciousness occurred at heights from 300 to 11,000 feet with and
without oxygen in an apparently healthy, well-adjusted man in whom there were
no previous symptoms. There was no warning in the last three and there were no
sequelae, the patient merely being aware of an interruption in the stream of con-
sciousness. The E.E.G. suggested epilepsy. This case illustrates many of the
diagnostic points in relation to epilepsy in fighters. In contrast is Case 88 (page 285).
Case 88: Epileptic attacks in an air gunner (page 281). Two epileptic attacks
occurred with and without oxygen in the air, in an unstable man who had had
petit mal attacks for 18 months. His mother had similar attacks, and his E.E.G.
was characteristic of epilepsy. The man’s disability came to notice through his
failure to reply over the intercomm.
These two cases are examples of epileptic attacks occurring without obvious
cause in predisposed persons, in whom the E.E.G. showed a dysrhythmia. The second
group of patients, those who have a fit as a result of special conditions encountered
in their duty, will now be considered.
No case of a fit occurring as a direct result of the physical effects of high altitude,
anoxia, or ‘ g ’ has been encountered, although the possibility is discussed in relation
to a case of anoxia on page 275, but in several emotion appeared to have been the pre-
cipitating factor.
4. Epilepsy caused by fear
Fear may give rise to epileptic attacks in two ways:
(a) Directly, by producing so-called reflex epilepsy. Examples of this sort
of specific trigger are not uncommon in civilian practice where cases occur in
which fits only follow immersion of the left foot in cold water, cutting the
hand, hearing organ music, or experiencing an uncontrolled outburst of anger,
and Case 23 may be an example of this. In his book on Fear, published in
1884, Mosso clearly describes a case of a boy in whom epileptic fits were
precipitated by emotion.
Case 23 : (page 276) is that of an air gunner who had a fit at 15,000 feet on his first
operational sortie. It was an unusually hazardous trip, and he had been at 15,000
feet many times before.' It was thought that an acute fear state had culminated in
a fit in a person whose E.E.G. suggested that he was predisposed to epilepsy.
{b) Indirectly, by producing secondary physical changes. It is suggested
that in war time flying this occurs when fear, usually superimposed upon an
anxiety state, causes hyper-ventilation which results in a profound fall in the
alveolar and blood carbon dioxide content. The aetiology and symptomatology
of this state is dealt with on pp. 270-271 where fear and anxiety states are
discussed, but Hinshaw and his co-workers (1941) have described the hyper-
ventilation syndrome in civil aviators. It is a commonplace that in the epileptic


subject a fall in blood carbon dioxide is an effective cause of epileptic attacks and
indeed a period of quiet overbreathing is used as a routine to produce larval
epileptic outbursts in patients suspected of having epilepsy during investigation
by the E.E.G. The unconscious overbreathing associated with prolonged fear
which will be dealt with later might be expected to maintain a more sustained
and severe fall in carbon dioxide than the voluntary short periods Of over-
breathing used in the laboratory. This mechanism for the production of a fit
was encountered in several cases in the present series, and Case 66 is a striking
example of it, making further description unnecessary.
Case 66: Fear causing an epileptic fit (pp. 278-279). An air gunner had had fits
between the ages of 12 to 17 preceded by praecordial pain and precipitated by
fear-provoking stimuli. There was a maternal history of epilepsy. He had two
similar attacks in the air immediately after experiencing fear which was associated
with the usual somatic accompaniments of dry mouth, sweating and respiratory
changes. He also had air hunger. On the second occasion, at 13,000 feet, on a raid
on Kiel, he was seen in a convulsion. The syndrome was reproduced at the equivalent
of 15,000 feet on oxygen in a chamber, when there was spontaneous unconscious
hyper-ventilation, reaching 100 a minute, associated with greatly increased ventila-
tion rate and low blood carbon dioxide. It is suggested that an epileptic fit was
produced in a susceptible person by acapnia resulting from hyper-ventilation, which
accompanied an acute fear state over enemy territory.
Besides idiopathic epilepsy and epilepsy resulting as a direct or indirect
effect of emotion, the usual physical causes of epilepsy must be remembered.
A dramatic example of this occurred in the following case.
Case 6 : Symptomatic epilepsy simulating panic in an air gunner. —ln a Stirling at
12,000 feet over enemy territory the rear gunner reported flak and searchlights in
great concentration to starboard. Evasive action was taken, but this observation
was not confirmed. He reported it again and then did not answer over the inter-
comm, which was switched on and transmitted stertorous breath sounds. The
W.Os./A.G. went back to find the rear gunner apparently unconscious. He recovered
on the rest couch after 20 minutes. On landing at base, weakness of the right side
which was found, but which rapidly disappeared, was thought to be hysterical
and the whole episode attributed to panic. He had, in fact, a left temporo-occipital
lesion (which on electro-encephalography produced an area of abnormal high voltage
slow waves over the left posterior temporal region) the first sign of which was a
fit with a visual aura of bright lights in the right homonymous field, which was
followed by a right-sided post epileptic paralysis. The nature of the lesion has not
been determined as the patient refused full investigation. It is probably a tumour.
It has been said that epileptic attacks while flying may occur as a result
of specific factors. The commonest of these has been found to be a psychological
disorder resulting from fear. This subject is discussed later in relation to
anxiety states and fear states.
5. Cardiovascular instability
(a) Fainting of cardiovascular origin
Vaso-vagal attacks, or periods of unconsciousness of cardiovascular origin,
rarely occur in the sitting position and in only one case in this series of 100
did it seem likely that this had occurred in the absence of rapid changes in
gravity.
Case 67 : Impairment of consciousness of cardiovascular origin (page 279). —A pilot
with poor cardiovascular regulation who became liable to faint in stuffy rooms and
on change of posture, had faint feelings without actual loss of consciousness while
flying. The attacks ceased when his general health improved. From the character
of the attacks, his physical signs, and his improvement with treatment, they were
thought to be cardiovascular in origin.
(b) Blacking-out at low ‘ g ’
Although loss of consciousness from simple cardiovascular causes while
in the air has not been encountered, there is a very interesting group of cases
in which vasomotor efficiency is lowered as a result of a fatigue state, and in


which the inefficiency becomes evident as a diminished tolerance to 'g’. The
association of cardiovascular instability with neurosis is well recognised. It
is responsible for the flushing and fainting of the subjects of anxiety states and
fatigue states, ■ and the postural vertigo and fainting of the patient with a
post-traumatic cerebral state may well have a similar cardiovascular origin.
This investigation shows that it may be a very early sign of the disorder, for
it may be elicited by alterations in ‘g’ while flying.- It seems that in these
states on the ground, the vasomotor system fails to adjust efficiently to a
sudden change of posture, the vertigo and faintness being produced by cerebral
anaemia resulting from a diminished cardiac output. Centrifugal acceleration
will produce exactly the same train of events in a cardiovascular system which
is efficient enough to respond satisfactorily to postural changes. The cardio-
vascular instability consequently causes a gradual lowering of the threshold
to 'g’, in the earlier stages, but as the condition progresses there is ultimately
fainting without any change of gravity. The lowering of the threshold is
associated with other symptoms of an anxiety or fatigue state. The whole
syndrome is well illustrated in the following case.
Case 100 : (page 281.) —An excellent officer developed a fatigue state, leading to
anxiety, as a result of exhaustion caused by a long period of flying instruction. As
the neurosis developed, his tolerance for ‘g’ gradually diminished until he blacked out,
and became unconscious with a slight change in centrifugal acceleration. He then
fainted for the first time in response to pain. He showed the syndrome of deteriora-
tion in cardiovascular control associated with a fatigue state, caused by exhaustion.
6. Fainting through pain (barotrauma)
There were two instances of men who had unbearable pain in the ears
during a rapid dive which led to a short period of unconsciousness. In neither
was there any evidence of neurosis, predisposition to neurosis or of a family
or personal history of epilepsy. The exact mechanism of the production of
unconsciousness is unknown, but it seems likely that a cardiovascular response
to the aural pain was responsible for a great fall in blood pressure. A cardiac
depressor response of this sort is recognised to occur in external stimulation
of sensory cranial nerves. Case 48 is an example (page 277) of a solitary
faint at the height of aural pain due to diving at speed in a man with blocked
Eustachian tuber. Bradycardia has been observed during the attack in one
of these cases, which consequently come under the same heading as the others
in this section.
7. Aural vertigo
Impairment of consciousness, usually not amounting to anything more
than confusion, may sometimes complicate a severe attack of aural vertigo.
Even true unconsciousness may occur at the height of an attack, but a period
of confusion during which the subject is unable to appreciate his environment
or to control his actions is not uncommon. In usual circumstances this slight
confusion may pass unnoticed, particularly if the patient is sitting or lying
unoccupied. In such an exacting task as that of a pilot the period of confusion
interrupts a succession of skilled movements, and so becomes evident. Two
examples were found in the present series. In both there was a previous
history of attacks of vertigo on the ground, and in the attacks in the air there
was vertigo, rotation of objects and nausea before the confused period, and in
both there was evidence of aural abnormality. The diagnosis of the condition,
which is not related to altitude; is usually simple since the pattern of the
attacks is so characteristic ; Case 69, in which confusion complicated vertigo
(page 279) is an example of this. It was that of a pilot who had had
similar attacks on the ground and who had stereotyped and brief attacks of
vertigo and confusion while flying. He had slight middle ear deafness on


both sides. He nearly flew his aircraft into the ground in one of the attacks.
The third example of vertigo (Table I) was that of a Spitfire pilot who had
his only attack, the pattern of which was similar to that described in the case
above, when bending down quickly in his cockpit to adjust his compass.
8. Oxygen lack
This chapter, of course, only deals with men who have survived a period of
unconsciousness in the air, and true oxygen lack appears to be uncommon in
these men under the conditions which exist in the R.A.F. at present, but it
might be well to observe that during the same period of time fatal examples
have occurred. On the other hand, many of the patients blame the oxygen
supply for their period of unconsciousness, but in most cases technical investi-
gation at the time and afterwards fails to show any defect, and the medical
evidence fails to support the patient’s contention. This is not always
conclusive, for freezing of masks must be considered and transitory anoxia
may leave no sequelae.
Of the four cases with oxygen lack, unconsciousness had occurred at over
35.000 feet in two, at 32,000 feet in one, and at 26,500 feet with exercise in
the fourth. The first three were in fighters, and they gave a typical story of
gradually increasing confusion and disorientation leading to unconsciousness,
with recovery in a rapid dive at under 10,000 feet. The fourth, Case 99, was
a flight engineer working at 26,000 feet on a portable oxygen bottle which
proved empty. He was found very cyanosed, and did not recover consciousness
for 50 minutes after going on to oxygen. There was stertorous breathing
during this time, he was twitching after recovery, and was confused and
amnesic for eight hours afterwards. Two hours after the anoxia, while still
confused and disorientated, full examination of the central nervous system
showed no abnormal physical signs. Subsequent decompression testing at
30.000 feet with and without oxygen showed normal responses. It may be that
this N.C.O. had a convulsion while anoxic, but the long period of uncon-
sciousness and of subsequent confusion and amnesia with rapid recovery has
been seen in several cases of uncomplicated anoxia. In one, where the anoxia
was profound and prolonged, amnesia lasted for three days and included a
period of retrograde amnesia. There was subsequent intellectual and memory
defect with a personality change indistinguishable from that seen after a head
injury. Recovery was, however, rapid and complete.
9. Susceptibility to oxygen lack
In three instances unconsciousness occurred and seemed, on strong circum-
stantial evidence, to have been due to oxygen lack, but in each case unconscious-
ness seemed to have supervened at inadequate height, i.e. 12,000, 13,000,
16.000 and 19,000 feet. In each of these instances another contributory factor
may have been operative, but it is certain that at the heights quoted the patients
were receiving no oxygen through their masks. Particularly in the first two
instances, where the subjects were air gunners, cold may have contributed.
A precis of the significant points in each history (Cases 2, 58 and 62) is on pages
275 and 277.' The four men were all found with impaired consciousness and with
inadequate oxygen, at comparatively low altitude. In the first, no explanation
can be offered. In the second, there had been great failure as well as anoxia
and a high blood pressure. In the third, there was anoxia with hyper-ventilation
and probably anxiety, and in the fourth there was anoxia with an innate
vulnerability to low oxygen tension. The E.E.G. was normal in.all and there
wa.s no history of previous faints or fits in any. Since this was written other
cases of unconsciousness associated with failure of the oxygen supply at


15,000 feet or less have come to notice. They occurred in conditions of cold in
Flying Fortresses. It may well be therefore that the critical height for
unconsciousness due to anoxia is lower in some subjects than is usually held.
It is explained on page 270 that some of the 43 cases of unconsciousness
associated with acute fear or anoxia were associated with hyper-ventilation, and
that this can cause a fall in inspired oxygen if an economiser is used, while
a diminution in the power of dissociation of oxyhaemoglobin due to the lowered
blood carbon dioxide content, which may be profound, lowers the tissue oxygen
tension still further. Added to this there appears to be in some unusual instances,
as in Case 2, an unexplained vulnerability to low oxygen tension. The four
cases which have been described were examples of anoxia through instrumental
causes, but it may well be that some of the other cases in which fear or anxiety
was the prominent feature may have lost consciousness as a result of anoxia.
10. Psychological disorders
Subjects with neurosis comprise the largest and most difficult group of
cases and it will be shown that in these there is evidence that the episode of
disturbed consciousness was psychologically determined. The only psychogenic
disorder of consciousness that comes to notice in civil practice is hysterical
amnesia, but only ten of this series of cases fall under this heading. Sargant
and Slater (1941) in discussing the amnesic syndromes in war, divided the
psychogenic periods of amnesia into fugue states and simple amnesic gaps.
The first are crude forms of escape from the present, adopted by obnormal
personalities, while the second disorder ‘is a simple protective mechanism by
which the continued recollection and presence in consciousness of painful
events is avoided.’ Although cases are hysterical in so far as they offer a
solution to the'patients’ problems, the first more often approaches malingering,
if the distinction between the two can indeed be made with certainty. Although
practically all of Sargant and Slater’s cases fell into these two groups this was
not so in the present series, for evidences of an hysterical aetiology were absent
in most of the cases. Other mechanisms must therefore have been operating
and it has been shown earlier that epileptic fits may occur as a result of fear,
either directly or as the secondary result of other changes, notably emotional
overbreathing. It is also possible that impairment of consciousness
unassociated with epilepsy may be produced in the air as a result of the visceral
changes resulting from fear while flying, and these mechanisms will be discussed
further.
Although, different reaction types have been recognised (see Table I) it
must be realised that they did not necessarily appear in pure forms, and it is
certain that all the instances of hysteria occurred in the subjects of fear or
anxiety states.
(a) Anxiety states
This is by far the largest single sub-group of cases (43 per cent) and is the
most interesting. In these and in the 10 per cent with hysteria the main
precipitating cause of the illness was fear (see pages 164-166). In this group of
cases the disorder was usually of recent onset and rapid progression, and in
many an acute fear state (Sargant and Slater 1940, Love 1941, and Cooper and
Sinclair 1942) was superimposed. Most of the patients were very much afraid,
and their fear was most intense while in the air. Either the fear itself or the
conflict which arose between their intense fear and their accepted standard of
behaviour appears to have been the precipitating factor in causing the psycho-
logical disorder in most cases. Symonds (1943) has already dealt at length
with the subject of the place of fear in causing anxiety states in air crews and


other combatants, so that the psychological mechanisms involved will not be
discussed further. Cases 39 and 64 (pages 276 and 278) are simple examples
of the normal relationship of this fear and the ensuing anxiety state to a
period of unconsciousness or amnesia.
Case 39 was an example of unconsciousness caused by fear in a timid air gunner
(Appendix). A timid, unstable, anxious man, both of whose parents were nervous
and equally unstable, volunteered for aircrew. Great fear was experienced on the
first two operational trips, and an acute anxiety state developed. He tried to escape
from the third trip by reporting sick, but being sent on it, an acute fear state devel-
oped within an hour of taking off. He was seen to be sweating and overbreathing
and has amnesia for the next 45 minutes. There is not enough evidence available
to determine his state of consciousness or the intermediate mechanisms initiated by
fear which produced it.
On careful questioning it became quite apparent that not only had many
of the patients in this group been intensely afraid before they became
unconscious, but that some of them had in fact been found deeply unconscious.
Some, like those referred to later, were merely confused or amnesic, but many
of these are excluded from the group of anxiety states, since those subjects
who had had a behaviour change or amnesic period as a direct result of
psychological factors, and in whom the mechanism appeared to be an escape
from their fearful environment, were grouped under the heading of hysteria.
In many of these an anxiety state was also present and in all a state of acute
fear had occurred. The circumstances in which unconsciousness occurred in
the first group of subjects was usually not dramatic, and frequently the man
was simply found unconscious, perhaps in his turret or at his table. The
commonest story was that no reply had been received on routine contact over
the intercomm., and that when another member of the crew had gone to
investigate, the patient was found slumped over his maps or guns, or was
lying in his bomb aimer’s position unconscious. Case 39 (page 276) is an
example of this. When the pilot was the subject the story was that he had
collapsed over the control column and the aircraft had gone out of control as
in Case 64 (page 278), an example of unconsciousness caused by fear in a timid
pilot. In this case an obsessional, intense pilot experienced severe stress in
his first few operational sorties. It is probable that much of this was caused
by pilot error, a result of his personal shortcomings. He developed an anxiety
state which culminated in an acute anxiety attack with two periods of amnesia.
From the patient’s story the amnesia was short lived and was probably very
superficial. The first was probably not hysterical but was a confusional state
resulting from the acute fear he was experiencing.
In these last two cases the patients simply appeared to have lost conscious-
ness, or to have been amnesic, but in eight cases clonic movements or a fully
organised fit was witnessed as in Case 66 (page 278).
The direct relationship of the incidence of these fear states or anxiety
states to the degree of danger encountered has been demonstrated on pages
168-170 and this relationship is shown in this series of cases by the fact that 75
per cent of the 57 men with psychological disorder were on operational trips at
the time of their attack, while 60 per cent were on night bombing sorties, which
have been shown to have the highest casualty and neurosis rate of all duties
(Chapters IV and X). When the syndrome occurred in men under training
it was usually associated with fear in a timid, anxious man, in circumstances
which would not ordinarily be expected to cause such a degree of fear, as in
Cases 15 and 42 (pages 275 and 277). It is characteristic that in these cases the
patients were pathologically timid individuals and that their response to their
easily evoked but intense fear was a period of hysterical amnesia (vide infra).


Case 14 was that of a pilot, aged 20, who had flown 4 hours under training. In each
of his first three trips flying dual in a Tiger Moth he had felt tense, apprehensive and
giddy, although he was simply flying straight and level. On the second trip the
instructor saw that the pupil had suddenly fallen over the controls apparently
unconscious, and he therefore made a hurried landing. He then found the pupil
conscious, trembling and sweating profusely. He helped him out of the aircraft
and noticed that he staggered as he walked away. The patient went up later, but
asked to be brought down again. He had always been timid and anxious, and had
had fainting attacks before. Full physical examination, including electro-encephalo-
graphy, was normal, and although he was referred with a diagnosis of “ vasovagal
attacks,” the Consultant in Medicine concluded that “ the cause is obviously fear.”
This man was pathologically timid and had an acute fear reaction each time he flew,
although he had an experienced and sympathetic instructor. In spite of the trivial
cause for his fear he appeared to have an attack of unconsciousness. This may have
really been loss of consciousness, but it is more probable, as he recovered on landing,
that it was a period of transient confusion.
Other forms of pathological fear may similarly cause impairment of
consciousness, as in the case of an officer who had a specific, irrational fear (a
phobia) for altitude. He was in other respects an excellent pilot, but being
forced to fly at 20,000 feet he had an attack of unconsciousness, which he
attributed to anoxia, but which was apparently related to an anxiety state
which his phobia had caused.
(b) Acute fear states
It has already been stated that many of these 43 patients seemed to have
been genuinely unconscious, and that 8 are known to have been convulsed.
Considering the difficulties of observation, it may be that more than this number
had an epileptic fit. Those who had simple amnesic states were grouped under
hysteria or panic states. Coma is not an integral part of an anxiety attack upon
the ground however acute and intense the attack may be, although hysterical
attacks often complicate the picture of an anxiety state. Yet the evidence
seems to show that some of these subjects became unconscious in the face of
fear. Some of them might have been in a stuporose state as a result of their
fear and not have been in coma, but lack of expert observation makes the
differentiation very difficult. The acute fear states encountered in land fighting
in this war have been described by Sargant and Slater (1940) and others
already quoted. Fear gives rise to profound physical disturbances, resulting
from activity of the sympathetic nervous system in normal subjects, causing
incontinence, vomiting, tachycardia, sweating and marked changes in the
respiratory rate (Cannon 1915). Although these somatic accompaniments of
the emotion of fear may be severe and very distressing, they do not produce
unconsciousness, and it is difficult to see how they could. Even if a psycho-
pathological mechanism of escape were postulated there would be difficulty
in explaining unconsciousness of the depth seen, and with the physical accom-
paniments found in some of these cases, for there is a great gulf between
amnesia or stupor and true coma.
It is reasonable to wonder whether with hyperventilation a secondary
physical factor is also causal. Overbreathing is the most common change in
respiratory rhythm found in anxiety and fear states (Christie, 1935) and this
has long been recognised for a description of the respiratory increase of
frightened animals was made sixty years ago by Mosso (1884). Interest in
the subject has increased recently and many papers have been published (Fine-
singer, 1943). Rushmer, Boothby and Hinshaw (1941) and Uehlein and Boothby
(1942) have drawn attention to prolonged hyperventilation among pilots and
passengers during civil flying.
Having witnessed the respiratory changes in some of the patients of the
present series, Goldie (1943) has recorded the respiration of a pilot during an


TABLE III
Height in feet at which unconsciousness occurred (feet)
Height
Not
known
Less
than
1,000
1,000
to
10,000
10,000
to
15,000
15.000
to
20.000
Over
20,000
No. of cases ..
4
4
13
18
9
, 5
actual bombing sortie. Even though the subject had carried out over 30
sorties lor which he had been decorated, his respiration remained at an
abnormally high rate all the way from base to the target. After that it fell, and
reached a steady normal level after the French coast was passed. The hyper-
ventilation was thought to be emotional for the observer, on his first operational
trip, was recording his own respiration rate and found that it showed no corre-
sponding changes. Case 62 (page 277) is an example of fear resulting in
conscious hyperventilation, in which an air gunner, liable to fainting attacks,
was conscious of overbreathing and of fear before losing consciousness at
16,000 feet on oxygen. No persisting physical cause was found for this un-
consciousness. Deep breathing of this sort may be prolonged and may produce
tetany, paraesthesiae, confusion and faintness, and even a state of collapse.
Tetany occurred in Case 81 (page 280) and a hyperventilation syndrome
identical with that which had previously been experienced in the air was repro-
duced by overbreathing in Cases 72 (page 280) and 66 (page 278).
Case 81 : Fear with tetany (page 280). —This is the case of a pilot who had a specific
fear of night flying who developed tetany, presumably due to unconscious over-
breathing associated with fear, while instrument flying. His fear had given rise to
an anxiety state and the syndrome was reproduced by voluntary overbreathing.
Case 72: Hyperventilation syndrome without admitted fear (page 280). —Here an
apparently stable, well-adjusted Spitfire pilot was prone to develop a syndrome
which could be reproduced by hyperventilation. This only occurred on operations
while wearing a mask, and began 15 minutes after take-off, at low altitude. It was
always associated with conscious overbreathing. Although this airman denied fear,
it is likely that this overbreathing on operations was emotional in origin, and his
subsequent breakdown supports this view. He was a man in whom the somatic
accompaniments of emotion wore more evident than his awareness of it.
Sometimes the hyperventilation may be present as an early manifestation
of fear, when the man does not admit to incapacitating fear and when he
genuinely is not experiencing the emotion to an embarrassing degree. The
bodily symptoms of fear may be much more intense than the subject’s aware-
ness of fear, and the description of tachycardia, pilomotor activity and slight
visceral discomfort before a team game which has no real terrors is quite common.
This phenomenon is well illustrated by-the last case, in which there did not
appear to be more than the usual degree of fear, although the visceral response
was greater than average. Although hyperventilation of this sort is usually
unconscious, five of ten patients in whom there was evidence of overbreathing
were aware of its presence (Cases 62 and 72 (pages 277 and 280)). In the others
the over-breathing was noticed by witnesses or the syndrome was*reproduced by
voluntary hyperventilation (Cases 66 and 72 (pages 277 and 280)). It will be seen
later that there is some evidence that it took place unconsciously in others.
It was striking to find how many of the periods of unconsciousness associated
with fear had occurred at high altitude. The 53 cases were divided as in Table 111.


As already explained, it is difficult to imagine coma resulting as a direct
-result of emotion in the absence of epilepsy. Examples have been quoted of
cases in which fear has been associated with unconsciousness or with frank
convulsion. The story is that of a member of a crew using oxygen at some-
thing over 15,000 feet, very afraid, showing some symptoms of an anxiety state
and having evidences of vulnerability to neurosis in his past history, who
becomes unconscious for no demonstrable reason. When the subject over-
breathes as a result of his fear he lowers his blood carbondioxide content,
which causes a rise in the blood pH, and at the same time prevents full utilisa-
tion of the oxygen in the blood, by preventing dissociation of the oxygen from
the oxyhaemoglobin (shift of the oxygen dissociation curve of haemoglobin
to the left). This will lower the critical altitude at which the unconsciousness
might supervene through anoxia. These men will breathe oxygen set for
5,00() feet higher than their height, through an economiser. The economiser
supplies a fixed amount of oxygen per minute. If rapid shallow respiration
occurs the percentage of oxygen in the respirate may be lowered and as a result
significant anoxia can occur when hyperventilating in a circuit which includes
an economiser (Matthews 1943). The low carbondioxide further enhances the
tissue anoxia, and the activity associated with an acute fear state will increase
the consumption of tissue oxygen. Thus even when the subject is breathing
oxygen, unconsciousness due to tissue anoxia may occur above a critical
height—somewhere above 15,000 to 20,000 feet, which varies from subject to
subject. A case in which many of these factors were operative was number 74
(page 280), in which unconsciousness complicated a fear state at high altitude.
This case is an example of a severely predisposed man who developed an anxiety
state as a result of considerable stress. He had an attack of deep unconscious-
ness with urinary incontinence as a culmination of an acute fear state, while
breathing oxygen at 17,000 feet. It is impossible to state the exact nature of
the unconsciousness. The only positive evidence in favour of epilepsy was the
incontinence, but his bladder had been full for two hours and in these circum-
stances incontinence would occur with unconsciousness of any cause. There
was no evidence that the attack was hysterical and under narcosis during which
the patient co-operated well, the period of amnesia could not be penetrated.
There seems no doubt that the man was profoundly unconscious and not merely
amnesic.
It seems possible that while some patients have an epileptic fit as a result
of overbreathing, some become unconscious through anoxia at an unusually
low altitude —this usually applies particularly to those in the neighbourhood of
20,000 feet or over, but cases have been described earlier in which coma has
supervened at 15,000 feet. It seems apparent that it is impossible to divide
the psychological from the physical factors in these cases, and that the physical
factors are also intimately united to each other. For instance, the epileptic fit
depends as much upon an innate tendency to periodic unconsciousness as it
does upon external factors such as acapnia and anoxia, while the initial effect
of the emotion of fear upon the individual depends upon a host of variables.
Of these, the degree of the affect, the conflict it arouses, the subject’s predisposi-
tion to neurosis, the form that the neurosis may take, and the somatic changes
which accompany it all seem important. Finally the precipitating psychological
causes depend for their effect upon their time relation to the basic psychological
disorder and upon many physical accompaniments in the environment, such
as the height, temperature, degree of fatigue, or even time after the last meal
at which an acute fear state arises. It will be seen therefore that in the
assessment of this group of cases all the information derived from clinical
examinations, psychiatric interview, physiological investigation and executive
report must be co-ordinated. Careful examination of one aspect only will
almost certainly yield negative results.


(c) Feax with hysteria
A period of hysterical behaviour with amnesia while flying is more likely
to appear in relatively inexperienced members of aircrew. Half the present
cases of hysteria were under training at the time of the attack. In attributing
amnesia to hysteria not only must there be no adequate physical cause for the
amnesia, but there should be evidence of hysterical features in the patient’s
background and an adequate cause for the hysterical reaction; since by
definition hysteria is a “ condition in which mental and physical symptoms
not of organic origin are produced and maintained by motives never fully
conscious, directed at some real or fancied gain to be derived from such
symptoms.” (Medical Research Council War Memorandum No. 4 1941.)
Furthermore the amnesia in most cases should be readily recoverable under
hypnosis, although failure to recover the amnesic period does not preclude
hysteria. Lack of evidence makes diagnosis difficult but it is likely that in the
light of experience the diagnosis of hysteria in past cases of this sort could be
reviewed with advantage. The hysterical attack may occur at any height,
though it is often at relatively low altitudes, seven of the ten cases occurred in
pilots, and fear was present at the time of the attack in all the cases. An
undoubted example of the syndrome in a man under training is shown in
Case 15 (page 275) where an hysterical attack occurred in a timid pilot under
training. The simple hysterical reaction described in this man is analogous to
the cases of hysterical amnesia described among Army personnel by Sargant
and Slater (1941). In these men the stuporose or amnesic period was thought
to have arisen as a means of escape from the dangerous environment.
At the other end of the scale is the experienced pilot who has an attack of
hysterical amnesia on operations, in order to escape from the memory of an
unpleasant situation, often complicated by the knowledge that he cannot
stand up to his fear. -This mechanism seems to have operated in Case 42
(page 277).
(d) Fear with panic.
When a state of panic arises, in the air or on the ground, the subject is
likely to have amnesia for the episode. This may either be an hysterical amnesia
or loss of recall, which extends beyond the short period of panic, or it may be
an amnesia caused by loss of attention, for the man may be so totally preoccupied
with his panic that he does not register any of the changes in his environment,
so that he had nothing to remember except the indefinite confusion of the panic.
Whichever mechanism is in force a panic state may simulate other disorders,
particularly epilepsy, and it is often overlaid by hysteria. This was so in Case 17
(page 276) where there were repeated attacks caused by panic. In this case,
where a grossly unsuitable man had three attacks of pain on operational flights,
the amnesia for the attacks was probably based upon a failure of attention
resulting from the panic, but overlaying it was a very superficial desire to
forget the dishonourable episodes, leading to a shallow or perhaps simulated
amnesia.
11. Summary and conclusions
A hundred consecutive cases of flying personnel who have become
unconscious, confused or amnesic while flying have been investigated. They
were unselected and came from all kinds of duty, but three quarters of the
patients had the attack while on operations.
A neurosis was recognised in 57 per cent while epilepsy was recognised in
23 per cent and suspected in another 9 per cent (32 per cent in all). True
oxygen lack was the cause in only 4 per cent, and other causes were oxygen


lack with personal susceptibility (4 per cent), cardiovascular changes (4 per cent),
aural vertigo, blacking out at low 'g ’, barotrauma, and carbon monoxide
poisoning. In some cases the syndrome was a mixed one, a neurosis being
associated with epilepsy or cardiovascular instability.
By far the most common primary cause of impairment of consciousness in
the air was a neurosis, usually an anxiety state, and the most frequent cause of
this was fear. This gave rise to impairment of consciousness or recall in the
following ways:—
(1) By causing an epileptic fit in a predisposed person, either directly in
response to emotion, so-called reflex epilepsy, or by indirect
methods. Evidence is presented that the most frequent indirect
method is by the emotional hyperventilation which may accompany
fear, leading to a great fall in the blood carbon dioxicfe content,
and the onset of a fit.
(2) By causing hyperventilation at altitude, which in appropriate con-
ditions will result in anoxia, and acapnia, leading to a state of
impaired consciousness without a fit. In some cases it seems that
this can occur even while the subject is receiving oxygen.
(3) By producing an hysterical state of stupor or amnesia.
(4) By causing panic during which the subject is unable to appreciate
events and so is amnesic.
(5) By producing secondary cardiovascular inefficiency which may cause
syncope or blacking out at low ‘ g ’.
The important part played by fear in these syndromes is illustrated by
the high proportion of them that occur on operational flying, particularly night
bombing, as well as by the subjects’ introspective accounts.
An epileptic fit is probably responsible in a third of the cases. There may
or may not be a previous history of fits. The story, of epilepsy in the pilot of
a single-seater aircraft differs from that in aircrew, since the only fighter pilots
who survive are those with short attacks. The epileptic attack may be without
apparent cause, may be associated with an anxiety state as above, or may
be symtomatic of other disorders.
Syncope due to cardiovascular instability is rare unless it is a symptom of
a neurosis. It may be induced by posture, slight alterations in ‘g’, or the severe
aural pain caused by barotrauma.
Aural vertigo may cause confusion, which is much more evident when it
interrupts skilled performance in the air than it is on the ground. Aural pain
due to barotrauma may cause unconsciousness.
Oxygen lack is uncommon, although it is frequently incriminated falsely.
There is usually technical confirmation of its presence. Some subjects lose
consciousness with anoxia at unexpectedly low altitude, but there seem to be
other contributory causes in these cases.
Carbon monoxide poisoning is rare but presents a characteristic picture.
It is difficult in many cases to establish the exact causes of impairment of
consciousness while flying, because of the lack of available clinical evidence.
If only a single cause is sought the diagnosis is even more difficult, for most of
the cases present a complicated picture in which a neurosis caused by fear is
primary while impairment of consciousness results from secondary physical
causes.
The correct diagnosis of the case of unconsciousness or amnesia while
flying depends more often upon study of the whole patient than it does upon
detailed investigation of one aspect of the problem.


References
Cannon, W. B.
Bodily changes in hunger, fear and rage. 1915,
Appleton, New York.
Cooper, E. L. & Sinclair, A.
Neurosis in Tobruh. 1942, Med. J. Austral, ii, 73.
Christie, R. V.
Some types of respiration in the neuroses. 1935,
Quart. J. Med. 4, 427.
Finesinger, J. E.
The spirograms in certain psychiatric disorders. 1944,
Am. J. Psychiat., 100, 159.
Goldie, E. A. G.
On respiration rate during a bomber sortie. 1943,
(Unpublished report). FPRC 552.
Love, H. R. ..
Neurotic casualties in the field. 1942, Med. J.
Austral, 11, 137.
Lennox, W. G.
Science and seizures. 1941, Harper, New York.
Matthews, B. H. C
Personal communication. 1943.
Medical Research Council ..
War Memorandum No. 4. 1941.
Mosso, A.
Fear. 1884. Translated by Lough, E., & Keisaw F.
Vth Edition 1896. Longmans Green, London.
Rushmer, R. F., Boothby, W. M. &
Hinshaw, H. G.
Some effects of hyperventilation with special reference
to aviation medicine. 1941. Proc. Staff Meetings
Mayo Clinic, 16, 801.
Sargant, W. & Slater, E. ..
■Acute war neuroses. 1941, Lancet, ii, 1.
Amnesic syndromes in war. 1941, Proc. Roy. Soc.
Med., 34, 757.
Symonds, C. P.
Anxiety neurosis in combatants. 1943, Lancet, ii,
Dec. 25, 785.
Symonds, C. P. & Williams, D. J...
Psychological disorders in flying personnel : personal
investigation in Bomber Command. 1942. FPRC
412 (f). Chapter IV.
Psychological disorders in flying personnel : clinical
and statistical study of neurosis ■ precipitated by
flying duties. 1942. FPRC 547. Chapter X.
Uehlein, A. & Boothby, W. M.
Proc. Staff Meetings Mayo Clinic, June 1942, 27, 417.
12. Addendum
Summary of a report to the Director-General of Medical Services, Royal Air
Force, upon the use of the electro-encephalogram in rejecting potential
epileptics among air crew under training
In about half the cases in this series diagnosed as epileptic, the E.E.G.
showed characteristic changes. This corresponds with the finding in an
unselected series of epileptics in the service of larval attacks in 27 per cent, and
less distinctive paroxysmal outbursts in 29 per cent. In a population without
clinical evidence of epilepsy larval attacks are absent and other paroxysmal
outbursts present in 0- 8 per cent. If every subject with a paroxysmal outburst
is considered to be a potential epileptic, rejection of 1 in 100 trainees by E.E.G.
might elimnate half the potential epileptics.
One E.E.G. Unit (one instrument, a trained technician and a clerk) could
examine 20 or 25 men a day (maximum of 500 a month), so that, supposing
the monthly intake to be 8,000 personnel, about 15 E.E.G. would be needed.
About 5 per cent (400) of all records would have to be scrutinised by an expert
each month to select 1 per cent to be finally classified elipeptic. The result of
such a scheme would be the rejection by each E.E.G. team of one or two men
per week or a total of about 1,000 trainees per annum. The view is held that
in the present circumstances the practical results would not make such an
enterprise worth while.


APPENDIX: CASE REPORTS
Case 2 ; Susceptibility to oxygen lack (19,000 feet). —A Flight Engineer, aged 24, with
23 operational hours, felt a little queer and drowsy at 15,000 feet and became
unconscious at 16,000 feet. He was receiving an adequate oxygen supply, but had
not been over 14,000 feet before. Afterwards he had a sore ear due to the aircraft
descending while he was unconscious. He had had no previous faints or fits, and his
past record was good. No physical abnormality was found except that his blood
pressure was 150/85, and he had a white count of 57,000 with a normal differential.
He was considered psychiatrically normal. The E.E.G. was normal. -At the R.A.F.
Institute of Aviation Medicine he was taken to 15,000 feet and removed from oxygen.
After 5 minutes he was very cyanosed and had considerable muscular twitching in
the limbs. After 10 minutes he became faint, his pulse rose from 80 to 96, oxygen
was restored and the twitching slowly subsided. Anoxia meter readings on another
occasion showed that at 15,000 feet his blood oxygen saturation was considerably
lower than the normal average. It was considered that the oxygen supply in the
aircraft must have been faulty, but that the patient was unusually sensitive to oxygen
lack. No spectroscopic abnormalities were found in his blood to account for this
sensitivity.
Case 7: Brief epileptic attacks in a fighter pilot. —An experienced commissioned
pilot, aged 24, lost consciousness four times while flying a Spitfire, (i) At 11,000 feet
he suddenly felt dizzy and light-headed, and was confused for a few moments. He
thought this was due to oxygen and then had a similar brief attack. After this
all was well, (ii) Six months later, at 3,000 feet, he started to do a roll. The next
he knew the plane was diving towards the sea and he managed to pull out a few feet
above the water, blacking himself out in doing so. He thinks he was ‘ out ’ for 10
to 15 seconds, (iii) Three months later he was.flying straight and level at 1,500 feet
and then found himself at 5,000 feet. The plane was trimmed to climb and he
thinks he was unconscious for 3J to 4 minutes. He had no warning or sensation of
an attack, but just knows that he had climbed 3,500 feet without being aware of it.
(xv) Next day, at 300 feet under low clouds, trimmed nose high, he again found himself
at 5,000 feet without being able to account for how he arrived there. He judged
he was ‘ out ’ for five minutes. He then landed and for the first time reported the
attacks.
There were no symptoms between the brief periods of unconsciousness. His past
and family histories were normal and full clinical examination was normal. The
E.E.G. was quite abnormal. It showed rhythmic 9-a-second waves in outbursts in
the frontal lobe ; rhythmic 6-a-second waves in outbursts in the parietal lobe ;
and outbursts of irregular fast activity which on one occasion developed into rhythmic
monophasic waves of 9 a second. It was thought that these changes represented
a constitutional type of abnormality, almost certainly epileptic.
Case 8: Susceptibility to oxygen lack (12,000 feet). —An air gunner with 120 total
and 38 operational hours, felt dizzy and faint at 12,000 feet sitting in his turret on
the way to Berlin. He was found in a semi-conscious condition, recovered five
minutes after having been given oxygen on the rest couch, but was slightly confused
for 45 minutes afterwards. He was wearing a well-fitting mask at the time, but his
economiser was found to be defective and no oxygen had reached him even with the
supply turned to 30,000 feet. He remained perfectly well after this, no psychiatric
cause was found, his past and family history were good, he denied fits or faints
and he was keen to return to operational flying. Physical examination showed no
defect and he was taken to 20,000 feet in a decompression chamber without oxygen
satisfactorily. The E.E.G. was normal.
Case 15 : Hysterical attack in a timid pilot under training. —An L.A.C., pilot u/t,
aged 25. with only 3J hours’ flying in Tiger Moths at a Grading E.F.T.S., had a
syncopal ' attack ’ while flying. At 2,500 feet when flying straight and level the
machine went into a steep turn, the pupil did not correct and was found slumped
down in the cockpit unconscious. The instructor landed in a few minutes, lifted the
pupil still unconscious out of the aircraft. He came round on the way to the flight
hut and was pale, breathless and shaking, with a rapid pulse. He had been a farm
worker who had always lived on his farm, had not played games and had always
been very careful of his health. When interviewed he said that when flying he got a
pain in his chest, became breathless and felt literally like a fish out of water. He
also got a pain in the left testicle—he had had a successful operation for varicocele
sometime previously. These symptoms became worse each time he went up and
culminated in trembling and palpitation, ending in the attack of amnesia. Since
starting flying he had become more anxious, particularly about his health, had lost
his appetite, became sleepless, and had nightmares that he was killing his instructor.
He said “ flying is not so simple as I had thought ” and “ it is taking a lot out of me,”
and ultimately admitted intense fear. He felt he did not want to go on if it was
going to injure his health.


Case 17 : Repeated amnesic attacks due to panic. —A pilot, aged 22, had flown 340
hours and began operating in Bostons, and was sent for an E.E.G. with a diagnosis
of epilepsy. On his first sortie he crash-landed his aircraft very badly on a small
emergency landing ground, although the weather was clear and as he was in radio-
communication he could have made base easily. His behaviour was inexplicable,
but he had an amnesia for the whole episode. On his second he suddenly broke for-
mation over the target. He side-slipped and would have hit his leader had the other
aircraft not taken violent evasive action. He then dropped his bombs at random
and made for home alone, in daylight, before the squadron. He was lucky to make
base, but did not remember the episode. On his third sortie going out to the target
he made a series of incredibly foolish technical mistakes, among which was keeping
his engines on full boost so that they overheated and eventually caught fire. He,
therefore, turned for home, jettisoned his bombs, but left his bomb doors open all
the way back, made the coast and made a forced landing in the first field he saw
without any selection or preparation, although he could have landed at one of the
South Coast stations. He made the crash landing with his flaps up and his wheels
down. He had an amnesia for all this. He was sent for an E.E.G. with a diagnosis of
epilepsy.
On examination. Physical examination, including the E.E.G., was normal.
After a few minutes’ questioning it transpired that he was quite terrified on opera-
tions, was sure he would kill himself and his crew, and felt he could not go on. He
admitted he had lost his head on each occasion, and was able with persuasion to
give an account of what had taken place. On each occasion he had an uncontrollable
urge to make for England, and as soon as he had done so to land at the earliest
possible moment. He described how his increasing fear became so intense that in
his terror he was confused and quite unable to think coherently or to act in a rational
and ordered manner. His flying discipline broke down completely and gave way
to blind panic. He had always been a timid unstable man, who had panicked at
examinations and who should never have been accepted as a pilot.
Case 23 : An air gunner, aged 20, was making his first operational sortie, the target
being Berlin. Over the target he was heard to go on and on firing his guns, and on
being questioned over the intercomm. gave no reply. He was found unconscious and
‘ struggling ’ in the turret, and was carried to the rest couch. He did not regain
consciousness for 20 minutes. The attack of unconsciousness took place at 15,000
feet, and the subject was on oxygen, the apparatus being found satisfactory. There
was no history of fits or faints in the patient or his family, and a psychiatrist who
saw him shortly afterwards did not think the attack hysterical. The E.E.G. was
quite abnormal. There were occasional waves of 3, 6 and 7 a second in all leads.
They were widely distributed and represented a constitutional abnormality which
may well be related to epilepsy. Decompression to 25,000 feet for 3 minutes resulted
in involuntary twitching of the hands, but 15 minutes at 15,000 feet without oxygen
were without effect.
Case 39 ; Unconsciousness caused by fear in a timid air gunner, —A sergeant air
gunner, aged 22, had flown 60 hours and started operations in Lancasters. His
first two operational trips were to Duisberg and Berlin. Things were ‘ lively over
the target ’ and the activity, including sights of aircraft being coned, took his breath
away. He slept badly and thought about it all a great deal and the next day was
preoccupied with fear. Before the next trip to Berlin he had a headache and felt
sick, he reported to the medical officer but was sent on the raid. Take-off was
postponed for two hours, which upset him still further. After half-an-hour in the
air, at 5,000 feet, he was sitting in the turret and felt hot and ill, sweat was pouring
off his face and he was trembling all over. He felt dizzy and faint, told the pilot
he was not feeling too good, remembers the reply of ‘ O.K.’ and then remembers
finding himself on the rest couch with two of the crew giving him oxygen. When
he came round he was unable to remember 45 minutes, but he said he was dizzy,
things seemed hazy, and he was still hot and sweating, but was better when they
landed at base three-quarters-of-an-hour afterwards. He was told that he had failed
to reply to further questions and was found unconscious. He confessed that opera-
tions had caused him intense fear, that his experiences on his first Berlin raid had
affected him greatly, and that heavy casualties on the station had contributed. He
was sleeping badly, had a poor appetite, felt depressed, wretched and run down,
and had headaches. He had always been an anxious worrier, easily depressed, and
previously was a professional dance-band drummer. His father is an established
neurotic and was so anxious about the patient that he 'phoned him each day to
know if he had been on ops. His mother is ' highly strung ’ and worries more than
the patient.
On examination. —His asthenic, colourless appearance bespoke his peacetime
vocation, but he was also anxious, depressed and restless, picking his nails. He had a
tremor of the fingers but otherwise the examination, including E.E.G., was normal.


Case 42 : Hysterical amnesia in an experienced pilot. —A Polish pilot officer with
1.000 flying hours was flying a Spitfire on his first sweep at 22,000 feet. The flight
commander reported " over France he came into collision with the plane next to
him, causing substantial damage to it. He then turned east and went in the opposite
direction to the flight. When called on the radio he did not answer, so I followed him
and succeeded in catching him not far from the Belgian frontier after 30 miles. I
passed him and he joined me. We came home and landed. He flew satisfactorily in
formation.” A few days previously he had had a collision in flying with no amnesia.
The patient remembered nothing in the 10 minutes between the collision and seeing
his flight commander. He had had no fits or faints, and except that he tended to
formate too closely his conduct had been satisfactory. Because of language difficulty
his past history was not obtained in detail. He said the amnesia was dfte to oxygen
failure, and although this cannot be excluded the technical reports did not support
it. All examinations, including E.E.G., were normal. Hypnosis was not used, but
the patient admitted to great fear and tension on his first operational trip. It is
thought he collided through an error of judgment, because of his fear, panicked and
then had an hysterical amnesia for his lapse.
Case 48 ; A faint associated with severe aural pain. —A sergeant navigator with 600
hours’ flying had never had any previous trouble with ears or sinuses. He had a cold
and developed acute pain in the ears while diving at high speed. The pain was
excruciating, and he felt sick and fainted, slumping forward on to his table. He
came round in about 2 to 3 minutes when the plane was level. He still had severe
pain in the ears. Eustachian insufflation was carried out a week after this episode,
but air entry was unsatisfactory on both sides. In all other respects he was normal,
physically and mentally, and his past record was excellent. In particular his cardio-
vascular system was normal. Three weeks later descent in a chamber from 15,000
feet at 7,000 feet per minute produced no symptoms.
Case 54 : Susceptibility to oxygen lack (13,000 feet). —An air gunner, aged 22, with
50 operational hours, felt confused and sick on the way to Germany. This increased
and he did not reply over the intercomm. at 13,000 feet, but fell out of the turret
when the doors were opened and was found to be stuporose and unable to walk.
He was wearing a mask, but through an error of the pilot he had received no oxygen.
Although the rest of the crew also had no oxygen they were unaffected. He recovered
with oxygen, but his behaviour is not recorded and he had a bad frontal headache
and nausea afterwards. He was very fatigued at the time, having operated on two
of the preceding three nights and having spent the whole of the last on a railway
station, so that it was his fourth night without sleep. He had previously been to
16.000 feet without oxygen with no ill effects. On examination, the only abnormality
was a high blood pressure, the systolic being consistently 150, and diastolic 92 to
100. The E.E.G. was normal. He went back to operations and did several trips over
the Alps on oxygen without symptoms.
Case 58 : Susceptibility to oxygen lack ( 16,000 feet). —A flight sergeant pilot, aged 24,
with 500 hours’ total and 100 operational, was going to Bremen on the thirteenth sortie
of a tour which had contained some hazardous experiences. He thought he was
getting no oxygen for he could not hear, feel or taste it, and at 16,000 feet he fell
forward over the controls, and the navigator found him stuporose. The wireless
operator flew the aircraft to 6,000 feet for 10 minutes and then the patient took
over, brought it home and made a good landing. The rear gunner had become
unconscious in similar circumstances the previous night, and it transpired that there
was some suspicion that both he and the patient had been subjected to relative
anoxia due to inadequate flow imposed by technical faults. No physical or psychia-
tric abnormality was found and he was anxious to return to operations, although
he preferred day bombing to night, and was probably more affected by some very
unpleasant experiences on his tour than he was prepared to admit. His past history
was satisfactory. He volunteered, however, that he had been breathing very rapidly
after reaching 6,000 feet. Subsequently full investigation at the R.A.F. Institute
of Aviation Medicine at 15,000 feet without oxygen and with strenuous hyper-
ventilation failed to show any abnormality.
Case 62 : Fear with conscious hyperventilation. —-An air gunner, aged 20, had done
40 operational hours in Wellingtons. He felt apprehensive and unwell the day
before take-off for his seventh sortie. He thought he would try to go through with
the trip, but after about two hours’ flying, at 16,000 feet, he was sweating freely
and said he was breathing rapidly. He had a pressing feeling in the chest, experienced
air hunger, asked for more oxygen and a little later lost consciousness. A member
of the crew tried to rouse him without success, the plane came down to 10,000 feet
and he regained consciousness after 5 minutes. The oxygen supply was satisfactory.
He had fainted twice on a railway station 4 months previously. Examinations,
including decompression tests with and without oxygen, and E.E.G., were all normal.


Case 64 ; Unconsciousness caused by fear in a timid pilot. —A sergeant pilot, aged 22,
had done 7 operational sorties in Halifaxes. He vomited before beginning his eighth
sortie, and after 20 minutes, at 1,500 feet, he began to sweat and felt faint. He had
a feeling of unreality and his whole attention became so fixed upon his instruments
that they irresistably absorbed all his interest. Then his eyesight became blurred,
he felt drowsy and was aware that he was falling forwards over the control column,
but he could not prevent himself from doing so, although he was aware that this was
wrong, and wanted to shout to warn the others. The next thing he knew was the
bomb aimer pulling him back from off the stick and taking control of the aircraft.
In a few moments he pulled himself together and brought the plane safely back
to base. When half-way along the runway and when his cockpit drill was complete,
he again slumped over the control column in the same way as before, but as the
brakes were already on the plane stopped. He then recovered and was able to leave
the aircraft without help. He was seen immediately afterwards by the Medical
Officer, who could find no evidence of any physical abnormality.
During his operational tour he had had a succession of unpleasant experiences.:
On the second sortie the aircraft got 6u{ of control in very rough weather, for it
stalled when climbing with a full bomb load of 6,000 pounds of H.E. and incendiaries
and spun from 2,500 to 1,000 feet, but he just managed to correct it and level out
at 300 feet. Structural damage to the aircraft was so great that it was later written
off. He lost all desire to fly after this and on the fifth trip when he was shot up and
came back from Munich on two good engines he was unable to jettison his bombs
and lost height steadily until they were released over the sea. On three other occa-
sions he had to change aircraft immediately before take-off because of mechanical
failure. All this resulted in a train of symptoms and he became moody, was irritable
and unsociable and fatigued, could not concentrate, and although he slept well, did
not benefit by it. Two nights before the amnesic attack he had been somnambulaniT
for the first time. He said " the job has been getting me down.”
He had always been intense and obsessional and inclined to worry. He had
previously been an art student, his work ' took a lot out of him ’ and he had become
haggard and had lost weight before joining the R.A.F. He was an only child, his
father being eccentric, moody and unstable, but there was no personal or family
history of fits or faints. All physical investigations, including the E.E.G., were
negative.
Case 66 : Fear causing an epileptic fit. —An air gunner, aged 20, was on his tenth
trip to Kiel an hour from base at 13,000 feet on oxygen, sitting beside the pilot. He
felt tense, nervous and very afraid. His tongue was dry, he was sweating, had
palpitations and then had a feeling of suffocation and could not get his breath. He
then developed a pain in the chest ' over the heart' of a gripping, cramp-like
quality. The sweating increased, he began trembling violently and his hands
would not stay still. The captain saw he was blue and the patient told him he did not
feel so well. He then lost consciousness and recovered on the rest couch 25 minutes
later. During this time he had ‘ a twitching type of convulsion mostly in the legs.
He frothed at the mouth and dribbled saliva.’ When the patient regained conscious-
ness he felt tired and had a headache and the aircraft was returning to base. Ten
minutes after landing the Medical Officer could find no abnormal physical signs.
The subject had experienced great fear in his previous trips, in one of which
the aircraft was blown on to its back by a near miss, while in another they were
caught in a cone of searchlights. He vomited all night after these episodes. When
flak or searchlights came close it was his habit to cover his eyes with his hands
and he felt so acutely afraid that he used to bury his head in his knees if he were
alone.
Previous history. —When the engine cut and the aircraft suddenly dived during
air firing practice in a battle, he had previously had a similar pain in the chest, and
had fallen to the floor unconscious for five minutes. He told no one about this.
He had had similar attacks ever since childhood. They occurred every 2to 3 months,
from 12 to 17 years of age. They always followed a fright, for instance, when a train
he was in nearly collided with another, when a train whistle went off near him, and
when flogged at school. They always began with gradually increasing pain in the
chest, he fell down and hurt himself, but had never been incontinent. When excited
he sometimes got the pain without .unconsciousness. He worked in a munitions
factory before enlistment, and had been a quiet, solitary individual who lacked
aggression. His mother also had attacks in which she suddenly started up from her
chair, fell to the ground, had clonic movements, and went blue. His 12 siblings
had no attacks.
Investigations. —Full clinical examination was normal and the E.E.G. did not
show any epileptic disturbance. Executive reports showed him a keen and reliable
gunner, and his attitude to his duty and to his disability was above reproach.


Questioning under pentothal narcosis recovered little of note, but it is important
that the amnesia was not penetrated.
Decompression in a chamber gave interesting results. He was taken to 15,000
feet with and without oxygen. When breathing oxygen from a mask his respiration
rate increased spontaneously from 14 to 40 a minute during 15 minutes at 15,000 feet.
It remained at this level until he was asked to start 2 minutes' voluntary hyper-
ventilation, when it reached 52 a minute. During this time the pulse rate rose from
102 resting to 120 per minute. Although asked repeatedly to stop deep breathing he
did not, and appeared unconscious of doing so. Ventilation continued at about 50
a minute for 10 minutes. After 8 minutes he complained of pain in the chest, similar
to that in his attacks. A sample of venous blood was taken but when the subject
saw the syringe the respiration rate rose from 44 per minute to over 100 a minute
for about 30 seconds. After a further minute his legs began to twitch. He was
taken oS oxygen, breathed a sample into a Douglas bag and the experiment was
terminated. The respiration had remained at 48 without the mask. The patient
had been unduly apprehensive throughout in spite of explanation, and said that
towards the end of the experiment he had felt dazed and dizzy and had a pain in
the chest, just as he did before the attack in the aircraft. There was no evidence
of tetany. Results supplied by S/Ldr. Goldie were as follows ; Anoxia meter readings
showed a normal fall in blood oxygen saturation to 85 per cent, on air at 10,000 feet.
At 15,000 feet at rest on oxygen, during forced and during spontaneous hyper-
ventilation the saturation remained at a normal level (92 to 95 per cent.) The blood
C0 2 content at ground level was 53-2 volumes per cent, and at height during
spontaneous over breathing it was 47-4 volumes per cent, a fall of nearly 6 volumes
per cent. The C0 2 output was 358 ccs. per minute at N.T.P., and the ventilation
rate at 15,000 feet was 25 litres per minute B.T.P. (about five times the average
normal), his expired air containing 3-22 per cent C0 2 and 17-7 oxygen.
Case 67 ; Impairment of consciousness of cardiovascular origin. —A Flying Officer
Instructor with 1,400 flying hours, of which 100 had been on operations on Spitfires,
had begun for 10 months to experience attacks in the air in which he suddenly felt
dizzy, weak and confused, his vision became blurred, and he felt hot and sweated.
He would open the window to put his head out and soon be all right. He had never
actually let the plane get out of control, and did not report sick till he had had three.
Such an attack had occurred two years previously, and he had had four similar turns
on the ground. In one he felt faint in a crowded bar and went out and sat on the
steps. Another occurred after a dentist had been cleaning his teeth without inflicting
pain. On rising from the chair he felt faint. In all these attacks he first felt hot and
giddy and ‘ swimming,’ then weak, was said to go white, sweated and then felt cold.
He did not actually lose consciousness in these attacks. His past history and family
background were above reproach.
On examination. —There was no evidence of neurosis and physical examination
was satisfactory, except that to exercise his cardiovascular tolerance was poor and
his blood pressure was persistently around 140/75. At the R.A.F. Institute of Aviation
Medicine his resistance to centrifugal force was below average. Decompression
to 10,000 and 20,000 feet without oxygen on two occasions showed no abnormal
responses. The Consultant in Medicine thought that his cardiovascular efficiency
was poor, but it improved after a course of graduated exercises with games,
followed by leave. It was considered that his attacks were due to lowered cardio-
vascular efficiency resulting from a lowered standard of health. He was returned
to full flying and has been well for six months.
Case 69 : Confusion complicating aural vertigo. —A sergeant pilot had flown 270 hours
under training, and has had six attacks of vertigo while flying. In these he’has a
sudden sensation that he is falling backwards and to the left while flying straight and
level. He feels giddy and has to concentrate on his instruments to make sure of his
position. He has to concentrate becahse of a feeling of confusion which he calls a
"semi-blackout" in which he “nearly passes out,” everything goes dark for a
moment, but he does not lose consciousness. Three weeks before the interview, while
flying an Oxford at 700 feet, he had the usual sudden onset of rotation backwards
and to the left, and had to concentrate on the instruments. Even so he lost 500 feet,
having gone into a steep dive to the left. He had similar attacks on the ground
before entry in which he suddenly had vertigo, objects went round, he had to
support himself and thought he might lose consciousness. The attacks were suffi-
ciently severe and frequent for him to declare them on entry. Examination was
normal, except that there was symmetrical slight deafness of a middle ear type.
There was no inco-ordination, ataxia, Rombergism or nystagmus. As is usual, he
was normal between the attacks.


Case 72 : Hyperventilation syndrome without admitted fear. —A West Indian sergeant
pilot, aged 25, who had flown 50 operational hours in Spitfires, reported sick because
he had had a series of attacks while flying (the attacks were all the same), and began
about 15 minutes after take-off upon a convoy patrol or a sweep, at about 1,000 feet
straight and level, with dizziness, a feeling of weakness, and then a fainting, confused
sensation. His vision then went misty and he had tingling of the extremities. He
had to turn back to base and the symptoms would subside on landing. He said he
was perfectly happy flying a Spitfire over the sea, and that fear was not present and
he never lost consciousness, although the symptoms lasted for up to 10 to 15 minutes.
There was no carpo-pedal spasm. He had discovered that the attacks were associated
with wearing a mask, and that when he did so his breathing was rapid and shallow,
like panting. He had come to associate the symptoms with this, and as his breathing
was normal without a mask when not using the microphone he kept the mask on
his chin.
The sergeant had a good past and. family history and an excellent service
record ; he seemed well adjusted to his duties and very keen to continue on
operations, saying that even if the attacks persisted, so long as he knew they were
not serious he was quite prepared to carry on. Physical examination, including
E.E.G., showed no abnormality. Two minutes quiet overbreathing produced vertigo,
a light-headed feeling, blurring of vision and tingling of the fingers, and the subject
volunteered that the symptoms were the same as he experienced in the aircraft. He
returned to flying, was subsequently posted with his squadron, but was finally re-
moved with a diagnosis of anxiety state.
Case 74 : Unconsciousness complicating a fear state at high altitude. —A sergeant
bomb aimer who had flown 200 hours, which included three operational trips, was
an unusually anxious and timid man, apt to become depressed and considered to be
severely predisposed to neurosis. His third sortie was abandoned because of icing
and low visibility, but over base his aircraft collided with another and in the resulting
crash the pilot was killed, and the navigator air-gunner injured, but the patient
only had bruises. The crash, and particularly the pilot’s death, worried him greatly,
and next day he felt tired and sick and did not sleep the next night. He was given
three week’s sick leave, but was unable to occupy himself, for he ' just wanted to
stay around,’ and when he started flying again was continually afraid of a collision
and was terrified of flying at night or in cloud.
Two months after the collision, when flying in a Stirling in a day cross country
at 17,000 feet in the front turret, using oxygen, he felt very nervous, had a headache,
was sweating and his hands were ' freezing on to everything.' He then found
himself at 10,000 feet on the bomb aimer’s bed to which he had been carried, receiving
attention, and was told that he had switched on the intercomm., had left it on
and was found unconscious. No convulsive movements were seen, he did not hurt
himself or bite his tongue, but he had passed urine during the attack, which lasted
for 15 to 20 minutes, but his bladder was very full before it.
On questioning afterwards he admitted great fear, “ I was trying to map read,
but all the time I gripped the pad tightly,-hardly daring to look down to earth. When
ice coated the outside of the turret I was cold and very unhappy, I felt panicky.”
An attempt was made by Wing Commander J. H. Hunt to obtain further information
under pentothal about the period of amnesia, but although the patient co-operated
well and gave a candid account of his fear and his wretched slats before and after the
attack, he was unable to recover any of the period of amnesia, and he did not
remember having been incontinent. Physical examination, including electro-
encephalography, was quite normal.
Case 81 : Fear with tetany. —A pilot u/t, aged 20, was having difficulty with instru-
ment flying at night for he did not like it, and had to concentrate on the instruments
constantly, until his ‘ nerves would go to bits.’ He has had five attacks while flying,
all after 2 to 3 hours of instrument flying, in which his arms first feel stiff, and his
hands become stuck to the controls as if he were held from the elbows down. He
cannot let go, as his hands will not relax, his movements become more difficult, the
instruments move about and go blurred, so that he cannot read them, and he calls
for help. He is unaware of any change in respiration. In the last attack he slumped
in the seat as if exhausted, the Wellington stalled, and the bomb aimer, in wrenching
his hands off the controls to take over, found that the pilot’s hands were stiff. The
patient later recovered and landed the aircraft. The attacks never occurred in day
flying and he had never fainted previously. When examined he had an anxiety state
with depression, and was having nightmares about night flying. Physical examina-
tion was normal, but after 4 minutes’ moderate hyperventilation tetany appeared
and Chvostek’s sign was positive.


Case 88 : Epileptic attacks in an air-gunner. —An air-gunner, aged 21, with 75 flying
hours, was stationed in the mid-upper turret of a Lancaster on an Operational
Training Unit practice flight at 5,000 feet, without oxygen. He did not answer over
the intercomm. twice and was found motionless in the turret. He did not respond to
questioning, was helped out, and then professed himself quite well. It was estimated
that he had not answered for 15 minutes, but no more information is available.
A few days later, at 20,000 feet, again on a practice flight, wearing a type G mask on
full oxygen, he suddenly felt himself floating away as if he were outside the aircraft
supported by air. He called the captain, he thinks unintelligibly, and was found
rigid in his turret. He was unconscious for 15 to 20 minutes, and was next aware
of being given tea. For 18 months he had had attacks of forgetfulness on the ground,
when his mind would suddenly go blank. Characteristically, he would walk straight
past a friend with a vacant expression, turning back in embarrassment when his
mind became clear, or would go to post a letter and walk past the post box without
knowing he had done so. He had had no fits or faints before, but had been an
unstable, nervous boy. His mother had fits in which she suddenly fell to the ground
for a few moments. The only physical abnormality was seen in the E.E.G. which,
among other abnormal features of a constitutional type, showed a larval epileptic
attack and so confirmed the diagnosis of epilepsy.
Case 100 : A Flying Officer Instructor at Elementary Flying Training School, with
1,000 hours flying in under 2 years, had been showing evidence of increasing fatigue
for 9 months. This began by his feeling mentally and physically tired and by his
sleeping while in the mess. He would be worn out at the end of an instructional
flight, and felt so tired that he was finding it quite difficult to walk to the flight hut.
The symptoms became worse and he was seen to be losing weight, looking haggard
and.very tired. Five months previously he was given 8 days’ leave with great benefit.
He went back to his duties instructing for 5 hours every day, and his symptoms
rapidly returned and became worse. After three months he felt quite exhausted
' mentally and physically.’ He said he was " worn out.” He was anxious, emotional,
irritable, sleepless and having nightmares. He had lost two stones in weight. He
began to find that his vision became blurred, and things went grey as he was
doing a ‘ flip off the top.’ Each time he did this it became worse, until he was actually
blacking out but not losing consciousness. He had previously performed this
manoeuvre hundreds of times with ease. He did not report this, but happened to
be taken on a test flight, and while repeating the manoeuvre with the Chief Flying
Instructor he lost consciousness, the aircraft stalled and went into a spin which he
corrected. He was taken off flying. Shortly afterwards, at home, he caused himself
pain by knocking his knee against a table and fainted for the first time in his life.
His wife witnessed the attack, which had all the characteristics of syncope as he was
white, pulseless, sweating and cold. The attack lasted for a few seconds. He was
removed from flying and sent on a course of ground instruction, but found himself
unable to stand the pace, and in consequence had three short periods of hysterical
amnesia. His past history showed him to have been conscientious and easily worried.
One of his brothers is similar, the other excitable and unstable. There was no family
history of faints or fits.


CHAPTER XXI
THE PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF AIRSICKNESS
by
Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charpes P. Symonds, K.B.E., C.B., M.D., F.R.C.P., and
Wing Commander Denis J. Williams, D.Sc., M.D., F.R.C.P.
FRPC report 593, September, 1044
Introduction
The object of this investigation was to determine to what extent and in
what ways psychological disorder might be a factor responsible for the cessation
of flying duties owing to airsickness in the Royal Air Force.
1. Material
One-hundred-and-twenty men were personally examined by the two investi-
gators, each independently interviewing 60 cases. Owing to the present disposition
of training units it was not practicable to obtain a representative sample of airsick
eliminees from all stages of training. The cases were drawn from;
(a) Grading Schools, Radio Schools, Air Gunnery Schools, the Air Navigation
and Bombing School, and Advanced Flying Units (Pilot and Observer)
within convenient travelling range.
(b) The Operational Training Units, Finishing Schools and Heavy Conversion
Units of Bomber Command.
The geographical limits referred to under (a) happened to include all the Observer
Advanced Flying Units, but excluded 8 out of a total of 29 Pilot Advanced Flying
Units. From these 8 units, however, there was only one case of suspension for
airsickness during the period under review. The sample, therefore, was fairly
representative of aircrew personnel under training in this country. It must be
remembered, however, that the early and intermediate stages of training for pilots,
navigators and air bombers are conducted overseas. Instructions for reference of
cases were issued by the P.M.Os. of the commands concerned. These were
that during a specified period all men who were to be withdrawn from flying
training on account of airsickness should be referred to the investigators as
soon as this decision had been reached. The cases were to include all aircrew who
had not yet received their brevets, and who would consequently be disposed of by
the executive, as well as all others who were to be referred as soon as a request
had been made for the necessary medical board. The man was to bring a sealed
envelope containing a report by the unit medical officer, including a record of
airsickness and any treatment given for it at that station ; any previous record of
airsickness contained in Form 48 or other document; and a report written by the
commanding officer upon the man’s general efficiency and behaviour, referring
especially to his attitude to his flying duties.
12. Method
Each individual was interviewed privately for one hour by one or other of the
investigators. Before being questioned he was told that the purpose of the enquiry
was to obtain information about airsickness which might be of value to others, and
that we were especially interested in any relationship which might exist between
the kind of airsickness experienced and the kind of man who experienced the air-
sickness. The man was then informed that no report would be sent to the unit or
medical board, the information received being used for research purposes only
without reference to his name. It was assumed for purposes of the interview that the
man’s flying career had probably ended. The history was then taken under the
following headings :
(a) History of airsickness
(i) The symptoms usually experienced when the man was airsick, including the
first symptom, and subsequent course, and the frequency and degree of
incapacity when airsickness occurred. In addition to nausea and vomiting,
the following symptoms were enquired for if the subject did not mention
them spontaneously—headache, giddiness and mental slowness.


TABLE I
Distribution in air crew categories of the 120 subjects suspended for airsickness.
Category
Percentage
Navigator . . . .
35-8
Air gunner
25-0
Wireless operator
21-6
Engineer ..
7-5
Air bomber
6-7
Pilot
2-5
P.N.B
0-8
(ii) The time after take-off or after the occurrence of unfavourable conditions
at which the first symptoms of airsickness were usually experienced.
(iii) The nature and duration of any symptoms experienced after landing.
(iv) A record of each phase of the man’s flying experience (pre-flying training.
Grading School, Air Observer School, Advanced Flying Unit, Operational
Training Unit) including the number of hours and trips flown ; the type
of aircraft ; the percentage of trips on which he vomited ; the percentage
of trips on which he felt quite comfortable ; any tendency to a diminishing
liability to airsickness on the course ; and whether, on each phase of his
flying training, the man had reported airsickness to the medical officer
(either of his own accord or because he was ordered or advised to do so)
and if he did not report it, why not. A note of any treatment the man had
received for airsickness and of the effects of such treatment.
(v) Whether any of the following causes had in the man’s experience contributed
to the airsickness ;
Rough weather.
Aerobatics, evasive action or other violent movements.
The type of aircraft.
His position in the aircraft.
The duration of the flight.
The temperature in the aircraft.
The smell in the aircraft.
The effect of other occupants of the aircraft vomiting.
Anxiety or apprehension.
Any other causes.
(6) History of motion sickness
Full details were taken of symptoms caused by the motion of sea, car, ’bus,
train, tram, swings, roundabouts, at any time in life, including adaptation with age.
(c) Psychiatric history and assessment of predisposition to psychological disorder
on a 4-point scale
This was obtained and recorded by methods already described in Chapter X
(Symonds and Williams, 1944). In the course of the interview evidence was collected
for deciding whether or not the man was at the time suffering from a neurosis.
{d) Attitude towards flying
This part of the history comprised the man’s motives for volunteering for
flying; his psychological reactions to flying, experience and especially to any
mishaps, and to his airsickness; his reaction to the prospect of being grounded ;
and his own wishes or plans for further employment in or out of the service, if
grounded.
(e) Assessment by commanding officer
A copy of the Commanding Officer’s report was filed with each case record.
3. Analysis of material
The order in this table probably represents the relative airsickness suspension
rates among aircrew under training in this country since the subjects of this
enquiry were not otherwise selected. The extraordinarily low figure for pilots


TABLE
II
Duration of symptoms
No.
Percentage
No symptoms at all
2
1-7
Lasting an hour or less ..
38
32
Lasting from 1 to 6 hours
42
35
Lasting until after a night’s sleep
14 •
12
Lasting for a day or more
24
20
deserves comment. The three pilots who were included in the 120 cases were in
fact all suffering from a neurosis at the time of interview so that there was no
instance of a pilot suspended for uncomplicated airsickness in the present series.
This important fact will be discussed later.
(a) Flying hours
The average hours flown before suspension was 116, but 37 of the subjects
had completed less than 50 hours, 13 had flown more than 200 hours and
3 more than 300 hours, while 5 had been on operations, two having completed
an operational tour.
(b) Symptomatology
It is necessary to give some account of the symptoms recorded because it
has been argued that certain variations in the symptom pattern of airsickness
may themselves indicate a psychological basis.
All the subjects experienced nausea, with its accompanying symptoms of
autonomic disturbance. The most common story was of the rapid onset of
sweating with a feeling of warmth or of cold associated with nausea and leading
to vomiting. In all except six cases it was the rule for vomiting, when it
occurred, to be repeated.
There were other associated symptoms, of which the most notable was
headache, which was mentioned in half the cases. It usually appeared before
the vomiting and persisted after it had ceased, often until after landing.
Occasionally it followed the vomiting and at times replaced it. Dizziness was
a frequent complaint but cross-examination disclosed sensations which could
be accepted as vertiginous in only about a quarter of the cases. Less frequently,
a sensation of slowing of mental processes was experienced.
In 100 of the 120, when symptoms occurred they persisted continuously
during the trip, but in the other 20 though usually persisting to the end of the
trip, they were intermittent. In these cases there was increasing nausea leading
to vomiting, total or almost total relief for a few minutes, and then a recurrence
of the symptoms, each bout having the same general character as the preceding,
except that vomiting was ultimately replaced by retching. In every instance
except two the symptoms persisted continuously or intermittently right up to
the time of landing. One of the men whose symptoms would abate had
a disabling neurosis with mild airsickness, and in the other nausea and other
symptoms would always persist to the end of the trip unless he vomited. This
means that in the 120 men suspended for airsickness there was virtually no
evidence of adaptation to the motion of the aircraft during the trip once
airsickness had started.
All the subjects except two complained of persistence of symptoms after
landing which varied in severity and in duration. The following table gives an
impression of the maximum length of time for which symptoms were experienced
on the ground:—


The symptoms ranged from persistent nausea, headache, giddiness, lassitude,
weakness and a faint feeling, to complaint of slight anorexia or abdominal
discomfort with hunger. There was a close direct relationship between the
severity of the symptoms in the air and their severity and persistence on landing.
A few men had symptoms for only a few minutes after landing, others were
soon relieved after a meal, while many of the others with more persistent
symptoms found that lying down and resting was most helpful. A common
story was that of gradually decreasing symptoms until going to bed, with
complete freedom next morning. The group of subjects who had had symptoms
persisting for more than a day were interesting. Such unusual persistence
often followed a particularly distressing trip but there were other cases in
which the cumulative effect of repeated flights was mainly responsible. Thus
several men said that their symptoms after landing were more intense and
persistent after two trips in one day than after a single trip, others described
the cumulative effect of a busy period of flying. The following is an example ;
Case 88 : A sergeant, aged 30, a flight engineer with 83 hours flying, was referred
from an H.C.U., his symptoms being giddiness, which was increased when sitting
in the 2nd pilot’s seat by turning his head to look at the instrument panel, nausea,
sweating and repeated vomiting. Towards the end of a long trip he came ataxic
in his movements and his thought was slowed. He had vomited on 90 per cent of
his trips. His spontaneous account of his symptoms after landing was as follows:
" On getting out of the aircraft I am very giddy and the worst feature is the
uncertainty of knowing where my feet are going. My mind is so that if people are
talking to me I have to think to get the gist of what they are saying. There is severe
headache with an ache behind the eyes and soreness on the top of my head if I comb
my hair. I get some relief from this by lying down and taking aspirin. I have no
appetite and am liable to be sick if I eat. My stomach feels on the work.” The
maximal duration of such symptoms he estimated at three to four days from the
following experience : From the time he first started flying he had only once had
more than 48 hours between flights. This was during a period of 7 days leave, and
he did not feel really well until the fourth day. Up till that time he had felt per-
sistently ill since his first flight. On returning from leave he did a 5-hour circuit and
landing detail in very calm conditions and was quite comfortable. The next day he
was on a similar detail under comparable conditions and was all right for 3 hours,
after which he had airsickness for the remaining one-and-a-half hours, and took
one-and-a-half hours to recover after landing. Next day, on a similar trip under
rather less favourable conditions, it began after 1 hour and continued for the rest
of the trip. From this time onwards he felt persistently ill (maximum interval
between trips 48 hours). When seen 3 days after his last trip he felt well except for
anorexia and an ache behind the eyes which he had previously noted as the last
symptoms to disappear. He was a very stable man with no evidence of neurosis
or neurotic predisposition and his morale was good. He liked flying and had shown
notable persistence in carrying on with it. There was a history of his always vomiting
on scenic railways and switchbacks since childhood ; he had not been on the sea,
and was not sick in cars or trains.
Our observations have convinced us that there is no intensity or
persistence of symptoms on the ground which is not compatible with airsickness
uncomplicated by any other physical or psychological disorder.
The degree of incapacity resulting from the airsickness was judged from
the man’s own statements and from the executive reports. The incapacity did
not, for purposes of assessment, include the period when the man was distracted
by actually vomiting. In two-thirds of the cases the man had at some time
in his flying career been so incapable in the air that he had been unable to attend
to his duties. Inefficiency short of total incapacity was described by the man
or his colleagues in nearly every case (94 per cent). It may, therefore, be
assumed from this sample of cases that before a man is suspended for air-
sickness by present standards his disability has made him seriously inefficient
in his duties.
The frequency with which airsickness is experienced can only be determined
in retrospect and then as a rule only from the man’s unsupported statement,
for unfortunately no course to course record of airsickness is kept. It may well
(76642) K


TABLE III
Frequency of airsickness at the time of suspension
Percentage of trips in which
Percentage of
vomiting occurred on last
cases
course before suspension
(Total 120)
0-24
6
25-49
7
50-74
21
75-99
43
100
24
be that the man’s story is inaccurate even when he is genuinely attempting to
give a true account of his condition. The frequency varies in the course with
weather conditions, and with the kind of exercise and the type of aircraft.
A rough indication of the frequency of airsickness at the time of suspension is
given by the following table.:—
This table shows that two-thirds of the suspended men vomited on the great
majority of their later trips, and reference to the notes shows that in most
instances symptoms were present on many of the trips in which vomiting did
not occur. This comment upon the frequency of airsickness in a course leads
to consideration of the degree of adaptation during the course. It has been
shown that in aircrew suspended for airsickness, adaptation does not occur
during a trip. In 20 (17 per cent) some adaptation to airsickness was recognised
during at least one course of instruction in the man’s flying career. By this it
is meant that the occurrence of nausea or vomiting was less frequent at the end
of the course than at the beginning. In the remaining 100 cases (83 per cent)
the sickness continued throughout the course without variation except in
relation to adverse conditions. Adaptation during the flying career was, of
course, not met in any case, since it was failure of adaptation which led to the
man’s ultimate suspension. In several cases there was progressive failure of
adaptation with increasing experience as in the following case :
Case 104 : A pilot officer, air gunner, aged 21, with 230 flying hours, was referred
from an O.T.U. where he was instructing. His symptoms were continuous nausea
• and repeated vomiting throughout the trip. After a bad trip he took 24 hours to
recover. The main factor was evasive action. With progressive experience he was
more frequently affected, the time of onset was shorter, vomiting gave him less
relief, incapacity was therefore greater, and the duration of symptoms after landing
was longer. At his A.G.S. he vomited on a third of the trips (only those with evasive
action) and at the O.T.U. on 20 per cent. He then went to a Lancaster squadron
arid did 23 operations, his tour being prematurely ended because of airsickness
which only troubled him severely when there was evasive action. On his first 4
trips with an average pilot he vomited on 2 : in the next 17 with a pilot whose usual
habit was to fly straight and level he vomited on 4 : on the last 2 trips with a pilot
who weaved most of the time he vomited frequently and was disabled. After his
tour he did tw r o fighter affiliation details at an O.T.U. as instructor and vomited
on both. He was, therefore, given 3 months’ rest from flying, but on resuming,
after 3 trips of straight andTevel flying without airsickness, he did 9 trips involving
evasive action and was incapacitated on all, vomiting on 8. He was not improved
by treatment. There was no history of motion sickness until after his increased
liability to airsickness, when he found that the, scenic railway upset him. There was
no evidence of neurotic predisposition. His attitude towards flying as judged from
the interview, and from the executive report was flawless. No reason could be
discovered for his progressive failure of adaptation except that he had developed
a conditioned response so that eventually " even the smell of a.kite running up will
give me that sick feeling, even when I’m passing one and not going to fly.”
Special causes for the disability were sought, as has been described (Method,
page 282). In some of the more severe cases, the man was invariably sick
while airborne, vomiting. occurred while the aircraft was flying straight and


level in calm weather, and he said that he was always so sick that he did not
know any factor which did, or could, make him worse. The aggravating factors
most frequently incriminated were : —bumpy weather, in 82 per cent of cases ;
evasive action, particularly during fighter affiliation exercises, and aerobatics
of any sort, in 70 per cent; and the length of time exposed to motion, that is
unusually long trips, in 53 per cent. The following factors were also mentioned :
the smell of the aircraft —petrol, coolant and hydraulic fluids ; warmth ; the
type of aircraft; the position in the aircraft, particularly of the rear gunner,
navigator or wireless operator who may sit sideways, and the bomb aimer
lying flat in the nose ; and apprehension either of danger or of failure to complete
the task. One or more of the factors other than rough weather and violent
manoeuvres were blamed by almost three-quarters of the subjects.
The time of onset of airsickness in a trip depends in most instances, of course,
upon whether any of the special aggravating factors are present during the
trip, and upon their intensity at the time. The usual interval after take-off
at which symptoms commenced was 20 minutes to an hour. Those (12 per cent)
who persistently noticed symptoms early, within 5 or 10 minutes of take-off,
were nearly all men with severe, incapacitating airsickness and they all had
a previous history of motion sickness, usually of exceptional degree. Symptoms
may also occur, however, as a result of association without any motion, for two
men who had been persistently airsick ultimately became mildly nauseated as
soon as they entered the aircraft, and before it was airborne. In neither case
was there any evidence of neurosis, neurotic predisposition or defective morale.
This anticipatory reaction, though dependent upon factors which may be
described as psychological, we regard not as a neurosis but as a conditioned
response. It is, of course, well recognised as a complication of seasickness.
The men with a variable or late onset of nausea in the air were all sick in
response to specific conditions, which have already been described. They
remained well until the special cause, usually evasive action or bumpy conditions,
operated.
(c) Psychiatric assessment
As already explained two questions were considered in every case —whether
the man was suffering from a neurosis and whether he showed any predisposition
to neurosis. In order to obtain as much consistency as possible in answering
these two questions, criteria were discussed before the material was analysed
and it was agreed that a neurosis should be defined as an illness characterised
by the mental or bodily symptoms of an affective disorder—anxiety or
depression ; hysteria ; or an obsessive compulsive neurosis. These symptoms
might be independent of the airsickness, they might cause or contribute to it,
or might develop as a result of the airsickness. Whatever part they might
play in the total symptom picture they must constitute disability additional to
airsickness in order to be called neurosis. Predisposition to neurosis was
assessed as nil, slight, moderate or severe on the basis of previous studies
(Symonds and Williams, 1944). This assessment was, of course, quite
independent of the diagnosis of neurosis. Whether a man is suffering from
a neurosis, airsickness or a broken leg one may enquire whether there is evidence
from his past history of a neurotic constitution. The concept of the neurotic
constitution used by us in this and previous reports closely resembles that
admirably described by Slater (1943) with the important exception that we
have given especial weight to factors which have been shown by Gillespie
(1942) and others to indicate the probability of neurotic breakdown under the
particular stress of flying duties. The assessment of severe predisposition is
equivalent to a clinical impression of sufficient probability of breakdown to
have justified rejection at entry by an Aviation Candidates Medical Board.
(76642) K 2


[d) Neurosis
Evidence of a neurosis was found in 9 subjects—7-5 per cent of the total.
There were 6 men with an anxiety neurosis, 2 with hysteria, and 1 with
anxiety and hysteria. In one of the cases of anxiety neurosis the symptoms
though they had been ascribed by the Medical Officer to airsickness were in
fact symptomatic of neurosis.
Case 37 ; An L.A.C. pilot under training, aged 24, was referred from an E.F.T.S.
with 42 flying hours. He had always been nervous of heights, had been under medical
care for four months at the age of 15 on account of depression and feelings of un-
reality, with a subsequent liability to milder episodes of the same kind of illness, and
up to the age of 18 had a phobia of eating in public places. His training began in
the U.S.A., but he was failed after 7 hours probably because he was nervous. In this
country he was given a second chance and passed through a Grading School. He
was nervous of spinning but got over it. At his Elementary Flying Training School
in South Africa after 3 hours’ flying he became run down and depressed, was given
sick leave and failed to finish the course, but returned to this country. Here he again
commenced Elementary Flying Training School training, but in any new manoeuvre
which tested his confidence developed severe anxiety with gripping in the stomach
and nausea. These sensations he described as quite different from those of true air-
sickness which he had twice experienced in rough weather.
The distinction between true airsickness defined as a species of motion sickness
and the visceral accompaniments of an anxiety state is, we believe, quite clear
and will be considered further in the discussion.
In the other 8 cases there was evidence of neurotic disability in addition to
true airsickness of some degree. In some of them the neurosis was judged to
have contributed to the airsickness by weakening the capacity for adaptation
to motion. The following case was the most striking example :
Case 49 : A sergeant wireless operator/air gunner, aged 22, with 200 flying hours
was referred from an Operational Training Unit with symptoms of nausea an hour
after take-off continuing through the trip with recurrent vomiting. He felt ill for
3 hours after landing. He had never suffered from airsickness at any stage of his
training, but shortly after joining his squadron was involved in a crash in which
4 of the crew were killed and he had a head injury with amnesia for 1 hour. On
recovering his senses he helped to drag from the wreckage a badly injured comrade
who afterwards died. Following this experience he continued flying but developed
anxiety symptoms, and also experienced airsickness on every trip. There was no
history of motion sickness or of neurotic predisposition. His morale was good.
In this case the development of an anxiety neurosis resulting from a severe
psychological trauma led directly to a loss of adaptation to the motion of the
aircraft with consequent disabling airsickness. In another instance (Case 84)
an anxiety neurosis arising from domestic causes resulted in a considerable
aggravation of a mild degree of airsickness and was further complicated by
a hysterical reaction.
Case 84 : A flying officer, pilot, aged 24, with 1,225 hours, mostly as staff pilot, was
referred from an Advanced Flying Unit, where he was under training. Until recently
he had been quite comfortable on more than 75 per cent of flights, though he was
airsick in usually rough weather and in aerobatics. After hearing that his mother
in Canada, to whom he was very devoted, had cancer, he became worried and sleep-
less, and after this was nauseated on every trip with occasional vomiting. He tried
to get a compassionate home posting and failed. He hoped to get invalided home
for airsickness and had an exaggerated idea of his disability. In this case a slight
liability to airsickness was aggravated by domestic anxiety, and provided the basis
for a hysterical reaction. There was no evidence of neurotic predisposition. Morale
was rated as indifferent.
There were three cases in which airsickness was associated with an anxiety
neurosis arising from failure to achieve confidence in the air, and in each case
the neurosis was considered to have aggravated the airsickness. The most
characteristic example was the following.
Case 15 : An A.C.2 wireless operator, aged 19, with 5 hours’ flying in the A.T.C. and
7 hours in the service, was referred from a Radio School. His symptoms were nausea,
sweating and abdominal discomfort beginning half an hour after take-off, followed
by headache and repeated vomiting, the symptoms persisting till he landed, and


TABLE IV
Assessment of predisposition to neurosis
Grade of
No. of subjects
Percentage
predisposition
of total
Observer 1
Observer 2
Total
Severe
5
4
9
7-5
Moderate
8
7
15
12-5
Slight
14
13
27
22-5
Nil
33
36
69
57-5
Total
60
60
120
100-0
afterwards for an hour. He had vomited on every trip except one. There was a
past history of motion sickness on 'buses, cars and trains up to the time of the
interview. He admitted constant fear in the air, imagining all kinds of catastrophes
and making plans for baling out. On the ground he counted the hours to his next
trip, dreamed of flying and crashes, was easily startled and had become depressed
and unsociable. At the interview he was tremulous, tense and pale. His father had
a neurosis and he himself had always been timid, anxious, unaggressive and liable to
depression. Predisposition to neurosis was assessed as severe. He confessed that
any manoeuvre in the air which increased his fear accelerated the onset of airsickness.
' His parents had exerted pressure upon him to withdraw from flying duties, and his
attitude had been influenced by this. Morale was assessed as indifferent.
In two cases symptoms which bore the imprint of true airsickness, with
little vomiting, and probably little physical disability were complicated by
the development of hysteria, probably motivated by the desire to evade flying
duties. The following is an example :
Case 101 : A sergeant pilot, aged 22, with 220 hours, was referred from an A.F.U.
His symptoms were giddiness (" as if you had been' spinning yourself around ”),
and nausea persisting throughout the trip’with only occasional vomiting. Nausea and
anorexia might persist for 3 hours after landing. He stated that he had been quite
comfortable on about 25 per cent of trips. At the Advanced Flying Unit from which
he was referred he had been nauseated on all of 10 trips but had not vomited. There
was a history of motion sickness in cars and roundabouts. When 18 he had been
under medical care because he was depressed and run down when working overtime
and attending night school, and he was easily hurt if people said he was not doing
his share. He had reported sick several times for dyspepsia which was investigated
with negative results. During the interview he protested that he was not fit to
fly—" Either cure my stomach or let me get out of the Service.” The executive report
recorded that he had been nervous in training (though the patient denied this). His
Commanding Officer had formed the opinion that he was trying to evade flying
duties. His behaviour during the interview was histrionic and the case was regarded
as one of true airsickness of moderate degree with hysterical exaggeration. There
was no evidence of neurotic predisposition. Morale was assessed as bad.
In the remaining case the neurosis developed after an infection and it was
difficult to decide whether the physical or the psychological factor had been
more important in increasing the liability to airsickness.
Case 63 : A sergeant W.Op./A.G., aged 26, with 60 hours’ flying, was referred from
an O.T. U. His symptoms were persistent nausea and headache with recurrent vomiting
beginning after an hour and a half in the air, and continuing throughout the trip.
Symptoms persisted for as long as 3 hours after landing. He vomited once at Wireless
School, not at all at Air Gunnery School and once at Advanced Flying Unit, being
nauseated without vomiting on about 20 per cent of trips. Then he was admitted
to hospital with persistent fever, and subsequently had a succession of boils. On
returning to duty he was easily fatigued, irritable, depressed and anxious, and on
starting to fly again he vomited with severe incapacity on 60 per cent of trips. He
reacted to this with a sense of inferiority and frustration which increased his anxiety.
There was no evidence of neurotic predisposition or of motion sickness. His morale
was good.
In none of the other 111 cases could any evidence be found of neurosis as we
have defined it.
(e) Predisposition to neurosis
(76642)
K 3


TABLE V
Assessment of predisposition to neurosis
Grade of
predisposition
Percentage of total
Present
airsick
eliminees
Healthy pilo
flyi
Before
Advanced
Flying Unit
s continuing
n S
After
operations
Severe
7-5
2
0-6 ■
Moderate . .
12-5
10
1-5
Slight .. .. . . ..
22-5
46
26-0
Nil
57-5
42
72-0
Total subjects
120
1,009
335
Thus 42*5 per cent of the subjects were thought to show some evidence of
predisposition, and in 7*5 per cent it was considered sufficient to have warranted
rejection at entry. The main value of these figures is that they can be compared
with those obtained for other aircrew who were not eliminated for airsickness
and who had been assessed in a similar way. It has been stated under Method,
paragraph 2, that the standard of assessment conformed as closely as possible
to that adopted in the Harrogate Experiment (Symonds and Williams, 1944) of
which both the observers had intimate knowledge.
The results of that experiment are comparable in that; —
(i) The standards of assessment were as far as possible the same.
(ii) The subjects had all reached A.F.U. so that the average flying
experience was much the same —about 120 hours.
(iii) The subjects differed medically from the subjects of the present
investigation only in that they had not been suspended for air-
sickness.
An important difference was that all the subjects of the Harrogate Experiment
were pilots, who by natural selection were virtually excluded from this survey.
A comparison of the results of these two enquiries, and of a similar enquiry
into tour-expired pilots follows in Table V. This table shows that the number
not considered in any way predisposed in the airsick group falls midway between
that of the pilots before A.F.U. and after operations.
There is, however, a significant greater number of severely predisposed
subjects in the present series of airsick eliminees than in the pilots continuing
Advanced Flying Unit training. The likelihood of this difference being due to
chance is less than lin 100 (PcO-01-X 2 - = 87). It will be profitable to examine
the severely predisposed subjects in closer detail.
(/) Airsick subjects who were severely predisposed
Of the 9 severely predisposed subjects 3 were suffering from a neurosis at
the time of examination. One of these (Case 37, page 288) was judged not to be
suffering from true airsickness at all, and in the two others anxiety symptoms
in the air, arising from fear of flying, were considered to have contributed in
an important degree to the causation of true airsickness.
In 4 of the remaining severely predisposed it was considered that although
there was no evidence of neurosis the neurotic predisposition had contributed
to the disability. It did this in one or both of two ways, by lowering the


threshold for airsickness (3 cases) and by weakening the man’s capacity to
endure airsickness (4 cases). ' Examples of the first mechanism are the
following:—
Case 60 : A sergeant air gunner, aged 20, with 50 flying hours, was referred from
a Conversion Unit. His symptoms were continuous and persistent nausea with
occasional vomiting occurring on 50 per cent of trips at A.G.S. and 0.T.U., and
on all his 9 trips at the Conversion Unit. Symptoms persisted for 1 hour after landing.
There was a history of motion sickness on trains and swings. Two near relatives
had been under medical care for psychological illness ; he had always been shy and
timid, lacked aggressiveness, was over-concerned with his health, before examinations
used to feel tense and nauseated so that he failed to do himself justice and had a
special fear of heights. He volunteered for air crew hoping to be a pilot, because he
felt it was the best job he could do in the war and tl\at he might at last be a success
in life. He thought he would be able to overcome his fear of heights, but found
himself unable to attain any sense of security in the air and would feel nauseated
with fear before entering the aircraft. Nevertheless, he carried on and did not report
sick until ordered to do so by his captain at the Conversion Unit. He frankly ad-
mitted his fear of flying, but denied any fear of operations though admitting he had
no wish to fight the enemy. Rather than do a ground job in the R.A.F. he preferred
the hope of working in a coal mine, where he would, he thought, be making a more
active contribution to the war effort. The impression he gave was of being straight-
forward and sincere. Morale was assessed as good, though the executive had
judged it to be bad.
Case 116 : A Canadian sergeant air gunner, aged 21, with 75 flying hours, was
referred from an O.T.U. His symptoms were nausea and recurrent vomiting con-
tinuing throughout the trip. At the B. and G.S. he vomited on all his 19 trips, was
told to report sick, but subsequently concealed his sickness. At the O.T.U. he
vomited on more than 75 per cent of the trips, and was nauseated on the others.
The onset of nausea was usually 5 minutes after take-off, but on his last two trips
occurred while going down the runway. He was ordered to report sick by his captain.
After a single trip he recovered in 3 hours, but after flying on two or three con-
secutive days he felt limp and had no appetite for three days, and during this period
would have waves of nausea, unrelated to food, time of day or other factors. There
was a previous history of motion sickness in cars, trams and trains. His father was
an unstable alcoholic who deserted the family, and he was over-attached to his
mother. As a boy he always thought that he was physically inferior to others, and
that he felt pain more easily so that he avoided fights and was bullied in consequence.
He had obsessional tendencies which interfered with his efficiency. At the age of
18 when working in a factory he became fatigued and anxious, and had attacks in
which he felt faint and sick, for which he was under medical care but not off work.
During his illness he became fastidious about his food. If he ate food which he
disliked he would immediately vomit, and the sight of distasteful food gave him
nausea. This habit continued. He was in a reserved occupation, but volunteered
for aircrew duties from excellent motives. He was not nervous in the air and did
not want to be grounded. Neurotic predisposition was rated as severe, and was
considered to have contributed to the airsickness in a specific way by lowering the
threshold for nausea and vomiting. Morale was assessed as good.
An example of the second mechanism, where a man’s psychologica
immaturity, liability to depression, and lack of persistence handicapped him
in his ability to endure is the following:—
Case 98: A sergeant air gunner, aged 22, with 130 flying hours, was referred from
a H.C.U. His symptoms were nausea with occasional vomiting whenever he was
exposed to rough weather or evasive action. Following a bad trip, symptoms persisted
for an hour after landing. At A.G.S. he was nauseated on 10 per cent of trips and
vomited only once : at O.T.U. he vomited on 15 per cent of trips and was nauseated
on another 25 per cent. At H.C.U. he vomited on 25 per cent and was nauseated
on another 12 per cent. There was a history of motion sickness on long bus
journeys and on swings. His father and brother were both liable to moods of de-
pression. He had clericaljobs after school but eventually obtained a scholarship at
a School of Dramatic Art and earned his living as an actor, but he lacked self-
confidence and occasionally suffered from stage fright. He was liable to moods
of depression in any uncongenial environment, and on one occasion had become
sleepless, irritable and unsociable for a period of several days. After a mood of this
kind he would usually become elated for a day or two. His motivation for joining an
air crew was sound but after entering the Service he was homesick. At the interview
he gave the impression of being narcissistic and immature, and it was considered
(76642) ■ K 4


TABLE VI
Analysis of cases of airsickness with evidence of neurotic predisposition
Predisposition
Degree of predisposition
Total
contributed to
Severe
Moderate
Slight
A. Airsickness
B. Inability to endure airsickness
3
4
2
8
5
4
10
16
Total in which predisposition contributed
to 1 or 2
7
10
9
26
Predisposition did not contribute to
1 or 2
2
5
18
25
that he was making the most of his symptoms, and that his keenness for flying was
feigned. His morale, therefore, was rated as indifferent, though the executive
reported it good.
Two examples of severely predisposed men remain. In these two cases there
was no evidence of neurosis and the predisposition did not appear to have
contributed either to the airsickness or the incapacity to endure it.
Case 1: A pilot officer navigator, aged 29, with 137 flying hours, was referred from
an A.F.U. His symptoms were persistent and continuous nausea and headache
with or without vomiting. He had vomited on more than 50 per cent of'trips and
had been free from symptoms on very few. After a bad trip symptoms persisted
for the rest of the day. There was no history of motion sickness. His father was
psychotic. He himself had never played any team games, his only interests being
art and music ; he was scared of water and therefore did not learn to swim, he
avoided fights, seldom left home, made few friends and was still a nail biter. He
appeared to have made a commendable effort to persist despite his disability, and
to be genuinely regretful at being taken off flying. His morale was rated good.
Case 26: A sergeant wireless operator, aged 20, with 16 flying hours, was referred
from a Radio School. His symptoms were continuous nausea followed by headache,
and occasional vomiting on 11 out of 15 trips. Symptoms persisted after landing
for 1 hour. There was a history of motion sickness on the sea, buses and swings.
A maternal aunt suffered from psychological illness. He was sensitive at school and
did not like being shouted at; was nervous of the dark and had a night-light till
he was 12 ; swam but was too timid to dive ; was over-anxious about being late
for engagements or missing the last ’bus back to camp ; w'as disturbed by murder
stories and was frightened of guns and thought it wrong to shoot animals. On the
credit side he was sociable and joined the A.T.C. because there were no clubs near
his home. At the interview he gave the impression of psychological immaturity.
He said that he was at first nervous of flying but after 6 hours got over this and liked
it. He appeared genuinely anxious to continue his training despite the airsickness.
His commanding officer stated; “ Expresses a sincere hope that this sickness
may be overcome as more experience is forthcoming. Somewhat nervous and
highly strung but very definite in his desire to carry on and become fully qualified.”
Morale was rated good.
It appears from Table V that there is no relationship between the presence
of the milder degrees of predisposition to neurosis and the likelihood of suspension
from flying training for airsickness. The position is that predisposition to
neurosis if it is considered so severe as to have warranted rejection for flying
training constitutes a disability to the airsick member of air crew by reason of: —
(i) Increasing the likelihood of superimposed neurosis.
(ii) Lowering the threshold for airsickness.
(iii) Undermining the man’s ability to endure the airsickness.
Less severe degrees of predisposition appear to play a relatively small part in
the disability, as may be seen in Table VI.
This table shows that predisposition when relatively severe was usually
considered to have contributed to the disability but that the slighter degrees


contributed much less often. Considering all the cases together there was
about an even chance (26 to 25) that predisposition would be considered to
have contributed to the disability. The likelihood of a neurosis was, of course
greatly increased by predisposition, since in the 9 cases with neurosis,
predisposition was considered severe in 3 ai\d slight in another 3.
{g) Morale
The morale factor as a cause of suspension was considered in each* case
independently of neurosis or neurotic predisposition, a rough assessment being
made in four grades—good, fair, indifferent and bad. The data for the assess-
ment included the severity and frequency of the airsickness, the man’s attitude
towards flying ascertained as described in paragraph 2 and the executive report.
Out of the total number of 120 cases morale was assessed as indifferent or
bad in 21. For purposes of comparison with the final judgment of the investi-
gators the executive reports were assessed separately. (In 16 cases the executive
report failed to provide adequate information for an assessment.) Analysis
showed that in the judgment of the executive there were 25 cases of indifferent
or bad morale.
( h) Discrepancies between assessment of morale by the investigators and the
executive
In the whole series there were 11 cases in which there was a difference of
more than one grade of assessment between the final judgment of the investi-
gators and that of the executive. In Bof these cases the executive assessment
was indifferent or bad when the final judgment was fair or good, in the other
3 cases the position was reversed* the executive report being fair or good when
the final judgment was indifferent or bad. In the 8 cases in which the executive
had in our opinion significantly underrated morale the main reason in 5 appeared
to be failure to appreciate the severity of the airsickness. This may be due to
a variety of causes. The case may be one in which there is intense and
persistent nausea with relatively little vomiting and the man has relatively
little to show for his disability: the man may have lost keenness for flying
duties owing to the severity of his airsickness, and his lack of keenness have
been recognised without recognition of its cause : or the late recognition of
airsickness which has been present from the beginning but has not been reported
(sometimes because it has been concealed) may have been taken as evidence of
poor morale. In the other 3 cases the executive had failed to appreciate that
the man’s incapacity was due to neurotic predisposition and that considering
his handicap he had tried his best. The following case summaries illustrate
some of these points :
Case 33 : A sergeant wireless operator, aged 20, with 40 flying hours, was referred
from an A.F.U. His symptoms were persistent nausea unrelieved by occasionat
vomiting and headache. Symptoms persisted for 6 hours after landing. He stated
that he had vomited on 80 per cent of all trips. There was no previous history of
motion sickness nor any evidence of neurotic predisposition. He had been originally
ordered to report sick by his instructor and had treatment without benefit. The
executive report stressed his lack of keenness to continue flying, their report in-
dicating indifferent morale. The investigators found morale good. He was a stable
and sensible man with good motivation who had rightly concluded that his air-
sickness was incapacitating.
Case 78 : A sergeant air gunner, aged 19, with 120 flying hours, was referred from
a H.C.U. His symptoms were persistent nausea and vomiting repeated 6 to 12
times during the trip. Symptoms persisted for one hour after landing. At his A.G.S.
he vomited on 10 per cent of trips ; at 0.T.U., 50 per cent: at H.C.U., 80 per cent.
He stated that at the O.T.U. he had concealed his airsickness and had not reported
sick, hoping for improvement. At the H.C.U. he was told to report sick by his captain.


There was a previous history of motion sickness in trams only. Physically and
psychologically he was immature for his age, and rated on this account as having
slight neurotic predisposition. His motivation for joining air crew was sound, and
he appeared genuinely depressed in a rather childish way by his inability to carry
on. The executive opinion was that ‘he suffers from airsickness and intends to
make the most of it as he is not keen to operate.’ Morale, therefore, was in their
judgment bad. In the judgment of the investigators it was fair. It was thought that
his neurotic trait had contributed in some degree to his incapacity, and also to a
false assessment of morale by the executive.
In the last of these cases the underrating of morale by the executive was
considered to be partly due to their failure to appreciate neurotic predisposition
as a factor which impaired the man’s capacity to endure airsickness. The
distinction may appear to the layman a fine one but is none the less real. When
it is a question whether airsickness can be endured without incapacity the man
with a neurotic constitution may fail, having tried his hardest, when another
more robust individual succeeds. Case 60 (page 291) provides another example.
This man with severe neurotic predisposition had persisted with flying duties
despite severe airsickness and continuous fear, and had eventually lost hope of
succeeding and had become depressed. The executive report of his morale
was bad, stating that he showed no enthusiasm whatever either on the ground
or in his keenness to fly. Their observations were correct but their
interpretation, in our opinion, was wrong.
In Case 37 (page 288), a man with severe neurotic predisposition and
persistent fear of flying had made several attempts to carry on and had
developed an anxiety neurosis which was related more to his fear of failure
than concern for his own safety. The case was wrongly diagnosed as air-
sickness. His morale was assessed by us as good. The executive, however,
reported it as bad considering that he had the ability to fly but did not desire
to do so. Again, the psychiatric interpretation differed from that of the
executive owing to a fuller appreciation of what was going on in the man’s
mind.
In the three cases in which the investigators judged that the executive
had significantly overrated morale the psychiatric interview revealed features
in the personality and in the man’s attitude towards flying which in each case
were related to neurotic predisposition and indicated less than an adequate
attempt to carry on. Case 98 (page 291) provides an example. The airsickness
in this case though genuine was not severe and the psychiatric evidence
suggested that The keenness to fly noted by the executive was a pose., In a
second case also the airsickness was of moderate degree and had in our opinion
been exaggerated. This also was the opinion of the Medical Officer though
the executive did not agree. His morale was assessed by the investigators as
indifferent, by the executive as good. In the remaining case the airsickness
was severe and would have eventually led to suspension but the man was a
Southern Irishman with unsatisfactory motivation for- volunteering for air
crew duties and a poor work record, had reported sick of his own accord after
his first experience of airsickness, and had decided early that he could not
carry on, being suspended at his own request after 19 flying hours. His
protestation of keenness to fly which was accepted by the executive as
genuine, with an assessment of good morale appeared to us inconsistent with
the rest of the story, and our assessment of morale was indifferent.
(j) Relation of morale to other psychological factors
In order to relate the morale factor to those which have already been
analysed the final assessment of morale was considered separately in four
groups of cases—those with neurosis, those with neurotic predisposition con-
tributing to suspension, those with neurotic predisposition not contributing to


TABLE YII
Proportion of cases showing poor morale
Cases of poor morale
Type of case
No. of
cases
No.
Percentage
Cases of neurosis
9
4
44-4
Predisposition contributing to disability
21
10
47-5
Predisposition not contributing to disability . .
25
• 1
4<0
Cases without neurosis or predisposition
65
6
9-2
Total cases
120
21
17-5
TABLE
VIII
Percentage of each morale group in
which there was also
Assessment of
No. of
morale
cases
Predisposition
Not
Neurosis
Contributing
contributing
Good or fair
99
5
11
24
Indifferent or bad
21
20
50
5
suspension; and those without neurosis or neurotic predisposition. The
results are shown in Tables VII .and VIII.
There are several points of interest in these figures. First, in the 9 cases
of neurosis morale was indifferent or bad in nearly half. A man suffering from
a neurosis may, of course, have good or bad morale. The medical diagnosis
and the ethical judgment are distinct though the distinction may sometimes
be difficult. The assessment of morale depends upon how far the man has
made the best of his qualities with full allowance for the handicap of illness.
This is not to say that his illness in itself is not disabling. A man with a
physical illness, for example, a duodenal ulcer, has a disability but we may
assess his morale by his attitude towards the total situation including the
severity of his symptoms, his obligations to others and his willingness to endure
discomfort for the sake of fulfilling them. Examples have already been
quoted under neurosis (pages 288-290) of cases with varying assessments of
morale. In hysteria, which by definition is an illness from which the sufferer
derives real or fancied gain, we believe there is usually some element of
conscious motivation which is itself evidence of poor morale. Of the 4 cases of
neurosis with poor morale, 3 were diagnosed as hysteria. The other (Case 15,
pages 288-289) was a case of anxiety neurosis.
Nearly half of all the cases with indifferent or bad morale fall into the
group in which there was no neurosis, but neurotic predisposition was thought
to have contributed to airsickness or incapacity. This may mean either that
neurotic predisposition when contributing to suspension for airsickness does
so in many cases because it is a contributing factor to poor morale, or simply
that in any case of airsickness the combination of such predisposition with
poor morale, is especially likely to lead to suspension.


There is probably some truth in both these interpretations. By contrast the
incidence of poor morale in cases of predisposition which was not thought to
have contributed to suspension was low. Finally it is to be noted that in the
whole series of 120 cases there were only 6 cases (5 per cent) in which indifferent
or bad morale appeared to have contributed to suspension without evidence
either of neurosis or neurotic predisposition.
4. Relative frequency and importance of psychological factors
as a cause of suspension
The analysis has so far shown that in the 120 cases of this series psychological
factors, including the morale factor, contributed to suspension in some degree
as follows ; Neurosis in 9 cases (7-5 per cent), neurotic predisposition without
neurosis in 21 cases (17-5 per cent), and indifferent or poor morale without
either of the other factors in 6 cases (5 per cent), a total contribution of
psychological factors in 36 cases (30 per cent).
In one case (Case 37, page 288) the neurosis, which had beenmis-diagnosed
as airsickness, was the sole cause of suspension. In the remaining 35 cases the
symptoms were those of true airsickness in which the essential cause is failure
at the physiological level to adapt to the motion of the aircraft. An attempt
has been made in each of these cases to determine whether psychological factors
were of major importance, that is to say whether they were more than half
responsible for suspension. As we have already indicated, psychological
factors may operate in two different ways. First, they may contribute to
physiological failure of adaptation. Thus, it is possible that in airsickness of
disabling severity psychological factors may have been of major importance.
Second, they may undermine the man’s capacity or will to endure airsickness,
and operating in this way may be of major importance either by leading to
suspension for a mild and non-disabling degree of airsickness, or by leading to
suspension for a severe and probably disabling degree of airsickness some time
before the average man would have succumbed. Both modes of operation
may be apparent in the same case. Examples of the mechanisms concerned
have been given in the sections dealing with Neurosis, Predisposition to
Neurosis, and Morale. Analysis has confirmed our impression that in the great
majority of cases in which psychological factors contributed the clinical picture
was that of a severe airsickness which either was, or would ultimately have
been, disabling, for in 29 (82 per cent) of the 35 cases now under consideration
vomiting had occurred on more than half the trips on the course prior to
suspension. In 21 (60 per cent) of the 35 cases, however, psychological factors
were judged to have been of major importance in determining the fact or time
of suspension. This number was made up of 7 cases of neurosis, 11 cases of
neurotic predisposition without neurosis, and 3 cases of poor morale without
either of the other factors. The addition of the case of neurosis in which there
was no airsickness brings the total number in which psychological factors were
of major importance to 22 (18 per cent) of the 120 cases referred to us.
5. The psychological factor in relation to the stage of training at
which suspension occurred
We have encountered the belief that when airsickness leads to suspension
in the later stages of training psychological factors are the common cause.
We have analysed our material with reference to this possibility for navigators,
wireless operators, air gunners, air bombers and flight' engineers, taking each
category separately on account of the differences in the training programme.
The findings are presented in detail for the benefit of those interested in the
several crew categories (see Summary, pages 283-285).


(a) Navigators
Of 43 navigators, 16 were referred after graduating from an Operational
Training Unit. In 9of these cases the man’s story was of vomiting on more
than 50 per cent of trips at each stage of his training. In one of them, there
was a neurosis with bad morale and psychological factors were considered to
be the major cause of suspension, and in 2 others a slight degree of neurotic
predisposition was a minor contributory factor.
Among the 7 cases in which there was a history of vomiting on less than
half the trips at some stage of training, in one an anxiety neurosis was the
major cause of suspension, and in 3 others neurotic predisposition (1 case) or
poor morale (2 cases) were contributory factors of minor importance. In 2of
the other cases vomiting was relatively infrequent, but nausea was present on
almost every trip and was severe, persistent and often incapacitating. In the
remaining case there had been a progressive failure of adaptation with
vomiting on half the trips at the Operational Training Unit.
Thus, of the 16 cases there were 2 in which psychological factors were of
major importance, 5 in which they were of minor importance, and in the
remaining 9 there was disabling airsickness without any psychological factor.
(b) Air gunners H
Of the 27 pupil air gunners, 7 were referred after graduating from the
Operational Training Unit and of these 4 gave a story of vomiting on more
than half the trips at Operational Training Unit. In one of these, neurotic
predisposition was a factor of major importance.
Of the 3 men with a story of vomiting on less than half their trips at
Operational Training Unit there were two in whom psychological factors (in
both instances severe predisposition and indifferent morale) were of major
importance. The other man provided a characteristic example of progressive
failure of adaptation with exposure to violent manoeuvres with no evidence of
any psychological factors. His captain’s report summarises the case well:
“ X has been my mid-upper gunner for the last six months. During this time
I have completed 120 hoursflying. While doing normal flying at Operational
Training Unit this gunner was .occasionally affected by airsickness during
bumpy conditions. However, since converting on to four-engine aircraft and
practising evasive manoeuvres (corkscrews, banking search, etc.) he has been
persistently sick to such an extent that he has been unable to carry out his
duties above oxygen height. Although he is ' a very keen, reliable and
co-operative crew member, I consider him unfit for operational flying.”
Thus of the 7 air gunners referred from a late stage of training there were
3 in whom psychological factors were present and in each case they were of
major importance. In the other 4 cases there was satisfactory evidence of
disabling airsickness.
(c) Wireless operators
Of the 27 wireless operators, 6 were referred after graduating from
Advanced Flying Units. Of these, ,2 were uncomplicated cases of severe air-
sickness with vomiting on not less than 75 per cent of trips at any stage of
training. In a third case, again a man of good morale without neurosis or
predisposition, there had been a progressive failure of adaptation. The
remaining 3 men were all suffering from a neurosis, though in one case the
psychological factor was not considered to be of major importance as he had
been treated for and was recovering from his neurosis at a time when his
airsickness in relation to evasive manoeuvres was becoming worse.


Percentage
On the sea
.. 45
In cars or buses
.. 48
In trains or trams
.. 40
On swings ..
.. 55
With other movements, e.g. roundabouts, fun fairs
.. 14
[d] Air bombers
Of 7 pupil air bombers, 1 was referred after graduating from the Advanced
Flying Unit. He gave a history of vomiting on 50 per cent of trips at all stages
of training. There was no neurosis or predisposition and his morale was
excellent probably contributing to his having got so far.
{e) Flight engineers
Of 9 pupils in this category, 1 was referred after graduating from a
Heavy Conversion Unit where he had vomited on 30 per cent of trips but had
been quite comfortable on 50 per cent. When airsickness did occur, however,
it was persistent and incapacitating. At the Lancaster Finishing School he
vomited on 5 out of 7 trips, being completely incapacitated by corkscrews.
There was no neurosis or predisposition and morale was good.
(/) Summary
Thus, out of 113 men who were under-training in the categories mentioned,
31 were referred at a late stage of training. Sixteen of these gave a history of
airsickness so frequent and severe that they should have been eliminated at
an earlier stage. Among these 16 cases there were 4in which psychological
factors contributed, being of major importance in 2 (12-5 per cent). Among
the 15 cases with a history of less severe airsickness there were 9 in which
psychological factors had contributed to suspension, being of major importance
in 5 (33 per cent). In the other 6 cases there was a satisfactory explanation
for the late development of disabling airsickness without any psychological
factor. The conclusion arrived at is that in half the cases suspended for
airsickness at a late stage of training the cause of late suspension has been
failure to detect the disability earlier. When, however, the history of air-
sickness carefully obtained reveals that on the course preceding that of
suspension the frequency of vomiting was less than that which is usually dis-
abling there is a probability that psychological factors will be discovered, and
that they will be of major importance.
With regard to the morale factor in this group of late suspensions for air-
sickness, among the 31 cases there was 1 with an assessment of bad, and 4 with
an assessment of indifferent morale, but no case in which poor morale alone
was considered to be the factor of major importance in causing suspension.
6. Constitutional motion sickness
Evidence of a previous history of motion sickness was obtained as
follows:
In only 19 (16 per cent) could no previous history of motion sickness be
obtained, and in 58 per cent sickness had been experienced in more than one
of these’groups.
Unfortunately the standards upon which a positive history of motion
sickness are based vary so much that it is difficult to compare these figures
with those of other observers. By our standards any motion sickness sufficiently
severe to be remembered by the patient, even though it occurred in childhood


and had since ceased, would be noted. Eighty-four per cent of our series gave
a positive history of motion sickness of some kind as measured by this standard.
This compares with a figure of 58 per cent in 19 airsick eliminees from navigation
reported by McDonough (1943) and 63-4 per cent in 107 airsick eliminees of
various categories reported by Hemingway (1943).
7. Discussion
We have found few papers in the literature devoted especially to the
psychological aspects of airsickness, and in those to which we have had access
there is difficulty at times in following the argument owing to differences of
definition. Armstrong (1943) after stating that airsickness is simply a
particular form of vertigo includes as a cause of vertigo “ fear produced by
being at or looking down from high places ” and develops the argument that
vertigo resulting from motion excites unconscious fear and that this is the
cause of vomiting of airsickness " which is nothing more or less than the natural
reaction of the body to a state of fear whereby it rids itself of all unnecessary
impedimenta in preparation for fight or flight.” According to this view the
primary cause of airsickness may be accelerations, or the fear of high places.
The secondary cause is a psychogenic state in which there is a conflict between
the instinct of self-preservation and the situation. Armstrong supports these
arguments with the observation that some individuals are airsick in straight
and level flight at constant speed in calm air, and that symptoms of airsickness
may persist for as long as forty-eight hours after a flight. He considers that as
there is no physiological explanation for such phenomena they must be
psychogenic.
We cannot agree either with his use of the word vertigo or with the argu-
ments which follow. Vertigo ks Gowers (1887) argued should be restricted to
sensations resulting from disordered function of the labyrinths or their central
nervous connections. These sensations though they may show many variations
fit into a specific pattern. There is a sense of movement in self or surrounding
objects which may or may not be associated with actual disturbance of bodily
equilibrium. Fear of falling, conscious or unconscious, does not produce
vertigo as thus defined. The nausea, sweating, pallor, vomiting, headache
and other symptoms associated with vertigo, and equally associated with motion
sickness, are the result of reflex physiological disturbance, and need no
explanation in terms of psychopathology.
The occurrence of airsickness under conditions in which motion is minimal
may be compared with seasickness in like circumstances. Neither in the air
or on the sea is there ever complete freedom from motion. It is more reasonable
to assume a high degree of physiological susceptibility than psychogenic factors.
The same comment is applicable to the persistence of symptoms of airsickness
after landing. Clinical experience of the effects of stimulation of the labyrinth
and vestibular nerve shows that symptoms may persist for many hours after
the stimulus has been removed. Apart from these observations we detect in
Armstrong’s reasoning the tendency to assume that when there is no physio-
logical explanation forthcoming for an obscure clinical phenomenon the cause
must necessarily be psychogenic. Such an assumption is unjustified. Psycho-
genesis canot be argued from negative conclusions but needs positive proof.
Bond (1943), in a valuable study of the emotional factors involved in a
group of 30 consecutive airsick eliminees among navigation cadets in America,
judged the emotional factor to be predominant in 15, and emotional maladjust-
ment an important factor in a further nine. As prima facie evidence for psycho-
genesis in some of his cases he mentions the liability to airsickness in level
v flight and calm air and the variety of special causes for airsickness given by


different individuals. The first of these points we have already discussed.
The second we believe may have a physiological explanation which applies
also to Bond’s observation that in the past histories of motion sickness there
was much variation in the type of vehicle or motion responsible and that this
also suggested a psychological cause. There is no doubt from our own observa-
tions which simply confirm those of others, that different individuals may be
susceptible to different types of motion whether in the air or in other conditions.
We have examples of men who have been frequently sick in trams but not in
cars or buses, of others who were sick on amusement devices which involved
rotation round a fixed point with exposure to centrifugal force (chairoplanes)
but were never sick on switchbacks, and vice versa. So also in the air there
are men with little susceptibility to rough weather, who are highly susceptible
to the manoeuvres of fighter affiliation or corkscrews. We have noted such
variations in men in whom we could detect no psychological abnormality.
Little is known of the physiological basis for undue susceptibility to motion
but, if as we suppose it is due to variations in the function of the labyrinths
and their central connections, it is not unlikely that such variation might be
specific in certain individuals for certain planes or periodicities of motion.
The probability of such an explanation is at least as great as that of a particular
emotional significance advanced by Bond. This is not to say that psychological
factors may not be important or to detract from McDonough’s (1943)
generalisation with regard to the multiplicity of aggravating factors that
“the cause of airsickness is motion, but the concurrent appearance of many
other factors that are specifically disagreeable to the particular individual
either through previous association or a neurotic background, often reduces
the amount of motion necessary to a minimum.” We have given examples
in the analysis of our material which support this view. The question, however,
is how often psychological factors are important. Bond gives summaries of
18 of his cases which we have attempted to review by the standards used in
our investigation. Four we should probably have regarded as suffering from
a neurosis contributing materially to the cause of elimination. In the
remaining 14 cases we should have found evidence of neurotic predisposition
in 13, with evidence of contribution either to the airsickness or the cause of
withdrawal in eight. Bond himself says that the presence of neurotic trends
does not necessarily mean that these have contributed to disability from airsick-
ness, and gives an excellent example (not included in his 30 cases). Nevertheless
he appears to us in the analysis of his matefial to err in the direction of
assuming that whatever psychological abnormality was found had been a
causal factor. It is clear, however, that the incidence of neurosis and of
neurotic predisposition was considerably higher in his series than in that
which forms the basis of the present report. The discrepancy may well be due
to the difference between Bond’s material and our own. The men whom he
examined were all willing to be eliminated from navigation training after an
average of eight flights, none having completed more than 20. We suggest,
therefore, that this was a group of men who were to some extent self-selected
by their willingness to be eliminated at a very early stage of training. In
such a group one would expect to find a high incidence both of neurosis and
of the more severe degree of neurotic predisposition contributing to withdrawal.
Fraser (1944) in a series of 80 consecutive cases of airsickness referred for
investigation in Australia found 32 with evidence of neurotic adjustment, and
12 others with doubtful adjustment. His material differs in an important
respect both from ours and Bond’s, for his subjects were a consecutive series,
not of eliminees, but of men who had reported sick, either of their own accord
or by order of their instructors. Fraser follows Armstrong and Bond in
making what he calls physiological inconsistency in the symptoms one of his
criteria for a diagnosis of neurotic adjustment, including airsickness without


any constant relationship to rough weather or violent manoeuvres, remissions,
delayed , failure of adaptation, and persistence of symptoms for more than
three hours after landing. We have already stated our objections to this
line of reasoning derived both from theoretical considerations and our own
records. Fraser based his psychological assessment upon analysis of the
material under five headings :
(a) Neurotic motivation for entry.
(b) Existing emotional over-dependence.
(c) Present anxiety.
(d) Somatic conversion symptoms (including psycho-somatic instability,
i.e. liability to syncopal attacks, biliousness).
(e) Physiological inconsistency,
and presents case summaries of 31 of the 32 cases considered to show neurotic
adjustment on the basis of positive ratings under these headings with scores
ranging from 1 to 4. He makes no distinction between neurotic constitution
and actual neurosis, though admitting the possibility of the fortuitous incidence
of airsickness in an emotional background. He implies that when neurotic
adjustment was found it contributed to the airsickness but does not always
provide evidence in support of this assumption. In some of his cases the
evidence of neurotic predisposition appears to us to be doubtful, for example,
when it is based upon physiological inconsistency and a history of bilious
attacks, or other physiological instability (classified under somatic conversion
symptoms). Analysis of his 31 case summaries in an attempt to compare his
material with our own suggests that the incidence of neurosis in his series and
ours was similar and that as in our own series the more severe degrees of
predisposition contributed to disability in an important degree, whereas the
slighter degrees of predisposition rarely did so.
McDonough and Bond (1944) believe that symptoms identical with
airsickness may be caused by emotion and that it may be difficult therefore to
decide what element is setiologically paramount in an individual case. We
submit that the first part of this generalisation is inaccurate. It is true that
in certain cases the main cause of airsickness may be psychological. In such
cases, however, the psychological factor operates indirectly by lowering the
threshold of physiological tolerance for motion. The symptoms, therefore, are
those of airsickness, not of psychological disorder. Apart from this, psycho-
logical disturbance may be the direct cause of symptoms which superficially
resemble those of airsickness. These symptoms, which are the visceral accom-
paniments of emotional tension, have no special connection with flying except
that the usual source of the emotional tension is fear, and fear, though it may
be excited by many other circumstances, is commonly experienced in the air.
When anxiety is the direct cause of disordered visceral function in the air
the symptoms may be confused with those of airsickness but there are several
points of distinction. The sufferer from airsickness becomes gradually, though
sometimes .rapidly, aware of malaise related to motion, and the subsequent
development of nausea and vomiting is accompanied by a feeling of limpness
and apathy. The symptoms of an anxiety state arise from emotional distress
which the sufferer can usually describe, though he may be only partially aware
of its origin, and if nausea and vomiting supervene they are accompanied by an
increase of emotional tension whose peak coincides with that of the visceral
disturbance. At the height of his symptoms the man with airsickness sometimes
expresses his feelings by saying that he would not care if he were dead. The
sufferer from an anxiety state in the air is usually afraid of being killed,
whether he is prepared to admit it or not. Case 37 (page 288) in our series provides
an example of the introspective distinction between the symptoms of airsickness


and anxiety. We have met with several others, and have been informed that
nausea and vomiting at moments of acute anxiety in the air, for example, in
aircrew of night bombers over the target area, have been observed on many
occasions. Symptoms of this kind and cause, however, are not the symptoms
of airsickness. They are anxiety symptoms in the air and should be so called.
It would appear from the material presented in this chapter that the
incidence of neurosis in men about to be suspended for airsickness is more
than twice as high as that which we have found for all flying personnel of the
Royal Air Force (Symonds and Williams, 1943). This we interpret as due to
two causes/ First, if an anxiety neurosis develops in a man with a liability to
airsickness, the airsickness is likely to be aggravated and to appear as the
presenting symptom. Second, if a man with airsickness develops hysteria the
airsickness is likely to be utilised as a part of the escape mechanism. All our
cases of neurosis (except Case 37, page 288) have fallen into these two groups.
The part played by neurotic predisposition without neurosis has already
been discussed under that heading. There is no doubt that it may contribute
to the severity of airsickness, or the inability to endure airsickness without
incapacity, and it is therefore one of the variables which must be considered
in the aetiology. There is equally no doubt that neurotic predisposition and
incapacitating airsickness may co-exist without any causal connection. In
studying this aspect of the problem of aetiology we were looking especially for
neurotic predisposition (as distinct from a neurosis) as a causal factor but
found it present in only 21 cases, whereas in 25 other cases neurotic predis-
position was recognised but appeared to have no causal significance. It must
be admitted that the definition of neurotic predisposition is arbitrary, that
our standards may differ from those of other investigators, and' that in an
interview limited to one hour causal significance may not be detected. Since
the measure of clinical definitions and standards is at best a rough one we
append one or two of our case records in full in order to illustrate the methods
employed (pages 306-307).
What has been said in qualification of our assessments of neurotic
predisposition as a cause of suspension for airsickness also applies to the morale
factor with the important exception that we had here the independent reports
of executive officers which in most instances were factual and detailed. It
has been noted that in comparatively few cases was there any material
discrepancy between the final assessment of morale and that given by the
executive report. In only 21 cases was defective morale finally judged to
contribute to suspension, and in only three of these was it considered to be
the only psychological factor present and the main cause for suspension. As
this finding contradicts a widespread impression it must be considered further.
It has been alleged that withdrawal from flying on account of airsickness in
the later stages of training is in many cases due to fear of the imminent hazards
of the operational tour, and in support of this we have been told that if one
or two men at the O.T.U. stage question their ability to continue training on
account of airsickness their example may be followed by several others. Our
analysis has provided very little support for this allegation. Our impression
is that half the men who are suspended at a late stage have endured typical
severe airsickness with unusual fortitude, and have been encouraged either
by their own optimism or by their instructors to continue flying. When they
are crewed up at the operational training unit {heir incapacity for operational
duties becomes apparent both to themselves and to other members of’ the
crew, and they are more likely and more willing to be eliminated. There are
probably always some men with a doubtful prognosis, who are encouraged
to persist by the example of others. If one or two men report airsickness it


is likely that others will follow, not because they are afraid of the operational
prospect but because they are genuinely uncertain of their fitness for
operational duties.
There is another group of men suspended at a late stage, in whom the
history of airsickness is atypical. Critical examination of the story reveals
that in some of these atypical cases there is incapacitating airsickness of
physiological origin. Our impression is that insufficient allowance has been
made for late failure of adaptation due to physiological factors, such as evasive
manoeuvres, a new type of aircraft, and increase in the frequency and duration
of the trips, and for incapacity due to persistent nausea with relatively
infrequent vomiting. When allowance had been made for such causes 6 out
of 15 cases in our atypical group of late suspensions were judged to be suffering
from incapacitating airsickness without any psychological factor. Psycho-
logical factors contributed in the other 9 cases and were considered to be of
major importance in 5, but there was no case in the late group of suspensions
in which defective morale alone, that is to say without neurosis or neurotic
predisposition, was the factor of major importance. Our observations therefore
suggest that the impression that lack of moral fibre is a common cause of late
suspension for airsickness is unfounded and that it has arisen from failure to
appreciate:
(i) that a number of men with a typical history of severe airsickness
throughout training arrive at the late stages before their disability
is brought to notice ;
(ii) that there are atypical varieties of true airsickness which are
incapacitating;
(hi) that psychological factors other than defective morale may lead to
suspension.
An additional argument against supposing defective morale to be a frequent
cause of suspension for airsickness is the significantly small number of pilots
found in this series. It is generally accepted that the incidence of airsickness
among pilots is low for reasons which are probably connected with their
occupation and position in the aircraft, but there is no reason why they should
be immune from the morale factor. If last-minute fear of operations were an
important cause of late suspension one would certainly expect pilots to be
represented in this group whereas among the 31 men suspended from the
stage of Operational Training Unit or later, although all other categories of air
crews were represented, there were no pilots.
8. Summary and recommendations
(1) A study has been made of the part played by psychological factors in
leading to suspension from flying duties for airsickness. One hundred and
twenty men who were to be suspended for airsickness were each interviewed
for an hour. They were referred from stations representing all training units
of Flying Training Command and Bomber Command at home, all aircrew
categories being included. At the interview a detailed enquiry was made
into the nature of the disability at all stages of training; the past history of
motion sickness; the psychiatric history with a view to revealing any pre-
disposition to neurosis and any evidence of neurosis ; and the man’s attitude
to flying. Executive and medical reports were available.
(2) The symptoms have been studied with especial reference to associated
symptoms such as headache, dizziness and slowing of mental processes; to
the persistence of symptoms, especially after landing; to failure of adapta-
tion ; to the frequency and degree of incapacity ; and to special causes. It


has been concluded that the symptom pattern of airsickness may show many
variations which are independent of psychological factors.
(3) Neurosis was present in 9 cases (7-5 per cent). In one case all the
symptoms were those of a neurosis. ■ln 7of the other 8 cases the neurosis was
judged to have been of major importance in leading to suspension. In these
the neurosis either caused loss of adaptation to motion, aggravation of existing
airsickness or failure to endure it. A distinction is made between true air-
sickness (motion sickness) and the visceral accompaniment of a neurosis.
(4) Predisposition to neurosis was recognised in 51 cases (42-5 per cent).
It was severe in 9 (7-5 per cent), moderate in 15 (12-5 per cent), and slight
in 27 (22-5 per cent). The proportion of severely predisposed men is greater
than in normal aircrew continuing training. Three of the severely predisposed
men had a neurosis and in one this was the sole cause of the disability, while
in the other two it contributed to it to a major extent. In 4of the 6 without a
neurosis severe predisposition had contributed to the disability either by
lowering the threshold for airsickness or by weakening the man’s capacity to
endure it. In the other 2 the predisposition though severe did not seem to have
been a cause of the man’s suspension for airsickness.
Although severe predisposition is likely to contribute materially to dis-
ability caused by airsickness, less severe degrees of predisposition play little
part—out of 42 with moderate or slight predisposition, the predisposition was
considered to have contributed to the disability in 19, and to have played no
part in 23. In 11 cases predisposition appeared to have been of major
importance in leading to suspension.
(5) Morale assessed separately from neurosis or predisposition was con-
sidered indifferent or bad—as opposed to fair or good —in 21 of the 120 (17-5
per cent). The difficulties which face the executive in assessing the morale
factor are discussed in some detail. Morale was defective in nearly a half of
those with neurosis and of those in whom predisposition contributed to
suspension, compared with 9 per cent of those without neurosis or predisposition.
In only 3 cases was poor morale alone, without any other psychological factor,
judged to be of major importance.
,(6) The part played by psychological factors —neurosis, predisposition or
morale—was analysed in relation to the stage of training at which suspension
occurred in each air crew category. In view of the importance attached to
these factors when suspension occurs late in training especial attention was
paid to their contribution in men at O.T.U. or later. In half of these cases the
cause of late recognition was failure to detect typical incapacitating airsickness
earlier. When, however, the disability on the course preceding that of suspension
appeared less severe, psychological causes were often present and when present
were usually of major importance. Defective morale rarely contributed to
suspension late in training.
(7) Constitutional motion sickness was recognised in the previous history
in 84 per cent of the cases, and in 58 per cent it had been experienced with more
than one kind of motion.
(8) The findings are discussed in relation to the views of other investigators,
and the broad general conclusion is reached that—
When a man is suspended for airsickness at any stage of training the cause is
usually motion sickness uncomplicated by psychological factors. Psychological
factors —either neurosis, neurotic predisposition or faulty morale—may contribute
by lowering the physiological threshold for tolerance of motion, or by reducing the
man’s ability or willingness to endure symptoms ; but psychological abnormality
may coexist with airsickness without contributing to it. As a cause of suspension


References
Armstrong, H. G.
. Text-book of aviation medicine. 1943. 2nd Edition.
London. Airsickness. Chap. 15.
Bond, D. D. ..
A study of the emotional factors involved in a group of
thirty consecutive navigation cadets in the process of
elimination for severe airsickness. 1943. School
of Aviation Medicine, Randolph Field Research
Report, Project 136, No. 1.
Fraser, W. H.
The emotional factor in airsickness. 1944. (Un-
published report). R.A.A.F. FPRC Report
No. FR 87.
Gillespie, R. D.
Tentative method of selection of flying personnel from
the psychiatric aspect. 1942. (Unpublished re-
port). FPRC 417, Appendix C.
Gowers, W. R.
Lectures on the diagnosis of diseases of the brain. 1887.
London, p. 153.
Hemingway, A.
Motion sickness history and results of the swing test
of one hundred and seven airsick eliminees from flight
training. 1943. (Unpublished report). School
of Aviation Medicine, Randolph Field Research
Report, Project 170, No. 2.
McDonough, F. E. .. .. •
Airsickness in navigation training. 1943. (Unpub-
lished report). School of Aviation Medicine,
Randolph Field Research Report. Project 165,
No. 1.
McDonough, F. E. & Bond, D. D.. .
Management of the airsick aviator. 1944. The Air
Surgeon’s Bulletin, Vol. 1, No. 3, 5.
Slater, E. ..
The neurotic constitution. 1943. J. Neurol and
Psychiat., 6, 1.
Symonds, C. P. & Williams. D. J...
Investigation ' of psychological disorders in flying
personnel : clinical and statistical study of neurosis
precipitated by flying duties. 1943. FPRC 547,
( see Chapter X).
Assessment of temperament in connection with
aircrew selection : report on the psychiatric
method employed. 1944. FPRC 529 (o), {see
Chapter XVI).
for airsickness psychological factors are seldom of major importance. Psychological
factors are never the direct cause of true airsickness which should be clearly dis-
tinguished from visceral reactions to anxiety occurring in the air.
(9) In view of the delay and difficulty attending suspension for airsickness
in the later stages of training owing to lack of evidence we recommend the
adoption of a standard method of recording airsickness for each member of
air crew on each course. The records for all previous courses should accompany
the man to his next course and they should include notes upon the frequency
of the airsickness, the main symptoms, the frequency of incapacity due to air-
sickness, the degree of adaptation to motion during the trip or course, and the
nature and maximum duration of symptoms after landing.


APPENDIX
METHODS OF ASSESSMENT OF NEUROTIC PREDISPOSITION AND MORALE
Illustrative case histories
I. Moderate predisposition
Case 53 ; A Pilot Officer, Air Bomber, with 400 flying hours, was referred from an
O.T.U. where he was instructing after an operational tour on night bombers, which
was terminated after 22 sorties on account of airsickness. The story of his airsickness
was typical, with persistent failure of adaptation. His father was a sheet metal
worker, who was said to have had shell shock in the last war and suffered from
tics. His mother was described as a highly strung, excitable worrier and he was the
only child. At about the age of 4 he was taken to a doctor because he was frightened
of the dark and could not sleep, and was said to have St. Vitus’ dance (probably
tics). From these symptoms he did not fully recover until he was 9. He also had a
phobia of heights, e.g. looking over the side of a steep hill. At school he was average
at work and above average at games, his best performance being in long distance
running. He swam and dived. Though he was shy of girls he made many friends,
but his school days were unhappy because of nervousness. When working by himself
he did well but in competition became over-anxious ; thus his examination marks
were always below the level of his average performance through the term. He was
more at ease in team games than single events, suffering a good deal from tension
before important events. Leaving school at 15 he worked in an accountant’s office,
living at home. His main hobby was playing the piano ; he also took part in club
cricket and football and, overcoming his shyness, took to dancing. His holidays
were spent camping with friends. He continued to be anxious. For example, if
anything had gone wrong at the office during the day he could not close the door
and forget it like others, and he worried when he had to take responsibility. In his
social life he worried about what others thought of him. He checked his work over
to an unnecessary extent. During one period he had obsessional desires to go back
to the office and see if he had turned the light out. He realised this was absurd and
drilled himself out of it. About once in two months he would have a period of two
or three days when he was depressed and irritable without reason. This disturbed
him enough to lead him to read a popular book on psychology, from which he
inferred that his moods must be endured. He described himself as neither aggressive
nor yielding, but if he bought a book he didn’t want, would think twice about going
to exchange it on account of his shyness. He was opposed to blood sports on principle
and collected for the R.S.P.C.A. Having, however, been in Coventry and Birmingham
during the raids he had no antipathy to bombing the enemy, although he did not
enjoy it but felt that it was something to be done for the benefit of all. It was
because he believed in retaliation that he volunteered for aircrew. At first very
homesick he subsequently enjoyed service life. He was not nervous in training, but
soon lost his enthusiasm on account of airsickness. After his first 10 sorties, having
vomited on all, he told his captain he thought he was not efficient and should not
carry on. The crew discussed the situation and were in favour of his carrying on
so he did so. They had a fair share of stress during the tour, being hit several times
by flak and once by a night fighter. He wanted to do a second tour if his airsickness
could be relieved, because he thought bombing would be a decisive factor in winning
the war.
Neurotic predisposition was rated moderate with the following comment:
An extremely frank individual inclined to use superlatives in describing his air-
sickness but not his operational experiences, which he does not minimise either.
He had good insight into all his neurotic tendencies and has been determined not to
allow them to interfere with his success. Determination and persistence are the
compensating qualities (with intelligence) which might have made the assessment
slight, but one would not have guessed this before his flying career. The predisposi-
tion was thought not to have contributed to suspension. Morale was rated as good.
2. Slight predisposition
Case 121 : A Sergeant, Navigator, aged 21, with 150 flying hours, was referred
from an O.T.U. His symptoms were those of typical severe airsickness, with vomiting
on 75 per cent of trips at the Advanced Flying Unit. His father was a clerk. There
was no family history of psychological abnormality. He himself suffered from
asthma and nightmares in childhood. At school he was shy, always afraid of making


a fool of himself and being laughed at, and did not play games at first because of his
asthma. Later, when allowed to do so, he was timid of rough games because he did
not like being hurt and avoided fights for the same reason, but was fond of swimming
and diving. He mixed well and was average at his work. Leaving school at 16 he
worked as a clerk for a year and then returned to school to train for the Roman
Catholic priesthood. This was his own idea, somewhat discouraged by his parents.
He then spent 2 years in a college away from home, made friends and enjoyed the
life. His recreation was cycling. He was a careful rider and had no accidents. Before
examinations he was anxious and would sleep badly though he did well. He was
liable to fits of depression without cause, during which he would become miserable
• and his work would be slipshod; and also had brief moods of elation. He had no
obsessional tendencies. Being due to be called up with his age group he volunteered
for aircrew because it was something he had never done and wanted to do. His
father’s attitude was neutral, but his mother did not object because of the long
training and her hope that the war would be over before he operated. He found
that he got on in the service better thanhe had expected. Having thought that coming
from a religious house he would find it all very difficult, and having been afraid of
being a ' Holy Joe,' he found he was more respected than mocked and made friends
despite church-going. Although somewhat nervous to start with he soon became
happy in the air except when airsick. He was regretful at the prospect of ceasing
training, and suggested that he might be able to continue in-an aircraft he could see
out of. If grounded, he wished to make use of some of the training he had received.
Neurotic predisposition was rated slight. The comment was : timidity, mild anxiety,
and affective liability offset by a cheerful and persistent disposition. The pre-
disposition was thought not to have contributed to suspension. Morale was rated
good. The executive report merely stated that he suffered from incapacitating
airsickness.
3. No predisposition
Case 2 : A Pilot Officer, Air Bomber, with 120 flying hours, was referred from an
A.F.U. with a typical history of incapacitating airsickness. His father was a healthy
mining engineer, his mother had a phobia of water and would never go in boats
and his two sisters had the same phobia. He was frightened of the dark till he was
10 and up till the present time ill at ease in a stuffy room. At school he was shy
but mixed well and was not unhappy. At work and games he was above average
and played association football for school, town, county, and Northern England.
He swam and dived but, having tried boxing, he gave it up because not much good
at it. After school he was apprenticed to engineering. His hobbies were cycling and
hiking with friends, and later motor cycling. He was a careful rider, not easily
frightened but taking no risks. He was not subject to mood swings, obsessionally
neat but not uneconomically so. Examinations made him more anxious than the
average, for he was preoccupied with the possible disgrace of failure, but always
succeeded. He knew he would have to serve in one of the forces and his own home had
been damaged by enemy bombing and friends killed, which stimulated him to get his
own back. He wanted to be a pilot or air bomber. At Grading School he never felt
confident of his own powers, being scared of the machine and the new element. He
did not say so, for he .would never admit he could not do anything. Having failed
in grading he was quite content to be an air bomber. He stated that it was not his
wish or decision to come off flying, but that his airsickness was interfering with his
work. Although he would like to continue, he appreciated that if he were inefficient
it would spoil a crew at the Operational Training Unit, so that he thought the best
thing he could do now was to be as good as instructor as possible and train others.
Predisposition was rated nil, the family and personal history of phobias and slight
tendency to anxiety not being considered of sufficient weight for a positive assess-
ment. The executive report was as follows : " This officer has been at this Advanced
•Flying Unit for 4 weeks. During this time he has continued his training as an air
bomber and has flown for at least 30 hours. He has been found to suffer from
airsickness. This airsickness does not appear to materially upset his work. The
sickness affects the officer on practically every flight. The sickness, though not very
severe, seems to give the officer a certain dread of its occurrence. Thus he is most
unhappy in his job. Summing up, I consider him unfit for operational duties and
recommend that his training cease. He is undoubtedly keen and may be very suitable
for instructional purposes.” Their rating of morale was assessed as fair. The in-
vestigators rated morale good.


CHAPTER XXII
RELIABILITY OF PSYCHIATRIC OPINION IN THE ROYAL AIR FORCE
by
Professor A. Bradford Hill, D.Sc., Ph.D., and
Wing Commander Denis J. Williams, D.Sc., M D., F.R.C.P.
FPRC Report 601, October, 1944
Introduction
Data on some of the R.A.F. psychiatric problems, which have been
presented in Chapters IX, X,’ XI, XIV and XVII, were obtained from a
specially designed system of card returns made by the R.A.F. neuro-
psychiatric specialists. Each of the cards provided information upon a
member of air crpw who had been referred to the specialist by the station
medical officer for an opinion as to the presence of psychological disorder.
Some of the information on the cards was factual, e.g. the man’s experience, in
hours flown, of non-operational and operational flying, the aircraft he had
flown, his squadron and the nature of his duties; the remainder comprised
the considered opinions of the neuro-psychiatrist upon the reaction type of
illness, its main causes, the degree of stress experienced in flying and in other
situations, and, lastly, upon the man’s constitutional liability, or predisposition,
to psychological disorder.
In reaching his conclusions on these points the psychiatrist will use the
available factual data, all the relevant information that he can gather from
the patient in the course of an interview, and the general picture that that
patient presents to him during the interview. In.other words, psychiatric
opinion must, to a greater or less degree, resemble other forms of clinical opinion.
It must be based upon accurate observation of signs and symptoms, and an
appraisal of their development and related history* assessment of the relative
importance of these various features, and finally a comprehensive judgment
of the whole case. Experience and acumen will play important parts in the
process, but clearly, even at their best, the most careful and objective judgments
cannot have the reliability of observations made in a less complex situation or of
characteristics which are open to measurement. While it must be admitted
that such judgments will inevitably differ between one skilled observer and
another, it is important to measure the scale of these differences. This
depends on the frequency with which they will occur in a series of observations,
and their size—whether the differences are relatively slight and unimportant or
whether they represent extreme divergences of opinion.
This information has not so far been available and the reliability of
psychiatric methods has been questioned both in relation to the management
of flying personnel who have proved unequal to their task and to the detection
of those who will be unequal to it. This reliability could be determined in an
unselected population, either of air crew or of entrants, by an experiment
involving the independent examination of each of the subjects by two or more
psychiatrists, but opportunities for such an experiment, which is not without
inherent difficulties, have not arisen.
An alternative method of approach existed in the card returns mentioned
in the opening paragraph, for in a number of cases the member of air crew
referred for examination had been interviewed by two psychiatrists, each of


whom had made a card return upon the same man. Such duplicate returns
offer a means of determining the agreements and disagreements between the
psychiatric assessments on the cards. They have, however, certain defects
which must be noted :
(a) Some part of the opinion of the first psychiatrist to study the case
would have been available to the second and this could have
influenced the second observer in his judgment, though this lack
of complete independence of the judgments is not thought to
affect the results seriously (see below).
(b) The opinions mainly relate to men with a psychological disorder so
that the conclusions could not be applied indiscriminately to the
general population.
The second objection applies particularly to the assessment of predis-
position to neurosis, for the level of agreement between psychiatrists on this
point might obviously differ in a population that had already revealed its
liability to neurosis as compared with a population that had not yet had the
opportunity to do so. We should, therefore, be reluctant to transfer the present
results without reservation to the sphere of selection at entry.
(c) The fact that two opinions were called for suggests that in some of
these cases we may be dealing with the difficult rather than the
straightforward problems; disagreement might therefore be at a
maximum.
1. The data
Under the reporting system already described in Chapter IX a card is
submitted for every member of an air crew seen by a neuro-psychiatrist. The
directions were explicit and that definition was made as rigorous as seemed
possible in psychiatry.
During a period of nearly two years just over 5,000 cards were returned
and it was found that in 541 of these cases the patient had been seen by more
than one of the 37 psychiatrists then at work. The first psychiatrist had
usually seen the man in a N.Y.D.N. Centre and the second either at the
Central Medical Establishment, London, in hospital, or at another Centre.
The intervening period was usually many days, often some months, but the
opinions always referred to the same illness. The card filled in by the first
psychiatrist was not available to the second but his opinion on the medical
history sheet (Form 39) often was. This form does not include the detailed
data on the card but does contain a short statement of the first psychiatrist’s
opinion which was therefore capable of influencing the second psychiatrist’s
judgment. The form of the opinion, contained in a few sentences, was quite
different from the information required on the card and it is thought that the
results given here are unlikely to have been seriously affected by this lack of
complete independence. The aspects of the case upon which the psychiatrist
was required to give his opinion were as follows ;
(a) The reaction type of the disorder under 9 diagnoses.
(b) The main causes of the disorder.
(c) Whether or not the disorder had been caused by flying duties.
(d) The degree of flying stress, under 5 grades, to which the man had been
exposed.
(e) The degree of psychological stress apart from flying, under 3 grades,
to which the man had been exposed.
(/) The man’s predisposition to neurosis under the 3 headings nil, mild
and severe.


Reaction types
TABLE I
: the number of cases diagnosed similarly or dissimilarly by two
different psychiatrists
Diagnosis of 2nd
psychiatrist .(P.2)
Diagnosis of 1st psychiatrist (P.l)
Total
Anxiety state
Depression
Elation
Hysteria
Fatigue
Obsessional
Organic— acute
i
Organic— chronic
Schizophrenia
Lack of
confidence
Anxiety state
348
13
0
12
3
1
0
0
1
13
389
Depression
14
34
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
51
Elation
0"
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Hysteria . .
17
1
0
32
0
0
0
0
0
1
51
Fatigue syndrome
5
0
0
0
10
0
0
0
0
0
15
Obsessional
2
1
0
0
0
4
0
0
0
0
• 7
Organic—acute . .
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Organic—chronic
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Schizophrenia
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Lack of confidence
13
1
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
12
28
Total
397
50
0
49
13
5
0
0
1
26
541
For each of these characteristics, except the causes, a table has been
constructed to show the opinions reached by the first and second psychiatrists
to study the case. It may be noted that the tables do not relate to a particular
pair of psychiatrists but to any of the 37 who saw flying personnel during the
period under review, the differentiation in the tables merely being between
the specialist to see the patient first and the specialist to see him second. We
are, too, not concerned here with whether the opinions are right or wrong, but
merely with whether they agree.
2. Results
(a) Reaction type. —Psychiatrists were required to confine their diagnoses
to one of 9 reaction types : anxiety state, depression, elation, hysteria, a fatigue
syndrome, an obsessional neurosis, schizophrenia or an organic disorder, acute or
chronic. If the subject were not considered to have a neurosis at all, or any
disqualifying organic disease, but declared his inability to continue his flying
duties he was classified as suffering from lack of confidence. The diagnoses
made on this basis by the two psychiatrists to see each subject are set out in
full in Table I.
Note. —ln this and all other similar tables the opinion of the first psychiatrist to see
the case (P.l) is shown in the horizontal marginal total. The opinion of the second
psychiatrist (P. 2) is shown in the vertical marginal total. The number of times P.l and P. 2
agreed absolutely upon any one opinion is given in heavy type. All other figures in the
body of the tables show wherein the disagreement lay.
In total it will be seen that the judgments of the two psychiatrists coincide
in 438 of the 541 cases, or in 81 per cent, and differ in the remaining 19 per
cent. It is of some importance to note that this amount of discrepancy can
occur although the total numbers of cases of each reaction type recorded by
each psychiatrist for the population as a whole are remarkably similar. For
example, of the total 541 cases, P.l diagnosed 397 as an anxiety state and
P. 2 diagnosed 389 similarly. P.l diagnosed 50 as depression and P. 2 found.
51 ; P.l regarded 26 as lack of confidence and P. 2 found 28 such cases. It is


Reaction types;
TABLE II
the amount of agreement shown by two different psychiatrists under
the main diagnostic headings
Diagnosis
No. of
cases given
by P.l
Per-
centage
ofP.l’s '
cases with
which P.2
agreed
No. of
cases given
by P.2
Per-
centage
of P.2's
cases with
which P.l
agreed
Mean rate of
agreement
percentage
dis-
agreement
percentage
Anxiety state ..
397
87-2
389
88-9
88-1
11-9
Depression
50
68-0
51
66-7
67-3
32-7
Hysteria
49
65-3
51
62-7
64-0
36-0
Fatigue syndrome
13
76-9
15
66-7
71-4
28-6
Obsessional
5
80-0
7
57-1
66-7
33-3
Lack of confidence
26
46-1
28
42-9
44-4
55-6
clear, however, from study of the body of the table that this agreement in the
marginal totals has occurred despite quite frequent disagreements over the
individual case.
In considering the amount of agreement under the separate diagnostic
headings, two figures, not necessarily identical, are available, namely, how
often P. 2 confirmed the previous assessment of P.l and how often the opinion
of P. 2 had previously been reached by P.l. For instance, P.l diagnosed
5 cases as obsessional and P. 2 agreed in 4or 80 per cent of them. On the other
hand, P. 2 diagnosed 7 as obsessional and P.l had reached this conclusion in
only 4of them or 57 per cent. There is no logical reason for adopting one
percentage rather than the other as the measure of agreement for we do not
know which judgment, if either, was the correct one. The best measure of
agreement is the mean of these two percentages weighted by the number of
relevant observations made by P.l and P. 2. When a diagnosis has been
given by P.l or P. 2 the mean agreement shows how often the associated
diagnosis was the same. For example, in the obsessional group, P.l made the
diagnosis 5 times and P. 2 7 times, and P.l and P. 2 agreed in 4 of the cases.
Agreement of P. 2 with P.l is 4/5, 80 per cent, but agreement of P.l with P. 2
only 4/7, 57 per cent. The measure of total agreement is 5 times 80 plus 7
times 57, divided by 12, which is the total number of diagnoses of obsessional.
This gives a mean rate of agreement of 66-7 per cent (see Table II).
Table II shows that when one or other psychiatrist made the commonest
diagnosis, anxiety state, the other agreed with him in 88 per cent of the cases.
When one or other concluded that the case was one of depression, hysteria,
fatigue or obsessional neurosis the other agreed on, broadly, two-thirds of the
cases. When one or other psychiatrist could find no evidence of disorder and
judged the case to be one of lack of confidence the other agreed in but 44 per
cent of instances.
In considering this last poor rate of agreement the limitation in the data,
previously referred to,, must be particularly remembered, but there are other
serious difficulties in agreeing upon this particular diagnosis. On the average
less than a third of the cases referred to a station medical officer as
lacking in confidence are submitted for the psychiatrist’s opinion, and the
latter is consequently dealing only with those which present the greatest
difficulties in diagnosis. Furthermore, it is impossible to make a sharp dis-
tinction between normal fear and abnormal fear, especially when the abnormal
fear state (called an anxiety state) arises as in these subjects from normal fear
(Symonds 1943). In the less well defined anxiety states when manifest fear of


TABLE
III
Reaction types
: the alternative diagnoses when disagreement existed between the
two psychiatrists
Diagnosis given by one psychiatrist -with the percentage of
Diagnosis given by
alternative diagnoses given by the other
LUC LI tilCX
psychiatrist
Anxiety
state
(94 cases)
Depression
(33 cases)
Hysteria
(36 cases)
Fatigue
syndrome
(8 cases)
Lack of
confidence
(30 cases)
Anxiety state
81-8
80-6
100-0
86-7
Depression
28-7
—
11-1
0-0
3-3
Hysteria
30-8
12-1
—
0-0
10-0
Fatigue syndrome
8-5
0-0
0-0
—
0-0
Obsessional
3-2
3-0
0-0
0-0
0-0
Schizophrenia ..
M
0-0
0-0
0-0
0-0
Lack of confidence
27-7
3-0
8-3
0-0
““
flying is not only the cause of the disorder but is apparent to the subject and the
examiner, it becomes a matter of arbitrary opinion whether the label which is
given to the disability is anxiety state (abnormal fear) or lack of confidence
(fear). In fact, the distinction between the two may be considered artificial
from a medical point of view, since it was made in the first place by the
Executive as a matter of military expediency, with the realisation that moral
as well as medical factors had to be considered. The psychiatrist had always
realised that a distinction of this sort had to be made somewhere but he would be
hard put to decide exactly upon what criteria the distinction should depend.
Thus, although the psychiatrists agreed in the diagnosis of lack of confidence
in only 44 per cent of cases, in 86-7 per cent of these cases in which there was
disagreement, one psychiatrist made the diagnosis lack of confidence and the
other anxiety state (Table III). There was consequently failure to maintain
an exact distinction between normal and abnormal fear. The Executive
Branch, recognising the slight shades of difference which are involved in this
distinction, base the disposal of the two groups mainly upon the man's previous
endeavour and achievement rather than upon the diagnosis.
While such difficulties in diagnosis may well account for the observed
discrepancies they do not, of course, alter those discrepancies. The fact
remains that when one or other psychiatrist thought a recognisable psychological
disorder was not present and marked the case lack of confidence the other
believed that it was present in at least half the cases.
Having shown how much agreement and disagreement there was between
the two psychiatrists in making a diagnosis, it would be well to discover in
what way they disagreed. The alternative diagnoses given when disagreement
existed are shown in Table 111. For instance, when one psychiatrist made
the diagnosis of anxiety, state, the other made one of the remaining diagnoses.
As shown in the first column, one psychiatrist made the diagnosis of anxiety
state in 94 cases, but the other made the diagnosis of hysteria in 31 per cent,
depression in 29 per cent and lack of confidence in 28 per cent, and in the
remaining 12 per cent fatigue, obsessional and schizophrenia.
Table 111 shows that diagnoses of anxiety state by one psychiatrist are, in cases of
disagreement, fairly evenly distributed by the other to depression, hysteria and lack of
confidence. Diagnoses of depression, hysteria and fatigue are usually regarded as anxiety on
the alternative assessment. It may be noted from Table I that there was no disagreement
upon the absence of acute or chronic disorders of organic origin. Agreement upon the 1
absence of a disorder has the same value as agreement upon its presence.


TABLE IV
Whether or not neurosis had been caused mainly by flying duties
Opinion given by
other psychiatrist (P.2)
Opinion given by one psychiatrist
(P-1)
Yes
No
Total
Yes
411
46
457
No
37
. 47
84
Total
448
93
541
{b) Causes. —The psychiatrists were asked to define the main causes under
the following headings ; psychological, physical injury, physical illness, air-
sickness, cold, altitude and exhaustion. Psychological causes were recognised
in virtually every case by both psychiatrists, so that there was naturally
nearly a 100 per cent agreement. There was also absolute agreement in
rejecting cold and altitude as causal in any case. Airsickness and exhaustion
were only blamed in 2 per cent, and physical injury and illness in about 10 per
cent of the cases. So little data were therefore available upon these opinions
that the agreement was not tested.
(c) The responsibility of flying duties. —The cards contained an unqualified
statement as to whether or not the neurosis had been caused mainly by flying
duties. The agreement of the two psychiatrists’ opinions on this point is shown
in Table IV. In the majority of cases, 411, or 76 per cent, P.l and P. 2 botji
considered that flying duties had been a contributory factor.
In a further 47, or 8-7 per cent, they agreed that they had not played a part,
giving a total agreement rate of 84*7 per cent and disagreement in the
remaining 15-3 per cent. When both psychiatrists give a great preponderance
of positive answers the agreement in the ‘ Yes ’ group is, naturally, bound
to be high and the disagreements are, therefore, mainly derived from the
cases in which one or other psychiatrist had concluded that flying duties had
not been causal. Of the 93 cases in which P.l believed flying duties had not
been a factor, P. 2 disagreed in half, and of the 84 in which P. 2 thought flying
duties had not been a factor P.l had reached a reverse conclusion in 44 per
cent. In other words when one or other psychiatrist had reached the conclusion
that flying duties were not causal there was only an approximately even chance
that the second opinion would be similar. This discrepancy is a reflection of
the great difficulty in deciding, when other causal factors are known to be
present, whether the experiences of flying which have contributed to the
illness are of major importance. This difficulty was particularly great in
men who broke down before flying at all, where the opinion might be held that
anticipation of the job in hand had or had not contributed to the illness.
(d) Flying stress. —The psychiatrists making these returns had been
instructed to assess the psychological stress the patient had encountered in
flying, whatever the nature of his duty, and to classify it in five degrees from
nil to exceptional. As the assessment of exceptional stress was made only on
seven occasions this grade has been included under severe. No definition of these
degrees was laid down and the observer had to make his assessments in terms
of what he would regard as an average experience for any duty. The figures
of the resulting opinions of the two psychiatrists are given in Table V.


TABLE V
Classification of degree of flying stress encountered in flying by two different
psychiatrists
Opinion given by one psychiatrist (P.l)
Opinion given by other
psychiatrist (P.2)
Nil
Slight
Moderate
Severe
Total
Nil
140
33
9
1
183
Slight
29
76
20
10
135
Moderate
9
33
72
21
135
Severe
1
12
35
40
88
Total
179
154
136
72
541
TABLE VI (a)
Percentage number of cases in which two different psychiatrists agreed and disagreed
in their opinions
(Derived from Table V)
Opinion given by 1st psychiatrist (P.l)
Opinion given by 2nd
psychiatrist (P.2)
Nil
Slight
Moderate
Severe
. (179 cases)
(154 cases)
(136 cases)
(72 cases)
Nil
78-2
21-4
6-6
1-4
Slight
16-2
49-4
14-7
13-9
Moderate
5-0
21-4
52-9
29-2
Severe .. .. ..
0-6
7-8
25-7
65-6
Total ..
100-0
100-0
99-9
100-1
TABLE VI (b)
Opinion given by 2nd psychiatrist (P.2)
Opinion given by 1st
psychiatrist (P.l)
Nil
Slight
Moderate
Severe
(183 cases)
(135 cases)
(135 cases)
(88 cases)
Nil .. .. ..
76-5
21-5
6-7
1-1
Slight
18-0
56-3
24-4
13-6
Moderate
4-9
14-8
53-3
39-8
Severe
0-5
7-4
15-6
45-5
Total
99-9
100-0
100-0
100-0
It will be seen that there is fairly close agreement between P.l and P. 2 in the
distribution of the degrees of stress in the population as a whole, as shown in the
marginal totals, but again agreement over individuals, in the body of the table, is
not so close. The extent to which agreement existed is given in percentage form in
Tables VI (a) and (b) which show how often P.l’s opinion was subsequently confirmed
by P. 2, and also how often P.2’s opinion had been previously reached by P.l.
It will be seen that the same answer is usually reached in comparing
P.l with P. 2 (Table VI(a)) or P. 2 with P.l (Table VI(6)). The conclusions
derived from them are as follows. If one or other psychiatrist thought that
no flying stress at all had been experienced by the patient the other agreed
with him in rather more than three-quarters of the cases and regarded it at


TABLE VII
Degree of non-flying stress experienced in the opinion of two different psychiatrists
Opinion given by other
Opinion given by one psychiatrist (P.l)
psychiatrist (P.2)
Nil
Mild
Severe
Total
Nil
315
63
4
382
Mild
43
97
5
145
Severe .. .. .. ..
1
2
11
14
Total
359
162
20
541
least as only slight in another 16-18 per cent. On the other hand, serious
disagreements (of more than one degree) are apparent in five per cent of the
cases —nil in the judgment of one and moderate or, very occasionally, severe
in the judgment of the other.
If the stress was judged to be slight by one or other psychiatrist there was
exact agreement in approximately half, and in another 21 per cent the second
opinion was only nil rather than slight. On the other hand, seven to eight per
cent of the cases considered slight in one judgment were regarded as severe
in the other—a difference of more than one degree.
With those cases where the stress was judged to have been moderate
there was again exact agreement in some 50 per cent but nearly seven per
cent were regarded as having had no stress at all in the second opinion.
Where stress was judged severe there was also exact agreement in roughly
half the cases, but the second opinion considered nearly 14 per cent as slight
only and one per cent even as nil—a total of 15 per cent marked discrepancies.
If in the table as a whole we consider a difference of more than one degree
as denoting a serious discrepancy between assessments, then we find that
there were 42 such divergences or 7*B per cent of the total 541 cases. (This
figure is the same whether we take P.l to P. 2 or P. 2 to P. 1.)
(e) Non-flying stress. —The degree of psychological stress which had been
experienced apart from flying, referred to as non-flying stress, was assessed
by the psychiatrists in three grades—nil, mild and severe—for which no
definitions were laid down. The agreement reached upon this three-point
assessment is shown in Table VII. The data show exact agreement between
judgments in 78 per cent of the assessments —the majority indicating no
such stress. The most marked difference in opinion lies in the severe category,
for P.l regarded 20 men as having had severe non-flying stress and P. 2 agreed
with him in 11 cases (55 per cent), but regarded five as having had mild stress
and four as having had none at all. This discrepancy is less when viewed in the
reverse direction for of the 14 assessed as severe by P.2,' P.l had similarly
judged 11 (79 per cent).
If nil or mild in one judgment and severe in the other is taken as being
a serious difference of opinion, the table as a whole gives 12 such cases, repre-
senting 2-2 per cent of the observations.
{/) Predisposition to neurosis. —Finally there is what is probably the most
important problem of assessment, that of predisposition to neurosis. It is
based upon the man’s life story up to the time of assuming aircrew duties, and.
upon the total impression obtained at an interview lasting for an hour. The
predisposition was assessed in one of three grades—nil, mild, severe—and the
relevant figures are given in Table VIII. Exact agreement was reached as to


TABLE VIII
Degree of predisposition to neurosis in the opinion of two different psychiatrists
Opinion given by 1st psychiatrist (P.l)
Opinion given by 2nd
psychiatrist (P.2)
Nil
Mild.
Severe
Total
Nil
61
51
4
116
Mild
64
202
34
300
Severe
10
56
59
125
Total . .
135
309
97
541
TABLE IX
Degree of predisposition to neurosis : the percentage of agreements and disagreements
between two different psychiatrists
Opinion given by other
Opinion given by one psychiatrist (P.l)
psychiatrist (P.2)
Nil
Mild
Severe
Nil
48-6
18-9
6-3
Mild
45-8
66-3
40-5
Severe
5-6
14-8
53-2
Total
100-0
100-0
100-0
the degree of predisposition assessed on this three-point scale in 322 instances,
or 59-5 per cent of the total. It will be noted from Table VIII that the
distribution of the assessments in the total population also show an appreciable
difference, for P.l regarded 135 of the men as having no predisposition and
97 as being severely predisposed, while P. 2 considered only 116 to have no
predisposition and as many as 125 as being severely predisposed.
The percentage rates of agreement and disagreement to which these
figures lead are given in Table IX. They are the weighted mean rates of the
proportions in which P. 2 confirmed P.l’s opinion and in which P.l had
previously reached P.2’s assessment calculated as described on page 311 and
as shown in Table 11.
These figures of Table IX lead to the following conclusions: —
(i) When one or other psychiatrist had assessed a man as having
no predisposition to neurosis, the second psychiatrist agreed
exactly with this opinion in just under half the cases (48-6 per
cent). The great majority of the remainder were regarded by the
second psychiatrist as having only a mild degree of predisposition.
In 5-6 per cent, however, the second psychiatrist concluded
that a case marked nil by his colleague had a severe degree of
predisposition.
(ii) When one or other psychiatrist had assessed a man as having a
mild predisposition to neurosis, the second psychiatrist agreed
with this opinion in two-thirds of the cases. In 18-9 per cent he
could detect no predisposition at all and in the remaining 14-8 per
cent he regarded the degree as severe rather than mild.


(iii) When one or other psychiatrist had assessed a man as having a
severe predisposition to neurosis, the second psychiatrist agreed
exactly with his-opinion in just over half the cases. In the great
majority of the remainder he would regard the degree of predis-
position as mild rather than severe, but in 6-3 per cent of the
cases marked severe by his colleague he could detect no
predisposition at all.
Returning to Table VIII, it may be held that differences between mild
or no predisposition are relatively unimportant and that the crucial agreement
then is upon whether a man is so predisposed that he should have been rejected
for aircrew on the evidence available. Of the 97 so regarded by P.l, P. 2 would
disagree in 38 cases, or 39 per cent., while of the 125 judged severe by P. 2,
P.l disagreed in 66 cases, or 53 per cent. In other words, in this particular
field of observation nearly half the assessments of severe predisposition made
by one psychiatrist were not confirmed by another psychiatrist, though in
87 per cent, of the disagreements the other psychiatrist recognised some signs
of predisposition which led to the assessment mild.
The circumstances in which the two psychiatrists work must be considered
in appraising this result. The first psychiatrist is almost invariably working
at a centre near the squadron to which the patient is referred by the station
or squadron medical officer. As a rule this psychiatrist has referred these
cases to hospital for further investigation and treatment, or to the Central
Medical Establishment for further investigation and disposal. He himself is
much more preoccupied with the immediate handling of the patient than with
his ultimate disposal. In these cases which he is referring elsewhere he is
less likely to tax the patient with a detailed analysis of his past and he ma} 7
fail to elicit points revealed by the second observer, which, had he known
them, he would have considered important in assessing predisposition. Indeed,
the first psychiatrist may feel it undesirable as well as unimportant to push
the matter at that stage. The second observer is bound to do so in order to
ascertain the best disposal, which is based mainly upon an assessment of
predisposition to neurosis, and he usually also has greater opportunity for
doing so. The results in Table VIII support these observations since they show
that the second psychiatrist has in fact elicited more evidence of predisposition
than has the first. As was pointed out early in this report, such limitations of
the enquiry suggest that it is undesirable to transfer the present results without
reservation to the sphere of selection of aircrew at entry.
3. Conclusion
In the previous sections we have shown in detail the amount of agreement
which the psychiatrists have revealed in assessing the characteristics of cases of
psychological disorder, and we have dealt with each of those characteristics
in turn. An obvious question then is : What is the overall result ? Is the
general standard of agreement good, bad, or indifferent ? The answer to that
question must depend partly upon the universe of discourse, i.e. the particular
problem at issue. If the object of collecting such psychiatric data is to get a
broad picture of the characteristics of different populations, such as different
members of aircrew or the same population at different periods of time, then,
on the whole, we should regard the amount of agreement as sufficiently close
to lead to some useful results. For instance, in assessing the importance of
flying stress as a factor in psychological disorder the psychiatrists quite
frequently show relatively slight differences of opinion and occasionally serious
differences. It would, however, be reasonable to use such judgments to see
whether the distribution of this characteristic differed widely between one
large group and another or between one time and another.
(76642) L


A parallel situation can be found in the study of the certified causes of
death. Some degree of error is inherent in all such material, varying from
one cause to another, but it is possible nevertheless to make, with due caution,
illuminating studies of changes in the death rates in time or between specific
occupational groups. With similar caution and attention to particular circum-
stances, e.g. changing standards in time, it seems that corresponding comparisons
can be of value in the present field of study. Further, with the causes of
death, attention must be focussed upon each particular cause under study
and the probable amount and type of error assessed; no overall degree of
accuracy can be applied. Similarly here we cannot give a general rate of
agreement. Our results show that in some characteristics there is a greater
degree of concordance than in others and those differences must be borne in
mind in the interpretation of results.
If the universe of discourse is not the characteristics of a population—
subject to error but still of value in giving the broad picture—but is the
characteristics of the individual, then we are on much less secure ground.
Even ignoring the slighter discrepancies, we have still a modicum of disturbing
disagreements which may, for the individual, have far-reaching results, e.g.
the connotation lack of confidence or the assessment of a severe degree of
predisposition. We make no attempt to minimise these disagreements. With
regard to the former we conclude that while with some cases there may be no
serious difficulty in reaching a clear-cut conclusion, in others there can, from
the medical aspect, be no certain dividing line between normal and abnormal
fear.
With regard to predisposition the psychiatrist’s aid may well be sought
in the selection of aircrew at entry. We have pointed out that we do not
think the present results can be legitimately transferred to that field since
these assessments were made after breakdown had occurred and not in
anticipation of it. The degree of concordance in judgments in a “ normal”
population might well differ from that found in this “ abnormal ” group.
At best, however, these subjective evaluations of the personality present
problems of great complexity and, as E. S. James (1944) has pointed out,
are capable of many interpretations. In practice, the rejection of an unsuitable
man will, however, depend upon the considered opinion of a medical board,
or, if he is considered medically fit, of a board of executive officers who may
use the opinion of the psychiatrist as well as the findings of psychologists, in
assessing the candidate’s temperamental suitability.- Thus either the medical
or tlie executive board may use the psychiatrist’s opinion to enlarge the
premises upon which their judgment is based. In such a setting differences
of psychiatric opinion may still play a part in the final decision, but they will
play a less dominating role—and such differences in the appraisal of personalities
are, it should be noted, not the sole prerogative of the psychiatrist but affect
all who are concerned with selection.
Returning then to the question at the beginning of this section—ls the
standard of agreement of psychiatric opinion good, bad, or indifferent ?
we should, in short, say that the answer depends upon the particular circum-
stances under which the observations are made, the particular characteristics
under study, and the particular purposes for which they are being applied.
The present observations, though limited to a circumscribed field, namely,
cases of psychological disorder, at least give some numerical measure of those
differences of opinion which it was obvious must occur in so difficult a field of
judgment. They may therefore aid in the interpretation of results in that,
field.


4. Summary
(1) Under a system in use in the Royal Air Force a specially designed
card is completed by neuro-psychiatrists for every member of air crew referred
to them with suspicion of a neurosis. The information thus provided includes
the psychiatrist’s conclusions upon the following points: The reaction type of
the illness ; its main causes and their relationship to the man’s flying duties ;
the degree of psychological stress to which the man has been exposed in flying ;
the degree of stress to which he has been exposed apart from flying; and the
extent to which he is predisposed to neurosis.
(2) In nearly two years just over 5,000 such cards were returned, and in
541 of these cases it was found that the same man had been seen at different
times and in a different place by two different psychiatrists. These duplicate
returns offered a means of determining the degree to which any twp
psychiatrists using similar methods of interview agreed in their judgments on
the points listed above.
(3) This scale of agreement is being measured, it should be noted, not in
an unselected population but in a group almost entirely composed of cases of
psychological disorder. To some extent it will probably comprise the more
difficult of those cases.
(4) The reaction type of the disorder was diagnosed under 9 headings. In
81 per cent of the cases the two psychiatrists agreed in their diagnosis, in
19 per cent they disagreed. Study of the specific diagnoses shows that the
psychiatrists agreed in nearly 90 per cent of cases with the commonest
diagnosis—namely, anxiety state—and in approximately two-thirds of the
cases diagnosed as either depression, hysteria, fatigue or obsessional neurosis.
They agreed in the complete absence of acute and chronic organic disorder.
When one psychiatrist could find no evidence of neurosis and judged the case
to be one of lack of confidence, the other agreed in only half the cases. This
disagreement is discussed in the light of the difficulty of deciding in borderline
cases where normal fear (lack of confidence) ends, and abnormal fear (an
anxiety state) begins. The great majority of these cases, regarded as fear
by one examiner, were regarded as an anxiety state, or abnormal fear by
the other. Disagreement upon this particular distinction, which is funda-
mentally artificial, was to have been expected.
(5) In 76 per cent of the cases both psychiatrists considered that flying
duties had been a factor in the psychological disorder. In 9 per cent both
considered that it had played no part, giving a total agreement rate of 85 per
cent and disagreement in the remaining 15 per cent.
(6) In assessing on a four-point scale the amount of flying stress experienced
the psychiatrists agreed exactly in 61 per cent of cases. They differed by more
than one place in their assessments in 8 per cent of the cases.
(7) In their assessment on a three-point scale of the degree of other stresses
to which the patient had been exposed the psychiatrists agreed exactly in 78 per
cent. They differed seriously in 2 per cent.
(8) In their assessment of the patients’ predisposition to neurosis upon a
three-point scale the psychiatrists were in exact agreement in 60 per cent of
the cases. Nearly half the assessments of severe predisposition made by one
psychiatrist were not confirmed by the other, though in the great majority of
such cases the second psychiatrist recognised some signs of predisposition,
regarding them as mild rather than severe. In 6 per cent of the cases that had
in the opinion of one psychiatrist a severe degree of predisposition the other
psychiatrist could detect no evidence of any predisposition.
(9) The limitations of the results of the enquiry and particularly of those
relating to predisposition are described, with a comment upon the inadvisability
of transferring the conclusions directly to the problem of selection of air crews.


References
James, E.
s.
Chapter in Hunt's Personality and the behaviour
disorders. 1944. Ronald Press Company, New
York.
Symonds,
c.
P
The human response to flying stress. Lecture II.
The foundations of confidence. Brit. Med. J. 11th
Dec. 1943, 740.
Symonds, C.
P. & Williams, D. J...
Investigation of psychological disorders in flying
personnel : statistical survey of the records for six
months, 3rd February to 3rd August 1942. FPRG
412 (g) (see Chapter IX).
"
Clinical and statistical study of neurosis precipitated
by flying duties. 1942. FPRC 547, (see Chap-
ter X).
”
Probability of return to full flying of men who have
broken down under the strain of operational duties.
1943. FPRC 561, (see Chapter XVII).
*
..
Occurrence of neurosis in R.A.F. aircrew, 1943-1944.
FPRC 412 (i), (see Chapter XI).
Williams,
D.
J
, Predisposition to psychological disorder in normal
flying personnel. 1943. FPRC 516, (see Chap-
ter XIV).


CHAPTER XXIII
FLUCTUATIONS IN NAVIGATOR PERFORMANCE DURING
OPERATIONAL SORTIES
by
Squadron Leader D. D. Reid, M.D.
FPRC Report 615, April, 1945
Introduction
Interest has been'recently focussed on the various factors likely to affeCt
the level of crew efficiency under operational conditions. Tactical considera-
tions, such as the need in bomber operations for precise timing and track-
keeping demand the minimum of human error. Laboratory experiments
have strongly suggested the importance of prolonged mental concentration as
a cause of deterioration in performance. The results suggest that the effect
of fatigue will be evident in a fall in the level of efficiency towards the end of a
long period of mental effort. In bomber operations, however, study of special
features of combat performance such as bombing accuracy has shown
inconsistencies which cannot be explained by the mechanical effects of heights
or evasive manoeuvre, or by the effects of fatigue on crew personnel. Such
instances also occur during training, where navigators can pass a speeded-up
synthetic exercise yet fail on a flying exercise conducted at relatively reduced
speed. Where no adequate physical explanation is feasible, the effects of such
intangibles as anxiety and emotional upset must be examined. This paper
describes an attempt to interpret the fluctuations in performance during
operational sorties in the light of the possible influence of such psychological
factors.
It is at once apparent that the main difficulty in making an accurate
analysis of operational performance is the absence of an adequate measure of
the quality of that performance at various points during a sortie. Certainly
there exists no gauge of overall skill which can be applied to the material
available from combat records. Until such a gauge materialises, it must suffice
to assess from the analysis of one facet of the overall performance, the
fluctuations in efficiency from time to time during an operational sortie.
In this study, the facet of performance analysed was the calculation and
plotting error involved in measuring wind vectors on the navigational charts
used on operational sorties. This measure of performance has considerable
advantages;—
{a) It is operationally important (in track-keeping and timing).
( b ) The degree of error can be expressed numerically.
(c) This error is independent of such technical considerations as the
reliability of radio fixes.
(d) Repeated assays of the error can be made throughout the sortie and
allocated to definite times.
The practical details of the method are given in the R.A.F. Manual of Air
Navigation, but for those unfamiliar with navigational technique a brief
description follows.
Like all other vectors, the velocity and bearing of the wind may be
represented as a line having length proportional to that velocity, and direction
equal to that bearing. The basic navigational method of finding the windspeed
(76642) M


FIG. 1
FIG. 2
Wind-finding by method of triangle of velocities


and direction is by the application of the principle of the triangle of velocities
(see Fig. 1). If, by accurate pin-pointing or other accurate,method of fixing
his ground position, the navigator knows that he has travelled from point A
to point Bin known time, the groundspeed and track can be calculated. The
airspeed, course, and often the air position, are given by the instruments, and
from these two vectors the triangle of velocities can be plotted, the third side
of which is the vector representing the speed and direction of the wind. This
process is, of course, open to the effects of human error in the arithmetic and
simple geometry involved. The error in wind computation may occur in
velocity and/or direction. The most satisfactory measure of the combined
effect of these mistakes is the ‘ vector error', expressed in m.p.h., between the
wind found by the navigator and the ‘ true ’ wind which he should have
derived from the fixes and air positions which he has logged. This wind vector
error in m.p.h. is actually equal to the error in miles after one hour’s flight, of
the aircraft’s computed D.R. position based on the incorrect wind (see Fig. 2)
where AB represents the course and airspeed vector after one hour’s flight.
BC is the ‘ true ’ wind vector, i.e. the wind vector found from the fix and air
position logged on the previous section of the route. (For the purposes of
this investigation these are assumed to be correct.) BC is the wind vector
incorrectly calculated by the navigator on the previous leg and used by him
to derive the D.R. position on the present section. The true D.R. position is
given by C,, the incorrect position by C 2. The distance between them Cj C 2,
is the vector error in wind-finding in m.p.h. Since the time of flight is one
hour, Cj C 2 is also the error in miles of the computed D.R. position. It is this
vector error which has been used in the analysis. The time and position at
which these wind vector calculations were made is available in the log. In
assessing the significance of the amount of error, it should be remembered that
some error is inevitable owing to such instrumental difficulties as reading a
protractor to within |°. Errors above an arbitrary minimum can be fairly
attributed to the human element. Indeed, the degree of navigator accuracy
could alternatively be measured by noting the percentage of errors exceeding
this permissible minimum.
1. Collection of data
An investigation into the standards of navigator performance was recently
conducted by the Operational Research Section of Bomber Command (1).
From the logs and charts of navigators engaged in a series of seven bombing
raids, random samples were taken of the calculations involved in wind-finding
at various points throughout the sortie. The errors, if any, made on each of
these occasions were then expressed, as explained above, in terms of the resultant
deviation in miles, of correct from incorrect deduced position. Up to six
samples were taken from the log of each navigator in each sortie. Through
the courtesy pf the officers concerned, these results were made available
for analysis.
2. Method of analysis of^data
Clearly, sorties to different targets involve journeys under varying
conditions of duration, enemy action and weather. The same psychological
factors can as a first step reasonably be assumed to operate at similar stages
of different sorties, e.g. approaching the target or on the last part of the way


TABLE I
Mean errors in successive stages in sorties
Objective
Base (0)
Enemy
coast (0)
Approach
to target
After
target
Enemy
coast (R)
Base (R)
Magdeburg . ..
4-45 (29)
3-30 (24)
2-95 (21)
4-46 (13)
5-62 (18)
5-50 (11)
Stuttgart (1) ..
0-00 (3)
1-20 (5)
2-17 (12)
4-67 (6)
6-00 (2)
- (0)
Stuttgart (2) ..
1-20 (5)
2-00 (15)
2-79 (38)
3-52 (32)
5-50 (2)
- (0)
Frankfurt (1) ..
0-25 (2)
1-70 (14)
3-58 (38)
3-76 (27)
4-93 (14)
1-50 (1)
Frankfurt (2) ..
0-17 (3)*
5-32 (17)
3-81 (16)
3-33 (26)
1-31 (16)
5-25 (2)*
Berlin ..
2-53 (19)*
3-90 (50)
7-86 (56)
3-96 (45)
2-22 (9)
4-00 (4)*
Dusseldorf
2-36 (66)*
2-90 (36)
7-15 (32)
4-07 (7)
7-59 (23)
3-14 (33)*
All objectives
2-67±-43
3-29±-33
4-90±-48
3-80±-42
4-86±-91
3-75±l-00
home. Any variations in navigator error which occur fairly consistently
under similar circumstances may then be open to a psychological interpretation.
All the routes taken by the main force to the targets on the seven raids were
known. One typical example is shown in Fig. 3. These routes were then
arbitrarily divided into sections according to the following convention :
(a) Base .. .. From base until the crossing of the line of
longitude before the enemy coast.
(b) Enemy coast .. Between the two lines of longitude on .either side
of the enemy coastline.
(c) Approach to target From the line of longitude on the landward side
of the coast, to the target.
(d) After the target .. From the target area to the line of longitude
before the enemy coast.
(e) Enemy coast ( R) Between the two lines of longitude on either side
of the enemy coast.
(/) Base ( R) .. From the seaward of these two lines to base.
Once the routes for the seven raids had been thus divided, the errors
occurring at positions within these limits were summed, and the mean and
standard deviation calculated. The results are shown in Table I, where the
means are given for each stage in each operation. Unfortunately the numbers
upon which these observations are based vary considerably but the main trend
is obvious in the grand means at the bottom of the table. These show that
there is a progressive rise in the mean error from base to target. After the
target, the mean error falls, then rises over the enemy coast before falling again
on the last stage of the journey to home base. (The significance of these differ-
ences may be gauged from the standard errors of the means given in Table I).
This result is compared in Fig. 4 with a graph of the variation in speed of
respiration in an experienced bomber pilot during an operational sortie (Goldie
1942). The obvious association between variations in performance and
(i) * Indicates the raids on which mean error tended to be at maximum before target was
reached.
(ii) Numbers of observations upon which means are based are enclosed in brackets.
(iii) Sections of route where losses occurred are indicated by heavy type.


FIG. 3
SECTIONS OF ROUTE OF SORTIE


respiratory rhythm is presumably due to some common factor affecting them
both. Emotional tension may be that common factor, since the diminished
efficiency of navigational aids beyond the enemy coast should, other things
being equal, impress on the navigator the need for accuracy of log and chart
work. It may be further presumed that such tension is increased in the
presence of enemy opposition. Inspection of the detail of Table I shows that
the trend evident in the grand means is not consistent in each individual
operation. This is in part due to the difference between the numbers of observa-
tions upon which the means are based, which introduce chance errors, but there
FIG. 4
MEAN ERROR AT SUCCESSIVE STAGES COMPARED
WITH RESPIRATION RATES
is also a clear tendency in three of the raids (marked in the table by an
asterisk), for the mean error to be at a maximum before the target is reached.
In the remainder, the mean error tends to be at a maximum in the latter part
of the sortie. This divergence accounts for the bimodal nature of the curve of
grand means. To test the, suggestion that some psychological reaction to
enemy opposition was the basis of this phenomenon, the combat reports for
these seven raids were examined. The numbers of aircraft lost to the enemy
defences, fighter or flak, were counted for each section of the route. The
sections of the routes on each of the raids where the opposition was fierce
enough to cause losses are in heavy type in Table I. Broadly speaking, it
may be said that—
Interception of the bomber stream may take place either before the
target is reached, or on the way home.
Opposition is generally associated with a rise in the mean error in
navigator calculation.


TABLE II
Mean Errors at Successive Stages on (a) Operational and ( b) Non-operational Flights
During
Return to
(a) Operational
Before
opposition
After
base
(1) No. of observations
252
442
49
48
(2) Mean error in miles (m)
2-77±-28
4-51±-30
4-87±l-17
3-75±l-20
(3) S.D. of error distribution
(a)..
4-37
6-38
8-18
8-34
(4) Coefficient of variation (
100 a\
157-8
141-15
167-9
222-4
\
(5) Percentage of errors
over
4 miles
22-6
36-4
44-9
18-8
ib) Non-operational
1st hour
2nd hour
3rd hour
4th hour
(1) No. of observations
172
172
172
172
(2) Mean error in miles (m)
l-33±-38
1-13±-I6
l-89±-18
0-90±-12
(3) S.D.—error distribution( a). .
4-98
2-08
2-33
1-62
(4) Coefficient of variation (
1UU(T \
374-4
184-1
213-8
180-8
(5) Percentage of errors
4 miles
over
5-2
4-7
4-1
2-3
This last conclusion is at best a crude generalisation, as it is unlikely that
the reaction to opposition is the only factor affecting navigator performance.
The data may be further analysed by division into observations made—
(i) before effective opposition was met;
(ii) during intensive opposition;
(iii) during the section of the route immediately after (ii) (if this lay over
enemy territory);
(iv) the last section of the journey home.
For comparison, a similar analysis was made of navigators’ errors
occurring during a series of night cross-country training flights under
operational conditions. The navigators concerned were fully trained per-
sonnel who were awaiting posting to operational squadrons. The flights
lasted about five hours and samples were taken of the calculations made at
intervals throughout the flight.
The results of these analyses are summarised in Table 11.
The data given in the second lines of both sections of Table II are com-
pared in Figs. 5 and 6. The operational means are all significantly higher than
the non-operational controls. Further, although the mean error in the non-
operational series tends to fall slightly, the means rise abruptly in the
periods during and immediately after the encountering of severe enemy
opposition.
Comparison of the standard deviations of the error distributions given in
the third lines of the two sections of Table 11, shows some divergence between
the downward trend of the non-operational values and the upward trend of
the operational ones. When this comparison is made between the more


accurate measures of dispersion round the means given by the Coefficient of
Variation, the divergence is not so striking and interpretation of the
significance of these changes in variability is difficult.
In the fifth lines of both sections are given the percentages of errors
exceeding the maximum which might reasonably occur because of the limitations
in accuracy of the instruments used (4 miles). The non-operational series
shows a consistent downward trend, while in the operational group the per-
centage rises to a maximum during and after opposition. In the last stage of
the operational flights the percentage falls considerably. These changes are
significant {X 2 = 17-71, n = 3, P<-01).
The position may be summarised by reviewing the trends of the means
and standard deviations in the light of these percentages. In the non-
operational series, the mean error decreases because fewer large mistakes are
made in each successive hour. In the first three stages of the operational
sorties, however, an increasing proportion of larger mistakes are made. In
the last stage, a much smaller proportion of the mistakes are above the
permissible limit.
One possible interpretation of the data may be offered. The standard of
performance to be expected in fully trained navigators flying under conditions
similar to those met on operational sorties is seen in the second series of results.
The two critical differences lie in the facts that; —
The efficiency of the operational group might have been diminished
by the accumulative effects of operational strain.
There was no element of hazard due to enemy action in the non-
operational series of flights.
The difference in general level and trend of the mean error and possibly also
in variability of performance between the operational and non-operational
series has already been noted. This difference cannot be attributed to external
technical factors, as the errors measured were mistakes in calculation which
were quite independent of the results obtained from the navigational aids.
These errors must thus have arisen within the individuals themselves.
Indeed, it is likely that they are the results of the emotional disturbance
inseparable from the anxiety involved in action against the enemy. The rise
in the mean error above the level usually found in normal flight even before
action is joined suggests the influence on performance of anticipatory anxiety.
Once opposition is met, the mean rises still further, presumably in the mental
confusion engendered by such perturbing circumstances. It is interesting to
note, too, that this inefficiency persists even after this stage of acute danger,
as long as the aircraft is over enemy territory and liable to renewed attack.
On the last part of the journey home, anxiety is at least in part allayed but
fatigue might be expected to operate. In this context, fatigue may be defined
as the effect of prolonged activity evident in a terminal deterioration of
efficiency. It is difficult to disentangle the influence of anxiety and fatigue,
particularly, as is often observed, anxiety per se will cause an early deterioration
in skilled performance (Davis 1943). A distinction might be made between
anxiety as a cause of distraction and anxiety as a factor in fatigue. The data
in Table II suggests that as far as the bulk of the crews are concerned, the
distractive effect of acute anxiety is more important than the effect of fatigue
as measured by a terminal fall in efficiency. The data does suggest, however,
that a small minority are still making unduly large errors when on the last


lap of the journey. It gives no indication whether this is due to a real
mental deterioration in an unduly fatiguable minority or merely to a
slackening of navigational conscience and crew discipline.
If this interpretation of the facts is valid, then it may be useful in
assessing the applicability of laboratory studies to operational conditions,
and in the explanation of the inconsistencies of combat performance already
noted. There is as yet no known method of eliciting in the laboratory the
emotional responses evoked by action against the enemy. The importance of
these responses in determining crew performance has been demonstrated.
Laboratory studies of fatigue which show only a terminal deterioration in
efficiency may well be applicable to the monotonous conditions of long range
sea patrols. But in bomber operations, such a terminal deterioration due to
fatigue would be masked by the effects of previous periods of acute anxiety.
Although thus overshadowed, the results of fatigue may be none the less real.
The difficulty of determining from operational data the optimum length of
activity to avoid fatigue is obvious. Although the results are only suggestive,
there is a hint that the effects, within a group, of prolonged mental effort may
be more evident in an increased variability or raggedness of performance rather
than in any terminal fall in the mean level of efficiency. This, of course, has
often been shown in laboratory experiments.
This reading also suggests explanations of the inconsistencies of training
and combat performance noted in the introduction. In training, discrepancies
between ground and air performance are probably due to the increased
emotional tension of flight. Errors in wind finding on the outward leg of an
operational sortie, when fatigue could hardly be expected to operate, presum-
ably arise from anticipatory anxiety. The increase in scatter of the bomb
pattern over a heavily defended target reflects acute anxiety. The persistent
effect of sustained apprehension was evident in the high mean error while still
liable to attack over enemy territory. This effect may well explain the results
obtained over targets when opposition en route had been anticipated, but not
in fact met.
As far as selection of key personnel such as the ' wind finders ’ of a
bomber formation is concerned, this study merely re-emphasises the
importance of stability of performance under conditions of stress. A close
analysis of their operational records will distinguish from among men of equal
proficiency under normal circumstances, those who maintain their efficiency
in the heat of action. To them should be assigned the post of unusual
responsibility.


FIG. 5
FIG. 6


References
O.R.S. Bomber Command report
Performance of wind finding aircraft. O.R.S. (Bomber
Command) Report No. S.169.
Davis, D. R.
Behaviour of neurotic subjects in the Cambridge cockpit
test. 1943 (Unpublished report) FPRC 530.
Goldie, E. A. G. ..
On respiration rate during a bomber sortie. 1943
(Unpublished report) FPRC 552.
3. Summary
(1) The errors in calculating and plotting wind vectors made by navigators
engaged in a series of night bomber operational sorties have been analysed.
(2) By an arbitrary division of the routes to and from the target and
plotting the sections where opposition was encountered, it was possible to
compare the fluctuations in performance with the times of occurrence of acute
hazard.
(3) Compared with the fluctuations in navigator performance during a
series of non-operational flights, the level of efficiency during the operational
sorties, which is lower at all stages than in the non-operational controls, varies
considerably. The average error rises to a maximum during and after enemy
opposition and falls again on the last part of the route back to base.,
(4) It is suggested that these fluctuations are successively due to the effect
on performance of anticipatory, acute and persistent anxiety. These effects
seem to be larger than the effects of fatigue in the latter stages.
(5) A caution is given against too confident a translation of laboratory
findings in studies of fatigue to operational settings where periods of acute
anxiety are usual. The significance of variability of performance is discussed.
(6) The psychological interpretation of the data is used to explain some
inconsistencies of performance in training and operations.
(7) The importance of stability under stress in the selection of key
personnel is re-emphasised.
A cknowledgments
My thanks are due to Mr. Sovig and Mr. Game of the Operational Research Section,
Headquarters Bomber Command, Royal Air Force, whose co-operation made this study
possible. lam also indebted to Professor A. Bradford Hill and Air Vice-Marshal Sir Charles
P. Symonds for advice in interpretation of the data.


AjB
Fit for full flying duties as pilot.
A,B
Fit for full flying duties as combatant passenger.
A.C.H
Aircrafthand.
A.D.G.B
Air Defence of Great Britain.
A.E.A.F
Allied Expeditionary Air Force.
A.F.U.
Advanced Flying Unit.
A.G.
Air gunner.
A.G.S.
Air Gunnery School.
A.N.S.
Air Navigation School.
A.O.C
Air Officer Commanding.
A.S.K.
Air Sea Rescue.
Bale-out
Abandon aircraft by parachute.
B. and G.S.
Bombing and Gunnery School.
B.A.T
Blind Approach Training.
Courage
Quality of persisting with a task despite fear.
Deep penetration
Flying deep into enemy territory.
Ditch, to
Make forced landing on water.
D.R. position
Position estimated by deduced reckoning, usually known as ' dead ’
reckoning.
Drink, in the
Having made forced landing on water.
E.F.T.S
Elementary Flying Training School.
F.E
Flight Engineer.
Fearlessness
Absence of fear where fear might be expected.
Flying stress
The load a man has to carry in the performance of flying duties,
including emotional strain, skill fatigue, bodily fatigue, air-
sickness, noise, glare, cold and altitude effects.
F.M.A.E
Flight Mechanic—aero-engine.
Form 48
Medical history.
Freshman
Man on first operational flights.
George
Automatic pilot.
G.R
General Reconnaissance.
Grading School
Elementary flying school used for selection.
H.C.U.
Heavy Conversion Unit.
Immediate (and non-)
Decorations are usually deferred but may be given immediately
awards.
after an achievement.
Inhibit
Suppress, prevent.
Innate tendencies
Tendencies to respond to external situations in a way which is
determined by inheritance.
Intercom.
Internal telephone system in aircraft.
L.A.C.
Leading aircraftsman.
Lack of moral fibre . .
Term used in Air Ministry letter on the disposal of members of
air crews who forfeit the confidence of their Commanding
Officers. Equivalent to lack of courage.
M/U gunner . .
Mid-upper gunner.
Neurosis
Synonym —nervous breakdown. Illness shown by symptoms
which are pyschological (mental) and/or physical (bodily).
Neurosis is the result of failure to adapt to strain. The symptoms
of neurosis are the same whether due to civilian worries, flying
stress or other combatant duties. There is no such illness as
flying stress.
N.Y.D.N. centres
Neuropsychiatric clinics.-
Operation or op.
Flight against the enemy.
Operational limit
Fixed maximum of combat flying.
O.R.S.
Operational Research Section of commands.
O.T.U
Operational Training Unit.
Overshooting (and
under-).
—the runway on landing.
GLOSSARY


P.M.O
Principal Medical Officer.
P.R.U
Photographic Reconnaissance Unit.
Psychologist
Scientist who specialises in the study of normal mental function.
Psychiatrist ..
A doctor who specialises in, the diagnosis and treatment of
psychological or mental illness.
P.T
Physical training.
Put up a black, to ..
Commit an error of technique, judgment or discipline.
R. Gunner
Rear gunner.
Ropey
Unsatisfactory or defective.
Scrubbing
Cancelling operational trips.
S.F.T.S
Service Flying Training School.
Shell shock
Term erroneously used to describe neurosis occurring in troops
during the 1914-1918 war.
S.M.O
Senior Medical Officer.
Sortie
Flight against the enemy.
Standing-by ..
Waiting in or near the aircraft at instant readiness for take-off.
Sweep..
Fighter sortie in formation.
Taylor suit
Electrically-heated flying suit.
Tour (operational) . .
Completed period of operational flying (e.g. 30 sorties or 200 hours).
Trip
Flight against the enemy.
U/S
Unserviceable—refers to machines.
U/t
Under training.
Waverer(-ing)
Man of defective morale in relation to operational flying.
W/O
Warrant Officer.
W.Op.
Wireless operator.
W.Op/A.G. (or /M) ..
Wireless operator air gunner (or mechanic).
GLOSSARY —continued


INDEX
Subject Page
Acapnia .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. .. •. 271
Accidents, contributing to flying stress . . . . . . . . . . .. 49-50
Aggression, lack of, related to timidity . . . . .. .. . . . . 51, 198
Airsickness, psychological effects of .. . . . . . . . . . . 161, 282-305
Airsick subjects who were severely predisposed . . .. . . .. 290-293
Analysis of cases of airsickness with evidence of neurotic predisposition . . 292
Analysis of material .. . . . . . . . . .. .. .. 283-287
As cause or symptom of neurosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . • 35, 126
Assessment of predisposition to neurosis . . . . . . .. .. 283, 290
Constitutional motion sickness .. . . . . .. . . . . •. 298-299
Discrepancies between assessment of morale by the investigators and the
executive .. . . .. .. . . . . . . .. .. .. 293-294
Discussion .. .. .. . . . . .... .. .. . . 299-303
Duration of symptoms .. . . . . . . . . . . .. . . 284
Frequency of airsickness at the type of suspension . . .. . . . • 286
History of airsickness .. .. . . . . . . .. . . .. 282-283
History of motion sickness . . . . . . . . . . . . . • 283
Material .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ' 282
Method 282-283
Methods of assessment of neurotic predisposition and morale : illustrative
case histories (Appendix) . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 306-307
Morale .. .. .. .. . . . . .. .. .. . . 293
Neurosis .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. . . ■. 288-293
Predisposition to neurosis . . . . . . . . . . 289-290,306-307
Psychiatric assessment . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . 287
Psychiatric history and assessment of predisposition to psychological disorder
on a four-point scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 283
Recommendations .. .. . . . . . . . . . . - • • • 303-305
Relation of morale to other psychological factors . . . . . . . . 294-296
Relative frequency and importance of psychological factors as a cause of
suspension .. .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. 296
Summary' .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .. 303-305
Symptomatology .. . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . 284-287
Th<s psychological factor in relation to the stage of training at which
suspension occurred in
Air Bombers .. . . .. . . .. .. . . .. .. 294
Air Gunners .. . . .. . . . . .. . . .. .. 297
Navigators .. .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. ■ 297
Wireless Operators .. .. .. .. . . .. . . . . 297
Alternative employment of operational air crews —see Relief employment
Altitude, effects of exposure to .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 49, 66
Amnesia .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 259-281
Anticipation .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. • 45-46
Anxiety .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 86-87,88


Subject Page
Bomber Command —see Commands
Day Bombers .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 62-64
Briefing . . .. . . . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 45
Cancellations of sorties, effects .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 45-46
Casualties, effects of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. > .. 49-50
Clinical and statistical study of neurosis precipitated by flying duties .. .. 140-172
Causes of neurosis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 158-163
Airsickness . . .. .. . . .. .. . . .. .. 161
Altitude 159-160
Causes arising from flying duties . . .. . . .. . . . . 159
Exhaustion .. . . .. .. . . . . . . . . . . Itil
Physical causes .. .. . . . . . . . . .. . . 159, 163
Physical illness .. .. . . .. . . . . . . . . 160-161
Physical injury . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . 160
Psychological causes .. .. . . . . . . . . . . 161-162
Relationship between breakdown and risk . . . . . . .. .. 162
Clinical aspect of neuroses arising from flying duties
Comparison of proportion of anxiety hysteria and depression in the
neuroses related to flying with those not so related .. .. .. 166
Fatigue syndrome . . . . . . .. .. . . .. 47-49, 167
Hysteria .. .. .. .. .. . . . . .. . . 166
Percentage of cases with anxiety states under commands .. .. 166
Percentage of fatigue syndrome for different duties compared with that
of all neuroses . . .. .. . . . . . . . . . . 167
Proportion of different reaction types .. . . . . . . . . 166
. Flying hours and operational experience
Operational and non-operational flying experience before cases reported
sick .. . . . . .. .. . . .. . . .. .. 148
Time of breakdown in relation to flying and operational experience in
each Command (percentage of cases) .. .. . . .. .. 149
Incidence
Comparison of incidence in the whole command with those in the
operational and training sections (per cent man-years) .. .. 147
Comparison of the marriage rate in the groups related and unrelated to
flying duties .. .. .. . . .. .. ... 148
Distribution in air crew categories resulting from flying duties in a year 142
Distribution of the cases under duties .. .. .. . . . . 145
Incidence in air crew categories as a percentage of man-years . . .. 142
Incidence in air crew categories in Flying Training Command .. .. 144
Incidence (per 100 man-years) in commands .. .. .. .. 144
Incidence in duties in operational units of commands (per cent man-years) 145
Incidence of neuroses unrelated to flying .. .. . . .. 122, 147
Neuroses apparently unrelated to flying duties in commands (per cent of
total cases) .. . . .. .. .. .. . . .. 147
Percentage of cases in air crew categories . . . . . . . . 142
Method of collecting and sorting data . . .. .. 97-98, 118, 140-142, 173
Prognosis of neurosies .. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . 167-169
Final disposals by the Central Medical Board .. .. .. 167
Final disposals of temporary disposals .. .. . . . . . . 168


Subject Page
Clinical and statistical study of neurosis precipitated by flying duties-— contd.
Prognosis of neurosis— contd.
Prognosis in relation to air crew categories . . . . .. .. .. 168
flying stress.. .. .. .. .. .. 169
non-flying stress . . .. .. .. . . 170
predisposition .. .. .. .. 169
Relation of flying experience to prospect of returning to flying duties .. 169
Stress and predisposition to breakdown .. .. .. .. .. .. 150-158
Flying experience compared with stress and predisposition .. .. 157
Relation of flying stress to increasing flying experience, age and
marriage rate .. .. .. .. .. . . .. . . 158
Stress in groups with differing degrees of predisposition . . . . . . 156
Under air crew categories .. .. . . .. .. . . .. 168
Under groups of neurosis due to flying, neurosis not due to flying and
lacking confidence .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 155-156
Under commands .. .. .. .. .. .. *.. 154-155
(
Summary of results . .. .. .. ... .. .. .. .. 170-172
Coastal Command —see Commands
Cold 4,9, 76
Commands, psychological disorders in
Bomber .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 31-64
Coastal .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 71-81
Fighter ... .. .. . . . . .. .. .. .. . . 65-70
Flying Training .. -.. . . . . .. .. . . .. .. 125
Overseas .. .. .. .. .. ■ .. .. .. .. .. 124
Factors causing neurosis in Bomber . . . . . . . . .. . . 43-50
Coastal .. .. .. .. .. .. 73-76
Fighter .. .. .. .. .. 66-67, 68-70
Flying Training ..... .. .. .. 144.
Overseas .. .. .. .. .. .. 148
Occurrence and incidence of neurosis in Bomber .. .. .. .. 136, 154
Coastal .. .. .. .. 136, 154
Fighter 136, 154
Flying Training .. .. .. 136, 154
Overseas .. ~ .. .. 154
Preventive measures in Bomber .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 51-62
Coastal .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 76-81
Fighter .. .. .. .. .. 67-68
t Flying Training .. .. .. .. .. .. 197-198
Confidence and lack of
Nature of 82,86-87,88,106,114-115,127,132-135
Confidence in aircraft .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 56-57, 73
Confidence in crew .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ... .. 51-52
Confusion .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 259-281
Constitutional factors —see Predisposition
Courage .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 107, 112-113
Crashes —see Accidents
Day fighting .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 65-68
Diagnosis —see Reaction Type
Discipline .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 57-58


Subject Page
Domestic factors affecting the load .. .. .. .. ... .. 60-61
Efficiency
Loss of, due to neurosis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 34,65,71-72
Epilepsy .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 262
Caused by acapnia .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. ... 271
Caused by emotion .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 263, 264
Idiopathic .. .. .. .. .. .. .... .. .. 264
Episodes of unconsciousness, confusion and amnesia while flying .. .. .. 259-281
Aural vertigo .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 265-266
Cardiovascular instability .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 264-265
Blacking-out at low "g ” .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 264-265
Fainting of cardiovascular origin .. .. .. .. .. .. 264
Fainting through pain.. .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ 265
Material and Method .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 259-260
Oxygen lack.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 266
Susceptibility to oxygen lack.. .. .. .. .. .. .. 266-267
Psychological disorders .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 267
Acute fear states .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 269-271
Anxiety states .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 267-269
Fear with hysteria .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 272
Fear with panic .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 272
Height at which unconsciousness occurred .. .. .. .. .. 270
Results 260-282
Aetiological classification .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 261
Epilepsy .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 262-264
Epilepsy caused by fear .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 263-264
Mixed syndromes .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 262
Summary and conclusions .. .. .. .. .. .. :. .. 272, 274
Experience, influence upon effects of stress .. .. .. .. 52-53,62,66-67,103
Fainting —see Syncope
Fear 36, 37, 44, 65-66, 72, 86-87, 88, 104-106, 108-111, 161
Epilepsy .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 263-264
Fear states, acute .. ■ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 269-270
Relation to flying stress .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 104-106
Fearlessness, nature of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 107-113
Fighter Command —see Commands
Day fighters .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 66
Night fighters .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 68-70
Fluctuations in navigator performance during operational sorties .. .. 321-331
Analysis of data .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 323-329
Collection of data .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 323
Mean errors in successive stages in sorties .. .. .. .. .. 324
Summary .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 331
Flying Stress .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3,18-21
Definition 3, 18, 19, 21, 31, 100
Effects of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 33-37


Subject Page
Factors contributing to .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 43-50
Catastrophes—crashes experienced, witnessed .. .. .. .. 49-50
Operational conditions
Anticipation .. .. .. .. .. .. .. •. 45
Briefing .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 45
Cancellation of sorties, late, repeated .. .. .. .. 45-46
Critical points in the tour .. .. .. .. .. .. 47, 64
Nature of operations .. .. .. .. • . . . 44-45, 64
Enemy defences . . . . . . .. -. .. .. 44-64
Hazardous return .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 44-45
Inactivity . . , . .. .. .. . . . . .. 46, 64
Length of trip .. .. .. .. .. .. 43-44, 73-74
Weather .. .. .. .. .. 43-44,64, 66,68, 73-74
Physical Factors .. .. .. .. . . .. 45-50,66,75-76
Altitude .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 49,64
Cold 49,76
Fatigue .. .. .. .. .. . . ~ 47—49,64
Sleep, loss of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 48-49,64
Factors influencing effects .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 51-61
Extrinsic .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 51
Confidence in aircraft .. .. .. .. .. .. 56-57, 73
in crew .. .. .. .. .. .. . • 51-52
Discipline .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 57-58,67
Domestic factors .. .. .... .. .. .. .. 103
Flying training and operational experience .. .. 52-53, 62, 66-67,103
Living conditions .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 59
Operational effort, spacing of .. .. .. ;. .. .. 54-55
Physical training .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 58-59,67
Recognition of sucfcess .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 55-56
Recreation .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 59-60,67-68
Intrinsic .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 51,69-70
Human response to flying stress .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 100-116
Lecture I—Neurosis in flying personnel .. .. .. .. .. 100-106
Distribution and causes of neurosis .. .. .. .. .. 102-104
Fear as an element of flying stress .. .. .. .. .. 104-106
Historical .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 100
Scope and methods of present investigation .. .. .. .. 101-102
Lecture II ... .. .. .. .. •• •• 107-116
Courage and confidence .. .. .. .. .. 106,112-113
Fearlessness .. .. .. . . . . . . .. ’ .. 107-108
Inhibition as a basis for fearlessness .. .. .. .. .. 108-110
Lack of confidence .. .. .. .. .. .. 114,115
Pavlov’s observations applied to fearlessness .. .. .. 107,110-111
Measures of the effect of operational stress on bomber crews .. .. .. 245-258
Conclusions .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 255-256
Sickness incidence .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 246-247
Variations in the relative liability to psychological disorder .. 246
Variation in weight .. .. .. .. .. .. . - 245-246
Summary of results .. .. .. .. .. .. . ■ .. 247-255
Index of relative liability to psychological disorder .. .. .. 251-252
Mean age at successive stages in tour .. .. .. .. .. 249


Subject Page
Measures of the effect of operational stress on bomber crews— contd.
Summary results— contd.
Mean height at successive stages in pre-operational training . . 251
Mean height at successive stages in tour .. . . .. . . 249
Mean weight at successive stages in tour . . . . . . . . 247
Physical measurements .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 247
Psychological disorder index .. .. .. .. .. 252
Psychological disorder index at successive stages in tour (1943) .. 252
Psychological disorder index at successive stages in tour (1944) .. 255
Sickness incidence .. .. .. .... .. . . 255
Sickness index at successive stages in tour . . . . .. .. 252
Variations in mean weight during operational and non-operational.. 254-255
Relation to
Incidence of psychological disorder .. '.. .. .. . . .. 252
Physical sickness rate .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. 252
Weight loss .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 247
Role of Medical Officer in relation to .. .. .. .. .. 37-38,61-62
Assessment of degree of agreement upon signs and effects of
Change in appearance, talk and behaviour .. .. . . . . 33-34
Change in attitude to flying . . .. .. .. .. .. 34
Effects of alcoholic excess .. .. .. .. .. .. 35
Efficiency, loss of .. .. .. . . . . . . . . 34
Inability to carry on .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 36
Keenness, loss of . . .. .. .. .. . . .. . . 34
Personal descriptions .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 36-37
Physical symptoms .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 35-36
Historical review
A critical review of published literature .. .. .. .. .. .. 1-13
Aetiology . . .. - .. . . . . . . . . . . 4
Constitutional predisposition.. .. .. .. .. . . . . 4
Flight factors causing psychological disorders . . . . . . . . 6-8
General description and symptomatology .. .. .. .. . . 1-4
Other physical causes .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8
Physical testing .. .. .. .. .. . . . . . . 8
Prophylaxis, flight factors . . . . .. .. . . . . . . 9
Psychological causes .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8-9
Psychological testing .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. 10-12
Results of selection .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 12-13
Selection of air crews .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9-13
Temperamental causes . . . . . . .. . . . . . . 4-5
Hyperventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 263-264
Epilepsy .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 262-264
Unconsciousness .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 259-281
Instructors
Notes for the guidance of .. .. .. .. .. ... . . 199, 202-204
Recognition of unsuitable pupils by behaviour
In the air .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 203
On the ground .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 204
Instrument flying .. . . . . . . . . . . .... 68-69
Lack of confidence, see Confidence


Subject Page
Leadership 42-43, 50, 53-54, 62-63, 76-78
Leave 60,68
Literature —see Historical Review
Living conditions.. . . .. .. . . .. .. .. .. ~ 59
Load (psychological) —(see also Flying Stress) .. .. 31,32,43-50,66,73-76
Factors contributing to .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 43-50
Role of medical officer in relation to .. .. .. .. .. 37,41,42,168
Medical Officers —see also Flying Stress—RSle of
Instructions to .. .. .. .. .. .. . . . . . , 97-98
Management of neurosis by .. .. .. .. .. .. 96-97
Causes .. .. .. .. .. .. 90-91
Diagnosis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 86-90
Predisposition to neurosis .. . . .. . . . . .. 92
Results of treatment .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 96
Symptoms .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. 96
Treatment .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 92-96
Role of, in detecting and preventing the effects of stress .. .. .. 37-38
Morale .. .. . . .. .. .. .. . . 9, 37
Motion Sickness —see Airsickness
Navigators
Performance on operations —see Fluctuations in
Normal flying personnel .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 185-192
Predisposition to psychological disorder in normal flying personnel .. 92, 185-192
Assessment of degree of predisposition in the series compared with that of a
control group .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ 187
Assessment of different groups of unselected cases by six different specialists 185
Degree of predisposition in the whole series .. .. .. .. .. 187
Method 185-198
Summary of assessments of predisposition by four observers .. .. .. 191
Summary and conclusions .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 192
Occurrence of neurosis in Royal Air Force air crew, 1943 to 1945 .. .. .. 173-182
Cases of neurosis in operational commands at home .. .. .. ..174,178
Distribution of cases of neurosis under air crew categories .. .. ..174,189
Distribution of cases under commands .. .. .. .. .. ..173,178
Duties considered chiefly responsible for the illness .. .. .. .. 175,179
Final disposal by a medical board .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 177,181
Main causes of the neuroses recognised by the specialists .. .. .. 176,181
Reaction types recognised 131-132, 176, 180
Relationship of flying experience to the time of breakdown .. .. .. 175, 180
Operational conditions affecting flying stress .. .. .. 43-45, 66, 68-69, 73-76
Anticipation of danger .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 45-46
Nature of operations .. .. .. .. .. 43-45,66,68-69,73-74
Operational inactivity .. .. .. .. .. .. 46-47


Subject Page
Operational effort, spacing of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 54-55
Operational limit
Bomber Command .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 38-40
Coastal Command .. .. .. .■• .. .. .. .. .. 72-73
Fighter Command .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 66
Operational tour .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 39-40, 42-43, 63
Second tour .. .. .. .. .. .. ...... 42-43,63
See also operational limit
Opinion —see Reliability
Oxygen lack
Susceptibility to .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 266
Panic .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 272
Personality traits
Combinations of traits related to predisposition .. .. .. 206,213-217
Evaluation of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 205 -206
Relationship to predisposition to neurosis .. .. .. .. ..211-212
Physical factors contributing to neurosis —see Factors
Physical fatigue, effects of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 47-49, 64
Physical training and sports ... .. .. .. .. .. .. . .58-59, 67
Predisposition 1 to neurosis .. .. .. .. 92,100-101,121-132,185-192
methods of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 185
Severe, definition .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 125
Incidence of, in flying personnel with neurosis .. .. .. .. .. 127
Normal flying personnel—tour expired .. .. .. .. 185-192, 210
Normal flying personnel—under training .. .. .. .. .. 211
Relation to airsickness .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 289-290
Probability of return to full flying of men who have broken down under the strain
of operational duties. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 230-233
Disposal of neuroses after more than 100 operational flying hours—related
to flying stress .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 231
Predisposition .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 232
By neuropsychiatrists .. .. .. • .. .. .. .. ;. 231
By medical officers .. .. .. .. .. ' .. .. .. 231
Summary .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. 232-233


Subject Page
' Prognosis for a return to full flying duties after psychological disorder
Accident histories .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 96-97, 234-244, 242
Casualty rate .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 241-242
Comparison between outcome in two similar groups seen by different
psychiatrists .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 240
Conclusions .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. 243-244
Consistency of psychiatric opinion .. .. .. .. .. .. 240-241
Detail of method .. . . . . .. . . . . .. .. .. 234-235
Method of follow-up .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 235-236
Selection of material .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 234-235
Frequency of neurotic symptoms among returned cases while employed
on flying duties .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 242
Frequency of symptoms .. .. .. .. .. .. 242-243
Predisposition and prognosis .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 239-240
Comparison between outcome during training and in experienced
operational air crews .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 240
Quality of service given .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 241-243
Quantity of service given .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 241
Results
Comparison between expected and actual percentage of pupils reaching
operational level .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 239
Type of duty being performed before breakdown and after test period.. 238
Type of duty being performed nine months after return to duty .. 237
Psychiatric assessment —see Predisposition and Personality Traits
Psychiatric method employed in assessment of temperament in connection with
air crew selection .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 205-224
Non-flying stress .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 315
Percentage agreements and disagreements between two different psychiatrists 314
Percentage number of cases in which two different psychiatrists ■ agreed
and disagreed in their opinion .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 314
Predisposition to neurosis .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 316
Reaction types .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 310,311,312
Summary .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 319
Psychological disorder, classification in the R.A.F. .. .. .. . . .. 20
Reliability of psychiatric opinion .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 308-320
Relief employment of tour-expired air crews . . .. .. .. .. .. 40-42
Return to full flying after neurosis —see also Probability of
Review —see Historical
Selection .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. .. .. . . 9-13
Assessment of predisposition
Psychiatric methods, analysis of .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 23-28
Psychological cases studied in relation"to selection .. .. ~ .. 22-30
Psychological methods .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. 10-12
Under training .. .. .. .. .. 197-198


Subject Page
Signs, the.. 31,62,64,71-72
Signs, temperamental unsuitability in flying personnel under training .. .. 193-202
Discussion .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 200-201
Method .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 194
Results .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..... 195
Pilots 195-199
Behaviour in the air .. .. .. . . .. .. . . 195-196
Behaviour on the ground .. .. .. .. . . . . 196-197
Difficulties in the detection of the temperamentally unsuitable .. 198-199
Guidance for instructors .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 199
Method of investigation in cases of suspected nervousness . . . . 197-198
Signs of nervousness .. .. . . . . . . .. 195, 199-200
Navigators . . . . . . .. .. .. .. . . .. 199-200
Summary .. . . . . .. .. . . . . . . .. . . 202
Notes for instructors on the recognition of nervousness in pilots under
training .. .. .. .. . . .. .. . . . . 203-204
Behaviour in’the air . . . . .. . . . . . . . . 203
Behaviour on the ground . . . . . . . . . . .. 204
Difficulties encountered in the assessment of nervousness . . ~ 204
Sleep, effects of loss of .. .. . . .. .. . . .. . . .. 69
Statistics of psychological disorder in flying personnel .. . . .. ..117-139
Analysis of factors responsible in 1942
Flying stress .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 121,135-138
Non-flying stress .. .. .1 .. .. .. .. .. 121
Predisposition . . .. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . 121-135
Reaction types . . .. . . . . .. .. . . .. 131-135
Analysis of occurrence—February to August, 1942
Analysis of occurrence in commands
Analysis of psychological causes in 1942 .. .. .. .. .. 121-122,131
Fatigue .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. _ .. 123
Fear .. ..' .. 123
Incidence and distribution in 1942 .. .. .. .. . . .. 124-137
Occurrence, distribution and anaylsis of responsible factors in 1943 and
1944 142-170, 173-177
Occurrence, distribution and analysis of responsible factors in 1944 and 1945 .. 178-182
Statistical survey of the occurrence of psychological disorders in flying personnel
in the six months, 3rd February to 3rd August, 1942 .. .. .. .. 117-139
Material .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ■■ 117-118
Method .. .. .. .. .. .. .. •• •• •• 118
Summary .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. •• 138-139
Stress —see FlyinglStress , Non-flying Stress and Operational Stress
Success .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. •• •• •• ..50,78-81
Syncope —see Epilepsy, Unconsciousness
Temperament
Assessment for air crew selection . . .. •. • • • ■ • ■ 205-224
Methods employed (psychiatric) .. .. . • ■ • • • • • 206-207


Subject Page
Temperamental unsuitability, signs of .. .. .. .. .. 18, 193-202
Tetany .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 270
Timidity, relation to lack of aggression .. .. .. . . .. 55, 202-231
Time of recognition of neurosis in flying personnel (FPRC 412(j)) .. .. 183, 184
Training
Incidence of neurosis in air crew under .. .. .. .. .. 126,136,137
Temperamental unsuitability of air crew under .. .. .. 193-204
Traits —see Personality
Unconsciousness .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 262-284
Visual .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 75,86,89,91
(7G642)' Wt. 3485/L.510 3/47 Hw. G 371.




LONDON
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
Tn be purchased directly from H.M. STATIONERY OFFICE at the following addresses:
York House, Kingsway, London, W.C.2 ; ija Castle Street. Edinburgh 2 ;
39-41 King Street, Manchester 25 1 St. Andrew’s Crescent, Cardiff;
80 Chichester Street, Belfast;
or through any bookseller
1947
Price yr. 6 d. net
