

PUBLIC INSTRUCTION
DELIVERED ON THE OPENING OE THE PUBLIC SCHOOL,
BLAYNEY, MAY 25th, 1880.
The Hon. SIR HENRY PARSES, K.C.M.G., M.P.
Reprinted, with corrections, from the special report of the
“Sydney Morning Herald ”
GEORGE ROBERTSON
SYDNEY, MELBOURNE, AND ADELAIDE
rivin




S IP H IE G Hl_
BY TELEGRAPH.
From the Special Reporters of the “ Sydney Morning Herald.”
Blayney, Tuesday , 25 th May.
Q-bH
Sir Henry Parkes and the Hon. E. A. Baker arrived here
by special train early this morning. At 11 o’clock the
ceremony of opening the new Public school took place.
There was a good attendance, and the day was observed
as a public holiday here in celebration of the occasion.
An address of welcome was presented to Sir Henry
Parkes by Mr. William Glasson, Chairman of the late
Local Board.
Sir Henry Parkes said : I receive your address of
welcome with much gratification, and must say I
entirely concur in the sentiments which you convey to
me by the address just presented. I can only say that
your address will be treasured with other similar testi-
monials which I have, from time to time, received, and
will serve to keep in remembrance my visit to Blayney.
I have accepted the invitation of your townspeople to
come here and open this Public school, and I think I
may congratulate you upon having so fine a building,-
which, for the present, is capable of accommodating the
children on the roll. I understand, within the last few
minutes, that the average attendance of the pupils in
your late school was about 100, and that this building is
capable of accommodating 130 children. Well, if I may
judge by the healthful appearance of the children, though
I am a stranger to Blayney, I may conclude that the
climate is tolerably healthy, and that, if you have 100


children attending school now, you are not likely to have-
fewer in the future, but rather to have an increase.
(Cheers.) I notice that some enthusiastic father cheers
that observation ; and that being so, it is almost a pity
that the building was not larger on its first construction,
because certainly it will have to he enlarged before a
very long time has elapsed. Now, in opening this Public
school, we are doing a great service, so far as our
limited efforts extend, in advancing the true prosperity
of the country. (Cheers.) In every school that is
opened we are, in a manner, planting a new moral
fortress, by which to beat down that ignorance which, in
times past, has so frequently enslaved the tender minds
of our children —(cheers) ; and the Legislature has
orven convincing evidence that its earnest aim is now,
that every child in the land shall be reached. (Cheers.)
You have heard —some of you at least—that these Public
schools have been called seed-plots. (Laughter.)
Well, we are assembled here to-day to plant another
seed-plot of national life—(cheers)— a seed-plot from
which the qualities which shall make the nation of the
future will be derived ; and, without seed-plots,
the country would most assuredly go to precipitate ruin.
I am not here to combat any other man’s opinions, or to
enter into any controversy ; butrto state, in as few and
as plain words as I can, what it is that the Parliament of
this country is doing for the advantage of the present
generation and of all succeeding generations in this
country. I need not tell you that the Parliament of this
country —as is the case in all young countries —is com-
posed, to a large extent, of self-made and self-trained
men ; and it is to the infinite credit of these men, having
missed the advantages of education which the children
of this school may freely enjoy, that they endeavour, by
every means in their power, to see that their successors
shall not miss the same advantages. (Cheers.) I know
of nothing which is more creditable to the Parliament of
this country than the liberal and the wise manner in
which it appropriates the public revenue for training the
young. There was a time in this country, and in eveiy


English-speaking country, when these advantages were
not so great, and were only open to a very few ; hut we
may hope, and that with the utmost confidence, that the
time will speedily arrive when the best kind of primary
education will be within the reach of every family within
the shores of this country. (Cheers.) You will be aware
that, very recently, a new law has been passed by the
Parliament of New South Wales, and it seems a fitting
time for me to place before you, briefly, what has been
the result of the Act of Parliament which has recently
been repealed. In the year 1866 the Act was passed
under which the present system of education has been
established. That law has existed for thirteen years,
and I will show you what has been the result of the
Public Schools Act. Glancing over the report of the
late Council of Education, I find that, during the year
1879 —the year just closed —there were 1,268 schools in
operation in New South Wales, with an aggregate of
pupils amounting to 134,624 souls—(cheers) ; and I
find that the fees, small as they were to individual
parents, paid in 1879 amounted to no less a sum than
£73,227 13s. Bd., showing how small sums will accumu-
late and make a large and valuable sum ; and, of course,
looking to the years that are passed, education must
have reached many children that otherwise it would
not have done, had it not been for the sum contributed
by means of these small fees. If education had been abso-
lutely free, and Parliament had appropriated only the same
sums that they did appropriate, of course, last year, there
would have been £73,000 less to have been expended on
education. We shall see presently that these fees have been
greatly reduced, though they are still retained. But
even in future, at the reduced scale, they will amount to
a very considerable sum for the promotion of education.
Now, the increase in our school system during last year
upon the last previous year (1878) was 81 schools, with a
total of 6,498 children. That showed the increase of a
single year. Now, if we come to the two principal
classes of schools which have existed up to the present
time, the Denominational and the Public schools, and if


we start from the first year under the Public Schools Act y
1867, we shall find that in that year there were Denomi-
national schools in existence numbering 317. Last year
there were only 161 in existence, showing a decrease of
156, or close upon one-half. In 1867, that is the first
year of the Public Schools Act, there were only 288
Public schools. Last year there were 684, showing an
increase of those Public schools during thirteen years of
396. (Cheers.) The schools altogether in operation
last year consisted of 684 Public schools, 317 Provisional
schools, 117 Half-time schools, and 161 Denominational
schools ; making the total of those which I have just
stated 1,268. Now, in the year 1867, the first year of
the operation of the Public Schools Act, there were in
the Public schools 28,434 pupils. Last year there were
in the Public schools 88,488 pupils—(cheers) —an
increase in the thirteen years of 60,054 children.
(Cheers.) In 1867 there were only 733 pupils in the-
Provisional schools. I may here explain, in parenthesis,
that these Provisional schools, under our system, are
schools of a temporary character, which have been
authorized where no Public school could be established
on account of the fewness of the children. In these
schools, in the year 1867, there were 733 pupils..
Last year there were 10,046 pupils in those schools.
(Cheers.) Another incomplete school under our system
is called the Half-time school, which is a school
where the teacher goes to the children because the
children cannot go to the school. Thus, there may
be a group of six or eight children in some lone place,,
and twenty miles distant there may be another group of
eight or ten children ; the teacher goes to the one small
group and teaches them for three days in the week, and
then he rides on to the other small group and teaches
them for the other three days in the week. That is only
a very imperfect means of education, but it is a far better
means than none—(cheers) —and everyone will see that
it has an instrumentality which reaches where education
is most wanted, in lone, separate places, where there is
no social intercourse. Well, the number of children in


those Half-time schools in 1867, the first year of the
operation of the Public Schools Act, was 267. Last
year it was 2,158. Well, in 1867 there were 35,306 pupils
in the Denominational schools; last year there were only
33,932, showing a decrease there in the thirteen years of
1,374. I shall have to refer to that for a few minutes a
little further on. Now, a better evidence of the progress
of our system than the one I have given in the addition
made last year will be to take last year and the year
before —the years 1878 and 1879 —because I find there
was a much larger increase in 1878 than in 1879, and I
find that in those two years the total number of pupils
added to the children attending our Public schools was a
no smaller number than 17,322. (Applause.) Everyone
will understand that with 1,200 schools under the super-
vision of the Government there must be a great number of
teachers ; and it is well that the people in Blayney, as it is
well that the people everywhere, should understand
what a teacher in these days is. No man, no woman, is
allowed to go into these schools to teach until they
themselves have been taught to teach. (Cheers.)
Formerly, in this country, and in nearly all parts of the
world, the teaching profession was a refuge to persons
who had missed their way in other walks of life. The
broken-down gentleman, who by spendthrift habits and
habits of imprudence had lost his fortune, would as a last
resource take up teaching ; or some clerk, who had been
dismissed for incompetency, would take up teaching ;
and there was no idea that this was a work in which it
was especially required that the aptitude and the ability
to teach should be proved. Under the present system
no teachers are employed, except in those imperfect
schools I have alluded to —no teachers are employed in
the authorized schools—until they themselves have been
thoroughly trained, and by examination have shown
their ability to do this great work of teaching. Very
well, the Public Schools Act has brought into existence
a moral army of upwards of 2,000 of these trained
teachers. You thus see what has been done up to this
time. You have an army of upwards of 2,000 trained


teachers, 1,200 schools under rigid inspection, with every
provision made for the health of the children as well as
for their moral instruction, and you have this .placed
within the reach, so far as cost is concerned, of the
poorest family in the land. (Hear, hear, and cheers.)
Thus much, then, of the old law, which is now abolished.
I have shown, I think, what a vast amount of good this
law has done for the country. I have shown what
countless blessings must flow to the men and women of
the future from the training they have received in these
schools. (Cheers.) You will ask, then, why has
Parliament abolished this law, which has done so much
good ? Because, good as it has been, the time has
arrived when Parliament thinks that something better
may be done —(cheers) —and this law, which I maintain
has worked so beneficially, and very probably, under all
the circumstances, has worked better than any even
more extreme law would have worked —this law has
been repealed ; and it is my business now, as briefly as
possible, to show you the principles of the Act which is
now in force, and which came into force on the first of
this month. The new law secures direct Ministerial
responsibility for the administration of the Act. Hitherto,
as you are aware, the old Act has been administered by
a body of gentlemen known as the Council of Education,
and what is known as responsibility to Parliament was
in a very diluted state, as all indirect responsibility must
be, compared with that responsibility which covers all
other departments of the State. By the new Act some-
body must be directly accountable to Parliament for
everything that is done under the law. That is one
change. By the new Act, the teachers, who have
hitherto stood outside the Civil Service of the country,
so to speak, will be drawn within the Civil Service
of the country, and will be civil servants just in the
same sense as a police magistrate or as a policeman is a
civil servant ; and they will be amenable to all the
regulations of the Civil Service. In the next place, it
establishes four classes of schools, which I will briefly
describe. It establishes Public schools such as this. It


establishes what is designated a superior Public school,
which in any remote town, such as Hay or Deniliquin,
where parents may have means to give their chil-
dren some better education than is given in a mere
Public school, and where they are so distant from better
schools that they must either undergo a great expense, or
otherwise, what is of more importance to parents, run
some risk as to the care of their children, by sending
them from home ; in such places as those a school may
be proclaimed a superior Public school ; and in places of
this kind, in addition to the ordinary teaching of a school
like this, some knowledge of languages, of the higher
mathematics, and accomplishments tor girls may be
taught, so that a respectable father and mother may have
their children trained, in addition to the Public school
instruction, without sending the boy or girl from home
or incurring great expense. (Cheers.) The Act estab-
lishes also what is designated evening Public schools—a
school conducted on precisely the same principles as this
school, but which would be open in the evening for young
men or young women whose education has been neglected,
to repair those defects of education so far as they can, if
they are disposed to do so by attending in the evening—
that in some cases will be a great advantage. (Cheers.)
Its operation, no doubt, will be limited ; but if it rescues
only some two or three here, and some two or three
there, of poor creatures who would pass through life
without instruction at all, it will he a great blessing, not
only to them, hut to society at large—(cheers)—and then
the new law establishes a fourth class of schools —High
schools for boys and High schools for girls, where they
may receive such an amount of advanced education as
will fit them to pass through the University, if they are
so disposed ; in other words, to pave the way for the boys
of any family, how poor soever they may be, to attend
the higher scholastic institutions, and take their place, if
they should be fitted for it, amongst the first persons in
the land. Those are some of the things which the new
law does. It reduces the fees so that the highest fee
that can he charged in future will be only threepence for


a child, and where there are four or more children in one-
family, the highest total sum to be charged will he one
shilling per week. This, then, fully justifies me, I think,
in saying that education is now placed within the reach
of all, so far as cost is concerned. I, for one, am in
favour of retaining this system of fees. I think it is a
link of sympathy between the parents and the children,
that it keeps up the responsibility of the parent to educate
the child. Trifling as it may be, it will be something for
the poor mother to have to collect her threepences on a
Monday morning; it will remind her that amongst her
responsibilities there is the responsibility of putting aside
some small portion of the income of the house to train
her boys and girls into respectable men and respectable
women. (Cheers.) And I think that while the retention
of these fees is just, it will be healthy in its moral
operation upon the minds of the parents of the country,
and at the same time it will add considerably, though not
so largely as hitherto, to the revenues applicable to the
purposes of education. Provision is made, however,
that if there should be any case where a family cannot
pay these small fees, the Minister of Public Instruction
or the Public School Board can remit them, and
admit the child perfectly free. lam aware that
objections have been raised to provisions of this kind, on
the score that persons would not like to have a
privilege which was not extended to all, and probably
that feeling may exist to some extent ; but because that
feeling exists in a few instances, surely we are not going
to release the hundreds and thousands of families who
can well afford to pay these small fees. Surely it is
only just that those who can pay and are anxious to pay,
as I believe the majority of parents are, should pay
these small fees for the instruction of their children.
The address which was presented to me just now alludes
to the facilities for religious teaching. I am one of
those who do not believe in children growing up without
religious teaching. (Hear, hear.) I believe that a
secure and sound and lasting faith is essential to all the-
higher qualities of humanity, and to the performance of


all the higher duties of citizenship —(cheers) —to say
nothing of the pillow which it affords to the vast
majority of men and women when they come to die. To
say nothing of that, I believe that men and women who
do not believe in something are likely to slide away
to ruin, and therefore I am not in favour of
with religious teaching ; but I am not in favour of
religious teaching being mixed with the ordinary
curriculum of a school, by which the use of figures, the
use of letters, and the use of the pencil are to be taught
to the children (hear, hear) ; it is no more necessary
to this kind of instruction than it is to teaching a child
to he a bricklayer or a carpenter. In teaching a child
to cast up figures, or to put letters together so as to spell
words, and thus acquire knowledge, or to use the pencil
to delineate landscapes, it is no more necessary to teach
religion than to teach him the use of the chisel, or the
hammer, or the spade. Of course, true religion will
pervade all our actions and walks of life ; hut no one
would ever dream of tolerating the introduction of
religious lessons into the workshop, or the brickyard, or
the farmer’s field, and for acquiring a sound instruction
religion is not more necessary. (Cheers.) But this
new law allows any clergyman or religious teacher to
go to the school and call the children aside teach
them for an hour every day in the doctrines of their own
faith ; and I say, fearlessly, that there is nothing to
prevent any sect of religion whatever from availing
itself of this advantage, and teaching its own doctrines if
it thinks well to do so. (Hear, hear.) If there are
persons in the community who object to Christian
religion—happily there are not many ; and I am one of
those who believe that the consciences of all men should
he respected, whatever their belief may he —but if there
are parents who object to the Christian lesson-books or
to the introduction of the religious teacher during this
hour, they have only to state their objection and their
children will not be subjected to the teaching they
object to. (Cheers.) Well, the new law provides for
the abolition of Denominational schools. I think I have


shown already that the abolition of Denominational
schools has been steadily going on throughout the last
13 years, that the Act of 1866 provided effectually for
the gradual extinction of Denominational schools ; for I
have shown that during the 13 years one-half of them
have fallen aw T ay, and I have shown, moreover, that
though the half which have been retained have been
more powerful, better organized, and placed under
trained teachers like the Public schools, still the
aggregate number of pupils has fallen away —that there
were not nearly so many pupils attending our Denomi-
national schools last year as there were in 1867. I think,
for my part, that that is a conclusive answer to those
who say that the parents of certain religious
persuasions will not send their children to the Public
schools. I think, if the statistics of our schools
show that the attendance at Denominational schools is
not so great now as it was 13 years ago, that is a
conclusive proof that parents are quite willing to send
their children to the Public schools if something does
not interfere to raise obstacles in the way of their doing
so. For example, in 1867 the population of the country
was only 447,620 souls. As I have already stated, the
pupils attending the Denominational schools in that year
were 35,000. Last year the population must have been
at least 730,000 souls, or an increase of 60 per cent.,
and yet the number of pupils attending these Denomina-
tional schools had declined. I say that it is a clear
proof that parents of any sect have no particular desire
to send their children to these schools, because, while
the population increased 60 per cent., the numbers of
children attending these schools declined, and very
sensibly declined. I now wish to point out, still very
briefly, what has really been the policy of our education
system. The change which has taken place now is not
so great as many people suppose ; on the contrary, in
the past law, and in the present law, there is, to anyone
who looks below the surface, a continuity of the same
principles. The law of 1866 commenced with dis-
couraging the religious schools, known as the Denomina-


tional schools. Its operation was to weed them out
wherever they were ineffective, and year by year to
diminish them. The new law puts an end to their
existence altogether at the end of 1882. I think it
must have been clearly foreseen, and it is perfectly
consistent with the principles and tendency of the Act
of 1866, that this class of schools would come to an end
(cheers) —and our system, both under the late
Act and under the present one, is of so catholic and
comprehensive a character that it is open to all children,
of whatever faith, of whatever colour, of whatever class.
(Cheers.) The parents of no child are too rich to send
their children here ; the parents of no child are too poor
to send their children here ; and one great advantage of
it and its moral influence is that children of the poor
and of their richer neighbours can sit side by side in
receiving their primary education. (Cheers.) I discard
altogether the idea that the Public schools are established
in any spirit of charity. They are not established to
meet any case of poverty. They are established for the
public good, so that society may be composed of educated
men and women. (Cheers.) Great as they are in their
blessings to the individual child, they are much greater
and much more important to the nation, in securing for
the future those conditions without which we cannot
hope to grow into a prosperous, a free, and a contented
community. (Cheers.) And what prevents our Roman
Catholic fellow-citizens sending their children to these
schools ? Ido not care what may be said by any
authority whatever. If the object of our Roman
Catholic fellow-citizens is to train their children to be
P-ood members of society, loyal subjects of the Queen,
persons performing the ordinary avocations of life so as
to emulate each other in doing good, if their aim be
simply to build up a free nation, what objects can they
have separate from ourselves ? (Cheers.) If they seek
salvation, do they not seek it through the same Saviour ?
(Hear, hear.) If their worship be different from ours in
form, is not the great end the same, and what can
there be to prevent them sending their children to sit


side by side with the Protestant children of the
country ? (Cheers.) Everybody in this land—every
man, be he born in the British Isles, or be he bom
of this soil—should be something more than a
sectarian. (Cheers.) He should be an Australian
citizen—(loud cheers) —and if his object be to rear
his children simply as members of one common society,
he has the perfect right, which everybody freely grants
to him, of training his children in the religious faith he
believes in himself; but what possible obstacle can there
be in the way of sending his child to one of these schools
to be taught to read, to write, and add up figures ?
(Cheers.) And what is more: I believe that a very
large number of the Catholic parents of this country
take the same view as I do. (Hear, hear.) If this were
not the case, how is it that, while the population of this
country has increased sixty per cent, in some thirteen
years, the children attending the Denominational schools
Pave decreased, and sensibly decreased, as I have shown ?
Now, in working out our new law much has to be done.
I have already described how much we all owe to the
liberality and patriotism of Parliament in making ample
provision for public instruction. All honour to every
Parliament that has sat under our Constitution Act for
its readiness in seconding any sound effort that has been
made to advance this great and holy cause. (Cheers.)
The manner in which the Public Instruction Act which
is now the law of the land passed through the Assembly
so easily and with overwhelming majorities, and the
manner in which it passed through the Legislative
Council almost unanimously, no one seeking to amend
it in any direction contrary to its spirit, are proofs of the
great desire of the Parliament of New South Wales to
serve the cause of education. (Cheers.) Then, I say, all
honour to our Parliament for its great services in this
great cause. (Cheers.) But the vital change that has
now been made, by which the whole system comes under
Parliamentary control, cannot be viewed without some
anxiety ; and I venture to express my sincere hope that
Parliament, while exercising a vigorous supervision, will


yet be cautions and forbearing in the introduction of the
expanded system. I venture to express a hope that the
teachers who, hitherto have been, as it were, an indepen-
dent body, will recognize, in a large and appreciative
spirit, their changed position as civil servants of the
Government, and I venture to express a hope that in the
administration of this Act there will be every care and
forbearance and precaution used, while the utmost zeal
is exercised in carrying out its objects. (Hear, hear.)
It is not a work in which we can act rashly, and the
more we see where we are treading before each footstep
falls, the better it will be for the solid and enduring
establishment of our Public schools. (Cheers.) I ven-
ture to think that the Government have placed the
administration of this Act in as safe hands as could
possibly be selected, when they have placed them in the
experienced hands of Sir John Robertson. (Loud cheers.)
He is one of the ablest and most experienced adminis-
trators we have, and it is not so much a special know-
ledge of the work of education as the aptitude for the
office work, the especial knowledge of administering a
Government department, which is required at the present
time ; and I trust that the Act after a little time will be
administered so as to add largely to the blessings which
the law has hitherto conferred, so as to extend the
advantages of education wider and wider and wider,
until they reach all our children, and at the same
time so to improve the quality of this education that
it shall be equal to any and inferior to none in
the world. (Cheers.) We have the means, we have
shown that we have the will ; and there is no reason
why we in this work should not be equal to, if not
transcend, the efforts of the most powerful and the richest
country in the world. (Loud cheers.) Just in pro-
portion as we all do these things, so shall we in a largei
degree, in every walk of life, contribute to the prosperity
and the true freedom of this young nation —(cheers) ;
and the object in the mind of every person should be,
not so much the befriending of some solitary child, not
so much the benefit of a family, but the great public


object of improving society and fitting it for the reception
of the highest principles of civilization in the future ►
(Cheers.) It is something for us all to reflect upon with
gratification, that the rising generation, and each genera-
tion that succeeds it, is, in all probability, certain to
receive a larger measure and a still larger measure of
these advantages; and you here, in this town of Blayney,
have one of the fountains of national life in this Public
school. I hope you will watch over it —that the parents
will not let trifling circumstances keep their children
away from it. A spasmodic attendance upon teaching is
a sorry thing. You cannot acquire anything in this
world without hard work. The child, if it is to be well
taught, must give its heart and soul to its lessons. The
parent, if he or she wishes the child to excel, must
encourage it to labour; and, after all, in labour in any
walk of life, every child, man, or woman has a truer
source of abiding happiness. (Cheers.) The most
wretched man in the world is the idle man —the man
whose time is a burden to him ; and the happiest is he
who, as the sun goes down, feels that he has done as
much as his. abilities will allow to add to the common
stock of comforts. (Cheers.) Thus you may make this
school a great institution in your midst, and I trust that
in a few short years, instead of 100 children attending
here, you will have double or treble that number, and
that some of these children will go out into the great
world to be a light to their fellows and a crown of
happiness to their parents. (Loud cheers.)
Sir Henry Parkes then declared the Public school to
be open. The National Anthem was played by the
Bathurst City Band, and cheers were given for the Queen,
Sir Henry Parkes, and the Government.
Walker, May, and Co., Printers, 9 Mackillop-street, Melbourne.
