

PUBLIC EDUCATION.
SPEECH
DELIVERED IN THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY,
June 18th, 1875,
HENRY PARKES, M.P.
fl^fO
The Order of the Day was read for the resumption of the
adjourned debate, on the motion of Mr. Dibbs, —“That, in the’
opinion of this House, a bill for the amendment of the Public
Schools Act of 1866 should be introduced, and that such bill,
among other matters,.should provide for the discontinuance, upon
reasonable notice, after a certain period to be fixed by law, of
assistance from public funds for Denominational schools.”
Mr. Parkes : When this question was introduced the
Colonial Secretary was not in his place ; but, as he is now present,
I am willing to give way to him.
Mr. Robertson said he could not think of taking precedence
over the hon. member in regard to the Public School question.
Mr. Parkes continued : I entertain great doubt whether I
am justified in taking up the time of the House upon this question,
submitted to us in the manner in which it is, and my doubt is


overnment has not given
which they regard the
i deal with the matter in
to my mind, and I will
ess. The hon. member
who has introduced the resolution—l suppose it maybe said with-
out discourtesy—represents an organisation out of doors, and it is
a singular circumstance that the hon. gentleman who followed
him, and who made a long and able speech on the question,
represents another organized body out of doors. One hon.
gentleman represents a body whose shibboleth is “secular,
compulsory, and freeand the other represents a body which is
bent upon the maintenance of Denominational schools as they
now exist. I wish to guard myself from being supposed to have
anything like wholesale sympathies with either of those bodies.
I certainly do not go the length of anything like unqualified
sympathy with the special objects of the body represented by the
hon. member for West Sydney (Mr. Dibbs), and I certainly have
no sympathy with the maintenance in this country of purely
Denominational schools. I feel it necessary to say thus much,
because, if I understand the speech of the hon. member (Mr.
Stuart), he maintains the principle of Denominational schools in
such a large degree that he would have the Act changed in that
direction if he could have it changed. I wish to guard myself
from being supposed to concur in the extreme views of either
party. Both hon. gentlemen appear to have a very imperfect
knowledge of the circumstances which attended the passing of
the Public Schools Act. They have both described the present
Act as something entirely different from the bill which was
introduced. The hon. member for West Sydney (Mr. Dibbs), has
used language to the effect that the bill as introduced by the
Martin Administration contained provisions for the maintenance
of Public schools and the abolition of Denominational schools.
The bill never contained any provision for the abolition of
Denominational schools. The hon. member for East Sydney
(Mr. Stuart), in allusion to some taunt that the clergy who opposed
the passing of the Public Schools Bill are now its advocates —that
having been its inveterate opponents, they are now its supporters
—has said that they never disliked the Act; it was the bill as
originally introduced which they disliked, but the Act itself under-
went such an entire change as to be quite a different thing from
the first draft of the bill. Well, the bill as first drawn contained
the very principles which the Act contains. At the very first,
before the bill saw the light, in the very first draft, it was provided
that in future no schools should be established by State aid,
except Public schools ; and it provided, side by side with this
provision, that Denominational schools, established by other
persons, should be aided under certain conditions, from the


public funds. These were the two broad principles of the bill,
and they remain the distinctive principles of the Act. They were
laid down in the first inception of the bill, and were never
departed from; and they are the main principles of the Act at
the present time. It is necessary, in dealing justly with the
question, to bear in mind that there never was power, and there
is no power now, for the establishment of Denominational schools.
The only schools which the Council of Education has power to
establish are Public schools, or schools on the same basis as
Public schools. The only power given to the Council in
reference to Denominational schools is the power to aid them;
they must be established by private persons.
In respect to this motion I cannot pass over altogether the
resolution of the hon. and learned member for the Western
Gold-fields, who also, I suppose, represents the League, and
who certainly has brought a large amount of ability and
eloquence to the representation of that body. That hon.
and learned member brought forward a motion which, in my
judgment, carried out the principles of the League more
distinctly than the motion now before the House. And the
hon. and learned member supported his motion by a speech
of great power, but no other single member was foqnd to
support his motion, and that certainly appeared a most singular
circumstance. For some reason, the friends of the League in this
House all turned their backs upon the hon. and learned member,
and left him alone with his motion. Surely it could not be that
he is a less worthy representative of the League than the hon.
member (Mr. Dibbs), because I do not think the House will
admit that the mover of the present resolution has dealt with the
question with a greater amount of ability than the hon. and
learned member for the Western Gold-fields. Coming to the reso-
lution itself, —it is easy to see where it has emanated from—that
it is a certain modification of the resolution submitted by the hon,
member for the Murrumbidgee some two years ago. This brings
me to another somewhat singular exhibition in the strangely
scattered state of parties in the House, by which the most
distinguished champion of the Church of England Defence
Association and the ablest defender of Denominational schools,
is practically associated in political life with the founders of the
League. The hon. member (Mr. Stuart), came into the House as
the leader of Denominationalism and the champion of the Church
and its schools ; but in all his proceedings in this House he is
associated with the true founders of the League, who in reality
are the present Ministers. On the 21st January, 1873, the hon.
member (Mr. W. Forster), the present Colonial Treasurer, invited
the House to affirm that a bill to amend the Public Schools
Act of 1866, should be introduced during that session. The
resolution was in the following words :


Government has not given
i which they regard the
a deal with the matter in
| to my mind, and I will
less. The hon. member
ppose it may be said with-
ion out of doors, and it is
gentleman who followed
speech on the question,
it of doors. One hon.
shibboleth is “secular,
a body which is
inational schools as they
i being supposed to have
i either of those bodies,
anything like unqualified
body represented by the
bs), and I certainly have
this country of purely
essary to say thus much,
if the hon. member (Mr.
)enominational schools in
. the Act changed in that
direction if he could have it changed. I wish to guard myself
from being supposed to concur in the extreme views of either
party. Both hon. gentlemen appear to have a very imperfect
knowledge of the circumstances which attended the passing of
the Public Schools Act. They have both described the present
Act as something entirely different from the bill which was
introduced. The hon. member for West Sydney (Mr. Dibbs), has
used language to the effect that the bill as introduced by the
Martin Administration contained provisions for the maintenance
of Public schools and the abolition of Denominational schools.
The bill never contained any provision for the abolition of
Denominational schools. The hon. member for East Sydney
(Mr. Stuart), in allusion to some taunt that the clergy who opposed
the passing of the Public Schools Bill are now its advocates —that
having been its inveterate opponents, they are now its supporters
—has said that they never disliked the Act; it was the bill as
originally introduced which they disliked, but the Act itself under-
went such an entire change as to be quite a different thing from
the first draft of the bill. Well, the bill as first drawn contained
the very principles which the Act contains. At the very first,
before the bill saw the light, in the very first draft, it was provided
that in future no schools should be established by State aid,
except Public schools j and it provided, side by side with this
provision, that Denominational schools, established by other
persons, should be aided under certain conditions, from the


public funds. These were the two broad principles of the bill,
and they remain the distinctive principles of the Act. They were
laid down in the first inception of the bill, and were never
departed from; and they are the main principles of the Act at
the present time. It is necessary, in dealing justly with the
question, to bear in mind that there never was power, and there
is no power now, for the establishment of Denominational schools.
The only schools which the Council of Education has power to
establish are Public schools, or schools on the same basis as
Public schools. The only power given to the Council in
reference to Denominational schools is the power to aid them;
they must be established by private persons.
In respect to this motion I cannot pass over altogether the
resolution of the hon. and learned member for the Western
Gold-fields, who also, I suppose, represents the League, and
who certainly has brought a large amount of ability and
eloquence to the representation of that body. That hon.
and learned member brought forward a motion which, in my
judgment, carried out the principles of the League more
distinctly than the motion now before the House. And the
hon. and learned member supported his motion by a speech
of great power, but no other single member was found to
support his motion, and that certainly appeared a most singular
circumstance. For some reason, the friends of the League in this
House all turned their backs upon the hon. and learned member,
and left him alone with his motion. Surely it could not be that
he is a less worthy representative of the League than the hon.
member (Mr. Dibbs), because I do not think the House will
admit that the mover of the present resolution has dealt with the
question with a greater amount of ability than the hon. and
learned member for the Western Gold-fields. Coming to the reso-
lution itself,—it is easy to see where it has emanated from—that
it is a certain modification of the resolution submitted by the hon.
member for the Murrumbidgee some two years ago. This brings
me to another somewhat singular exhibition in the strangely
scattered state of parties in the House, by which the most
distinguished champion of the Church of England Defence
Association and the ablest defender of Denominational schools,
is practically associated in political life with the founders of the
League. The hon. member (Mr. Stuart), came into the House as
the leader of Denominationalisra and the champion of the Church
and its schools ; but in all his proceedings in this House he is
associated with the true founders of the League, who in reality
are the present Ministers. On the 21st January, 1873, the hon.
member (Mr. W. Forster), the present Colonial Treasurer, invited
the House to affirm that a bill to amend the Public Schools
Act of 1866, should be introduced during that session. The
resolution was in the following words :


That this House is of opinion that a bill for the amendment of the Public
Schools Act of 1866 should be introduced during the present session, and that
such bill, among other matters, should provide for the extension and stricter
enforcement of the principle of secular instruction, and for the discontinuance,
upon reasonable notice after a certain period to be fixed by law, of assistance
from public funds for Denominational schools.
I moved an amendment which altered the resolution, and made
it read as follows :
That this House is of opinion that the experience of the last six years
fully justifies the policy of the Public Schools Act ot 1866, and that any
interference at the present time with the operation of that Act, and the
valuable system of public instruction established under its provisions, would
be impolitic and prejudicial to the best interests of the people.
A division was taken, and there were sixteen for the original
resolution, and twenty-six against it. Amongst the sixteen were
Mr. Forster, Mr. Robertson, Mr. Garrett, and Mr. Lucas. The
hon. member now at the head of the Government moved an
amendment upon my amendment, which would have had the
effect of allowing a motion of a similar kind to be made again,
and would have left the question open to be dealt with in another
week or any time thereafter. That motion was negatived by
twenty-six to nineteen, and among the nineteen were Messrs.
Robertson, Garrett, Forster, LuCas, and Burns. The original
resolution having been negatived, my amendment was carried by
twenty-six to nine, and amongst the nine were Messrs. Forster and
Garrett —Messrs. Robertson, Lucas, and Burns having walked out
of the Chamber. That event led to the formation of the League.
In consequence of that defeat, and the feeling entertained by
some gentlemen who were conscientiously in favour of purely
secular instruction, a meeting was held at the house of a late
member of this House (Mr. John Stewart), and at that meeting
the League was decided upon and formed. So that the League
for the reconstruction of the school system of this country really
sprung from the action of the gentlemen who are Her Majesty’s
present advisers in this country. That was the first time that we
had placed upon the records of Parliament anything about purely
secular instruction and the extinction of Denominational schools;
and it is worth while to note that the champion of Denomi-
nationalism in this country is about the ablest and most consistent
supporter of the authors of this secular movement. Of course,
I cast no reflection upon the hon. member, and I compliment the
Government upon having a supporter so able and so valuable.
But it is nevertheless a singular circumstance that the man who
came here to defend the Church schools should be the steadiest
and stanchest supporter of the men who tried to destroy those
schools,andwho,if theyare consistent,must bring in abillto destroy
them. I do not suppose for a moment that the motion introduced
by Mr. Forster three years ago had any object except to carry out


what was a conscientious belief. I have too great an admiration
for the party of gentlemen who now fill the Treasury benches to
suppose that they had any unworthy intention to embarrass the
Government of that day, and, having the fullest opinion of their
sincerity in this matter, I expect to see them bring in their bill; nor
do I think it unreasonable that they should have a little time, but I
expect to see them bring in a bill to carry out the principles of the
League.
A good deal has been said on this question of education about
what is being done in continental countries, in America, and
other colonies of the British Empire. It is a question of so practical
a character, one which requires to be dealt with so purely in view of
our local circumstances, that not much instruction can be derived
from any of these examples. But I will very cursorily allude to a
few of the cases of other countries. I think lam correct in say-
ing that in no country on the Continent is secular education
established, with the single exception of Holland. In the whole of
the systems of the principal countries of Europe, religious teaching
is incorporated with the system of public education. The only
country where anything like a pure secular system exists is the
small country of Holland. In Prussia, the whole system is
eminently religious, and so is it in France and Switzerland. In
America the systems vary so much in different States that it is almost
impossible to draw any fair illustration as regards what is best to
be done in Australia. Nor do I think it is the case that the
different systems in America have been in any marked degree
superior to the system of New South Wales. I have in my hand
a report which accompanied the President’s message to both Houses
of Congress in 1871, and I will read from it passages, taken
almost at random, respecting five or six of the principal States. I
will commence with the State of Kentucky, a very large State, and
where the system of education has been in force many years. I
find this passage in the State document: —
One of the most discouraging features, and one of the most difficult to
practically provide against in the establishment of a general school policy for
universal education, is the large per-centage of pupil children who do not
appear in attendance upon the schools, though they are made free and open to
all. If we accept 370,000 as the average number of pupil children annually
reported in the State for the last four years, we may safely take thirty per cent.,
or 111,000, as the average number in attendance on the common schools, for
the full legal sessions. The non-attendant list runs up to the enormous figures
of .259,000, or seventy per cent, of the whole. If we accept 4900, as the
average number of schools taught for sessions of three months each, we will
have an average attendance on each of twenty-five pupils. If we except the
city schools from the country, this average for the town and country school
districts will be about seventy census children reported, and twenty pupils in
constant attendance for each. In another view, the ratio of pupils in average
attendance to the non-attending pupil chilcfren is as one of the former to two
and one-half the latter.
So much for the State of Kentucky. I now come to the State of
Maine, which has been eminently regarded as the seat of the social


virtues —a State which has given its name to the liquor law, which
is held in great reverence by the friends of temperance. This is
what was the case in the State of Maine :
This law has amounted to little or nothing. It is not the positive man-
date of the people that the ignorant and vicious should be instructed, and sub-
jected to discipline. Where parents are dependent upon the labours of children,
society should carefully balance the necessities of each —administer to the
wants of the parent, and send the children to school. Very few towns have
availed themselves of the license of the law, and yet from every quarter the
complaints of small school attendance come up, and the accompanying requests
for a compulsory law.
Next, I come to the old and venerated State of Massachusetts, one
of the States which was the cradle of American liberty, and is
now the seat of American culture. Speaking of the compulsory
law, —and there is a compulsory clause in the school law of
Massachusetts, —the report says;—
Nobody looks after it —neither town authorities, nor school committees,
nor local police—and the large cities and many of the towns of the State are
full of unschooled children, vagabondizing about the streets, and growing up
in ignorance and to a heritage of sin. The mills all over the State, the shops
in city and towns are full of children deprived of their right to such education
as will fit them for the possibilities of their after life, and nobody thinks of
obeying the school law. In fact, most persons are ignorant that there is any
such law, so that between those so ignorant and those that care for none of
these things, we have no right to boast of compulsory education in Massachusetts.
The law of compulsion has been tried under the most favourable
circumstances, in the bosom of a people highly educated, with a
native literature, containing many of the most eminent minds of
the United States, and it has utterly broken down. Coming to
the great State of New York, I find, there, the report is not more
favourable.
Yet education is not carried to every child. There is no inconsiderable
number of boys who congregate upon street-corners, surround places of public
resort, gather in saloons and dram shops, and infest the thoroughfares of
business, shocking decency itself with their oaths and vulgarity. They are
depredators upon public and private property ; they are the pest of neighbour-
hoods, the terror of unoffending children, a reproach to religion and good
morals, and are controlled only by the strong arm of municipal law. Many of
these boys, at different periods, have been brought before the Grand Jury for
indictment; but considerations of pity rather than justice have so far prevailed
with that body as to suffer these culprits to escape the just and well-merited
punishment for their offences. This evil is not only local in character and
effect, but wide-spread and general, as shown by the ever recurring deeds of
crime which fill our gaols, penitentiaries, and prisons, and constantly operate
to deprave public morals and disturb the peace, stability, and good order of
society.
I will only trouble the House with one short quotation from the
report on the state of education in Rhode Island, where there is
a compulsory clause in the education law. We shall see from this
state document how it works :
What shall be done for the more than 10,000 children in our State unde r
fifteen years of age who attend no school, most of whom can neither read nor
write, and many of whom are vagrants and truants, with none to care for their
welfare ? Some of them work in our factories, and, from necessity of one


kind or another, are compelled to pass the tender years of youth—the best and
only years for acquiring the rudiments of an education under the severe
restraints of long-continued and wearisome labour, and deprived of the blessing
of common school instruction. Others are learning the vices and corruption
which idleness, neglect and profligacy must surely engender, and, under the
influence of bad associates and adepts in crime, are candidates for the reform
school and the prison. Can the State afford the loss of so many of its children
from its school of learning, to be educated in schools of crime ? Can it take
the responsibility even of allowing one-fifth of its youthful population to grow
up in a condition which will endanger its civil rights, as well as material pros-
perity, and its social and moral character.
I think the extracts I have read show that in this colony we are
in danger of being carried away by the delusion of overlook-
ing the realities at our own doors for some fancied superior condi-
tion that lies beyond our reach. It seems to be proved that
education is not better in the States of America than it is in New
South Wales. And it is necessary to notice the great difference in
the educational system of the United States from anything
we have here. The only system we deal with is a uniform system
of primary instruction. But the Public school system of America
includes the whole scheme of Public schools from the foundation
to the top. There are teachers’ institutes, soldiers’ and orphans’
schools, reformatory schools, normal schools, and grammar schools
and colleges. So far as the State is concerned in the operation
of the Public Schools Act, we deal with schools for elementary
instruction of one uniform kind ; and, in estimating the extent to
which our schools reach the wants of the people, we must always
remember that, lying outside these schools, are all the good private
schools, all the schools of higher grade than the Public schools,
and all the various means for private tuition ; so that we can
form no adequate, certainly no accurate, conception of the extent
to which education reaches the children of the colony if we
restrict our views to the schools under the Council of Education.
In America we see the result at one glance, and to some extent
we see it at one glance in Victoria.
Coming to Victoria, sufficient time has not elapsed to enable
us to judge of what has been done there, and I think I am
quite correct in saying that there is a very large number of
persons in the colony of Victoria who looked with grave appre-
hension and doubt upon the precipitate step that was taken
there a few years ago. We ought to look fully and fairly in the
face all the circumstances surrounding this great change in
Victoria. There was a Government in power which had at its
head one of the most cultivated and able men that have appeared
in these colonies —Sir Charles Gavan Duffy. It was well known
that that gentleman was in favour of the continuance of State aid
to Denominational schools, and it was seen that the only way to
upset his Government was to carry a resolution which he could
not comply with. With this view an effort was made which suc-
ceeded in obtaining the concurrence of a bare majority to a motion


in favour of an Educational Bill being immediately introduced with
provisions which it was known would not be adopted the
Duffy Government. This resolution was carried, and the Govern-
ment displaced; and the Government who succeeded to office
were compelled by their own act to bring in this Bill.
Mr. Dibbs : Was not thar public opinion ?
Mr. Parkes : I am not surprised at the interruption ; but I
am surprised at some of the cheers. The Bill introduced in no
sense represented public opinion at the time. It was _ the result
of political machination—the fruit of a political combination for
party purposes. Mr. Francis’s Government were bound to intro-
duce the Bill ; they could not have lived a day if they had shrunk
from their self-imposed obligation, and it could not therefore be
said to represent the calm, deliberate judgment of its authors. I
will advert for a few moments to some circumstances which seem
to show that I am quite justified in saying that the Victorian Act
does not give universal satisfaction. Mr. Donald Cameron, a spe-
cial commissioner, appointed by the Queensland Government to
inquire into the working of the Act, has, in a carefully prepared
report, expressed his doubts as to the soundness of some of its
provisions, and distinctly reports that to a considerable extent it
has failed in what ought to be the highest object of any law,
namely, the improvement of the quality of education. It matters
very little what the machinery is if it produces education of the
best quality, and produces it in sufficient quantity, and the very
highest object of all supporters of the expenditure of public money
to public education ought to be to raise the quality of the instruc-
tion given. After this debate was adjourned, I wrote to three or
four parties in Victoria, to ascertain the opinions of persons
representing different sections of the community upon the working
of the Act. I have before me a letter from a literary man of some
eminence, resident in Melbourne ; a letter from a Protestant gen-
tleman of very considerable intelligence and standing, and a letter
from a Catholic gentleman intimately informed of what the Roman
Catholic body is doing. My first correspondent says that the Act
is a great success—that no Minister would dare to propose its
repeal. He says that to a great extent the Churches are becom-
ing reconciled to it, and, altogether, he speaks of it in very high
terras. And this is a gentleman of superior literary attainments
—a man of undoubted and acknowledged ability, and I
ought to add that he is a man who holds rather extreme views of
human progress. The other letter is from a resident in a country
town, who has ample means of judging of the state of the colony
in relation to the operation of this education law. He says :
I think the schools—free and secular —are popular among the people.
My own opinion is that the schools are not generally so efficient, nor the body
of teachers as well trained as in New South Wales. The Churches, as
churches, are not satisfied. But there is a very respectable minority friendly
to the Act as it is. Remote districts, numbering from ten to twenty, or thirty


children, still suffer the want of education in most cases. I am acquainted
with one district where the children must walk three to five or six miles or
not attend. Another where there are ten to twenty and no school.
Although the Act has attempted to sweep the children into the
laige State schools, its compulsory clauses have completely broken
down; and remote districts, where there are small groups of fami-
lies, and where education is wanted more than anywhere else, are
left in a state of moral destitution. I now come to my Roman
Catholic correspondent, and he says :
No Roman Catholics can adopt a purely secular system; almost every
school from which aid has yet been withdrawn is maintained, and, as a rule,
with largely increased attendance; the same course is likely to be continued.
Other denominations sympathise with us, the Church of England, Rev. P.
Potter ; Mr. Henry Henty, Presbyterian; Mr. Dixon {vide letter to Daily
Telegraph ); see also, Professor Hearn’s Pamphlet on Payment by Results ;
more persons object to the law without sympathy with the Catholic objection.
In July, 1872, I estimated the number of Roman Catholic children in this
colony, between five and fifteen, at 46,000.
According to the last report, there were, last year, in Victoria,
1113 schools. Those schools were classified as State schools in
buildings belonging to the minister, 531; State schools in leased
buildings, 457 ; capitation schools, 125. The number of children
enrolled, excluding double enrolments, was 181,131. At the
same time, the population of the colony was 790,492. Ihe
children from three to six years old, numbered 73,007 ; from six
to fifteen, 196,789; from fifteen to sixteen, 12,080; making
altogether, 281,876. Now let us see how these children were
distributed. Attending the State schools there were 181,131 ;
attending the Industrial and Reformatory schools, 1681 ; attend-
ing the Grammar school, 1230; in private schools, 15,480. The
enormous number of 82,354 children attended no school at all.
What is the state of education in this colony ? According to
the last report of the Council of Education, there are, under that
body, 1007 schools. Considering that our population is under
600,000, I think that such a number—which excludes private and
all schools outside the Council’s control —compares very favour-
ably with the 1113 schools in Victoria, where the population is
nearly 800,000. At the end of 1874 there were enrolled under
the Council of Education, 100,384 children. The Registrar-
General has prepared a return, which shows that the number of
children of school age in the colony is about 140,000. So that,
whilst Victoria has 80,000 not attending any school, we appear
to have 40,000. Ido not think we need fear comparison in that
respect. On all hands it is admitted that our system of training
is exceedingly good —quite equal to that of most other countries.
It is admitted, too, that by our means of inspection, examination,
and training of teachers, we have raised the quality of education
in this country at least to an equality with that of any one of the
other colonies. So that we are spreading the means of education
of a high quality to as large a proportion of our children as they


appear to be doing in the neighbouring colony of Victoria. Our
expenditure on education for the year is The expen-
diture of the sister colony during the same period is little short of
three-quarters of a million sterling. The expense of building new
schools and maintaining schools follows upon the suicidal policy
of c'osing schools that are good enough, and leaving remote places
without any schools at all.
I think, if the business of conducting public affairs in relation
to this difficult question of public instruction is to be measured
by caring for the children, providing the means of reaching
them, and at the same time economising the public money,
we have no cause to be ashamed of the comparison between
this colony and Victoria. I find, by published statistics, that
at the end of 1867, —the first year of the school system —
there were in this colony, 642 schools. At the end of 1874, after
a period of only eight years, there were 990 schools. In the next
three months—that is, up to the time when the report of the
Council was issued—there were added seven Public schools, nine
Provisional schools, and one Half-time school; making the
number 1007. Is not that a gratifying increase of the scholastic
institutions of the country ? At the end of the year 1867, the
number of pupils attending schools under the Council of Educa-
tion was 64,740; at the end of 1874, there were 100,384 —show-
ing an increase of nearly 40,000 in eight years. Is not that a
great result to accomplish in so short a time ? Then it has been
said that Denominational schools have been fostered. But what
are the actual facts ? At the end of 1867, the pupils attending
the Public schools numbered 28,434; at the end of 1874, the
number of pupils attending the Public schools was 53,702 —show-
ing an increase of 25,268 on the eight years. Is not that a result
which should gratify everyone desirous of maintaining this Public
school system ? Now, what has been the case in regard to De-
nominational schools? At the end of 1867 there were 317
Denominational schools in the colony. At the end of 1874 there
were only 204. Notwithstanding that decrease of schools, the
number of pupils attending Denominational schools has not
decreased. And that, I maintain, is a most gratifying evidence
that the law has raised these Denominational schools into a state
of efficiency, and made them serve far nobler purposes. These
204 schools now train 35,306 children, as against the 36,218
children who attended the 317 schools at the end of 1867. That
in itself, I contend, is an unanswerable argument that the law has
worked well. These Denominational schools are taught by the
same class of trained teachers, and are subject to the same exami-
nation as the Public schools, and I am bound to make the admis-
sion that the law has made this class of schools, in many cases,
as efficient as the Public schools. The law has purified all
Denominational schools, kept back all improper patronage in the


appointment of teachers ; and it is an undeniable fact which
cannot be set aside by rant or wild statement, that where there
are two schools, —a Public and a Denominational school—if the
Denominational schoolmaster has the greater aptitude for teaching,
he will have the larger and better school. As was stated by Earl
Russell, no good school can exist without a good schoolmaster;
and, however good the system of training may be, we cannot
manufacture teachers equally good out of unequal material. Those
who understand the matter place a much higher value upon
aptitude for teaching than upon ordinary attainments ; and a
teacher will not get his classification merely on the ground of his
attainments, but upon his aptitude to teach,
I desire to dwell for a moment or two upon the provisions
of the present Act, and I ask the mover of the resolution
to give me his attention while I do so. The bill as first
introduced was the same in all its main principles as the
present law ; the principal alterations being that the minimum
attendance at Denominational schools was reduced from forty
to thirty in committee; and that the Legislative Council in-
troduced the present provision for school fees, which I think is
an improvement. The law provides that in the establishment of
new schools the site must be vested in the Council of Education,
for Public school purposes ; and it also provides that where the
attendance at the Public school has reached eighty pupils, and
where there are thirty other pupils desirous of attending a Deno-
minational school, if the Denomination erect and furnish a school
for themselves, the Council may then aid them to the extent of
supplying books and sending a trained teacher. And the Council
is authorised to do that only on the condition that the school
must come under precisely the same regulations, and be subject
in all things to the Council of Education. Is there anything
unwise in that condition ? The Denominational schools of this
country are unlike those in any other part of the world, so far as
lam informed. To all intents and purposes they are Public
schools in the course of elementary instruction. They are under
the same discipline and control in all respects in their secular
instruction; and the Church only has authority to add to the pre-
scribed course the catechisms and prayers of the Denomination.
Unless we are prepared to say that religion is an evil thing, unless
we are enemies to religion itself, it is difficult to see how we can
reasonably object to the Churches adding their prayers, their
hymns, and their catechisms, if in all other respects the instruction
of the children is faithfully carried out. The men who can go
before a public meeting and talk about the establishment of
Denominational schools under the present law, are talking the
veriest nonsense. There is no power in the Act to apply public
money to the establishment of Denominational schools, or to
apply a single penny in payment for religious instruction. There


is permission for the Churches to add religious instruction, but
the Denominations must do .it at their own expense and upon
their own responsibility. For the sake of a thin unsustainable
theory, for the sake of carrying out impracticable whims, are we
going to shut up such magnificent schools as St. Philip’s, St.
Mary’s, and St. James’, and put the country to the expense of
building other schoolhouses, which can supply no better kind of
education ? We shall gain no single advantage, but only gratify
the whim of a bigoted religionist or an equally bigoted secularist.
I use these words advisedly, for in the course of my life I have
never seen a more marked exhibition of intolerance than has been
displayed on the part of some of these so-called school reformers
who, the moment a man ventures to dissent from them, though he
may have been battling in this cause before their names were
heard of, do their best to cover him with vituperation and
slander. Their intolerance is harmless only on account of the
imbecility which accompanies it. The law provides in the most
careful and beneficent way for the safe teaching of the teacher,
and that is one of the great essentials in any school system. The
law has made this provision's© carefully and well that, combined
with the integrity and inflexible conduct of the gentlemen who are
entrusted with the administration of the law, the system has been
more successful than that of alnfost any other country within my
knowledge. We have an army of nearly 1400 teachers, who have
come out of the Council’s training school, who are gifted with the
faculty of supplying an education to the people not only large in
quantity, but of high quality. We have a system comparatively
easy, simple, and economical in its working. The law provides
for keeping up these schools in their efficiency by regular inspec-
tion, applicable to all alike which receive aid from the State ; and,
above all, the law supplies what the gaudy system of the sister
colony has hitherto failed to do—by its beneficent agency of half-
time schools it has, in remote places, gathered in the children who
would otherwise grow up in ignorance. Considering the circum-
stances of the population, the differences of opinion, and even
the prejudices which prevail in the country, we have a law
sufficiently elastic to accommodate itself to all conditions of our
Australian life, sufficiently comprehensive to reach all its proper
objects, and economical enough to avoid all extravagant expendi-
ture. Before we set aside this law for the purpose of carrying out,
or attempting to carry out, some mere theory, we should think
well of what we are about to do. And if, in any case, the
qualities which make up a statesman are required, they are
required in a case of this kind. I met, the other day, in a book
recently published by a writer of great ability, an expression of
opinion upon the qualities necessary for governing, and as it has
great force and beauty, if the House will pardon me, I will read
the passage, because it seems to me to specially apply to such a


work as carrying out the public instruction of the people of an
English community. The writer, from whom lam about to read,
has distinguished himself during the last two or three years by
writing some remarkable essays upon the great changes which
have lately taken place in England. In one of his essays there
is this passage :
The business of the statesmen is to be the servant of the people, in the
sense in which the Pope is servus servorum . as working in their service, but not
as the instrument of their orders. The statesman who is worth his salt has to
be continually initiating, devising, suggesting, He has often to create a public
opinion, to modify it, never to be its tool. The democratic fallacy and the
heroic king fallacy proceed from the same root of error. The democratic fal-
lacy assumes that the people will always best know what is good for them, and
the heroic king fallacy assumes that all that is wanted is to force mobs into
order and quiet. Both alike forget that in the subtle organism of modern
societies the only sound methods of treatment are methods of extraordinary
complication and delicacy. When the old democratic doctrines grew up,
what was wanted, or at least wanted immediately, was the redress of griev-
ances and the removal of glaring abuses. On the other hand, the great task
of government was to suppress crimes of violence, and enforce the regular
course of justice. We have long left both behind. Societies like generations
of men throw up their own special maladies ; and old States necessarily breed
diseases of a deep-seated kind. Abuses in them are neither glaring nor obvious,
but infinitely insidious, concealed, and complicated. Grievances are not found
on the surface irritating the skin, but they wear away the marrow of the bones
and linger in the joints, blighting and deranging each organ in turn. They
may be diagnosed, and even cured by infinite patience and skill; but the trac-
ing their secret causes and consequences requires consummate sagacity, and
their healihg is a task of prolonged and refined artifice. It is as false to regard
them as incapable of cure as to think them curable by drastic remedies. With
diseases of this sort to deal with, the modern statesman needs to be perpetu-
ally watching, calculating, and acting. It would be preposterous to leave
these difficult tasks to popular initiative ; and yet, when the remedy is found,
it can only be applied by popular support. Thus the statesman has to be for
ever modifying public opinion, and to be for ever modified by it. He must
strain every nerve to carry the right measure to completion, short of the point
where it meets with fixed and invincible opposition. He must never force,
and never be forced. He must create the opinion on which alone he rests for
strength ; create it by honestly forcing the conviction that he is right, not by
manipulating electoral strings. The body on which he works is as changeful
as the sea ; yet it has currents as irresistible as the tide. But he is as little to
be carried hither and thither by the breath of every wind as he is to brace
himself to bear back the set of the tide.*
This extract describes exactly the principle which ought to operate
in dealing with the long pent-up prejudices and preferences of a
mixed people on this education question. I was startled at the
levity and superficialness of some of the arguments I heard the
other night. They took this form—that the clergy who opposed
the passing of the Public Schools Bill are now among the warmest
advocates of the Act, and upon that alleged change of position
was built up a supercilious taunt at the inconsistency, or perhaps
the insincerity, of the clergy. If those who opposed me in 1866
have since thought it well to say that what I did then was right,
“ Order and Progress,” by Frederic Harrison.


am Ito question the sincerity of their conduct 1 On the contrary,
I think their change of attitude ought to be accepted as in the
highest degree creditable to their conscientiousness on their
further examination of the question. One word more about this
Act in regard to its practical character. The elasticity of its
provisions is such that they have been able to call into existence
two classes of schools, which do not exist in the other colonies ;
and those two classes of schools, now numbering more than 300,
supply the means of education where neither Denominational nor
Public schools could supply it. I allude to the Provisional
schools and to the Half-time schools. The hon. member for
Newtown, when addressing himself to this question, read a letter
from the Bishop of Sydney to the Council of Education. In that
letter the Bishop offered to concur in the conversion of Denomi-
national schools in certain places, where there was a small
attendance, into Public schools, and that circumstance was laid
hold of, very unfairly, to argue that if the children in the country
did not want religion, the children in the towns did not. The
Bishop obviously meant that, as a matter of expediency, it would
be better, on all accounts, to consent to the conversion of
Denominational schools into Public schools in certain places
where there were only a few children ; not that he preferred that
step as a matter of principle, Or was less anxious for the religious
instruction of the children.
I now come to a very difficult part of the subject, and
a very delicate one —I mean the attitude of the Roman
Catholic Church in relation to this subject of public instruc-
tion. My views upon this matter are well known, and I have
no occasion in any way to modify those views. I am bound,
however, to recognize the fact that a large body ot men
and women in this country, numbering more than one-
third of the whole population, are members of the Roman
Catholic Church. Whatever their views may be, they are
subjects of Her Majesty in the same political sense as are
the rest of the population ; they live under the same laws as
we live under; they pay their share of the same taxes ; they
bear their equal part of the public burdens ; and they are bound
by the same obligations as their fellow citizens. Well, it is said
that the Roman Catholic body, as a matter of conscience, will
not send their children to schools where they will not be instructed
as Roman Catholics. On the other hand, it is said that the State
will provide Public schools for them where religious instruction is
shut out, and that if they do not like to send their children to
those schools, it will be their own fault. That is a fair represent-
ation of what seems to be required by the Roman Catholics on
the one hand, and of the arguments of the secularists on the
other. But these purely secular schools will be paid for out of
the public revenue, and the Roman Catholics will be required to


contribute as much to the revenue as those who make use of the
schools. Most persons in this country are sufficiently well off to
make sacrifices when their consciences are inflamed with zeal for
the maintenance of their principles, and the Roman Catholics
here will do as the Roman Catholics in Victoria are doing—turn
their backs upon your newly-organised Public schools, and pro-
vide separate schools for themselves. While the Roman Catholics
support their own schools, they will at the same time be compelled
to pay towards the support of the schools you set up for the other
classes of the population, and to which they refuse to send their child-
ren. Call it what you will, this will be nothing short of oppression. I
believe that the persons who are united in this crusade, if it may
be dignified by that name, form two broad sections —those who
are opposed to religion altogether, and those whose sectarian views
have been heated to such a degree, that they want to force all others
to their own standards of belief. I will take the Orange point of
view, which supposes that Roman Catholics are a kind of creatures
who ought to be swallowed up, having been first grilled by a
sufficient heat of public agitation. The Orangeman looks upon
the Roman Catholic religion as a great evil in the world; but, by
the course' you propose, you will bring up in these separate schools
the very extreme types of the Roman Catholic. You will have
the Catholics of the next generation learning to hate all other
classes, and cherishing a spirit of hostility against society, spring-
ing from a keenly-felt, though, perhaps, a magnified grievance,
having to pay for the education of other people’s children at the
same time that they bear the entire burden of paying for their
own. Instead of the spread of enlightenment and the reconcilia-
tion of classes, bringing all into one bond of union, we shall be
erecting an iron wall to keep classes apart, and we shall have
Catholics of that extreme political and party type which has never
yet been seen in this colony. The grievance, once rooted in the
minds of the Roman Catholic body, will find advocates for redress
in quarters least expected. Men of education and of large sym-
pathy in all parties will side with those who suffer injury; and in
the course of time we shall have a reform of this state of things
which will be a violent rebound, working out results entirely
opposite to those which in your blindness you are aiming at. The
thing itself is essentially unjust. So long as we appropriate the
revenues of the country for the purposes of education, we have
no right to apply them in a way that will exclude a large pro-
portion of the population from the benefits of the expenditure. I
admit that if a case of necessity could be proved, then we might
be justified. But the necessity cannot be proved. The system
of education in this country is so sound, so comprehensive, that
it includes all classes, and in consequence there is no necessity
for creating these serious heart-burnings in one portion of the
population.


i 8
I have shown what the provisions of the Public Schools
Act are, and if men will carefully examine the la.w for them-
selves, they will see the accuracy of my explanation. I have
shown that in an eminent manner it respects the liberty of con-
science and the differences 0/ opinion, while it spreads instruction
to all classes, in all conditions, and under all circumstances, which
are found throughout our extensive territory. I have shown, what
could not be denied, that the law has succeeded in supplying this
instruction of a high quality. Is not a system that has done this
in eight years entitled to a further trial ? Is it to be set aside, or
in its main provisions rescinded for the mere purpose of an ex-
periment which cannot give you better results in the quality of
education or the qualifications of teachers, and which will exas-
perate large classes of the population ? This is not what I have
been led .to believe in as a manifestation of liberal thought. I
believe that on this question especially, we ought as far as we can,
to respect the convictions and associations, and even the preju-
dices, and what we may regard as the unsound opinions of all
persons; and unless the necessity for a contrary course can be
proved beyond doubt, we shall be acting most wisely and safely
by maintaining a system which all, more or less cordially, can
accept and support. It would wiser policy, and a higher
patriotism on the part of hpn. gentlemen to endeavour to improve
the administration of the law, instead of tinkering with its
machinery,—to try to extend the blessings which are practically
in our hands to a wider area, instead of seeking new and untried
means for their dispensation. This might be done in many ways.
It might be done by introducing improved books; by instituting
adult schools, and night school;; by establishing school libraries,
and various means by which instruction could be imparted more
generally, and instruction of : higher class given without any
detriment to any one, or any objection from any quarter. It
would be infinitely wiser to use the machinery already in exis-
tence, and extend the of education more generally,
than, for the sake of some theoretical aim, to agitate for changes
which will involve great cost, and produce no higher educational
results. In addressing these observations to the House I have
done so in the sincere belief That the wise course is to go on in
the more active administration- of the present law—improving the
means of instruction as much as possible, extending the schools ,
to every part of the country where they are required, raising the
character of the teachers by eyery means in our power; and by
taking this course we may hope to attain results which will be
equal to those of any country, and we may fairly expect to carry
with us the confidence and, support of nearly all classes of the
population.
v
• f. * .AfVu*.
