

PUBLIC EDUCATION IN NEW ZEALAND:
A SPEECH
DELIVERED BY
THE HON. SIR ROBERT STOUT,
(FELLOW OF THE NEW ZEALAND UNIVERSITY,)
MINISTER OF EDUCATION,
IN THE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
June 18, 1886.
WELLINGTON.
AUTHORITY I GEORGE DIDSBURY, GOVERNMENT PRINTER
18 8 6


-
i


PUBLIC EDUCATION IN NEW ZEALAND:
A SPEECH
DELIVERED BY
THE HON. SIR EGBERT STOUT,
(EELLOW OF THE NEW ZEALAND UNIVERSITY,)
MINIS Tiß El OF EDUCATION,
IN THE
HOUSE OE REPRESENTATIVES,
June 18, 1886;
WELLINGTON.
AUTHORITY: GEORGE DIDSBURY, GOVERNMENT PRINTER
1886




PUBLIC EDUCATION IN NEW ZEALAND.
Before asking the Committee of Supply to vote the sums
under the heading of “ Education/' I think it is my duty
to make a short statement regarding the department under
my charge, and to explain some of the amounts appearing
on the estimates. Last year I gave a general sketch of
our educational system, with the details of which I assume
all honourable members are acquainted.
We have, practically, seven classes of votes under the
head of " Education." We provide by permanent Act for
aid to the New Zealand University and to the Auckland
University College. We vote aids to several of our
secondary schools, as the reserves set apart for their en-
dowment are not sufficient to maintain them. We vote
moneys for the primary schools. There are also included
under the Education Department votes for the industrial
schools for the maintenance of criminal or neglected
children. We have also to provide for Native schools and
for a special school, namely, the Deaf-mute School at
Sumner. There is also the departmental vote proper, pro-
viding for the maintenance of the central department at
Wellington.
Before referring to particular votes, I may here men-
tion that it will he observed that some amounts were
formerly voted under the heading of “ Charitable Aid."
The expenditure, for example, for teaching children sent
to the Blind School at Melbourne and for maintaining
destitute children in the industrial schools, came formerly
out of the charitable-aid vote. The former now appears
by itself under "Charitable Aid" in the Colonial Secic-


tary’s Department, and the latter under the head o£
“ Industrial Schools ” in the Education estimates. We
have thought it better to bring the votes specially before
the House in the form in which they now appear in the
estimates. This will obviously give greater control to
Parliament than it has had in the past.
I may now refer to the departmental vote proper. It
is for £2,268, and it will be observed that only part of the
usual yearly salary is taken for the Secretary of the de-
partment. This has arisen by the retirement of Dr. Hislop
from the secretaryship. He has been, as the House is
aware, connected with the department since its inaugura-
tion. He was formerly Secretary to the Education Board
and Inspector of Schools for Otago, and altogether he has
been in harness in New Zealand no less than thirty years.
He has obtained the allowance allowed by law on the re-
tirement of officers, and leaves at the end of August next.
It is not necessary for me to bear testimony to the good
work that Dr. Hislop has done. I feel sure that that is
generally recognized amongst honourable members, and I
have no doubt that in his retirement he wdll still be found
taking a deep interest in the education system which he
did so much to build up. The Rev. Mr. Habens, the
Inspector-General of Schools, is performing the joint
duties of Inspector-General and Under-Secretary. This
has necessitated some alteration in the department. With
the increasing numbers of Native schools requiring inspec-
tion, and spread as they are over the whole colony, I have
had to appoint Mr. Kirk as Assistant-Inspector to Mr,
Pope. It will be observed, however, that I have been able
to effect a saving on the whole in the cost of the office ;
and, considering that the work of the central department
is increasing largely, this economy will, I hope, prove
satisfactory.
I must now state briefly what may be obtained in greater
detail from the Education Report which has been laid on the
table of the House, namely, the progress that has been
made in education during the past year. The number of


students who matriculated in December at the university
was 178; the number the year before was 129; the
number of candidates admitted to degrees at the last
examination Avas as follows : 18 to the degree of 8.A., 8
to the degree of M.A., and 1 to the degree of LL.B.
These details slioav that our university system is still
doing good work; and I may add that the Examiners are
almost wholly resident in Great Britain; and that the
standard insisted upon for degrees is as high as in most
universities.
The number attending secondary schools was 2,578 at
the close of last year. The report of the Inspector-
General on the various secondary schools and the work
done by them appears in the Education papers, and I do
not need to refer to it. The average number of children
attending the primary schools was last year about 80,000;
and I estimate that the number this year will be 85,000.
This, of course, necessitates an increase in our Education
vote. The number on the rolls was 102,407 at the end of
the year, being an increase on the year of 5,169.
The reception of the new standards which were gazetted
last June has been, on the whole, most satisfactory. The
teachers have recognized that they will be of considerable
advantage to the smaller country schools. The power given
to teachers to group the subjects, and the mode adopted
of making geography and history class subjects, instead
of requiring individual passes, will prove most useful in all
schools, and prevent the cry of over-pressure.
The insisting upon drawing as a compulsory subject has
been well recei\ r ed, and there seems to be a desire through-
out the colony to pay attention to this much-neglected study.
There are special art masters, with art schools, in the
Education Districts of Otago, North Canterbury, and Wel-
lington, I have been in communication with the Auckland
Education Board and with the Nelson College and Educa-
tion Board for the purpose of ascertaining whether these
districts could not also obtain the advantages of art masters,
and I have no doubt that by degrees we shall have art


schools established in every educational district. Auckland
has in the city a master who specially devotes himself to
mechanical drawing. Arrangements will no doubt be
made for a drawing master to visit the country and sub-
urban schools. It is not necessary that I should at present
dwell on the importance of drawing; that is now being
recognized everywhere by educational reformers.
Some attention has also been paid to technical education
in another shape —that is, the familiarizing boys with the
use of tools, and in some country districts I am glad to find
that agricultural chemistry is taught with some success.
The advantage given to teachers in passing for certificates
in agricultural chemistry will be seen from the new stand-
ards for examination. I recognize that, if the colony is
to improve its position in production and in manufactures,
steps must be taken to train our youth in agriculture
and in skilled industries. I propose that the Govern-
ment shall, in order to encourage the study of drawing
and of science amongst teachers, give a small sum annu-
ally, by way of bonus or scholarship or prize, to those who
pass with honours at the certificate examination in drawing
and science. The bonuses will be £o, £3 , and £2 for
drawing, and the like sums for science. I hope this will
have a stimulating effect on our teachers. I only regret
that the large sum I have to ask for education prevents
my submitting to the Committee of Supply a vote by way
of bonus to the teachers of those schools whose pupils
distinguish themselves in drawing and science. There is
also a practical difficulty in the way, namely, that as the
inspection is not under the central department, but under
the Boards,it would be difficult, if not impossible, under
the present arrangements, to distribute such a vote fairly.
As to the industrial-school vote I have to state that the
number of children in the industrial schools and boarded-
out at the end of December was as follows: In Government
schools, 842; in a local school (Thames), 12; and in private
(that is, Roman Catholic) schools, 262: total, 1,116. This
is an increase over last year of 57.


Under the Hospital and Charitable Aid Act of last
session those children who have been admitted since
December, 1882, to industrial schools on the ground
of the poverty of their parents have to be maintained by
the Charitable Board of the district to which they belong.
This will, I hope, lead to the founding of orphanages as
separate institutions by private individuals, and thus the
industrial schools will gain more the character of reform-
atory institutions than of schools for the children of indi-
gent parents. Of course, great care will have to be exer-
cised, whatever system be adopted, that parents shall not
be relieved of their proper and legitimate responsibilities.
There is a vote of J4OO for aid to children to attend the
Blind School near Melbourne, under the head of “ Colo-
nial Secretary’s Department.” This vote has been paid
for many years, as I have said, out of the charitable-aid
vote, and happily in New Zealand we have not a sufficient
number of blind, especially of young blind persons, to call
upon us to found an institution of our own. No doubt,
however, as the colony increases such a school will be
required, and I hope the charitably-disposed in our midst
will show themselves anxious to assist the founding of such
an institution when it may become desirable to do so.
Having thus casually and shortly referred to the votes on
the estimates, I may be permitted to make some general
explanations about the reforms which I consider necessary
in our education system. Let me state this : that I think
it would be fatal to the system to imagine that it did not
require improvement. As the colony progresses it must
necessarily follow that our system must vary with the
change in our conditions, and that as education and science
advance so must we take advantage of their progress.
I propose first to refer to the university. The need of
having our higher education rendered more systematic and
complete was seen by me many years ago, and my colleague,
the Hon. the Native Minister, who was Minister of Educa-
tion in 1878-79, recommended that a Boyal Commission
should be appointed to inquire into higher and secondary


education in New Zealand. That Commission was com-
posed of able educationists, and, after talcing considerable
evidence, they furnished a most valuable report, which
was presented to Parliament. The final report appears
in the Appendices, 1880. To some of their recommenda-
tions effect has been given. They proposed that the New
Zealand University should be a teaching body, carry-
ing on the work of teaching by means of university
colleges. At present, as is well known, it is an ex-
amining body. The University Act of 1874 expressly
declared that the University was established, not for the
purpose of teaching, but for the purpose of encouraging
in the manner thereinafter provided the pursuit of a liberal
education, namely, by granting degrees and scholarships.
The Commission proposed that there should be four
university colleges—one at Auckland, one at Dunedin,
one at Christchurch, and one at Wellington; that the con-
stitution of the existing university colleges should be altered
and made uniform; and that the New Zealand University
should practically consist of the four teaching colleges repre-
sented in a Senate. I shall state more explicitly by-and-by
the proposals which this Commission made. Meantime, I
wish to bring before the House the faults of the present
system, and the merits (if any) that it possesses.
The main fault in our university system is that it re-
gards examinations as the beginning and end of the
function of a university. It was founded on the
London University model, for adopting which I last
year, explained the reason. Shortly put, it was this:
The colony was not able to start properly-equipped teach-
ing universities in the various centres of population. A
university had been established at Dunedin, and it was
thought that some colleges might be able to give university
teaching. It was felt, however, that to give these colleges
power to confer degrees would tend to degrade the higher
education and make a university degree in New Zealand o£
little value. In order that a high standard might be ob-
tained, the New Zealand University was founded and libe-


rally endowed, considering that it was only an examining
body. It has now been in operation twelve years, and the
number of students who have obtained degrees since it was
founded, through its examinations, is 123. The funds of
the university in hand are £1,702. The Otago Uni-
versity, Auckland University College, Canterbury Col-
lege, and Nelson College are affiliated to it. Some
of the colleges that were affiliated to it in its early days
have had to he disaffiliated, as they were not complying
with the condition of providing a sufficient teaching staff.
Except, however, by its examinations and scholarships, it
is out of touch with the teaching colleges. Over them it
has no control. It has not even the power of making
suggestions, and the teaching colleges are quite separate
and apart from the university. They, again, have no
power to guide it in its regulations, nor even to make
suggestions to it. This, is the weak point in our university
system. The teaching colleges' and the examining body
should be in accord, and one should help the other. Then,
again, another defect in our system has been that it has
trained our teachers in primary and secondary schools and
in colleges to think that examinations are the “ be-all ”
and “ end-all” of our education system. Nothing, in my
opinion, could be more mischievous. Examinations are
necessary to test results, but, if our children and our young
people are trained to look to a “pass-” or a “degree”
as the aim of school or college life, they ate setting before
themselves a mischievous goal. One can find in all our
schools some faults that have grown from this examination
system. I have seen it myself even in primary schools,
I have listened to a history lesson which consisted in
dictating short passages that were answers to probable
questions. The teacher evidently had no grasp of the
subject himself, and could not impart any to his pxipils.
If we had had in New Zealand the system of payment by
results or payments by “ passes ” in standards, which exists
in England, and which some educationists have urged us
to adopt, the result to our system would have been


most calamitous. Over-pressure would not have been the
only mischief. Our children, instead of having had their
minps trained, wouldhave had their memories crammed.
We have, then, these two weak spots in our univer-
sity system, and they are weaknesses that even the affiliated
colleges under the London University are beginning to
discover. In the Convocation of the London University,
and amongst many eminent educationists in London, the
question has been raised whether now, when tests are
abolished at the older universities, the London University
should not be a teaching institution, I have had before
me the results of various conferences that have taken place
on the subject. I cannot say what the result may be, but
the fact that men who are eminent in medicine, in sciences,
and in philosophy, have formed themselves into an associa-
tion for promoting a teaching university for London shows
that even there the need of something beyond the examin-
ing body is felt. No doubt various causes have led to this
movement in London. It has, no doubt, been brought about
to some extent by the position of the medical schools in
the metropolis, and by the desire to obtain for doctors uni-
versity degrees on easier terms than they have hitherto
been obtainable at the London University. There are
so many licensing bodies in London that can authorize
its licensees to practise, that the number of students
who attempt to obtain a university degree in medicine
from the London University seems to be falling off. And
universities like Edinburgh, Dublin, &c., that can confer
university degrees in medicine, are more sought after by
students. The movement to have a teaching university in
London may be explained then to some extent by the desire
of the medical profession for university training. Still, the
movement is not entirely confined to doctors, and I have no
doubt it will grow until there is founded in London a real
university —not a mere examining body.
Then, there is another weak point in our university
system, and one which I am afraid must remain for many
years to come, and that is, that we make very little provi-


sion for constituting what the true university should be—-
namely, the home of research. Teaching students, grant-
ing degrees, having tutors, appliances, and libraries, where
pupils may obtain knowledge, are only parts of university
work; something more is needed. The university must
be the place where the problems of the time in science,
philosophy, and politics may be solved. To some consider-
able extent the older universities of Europe are perform-
ing that function. In America we see the universities pro-
ceeding on the same lines. The Johns Hopkins University
of Baltimore has founded an historical school, or rather,
I might say, provided a means for promoting a new way of
studying history. It has also laboratories for scientific
pursuits second to none in the world. In New Zealand
our colleges are too poor to attempt this work. Our
university has been confined to examinations, degree-
granting, and providing scholarships, and this higher path
of university life has not yet been trodden. Nor do I see
any chance of the New Zealand University becoming a real
university in this respect so long as it has no permanent
abode in the colony, and so long as it consists of a mere
peripatetic Senate, meeting once or twice a year to pass
statutes, disburse funds, award scholarships, and grant
degrees. I have stated thus briefly some points in univer-
sity life that we must not overlook.
I must now more fully show how the Royal Commis-
sion of 1879 considered we should proceed in improving our
university. Shortly stated, the Commission recommended
that there should be four university colleges in New Zea-
land —one at Auckland, one at Wellington, one at Christ-
church, and one at Dunedin; that these four colleges
should constitute the university ; that the governing body
of the four colleges should be the College Councils —four
members to be nominated by the Governor in Council, four
by the Professorial Board of each college, and four by the
graduates of the university on the books of the college,
and that the appointments should not be for life but only
for four years, one member of each set retiring each year;


to be eligible for re-election; thus giving life and vitality to
the Councils. It also recommended that there should be
a Professorial Board connected with each college. The
university was to be the Chancellor, Vice-Chancellor, Fel-
lows, and Graduates, and to be governed by a Senate. The
Senate was to consist of six Fellows nominated by the Go-
vernor in Council, and three by each of the College Councils,
thus making a Senate of eighteen members. The Convo-
cation which now exists was to be abolished, and as an equi-
valent the graduates were to have the power, as I have
pointed out, to nominate one-third of the College Coun-
cillors. It was proposed that the university should have
its seat in Dunedin. This was carried by a majority of
one only of the Commission. I may add that the members
of the Senate were not to be appointed for life, but only
for three years. There were other details in the scheme,
to which I do not think it is necessary to refer; but I have no
doubt that if this scheme were adopted the relation between
the teaching and the examining body of the university would
be improved; the University would be strengthened; the
revenues at its disposal would be better utilized than they
have been in the past; and we should have a new start in
university life. I believe it is necessary that something
should be done to provide a university education for Wel-
lington and for what I might term the Straits Settle-
ment. I do not think it necessary that much expense
should be incurred in starting a college in Wellington.
All that need be aimed at, at first, would be part of the
arts course. I had intended to introduce this year
into Parliament a Bill giving effect to the main pro-
visions in the report of the Commission. As, however,
the Senate of the New Zealand University adjourned the
consideration of this report to their next annual meeting,
which is to take place in March next, I thought it would
not be proper to ask Parliament to discuss the question until
the opinion of the Senate, consisting as it does mostly of
experts in university work, should be obtained.
There is one point in the Commission’s report that


will require careful consideration, and that is, whether
Convocation should he abolished. It was thought that
the appointing of the College Governors by the graduates
would he an equivalent for the powers that they in Convo-
cation now possess. I believe the Convocation has created
an esprit de corps amongst the graduates, and that the
suggestions made by it have been of value to the Senate,
and it may be that to abolish it would be a mistake.
And here, in order, perhaps, to promote discussion on
the subject in and out of Parliament, I would point out on
what lines I think we should for some time to come pro-
ceed with our university work. We do not possess the
means, nor perhaps have we the students, to establish
a comprehensive university, even leaving out the question
of “ research,” in each of the four cities I have named.
We must, in our university colleges, specialize—that is,
we must provide that our colleges should take up one or
other branches of university work. I believe all must, as
a fundamental principle, provide for what may be termed
the arts course, or, at all events, for sufficient subjects to
enable students to get degrees in arts. It is impossible,
however, with our limited means, to have medical schools
at each of the four university colleges; nor can we have
at each of the four colleges a complete scientific course;
nor can we provide that there shall be provision for music
and fine arts ; nor can we look for the higher technical
instruction that is daily becoming more necessary in our
industrial life. In these four colleges we must, I say,
specialize, having, however, as I repeat, an arts basis. I
am now only hinting what might be done ; but in the
suggestions I now make—suggestions which I have made
before —I have found considerable coincidence of opinion
amongst some of the able scientific experts that this colony
possesses. I might mention two names that stand high in
the scientific world—Dr. Hector, of Wellington, and Pro-
fessor Hutton, of Christchurch.
I would suggest that as Dunedin has a medical school,
w r cll equipped, a school that has done considerable work, as


the position of its students in the Edinburgh University
shows, it should be the university college that pays special
attention to medicine. When, as I have no doubt will soon
happen, the Midland Railway opens up the vast mineral
deposits of the Middle Island, there might be established
at Christchurch a School of Mines that would have a
professor of geology and mineralogy (including petrology),
a professor of surveying, and a professor of what has
been termed natural philosophy, mechanics, &c. Canter-
bury College has also connected with it an Agricultural
School, which might be brolight more into accord with
its university teaching, and attention might be bestowed
on agricultural chemistry and other classes that are needed
for the scientific farmer. Then, if we go to Auckland,
we must look to it as a place peculiarly suited for mari-
time pursuits. Its unique position and its magnificent
harbour point it out as the seat of great future develop-
ment in maritime enterprise. Why should it not have an
observatory and a Professor of Astronomy, and Professors
dealing with mechanical engineering, with navigation, with
physical geography, with also, perhaps, marine and land
surveying and civil and marine engineering ? It would
have also technical schools allied to it, considering the
development that has been made in Auckland in industrial
enterprise; and the nearness of the rich mineral region of
the Thames would enable it to start in connection with it
a School of Mines at the Thames, It, therefore, could
have a bias in these directions. Then, it could also be a
home of research for languages. Ido not think we
have made enough of the study of the island languages,
nor of ethnology, and the sciences allied to it. So far
as Wellington is concerned, it is the seat of Parliament
and the seat of the Court of Appeal. This city might
be prominent for its special attention to jurisprudence, to
law, to political science, to history. And our parliamentary
library, in such an event, would be an immense boon to
students, Wellington has also, in the able Director of the
Museum and his assistants, scientific men whose services


could be utilized for the teaching of the geology and natural
history of New Zealand. The time is also near when some
university college—it may be in Auckland—will have a
Professor of Music, but which college will first found an
Academy of Music I cannot prophesy.
Here, then, are different functions open for the different
university colleges; and I again repeat that if any one
of them attempts to teach all branches of a university
education it will fail. As in our industries, as in our
commerce, nay, even as in our political life, there is a
need of specialization of function, so is there in our
university work; and I hope that the suggestions that I
have now made will not be overlooked when we discuss what
is necessary for the improvement and development of
university education in this colony.
I do not overlook the need of providing that our
primary school teachers should have more direct relation
with the university and university life. I am glad to be
able to state that many of our primary school teachers have
graduated. There are in our lists many graduates, and
I have no doubt, from the number who are studying in
our colleges, that, as the years increase, we shall find their
number rapidly grow ; but something more is needed. I
have, as one of its members, urged before the Senate that
provision should be made for students obtaining degrees in
pedagogy. Depend upon it the more nearly the primary
school is allied through its teachers to the university the
better for both. And lam in hopes of seeing established
at some one or other of the University Colleges Professors
of Methodology, who would lecture on the history, methods,
and philosophy of education, and raise our teachers to a
higher standpoint than they have yet obtained. In Edin-
burgh and St. Andrews there are able Professors dealing
specially with education. I have not ventured to hint to
what university colleges or college such Professor or Pro-
fessors should be attached. I was in hopes that the Pres-
byterian Church of Otago and Southland, out of its
educational endowments —endowments which it holds in


trust for the people of Otago—would have been able to
grant such a Professor to the Otago University. lam not
going to refer to circumstances which have recently
occurred in Otago. All I can say is, I regret that such
an appointment seems to have been lost sight of by the
Otago University Council.
And here I may remark that there are many reserves
held throughout the colony by various churches which
were not meant to be applied to church purposes, hut
were to he held for general educational uses. These
should he utilized in a more general way than they have
been in the past. The time must come when Parlia-
ment will inquire as to how the trustees are carrying out
their trusts. It may he that many of them are doing good
work. Some I know are, hut it is a subject on which I
am able to give very slight information to the House.
I now come to our secondary schools, and just as our
university-teaching bodies are out of touch with the
university proper, so are our secondary schools out of
touch both with the primary schools and the university
colleges. There are many well-appointed and well-taught
secondary schools in New Zealand. Over most of them
the Government has some slight control, for it can in-
spect them. The Education Boards also have over some of
them a little influence, because the Boards can appoint one
or more Governors of the schools. But there is a want of
continuity between the primary schools and the secondary
schools and the secondary schools and the university college.
This is a blot on our secondary-school system. There is also
little power vested in the Government, and there are no
funds given to us for the purpose, even if we had the power
to exercise any control over the status, over the standards,
or over the mode of teaching. An inspection once a year
cannot even get at the results of the schools. All that
can be hoped to be done is to give us a slight inkling of
the work that has been attempted. Ido not think this
is creditable to us, but I see enormous difficulties in the
way of effecting much change or improvement. First, the


colonies as a whole have not awakened to their responsi-
bilities regarding secondary education, though we are
in advance of the other colonies, for we have looked
upon secondary schools as a necessary part of a State sys-
tem of education. In some colonies this has not been done,
and where it has not been done that colony has suffered and
will suffer still more. In my opinion there should he passed
a secondary-school statute, making the mode of the govern-
ment of such schools and the relation of the schools to the
population uniform throughout the colony. There should
also he provision made that the schools should be examined
as well as inspected once a year by men of high educa-
tional standing, men who could give suggestions to the
teachers and hints to the Governors. I would not in such
a statute disturb the existing endowments. The fact is
that for none of the schools are the endowments sufficient,
and taking away any secondary endowments would simply
mean destroying the existing schools. Government ought,
however, to see that the endowments are utilized to the
best advantage, and the Minister of Education should feel
that there was a responsibility cast upon him as great in
reference to secondary schools as to primary and Native
schools. It may not be this session or next session, but
such a Bill will have to be introduced; and I believe that
dealing with this question of secondary education cannot
be long delayed. I would, however, desire to see our
university first perfected, because, were that done, we
might get valuable aid from it to assist us in dealing with
our higher education.
And now I come to some things that are blots in our
primary system. I must first say, however, that I believe
our primary schools are gradually getting better. I have
read carefully through the various Inspectors’ reports, and
though in all of them we shall find references to the
weaknesses of the schools, yet there is a gradual improve-
ment noticeable.
The first thing that I notice is that the tables to the
Appendix of the Education Report will present to outsiders


appearances that are very misleading. We have, for example,
in one table the number of those who have passed in the
standards in the various educational districts. In some dis-
tricts the passes are extremely high. In Nelson,. 165 out of
5,000 have passed the Sixth Standard ; in South Canterbury,
only 44 out of 4,200; in Wellington, only 166 out of 8,000;
in North Canterbury, 203 out of 19,000; and in Auck-
land, only 74 out of about 20,000. It will be observed
that there is a great variation amongst the various educa-
tional districts in passes in the standards. Is this to be
explained by the fact that a better education is given in
some districts rather than others ? No doubt there is a
difference in the kind of education given in the different
districts; but the fact is that in the districts the mode of
inspection varies. So long as there is no direct central con-
trol over the Inspectors, and each Inspector is allowed to
follow his own idiosyncrasy in the mode of performing his
duties, so long will it be impossible to ascertain exactly, for ,
purposes of comparison, the results of teaching in the various
educational districts. I do not see how this is to be
remedied. It has been suggested that the inspection should
be taken from the Boards; but lam opposed at present to
the inspection being placed under the central department.
I do not wish to sec anything done that might weaken
the functions and responsibilities of the Education Boards.
In reading the various Inspectors’ reports it will be
observed that our system is not harmonious—that there is an
absence of uniformity. Ido not know if that is any fault,
rather I should say it is a benefit; but lam afraid that this
benefit is counterbalanced by a danger of adopting a mode
of teaching congenial to the views of the Inspectors, and
thereby crippling the freedom of the teachers. I believe
that, if the results of the examination in the standards
sufficiently show that the children are being properly
taught, a great deal ought to be allowed to the idiosyncrasy
of the individual teacher, and that, if this be not done,
our system will become one of routine and of cram. In
visiting one or two schools in a district, I have un-


erringly picked out the peculiarities of the Inspector. In
one district, for example, I could tell the things that he par-
ticularly desired to see taught in the school. Sometimes
what he desired was very laudable. In every case it
seemed to me too much stress was laid on the anise and
cumin of education, and too little on its essentials ; but
in none of the schools that I have visited did I find such a
distinct impress of the teacher’s individuality as I should
have liked. When an Inspector remains in a district for
many years, and has the opportunity of shaping the
educational life of the district, a considerable amount of
sameness in our schools must necessarily arise.
The only remedy that I see at present for this would be
for the Boards themselves to arrange for exchanging In-
spectors. Were this done, the teachers would feel greater
responsibilities cast upon them, and feel the burden of their
own individuality more. It also might not be inadvisable,
had we officers requisite for the purpose, for the central
department to inspect occasionally a few schools in every
educational district, for the purposes of comparison, rather
than to ascertain the methods of teaching and results.
This means, however, greater expense to the central depart-
ment, and I am loth to ask the House to vote the money.
I pointed out last session that there was a danger of
our primary system becoming too literary. That I hope
will in future years be corrected. The attention which
will be given to drawing will lay the foundation for
technical education; and, if we can only get in the
country schools some attention, though it should only be
of a slight character, paid to agricultural chemistry, and
in the city schools some attention paid to those sciences
that are the foundation of mechanical and other industries,
we shall accomplish a good deal.
I am glad to be able to state that this need of technical
education ds being slowly, but surely, recognized. Some
secondary schools are, I have said, providing for the teach-
ing of the method of handling tools. The larger
educational districts have, as already stated, made arrange-


ments for giving instruction in drawing. I should like
to see the smaller districts that are unable separately
to appoint an art master joining together for the purpose
of obtaining the services of one master. By means
of giving a slight bonus, which I mentioned in a former
part of my remarks, if teachers pass in drawing and science,
an impetus will be given to technical education. If our
country is to be a home of industries, we must look to our
youths to accomplish it. They must be trained to feel that
it is as high an honour to be a trained mechanic as a good
clerk, and though literary positions have their advantages,
their privileges, and their duties, yet that the “ Captain
of Industry” holds the higher place.
I cannot leave the question of the encouragement of
industries through education without referring to agricul-
tural schools. There is, as I have already said, an Agricul-
tural School connected with the Canterbury College. This
is situated at Lincoln, and it has a considerable number of
pupils. The course of study extends over two years. A
thorough practical knowledge of, and familiarity with, the
use of all implements, of all operations of husbandry, of
the management of stock, of the most recent systems of
cheese- and butter-making, &c., is obtained by the students
through their taking part day by day in the farm-work.
Theoretical information on agriculture is imparted by
lecture. The course includes lectures upon inorganic,
organic, agricultural, and physical chemistry. Daily work
in the laboratory, in the examination and analysis of waters,
soils, manures, foods, and farm-products, generally enables
students to acquire an intimate knowledge of the composi-
tion of these various substances, and serves to illustrate
the lectures delivered in the theatre. Instruction is also
given in natural history, including botany and vegetable
physiology, geology and physical geography, and ento-
mology ; in veterinary medicine and surgery; and in land-
surveying and draining, mechanics, mensuration, and book-
keeping.
Power was taken last year in the Forest Bill to establish


a Forest and Agricultural School on the education reserve
near Whangarei. In dealing with the forests the Minister
of Lands has tried to keep down expenses, and thus has
been prevented, up to the present time, from founding the
school. Matters are, however, in train in that direction.
We hope to see that school utilized, not only for the teach-
ing of forestry, but also especially for training youths in
the cultivation of subtropical fruits. The vast and
interesting area of land north of Auckland is suitable for
productions to which English people have been unaccus-
tomed. It will be the home of the olive, the orange, the
lemon, and all fruits that only grow in subtropical climes.
The school so situated at Whangarei will, we hope, be of
great advantage for the northern part of the North Island.
We believe that New Zealand must remain essentially a
farming country. Its situation, its coal deposits, and its
climate will no doubt make it the seat of many and varied
manufacturing enterprises. At the same time, however,
farming will be one of its main industries. How are
we to give our children a bent towards this great
industry ? I have already mentioned that we hope to
see agricultural chemistry taught in an elementary form
in primary schools. We are providing for bonuses to
be given to teachers to pass in science—and agricultural
chemistry we treat as an important branch of science—but
something more is required. If each County Council
were empowered to start a small model-farm in the county,
it might be made self-supporting. I think it would be better
to leave this for the county to do than to empower the
Education Boards to interfere. A piece of land might be
granted by the Government, if any were available for the
purpose, and the County Council might, at small expense,
start a model-farm. Ido not think any great staff is re-
quired, nor any expensive buildings, nor any large area of
land. On the contrary, I think, the model-farm should be
a model-farm of what has been termed “ petite culture,”
In fact, it should be a farm carried on to show how small
farms should be cultivated and made to pay. The State


might assist by paying part of the salary of the teacher,
leaving the manager to be paid by the county, and'leaving
to the County Council to make such arrangements for
boarding of pupils and charging fees as it might think
proper. The products of the farm, and the fees for the
pupils, ought to be able to pay all expenses, except the full
cost of the teacher; and, due provision having been made
for agricultural schools, we might have technical schools
for manufactures started in our cities. These schools
should be mainly for apprentices, and to provide for
evening classes for those who are unable to attend a day-
school. An impetus might be given to manufacturing
enterprises in the cities, and a bias towards industries
amongst our civic population, such as we have not yet seen
were some such steps adopted. Ido not think any of the
local bodies would suffer large pecuniary loss from taking
these steps. I hope the suggestion I have made will not
be lost sight of, and in the Municipal Act power should be
given to boroughs and cities to found schools, I also
propose to insert in the Counties Bill a similar provision;
and these country farming schools and city technical schools
could fit the scholars for attempting higher technical work
in the universities. The agricultural school connected
with the Canterbury College would be looked upon as the
school that would finally equip the scientific farmer for his
work, and these university colleges that had Professors
of Mechanics would necessarily receive the brighter pupils
of the city technical schools. With the aid of scholar-
ships many farmers’ sons and apprentices would be able
to obtain in the university college the highest technical
training to fit them for their work in life.
Before I leave this question of schools, there is one re-
mark that I desire to make with special reference to the
teaching of children in country districts. In the towns
and the centres of population there are secondary schools,
and in this respect people living in country districts labour
under some disadvantage. Can this be remedied ? The
only possible way of remedying it is to get for country


schools highly-educated teachers. I believe it is more
necessary to have in our primary schools in outlying dis-
tricts highly-educated teachers than in the same class of
schools in our towns. There are many districts in Scot-
land in wdiich, through augmentation of the salaries of the
teachers, the parish schoolmaster is a graduate of some
university. I should like to see the same in the country
districts of New Zealand; and, were that obtained, the
teacher could, without injury to his other pupils, give to
his highest classes instruction in secondary-school subjects.
It is the ability to do this that has made the parish schools
of Scotland so famous. From them pupils can go direct
to universities, without passing through secondary schools.
I do not believe that what is termed our district schools
will be thoroughly equipped until they are able, in country
districts at all events, to do what is done in Scotland. I
know that this is impossible at the present time. Many
teachers in the country schools are poorly paid; many of
them are even uncertificated ; the certificates of others show
that they are not competent to give any secondary instruc-
tion to their pupils. lam only making a suggestion as to
what we must have in view. The time must come when
to the bright and willing boy of every country district
there must be opened the door of knowledge as wide as
to the dweller in the city. Country settlers, though they
have many joys, have also to undergo many hardships.
They have to live away from much social intercourse and
much social enjoyment. Do not let it be said that we are to
deny to their youth the advantages of a first-class education.
I have made these remarks about country schoolmasters
because it seems to me that throughout the colony there
has been a desire by the Education Boards to centre all the
besttteaching-porerw r er in the cities. No doubt in the cities
there are the large schools, and these require capable
organizing teachers. At the same time, as I have pointed
out, the towns have secondary schools, and those who
desire their children to obtain secondary education do not
need to rely on district schools.


There is a vote on the estimates for the purchase of
playgrounds. I trust that Education Boards, in selecting
sites for schools, will not overlook the need of having suffi-
cient playgrounds for the scholars. I look upon the need
of having sufficient playgrounds connected with our schools
as all-important. In the playground the pupils obtain
physical training; but something more is got: there is
a feeling of comradeship created that destroys all class-
feeling, and makes the playground the greatest engine for
promoting a true democracy.
I should like here to make a few remarks about our
schoolbooks. Our present method of dealing with school-
books is to authorize the use of certain schoolbooks in
the schools. The department has authorized seven sets
of reading-books, including the following series : Royal
Readers, McMillan’s, Chambers’s English, Chambers’s
National, Collins’s Academic Profession, Phillips’s New
Code, and London Readers, and several books not in sets.
As many as twenty books of arithmetic are authorized,
twenty of grammar, twenty - four of geography, more
than twenty of history, and so on; and I have ascer-
tained that the number of books actually used with the
approval of the Boards greatly exceeds the number autho-
rized. It will be seen, therefore, that the greatest diversity
is allowed. I believe the time will soon come when we shall
be able to see one or more series of reading-books prepared
in the colony for our schools. Some of the lessons in the
reading-books are only suitable to children in Europe; and
it would be a great advantage to our children if, in the
reading-books, lessons in the history, geography, and in-
digenous and exotic products of the colony were introduced.
I wish to say a word about the encouragement of thrift.
The school savings bank scheme, instituted some years ago,
was never taken up with spirit, and no operations are now
conducted under it. The substitute for it is the system
under which the Post Office receives deposits of children’s
savings on cards of which each holds twelve penny postage-
stamps. In 1881 nearly 9,000 accounts were opened in


this way; but in the next year only 852, and the year
after only 651.
Since last year a renewed endeavour has been made
by the Education and Postal Departments to encourage
thrift by means of deposits in savings banks, and, though
no savings banks have been started, the mode adopted
some years ago of issuing postage-stamps on cards has been
revived. I directed the department to issue in January
this year no less than 4,000 notices to School Committees
and teachers, inviting their attention to the subject, and
40,000 copies of the Post Office notices were distributed
explaining the scheme. The accounts open at the end
of 1882 were more than 8,000; but they fell off till, at
the end of 1885, there were only 3,296 open. This num-
ber is less than one-half of what is required to make
it proportional to the number of depositors in school
savings banks in Prance, having regard to the population
of the two countries. It is, however, not much smaller
than the number of depositors was in France when the
scheme in that country w r as only five years old. As the
result of the issue of the circulars to which I have
referred about 4,000 ucav accounts have been opened.
In this respect I think that we who are looking to the
future of the colony, and to the future of the race, have
been remiss in our duty. If the Post Office Savings Bank
for children or the postage-stamp scheme had been pushed
as it might well have been, I believe much more might
have been accomplished than I have been able to record.
I hope that members of the Education Boards and School
Committees will aid the department in their efforts to
promote thrift amongst children. It is one way of accom-
plishing what is desired by all of us —the establishment of
a thrifty and prosperous people in the colony.
I must now say a few words about our Native schools
and some other educational institutions that come under
the Education Department, lam glad to be able to state
that there is a great improvement in our Native schools.
These are gradually being extended and new buildings


erected. The older Maoris are taking greater interest in
the instruction of their children. Where an opportunity
has been given to teach Maoris a trade, the result has been
exceedingly satisfactory ; but I think it will be recognized
that, for a primitive race, the primitive arts ought first
to be taught. The statistics show that the number of
children was 2,161; the year before it was 2,326. One or
two Native schools have been handed over to the Educa-
tion Boards.
The institution for the deaf mutes at Sumner is still
doing good work. Our industrial schools are, on the
whole, m a very satisfactory position. I may point out
what the effect of the Hospitals and Charitable Insti-
tutions Act was in reference to these schools. So far
as children committed for any offence are concerned, the
State is still liable to pay for them, that is, if the parents
are unable to do so. If, however, the parents are in indi-
gent circumstances, and the child consequently neglected,
the cost of maintaining the child falls upon the Charitable-
aid Board. In Auckland the local body have asked that
they shall have the management of those children. If
orphanages are established for such children, the Board
can get the full management of them ; and I am in hope
that orphanages may be established, or at all events
societies instituted to provide for them, by keeping
them in orphanages or boarding them out. In my own
opinion, if the boarding-out system is properly super-
vised, it is better than maintaining children in large
buildings. It gives them a home-life, and better fits them
for the struggle of life through which they have to pass.
I gave last year some interesting statistics of what the
result of our industrial-school system has been, and I do
not need now to repeat them, I may, however, point out
to the House that the control of the industrial schools
is one that gives the department anxious consideration,
and, were it not for the kind and gratuitous services of
many ladies and gentlemen, especially in Auckland, Canter-
bury, and Otago, it would, I think, be impossible for the


department to properly supervise them. We are fortunate
in the officers we have, who look after the schools, but we
are still more fortunate in obtaining the offices of the
ladies and gentlemen to whom I have referred.
I do not know if it is necessary to say anything further
regarding our education system. I propose, in view of the
reductions in the Civil Service contemplated in our Civil
Service Bill, whilst I ask the Committee of Supply to vote
the sums on the estimates, to take power in the Appropria-
tion Bill to reduce the vote by £4,000, if the Commission
report that the Civil Service salaries are to be reduced.
The vote was reduced by about £33,000 in 1880, and the
reduction now is not only far smaller, but will be less
felt, because now the number of children has increased,
and the more the numbers the more economical the manage-
ment. lam sorry that I should have to make such a
proposition, but the Government must keep faith with the
House and carry out what has been promised in the way
of retrenchment.
I may say, in conclusion, that there has been laid
on the table of this House, along with the report prepared
by the department, some very interesting papers. I must
particularly refer to the very valuable report prepared by
Mr. Laishley, of Auckland. He has forwarded to the
department in illustration of his report some valuable
books. After the session his report will be printed; and
I would ask the members of the House and others who
take an interest in educational matters to carefully peruse
what Mr. Laishley has written. Ido not agree with some
of his conclusions, but that does not prevent me bearing
testimony to his care and zeal in the work he has per-
formed.
Sir, I think that it is right to make the remarks I have
made, so that members may have in a small compass my
views as Minister of Education on our educational system.
I have avoided details because they will be found in the
educational report; but I trust that members will agree
that our system is being slowly perfected, and that it is a


system of which we may well he proud. When the
reforms I have referred to are carried out, it will, I
believe, he second to no State system in the world. This
I feel, that to education, in its widest sense, must we
look for true progress. Primary schools are not educa-
tion. If we wish to see true equality maintained, such as
must exist if we are to remain a democracy and a pro-
gressive nation, secondary schools and university col-
leges must he established and carefully nurtured. Hence
it is that I have dwelt on the need of the higher education.
Without it class distinctions and bitterness will arise, and
the standard of the primary schools he lowered. With it
we may hope for a nobler nation, a happier people, and a
true democracy.


i
.


f
/
