

■iM
u. ?.up, DEMONSTRATION
" Ic U
i ¥ . y j/y
! if. IN HONOOR OF THE . .
tA 7 V
# Right Hofi. &. H. REIO,
HELD IN THE
TOWN HALL, SYDNEY,
16th OCTOBER, 1899.
SYDNEY:
18 99.
Samuel K. Lees, Printer and Stationer, 81 Clarence Street.






Ifff'■
PUBLIC DEMONSTRATION
. . IN HONOUR OF THE . .
Right htefi&H-REIS,
HELD IN THE
TOWN HALL, SYDNEY,
16th OCTOBER, 1899.
SYDNEY:
Samuel E. Lees, Printer and Stationer,, 81 Clarence Street.
1899.


■
->


(general Committee
Sir Matthew Harris, M.P,
Alderman Dr. Graham, M.P.
Mr. H. S. Levy.
~ W. Wilks, M.P.
~ James Macpherson, J.P.
Hon. Nicholas Hawken, M.L.C.
Mr. Wm. McCourt, M.P. (Chairman
of Committees).
„ G. E. Edwards.
~ J. Hawthorne, M.P.
Rev. Dr/'Zillman.
Mr. L. D. Phillips.
Hon. W. R. Campbell, M.L.C.
Mr. J. Donkin.
~ Reginald Black.
~ W. Archer, M.P.
~ T. Taylor.
~ A. Hardie.
~ Jas. Hogve, M.P.
~ Charles Lovely.
Rev. Dr. Aspinall.
Mr. R. W. Richards.
Dr. F. W. Hall.
Mr. G. Anderson, M.P.
Crecutibe
Sir Matthew Harris, M.P.
Mr. Charles Lovely.
~ J. Donkin.
~ W. McCourt, M.P.
~ John Macpherson.
~ Alderman Thomas Jessep, M.P.
~ John Nobbs, M.P.
Varney Parkes, M.P.
J. P. Gray.
Mr. James Sandy, J.P.
Wm. Rigg, M.P.
Committee
Mr. J. Garland, M.P.
~ John Hunter.
~ J. P. Gray.
Pan. Creasurcrs
Alderman Dr. Graham, M.P. | Mr. H. S. Levy, J.P.
Pan. Secretaries
Alderman Jessep, M.P.
(Mayor of Sydney) Chairman.
Hon. R. Fowler, M.L.C.
~ James N. Brunker, M.P.
Mr. John Nobbs, M.P.
~ Alderman T. Jessep, M.P.
~ Alderman Bain.
Alderman S. E. Lees, M.P.
David Storey, M.P.
~ Alderman G. S. Crouch.
~ John Hunter.
Hon. Joseph H. Carruthers, M
Mr. S. T. Whiddon, M.P.
~ E. C. V. Broughton, J.P.
Hon. Jacob Garrard.
~ E. W. Molesworth, M.P.
~ Frank E. McLean, M.P.
Hon. A. J. Gould, M.L.C.
Mr. Wm. Mahony, M.P.
Professor Anderson Stuart.
Hon. Joseph H. Carruthers, M
Mr. David Storey, M.P.
Alderman Dr. Graham, M.P.
Mr. H. S. Levy.
| Mr. John Nobbs, M.P,


■
> .*


P R E F KC E.
CONTENTS.
Leading Article, Sydney Mormng Herald .
Extracts from News Columns.
Leading Article, Sydney Daily Telegraph.
Extracts from News Columns.
Leading Article, Sydney Evening News.
Extracts from News Columns.




“ Sydney Morning Herald.”
Mr. Reid was fully entitled to the demonstration made in his honour
at the Town Hall last night. He had held office for so long, under such
circumstances of stress and conflict, had so powerfully impressed his
influence upon the legislature and the public life of this community,
and then had vacated office on so slight an occasion, that it was proper
of his friends and all who admire pluck and ability to mark his retire-
ment from the Premiership. It was not, as Mr. Reid himself pointed
•out last night, a farewell, like those valedictories accompanied with
gratuities which public servants have in past days received. Mr. Reid
has not come to the sere and yellow leaf. Rut it was well thought of
to signalise his services to the freetrade and liberal cause, to his party
in Parliament, to the community, and to public life throughout these
Australian colonies, by a testimony of appreciation such as was conveyed
by a crowded meeting of citizens in the Sydney Town Hall, with a
presentation of plate and an address, and amid the sympathy of the
community. These things are not individual gifts alone : they emphasise
regard for public men, and they dignify public life. The occasion being
properly chosen for an expression of esteem, the manner in which it
was conveyed and acknowledged was also such as to show the im-
portance of the demonstration.
Mr. Reid was in a happy vein in his reply to the address. The
•occasion was not a political one, and he made no political capital.
There was no touch of bitterness, and the chapter of autobiography was
manly and genial. A considerable part of his speech was personal
reminiscence. It was interesting to hear from his own lips of his eaily
.steps towards the political ambition which he had designed for himself.
The audience could get a glimpse of the not too assiduous law student
started on his career by the praise and the blame of Sir Julian
Salomons, achieving his admission to the Bar, entering Parliament almost
from the steps of a Government department, and then for several years
filling a minor role on the Parliamentary stage. That was the day of
the Width of Streets and Lanes Act—a useful little Act, but not
quite the measure of the future leader’s legislative reach. Again, after
some years, not unrelieved by offers of office, Mr. Reid begins on the
lowermost rung of the Ministerial ladder, and as Secretary of Public
Instruction, true to the axiom that a capable man makes more oppor-
tunities than he finds, he signalised his term of office by liberalising
public education. From that office, as well as from Parliament, he
retired by a constitutional mishap, to return in due time at the head of
the premier constituency of the colony, to succeed to the leadership of
the freetrade party on the resignation of Sir Henry Parkes, and to
begin the record of the Administration of August, 1894—September,
1899, a record well within the memory of those who have come to
citizenship during this historic five years. This is a striking series of
high public trusts conferred upon the ex-Civil servant of twenty years
a( ro a series which gradually advanced him from the routine of a
department and a debating society to the Privy Council, the five years’
Premiership of New South Wales, the virtual leadership of the Aus-
tralian federal movement, and an ineffaceable influence upon the entire
policy of this country. Seldom, even in modern days, have individual


capacity and public confidence combined to bestow such a career, and
one which cannot be considered as more than temporarily checked.
From Report in the “Sydney Morning Herald .”
PRESENTATION TO MR. G. H. REID.
ENTHUSIASTIC PUBLIC MEETING. — SPEECH BY THE EX-PREMIER.
Shortly after the defeat of the Reid Administration, it was decided, at a meeting
of citizens called to consider the question, to mark the public esteem in which
Mr. G. H. Reid, the ex-Premier, was held, and the appreciation with which his
political actions were regarded, by presenting him with a substantial token of
such feelings, and by extending the compliment of a presentation to Mrs. Reid.
The function took place at the Town Hall last night in the presence of a gathering
which filled the whole building, and included in its numbers very many ladies.
The Mayor (Alderman Sir Matthew Harris, M.L. A.) presided. Among others who
had assembled in honour of the ex-Premier and his wife.were Lady Harris, Miss
Harris (Warrane), Hon. John Hughes, M.L.C., Hon W R. Campbell, M.L.C ,
Hon. Richard Jones, M.L.C., Hon. Alex. Kethel, M.L.U, Hon. A. J. Gould,
M L C., J. N. Brunker, M.P., J. H. Carruthers, M.P., J. H. loung, M.P., J. A.
Hogue M.P., Joseph Cook, M.P., C. A. Lee, M.P., Varney ParkesrM.P., W.
Archer, M.P., T. Brown, M.P., Henry Clarke, M.P,, W. W. Davis, M.P., J.C. L.
Eit7mtrick MP, Hr. Graham, M.P., J. S. Hawthorne, M.P., Alderman T.
Kp MP. Alderman S. E. Lees, M.P., S. W. Moore, M.P E W Moles-
worth M P W Mahony, M.P., W. Morgan, M.P., Captain Millard, M.P., J.
sobt’ «P.P. ». storey, M.P., S. T, Whiddon MP W, H.
Wilks' M.P. Rev. Dr. Maclnnes, Messrs. S. H. Levy, E. Scholes, Dr. Murra\
Will Dr. Milford, Dr. Goode, Hr. Walker Smith, Professor Anderson Stuart,
Dr Mathieson, Messrs. W. Macpherson, J. Ritchie, C. J. Christie, Forbes-Angus,
G E Russell-Jones, H. E. Foster, Consul Falstedt, S. H. 1 airland, W. H.
Hentsch, W. Cullen Ward, C. E. Marshall, Alderman T. Hughes Rev. Dr. Zill-
man W D. Benjamin, J. A. Dowling, D. Y. Syrae, J. H. Walker, Geoige
Weldon, G. E. Edwards, J. G. Byrne, and many others.
The subiect of the presentation to Mr. Reid was exposed to the view of the
audience It took the form of a large oval solid silver salver, tea and coffee
service and kettle of early Victorian period, beautifully engraved with scroll and
acanthus leaves. The centre of the salver was engraved with the following
inscription “ Presented to the Right Honourable George Houston Reid, P.C.,
Q.C., D.C.L. (Oxon.), M.L.A., by many citizens of New South Wales in recog;
Stion of his great public and national services.-Sydney, 16th October, 1899.
Each piece of the tea and coffee service and kettle was engraved with the mono-
> < 0 H R ” The whole of the service was stamped with the silver hall-mark
fnd Queen’s' head, and each article was fitted to a solid oak and morocco case.
The subiect of the presentation to Mrs. Reid was a diamond new moon, set with
23 beautifully cut diamonds. The jewels are suited for use as either a hair
ornament or a brooch. The whole work was executed by Messrs. Flavelle Bros.,
Limited, of George-street.
The Sydney “Daily Telegraph.”
THE REID DEMONSTRATION.
For the second time Mr. Reid has been entertained at a complimentary
meeting in the Town Hall. The first of these occasions was when,
accompanied by Sir John Forrest, Mr. Kingston and other eminent
colonial politicians, he was publicly congratulated for playing his part
so well in the Jubilee ceremonies. Then he was hailed as a staying


guest. Last night he was speeded as a parting one, for a time at least.
That the function of last night was a most successful one is matter for
general congratulation ; for Mr. Reid has in his time done the State
o O
great service. In the troublous, risky political times of a few years
ago, when the nominal freetrade party in Parliament was not what it
claimed to be, and no other man of political light and leading was bold
enough to propound a policy of direct taxation, Mr. Reid led that party
out of the wilderness of fiscal doubt, and went as far as was then
humanly possible in the way of putting our system of taxation on an
economically sound basis. For that, for the prosperity that ensued,
and for the good example he gave to the other colonies, he is entitled
to the gratitude of the people of New South Wales, and has amply
earned the fine testimonial he received last night. It is true that to
many of those who were at the Town Hall, and to many others who
will only know of the proceedings by reading of them, it will occur
that there has been a jarring change since Mr. Reid came back from
the Jubilee banquets and other speech-making functions, at which he
so sturdily maintained freetrade principles since miw he appears as
the advocate of a Federal scheme foredoomed, with his acquiescence, to
heavy protectionism. But that is irrevocable, and there is little if any
good to be gained by charging him with it. Probably Mr. Reid, if
accused of changing front, would reply, in the words of another ex-
perienced statesman, that the person who does not alter his opinions
is either an inspired prophet or a born fool. Since what is done is
done, and cannot be revoked, it is merely fair to give honour to those
who deserve it. Unquestionably Mr. Reid deserves it—for the determi-
nation and skill with which he changed the fiscal policy of this colony
in face of difficulties so threatening that they would have frightened a
weak man, for the dignity and ability with which he represented New
South Wales in England at Jubilee time, and for the effort he made to
put the finances on a sounder basis. His ejection from office lately
became a necessity, not only because of the circumstances connected
with payments to a member of Parliament, but also because he appeared
to have acquired that habit of comfortable carelessness to which long-
tenured Premiers are apparently prone. Recent events, however,
should not be allowed to cloud remembrance of his successful earlier
Prime Ministerial career, and it is pleasant to observe that his services
in the eventful days of 1894 and 1895 have been so handsomely
appreciated.
(From Report of the Sydney “ Daily Telegraph .”)
DEMONSTRATION TO MR. REID.
PRESENTATION OF A SOUVENIR. SPEECH BY THE EX-PREMIER.
RECORD OF HIS POLITICAL LIFE. —AN ENTHUSIASTIC AUDIENCE.
The demonstration to Mr. Reid, the leader of the Opposition, arranged by his
political supporters and public admirers, was held at the Town Hall last night.
The personal popularity of the ex-Premier and his attractions as an orator were


guaranteed by the presence of nearly a hall-full of the public. In the crowd,
doubtless, were many of Mr. Reid’s political opponents, but all combined heartily
to show their appreciation of his personal worth. It was an occasion when all
that was fine and unquestionable in his five years’ Premiership was remembered
and placed in the forefront. Mr. Reid’s services at the seat of the Empire in the
Jubilee celebrations were honourably mentioned in the address which was read
by one of his Parliamentary supporters. The audience cheered the reference
loudly.
Just before 8 o’clock the city organist mounted his seat at the great instru-
ment, and touched the sentimental side of the audience by a stirring performance
of the melody “Soldiers of the Queen.” This prepared the people for the entrance
of the hero of the evening, and when he walked on to the platform a moment
later, accompanied by the Mayor of Sydney (Sir Matthew Harris), a great portion
of those present rose to their feet and cheered vociferously for several seconds.
When the cheering subsided, Mr. Jessep, M.P., called for “ Three cheers for the
greatest man in Australia.” This was dangerously close to “Australia’s noblest
son,” but it was Mr. Reid’s night out, and three ringing cheers burst from the
multitude.
The Mayor, who occupied the chair, then proposed to introduce the business
of the meeting, and briefly said they had met to do honour to a man who had
rendered great services to the country. He then presented Mr. Reid with a
brilliantly illuminated address and a magnificent souvenir consisting of a large
oval solid silver salver, tea and coffee service, and kettle of the early Victorian
period, beautifully engrossed with scroll and acanthus leaves. The centre of the
salver was engraved with the inscription : “ Presented to the Right Hon. George
Houstoun Reid, P.C., Q.C., D.C.L., Oxon., M.L.A., by many citizens of New
South Wales, in recognition of his great public and national services. Sydney,
16 Oct., 1899.” Each piece of the tea and coffee service and kettle was engrossed
with the monogram “G.H.R.” The presentation to Mrs. Reid, who was unable
to be present on account of a severe attack of influenza, consisted of a diamond
new moon set with 23 diamonds.
The presentation was the scene for another great outbiirst of cheering. The
ex-Premier then started the address which the people had come to hear, and in
which he had promised not to touch on party politics. In referring to his party,
he said he had always led a solid and loyal following. The two or three men who
had lately broken away were but ‘ ‘ a wayward and fitful shadow across the glory
of the noblest political event in the history of the Southern Hemisphere.” This
was, perhaps, the most pointed party reference throughout what was a happy
and, at times, amusing and somewhat autobiographical address.
During the evening the city organist played further selections on the organ,
and on his striking up “ Rule Britannia” the audience rose and sang a stanza,
winding up with three ringing cheers. There was nothing to show that this out-
burst should of necessity be put down as enthusiasm on account of the Boer war,
but in view of the general martial excitement pervading the atmosphere it might
be allowed that the population of Sydney is following the infectious example of
its neighbours in the other colonies. Some enthusiasm was caused by the reading
of a telegram from Mr. Kingston, the Premier of South Australia, as follows
“Mr. Holder and I note with interest the proposed recognition of Mr. Reid’s
Federal services, and heartily sympathise with the movement. In some respects
we have strongly differed from him, but none the less we warmly appreciate his
work in assisting to elevate the matter to the dignity of a people’s question, his
Convention services, and his enthusiastic advocacy of the cause since the last
Premiers’ Conference. Without these, Federation could not, in our opinion, have
achieved its present success. With’ kindest regards to Mr. Reid, and best wishes
for a pleasant and successful gathering this evening.”
The platform was packed with a number of ladies and prominent citizens.


Sydney “Evening News.”
MR. REID.
That Mr. Reid’s speech at the great meeting in his honour last night
should be largely autobiographical was a natural result of the occasion.
That when a public man becomes an autobiographer he should not
detract from the merits of his subject is perfectly natural. As an
amusing gentleman said in a farce which is seldom seen on the stage
nowadays, “ If a man does not blow his own trumpet, who is he to get
to do it for him 1 ?” Our ex-Premier, therefore, was not unreasonably
egotistic when he got his opportunity, and the line of genial optimism
which ran through his utterances showed that political adversity had
not daunted him, while it also presaged a good humoured, and therefore
all the more dangerous, opposition to the present Ministry. Mr. Reid
will, of course, give Mr. Lyne and his colleagues a fair trial—just as
fair a trial as they g ive him when he took office. That is to say, he
will lose no chance which may be afforded him to change places with
them. If he refrains from motions of censure or votes of want of con-
fidence, that will be merely because he will have realised that he cannot
carry them, and that to bring them forward merely to be defeated is
bad political generalship. But if there is any probability of carrying
a vote which will imperii the existence of the Ministry, Mr. Reid, as
leader of the freetrade party, will let no charitable feelings as to giving
Ministers a chance interfere with his action. In this lie will do nothing
contrary to the ethics of political and party warfare, nor will he in
any way differ from Mr. Lyne and that gentleman’s fellow-Ministers if
they were in opposition. Coming, then, as a prelude to the resumption
of Parliamentary business to day, Mr. Reid’s speech shows him to be in
what is called first-rate fighting trim, and it is certain that with him as
leader of the Opposition the Ministry will not have so reposeful a time
of it as he himself often had when Mr. Lyne sat on the Speaker’s left
hand. This will be all the better for the political life of the country,
and will keep the Ministry from rusting during the long career which
Mr. O’Sullivan predicts for it. So far as his references to his political
opponents last night were concerned, it cannot be said that Mr. Reid
went out of his way to attack them, or that his criticism of them, brief
as il was, was unfounded. While perfectly agreeing with Mr. Lyne
that Parliament must be respected with regard to the sending of a
military contingent to South Africa, Mr. Reid was justified in pointing
out that the Premier’s “ letting I dare not wait upon I would ” style of
action in connection with the subject had undoubtedly made New
South Wales the laggard rather than the leader of Australia when
Australia was to be represented outside her own coast line. Nor were
the member for King Division’s references to the deserters from his
party, while sufficiently contemptuous, in any way acrimonious. He
possibly remembers that if they left him because he did not maintain
the opposition to the amended Federal Constitution Bill which he had
offered to the original measure, they themselves might not have been
such successful opponents of the latter but for his leadership and
support. As to the manner i n which the members of the new Ministry
have suddenly found that Mr. Reid’s finance was not so bad as they T


thought it was when they were in opposition, Mr. Reid’s allusion to
their conversion was only natural and was not ill-natured. 11 will
indeed, we imagine, be found that the only manner in which the present
Ministry will be able to make out the need for a loan for other than
conversion purposes will be by increasing the road vote and by declining
to use the Savings Bank funds. That is to say, the State, under Mr.
Lyne, will pay the Savings Bank depositors 3 per cent, for money
which it will not use, and will borrow other money for use at 3 per
cent. This may be in accordance with the views of the Auditor-
General, but it will scarcely be good economic national finance. With
the personal part of Mr. Reid’s speech not much fault, as we have said,
can be found. He was very candid as to the constitutional obstacles
which his own nature offered to his political advancement, but this
only showed how a laudable ambition to lead his fellow-men can enable
anyone to overcome constitutional and characteristic difficulties. And
it is a truth that, until his leadership of the Opposition for three years
and his Premiership of four years showed that Mr. Reid had no present
equal in New South Wales as head of a political party, very few of us
gave him credit for anything more than brilliant debating abilities. In
fact, his qualifications were mostly regarded as being of the destructive
rather than of the constructive kind. Of course, public opinion on
his merits as a political leader is now quite different to wh&t it was
six or even four years ago, but for this he has had himself to thank,
and his frank estimate of himself last night gave the best reason of all.
(From the Reports of the “Evening News”)
GREAT DEMONSTRATION AT THE TOWN HALL.
A great audience assembled in the Town Hall last night to witness the souvenir
presentation to Mr. Reid, ladies and gentlemen being about equally represented.
On the platform were the ex-colleagues of the late Premier, members from all
political parties in the House, many clergymen and ladies, amongst the latter
being the Mayoress and Miss Harris. Mrs. Reid was unfortunately absent owing
to suffering from an attack of influenza. There were a number of apologies from
gentlemen unable to be present, and Mr. Jessep, M.L.A., read a telegram from
Mr. C. C. Kingston, Premier of South Australia, containing a cordial greeting to
the meeting, and expressing his appreciation of Mr. Reid’s federal services. Mr.
Reid’s appearance was the signal for an outburst of prolonged cheering, whieh in-
dicated that his personal popularity was still far from being on the wane. The
Mayor (Alderman Sir Matthew Harris) presided, and, amid cheers, presented the
souvenir, consisting of a salver, kettles to match, and a four-piece tea and cofiee
service.
Then Mr. Reid gave a few autobiographical details, which greatly enter-
tained his audience. At the early age of 10, he discovered to his great torture
that he was born to be Premier of New South Wales. Of course, he couldn’t,
talk then, and he was also very shy, but he joined a debating society when in his
teens, and soon got over these little defects. Three greater obstacles had yet to
be subjugated : An Australian’s love of pleasure ; his equal dislike of hard work ;
and, thirdly, an agreeable appointment in the Public Service. Still, as a step in
the direction of his ambition, he began to read for the Bar, but it was a long
read indeed. When a young man of about 20, as a witness in some legal affair,


lie gave an answer to the cross-examination of Sir Julian Salomons which com-
pletely dished that gentleman’s case. Then the learned counsel sent for this
smart witness, and advised him to study for the Bar, and was surprised to find he
was already qualifying for the profession. But as year followed year, Sir Julian
got rather tired of inquiring of his young friend whether he had not passed his
examinations yet. Finally, he sent for him, and said he believed Mr. Reid ne\er
meant to appear at the Bar in this world, only at that of the next. (Loud
laughter.) The sting of that reprimand, however, was enough. Mr. Reid im-
mediately passed his examination, but by this time he had attained the ripe age
of 34. In due course he became a Member of Parliament, then a Minister, and
afterwards, to the surprise of everybody but himself, his ambition was realised,
and he became Premier of New South Wales. (Cheers.)
Mr. Reid gave many details of his political life ; of the cordial relations that
had existed between him and Sir Henry Parkes up to a certain point ; of the acts
of legislation he had participated in, especially ni regard to the inquiry he had
moved for into the abuses of the land laws in 1881 ; of the high schools for boys
and girls, which came into being during the twelve months he was Minister for
Education ; and of the State scholarships, which enabled the poorest children to
gradually win their way up to the University, and of the system of technical
training,' and the teaching of history in schools. Dealing generally with his
career, Mr. Reid confessed that he had not always taken political life seriously ;
but still when it came to him to take the leading position in the land, while still
claiming to be jolly and fat—(laughter)—he never shirked his work. Mr. Reid
also admitted his indebtedness to the great support given him by a loyal party
and by the press, some portion of which was now engaged vaunting the ex-
cellencies of men whom before they had spent their time in vilifying ; still, he was
grateful for what they had done for him ; and he had also a tribute of praise for
the Labor party. He had also a little to say in defence of his recent Administra-
tion ; the many things it accomplished, and the few it failed to do ; and the great
prosperity, in spite of bad seasons, which had followed his establishment of a
freetrade policv and direct taxation ; also something about the famous million de-
ficit, which Mr. Lyne has talked so much about, but cannot find. But the
domestic legislation record of the late Government was, Mr. Reid thought, topped
by its achievement of federation, and with a patriotic peroration on the great
change for the better this meant for all Australia, Mr. Reid sat down, amid loud
cheering, after speaking for nearly two hours. M. Wiegand, who had given
selections on the organ during the evening, then played “ Rule, Britannia,” and
the whole audience joined in a patriotic rendering of “God Save the Queen,” and,
after a good deal of cheering, the meeting separated.


* Tiie 1 Humiliated Address *
-I-I-i— .1-1-1-I
Mr. Alderman JESSEP, M.P.,
_ read the Address, wlqich was as follows
To the Right Honourable
George Houston Reid,
P.C., Q.C., D.C.L. (Oxon), M.LA.
Dear Sir,
On the occasion of your ceasing to hold the position of
, Prime Minister of New South Wales, we beg you to accept this
I Address and the accompanying Souvenir as a tangible, though
inadequate, embodiment of our warm appreciation of your public
and national services during your five years’ Premiership of the
L. colony. Throughout your long and distinguished public career,
your interest in the welfare of all classes of the community has
I been unceasing; your industry and capacity in conducting the
—■ legislative business of the country have been conspicuous, and
'• your honest and fearless administration will long be gratefully
remembered by the people of New South Wales. Your able
representation of this colony in the mother-country on the occasion
of Her Majesty’s Record Reign Celebrations, and the high dis- _
I tinction conferred upon you by Her Majesty in appreciation of
' your public services, are matters of which the people of New
South Wales are justly proud. Your name will live in the annals
of Australia as the statesman who most effectively assisted to
bring into action the machinery which gives to us our Federal
Constitution, as an achievement of our own times. We sincerely
_ trust that the people of this continent may continue to have the
i benefit of your experience and ability, not only in the councils of
this colony, but in those of the Commonwealth of Australia, and __
I that Providence may vouchsafe to Mrs. Reid, yourself, and family
I a long life of happiness and prosperity.
Signed on behalf of the Executive Committee of a meeting of
citizens.
MATTHEW HARRIS,
Chairman.
Sydney,
Ibth October, 1899.


Mr. Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I appear before you with a heart full of pleasure
and a mind full of gratitude. (Cheers.) On this occasion,
I prefer to regard Sir Matthew Harris, the chief magis-
trate of this city, as a member of the Freetrade and
Liberal party of New South Wales, which embodies so
many honourable traditions, and of whose leadership I
am proud. (Loud cheers.) I feel very grateful that a
moment of political misfortune has suggested to the
members of the party and other friends this kindly
remembrance. (Applause.) The thousands who fill this
great hall I thank for crowning personal kindness with
the significance of a public demonstration. (Cheers.)
The feelings which prompted the suggestion of a money
testimonial make me an everlasting debtor, but I have
craved leave to prefer the beautiful gifts which I see
before me. (Loud cheers.) The largest number of
sovereigns that could be collected would, I fear, soon
“ take unto themselves wings and fly away ” —(laughter)
—whereas this magnificent souvenir will, I hope, en-
shrine the memory of your generous thoughts in the
recollection of my children’s children. (Loud cheers.)
In this and other countries the close of a great career,
or the pressure of necessity, has called forth national
recognition in pecuniary forms, and fitly so ; but I
cherish the conviction that my public career is not yet
closed—(prolonged cheering), —and I am glad to tell
you that I feel strong enough to fight my own way in
the world without any necessity for such assistance.
(Applause.)
HIS DOMINANT FEELING.
My dominant feeling is one of obligation. If I have
remained in the office of Prime Minister for a period
longer than any previous occupant of that office, it is
because of steadfast and generous support. During my
eight years of leadership on both sides of the House, I
have been backed by a splendid party of colleagues and
representatives within the walls of Parliament, and of
electors in all parts of the colony. (Cheers.) There has


been only one band of deserters in our ranks, but the
loss of the support of Mr. Haynes, Mr. Fegan, Mr.
Cotton, Mr. J. C. Fitzpatrick, and Mr. E. M. Clark, is,
I consider, one of the finest episodes of my career.
(Cheers.) It was a defection which cast a fleeting
shadow over the noblest political event in the history of
the Southern Hemisphere —the union of the Australian
colonies. (Loud cheers.)
THE CONDITIONS OF PUBLIC LIFE
No one should enter the political arena, I think,
who does not possess a good digestion —(laughter) a
combative tendency, and a cheerful temper. (Cheers.)
You must be prepared to face strenuous antagonism, to
enjoy, indeed, to thrive upon it. (Laughter.) To the
most successful public man hours of bitterness, and times
of suffering, are bound to come. But who can climb out
of a cradle at all without such experiences, if he is worth
anything at all ? (Cheers and laughter.) Then, my
twenty years of public life here have taught me this: for
every sting of undeserved censure inflicted upon a public
man, he is solaced by a much larger quantity of unde-
served praise. (Cheers and laughter.) I hose who can
maintain a spirit of cheerfulness when defeat comes, are
like those who enjoy success quietly, they can never be
put to open shame. (Cheers.) In this respect, I believe
my practice accords with my precepts. I have had a
good number of antagonists, and some reverses, but
neither the man nor the defeat has arrived yet that
could “ upset ” me. (Laughter and applause.)
YOUTHFUL AMBITIONS.
When about 12 years of age, I discovered, by one
of those growths of sublime egotism to which youthful
inexperience is so prone —(laughter) —that I had a good
chance of becoming Prime Minister of this country.
(Cheers and laughter.) Even then I had a misty notion
that inspiration was not everything, and that some sort
of training was advisable, especially in the art of public
speaking. (Laughter.) It may be a surprise to you—it
is to myself now —that as a youth my chief obstacles
arose from diffidence and a want of nerve. (Laughter.)


I joined a debating club at the age of 15. No one can
have had harder struggles before he acquired even the
rudiments of the art of speaking in public. Some decry
the debating clubs because of the terrible talkers they
sometimes produce. But since the tongue will wag,
whether it be trained or untrained, upon the whole the
chances are that, of the two, the tongue which has
received training will inflict a smaller degree of torture.
(Cheers and laughter.)
In my efforts to realise my juvenile aspirations,
I had three powerful drawbacks, —a keen appetite for
pleasure, a strong dislike for hard work, and an agreeable
appointment in the Civil Service. (Laughter.) From
these causes, my progress was very slow. I have
come to love my profession for its own sake, but I
resolved to adopt it because it was more in touch
with political possibilities than any other. But I was
quite 34 by the time my admission to the Bar was
ordered, in 1879. When I was 12 I intended to be
Prime Minister at 30. Of all the curious illusions by
which the race is swayed, those of the young and the
aged on the subject of longevity are among the most
amusing. A child of 10 looks upon a man of 40 as quite
in the “sere and yellow leaf.” A man of 60 seems to
think death farther off than ever. (Cheers and laughter.)
ENTRY INTO PUBLIC LIFE.
There was a General Election in 1880, and I became
a candidate for East Sydney, an electorate with four
members. On a Saturday I resigned the position of
Secretary to the Crown Law Offices, on the following
Monday I was on the hustings, and on Wednesday I
was returned at the head of the poll. (Loud cheers.)
My amazing self-confidence was not punished, as I can
now see it deserved to be. On the contrary, by a display
of spontaneous generosity of which there may be, perhaps,
no parallel in this part of the world, I was taken upon
trust by the electors, and placed above the Premier, Sir
Henry Parkes, and seven or eight other candidates.
(Loud cheers.) By the Electoral Act of 1893, East
Sydney was effaced by single electorates, dhe central
part of East Sydney became King Division. To show


the enormous debt of gratitude I owe to the electors, I
need only mention that in eight contests for East Sydney
I suffered one defeat only, and in three contests for King
Division I succeeded. (Cheers.) I had very formidable
opponents —Sir Henry Parkes and Mr. Barton. (Loud
cheers.)
AN INDEPENDENT MEMBER.
No one could have entered Parliament more free
from party ties than I did. I owed nothing to any
party —quite the reverse : the electors alone helped me.
For Sir Henry Parkes, the Premier, I had none of those
feelings of cordial loyalty and sympathy which a follower,
or a Ministerial colleague, should have for his chief.
This, of course, had an important influence upon the
early part of my career. Some have endeavoured to
make out that the thing which kept Sir Henryand myself
apart was the very disparaging estimate he had of my
fitness for office. The fact, however, is that Sir Henry
Parkes never formed a Ministry after I entered the
Assembly without inviting me to join him. (Loud
cheers.) In 1887 he offered me a choice between two
offices. (Cheers.) Then he offered to nominate me for
the Speakership. (Cheers.) A vacancy occurring in
the office of Attorney-General twice, I was asked to
accept it both times. (Cheers.) In 1889 I was offered
a choice of offices. (Cheers.)
A private member has few chances of law-making—
once in a Session, perhaps. There were two matters,
however, I can recall with satisfaction. The first bears
upon a disgraceful state of things prevailing twenty years
ago. The rapid extension of the suburbs of Sydney
proceeded without any sort of supervision from the
authorities. The result was a network of unhealthy
streets and lanes, crowded with cheap houses, and 15 or
20 feet of space between them, in a large number of
cases. Air space in the lanes is of vital consequence to
the children of the poor. (Cheers.) After keen passages
of arms with vested intetests, I carried a Bill providing
that in every part of the colony a street should be at
least 66 feet wide and a lane at least 20 feet, and that


dwelling-houses fronting lanes should be built 23 feet
back on each side—a space of 66 feet from wall to wall.
(Loud cheers.)
The second matter bore upon the state of the land
law, and the way in which it was administered. The
main object of Sir John Robertson’s Act of 1861 was
excellent - the settlement of a prosperous yeomanry on
the soil. (Cheers.) But great abuses had laid hold of
the system, and prevailed in the Lands Department.
The “ squatters,” having no security of tenure, naturally
tried to protect themselves. T hey bought out the free
selectors in a wholesale manner. They persuaded their
hands to take up desirable areas in the interest of the
“ station.” The Government offered enormous areas for
sale by auction at an upset price of £1 an acre. Ihe
pastoralists bought lots chosen as a skilful general
chooses favourable spots for the defence of territory.
(Cheers and laughter.) The administrative machinery
was hopelessly centralized, and had broken down. In
1881, upon a motion declaring inquiry to be imperative,
I forced the subject upon the attention of the House
and the country. (Cheers.) The facts were so out-
rageous that an agitation commenced which led up to
the defeat of the Parkes-Robertson Government in the
following year (1882), both in the House and before the
electors.
A new Ministry, headed by Sir Alexander Stuart
and the late W. B. Dailey, took office. I was offered
the Treasury, but preferred to go to the Education De-
partment. This choice had distinct objects
behind it. Our system of public instruction, very efficient
in its primary forms, and fairly vigorous in its highest
sphere—that of the Sydney University—had an ugly
chasm between the two extremes. There were no high
schools for boys and girls. Nor did the teachings of
the University reach those young men who had daily
work. Then there was no State system of technical or
industrial training.
I was a year in office, but in that time a number of
high schools were established, and a system of evening
lectures in connection with the University. (Loud


cheers.) Technical colleges and schools began a career
of great usefulness. (Cheers.) I did not shrink from
opening the Public Schools to the teaching of history.
(Loud cheers.) Then the standard of proficiency was
modernised, and great economies in the building of
schools set going. (Cheers.) A system of Scholarships
opened up the avenues from the primary to the highest
education. The distinctions of the University became
possible for merit, however poor and friendless its sur-
rounding circumstances. (Loud cheers.)
In 1891 the defeat of the Parkes Government, and
the retirement of Sir Henry Parkes from the leadership
of the Freetrade and Liberal Party, were followed by
my election in his place. I became leader of the
Opposition. (Cheers.) With this mantle of respon-
sibility there came, of course, the need for greater
seriousness and more sustained effort. 1 only
too much reason for curiosity as to the result. But I
think in this phase of my life an honest endeavour to
perform my duty was perceived. (Cheers.)
When, in August, 1894, Sir Robert Duff accepted
the resignation of Sir George Dibbs, and invited me to
form a Ministry, there was, as I afterwards learned, the
gravest doubts as to my “staying” powers. Some
prominent opponents predicted a brief and inglorious
fgig'n. As everyone knows, my term of office exceeded
all previous records. (Loud cheers.) During those
five years it will be allowed that I did a fair amount of
hard work. (Cheers.) As for the. success which came
to me, no one knows better than I do how much it was
due to able and faithful Ministerial colleagues, and an
always kind and loyal party. (Cheers.)
ANTIQUATED LAWS.
I have often been accused of unduly censuring my
predecessors in power. I cannot even now take back
one word of those criticisms. (Cheers.) Our statute
book was, in 1891, in a most disgraceful state —full of
obsolete and antiquated measures. We have done some-
thing to put a new face upon it, but there is much more
to be done before the reproach is removed.


1892.
1898-9.
Customs and Excise
.. /2,967,49s
/i,621,062
Direct taxation ...
349-795 •
816,136
1892.
1898-9.
Customs and Excise
... £2 10 3 ...
£* 4 1
Direct taxation ...
.. 0 5 11 ...
012 1
One of the most urgent duties of the new Govern-
ment was to repeal the fiscal legislation of their
decessors. (Cheers.) The incidence of taxation was as
unfair as it could possibly be. (Cheers.) The change
effected can be shown in a comparison between 1892 —
the year before the financial panic—and 1898-9, viz.
PER HEAD OF POPULATION
7.288
The tariff is now the freest in the world. (Cheers.)
Direct taxation—on unimproved land values and incomes
—is not unduly heavy, about one-third of the Customs
and Excise. (Cheers.) You must remember the terrible
calamities which a policy of freetrade and direct taxation
was to bring upon you. (Cheers and laughter.) The
factories were to be closed, and the operatives were to
die of starvation. (Laughter.) Instead of that the
number of factories and operatives has increased. (Loud
cheers.) Then, the farmers were to be utterly ruined!
You will be glad to learn that the area under crop has
risen in five years from 1,206,000 acres to 2,206,000
acres. (Cheers.) The area under wheat has increased
in that period by 120 per cent. (Cheers.) Under the
blighting policy we forced on, trade was to be crippled.
Yet in four years our trade rose from to
(Loud cheers.) Gold and bullion were
to be drawn from us at an alarming rate. \.et in four
years, with a larger volume of trade than Victoria, we
exported gold coin and bullion to an amount
less than Victoria ! (Cheers.) Our increase in popula-
tion from 1894 to 1899 was larger than the combined
increase during the same time of Victoria, Queensland,
South Australia, and Tasmania. (Loud cheers.)
The state of the Civil Service was lamentable when
we took office. (Cheers.) It possessed no defence
against political patronage. Entrance was not subject


to competitive competition. The offices were over-
crowded. The great majority of the officers were good
men ; but there were some of whom nothing good could
be said. The Public Service Act of 1895 swept the
abuses away. (Loud cheers.) Superfluous, unworthy,
and incapable servants were removed. Salaries were
adjusted according to merit and the work performed.
The Land Act of 1895 was the first important
measure we carried. The law of 1884 had removed
many abuses, and promoted a better feeling between
pastoralist and selector, but the evil of “ dummyism ”
was still rampant. Mr. Carruthers, the Minister for
Lands, devised a method of suppression which was
effectual, by attaching to “ homestead selections ” a per-
petual condition of residence. (Cheers.) There was
freedom of transfer, but forfeiture if the home was
deserted. (Cheers.) Then there was only one price
for Crown lands, £1 an acre, upon ordinary areas. This
was absurd. The 1895 Act provided that there should
be a classification of values. (Cheers.)
The Health Act, the Factories and Shops Act, the
Water Rights Act, the Immigration Restriction Act,
and other measures, complete a record of useful
domestic legislation of which we have some reason to
feel proud. (Loud cheers.)
Besides establishing a light Customs tariff, we re-
ceived the cordial support of Parliament in making a
change in the system of keeping the public accounts.
Under the old system, votes of money for the^ service of
a year were kept open for varying, and sometimes long,
periods, with the result that the actual receipts and out-
goings in a given year gave you no idea of the state of
die finances. From this cause bitter, endless disputes
raged as to the financial position. The new system gives
a better chance to the public of judging for themselves.
Like the accounts of other countries, the Revenue and
Expenditure are now upon a cash basis, the money
actually paid within a given year being set against the
money actually received. (Cheers.) The moneys voted
for a year, but not applied for in the ordinary course of
business before the close of the financial year, become a
charge upon the succeeding year. lam sure you will


rejoice with me in the fact that, though taxation has been
greatly reduced, every year under the new system has
shown a credit balance. (Loud cheers.)
THE MILLION DEFICIENCY
Of course, as you know, there have been wild asser-
tions as to a deficiency of 1,000,000. (Cheers and
laughter.) These statements have been repeated for
from four or five years, chiefly by Mr. Lyne. That hon.
gentleman has been in the Treasury for a month, but
the million deficiency is still missing ! (Laughter.) The
new Premier now states that if the new system had not
started free from an old deficiency—with which it had
nothing to do—there would have been a deficiency.
Everybody knew that long ago —especially gentlemen
like Mr. Lyne, who had the spending of a good deal of
the money. (Cheers and laughter.)
ADMINISTRATIVE ACTS.
Ministers had effected vast changes in the adminis-
tration of the public departments. (Cheers.) Chronic
arrears of public business had been removed in several
of the most important departments. No person of
repute had brought a single charge against any member
of the Government during our five years of work in the
public offices. (Loud cheers.)
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.
I wish to repeat that any services to the public I
may have been able to render are greatly due to the
ability and labour of my Ministerial colleagues, and to
the magnificent loyalty and discipline observed by the'
members of the Party. (Cheers.) Beyond the walls of
Parliament, in the support of the great body of the
electors, we have, perhaps, our greatest reason for
gratitude and thanks. (Cheers.)
THE LABOUR PARTY.
Special thanks are due to our Parliamentary allies,
the Labour Party. (Cheers.) No 18 or 19 members
of any Parliament, holding, as they often did, the
balance of power, ever discharged their duties with as


much delicacy of feeling as that Party has shown to me
during my five years of office. It was common report
that there was an absolute alliance between the two
parties, but that was never the case. During the whole
time the Party never once attempted to put unworthy
pressure upon me. The worthy leader of the Party,
Mr. McGowen, has placed me under the greatest obliga-
tions. (Cheers.) Ido not wish to speak harshly of the
conduct of the Party during the recent crisis. When
Mr. Lyne moved his motion of censure, and launched
his attack, the Party met and decided to support the
Government. Subsequently, on an amendment forming
part of the original indictment, they decided to vote
against us. This seemed a “ Yes-No ” sort of proceeding.
If they thought I had made one fatal mistake in five
years, the time may come when they will find that they
also made one fatal mistake in five years. (Laughter.)
THE UNION OF AUSTRALIA.
1 have not yet referred to what was the greatest
work of the late Administration —the achievement, in
unison with the sister colonies, of the work of Australian
federation. (Loud cheers.) We came into power with
no mandate on this subject. We found the work of the
Convention of 1891 in abeyance. The work of that
Convention, whilst defective, was in many ways both a
solid and a brilliant beginning. The greatest defect of
all was the absence of any popular initiative. (Cheers.)
The work began amongst the great men, and there it
seemed to stagnate. (Cheers.) The Ministry thought
that a new start should be made, upon different lines.
Accordingly, we invited the Governments of Australia
to agree to a Premiers’ Conference on the subject,
to be held in Hobart in January, 1895. This over-
ture met with a ready response, and a Conference,
composed of the Prime Ministers of the colonies of
New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia, Tas-
mania, Victoria and Western Australia met in Hobart
accordingly. We agreed upon a new Convention ;
that it should consist of ten members from each
colony, chosen by the electors; that a Federal Con-
stitution should be drawn up by the elected body, and


that it should be submitted to a referendum vote of
the electors for approval or rejection. Queensland and
Western Australia did not bind themselves so abso-
lutely as New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia
and Tasmania. These decisions involved legislation and
elections in the colonies concerned, and in March, 1897,
the Convention met in Adelaide and drafted a Constitu-
tion, mainly founded on the work of 1891. You will
recollect vividly the various steps of this great move-
ment : the adjournment of the Convention until the
various Parliaments could consider and suggest amend-
ments ; its meeting in Sydney in September, 1897 , and
its final meeting in Melbourne in the beginning of 1898.
From that body came a Constitution which was accepted
with enthusiasm in Victoria, South Australia and Tas-
mania. In New South Wales it was the subject of bitter
controversy. Ihe Bill received a majority vote, but the
majority did not reach the statutory number of 80,000.
I had criticised the measure strongly, and felt the
demand for improvement in certain respects to be a just
one. After the General Election of last year, I sub-
mitted resolutions to both Houses, suggesting changes.
In January last there was a Conference of Premiers, at
which some of the suggestions made were approved.
(Cheers.) Then followed the Referendum of June 20
last, which resulted in a triumphant acceptance of the
improved Bill. South Australia, Victoria, Queensland
and Tasmania also approved. Ihe matter is not yet
settled in Western Australia. Already the necessary
addresses are on the way to the Imperial Government,
and we may hope for the proclamation of the Common-
wealth of Australia” within nine months. (Loud
cheers.)
THE LEADERSHIP OF AUSTRALIA
During the period of my term of office, the sister
colonies, for the first time in our history, recognised the
position to which the colony was entitled as the oldest
and most populous of the group. (Cheers.) Already,
Mr. Lyne has lost the leadership, in connection with the
despatch of volunteers to aid the British forces in South
Africa, for we find that South Australia and Western


Australia are arranging for the transport of their con-
tingents through Victoria. (Cheers.) I quite concur
that the approval of Parliament was necessary, but the
Government might have preserved the lead and made
all preliminary arrangements, subject to Parliamentary
approval. (Loud cheers.) Ihe liberal offer of the
Imperial Government removed all difficulties arising out
of limited means. (Cheers.) Some say, “ Let us wait
until a great crisis comes.” When that day comes, we
may have all we can do to defend ourselves. (Loud
cheers.) We are sheltered and secure every day and
every night and every year behind the mighty power of
Britain, and the least we can do is to rally round her in
her hours of trial and conflict. (Loud cheers.)
CONCLUSION.
We hear remarks to the effect that our politics have
passed into a less important phase, in view of the near
approach of Federation. There never was a greater
mistake. (Loud cheers.) Federation confers a double
citizenship. (Cheers.) The time of transition, the time
of entering upon national changes, is perhaps the most
trying and critical of all. (Cheers.) We owe a duty to
the mother colony, but will never press her claims beyond
the limits of that which is just and for the benefit of all
Australia. (Cheers.) We long for union, not from
selfish but from brotherly motives. (Loud cheers.) And
I ask you to conclude this magnificent demonstration
with three hearty cheers for
Australia !
[The vast audience rose and gave three enthusiastic
cheers. Then the same compliment was paid to Mr.
Reid, and, on his invitation, to the chairman (Sir Matthew
Harris), the organist closing the proceedings with “ Rule
Britannia” and “ God Save the Queen.”]








