

STATEMENT
OP THH
PUBLIC SEBYIOE&
£ir Lancia
First Chief Justice of New South Wales.
—■&&$)&&
JSgbiug:
JOSEPH COOK AND CO., PEINTEES, 370, GEORGE STEEET.




X6>s
STATEMENT.
Sib Feakcis Fobbes was appointed the First
Chief Justice of New South Wales in 1823.
By the terms of the Charter containing his ap-
pointment, he was to receive a Salary of £2OOO per
annum, from the date of his appointment, and to be
provided on his arrival in the Colony with a suitable
government residence, rent free.
Before the arrival of the Chief Justice in New
South Wales, there was a Court of Criminal Jurisdic-
tion regulated by Act of Parliament 27th Geo. 3rd.
It consisted of a Judge-Advocate, and a Jury of
seven Military Officers. It could only assemble on
the summons of the Governor —who selected the
Jury. The Judge-Advocate framed the indictment,
the prosecutor conducted his own case, the accused
was unassisted by Counsel, and a majority of three
fourths of the Jury was sufficient in all cases.
Immediately after his appointment, Sir Francis
Forbes was requested to prepare the draft of an Act
for the better administration of Justice in New South
Wales; and he was engaged, for several months before
he left England, in framing the important bill which
afterwards became law as 4th Geo. iv., chap. 96. This
Act established a Supreme Court in New South Wales
for the trial of Criminal and Civil issues. All crimes
and misdemeanors were to be henceforth prosecuted
by Information in the name of the Attorney General,


and tried by the Chief Justice and a Jury of seven
Commissioned Officers of His Majesty’s sea and land
forces; and all Civil issues were to be tried by the
Chief Justice and two Magistrates as Assessors,
unless both parties to the suit desired a Jury—in
which case the Jury was to dbnsist of twelve civilians.
This Act also gave to the Court Equitable, Ecclesias-
tical, and Insolvency Jurisdiction; and provided for
the establishment of Quarter Sessions and Courts of
Eequests.
This Act was not finally passed into law before
Sir Erancis Eorbes sailed from England; and did not
reach the Colony until three months after his arrival
Sir Erancis Eorbes arrived in March 1824 ; and one
of the first duties he was called upon to perform was
as member of a Commission, consisting of Governor
Sir Thomas Brisbane, Archdeacon Scott, and himself,
appointed from Home, to enquire into certain charges
preferred by the Magistrates against Dr. Douglass.
These charges were dismissed after full enquiry; and
although the Magistrates were greatly offended, the
Secretary of State signified his approval of the deci-
sion arrived at, and stated that the proceedings were
highly satisfactory. But it was very unfortunate for
himself, that Sir Francis Eorbes was appointed a
member of this commission; because, at the commence-
ment of his career, it brought him into hostility with
the Magistrates, —who were a powerful and influ-
ential body, and who naturally felt aggrieved that their
charges were not supported.
Shortly after this new Act having been received,
it was proclaimed in Sydney on the 17th May 1824 ;
on which day the Chief Justice was sworn in and
took his seat on the Bench.


The hostility of the Magistrates towards the Chief
Justice began to show itself, soon after the Proclama-
tion for holding Courts of Quarter Sessions under the
new Act was published. The Magistrates in Sessions
refused to impanel a Jury to try the issues in these
Courts, and addressed several letters to the Governor.
A long correspondence took place, and the matter
finally came before the Supreme Court; when the
Chief Justice decided, that the Magistrates derived
their Commission from the King and not from the
British Parliament; that their functions and obliga-
tions were settled by the Common law ; that these were
not mentioned in the Act of Parliament recently
passed, and therefore were not taken away by the Act.
The opposition of the Magistrates to the impanell-
ing of Juries in Quarter Sessions was thus overcome.
This was the first introduction of trial by Jury in
its English form in this Colony; and when it is re-
membered that the Chief Justice framed the Act,
which provides for the gradual introduction of trial
by Jury in all the Courts, and decided as he did upon
that occasion, there can be little doubt that the intro-
duction of trial by Jury, as it existed in England, was
contemplated by him at the time the Act was drawn.
Be that as it may, after his arrival in the Colony the
Chief Justice was always a strenuous advocate for the
introduction of trial by Jury ; and he used every effort
to press the matter upon the consideration of the
Government, both in his place in Council and in his
representations to the Secretary of State, until it was
fully conceded. Among others to whom he wrote in
England upon this subject, he appears to have written
to Sir James Mclntosh; who in a speech in the House


of Commons, on the 20th June 1828, says —“ That
“ learned person Chief Justice Forbes, whom he had
“ the honor of knowing, was now Chief Justice of New
“ South Wales ; and he (Sir James Mclntosh) had a
“ letter from him, in which he stated that his judicial
“ experience for five years led him to the convic-
“ tion, that the introduction of trial by Jury would
“ tend greatly to the well being of the Colony; and he
“ laughed to scorn the notion, that it was not as fully
“ ripe for such a change as any other dependency of
“ the British Crown.”
Under the new Act the Chief Justice was appointed
a member of both Councils, Legislative and Execu-
tive ; and, as a check to the passing of ahy illegal Act,
he was required to certify that there was nothing repug-
nant to the Law of England, in any bill adopted by
the Colonial Legislature, before it became law.
Sir Francis Forbes strenuously opposed this
arrangement before his departure from England, as
placing him in a false and invidious position; but it
was thought unsafe to dispense with this check, on
the first introduction of free Institutions. He however
foresaw the incompatibility of uniting the duties of
Councillor and Judge; and, to use his own expression
in remonstrating on one occasion with the Home
Government, he says “ I have no business there.’
Again, in pointing out how such duties would
bring him into collision with the Governor, he adds
“ How long would my Lord Chief Justice Abbott pre-
“ side at the Horse Guards, without being accused of
“ mutiny and sedition.”
The correctness of these views was soon proved in
1820. The case ofthetwoSoldiersSuddsandThompsou


came before the Supreme Court; and the position
of the Chief Justice, as Judge and Councillor, was
most embarrassing. It brought him into collision with
the Governor. As a Judge he was obliged to state
plainly some unpalatable truths; and as a Councillor
the Governor thought he should have screened him, if
possible, from the consequences which might follow
his resistance of the law. The Chief Justice’s con-
fidence abused, and his opinions misquoted, cruel
comments appeared in the newspapers. His peculiarly
painful position afforded him no means of explanation,
and he again entreated to be relieved. The Govern-
ment then, though regretting the necessity, yielded to
his solicitation; and he ceased to be a member of the
Executive Council.
This was not the only case of embarrassment. The
press became loud in its comments, not only on the
Governor but on the Chief Justice. An attempt
was made by the Governor to pass two Bills ; one im-
posing a Stamp duty on newspapers, and the other a
licensing Act. The Chief Justice decided, that both
these Acts were repugnant to British law in the form
in which they were presented; the former in the
amount of the duty, the latter in giving the Governor
an arbitrary power to grant or take away a license
for publishing. The Chief Justice refused his assent
to these two Bills, and thus the liberty of the press
was preserved.
Several actions for libel were afterwards brought;
fines and imprisonment were imposed; and an Infor-
mation for libel was filed against the Colonial Secre-
tary, for publishing in the Sydney Gazette a Gover-
nor’s Proclamation reflecting on certain individuals.


To go into those cases is not necessary; but they give
some insight into the painful and harrassing position
of a constitutional Judge, under such circumstances,
in a colony whose population waa of so mixed a
character, and where parties were divided by political
struggles.
Another case of trying difficulty arose, on the
question whether the Governor had power to takeaway
assigned servants from their masters. At that period,
all pursuits both in Town and Country were carried
on by the labour of assigned servants. Such a power,
therefore, exercised arbitarily, might have ruined any
owner of property. Apart however from any con-
sideration of that kind, a case came before the
Supreme Court, in which it was necessary for the
Chief Justice to decide whether the Governor
possessed this power. The Chief Justice decided that
the Governor had no such power. The Governor
however persisted that he had the power, and wrote
home for the opinion of His Majesty’s law advisers ;
who expressed themselves against the opinion of the
Chief Justice. He however adhered to his original de-
cision, that an Act of Parliament alone could give
the Governor powers which otherwise he did not
possess ; and, when a proper statement of the Chief
Justice’s views was received by the Home Govern-
ment, it was found that he had read the law correctly.
His decision was accordingly upheld.
This was another great service rendered by Sir
Francis Forbes, to the cause of legal and Constitu-
tional government in this Colony.
I could multiply instances of serious difficulty
and fearful responsibility ; of cruel misunderstanding


and still more cruel misrepresentation. But what
I have said is sufficient to prove that such a struggle
would have its effect on mind and health. And when it
is considered, that, added to these weighty responsi-
bilities and never ceasing labours, (the Court sitting
throughout the year,) my husband was the sole
Judge for some years, that every variety of
legal trial came before him, Criminal, Civil, Equity,
Admiralty, (see case Almorah) Insolvency, besides
drawing up the Colonial Court Acts, Judgments
of great importance, on the Jury question, Marriage
Law, Interest Bill &c., and his incompatible duties in
Council as legal adviser, it will be seen that such an
amount of labour and responsibility would have worn
out a stronger constitution, and destroyed any mind.
Sir James Dowling’s arrival was a great relief. He
was an upright Judge and a sincere friend. Not less
so was Judge Stephen. But assistance came too
late; and before General Darling’s departure the
health of Sir Francis Forbes had given way.
Governor Darling, being a Soldier and not a
Lawyer, conceived that the Chief Justice was bound
to uphold his measures under all circumstances. In
those early days, (when liberal Institutions were
being introduced into a Colony so constituted
as New South Wales was at that time) he himself
had his own difficulties to encounter ; and misunder-
stood as he was himself, he misunderstood the Chief
Justice —attributing his legal scruples to a desire to
court popularity at the expense of the government.
Be that as it may, the Governor certainly exerted his
prejudicial influence in many instances.


The Chief Justice had been promised an increase
of salary. All officers appointed from that period had
an increase. The Governor from £2OOO to £5OOO.
The Colonial Secretary from £BOO to £2000; with
permission to retain a pension of £750 per annum, to
be paid from the Colonial revenue, and a house
allowed by General Darling —and so on. Chief
Justice Pedder of Van Diemen’s Land, appointed on
the same day as Chief Justice Forbes, had an
additional £5OO per annum to his salary, and retired
on a Pension of £l5OO per annum.
Sir Francis Forbes’s salary remained stationary,
and the Pension voted him was £7OO. He however
had resided for some years in a government house,
secured to him by Charter rent free; but was required
by General Darling to vacate it, or to pay £2OO per
annum out of his salary.
His salary, too, was by Charter agreed to be
paid by Quarterly bills on the Treasury in England.
This, General Darling represented as inconvenient;
and it was placed on the Colonial fund without the
Chief Justice having been consulted. Had it re-
mained on the Imperial fund, his retiring pension
would have embraced his services as a Colonial Judge
for 22 years, instead of the 15 he was on the New
South Wales Bench.
He might have enriched his children, by accepting
for them from Sir Thomas Brisbane a grant of 10,000
acres of land which was offered to him; but this he
refused from a high sense of honor. The only grant
of land he ever received was 2,056 acres on the Hunter
at a time when every respectable Emigrant and
Official person received the same. He unfortunately
for his family added 16,000 acres of purchased land


to the grant, the price being paid into the Treasury;
and the whole of which 16,000 acres sold for less
than one quarter of what was paid for it.
Edenglassie on the Nepean was & purchase, and a
dear one. And the acre and quarter at Hyde Park,
which was at first given as a garden when of little
value, was granted to him by Mr. Secretary Spring
Rice’s permission, expressly as compensation for the
loss of his Government residence —or as the Despatch
stated “ in lieu of it.”
In 1836 Sir Erancis obtained leave of absence, which
was tardily granted; and he returned to England in the
vain hope of recovering his health. He left the Colony
a few months before the termination of Sir Eichard
Bourke’s government; and, to the last hour of his re-
maining in the Colony, gave Sir Eichard every
assistance in his power. A new Bill Avas to be
brought before Parliament. Again parties were
divided. Sir William Burton’s memorable charge
to the Jury was considered an attack on
Sir Eichard Bourke’s administration. Two Peti-
tions were forwarded at this time to the Home
Government, embodying the views of each party. On
the Chief Justice’s Arrival in England, these Petitions
were sent to him while at Cambridge, with a request
that he would give his opinion on them. He carefully
dissected each clause, and forwarded to the Secretary-
of State his views with regard to the proposals con-
tained in each Petition. He had also interviews with,
and received the thanks of the Home Government
for these opinions, and also for the assistance he had
given with regard to the Bill then coming before
Parliament. Every subject was reviewed by him; Con-
stitution of new House of Assembly, Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, Juries, Penal law &c. He received from


Mr. Amos, and others connected with government,
letters of acknowledgment for his eminent services.
11l as he was, he laboured to the latest hour of his
strength and ability, to carry out measures for the
benefit of the Colony. He had therefore no rest during
his visit to England, and no good result attended the
change as far as health was concerned. His malady
rapidly increased; both head and heart became affected;
and, feeling he could no longer perform his duty with
efficiency, he sent in his resignation. It was accepted,
with many expressions of regret at the loss he
would be not only to the Colony but to Her Majesty’s
Giovernment; which conferred on him, as a mark of the
estimation in which he was held, the Honor of
Knighthood. He then returned to the Colony merely
to die. Two years of suffering closed his valuable life;
during which two years, of entire confinement to his
bed, he was sustained on the small pension of £7OO
per annum; those years of drought and disaster,
1810 —and 41—while ruin surrounded his family.
To sum up briefly. Sir Francis Eorbes framed the
Act for the administration of justice in New South
Wales. Under his direction and guidance, the several
Courts appointed by that Act were brought into
operation. In connexion with these he recommended,
and in the end obtained Trial by Jury. He procured
for Prisoners the right to be defended by Counsel.
He protected the liberty of the Press. He protected
the Colonists from oppression. He was the friend of
liberal Institutions ; and his latest act was, advising
and assisting in preparing the Bill for the first in-
troduction of responsible government in this Colony.
And how was he rewarded! —While others received
frequent favors from the Grovernment, and so enriched
themselves, his position and feelings deprived him of


these advantages. He incurred the displeasure of a
Governor, because he would not sanction his illegal
acts. He received no increase to his salary which had
been promised him. His house (given to him by
charter) was taken from him. His salary was placed
on the Colonial fund against his wish, and without his
knowledge; and he was thus deprived of all claim on
the Imperial Government. And so, after serving Her
Majesty’s Government for 25 years, he received the
inadequate Pension of £7OO per annum ; subject to a
painful discussion, which added to the bitterness of his
feelings during the two years he lived to receive it.
I have felt strongly the injustice of such treatment;
and it has been asked, why should I have allowed
these wrongs to sleep. This is not the case; but, if it
were so, it would afford no excuse for permitting such
gross injustice. I can trace back my efforts, to
the time when my own Pension was discussed.
Some cruel observations being made by parties ignor-
ant of the past, and considering it a very inadequate
provision for the Widow of one whose services had
been so great, even to the sacrifice of his own life,
I forwarded a memorial to the Queen; who gave
it her gracious consideration. But, though the
Secretary of State for the colonies bore testimony to
Sir Francis Forbes’s services, as affording his family a
just ground of claim upon the Colony, that recommen-
dation was not carried out as it ought to have been;
and when I applied to the Land Minister for a grant
of land, equivalent in value to those granted to officials
at Wooloomooloo, at the time of their application, I
received as my answer that the new Land Act did not
sanction grants.
I then urged the recognition of Sit Francis
Forbes’s services in some shape; and at last


succeeded in obtaining a promise from the then
government, that the sum of £2063, being the
difference between the £7OO actually received in
each of the two years succeeding his retirement
from the Bench, and what is now granted (namely
£I4OO per annum) to a retiring Chief Justice, should
be placed on the estimates. This was done; but before
the estimates were laid on the table the Ministry re-
signed. The succeeding Premier, however, had promised
his support; and itappeared that there would be no diffi-
culty in doing justice to the memory of Sir Francis
Forbes. But, for some reason, the pen was passed
through the item. I then applied to the Attorney
General of the day, who promised to move in the
matter; when again the Ministry resigned.
I have now respectfully but earnestly
to urge on the Government, and the
Members of the Assembly, that the ,sum of £2068,
which was the calculation arrived at, (the period of
receiving the Pension embracing some months over
the two years,) may be replaced on the present esti-
mates. In this form it can lead to no precedent; but, if
it be thought more advisable to add whatever sum
Parliament may think right, to the annual pension now
received by me as the widow of th ajirst Chief Justice
of the Colony, I shall feel that the memory of his long
and eminent services has not passed away with his
life; and that the debt of gratitude which those services
cast upon the Colony is at last recognised. I submit,
however, thatthemore gracious manner of acknowledg-
ing these would be, by replacing the sum of £2063 ou
the estimates.
AMELIA SOPHIA FOKBES.




~TA~4~p
/3f6i.iO
A/ OCjf-1
