

STAFF TAPERS


Free thought and
radical collection
bequeathed to the
National Library of Australia
by
Harry Hastings Pearce










Punch Staff Papers:
A COLLECTION OF
TALES, SKETCHES, &c,
IN PROSE AND VERSE,
BY THE MEMBERS OF THE
STAFF OF SYDNEY PUNCH;
yj ITH J ILLUSTRATIONS
BY
Mrs. G. M. Stephen; and Messrs. M. Scott, G. M. Stephen,
H. Wise, G. G. McCrae, and J. H. Flynn.
GORDON AND GOTCH, SYDNEY AND MELBOURNE


SYDNEY:
GIBBS, SHALLAKD AND CO., PRINTERS, LITHOGKAHEKS, ETC.,
PITT STREET NORTH.


PREFACE.
HN laying this book—the first work of the kind pro-
duced in these colonies—before the public, it may
not be unadvisable to relate the story of its concep-
tion and execution.
In Australia, as a rule, the literary man, pur et simple , has
little or no opportunity of associating himself with his work,
and is thus in a great measure debarred from attaining that
notoriety which is the first step on the ladder of Fame and
Fortune. His only employers are the proprietors of newspapers,
and, as a necessary consequence, by far the larger portion of his
writings appear anonymously ; and all are comparatively under-
paid. If a tale or novel be required, a local writer stands but
small chance of employment—it is so much simpler to reprint
the work of an English author, who will demand far less remu-
neration, and whose name will in itself be a “ draw.” No one
knows better than the newspaper proprietor the truth of the
proverb, that “ No man is a prophet in his own country”—a
proverb applicable all the world over, but more especially in
Australia, where the educated classes are too much engaged
in the pursuit of wealth to have the leisure and time to waste on


such a profitless pursuit as light reading ; and where rich and
poor, educated and ignorant, are alike accustomed to estimate
a man by the condition of his wardrobe and the state of his
bank-book. The literary hack is thus despised for his poverty,
and his talent is unappreciated—because unknown.
To give the public an opportunity of judging for themselves
of the average work of local writers, the members of the Staff
of Sydney Punch determined to unite and publish a work in which
every man should have his chance. How they have availed them-
selves of their respective chances will be seen in the following
pages.
Now being, in the main, critics themselves, it cannot be
expected that they should deprecate criticism. No—they rather
invite it, —but a simple statement of facts is necessary to guide
their reviewers, lest they fall into the error of blaming the many
for the fault of the one.
We may here confess to a mistake having been made. There
has been no Editor. The result is, that each contributor is
alone responsible for his contribution—and, speaking technically,
for the reading of it, as it was resolved that each man should
read his own proofs, the same being agreed to in the contract
with the printers. Messrs. McCrae, Lee, and Thatcher are
exceptions hereto, being non-resident in Sydney. A few mis-
prints have occurred owing to careless reading on the part of
the authors, for which the printers are not held responsible.
At the outset, contributions were read by the authors at
meetings of the proprietors, discussed, and balloted for; but it
was soon found impossible to carry out this plan in its integrity—
as, according to the contract, the printers could not be kept
waiting for copy; so that some articles appear which were not
subjected to the same ordeal as others.


'The book is the work of the paid professional Staff of
Sydney Punch, and of gentlemen who, until very lately have
been in that position, and who are still occasional contributors.
Others, whose names appeared in the original prospectus, have
failed to send in contributions, and possibly the public have
suffered some loss in consequence ; but they were waited for
as long as time would permit, and the fault (if any) rests with
them alone. At the same time acknowledgment is here made of
the kindness of Mr. and Mrs. G. M. Stephen, and of Messrs.
Flynn, Collis, and F. Mason, to whom the members are indebted
for some of their illustrations, and who do not properly come
under the heading of Punch Staff.
The article by the late Mr. Deniehy was handed in for pub-
lication by Mr. Walter Cooper, and accepted as likely to
prove of interest to the numerous admirers of the deceased
gentleman.
Finally, if this attempt be a literary and pecuniary success
it will not be long before a second series of
jSxAFF A
will be offered to the public.
Punch Office,
Sydney, 10th Oct., 1872.


“ 0 that wine enemy had written a book /”


TABLE OF CONTENTS.
PACK.
Frontispiece (by M. Scott).
Title ... ... ... ... . j
Preface ... ... ... ... ... . ij^
Table of Contents .. ... ... ... v jj_
Browning’s New Poems ; a Review, by the late D. H. Deniehy ... \
A Fable, by S. IT. Banks .. ... ... ... g
The Auberge, by G. G McCrae ... .. ... xo
Budgeree School Concert, by T. Moser ... ... ... i^
Shadows, by S 11. Banks .. ... ... ... 25
Kai Tamaru and the Devil, by G. Bunster ... .. ... 35
(With illustration, by //. Wise.)
Vitae Amores , by S. 11. Banks ... ... ..
Sedan, by H. Kendall ... .. ~ ... ... 54
My Dream by H. W. 11. Stephen ... .. ... 5c
Billy's Passenger, by R. Thatcher ... ... ... eg
Lines to a Lady, by D. M. Coleridge ... ... ... -j j
To the \Vann9ll Rose, by D. AI. Coleridge ... ... ... 72
The Last Farewell, by G. G. McCrae ... ... ... 73
Little Lily, by 11. IV. H. Stephen ... ... ... ... 75
(With illustration, by G. M. Stephen.)
The Secret , by S. H. Banks ... ... ... ... 76
Going Down in the World, by R. E. Lee ... ... ... 77
Aboriginal Death Song, by 11. Kendall ... ... ... 81
To ,by H. Kendall ... ... .. ... 82
Cave Canem, by A. PV. East . ... ... ... S 3
Love’s Career, by S. //. Banks ... ... ... ... g Q
Jim’s Share, by G. Walch ... ... ... ... gi


PAGE.
Alonzo de Guzman, by R. Li. Lee ... 97
The Day of Small 1 Kings, by 7. Moser ... •• 99
Death of Acis, by H. Kendall ... ... ... 106
L’Arrivee, by G. G. McCrae . . ••• • Io^
(With illustration, by the Author.)
Mans Von Schloggenbochs, by 11. IV. IT. Stephen 109
(With Illustration, by M. Scott.)
Prayer and Praise, by S, H. Banks ... ... H 2
Basil Moss, by H. Kendall ... ••• ...Hi
Charlton Grange, by P, L Murray ... ... *47
(With illustration, by M. Scott )
Little Things, by S. H. Banks ... ... ... •••
Bertie*and I, by D. M. Coleridge ... ... ... 166
My Sweetheart Long Ago, by G. Punster ... ... ... 167
(With illustration, by M. Scott.)
Whatanidea, the Yaller Gal, by A. IV. East ... , ... 171
Writing by the Mail, by H. IVise ... ... ••• ••• 194
(With illustrations, by the Author.)
The Baron’s Revenge, by K. E. Lee ... ... 1 97
Laura, by D. M. Coleridge ... ... ... ...199
Sydney Harbour, by H. Kendall ... ... ... 207
(With illustration, by Mrs. G. M. Stephen.)
The Old Hut, by S. H. Banks ... ... .. ... 209
(With illustrations by J. H. Flynn.)
A Roundabout Paper, by G. Punster ... ... .. 217
The Spirit of the Vale, by S. H. Banks ... ... ... 222
Men of Letters in New South Wales, by 11. Kendall... ... 225
“The Sword,” by G. G. McCrae ... .. ... 232
The Philosophy of Criticism, by S. It Banks ... .. 235


PUNCH STAFF PAPERS.
ROBERT BROWNING'S NEW POEMS:
FRAGMENT OF AN UNPUBLISHED REVIEW.
BY THE LATE DANIEL HENRY DENIEHY.
N QUESTION ABLY the greatest English dramatic
y P o et since the age of Elizabeth is Robert Browning.
jMgrH Indeed, we doubt if, the two mighty Germans, Goethe
and Schiller notwithstanding, in every characteristic
of the highest drama, there is anything among the modern plays
of Europe equal to “ The Return of the Druses.” Bold and
broad assertion this, reader ; but were it just now our object to
review Robert Browning’s dramas, profusion of evidence and
tolerably good argument are at hand. “ Faust,” notwithstanding
its dramatic form, is obviously outside the category of drama
properly so called ; just as our own “Festus,” of which he is the
antetype. But where in all the Weimar plays with their Joans of
Arc, their Mary Stuarts, their ever so fair, so fragile and so hap-
less Theklas, is there a creation like the glorious Druse maiden,
Anael ? And with # all reverence for two of the greatest dramatic
poets of all time, it was in the heart and brain of neither Goethe
nor Schiller to have conceived and left with the world, in all its
forlorn depths of ruined, darkened, blasted genius and heroism,
“ not less than archangel fallen,” the Druse leader and prophet,
Djabel. Never in modern poetry was power at once so subtly
psychologic and with so much of ideal grandeur and every delicate
and tearful pathos shown, as in “ King Victor and King Charles.”
* Dramatis Personae. By Robert Browning. London ; 1864.


No heart-crush, say rather, perhaps, heart -wear outside Shakspere,
like the young monarch, Charles. And besides, reader, all with-
out the element of Love about which most dramatic heart-break
revolves. The affections that have play in the drama are simply
the conjugal attachment of Charles for his wife; and how pro-
found the pathos of his reliance on her as his Only One, amidst
the hopeless, devilish subtlety of the meshes which his father, the
abdicated Victor, had woven round him ! “ Colombe’s Birthday”
is only inferior to “ The Return of the Druses.” Indeed, if the
plays were in Swedish or Danish (excuse us, majestic shade of
Oehlenschlager), no English man of letters would have deemed
his education complete, till he had learnt their language and read
them in the original. A few good translations would have set
people agog, as a quarter of a century ago Coleridge and De
Quincey, and afterwards Carlyle, gave readers a craze about
German, because of the bunches of grapes they had brought from
the vineyards of Schiller and Jean Paul. As it is, how many
fairly-educated persons, even with a love of poetry, really know
anything of the author of that so deep, austere, and grand and
melancholy “Paracelsus”? Robert Browning, sirs, is substan-
tially “ caviare to the general.” And, to a great extent we fear,
always will be. His own fault in some sort, you will venture to
him, great and unique as his genius is. Perhaps so; there is
something in that.
In his dramas, Robert Browning works at his art in as clear
and keen and bright an atmosphere as that of the Italy he loves
so well —the Italy with whose warm splendours of colouring he
and Walter Savage Landor have suffused English literature in a
kind, and to a degree, utterly unknown to Italian‘poetry itself *
* Strange; and we take the risk of the statement on ourselves. Keats’ warm South , the
true, the blushful Hippocrene, is in English poetry and in French prose (George Sand’s
Venetian romances), and nowhere in Italian literature. There is very little passion in Italian
poetry; and, outside Dante, no imagination at all, mtlch less a Southern luxuriance of imagi-
nation such as you have in Robert Browning’s “ Pippa Passes.” In the first scene, the
“ Rage of the vulture, the love of the turtle,
That melt into softness—that madden to crime,”
is painted as no poet ever dreamed of doing it in a literature of which Alfieri with his rigid,
cold, colourless casts from the antique, is the chief, —in fact the sole dramatist of mark.
Petrarca’s sonnets are no more specially Italian in colour, thought or feeling, than those of


But this quality of clear, sharp handling, except in the “ Dramatic
Lyrics/' and such verses as the “ Lost Leader,” and many of the
poems in “ Men and Women/’ when Browning ceases to construct
dramas, he chooses to leave behind him. And this from no loss
of a jot of power of any kind—least of all from want of expres-
sion, in which he is a master beyond all modern men of metre.
He shapes a phrase which will fix the shyest delicacy, the most
elusive subtlety of meaning, as a jeweller cuts, polishes, and
sets a ruby. But the context he seems to throw you down pretty
well fresh from his brain, —though wondrous art in the way of
presenting the thing continually shows itself. You must, as the
old ballad phrase is, “rede” the text for yourself. And the
reader, presented with some of the finest poetry the world has
ever seen, can only make use of it on two conditions—to get at
meanings, sheath within sheath, not only deep but recondite, and
also to get at forms of expression often alive with splendour, but
altogether elliptic—often barely indicative , and contenting them-
selves with suggestion.- The latter characteristic has come to
something like consummate flowering in this latest book of the
poet’s ; the school-precept of “ mind your stops ” was never more
needed since first men learnt to read. The punctuation tyrannises
over the reader’s first apprehension of the meaning. Some wag
on this head, tells a story of Douglas Jerrold, a hard, keen, yet at
bottom a finediearted humourist, but not exactly the man for a pos-
tulant before the innermost shrines of which Browning is hiero-
phant. Trying with pathetic industry, in weary days of invalid
duresse, to get through some pages of “ Sordello,” with its intri-
cate Franco-Gothic contours —its involute richness, he at length
laid the volume down, and doubting himself rather than an actual
Sir Philip Sydney, of Drummond of Hawthornden, or of Hartly Coleridge, though he plays
for ever on one string, and that, a chord of the deepest and the most evocative of passion in
the human heart. Tasso, his melancholy and romantic story aside, might, as far as couleur
locale goes, have written his Gerusaletmne in England, where old Fairfax made so much
better, heartier, and more warlike poetry of many of the stanzas —putting the blare of the
trumpet into the smooth ottava of the original. Dante is the poet par excellence of Italy ;
his poem the national evangel , whether all Ugo Foscolo and Rosatti saw in it is there or no.
But, as the woman said of his own dark face, “ smoky as Hell” as most of it is, it might—
the politics and the mediaeval Italian acliarnement aside—just as well have been written in
“ the cold and cloudy clime” of the North, for any stamp of specific local imagination there


printed-book, AND Robert Browning, ejaculated, “ Good God ! am
I mad V' As for that “ Sordello,” si non e vero e ben trovato ;
though it contains some of the finest poetry in the world. But
the trouble once taken—hints and suggestions rightly and fully
apprehended, and poetry regarded as any man of intelligence and
sensibility regards a fine picture, till it comes out on him fully, and
he has grasped it, no productions in modern literature will yield
him more wealth of imaginative beauty, newer and deeper
thought, than the lyrics and miscellaneous poems of Robert
Browning. Perhaps none will yield him as much.
A few words more “ in the general,” before we proceed to our
notice of the great poet’s latest book, “ Dramatis Personae,”
dating of this year of grace eighteen hundred and sixty-four, and
just brought out to us in Australia by the Northanu Irrespective
of his substantial imaginative power as a poet, it is the unique-
ness, the specialty of that power which will at first strike the
reader. Leave Browning unread, and in .the whole range of
modern poetry, or of the elder poetry either, you will get no
soup^on —no inkling either of the mode of handling, the points
of view, or even the specific cast of imagery of this singularly
powerful writer. In Keats and Tennyson, you see potentially the
faculties of Robert Browning’s gifted wife, though her poetry was
all her own. But for anything that appears, Keats and Tennyson
—or indeed any other modern poet —might never have existed,
for aught that touches Browning. His treatment of his subjects
is altogether novel; and, were he not so great a dramatic poet,
would be idiosyncratic. From entirely new and unsuspected
points, he deals with his theme and invests it with a body of his
own subtle imagination—with varying and inexhaustible forms of
is about it; indeed it belongs to a harder mould than that wherein Southern poetry is cast.
As for Ariosto, and his buffoon followers, such as Fortiguera, the poems might have had their
romantic and sparkling quality, and all—the forest adventure, the amour, the battle, the
banquet—have been composed anywhere. All this scarcely applies to Manzoni, D’Azeglio,
Giacomo Leopardi (the wonderful), Cercano, Grossi, and some other modern writers. No ;
Dante excepted, not in her literature but in her Art, is the true exponent of the depth and
grandeur of Italian character. As for her minor poets, in whom so much wealth of the poetry
of other lands is found, they are only practitioners in beautiful diction, working on the loveliest
language in the world. And Englishmen,—Milton, Matthias (of The Pursuit of Literature),
and John Herman Merivale have written nearly as good Italian verse.


Life. 1 he entirely new and yet wonderfully profound method of
dealing with his themes—even after they have been handled by
others, and put away as completely and conclusively dealt with,
was admirably pointed out by an English reviewer some years
ago. Leigh Hunt has a charming ballad entitled “ The Glove
and the Lions.” One day, while Francis the First and his bril-
liant court had assembled to sport of the lions in their dread area,
lar below the royal amphitheatre of seats, De Forges, a gentleman
of the court, had long, with little guerdon of grace, wooed a lady
—professing, of course, he was ready not only to die for her—
that of course any lover, particularly a soldier, a courtier and a
gentleman would do, but to die for her a thousand times. The
lady, rather “ fast” we suspect, and by no means over-tender of
heart, took it into head to test this. She threw her glove down
among the lions; and, turning to the knight at her side, looked
steadily her wish. De Forges (what would you have done,
reader, under circumstances of a “fix” so imminent?) made his
best bow, descended, jumped among the lions with as much sang-
froid as man might who would, perhaps, in five minutes find
himself hopelessly dilapidated, and returning to the lady’s seat
with her glove pitched it into her face. As people colloquially
put it, he declined to “have anything more to do with her.”
Leigh Hunt closes his ballad with the royal opinion of the transac-
tion, expressed in rather strong language :
“By God, ’twas rightly done !” King Francis said.
Hereupon, “Not so fast,” says Mr. Robert Browning, “ lom not
so sure of that , and it may be well to overhaul the matter from
the other side. Pour vos beaux yeux, Wooed, Insulted and Re-
jected of the knight, De Forges !” And the poet put it with
a subtlety that in the Middle Ages would have ranked him as the
first of casuists, —that surfeited with the knight’s lip-homage,—
say “ pestered” with him, though well inclined to love him, she
determined on making an experimentum crucis ; that successfully
done, she resolved to love him with her heart of hearts for ever.
As for the lions, why but for the thought of the thing, it was, at
worst, but just the death which it was De Forges’ trade to dare.


Besides, she felt complete confidence in his quickness, courage
and coolness in the matter of the risk. That the knight’s devotion
gave way under the trial, —taking him upon his own relation to
his mistress, —that was shortcoming of his nature, not of hers.
But we must refer the reader to the poem, where the case for the
lady is marvellously argued, though in the poet’s somewhat abrupt
elliptical way. Meanwhile, our admission of Browning’s motif
on the theme notwithstanding, we in common, we fancy with most
people, take Leigh Hunt’s view of the matter. It was the act of
a heartless and cruelly vain woman to show her power over her
lover before “ the worldor, even accepting Robert Browning’s
view of it, after all only the abominable test of a psychological
experimentalist in petticoats, making analysis of the stuff a lover
was made of. From such ladies, Libera nos Domine.
The volume “ Dramatis Personae ” (rather a loosely-chosen
title for a book of its character,) contains eighteen compositions ;
the first, “James Lee,” consisting of nine separate poems in the
shape of so many episodes. “James Lee” is a.story of passion
intimated rather than told by so many passages in a life, —perhaps
in one day, in one week of a life. Each of these passages con-
stitutes a separate poem. The speaker or singer, whichever you
please, is a lady, and the whole is a sort of melodrama of which
the theatre is the heart of a loving, lonely-thoughted and despair-
ing woman. The poems are respectively entitled, “At the
Window,” “ By the Fireside,” “In the Doorway,” “ Along the
Beach,” “ On the Cliff,” “ Under the Cliff,” “Among the Rocks,”
“ Beside the Drawing-Board,” “On Deck.” Here is the last-
named : and it will serve as a specimen of Robert Browning’s
characteristic and somewhat abiding form of treatment, in its
latest manifestation,—
There is nothing to remember in me,
Nothing I ever said with a grace,
Nothing I did that you cared to see,
Nothing I was that deserved a place
In your mind ; now, I leave you, set you free.
Conceded ! In turn concede to me,
Such things have been as a mutual flame.


Your soul’s locked fast; but, love for a key,
You might let it loose, till I grew the same
In your eyes, as in mine you stand ; strange plea !
For then, then, what would it matter to me
That I was the harsh, ill-favoured one?
We both should be like as pea and pea;
It was ever so since the world begun :
So, let me proceed with my reverie.
How strange it were if you had all me,
As I have all you in my heart and brain,
You, whose least word brought gloom or glee,
Who never lifted the hand in vain
Will hold mine yet, from over the sea !
Strange, if a face, when you thought of me,
Rose like your own face present now,
With eyes as dear in their due degree,
Much such a mouth, and as bright a brow,
Till you saw yourself, while you cried “ ’ Tis She!"
Well, you may, or you must, set down to me
Love that was life, life that was love ;
A tenure of breath at your lips’ decree,
A passion to stand as your thoughts approve,
A rapture to fall where your foot might be.
But did one touch of such love for me
Come in a word or look of yours,
Whose words and looks will, circling, flee
Round me and round while life endures,
Could I fancy “ As I feel, thus feels He;”
Why, fade you might to a thing like me,
And your hair grow these coarse hanks of hair,
And your skin, this bark of a gnarled tree, —
You might turn myself; should I know or care,
When I should be dead of joy, James Lee ?
Whatever be its merits or whatever you think '"of it, you will
nowhere, we suspect, reader, find a love-poem of a similar cha-
racter. As we have said before, of the poet’s writings in the
general, he has handled the thing in a way altogether peculiar to


himself. And you see what he means. Ah ! what a fearful and
holy thing, the true all-absorbing love for another of a human
soul, however homely its casing. “ The Worst of It,” and “ Too
Late,” are intimations of passionate passages in life, in the poet’s
highest manner. “ Dis Aliter Visum or Le Byron de Nos Jours”
is in a different but equally characteristic style of Browning’s.
With his knowledge of the human heart’s weakness, —his orient
affluence and splendour of image, his epigram, his grim humour,
his mastery the while of all tender chords in our nature, his
worldly idiom when he chooses, —what havoc could the author of
“ Pippa Passes,” and of so many startling physical revelations,
have made, could he have abased himself to spin “Zadigs” and
“ Don Juans.” But in the broadest and loftiest sense, he is one
of the most religious of poets. He is greatest, when in some
way or other of his own, —in the most natural manner and yet
with exercise of his wonderful art, the creature is brought in direct
relation to God. There lies the charm of the finest passages of
“ Paracelsus” and in his best poems. And because they are
alive with this quality as Robert Browning uses it and with
solemn serene splendours of his own, and besides as exemplifying
his special characteristics as a poet, we regard “ Abt Vogler” and
“ Rabbi Ben Ezra” as the finest poems in the volume. They are
warm from the inspiration unrivalled in these days, that produced
the “Saul” in the poet’s “ Bells and Pomegranates.” Abt Vogler
has been playing on the great musical instrument he invented, —
Would that the structure brave, the manifold music I build,
Bidding my organ obey, calling its keys to their work,
Claiming each slave of the sound, at a touch as when Solomon willed
Armies of angels that soar, legions of demons that lurk,
Man, brute, reptile, fly,—alien of end and of aim,
Adverse each from the other heaven-high, hell-deep remov’d, —
Should rush into sight as he named the ineffable Name,
And pile him a palace straight, to pleasure the princess he loved.
Would it might tarry like his, the beautiful building of mine,
This which my keys in a crowd pressed and importuned to raise !
Ah, one and all, how they helped, would depart now and now combine,
Zealous to hasten the work, heighten their master his praise!


And one would bury his brow with a blind plunge into hell,
Burrow awhile and build, broad on the roots of things,
I hen up again swim into sight, having based me my palace well,
Founded it, fearless of flame, flat on the nether springs.
And another would mount and march, like the excellent minion he was.
Ay, another and yet another, one crowd with many a crest,
Raising my rampired walls of gold as transparent as glass,
Eager to do and die, yield each his place to the rest :
For higher still and higher (as a runner tips with fire,
When a great illumination surprises a festal night—
Outlining round and round Rome’s dome from spire to spire)
Up, the pinnacled glory reached, and the pride of my soul was in sight.
A FABLE.
S. H. BANKS.
“ Ignorance is the curse of God ;
Knowledge the wing wherewith we fly to Heaven.”
—Shakspere.
fIUiSII rnor tals—whom the gods have not endowed
i With stl 'e n gth to soar above the humble crowd—
Essay to rise from out their meaner state,
Let them remember Icarus, his fate :
Disdaining earth, with waxen wings he flies
To thab great arch, beyond th’ ambient skies,
Where JOVE, in majesty upon his throne,
The world directs in wisdom, and alone !
But mark the end of that presuming fool:
High o’er our orb, unfanned by breezes cool,
Too near the Sun the daring youth aspires,
And moves exposed to its devouring fires ;
His wings of wax no longer cleave the air,
They melt —he falls with cry of dread despair !
Till, downwards hurled, the wretch lies mangled, crushed * * *
Mute scorn succeeds—e’en Pity’s voice is hushed !
Accept the moral ye, earth’s mighty things,
And ne’er attempt a flight with waxen wings.


THE AUBERGE;
SOUVENIR OF NORMANDY.
GEORGE GORDON McCRAE.
LOVE a tavern old, wherein
jjjjgM To pass a night or so—no sin,
And drink, (enjoying well-earned ease,)
Before I taste my Switzer cheese,
A/afo7t with pheasant !
For me the brilliant bougies burn,
To me the omelette comes in turn,
With brandy blazing !
Whilst on the hearth, ’tween iron dogs,
Roars up the ruddy fire of logs,
With glow amazing!
In such a cozy nook can I
The world, and time, and care defy,
And eat my pear,
And quaff my Chablis while I think
Of Austral vintages, and drink
My petit-verre !
The softest, blandest eau-de-vie,
Whose warmth soon enters into me
My heart to soften ;
And cafe noir in tiny sips,
As the cigar forsakes my lips
Slow and not often.
******
Another tavern now I haunt.
O’er which two tattered banners flaunt,
One red, one lettered ;
The last with misspelt legend BEDDS
And BILLYARDS on its waving shreds
That might be bettered ;
But here there's company galore
Of those that mine, or keep the store,


Who’d else live dully-*
Who here knock down the blessed tin
They found so hard to gather in
From yonder gully ;
Here rough and ready is the fare,
And ah ! I miss my mellow pear ;
Yet, ne’ertheless,
Beneath the uncouth country sign,
I drink my sound Australian wine ;
The vintner bless :
And only wish ’twere mine to change
This weary, stunted, box-tree range
For grey Rouen!
With all its picturesque details,
The Seine with all its tiny sails,
And Saint Ouen !
And tall Saint Maclou and the rest,
Cathedral, churches, great and blest :
The pale “ Pucelle”
Whose statue in the market stands,
Wrought by a Royal Princess’ hands—
The “ Silver Bell.”*
But were it mine to make the change,
And clothe this stunted, box-tree range
With church and shrine,
I would not alter, as I think,
My daily draught of wholesome drink—
Australian wine !
* The Gros Horloge,” (great town dock).


BUDGEREE SCHOOL CONCERT.
THOMAS MOSER.
10 have, under ordinary circumstances, to listen to the
I music provided at amateur concerts, one would think
i bad enough, but to write a report about it afterwards
lis ten times worse. Truth in these cases is about the
last thing a professional reporter thinks about, I imagine ; and if
ever the Goddess of Music has a day of reckoning with newspaper
reporters, it will go hard with them, as they have been the means
of injuring her credit more than any class of persons with whom I
am acquainted. The demented amateurs who parade a platform,
and perpetually attempt to sing music far beyond their powers,
are simply temporarily insane ; but the reporter who praises them,
with the consciousness of the lamentable failure, is simply a
hypocrite. Apollo’s special province being to “ twang the lyre
(liar),” I hope, for Brogley’s sake, that he will never meet that
deity in the Elysian fields, or the former is likely to come to great
grief. It was bad enough for him to make an ass of himself at
the Budgeree concert, but he might have let the matter rest there,
and not sent a communication to the papers about it. To show
what the Budgeree concert was, and what Brogley described it as,
is the object of my tale, and I hope that it will be a warning to all
budding and full-blown pressmen to avoid hypocrisy.
Any Australian, I take it, knows where Budgeree is, and those
who do not know Australia are not likely to be enlightened by a
geographical description. Suffice it to say, that it is situated
in what an eloquent M.P. of my acquaintance calls “ the vast
intayrior.” It is a particularly lively place, is Budgeree, —what my
legislative friend would call a “ pastorial township.” Scatter,
within the radius of half a mile, a public house, a store, a black-
smith’s shop, and a dozen bark huts, and you have Budgeree.


Upon a hill in the suburbs stands a rude slab building, consisting
of a room some twenty feet square, flanked by a species of skillion
about the fourth as big, and you have Budgeree school and mas-
ter s residence, all in one. This unpretentious edifice was mainly
erected through the instrumentality of Mr. Speckerton, a neigh-
bouring squatter, who, having so far assisted to populate the
country by having had some seven children born unto him, con-
ceived the sensible idea of educating them cheaply through the
medium of the Government. Speckerton was a widower, and his
house was kept by a half-sister, a spinster of doubtful age but
most undoubted virtue, who, in addition to being possessed of
domestic economical qualities of a rare order, was to the young
Speckertons a mother in every sense except that of affection.
1 he notorious Mr. Elwes, who figures in history as the most penu-
rious man ever heard of, (illustrated, as his character is, by the
ingenuity with which he saved fuel by converting brawn into soup
by sleeping in bed with the pot), was never married ; but history,
I fancy, would have said otherwise if Miss Pike had lived con-
temporaneously with him, and a mutual acquaintance had existed.
This lady was a character which the student of modern literature
might conceive if he combined those of Dickens’ Mrs. Pipchin
and Mrs. Stowe s Miss Ophelia. She blended the sardonic grim-
ness of the one with the primness of the other. Brogley used to
say, that “ the most complete realisation of the simile of Justice
holding the scales was to be seen when Miss Pike weighed out
the shepherds rations. She was, however, all in all to Specker-
ton. She kept his books, drew out his cheques, presided over his
household, and did bring up his children in the way they should
go in a stern rule of thumb way of her own, the fruits of which
tiainmg bid fair to make them turn out in after life contemptible
and deceitful <£ prigs.” Stern and reserved to strangers as Miss
Pike was, viewing every male visitor with sinister eye, as one who
had latent designs on her heart and the capture of her share of
the Speckerton flocks and herds, she would have passed muster as
an excellent specimen of a modern ogress if, by some freak of
nature, she had not dispelled the idea by being musical, which is
not a quality of ogresses, being confined usually to syrens, which


Miss Pike bore no analogy to. By being described as musical, it
is not to be understood that Miss Pike had any musical ability,
but she was so far fond of it as methodically to perform at certain
daily intervals upon a very bad cottage piano, accompanying her
tintinnabulation, so to speak, for the tone of the instrument was
like a cracked bell, by chirping forth sundiy lackadaisical ballads.
“ Her voice was ever soft and low,” said Ring Lear when speak-
ing of Cordelia, “ an excellent, thing in woman.” In one respect
Miss Pike fulfilled the conditions, her voice was low and attenu-
ated, but unfortunately it had no softness, the quality partaking
more of the Jewish than the FEolian harp. She was great upon
Nathan’s vocalisation of Byron’s Hebrew melodies, and her ren-
dering of “ the Wild Gazelle on Judah’s hills,” accompanied by a
basso obligato on the part of Speckerton, was a musical wonder.
In point of fact, it was doubtful which was the most trying to the
auditor, Miss Pike’s soprano, or Speckerton’s bass. If the latter
worthy had confined his musical display to grunting bass, I should
say that it was a toss-up which was the worst musical performer;
but in an evil hour he learnt the flute, and if the vocal duets
betwixt him and his sister-in-law were depressing, the instrumental
were simply torture. “ Now !” Speckerton would say to us, when
we spent an evening with him, “ I have no doubt you will like
some music. Priscilla, let us try ‘ Flow on, Thou Shining River !
Hereupon Miss Pike would demurely rise and shake out her
skirts, open the piano, and sternly open the music-book, while
Speckerton, mounting his spectacles, would, with an air of
profound wisdom, proceed to unpack the flute and screw the
joints together, and as he unctuously sucked them as if they were
barley sugar sticks preparatory to putting them together, he would
thus address us : “ That lovely air—(suck) ‘ Shining River
(suck) —these joints are awfully stiff! —(suck) —is one of those
grand old things —oh, by Jove ! these hot winds play the mischief
with one’s instrument —(suck ! screw--w--w) that I ne\er tire of.
Just listen to the opening chords ! Now, Priscilla !” He would
then proceed to draw a chair to the piano, and posing himself
with his face about four inches off the music, and the butt-end of
the flute parallel with Miss Pike’s ear, he would blow frantically


down the instrument like the noise of steam from an escape pipe.
But Miss Pike never winked an eye. Bolt upright she sat, and
would have suffered blowing bodily off her stool before she
flinched. Speckerton was a great performer, with tremendous
power of wind, though a trifle fitful. You never could be sure
upon the octave he got into, and as he always blew as hard as he
could, and his instrument was certainly not Cart’s best, the tone
was not dissimilar at times to the sound of wind in a ship’s
Miss Pike, on the other hand, was not a demonstrative
performer; her touch, musically speaking, was of the arpeggio
order; that is to say, she struck the chords by making one note
follow the other, and as she expressed her appreciation of the
melody by jerking up her fingers, after each manipulation, level
with her chin, something after the manner of conceited old hens
who strut about a poultry yard, she produced a remarkable musical
effect, in this, that it was more attributable to impressing her
hearers with sight than sound.
“I’ll tell you what it is,” said Speckerton to us one night,
after we had been grievously afflicted for an hour; “we’ll get up
a concert in aid of the school funds. There’s me and Priscilla
(Speckerton’s grammar was occasionally defective)’can sing and
play; Mr. Perkins there can recite a bit; and you, Mr. Brogley,
can take the chair and give the opening address. We are sure to
make it a success, and we only want three pound to finish the
schoolmaster’s skillion.”
“Speckerton,” said Brogley, “you’re a genius ! I’m on.”
Perkins gazed in blank amazement at the bare suggestion, and,
when he could recover himself, delivered himself of a powerful
negative, so far as his share in the proceedings was concerned.
“You won’t?” said Brogley; “then don’t! I’ll soon find a
substitute. Why, that fellow Schweinigel, one of my shepherds,
is a grand musician. He plays splendidly on the ophicleide, and,
what’s more, he has got one that belonged to his grandfather, an
old Belgian bandsman, who ran away at Waterloo, and reared
a virtuous family in England by playing the bass in a travelling
waxworks’ band! I tell you, Schweinigel is a regular clipper.
Hear him sing ‘The Watch on the Rhine,’ and play his own
accompaniment on the ophicleide. By Jove, it’s grand ! ”


“And my stockman, Tom Pott,” chimed in Speckerton, “can
do a little on the cornet, and will manage a capital second to me
on the flute. Why, bless me ! with Priscilla on the piano, we
shall have a full band 1”
If Speckerton had just dropped upon a hundred pound nugget
he could not have made this discovery with more profound wonder.
The idea of a full band in Budgeree was something astounding.
« But,” said Brogley, “ you see the inhabitants are not used to
these musical displays, and we must reserve the full band to the
last; otherwise, if they once get a taste of its quality, all the other
performances will be comparatively tame.”
To this suggestion Miss Pike made no response, but sat stoney
and rigid, her hard, grey eye fixed on Brogley, whose mischievous
eyes twinkled, and the corners of whose mouth twitched, as his fertile
brain hatched some practical joke to be made out of the affair.
“ Miss Pike,” at last said Brogley, “ need Ibe assured of your
assistance, and will you, as a personal favour to me, permit your
name to be put down for that lovely air, ‘ The Wild Gazelle on
Judah’s Hills f”
“Mr. Brogley,” replied Miss Pike, “at the call of charity or
benevolence my feeble powers are at the disposal of any suppli-
cant. lam in your hands.”
“ Better than in his arms,” whispered Perkins; and thus was
Miss Pike, as will be seen hereafter, allured to ignominy by that
arch-deceiver, Brogley.
Those who knew intimately Richard Brogley, Esq., J.P.,
Crown tenant of Block No. 2, Budgeree North, knew a “cha-
racter,” or what might be termed in modern parlance a cure.
The Demon of Mischief marked him for her own from his early
years, and he who had manifested himself as a lawless scapegrace
when a lad developed in manhood to a heartless practical joker.
Bong had he cherished in the innermost recesses of his heart the
fervent desire to be one with old Speckerton and his prudish
sister, and to pay them out for sundry small meannesses he had
on the debit side of his moral ledger against them, and no sooner
was the idea of this concert mooted than a happy thought flashed
across his mind, and he set himself from that moment to bring
Speckerton to confusion. And here I may remark that we,


namely, Perkins and myself, were simply visitors of Brogley’s, and
that on our joint parts I hereby distinctly repudiate having had
anything to do with this concert or its results; and if Brogley had
not most unjustifiably introduced our names into his report of the
proceedings, I would not have said a word about it. However,
to resume the narrative :
No sooner had Speckerton delivered himself of this grand
conception than a programme was drawn up on the spot, and as
we parted to ride home with Brogley, that worthy thus assured
Speckerton of his sincerity and cordial assistance : “ Now, my
dear fellow ! do not you bother yourself about any arrangements ;
all you have got to do is to practise like mad. I’ll send
Schweinigel and his horn over every night for a week, and do
practise the National Anthem, which I will personally conduct for
you ; as for the rest, I’ll manage everything !”
“ I’ll tell you what it is,” said Brogley, when we had ridden in
silence for some time, “ if ever that old prig Speckerton and his
vinegar cruet of a sister forget this concert, may I . Well,
never mind ; I won’t say what.”
“ What for 1” said we.
“Why,” said Brogley, “you fellows, not knowing this place,
don’t see his little game. The fact is, not content with getting
the school established here mainly for his own family, as he won’t
employ married men, objecting to the incumbrances of other
people, he gets the Government to allow him so much to add
to the schoolhouse. He built it on contract, and knocked
out about dj 2 ° on it, and now has the cheek to get up a concert
to pay for these additions, which he will, of course, make, and
clear another fiver; but see if I don’t square his yards for
him ! ”
“But, I say, Brogley,” said Perkins, “you are going to sing,
“ are n’t you 1 I’m not going to recite unless you do.”
“ My dear fellow,” said Brogley, “ I only know one song, and
that’s ‘ The Steam Arm,’ and since I heard little Hoppy sing it at
a supper in Sydney, I cannot face it again. Talk about singing
with muscular expression ! you should see him—his arms going
like windmills. He always bursts waistcoat strings and a few
B


buttons when he sings that song. It’s tremendous ! You see,
the effect is more muscular than vocal, otherwise it’s not a hard
tune to sing—not harder than the ‘Old English Gentleman,’ or,
speaking more classically, a Gregorian chant.”
“ This will be an awful affair,” solemnly added Perkins;
“ that old lady’s singing is a ‘ caution !’”
“ Don’t you believe it,” said Brogley; “ just wait till the old
girl gives you ‘ The Wild Gazelle on Judah’s Hills;’ she gets quite
playful, and her execution is immense. However, we shan’t have
much of it, and I mean to introduce a novelty by providing
refreshments for everybody. Look at the bill— ‘ Refreshments
provided;’ why, it is sure to draw a house ! ”
To make a long story short, the concert duly came off.
Brogley had placarded it all over the town, and the publican
and storekeeper’s family had taken tickets as a set-off against
the beer and cheese accounts, while ourselves and the station
hands were, alone, enough to make up a respectable audience,
at least so far as numbers went. The school children having
had a half-holiday, Speckerton and Miss Pike drove over with
the cottage piano in a spring cart and arranged all the seats.
Punctual to the hour, we were all in our places, and Speckerton
opened the proceedings by moving that Richard Brogley, Esq.,
do take the chair, which was unanimously carried. “ What have
you got in your pockets, Brogley,” said I, as he mounted the
platform with sundry ominous parcels sticking out of his coat
pockets. Mysteriously catching me by the arm, he whispered, in
awfully melo-dramatic tones, in my ear, “ The hour has come
and the man ! Hold thy peace and await the climax !” With
these parting words he took his seat and shortly addressed us as
follows : —“ Ladies ! ” said he, bowing to the publican and store-
keeper’s wives, “ and gentlemen,” repeating the bow to four
shepherds of Speckerton’s who had been swindled into buying
tickets, and evidently looked upon the whole affair as a mean
attempt to extort money, “you are all aware of the object of our
meeting. Harmony is, primarily, the order of the evening, but,
secondly, it is—”
Here Perkins observed, in a stage whisper, “ Plunder !”


“ What!” said Brogley, “ did I hear someone say plunder ! 1
am surprised at such an uncalled for criticism. No ! far be that
from our thoughts !it is—” Here Brogley broke down, and turning
to Speckerton, he hurriedly whispered to him. “ Oh, yes ! I beg
pardon,” continued Brogley, helped by the prompting, “ It is,
ladies and gentlemen, to raise funds for Mr. Speck ”
“No !” energetically whispered Speckerton, “ not at all—not
for me, for the school ! ”
“ Really,” said Brogley, “ these unseemly interruptions are
very distressing, I was about to explain that funds are required
for the schoolmaster’s residence, which our good friend Mr.
Speckerton promised to pay out of his own pocket; or, rather,
said that—um !”
At this juncture, Speckerton, who had rapidly been becoming
apoplectic, vehemently interfered and commenced an explana-
tion.
“ Upon my word,” said Brogley, 44 1 must call our friend to
order ; he clearly is not entitled to make any explanation without
moving the adjournment of the House.” (“ Hear, hear,” from
the storekeeper, who, having once been a provincial alderman,
was up in Parliamentary practice.) “But I have no doubt,” con-
tinued Brogley, “ that as funds are required they will be this
evening forthcoming; and, as I have caused refreshments to be
provided, I think I may safely say to my friends behind me, 4 No
song no supper !’ ”
Here the four shepherds showed signs of animation, and,
following Brogley’s glance in the direction of the beer-bottles,
became suddenly deeply interested in the proceedings.
“ The first piece on the programme is a duet,” continued
Brogley, examining the paper he held in his hand, “ 4 Flow on
thou Shining River,’ —flute and piano—a rich treat in store for us,
without doubt.”
Great shuffling of feet and clapping of hands greeted this
announcement, especially on the part of the seven junior Speck-
ertons, who sat in a row under their aunt’s eye, and had evidently
been tutored for demonstration at the right places. Miss Pike
gracefully rose, and, casting the shawl off her shoulders, favoured


the spectators with the display of as much charm as can be
gathered from the contemplation of an attenuated thorax and any
amount of collar-bone. Shaking out her feathers, as it were, to
follow the analogy, she gracefully hopped on to the music-stool
and arranged her music. In the meantime Speckerton, who had
gone through the sucking and screwing performance, had got his
flute put together, and blew a preliminary wail out of the instru-
ment. The piece was not a very great success. Speckerton lost
his place and got into difficulties early in the proceedings, and
as he subsequently observed, something went wrong with the
E-flat key, the only noticeable effect of which seemed to be that
he blew harder than ever, and as Miss Pike thumped to keep him
in time—moving her head like a mandarin—the flute and her
back comb came constantly into collision. Schvveinigel’s “ Watch
on the Rhine” was not much better, though the ophicleide inter-
ludes were exceedingly fine ; the tone he produced being similar
to the wind whistling through the bung-hole of a cask. When
the applause had subsided, which was chiefly caused by the four
shepherds who had some acquaintance with Schweinigel, and peri-
odically got drunk with him, Brogley again introduced Miss Pike,
and we all cheered vociferously.
“ We now come to the gem of the evening,” said he, “ Byron’s
beautiful Hebrew melody ‘ The Wild Gazelle on Judah’s Hills,’
which Miss Pike will favour us with ; but, in order to bring the
composition within the limited range of our comprehension, she
has kindly undertaken to sing it in English , and not in the original
Hebrew ! /”
At this startling announcement Miss Pike gave such a look at
Brogley as ought to have frozen him up ; but he merely smiled
and bowed, and she at once saw the hopelessness of bringing him
to any propriety. It is impossible to do justice to this excellent
lady’s performance. She hardly merited the character of playful-
ness in execution credited to her by Brogley, but it was remarkable
in its way. When she threw her eyes upwards as if inspired, and
ecstatically referred to the gazelle “ drinking from the rills which
gushed on the ho-ho-hohoho-lee ground,” which she particularly
emphasized, it was very fine; but a little of it went a long way.


It is scarcely worth while referring to any further individual cases.
Perkins gave up all idea of the recitation, and read “ The Jumping
Frog from Calaveras County,” at which the young Speckertons
choked, and their aunt —-outraged at anybody daring to laugh at
such nonsense— ; made the whole of them stand up for the rest of
the evening. She never read such tales, but gave us, later in the
evening, about forty lines from “ Hiawatha,” during the reading
of which two of the shepherds fell asleep, and the other two took
to chewing tobacco and expectorating copiously. It was nearly
ten o’clock before we got through the programme, and—when the
last song had been sung, wherein Speckerton declared at the top
of his voice that there was no sentiment equal to that breathed
in the words “ I’m a Heengleesh—m-a-a-n !”—Brogley informed
the audience that, as they intended to partake of some refresh-
ments they would do so, preparatory to closing the evening’s pro-
ceedings with the National Anthem by the “full band,” —he laid
great stress on this fact.
“ Now, Perkins,” said Brogley, “ hand the ladies round to the
table, and do the amiable; I’m going to conduct the anthem, and
I have some little arrangements to make.” What these “ little
arrangements” were, we shall speedily learn.
The onslaught on the comestibles and drinkables was a fea-
ture in the proceedings. Miss Pike condescended to sip some
colonial sherry and pick at a biscuit or two, while the y< ung
Speckertons, who were trained to “ spoil the Egyptians,” made
havoc amongst the sandwiches. One old shepherd was soon
deep into a sardine-tin, eating the fish with a jack-knife ; while
his companions and the German swilled bottled beer, despising
tumblers. A few crusts, empty bottles and tins, were soon all the
fragments of the feast,—and then it was that Brogley again spake.
“ 1 have desired,” said he, “to make this rendering of our
glorious old anthem as perfect as possible. The performers will,
at a given signal, take their instruments; and, as I beat one, two,
three, the instruments and voices will go off at once.”
So saying, he marshalled the band into their places, and
seizing a roll of music he waived it over his head. Speckerton
gripped his flute and held it at arm’s length, with his fingers


tightly stopping the keys; Schweinigel presented his ophicleide
like a soldier his musket, and Tom Potts, who had only this
opportunity of showing his powers, stood with his cornet stuck
out like a telescope, smacking his lips ready for the signal. Little
did these enthusiastic musicians know what was in their instru-
ments! Miss Pike raised her ten fingers distended, as if she were
a hawk about to pounce upon a bird, and then Brogley said
“Are you ready?—one —two—three !”
What an awful result! From Speckerton’s flute poured forth
a cloud of flour into Schweinigel’s ear, while that worthy’s ophi-
cleide emitted from the bell a shower of feathers, evidently the
debris of some old parrot’s nest; and poor Tom Potts, who had
dipped his lips into a terrible dose of mustard stuck in the mouth-
piece of his cornet, dropped the instrument, and gave vent to a
startling expletive.
“ Himmel 1” yelled Schweinigel, blinded with the flour, and
administering a bang on the head to Speckerton. “ You vill try
your tamfen tricks mit me. Dat for your fifer!” So saying, he
snatched old Speckerton’s flute and smashed it on the ground.
One tremendous roar burst from the audience, and the only
unmoved amongst the spectators were Brogley and Miss Pike,
who confronted each other with a mutual glare.
“ Miss Pike,” said Brogley, at last, “ you might have reserved
this pleasantry for another opportunity.”
Miss Pike stood perfectly aghast. “ Sir !” at length she said,
“what do you mean ? What do }Ou mean ?”
“All right!” said Brogley, slyly grinning at her. “We all
know your little funny ways; but this is rather too much of a
joke, eh !”
“ Mr. Brogley,” shouted old Speckerton, ruefully rubbing his
head with one hand while he examined a joint of his broken flute
with the other, “ I—l—am astonished at such conduct.”
“ Sir !” added Brogley, “ You shall hear more from me !” and,
with an air of injured innocence, he strode majestically away.
How we got home that night from the meeting, which broke
up in admired disorder, —how we adjourned to the publican’s and
Schweinigel and Tom Potts were pacified with rum, —and how


Perkins and I made tracks away from Budgeree next day—need
not be told. Brogley did not let us sleep a wink that night. He
visited our rooms at intervals of every five minutes armed with a
bottle and a tumbler, and persisted not only in giving us his des-
cription of the tableau at the last, but hearing our individual
impressions of the effect produced upon the various members of
the audience. The house rang with laughter all night, and as we
parted in the morning we left our host grinning with as lively
appreciation as ever of the happy way in which he had triumphed
over the Speckerton family.
* * * -X- -X* -X- -X*
About a week after we had reached Sydney I was astonished
by Perkins making a sudden visit to my office in a state of intense
excitement, and holding a paper in his hand. “No ! by all that’s
horrible !” said he, “have you seen this?” So saying, he dashed
upon my table a copy of the Wallaby Gazette. What was my
consternation to read the following
1
BUDGEREE.
[from our own correspondent.]
A most successful concert was given, on the 17th instant, in aid of the
school funds, both as regards the musical ability of the performers and the
pecuniary results. When we state that Miss Pike and Mr. Speckeidon gave
their valuable services, and produced, in a style equalled by few professionals,
many of the choicest vocal and instrumental gems in their repertoire ; that Mr.
Plans Schweinigel, a second Prospere on the ophicleide and a splendid
baritone, ably assisted ; while Mr. Thomas Pott, of Provincial fame as a
cornet player-, added his musical powers to swell the uninterrupted torrent of
melody which flowed from the Budgeree school-room for over an hour; we
have said enough to give the public an idea of the rich intellectual treat
afforded. It is with pleasure, yet mingled with pain, that we advert to the
presence, on the occasion, of John Smith and Peter Perkins, Esquires, two
Metropolitan connoisseurs who expressed their unbounded delight at the per-
formance, considering it far beyond the ordinary run of professional concerts
in Sydney. We refer to the pleasure, it gave us to reap the eulogiums of two
such excellent critics : but we feel a pang of pain which time will not readily
assuage. Doubtless with every kind feeling towards the performers, they
carried a little pleasantry too far, and, by a silly joke, caused the loss, to one
gentleman, of a valuable flute, by Cart, which will not readily be replaced.


Fortunately, these gentlemen left Budgerce early the following morning, or
they might have figured as principals in a coroner’s inquest, by falling into the
hands of an indignant and outraged populace.
“ There,” said Perkins, “ did you ever read anything like
that 1 It’s infamous ! I -wish we had the writer here, —I shall
write to Brogley about it, and get him to find out the author.”
“And,” said I, “I will write to the proprietors of this precious
paper, denying the truth of the whole thing.”
So we did—Perkins’ letter to Brogley has never been answered
to this day; and I have heard that he shows it to his visitors as
one of the best features of the joke. I did get an answer from
the proprietors of the Wallaby Gazette , and, for the benefit of
newspaper letter-writers generally, I produce it.
Wallaby Gazette Office, 28th June, 1872.
John Smith, Esq.
Dear Sir, —With reference to your note, complaining of some report of a
concert held at Budgeree early in the month, we beg to state that Richard
Brogley, Esq., J.P., is our recognised district correspondent, and, being a
gentleman on whose truthfulness and honesty we firmly rely, any notice of your
communication, in our columns, is quite out of the question. Very truly yours,
Reglet and Quoin, Proprietors.
This is all the redress which either Perkins or I have been
able to get, and, but for the kindness of the Editor of Punch Staff
Papers , we, probably, should never have been able to explain
matters: but, as Brogley is down as a subscriber, and it is
possible he may read this paper, I, on the part of Smith and
myself, hereby publicly denounce him as an impostor, and pub-
lish the facts of the case partly out of justice to ourselves, partly
to bring Brogley to confusion, but chiefly to point out that
Brogley’s report is not one whit less hypocritical, nor was the
concert itself one whit worse than scores I have respectively
read and heard. I will, however, do my enemy one justice-
I do not think Brogley believed one word he wrote, and neither
do I believe one half the newspaper reporters say when they write
about amateur concerts.


SHADOWS.
SAMUEL HAWKER BANKS.
“ We are such stuff
As dreams are made of, and our little life
Is rounded by a sleep.”—Shakspere,
OME, let me try and tell thee of the time
W I once did speak of to thee, when I dreamt,
i That time will be remembered—it was one
Of those not easily forgot : for men will think
1 1 Of torture by the mind or body borne,
And this was one of sickness and distress.
Some years have passed since then, yet memory still
Retains possession strong of all I saw—
Or thought I saw—and this I ’ll strive to tell.
I.
’T was night ; within my chamber’s walls there hung
A heavy stillness ; weak and flickering gleams
From my expiring lamp threw all around
A colour pale and death-like, as they strove,
In battle with the dark, for longer life.
My eyes, out-wearied by their lengthened watch,
Would fain have closed in sleep, but that my thoughts
Among the ruins of a wasted Past
Raked busily, as if in search of some
Forgotten gem on which their gaze might feast—
Some hope unrealised, not yet too late
To yield a welcome prize ; some much-loved face
Whereon sweet smiles once sat—to gather thence
If but one ray to make life hopeful still.
11.
With every pause —between my waking state
And that half-sleeping one—new thoughts to life
Would spring with joy, and waft me far away
O’er land and sea where I had pleasures known ;
Then, suddenly returning, headlong throw
Themselves into the Present, dark and wild.


Long thus I lay, and turned uneasily
Upon my couch, and vainly sought a rest ;
I tried to sleep—to rid me of my pain,
And tempest of the mind : but gentle sleep,
As if afraid, stood douhtingly aloof;
Then, for an instant, gave me soft caress ;
Then, like a timid maid, recoiled, as’t were
To blush at what she’d done. One moment mine
Of sweet forgetfulness ! My weary eyes
Half-opened now, their languid gaze would fix
Upon the stencilled walls, where (lowers and birds
Of many colours mingled with the dark
And Spring-like foliage depicted there,
Which day’s clear light made pleasing to the view,
But now appeared in shapes fantastical—
A loved, and then a hated, form assumed—
Yet such distinctness lacked could not be traced
To aught I had remembered.
ill.
Then I slept!
And in my dream—for dream it surely was—
I wandered near a dark and stagnant pool,
Whose very blackness made like sombre night
The scenery around, while all above
Was bright and cheerful—as't were some deep pit
From whose dank level light of day appears
Like silver ball suspended high in air
Above our mortal reach. The narrow path
By which I made my way—(so thickly edged
With brambles intertwined they tore my feet)
Was rough and rugged ; large protruding stones,
With scarce an inch of ground between them, stood
To check my onward course. At length, I stopped
Upon a grassy space, close to the brink
Of that same loathsome pool, whose slimy face—
Like oil, and still—revealed the forms within.
I stood, with wondering fear transfixed, and gazed
Upon the dreadful picture there : a mass
Of horrid life, of shapes none could conceive,
Which madly strove, beneath the lucid film,
To vent their rage on me. Now one, more bold
Or fiercer than the rest, would leap above
The poisoned pool which held its baleful kin,
As it would fasten on me with its fangs,
And then fall back to gather strength anew !


IV.
While there I stood—security and fear
The time between in alternation fast—
-1 hose strange forms sank, and o’er the surface calm
1 he light extended ; the erst so narrow pool—
Ere I could well reflect upon the change—
Became a river, flowing calm and clear,
By trees and flowers so margined that they seemed
Too beautiful for earth, or mortal’s view
These each again, less perfect in its form,
The river’s face produced ; the fleecy clouds
Likewise were shown—their height in depth extreme ;
To look therein it seemed, if I shouldsink,
Naught would my progress bar to some new world
Immeasurably far, no more to rise !
I asked myself, May there not be such world,
Not in our record placed, for which at last
1 he unthralled soul might take a downward course,
And, darting through the vapoury bed beneath,
Find out that world, and there obtain a rest—
As free as upwards wend, where stars are set ?
v.
As I pursued my way along the bank,
So clothed with flowers, less rapid ran the stream,
\ et shallower became ; the sand below
In the bright Sun’s beams shone like choicest gems,
Reflecting many hues, and changing still
As each small ripple danced upon its face,
So clear withal that on its level bed
Had but an atom stood of colour strange
Its form might there distinctly have been seen !
I mused upon so wonderful a sight
For some brief while in admiration wrapt;
At length I raised my eyes from what that while
Had kept them there : before me stood
A female form of beauty so sublime
She seemed an angel from the Heavenly spheres
Sent down to guide me on my changeful way.
Above the earth she floated, and yet near ;
Her long robes—white and spotless as the mist
Which flies from Phoebus’ rays by Zephyr fanned—
Swept the soft grass along ! All I had seen,
My wildest fancy shaped, or fevered dreams


Invented, in that gracious figure stood
To my enchanted sense ; and I, subdued
By very admiration, scarcely saw !
Yet such an one had I in youth once known :
Before the advent of that rugged time
Which burdens us with care. And since then, too,
Bright angels, such as she, upon my path
Have strewed Hope’s choicest flowers, —to fade in turn
With those before decayed. But what avail
Resuscitated memories, when the field
On which they lie is now o’ergrown, and rank
With weeds which choke all things of life beside ?
What ever comes from thoughts like these, untombed,
But doubt of all that is ? For may not that
Which now seems fair as quickly fade and die
As did what went before ?
VI.
But, to the scene
My purpose’t is to trace ; and thus it was :
How long I wondering stood I cannot tell
It seemed an age ; for, in one flash of thought
Do we not o’er again live out a life
Of joy or sorrow, pleasure, or of pain?
In one short breath—ere we can say we breathe—
We quit the prison of our mortal frame, —
That earthly load which stays our Heaven-ward flight,
And, floating off on wings by Fancy spread,
To other lands are wafted, over seas ;
With friends or loves long dead again converse,
As well as living ones, though far away,
And just as soon regretfully return
To what we find too real ? So came I thence
From my thoughts’ travel on their backward path—
But, from my stupor starting, soon again
My eyes I raised, and fixed their gaze on her,
Who as a thing of life and light yet stayed.
She beckoned my advance ; while, in her hand,
She held a plain gold ring high o’er her head
As she would have me take it. In the stream
She threw the shining orb, and seemed to say
“ Recover it—’t is thine ! ” I saw it there,
Resplendent on the sand ; and then I plunged
Into the silver flood, obtained the prize,


And with it reached the land. My fooling made
I looked around for her who’d set the task :
In vain I looked—no form of hers was there ;
But, on the bank, opposed to where I stood,
I saw her stand, and on her lovely face
A sweet smile sat; and then a clear voice said—
’T was hers I heard, like music floating o’er—
“ If thou hast courage, cross and follow me,
“ And I will lead thee by most pleasant paths
“ All mortal woes beyond—no sorrow thine ;
“ Come thou, and leave all human pain behind ;
“ The heaven thou oft hast pictured shall be thine,
“ Thy bed shall be of roses, and the air,
“ With perfumes laden, all that thou wilt breathe ;
“ While sounds delightful, softened to the sense,
“ Shall charm thine ear, and lull thee to repose.
‘‘ Where I will lead thee death is quite unknown :
“ Immortal thou, eternal then thy joy !
“ What would’st thou more? Cross thou and follow me ! ”
She ceased to speak ; but her enchanting tones
Still lingered on the sense until they seemed
Afar off to expire, yet to the last
Were sweetest music sounding their own knell.
VII.
Upon that brink I undecided stood—
Debating, as it were, if I should stay
Or go as thus invited. While I paused
The stream expanded, yet so slowly grew,
Her sylph-like form —unmoved from where she stood—-
Retreating seemed, but’t was the stream alone
Which thus between us stretched, and yet she stood ;
Yet beckoned me to cross ; still grew the stream,
Until she looked in distance just a speck
With outline undefined—while, from my hand,
The toy dissolved away.
VIII.
The water, now,
No longer mirrored clouds : its ruffled face j
A darkened aspect wore, as if a storm
Were brewing o’er the scene ; the lightning’s flash,
And distant thunder’s roar—like bugle’s note,
Or cannon’s hoarser tone on field of strife
Impatient armies give to herald the attack —


Foretold the savage time would soon ensue !
Then followed pause, as if opposing foes
The vantage ground surveyed, and then essayed
To concentrate their power. Confusion wild
Succeeded this respite : from every point
The elements advanced, and all the winds—
Combined for greater force—upon the field
In readiness appeared, as’t were to blow
Our atom of a world so far in void
It never to its orbit could return !
The thunder onwards rolled, and nearer drew
Till in loud crash it signal gave the winds
To rouse the yielding flood, and they obeyed !
The tumult then began : gigantic waves
Leaped up in savage sport, as they would reach
The azure arch ; then heavily recoiled ;
Then lashed themselves in fury on the shore !
The bank whereon I stood huge rocks became,
Which now o'erlooked the foaming tide beneath;
While I, in safety, stood above its reach !
IX.
All this contention, I amazed saw ;
But yet my thoughts w'ere far from thence removed
My anxious eyes still bent their steadfast gaze
In quest of her whose form had so entranced—
Whose soft melodious voice I late had heard—
Whose invitation I but now refused ;
But naught of her remained to glad my sight :
No fairy form—no distant land appeared ;
But one vast sea, without a bound, was all!
x.
Unmoved I gazed ; and felt like one alone
U pon the great world’s brink! It seemed to me
Tire limit of all Time and mundane life, —
And these convulsed—Eternity beyond !
A dreadful stillness now there seemed to be,
Which made my mortal terror more extreme :
For, while the elements were all at war,
No sound reached me—the sense of hearing gone,
Pale fear succeeded, and the thickened air
Oppressed me so that life seemed ebbing fast.
And then I thought ’twas terrible to die—


Alone, unwatched, unwept, forsaken thus ;
And then the scenes of all my former life
Came rushing in upon me, as’t is said
On drowning men they do, when o’er their heads
The surging waters rise, and they do strive,
In madness, but to live.— O, then, I thought,
If but an hour I could survive—no more !
I would the time improve ; seek some new way,
Not yet by me essayed, to reach that goal
Where sweet Content stands smilingly apart—
Yet oft, like Pleasure, flies as we pursue.—
And then I turned and wildly tried to ’scape
The terrors of the time, but vainly turned,
For there in front of me, as from the earth
It had itself upraised, a figure stood
With lifted arms to stop my eager flight;
Then pointed o’er the waters, then on me
Its gaze directed—if such power it had,
For none could I perceive. Of form obscure,
A shadow it imparted and appeared—
A combination terrible indeed !
It nearer drew, and, in discordant tone,
Addressed itself to me : and my lost sense
To me returned, to hear but it alone ;
And thus it spoke:— “ Thou hast thy wish !
“ Hut, having spurned the good once proffered thee,
“To me thou dost belong ! Henceforth, o’er thee
“ My influence I use, and thou, my slave,
“ Shalt work my utmost will. From out thy mind
“ I tear the only thing which hitherto
“ Hath bound thee to the earth and sweetest life,
“ And yet thou shall not die. Bright Hope,
“ On which thou heretofore hast fed, is gone !
‘ ‘ And in thy breast—thou hated of mankind—
“l now implant Despair, to plague thee so
“ That thou the beasts shall envy, and still live ! ”
It ceased : and I, in very fear, sank down,
And on the ground lay crouching—dared not move,
Nor seek to view the object of my dread,
XI.
Again the silence reigned, and over all
Came blackness to the feeling palpable ;
The air became so piercing, raw, and cold,


I scarce could move my limbs, and passing o’er
In freezing blasts, it whistled on its way
In glee at its success. And now I heard,
Breeze-borne, and in the distance made, the sound
Of many voices hissing out the words
The Shadow late had spoke. They nearer drew,
And in my fear I struggled to my feet,
And made a forward course ; nor whither knew,
But in the darkness plunged. The voices came :
“ Thou—hated of mankind ! ” they wildly yelled ;
And back again the echoes threw the din,
Till naught else could I hear.
XII.
It lighter grew ;
And as I progress made, and haunts of men
Drew near, I found at my approach all fled,
As from an object leprosy had seized ;
And, taking up the cry now hushed behind,
They madly dashed along. I followed fast,
Thus by my terrors urged, but none o’ertook !
I tried to speak ; but could not utter word
Of that assurance I so wished to give :
How much they wronged me ; and that all my thought
Had ever still towards the good inclined,
And that I sought not ill. They heeded not.
And I, in very frenzy to be heard,
At length awoke !
XIII.
And I remember how
Long time I lay all fevered from this dream,
Not yet assured it had not been too real —
My frame exhausted, and my mind confused —
Till I became quite conscious and assured
’T was but a dream which thus had haunted me ;
And thankful in my heart it was not truth !
XIV.
While thus I lay, and pondered o’er the scenes
Presented in my sleep—and here described —
I clearly traced realities of life,
Which often had engrossed my waking thoughts :
The search for Truth ; the dark and narrow path ;
The stagnant pool of Ignorance, and what


Its foulness ushers into life, opposed
To all unlike their loathsome kind ; the light
Which slowly breaks upon the ardent soul—
The clear transcendant view which Truth imparts
To soul long clouded by each scruple’s film,
Or by the gloom through which it strives to break ;
Or, in its darkness, groping further off—
By pride or passion led—beyond the goal
It cannot hope to gain while thus allured.
The form of love and beauty I had seen—
(Which bore the emblem of eternity,
That by my hesitation I had lost) —
Now seemed the fair embodiment of Good
And its ne’er ending life, which, if refused,
Enforces the reception of all 111,
Depicted in the figure terrible
My after-vision filled. What else ensued
Displayed the tumult in the o’erwrought mind—
The struggles of the sufferer, to be free,
And show himself in his own purer state,
When error sprang from doubt —not wanton ill.
XV.
In this our earthly shell is there not set
An essence—named by us the Soul—the which
Our grosser nature hath no power to rule
Or sway to its intent, —the mystic bond
Uniting us to that Invisible
And mighty source of life by Him supplied ;
In whose great scheme we form the merest speck.
And yet with mind endowed—beyond all else—
Of various degree, that prompts each thought
And act, each hope, and each despair ? Are we,
Thus fashioned, framed, responsible still held
For what our minds reject or what receive,
When they are ne’er controlled of themselves ?
And is not sleep that time of Reason’s rest
Wherein the mind —o’erladen with its stores*
Of unwrought thoughts, anticipations vast,
Hopes unattained, and thronging doubts and fears,
And all that our unsated nature doth create
(To fill that other world where mind is moved
By beings fancy-formed, unknowing life)
Reviews them all, though vague, confused, and wild ?


Or, is such state an antepast of that
When souls—set free from their abode of flesh —
Unburdened by the bitter cares of earth —
Soar to the world of bliss, the skies beyond,
To realise what earth had failed to give ?
’Tis mystery profound, and must remain
To mortals ever so, till Will Supreme
Decide the hour the solemn change must hap
Shall all unfold these secrets to our view—
The veil in twain is rent —and we the Light
Unclouded shall behold ; no longer toys
Of Passion or of Pride, ot Ignorance, or Doubt ;
No more the victims of ourselves, or those
Who, ruling us on the earth, are but the same !
********
A
The vision came no more. But as the storm,
Which lashes Ocean in a fury wild,
Its strength expends, subsides at length in calm—
The heaving polished wave denoting still
The fierce war hath been waged —so moved my soul,
Till time and thought its quiet had restored ;
And then I wondered how men e’er assumed
The power to judge of what they could not know,
And harshly oft condemned, while they themselves
Were naught but slaves—as all their fellow kind.


KAI TAMARU AMD THE DEVIL;
A LEGEND OF LAKE TAUPO.
GROSVENOR BUNSTER.
U~ jHE scene of this legend is called Taupo— a district
1 owing its name to the lake from which the Waikato
l springs, and which spreads itself in one vast sheet of
1 water towards the volcano known to the Maories as
Ruapaiho. At the source of the Waikato, on a slight elevation,
is placed the most important native settlement of the district;
and here, Bohepe—a fat, genial, short-winded old Maori, of
most hospitable and social character—holds his court. The
writer was his guest for some days, and learned the following
legend (one of many he related) from his lips. Of course it is
impossible to convey to the reader the mingled humour and
awe, with which Bohepe detailed the legend. The chief, though
feigning an unbelief in the story, evidently violated his own con-
victions in doing so ; and it wavs a curious, and not a little
interesting matter, to mark the struggle between the influence of
his own superstitions and his desire to appear superior to them, in
the eyes of the Pakeha.
More than fifty years ago, Kai Tamaru was chief of that por-
tion of the Waikato tribes then settled on Lake Taupo. Kai
Tamaru was a warrior of great note and reputation. He w r as one
of those fierce, resolute old fellows, to whom death and danger are
playthings, with which it is great fun to divert oneself; who loved
war for this reason, and who steadily maintained the good old
genial system of disposing of those killed in war, in that utilitarian
fashion which modern prejudice and sensitiveness protest against.
In other words, Kai Tamaru ate every prisoner he could get hold
of; and, with the natural pride of a great nature, found no better


satisfaction than in regarding the suggestive rows of skulls and
thigh-bones, with which his own, and his people’s warries, were
decorated. To such a character, the dull times of peace were
necessarily objectionable; and it was while he was suffering from
this inactive condition of affairs that my story begins.
The chief sat at the door of his warri gazing gloomily across
the calm waters of the lake. He was awfully hungry; but he
longed only for meat. He did not care for the vegetable which
the Paheka had introduced, and which now forms the chief food
of the aborigines of New Zealand. He was not averse to pork,
when he could get it—but pigs, like potatoes, were then very
scarce in the inland parts of New Zealand ; and so, Kai Tamaru
and his followers were fain to content themselves with the small
fish of the lake, a few waterhens, pigeons, some native spinach,
and fern-root. Now Kai Tamaru abominated this diet. His
stomach yearned for the fleshpots of the Waikato. He bethought
himself of past forays and expeditions against his enemies; and,
high above all other remembrance, came that of the feastings
upon the succulent carcases of slaughtered prisoners. All who
have been hungry, as Kai Tamaru was, will confess that such
retrospective thoughts as these were ill-calculated to compose
his mind to philosophical serenity : even had Kai Tamaru been
in the habit of exercising any moral influence over his impulses
and passions; and so, as he thought of past dainty bits of boiled
and baked human nature, he fairly groaned with impatience and
impotent desire. He longed for some carnal sustenance, and he
longed in vain. To desire, was, in him, to get angry, unless that
desire were gratified ; and Kai Tamaru, when angry, was a sort of
person no one cared to have anything to do with. So that it
came to pass that his people kept away from him ; and he sat
alone in sullen dignity, looking, as I have said, over the waters
of the lake. Every now and then, his brows would meet, in an
awlul frown ; and he would mutter some choice curses between
his clenched teeth.
He was gazing and muttering, as I have described, when the
shrill cries ot women came upon his ear. He frowned more
deeply; and uttering aloud the oaths he had hitherto merely mur


mured, sprang to his feet and looked, with inflamed and fierce
visage, in the direction whence the cries came. He saw a small
crowd of women passing from the crossing-place of the Waikato,
and apparently making towards him.
“ What is all this,” he asked, as the weeping women drew
nearer to him ; “ why are you yelling and screaming, like so many
born devils? What’s amiss? Speak, you Jezabels, or I’ll have
you hamstrung ! ”
“ O-whe! O-whe ! Kai Tamaru,” cried a voice, gentle and soft,
yet thrilling with the agony of a deep and intense sorrow, “ O-whe !
my babe, my little one, ray sucking-pig, my pretty toi-toi ■”
and here the speaker burst into loud and passionate weeping;
while the women around her raised their shrill voices in chorus.
Kai Tamaru stamped on the ground, and swore an awful oath:
“Silence!” he roared. “Come here, Paketoi;” and stepping
into the midst of the throng, he took hold of a young girl’s hand,
and dragged her forward. “ Now,” said he, “what’s up ?”
If he didn’t express himself quite so idiomatically as I have
made him, it is my fault, and not his. At any rate, the expression
I use fully implies his meaning, and this is all that is needed.
He repeated his enquiry ; and the young girl —who was as pretty
and modest-looking, as the majority of her sex around her were
withered and old—ceased weeping, as, with her disengaged hand,
she thrust forward something she carried in a kit, or basket.
“ Look, Kai Tamaru,” said she, with the calmness of genuine
grief, “look. Behold my potato; look on my boiled habuka;
see my fern-root —my little one ! ”
Kai Tamaru, —a puzzled look in his stern face, opened the
kit, and looked at its contents. He started back. As he did so,
a quick but indefinable expression came into his face—an expres-
sion made up of mingled surprise, hunger, cunning and satisfac-
tion. But it passed away at once. When he spoke again, it was
with a wonderfully soft voice, for Kai Tamaru.
“ My poor Paketoi,” said he, “ how came this ? ”
“ Listen, Kai Tamaru,” cried the girl, wringing her hands;
“ I went with my potatoes this morning to the springs.* My
* The neighbourhood of Lake Taupo is remarkable for the hot springs which line the track
for several miles along its shores. The natives cook their potatoes in these springs.


little joy, did he not repose on his mother’s back ? And I—oh
careless one ! —stooping over the spring to plunge the potatoes
into the water, jerked my suckling from his mat. Lo ! Kai Ta
maru, he fell into the boiling water. Did I not pluck him forth,
as I pluck forth this hair ! But he was dead, he was dead.”
“ Boiled! ” said the chief, rather meditatively, than as an
interrogation.
The poor mother bowed her head in answer; and, covering
her face with her hands, renewed her sobs.
“ Well,” said the chief, now speaking more cheerfully, “of
course its a bad affair for you, my little Paketoi; but it can’t be
helped. The worst thing about it, is, you know ” jerking a
thumb in the direction of the mountain, and shaking his head.
The women shuddered; and the poor girl, seizing the body of her
child, clasped it to her bosom, as she gazed across the lake with
mingled fear and hate.
“ You see,” said Kai Tamaru—a regretful cadence in his
voice—“ the old gentleman over there has his privileges. All
who come by their death by being drowned, or parboiled in the
hot springs, are his property. It’s awkward ; but there’s only
one way to avoid it, my poor little Paketoi.”
It is not within my power to describe the sympathetic voice
and manner with which the chief said this.
“ Yes,” he resumed, “ there is only one way by which you can
save your little one from the clutches of the devil.”
“ Tell me, tell me,” cried the poor girl.
“ Well,” said the chief, drawing himself up with dignity, “ I
am, as you are aware, one of those warriors who fear neither man
nor devil—ahem !” and here he struck an attitude, and made a
derisive face at the mountain. As he did so, those who looked
with him at the smoking, yet snow-clad volcano, were horrified at
beholding a giant form rise, as it were, from the depths of its
crater, and, making a menacing gesture towards the settlement,
disappear as suddenly as it had come forth. The women shivered
with terror. Their chief alone preserved all outward fortitude;
though, to his own annoyance, a thrill, such as he had never
before experienced, passed through his frame. He leaped forward,
and cast a furious glance towards the spectre.


“ Ha, ha ! ” cried he, flinging up his brawny arms, “ I defy
you. I Kai Tamaru, son of Waitanekatoi, son of Bohepe Tamaru,
and a thousand warriors—l defy you. Saw you that? ” continued
he, turning with flashing eyes towards his terrified followers —for
the whole settlement, men, women and children, was now grouped
around him, —“Saw you that? Now I ’ll tell you how we’ll
cheat this fellow. Paketoi, I ’ll eat your baby.”
“ Eat my baby, Kai Tamaru ! ” cried the mother, ruefully.
“ I will,” said the chief, smacking his lips ; I don’t like it,
but I ’ll do it for your sake. It shall never be said that Kai Ta-
raaru shirked his duty to his people I ’ll eat your little one, and
then you may defy the devil and all his works. He ’ll never get
your baby after I have eaten it, any way. I ’ll take the responsi-
bility on myself. Come; what do you say ?”
There was a murmur of assent among the men, who—more
particularly the elderly gentlemen of the community, and, not-
withstanding the risk they would have run of offending the arch-
enemy of their race —would not have objected to have done the
poor mother the service so generously tendered by the chief.
And really, from a Maori point of view,—a view essentially par-
taking of peculiar notions as to food generally, and boiled baby in
particular—poor Paketoi’s deceased infant looked tempting. Many
an old warrior wiped his lips, and eyed the child with longing
looks, as he hastily reflected upon the treat in store for Kai Ta-
maru, after the long interval of semi-starvation which had befallen
the settlement. It is possible that Kai Tamaru observed these
indications of a very natural yearning in the faces of his followers ;
for he hastily tucked the deceased infant under his arm, carried
it into his warri, and deposited it in a corner.
“Now, said he, returning, “you had better disperse. Kick
up a row, and spit towards Ruapaiho as much as you can ; for I
don’t care to be interrupted by the Devil, until I have finished.
And Paketoi, my child, do not grieve. Be assured I will protect
you, little one. Bless you, my children! ” and he waived the
assemblage away.
Was it the benevolent satisfaction which always inspires one
who does a good deed at the sacrifice of his own interest or inc li


nations, that threw such a gentle calm across the rugged features
of the chief, as he watched his people depart; or was it the more
vulgar contentment which springs from the realization or prospect
of an excellent dinner? Who shall say? Let it suffice that
Kai Tamaru’s face was illumined by a light of almost ecstatic
enthusiasm, as he turned back into his warn, closed and barred
the door, threw some fagots on the fire, and prepared for the
sacrifice.
Night had closed in, and the old chief had completed his
meal. He still kept his warri shut fast; and now slumbered on
his fern-couch, with the sound and unbroken slumber which
springs from repletion and contentment. And, indeed, it is pro-
bable that Kai Tamaru would have slept on till morning, had he
not been awakened by a sudden glare of light which fell upon
his face. Opening his eyes lazily, he saw that this arose from his
fire, which had apparently been recently replenished with fagots,
and now blazed and sputtered and crackled, as though it were a
thing of life.
A brisk and lively fire is a pleasant thing, and Kai Tamaru
felt all its genial influence, as, with sleepy enjoyment, he watched
the bright flames leap and frolic upwards, towards the roof-tree.
But, presently, a dim idea occurred to him that somebody was
sitting on the floor, warming his shins at the other side of the
fire. A hazy perception of a form and face, not altogether un-
familiar, came to the chief; a form of gigantic size, and a face of
sinister and disagreeable expression. Thinking this a dream, Kai
Tamaru rubbed his eyes, jerked himself on to his elbow, and
looked fixedly, through the smoke and flame, at the apparition—
if such it was. To his great surprise, and no little indignation, he
discovered that there was, indeed, a stranger present, and that there
really sat a personage of large stature and malignant looks, warm-
ing his shins by the fire, in the manner described. He was a tall
lean individual, clothed in the flax mat and robes usually worn, in
those days, by the Maoris. His head was shaped like a cocoanut,
and from his forehead projected two excresences, which, while
they could not well be likened to horns, were of too ambitious a
character to be appropriately called wens. His nose was long,




KAI TAMARU AND THE DEVIL.


thin and red ; his eyes were deep sunken, and glowed like coals ;
a long moustache slightly hid the sardonic expression of his mouth;
and his chin was cocked out with that supercilious and authorita-
tive air that belongs to the inheritors of power. His frame was
gigantic, but painfully thin. His arms were long and lean,
and terminated in hands, the fingers of which resembled the
talons of a dragon ; while his legs presented the smallest preten-
sion to calf, and his feet, like his hands, were highly suggestive of
the pedal belongings of some scaly and unpleasant creature.
Add to this, that this singular being rejoiced in a tail which he
carried gracefully over his left knee, and some idea may be formed
of the character of the visitor who had interrupted the chiefs
repose. But the stout old chief, though astonished, was not
appalled. He gazed fixedly at the stranger, and took mental
note of every particular of his personal appearance. Indeed, a
sense of amusement was the principal feeling by which he was
prompted. “ I wonder,” thought he, “if he ever cuts his toe-
nails ; ” and as this idea suggested itself, the hearty old warrior
burst out laughing. At this, the stranger looked up and nodded.
“ How d’ye do, Chief?” said he, “You’ve been snoring a
hurricane, old boy. Had a good dinner, eh ? ” and the speaker
thrust one foot into the fire, and kept it there. “ Cold night,” he
continued ; “ nothing like a good fire, Kai Tamaru. You should
see my fires — should see ! you shall see them — and feel them
too, eh —ha !ha ! Feel them —eh, old boy—feel them —ha !ha !
ha !” And here, poising gracefully upon one foot —which he still
kept in the fire —the audacious stranger extended one long, lean
arm, and poked the chief under what are called, by convivial
anatomists, the “ short ribs.”
To be thus familiarly treated after a hearty meal, is calculated
not only to offend one’s sense of one’s dignity, but to seriously
interfere with one’s wind. Kai Tamaru was awfully indignant.
Paralysed with rage for the moment, he sat glaring at the stranger ;
who returned his look with a sinister smile, and proceeded to
rake the embers of the fire together with his long and attenuated
fingers. This done, he thrust the end of his tail into the fire,
and rubbing his hands cheerily, chuckled aloud.


“ Now >” said he, again nodding to the amazed chief, “ this is
comfortable. We shall be able to converse cosily. How do you
feel, Kai Tamaru, and where is my baby?”
“ Baby?” gasped the chief.
“Yes, baby,” repeated the other, playfully filling his hands
with red-hot embers, “ Paketoi’s little one, you know. What have
you done with it ? IVe just called over for my supper, you
know; ” and here the gentleman laughed, as though he had given
utterance to an excellent joke.
dhe chief slowly rose to his feet: his right hand grasping his
trusty tomahawk. Ihe stranger sat unmoved, gazing medita-
tively into the fire.
It was a dirty trick, Kai I amaru,” said he ; “ a dirty trick to
play upon me; but I forgive you. Only you must provide me with
my due. I don’t grudge you the meal, Old Blood-and-Bones, but
I m not going to be done out of mine. So, when you ’re ready,
let me have a fine fat youngster, such as you’ve just made so
hearty a repast from. Egad, you ’re a knowing fellow ; but you
can t get over me—ho ! ho ! You can’t get over ?ne , old chap,”
and here again the stranger laughed ; and, leaning over, thrust his
long nose into the fiercest flames of the fire.
1 he cold nips one’s features terribly,” the stranger proceeded.
Really, Kai I amaru, I’m a good-natured fellow to put up with
all this inconvenience. Confess it now ;am I not a good-natured
fellow?” and he withdrew his nose from the fire, and bent his
bright eyes upon the chief.
lo do Kai Pamaru justice, he felt no fear; no such craven
feeling could enter his sturdy heart. His had been no vain boast
when he declared that he feared neither man nor devil; and now,
his first surprise over, the old chief’s fierce soul burned with indig-
nation and resentment.
“ Confound your impudence,” he cried ; “ I ’ll teach you to
intrude upon a gentleman’s privacy. Take that,” and he hurled
his tomahawk at the head of the stranger. It passed clean
through him—the chief marked this—and stuck in the door of
the warri; where it shivered, as an arrow shivers when it strikes
the target.


The stranger smiled; and leaning backwards, withdrew the
hatchet from the wood, and handing it across to the chief, re-
marked, “An excellent shot, Kai Tamaru; try again. I assure
you that you won’t give me a headache. Try again, old boy.”
But the chief shrank back, and sitting down on his couch,
watched the stranger gloomily, and without uttering a word. The
latter smiled again.
“ You see, my dear Chief,” said he, “ that sort of thing is all
very well for such fellows as yourself; but I’m made of different
metal. I don’t blame you for doing your best, not I. I rather
like your spirit. But, seriously, if you want to get rid of me, you
must provide me with my supper.”
“I Ve eaten it,” said the chief, sullenly.
“ Oh, I know,” answered the other, coolly flicking away a
cinder from his shin ;“ I know you’ve eaten one supper. But
there’s no scarcity of toothsome youngsters in the settlement, my
friend. I often watch the young rascals as they play on the sands.
I love innocent childhood, ha ! ha ! Unsophisticated tenderness,
eh?—ha ! ha ! Now I am not particular so long as you pick me
out a fat one. Thank goodness, nobody can say Dm an epicure.
But I detest lean meat —pah 1 ” and the old gentleman spat em-
phatically into the fire. The chief answered never a word, but
sat sullenly glaring at the stranger.
“ If I am not mistaken,” the latter resumed—now speaking
as though in a reverie : for he stirred the embers with his caudal
appendage in an absent manner —“ if lam not mistaken, Paketoi
has another little one ; a youngster of some five years of age,
plump, well nourished, juicy—ha ! —yes ! —hum ! Is it not so,
Kai Tamaru % ”
“It is,” answered the chief; “ what then 1 ”
“ Well, simply this, old boy, I ’ll have him.”
“ I ’ll be damned if you do !” roared the chief, angrily.
“You’ll be damned if I don't” said the stranger. “You’ll
be damned if Ido n’t; and that’s all about it. Come, now,
you Ve tried my patience to the utmost. Now, see here : I’m a
kindly fellow if I’m treated well; and though you Ve been very
rude, I ’ll forgive you on these conditions : —I ’ll give you until


to-morrow night, and go without my supper to-night. But re-
member —when I return to-morrow evening, you must be prepared
with Paketoi’s youngster.”
“Well —what if I am not prepared,” cried the chief haughtily.
“ Then you ’ll have to come yourself, my dear Kai Tamaru.
I ’ve got a nice corner over yonder for you, warm and cozy. Still,
as you may prefer to remain where you are, I give you the alter-
native. And now, my dear, dear friend, good night.”
With that, the stranger whisked his tail in the chiefs face,
winked wickedly at him with one of his red eyes, struck him a
smart blow on his stomach, and disappeared through the closed
door. The chief stood a second or two gasping for breath and
with rage; and then, quickly unbarring the door, rushed out.
The moon was high above the lake, and cast a soft gleam over the
whole surface of its waters; and Kai Tamaru could plainly see
the stranger, his tail carried under his left arm, leisurely and
gracefully striding across. At every step he took, the water
sputtered aud fizzed, as though it had suddenly come in contact
with some red-hot substance ; and a mist, such as arises from
such contact, enveloped his huge form. As Kai Tamaru gazed,
with mingled awe and passion, the object of his attention arrived
at the opposite side of the lake, and, pausing, turned his face
towards the chief —who could not forbear a menacing gesture.
The stranger, however, merely smiled ; and, elevating the tip of
his tail until it touched his nose, winked a most insulting wink
at the old warrior, and dropped quietly into the volcano. The
chief, with a smothered yell, rushed into his warri, and, throwing
himself, face downwards, upon his couch, remained there until
the day broke.
If Kai Tamaru’s temper had been irritable before his sacrificial
repast, it was ten times worse the day following. The old woman
who timidly placed a net of roasted potatoes on the floor for his
breakfast, set it about that the chief was in a terrible humour;
and many, wise and experienced in over-gorging, put this down to
indigestion. Paketoi, with a woman’s and a mother’s inconsis-
tency, could not help feeling a kind of satisfaction that her baby
had disagreed with the old chief; even though she fully recognised


the service he had rendered her by partaking of it. Women
are contradictory creatures —whether tame or savage, white or
copper-colour. But when Paketoi was suddenly summoned to
attend Kai Tamaru, a quick fear fell cold upon her heart. With
the mother’s instinct, and a mother’s prediliction, she divined that
her infant had tasted good; and the fear came upon her that Kai
Tamaru was overcome by a desire to keep up the sacrifice at the
cost of her only remaining child. Sadly and fearfully she obeyed
the summons. The chief was sitting by the fire, and he bade her
close the door and squat on the mat opposite to him.
For some time he did not speak. He was evidently embar-
rassed, and Paketoi’s fears became the better confirmed as she
watched his changing and confused countenance. Her heart
beat high—when, at last, Kai Tamaru lifted his blood-shot eyes to
her face and addressed her.
“ Paketoi, little flower,” said he, “ is it many moons since your
husband was killed ? ”
“ Alas ! yes,” sighed the girl.
“ Art happy, Paketoi, without a mate ? ”
“ I was happy, Kai Tamaru,” she answered, “ till I lost my
treasure. Who sang so blithely as Paketoi; whose laugh was so
loud ; whose heart was so full of thankfulness 1 But woe is me !
the light of my life is gone.” And here she bent her face in
her hands, and cried bitterly. The old chief was moved ; he
fidgetted with his hands, and shuffled with his feet, and pished
and pshawed, and swore under his breath. At last he spoke
again.
“ Listen,” said he, “ I have long looked upon you with favour
1 have seen that you are handsome, industrious, cheerful—in fact,
I—that is —well, hang it, Paketoi, I love you. You shall be my
wife.”
The girl looked at Kai Tamaru, with amazement depicted in
her pretty face. “ Your wife, Kai Tamaru ! ” she cried.
“ Yes,” replied the chief. “It is true that there is some slight
difference in our ages; but, my pretty one, what of that 1 lam
hale and hearty. Look at my biceps—” and here he displayed
to her his brawny arm. “ Why, my dear Paketoi,” he continued,


warming with enthusiasm, “ IVe knocked out the brains of fifty
warriors, each with a single blow of my fist. Think of that,
Paketoi; think of that.”
Paketoi did think of it, the idea occurring to her that, in a
domestic sense, knocking brains out of other persons’ heads was
scarcely a recommendation. However, she did not speak, and
the chief continued.
“ I am great in war,” said he ; “my name is a terror on the
Waikato. It is true that we are at present hard up for grub ; but,
my little one, wait a bit. IVe a crow to pick with that fellow
Awai, at Opipi, and believe me we shall soon have a merry time
of it. You shall wear the rascal’s shin-bone for an ornament, my
dear ; and you shall eat of the best of- well, never mind : this
may be unpleasant. The whole fact,” said Kai Tamaru, “is
summed up in this, my sweet Paketoi: I love you, and you shall
be my wife.”
While the chief was speaking, Paketoi had reflected. She
was but a woman, after all; and the feeling of repulsion by
which she had been animated, when he abruptly made his
proposal, gave way to a consideration of the advantages which
would attach to the position of Kai Tamaru’s helpmate. Women
are all alike in these matters, let romance-writers say what they
may ; and just as a young lady, playing a part in the great farce
called civilization, might hold an “establishment” as the first
essential of wedded life, so we may conceive Paketoi’s reflections
as naturally turning on the distinguished position which she was
asked to share, rather than the personal characteristics of the
great man who had asked her. So that, after the first surprise,
not to say disgust, was over—for a natural sentiment of repulsion
was, for the moment, excited against a gentleman who had so
recently eaten her infant—Paketoi looked bashfully at the fire,
and fidgetted with the ends of her flax-mat. The chief grew
eager.
“ Come,” said he, “ what say you, Paketoi 1 ”
« Your will is law, Kai Tamaru,” she responded. “ I'm sure
you do me very great honour. I will try my best to make you a
good wife.”


“ Well, you see, Paketoi,” said the chief, “ you owe me some
gratitude. I’ve got myself into an awful scrape with the Devd.
He was here last night, and ”
Paketoi started to her feet, in terror. “ Here ! ” she shrieked.
“ Sit down,” cried the chief; “ don’t be alarmed, fie’s rather
a gentlemanly sort of fellow than otherwise. But I had to com-
promise the matter with him. You see, Paketoi, when there’s
the Devil to pay, one mustn’t stick at trifles. Eh, my little bird V'
Paketoi looked at her chief and future lord, with a dull sus-
picion that there was something unpleasant to be said, which
the chief had endeavoured to soften by making this proposal of
marriage to her. The fear returned to her that danger was in
store for her remaining child. She looked piteously at Kai Ta-
maru; who now spoke rapidly and with averted eyes, as men do
who plunge into disagreeable revelation, as one plunges into the
water, after having shivered on the bank for half an hour or so.
“ I couldn’t help it, Paketoi,” he said, in a deprecatory tone
of voice ; “ I could not make better terms, my sweet one. He
was peremptory. I tried to brain him ; but, Lord bless you, my
tomahawk went clean through him, and never hurt a hair of his
head, confound him ! So I had to give in. It would never do to
let him carry me oft, my dear ; and so—and so—you see —oh !
hang it, well, I promised that I’d have your little boy ready for
him by to-night. There—the murder’s out, and I feel all the
better for it—phew !” and he wiped the perspiration from his
forehead, and glanced furtively at the girl. She was on her knees ;
her hands clasped in supplication, and her eyes streaming with
tears.
“ O-whe,” she cried, “Oh my father, my chief—great warrior,
lord of our tribe, whose breath is as the fierce storm-wind to your
enemies, the gentle summer breeze to your children—pity me.
Steal not my broken heart—leave me one string to my soul —spare
my boy, spare my boy. Oh Kai Tamaru, my lord, listen to my
prayer. Heed me, and I will serve you as a. slave, bless you as
the best, live my life but for you and your sake. Oh woe ! oh
woe is Paketoi.”
She had worked herself across the floor on her knees, and


now grovelled at the chief’s feet in an agony of grief. Kai Ta-
maru felt most uncomfortable.
“ Look up, my dear,” said he, somewhat petulantly; “ you
make me feel like a fool. Come now, what is all this fuss?
Needs must, you know, when the Devil drives ; and I tell you
plainly, my poppet, I’ve no inclination to pay the penalty of my
indiscretion in propria persona. No, no, little one, my life is too
valuable. So make the best of a bad job, my pretty song-bird,
and don’t bother me. Let the boy be prepared by dusk.”
With these words he made a sign of dismissal with his hand,
and turned his face to the wall. Paketoi threw up her arms with
an eloquent gesture of grief, and rose to obey. As she was about
to pass out of the door, however, a very natural thought suggested
itself to her. She turned to the chief.
“ Kai Tamaru,” said she.
“ Well.”
“ Must it be my boy ? ”
“ It must.”
“ Because, you know,” urged the poor girl, “he is not so very
fat after all; and I’m afraid he’s got something the matter with
him.”
“ All the better,” cried the chief; “ especially if it’s catching.
Maybe he ’ll give the complaint to that fellow over yonder.
Besides, if he’s sick, there’s the less reason he should live. Now
go, my dear girl, and don’t bother me any more. I feel sleepy.”
“ One word more, Kai Tamaru,” cried Paketoi, plaintively,
“I’m sure my little one won’t taste well. Now there’s Omi
Kaipai’s twins—they ’re beauties, rolling in fat: I’m sure his
Highness would like them best.”
“ Once and for all, woman,” said the chief, “ I tell you that
his Highness pitched upon your little boy. It is a kind of poetic
justice, too, d’ ye see ; for, as I deprived him of one of your
children, it’s only fair that the sacrifice should run in the family.
Besides, I’ve promised, and that’s all about it. Now do go, my
dear, before I lose my temper.”
So Paketoi passed out, with the doom of her younster ringing
in her ears, and the sense of its meaning cold upon her heart.


“ Oh, my lone one,” she cried, apostrophising her little boy, who
was making dirt pies in front of his mother’s warri, “ Oh, my
heart’s blood, my one thought—link left me of my dead husband
—must I part with you, too 1 Oh, cruel Kai Tamara—hapless
Paketoi.”
In the wildness of her grief she caught the boy in her arms,
and fled despairingly into the fern, which then grew at great
height around and about the settlement : and here, casting herself
upon the earth, gave way to the bitterest lamentation. The
child, infected by her example, raised its treble in chorus. She
pressed him to her bosom, and kissed his lips, his forehead, his
ears—as mothers, only, kiss their dear ones.
Presently, however, she grew less vehement in the expression
of her sorrow; and, reclining upon one arm, while she held her
boy fast with the other, gazed sorrowfully at its little copper-
coloured face : a sob of anguish now and then agitating her
bosom. At last he fell asleep to the murmurs of her endearing
words ; and the mother lay still and passive, but with a settled
grief in her young face very sad to see.
She was thus, when suddenly her ear caught a sound not quite
unfamiliar to her—a sound I can best describe as a grunt.
“ Hugh ! hugh !” it came nearer and nearer—“ hugh ! hugh !”
it was close at hand ; and presently the girl perceived an old sow
push her way through the fern and trot along the pig-track,
followed by a goodly litter of juveniles. It was a sight welcome
to a Maori’s eyes; doubly welcome to Paketoi’s. Despair inspired
her with an idea. She bent forward, seized a straggler of the
litter, muffled its cries in her mat, and, in less time than is taken
to tell of it. had the porker dead. She had cut its throat with
the shell which, in the absence of knives, the Maories then
always carried with them. The old sow passed on, unconscious
of her loss.
Paketoi, folding the deceased porker in her mantle, stole
gently back, and passed into her warri without exciting attention.
Setting her child down in a corner, she speedily disembowelled,
dressed, and prepared the pig; and lighting a fire in the Maori
oven within her hut, baked it to perfection. Many, passing by,
D


stopped to sniff the savoury perfume which was exhaled from the
porker, as Paketoi wrapped it in clean fern and flax ; but she kept
the door fast, and refused answer to the many enquiries which
were made as to the origin of the appetising odours. And thus
she kept, until the sun went down and darkness had closed upon
the settlement. Then she softly unbarred the door, and carrying
the bundle in her arms, passed unobserved to the chiefs warri.
He was sitting in his usual way, gazing sullenly at the fire.
“ Oh, you have come,” said he ; “I was beginning to fear
that I should have to look for you. Eh ! ” and here he sniffed
the odour of baked meat —“ by George !” he cried, “ that smells
good, my little one—deuced good. You are an excellent girl.
But, eh I —it does smell good. There can be no harm, Paketoi,
in looking at it—eh % Lord, how hungry I feel, to be sure,” and
a wolfish glare came into the chiefs blood-shot eyes, as, to
Paketoi’s dismay, he prepared to unfasten the bundle. She was
about to remonstrate, when a sudden strong smell of brimstone
pervaded the hut, and, looking up, they perceived the stranger
regarding Kai Tamaru with a sinister smile. Paketoi sank to the
earth in terror. The chief gripped the bundle hard, and glared
ferociously at the visitor.
“ I’m very sorry to see this,” said the latter, “ very sorry.
You really don’t seem to possess an atom of self-restraint, Chief.
You know very well that you were about to tamper with my
supper again. Come, now, hand it over, you confounded old
rogue, or, upon my sacred word of honour, I ’ll deal harshly
with you.”
The chief sullenly passed the bundle across. The stranger
sniffed the delicious smell which came from it, and turned to
Paketoi.
“ You 're a good girl,” said he, eyeing her in a critical manner,
“ and a pretty girl; you are indeed.”
“ Come,” cried the chief, “ none of that. You leave her
alone. You’ve made her miserable enough, without insulting
her with your fine speeches. Now, look here —I’ve kept my
word; I suppose I may count upon your keeping your promise—
you ’ll not bother me any more 1 ”


“ At present, Kai Tamaru,” answered the other, as he warmed
the tip of his tail in the fire; “not at present, Old Tare-and-Tret.”
“ What the deuce d’ ye mean by that,” roared the chief, jerking
himself on to his elbow, and looking ferociously at the Devil,
“ what the deuce d’ ye mean by that t ”
“ Hush! ” answered the visitor. “ You really have no manners,
Chief. Swearing before a lady, too —fie !my dear boy —fie ! ”
“ Well, what do you mean 1 ”
“ Merely this, Kai Tamaru,” answered the other, “ merely
this : I shall not trouble you again on the score of my supper —
nor, indeed (unless you force me), will I intrude myself on you at
all until, you know, you take up your board and lodgings with
me altogether. Then , Kai Tamaru, we ’ll have a roaring time of
it. Farewell, till then ; lady, my devotion t’ ye ! ” and, with a
distinguished bow, and gallant flourish of his tail, the gentleman
passed out.
As before, the chief remained a second or two, quiet; and
then bounded after him. Again the moonlight enabled him to
trace the passage of the stranger across the lake ; and again he
marked that, as his feet touched the water, it fizzed and sputtered,
and a haze arose and enveloped his form. When he reached the
other side of the lake, he sat down, and, untying the bundle, pre-
pared to taste his supper.
“He can’t wait,” sighed the chief; “it did smell beautiful! ”
But what was his surprise when he beheld the stranger start
to his feet, look intently at the contents of the bundle, hurriedly
wrap it up again, shake his fist at the settlement, and then bound
rapidly up the mountain. Arriving at the mouth of the crater, a
fierce flame suddenly shot out, into which he darted without a
moment s hesitation. Ihe chief could make nothing of it; and,
returning into his warri, he found Paketoi shivering with appre-
hension that her ruse had been discovered. The chief suspected
something.
“Paketoi,” said he, sternly, “you have not played me any
trick ? ”
The poor girl, faint with terror and sick with misery, fell on
her knees and confessed everything. For a moment, the chief


stood looking angrily at her. Then he suddenly burst into a loud
laugh.
“ Well done, Paketoi,” cried he, lifting her up, and rubbing
her nose with his own ; “ excellent, beautiful.* We Ve done the
Devil, my dear. The biter is bitten, my sweetheart, ha, ha, ha?”
and the stout old rascal’s sides fairly heaved under his laughter.
“It was a capital idea,” he continued. “By the way, Paketoi,
let the young men go forth to morrow and trace those suckers.
We will be married at once, and have a rare feast. Cheated the
Devil—cheated the Devil ! ha, ha ! ”
With that, Kai Tamaru patted Paketoi on her cheek, told her
she was a good girl, and said that he was n’t a bit angry with her.
Then he dismissed her, and retired to his couch. But it was
hours ere he slept. The trick which had been played on the old
gentleman of the mountain tickled the chief amazingly, and
every now and then his followers would hear his hoarse laughter
echo through the settlement. But they knew him to be an eccen-
tric old fellow, and that he was given to as extravagant and
unlooked-for bursts of laughter as of rage ; so they thought little
of it. But when, next morning, the young men of the settlement
were bidden to scour the country round for wild pigs, for the
feast with which the marriage of Kai Tamaru and Paketoi was to
be celebrated, there was much wonder among the old and young
women. The former bridled their heads, and muttered that it had
been better if Kai Tamaru’s bride had been old and experienced;
the younger ladies, while they envied Paketoi’s prospective posi-
tion and power, did not grudge her the caresses unhappily insepa-
rable from the enjoyment of such positions. As for the men,
they thought all the better of the old chief for his courage in
taking to himself another wife.
The hunters were successful, and for days great feasting and
revelry reigned in the settlement. And it was observed that each
night of the jubilee, a sinister face regarded the proceedings from
the edge of the volcano’s crater; at which the chief, much to the
wonderment of his people, laughed exceedingly.
* Rubbing noses is, with the Maories, a caress equivalent to a kiss among Europeans.


Paketoi made Kai Tamaru an excellent wife, and bore him a
goodly family. In time he died ; and it was noticed by those
who stood without his hut that, as his spirit fled, he uttered
a yell of mingled hate and fear; and that a strong odour of brim-
stone pervaded his warri. Paketoi, who attended him, had a
shrewd notion of the meaning of all this ; but she kept her own
council. A few weeks after her lord’s death she took to herself a
younger husband, to whom, indeed, she had been betrothed when
Kai Tamaru selected her for a wife, and who had patiently waited
for the old chief’s demise.
As for the Devil—well, we shall see !
VITÆ AMORES!
SAMUEL HAWKER BANKS.
i.
Forget Thee !
ras’jgalF but for one brief day
SgIK My heart should truant be,
* Or from those lone haunts stray
Where Love hath wandered free,
The flowers would fade and die
Which o’er its paths are strewed :
And verdure now so green—
By blessed Hope bedewed—
No more would glad the eye ;
Nor aught around be seen
But desolation there.
If only for an hour
Fond memory failed in power—
Or did a moment sleep—
Then Love, in deep despair,
For its return would weep.
Love on hope still lives :
Its food, ’t is memory gives.


11.
Forget Thee!
syga°g| ANST thou, then teach me how ?
TpSi My lips could never learn
To unspeak one true vow !
To quench the fires which burn
So fiercely in my heart,
Requires more power than mine ;
To tear those bonds apart,
Which now so closely twine—
Linking each soul to soul,
In their sublime control—
Uniting us in love
Whose term would lasting prove
Demands more strength than thine !
When that the Power Divine,
Which gave it holy breath,
Shall will that death must be—
It dies ! But only death
Can sever Love and me !
SEDAN.
HENRY KENDALL.
raironINOTHER battle ! and the sounds have rolled
By many a gloomy gorge and wasted plain
——--1 O’er huddled hills, and mountains manifold,
Like winds that run before a heavy rain
When Autumn lops the leaves and drooping grain,
And earth lies deep in brown and cloudy gold.
My brothers, lo ! our grand old England stands,
With weapons gleaming in her ready hands,
Outside the tumult ! Let us watch, and trust
That she will never darken in the dust
And drift of wild contention, but remain,
The hope and stay of many troubled lands,
Where so she waits the issue of the fight,
Aloof; but praying “ God defend the Right !”


MY DREAM.
HAROLD W. H. STEPHEN.
H DREAMT—Methought I was a little child,
A new-born infant in the world, and lay
Calmly repdsing in my mother’s arms ;
Couch’d in a chamber hung with tapestry,
And furnished in a strange and antique style.
I gazed around with curious startled glance,
Half conscious that ’twas but a dream, yet half
Believing in the truth of all I saw.
A crimson-curtain’d canopy o’erhung
The couch, and on a brazen tripod burned
A lamp of ancient mould, whose flick’ring flame
Sufficed but hardly to dispel the gloom.
I wondered how it chanced that I again
Should be a little child, and blessed kind Fate
Which thus had blotted out my past career.
Methought I’d gladly live again the life
Which ever yet had been misspent, and how,
With stern experience for my guide, I would
In future shun the evil deeds of yore.
I gazed upon my slumb’ring mother, whose
Encircling arms embraced my infant head,
As’t were that e’en in sleep her thoughts dwelt on
The need to still watch o’er her helpless babe.
Ah ! who can tell the pangs of fierce remorse
That pierced my heart, as I recalled to mind
The base ingratitude of former years ?
The boundless love so ill returned—the care
So wasted on a graceless ingrate son ?
A storm of blinding tears, whose scorching salt
Betrayed their bitter source, ran down my cheeks
As thus I pondered o’er the wretched past.
For years I had not prayed, but spent my life
In thoughtless sin and wanton deeds of ill;
But now, at last, my stony heart was touched —
I trembling muttered faint but heartfelt prayers,


And raised mine eyes above—Oh ! strangest sight!
No canopy was there—no roof—no wall—
All—all was blank ; but as I awe-struck gazed,
It seemed as if a veil was rent in twain,
Disclosing to my view two mail-clad knights
Engaged in fierce and deadly strife. The one
Appeared a warrior from the hosts of Heaven ;
With star-like, silv’ry sheen his armour shone,
And on his breast he bore the Christian’s crest,
The Cross—blest emblem of the Sacrifice.
Black as the darkest night was the array
Of his opponent —still a lurid glare
Reflected from his cuirass, and his shield
Seem’d living fire from Hell’s own furnaces.
And then I knew the stake depending on
The issue of the battle just begun—
It was a soul—a human soul—mine own !
My better Angel he of silv’ry mail
And noble mien—the Tempter’s slave his foe !
Dim in the distance loomed a fearful form,
A form of dread—shapeless yet awe-inspiring—
Whose baleful eyes all glittered in the gloom
Like diamonds bedded in a block of coal.
And as the conflict waged, red tongues of flame
Flickered and darted round this evil Thing
Lighting up features awful to behold.
Out from the darkness, far behind, arose
At times a wail of stifled agony,
At times a groan of deep despair. To me
It seemed all Hell had int’rest in the strife
Which should decide my future weal or woe ;
For, when the Demon Spirit hurled a dart
Which wounded sore the Champion of the Light,
A loud wild yell of triumph then uprose
From the exultant fiends, who gladly hailed
The hoped-for downfall of an erring soul.
But when, by chance, the baffled demon paused,
Sore pressed and sweating drops of purple gore,
Ah ! then’t was horrible to hearken to
The roar of rage and hate which filled the air,
Sounding like thunder from the depths of Hell
Mingling with a gnawing and a gnashing,
As of ten thousand thousand furious beasts
Rending their prey with lust most ravenous—
Turning mine eyes above, my heart was filled


With peace and sweet reliance, for I saw
Legions of Angels hov'ring in the air,
Counselling their brother in his bitter need ;
Refreshing him with draughts of heavenly love,
And taking yet a deeper int’rest in
The combat’s issue.
In soft sad light,
Half veiled behind a fleecy vapour, lay
Ihe Angels’ home. White battlemented walls
Encompassed it as far as eye could reach,
With jealous care excluding all approach
Save by the gate alone, and here there stood
A mighty Angel—having charge to keep
Strict ward and watch, and let none in but those
Who, while on Earth, had kept their Master’s trust.
Methought from thence a subtle perfume rose
Of fragrance strange and inconceivable,
The incense from unnumbered altars, burned
In honour of the Mighty King of Kings ;
While faintest strains of holy harmony
Showed there was everlasting joy and peace.
To gain an entrance to this blissful place .
Methought I’d bear a thousand ills on earth,
Naught caring for the unbeliever’s scorn,
Nor lusting after worldly wealth or praise.
Alas ! a glance at him, my Champion Knight,
Filled me with dread for the x-esult. He stood,
Yet scarce had strength to stand. His armour, hacked
And hewn to shreds, exposed his naked limbs
To the assaults of his relentless foe.
Many a gaping wound betrayed the skill
With which the demon fought his fiendish fight.
My blood ran cold—mine eyes grew dim—l heard
The clashing of their weapons and the roar
Of devilish approval from the fiends,
Who clustered round in eager haste to seize
The victor’s prize—a human soul. And now
The heavenly light above grew less and less
The angels wept-—they deemed the battle lost—
The fiend used Envy, Lust, Ambition—
All potent weapons in the cause of Hell—
Then Malice, Avarice, and Greed. It seemed
That as the battle raged I grew in years ;
From childhood I advanced to youth, to age,
And still the demon never failed to wield


A weapon suited to my age and case.
At first I saw my champion stand unhurt,
Repelling ev’ry thrust with seeming ease ;
But as I older grew, ’t was plain to see
His strength was waning fast with each attack.
At last the crisis came when he no more
Could brace him for the fight, but bent his head
To meet the death-stroke he could not evade.
And then arose a shout of madd’ning joy !
A peal of hideous mirth ! —a deat’ning roar !
With brazen clash the gates of Hell are thrown
Wide to receive th’ expected guest. From thence
A dreadful sick’ning stench pours forth, and cries
Of anguish add their horror to the scene.
All is now gloom and murky darkness here—
No more I see th’ angelic throng—no more
The blessed vision of their bright abode.
But now.that shapeless form I first did note
Has grown distinct—a grim, grey, ghastly Thing,
Fashioned in human form —yet never man
Did bear such air of fallen majesty.
The steely lustre of his serpent eyes
Expressed nor joy, nor care, nor woe, nor pain,
Nor triumph ih the vict'ry gained, but shone
Like a far-distant star whose light is but
The reflex of a grander, mightier orb.
In agony of dread I lay, as he,
With awful slowness, neared my couch. I cried
With bitter anguish to the Lord of Heaven —
Methought I heard reply, “ As thou hast sown,
So SHALT THOU reap.” The hellish crew around
Encircled me as in a ring of fire—
Outpealed with solemn clang the Bell of Doom,
Tolled as a warning to the sons of Earth,
That one of mortal race hath passed away—
That one more soul the judgment now awaits
Which shall consign him to eternal joy
Or dreadful torment. But for whom this knell ?
Was / then dead ? And had my doom gone forth ?
Ah me ! I feared it was too true. And now
The time for prayer and pardon was gone past—
All hope was lost—the demon’s outstretched hand
Was raised aloft to seize me, when—l woke !


BILLY’S PASSENGER.
RICHMOND THATCHER.
PiSSSSSIOME years ago, not many, I went to Western Aus-
tralia, in what capacity I shall not say. I might have
been a “bagman” for some Melbourne house; a
“ special ” for an influential journal, to report on the
Convict and Ticket-of-Leave systems; a gold seeker, or a bailiff
to take charge of an insolvent estate—suffice it to say, that my
business was to take me to what is called the new country at
Nicol Bay, where the avicula or pearl shell has been found in
such numbers.
Now I hate the sea, and always shall do so, as a profession.
I can watch its various moods from the shore with as much admi-
ration as a young poet meditating “ an Apostrophe to the Ocean.”
I love to hear it whilst lying in bed : its sonorous roll acts on me
like a dose of chlorodyne without the reaction; it intoxicates my
soul and not my body, as they say ammonia does. lam a col-
lector of marine fauna, and as ardent a conchologist as ever
watched breathlessly the hauling up of a dredge, or fondled over
a new “ volute ” in his cabinet. I don’t dislike watching from
the deck of a vessel the terrible struggle for mastery between the
white-crested billows and a good and well-found ship ; but the sea
as a profession, a sailor’s life, I hate, for the following reason :
When very young I was sent to sea, not apprenticed, nor as a
cabin boy, nor a loblolly boy, nor as a boy at all—l was a mid-
shipman in a crack employ. “ Our fellows ” had as much esprit
de corps as navy men, and many the riot on shore have I joined
in at the Cape or in Calcutta, pulling down lamp-posts and beating
policemen. My father paid handsomely to get me into “ the ser-
vice,” and then it was thought a favour. I think the money he
paid for four voyages, mess money, clothes, and pocket money
w r ould have bought me a commission in a marching regiment, or


paid my fees and expenses whilst at college, or studying the law.
You would fancy that, as a midshipman, I should see the mighty
ocean and life on it in the most pleasant phase. To wear a gold
band, to have a decent mess, a “ hammock man,” and dine in my
turn in the saloon with the captain and passengers, to be admired
when on shore, and rise superior to youths of my age in the esti-
mation of “ the sex ” who would “ love me for the dangers I had
passed,” is all very well, but I loathed the constant tyranny
of the officers. Yes, I don’t know whether the custom is con-
tinued now (I believe it is from what I see as an occasional pas-
senger) but in my time a course of bullying and spirit breaking
was pursued towards youngsters. I never saw tyrants like mer-
cantile navy officers, one and all, I think the hatred is passed
on like entailed estates, or a vendetta ; it was always their cry,
‘‘ when I was a boy I was done this to, or had to do that.” They
called it breaking in the youngsters,” or “ making sailors of
them.” God forgive them. I can pardon their petty tyranny
now, I can even laugh at their ludicrous (as I think at this time
of my life) efforts to keep up their dignity, and do what they con-
sidered the amount of bullying required by nautical etiquette
towards those younger or less experienced than themselves.
My first voyage was to Bombay in a leaky old tub, in company
with three other young gentlemen whose parents or guardians,
had each, like mine, paid for the privilege of being under
water for five months, which time it took us to crawl out to the
Indies. We four messed with the third mate, a fine specimen of
the sea bully. No indignity was too great for us. He was an
unsuccessful man and a savage one, a brutish cad, half sailor and
half digger, for he had left the sea for some years to work on
different “ rushes ” in Victoria, and had returned to the maternal
bosom of the ocean as third mate when men, ten years his juniors,
were commanding vessels. The second mate was a very young
man, and the first time he struck me I, in my innocence, returned
the blow, and would have held my own, perhaps beaten him, but
for the third mate, who knocked me down “ prone to” the deck as
sensation writers say. My audacity was severely punished, and
my position rendered, if possible, still more miserable. The mate


was what is termed a fine fellow, adored by the men, and on good
terms with the owner, but to the youngsters he could never un-
bend ; it was against all nautical etiquette. I met him in after
life, and found him a genial, kind-hearted gentleman ; but then, he
was to me simply a harsh task-master. The captain was, like
most other captains, of neither the old nor the modern school;
he cared for his ship, liked wine (not grog), and a good dinner,
and would listen to no complaints from the “ young gentlemen
but would curtly remind us of what he had suffered. I made my
four voyages in four different ships, and found mercantile naval
officers much the same, the vendetta between mates and youngsters
seeming universal in the service. It may be asked why I kept
to the sea so long if I disliked it so much, and I answer —for seve-
ral reasons. In the first place I was young, and when the ship
reached London I was free. Oh ! the blissful release from the
horrid thraldom ; the intoxication of being petted, admired, and
envied; the attention I got from sentimental misses who read the
“ Corsair ” and the “ Pirate; ” the scowls from those “ home-
keeping youths ” who are supposed to have “ homely wits ” —that
was the one great reason. And so it went on till I had served the
time required by the Navigation Board before I could pass my
examination as second mate or “ greaser,” as foremast hands term
that honoured officer. I was then heartily tired of the service,
and had made up my mind to leave it the first favourable oppor-
tunity, but I went to a teacher and was coached up in navigation,
a science I was supposed to be taught thoroughly during my four
years’ service. I “ passed the Board,” as it is termed, to the joy
of my mother, for my father in the meantime had died. The
examiners, both in navigation and seamanship, complimented me
on my proficiency, which was due, I must say, more to my
coacher than to any merit of my own, and as I left the hall in
Leadenhall-street with the order for my certificate, I said to my-
self, “this is all I shall ever get for about from old Dun-
bar.” But there was a time when I would not have bartered the
knowledge acquired on those four voyages, for the wealth of the
Indies.
But to return to my Western Australian experience. I took
passage from Melbourne in the mail-steamer, which duly landed


me at King George’s Sound ; and bents teamed away from Albany
as if rejoiced to leave Lagsland (as one of our number facet-
iously termed Western Australia). Aafter a few hours’ detention,
I was carted over the most sterile and desert country I ever saw.
Talk of the Gulf country, and the Great Australian Bight—they
are fertile paradises compared to the district between Albany and
Perth. Not a soul to be seen, not a sound to be heard—one
eternal succession of sand, and the most uninviting herbage that
the most frolicksome innocent lamb, or the maddest and most
demented old ram, would ever mistake for anything succulent. I
would defy Mark Twain to find anything ecstatic to say about
that desert, without an oasis in the shape of an hotel or a road-
side public for over two hundred miles. As the cart drove up to
the General Post Office, Perth, I mentally vowed to go back to
Melbourne by sea from Freemantle in anything that offered,
rather than face that road again.
Perth is a town worthy of a more lengthy description than I
can afford to give or the Punch Staff Papers will allow space for ;
it is sufficient to say that it stands on high ground, where the
pretty Swan River widens into a large lake ; has good, substantial
public buildings, the result of convict labour; capital hotels; is
sometimes enlivened by “ talent ” from the Eastern Colonies—as
they term South Australia, Victoria, and New South Wales ; and,
on the whole, is as an agreeable a surprise to the visitor, who pic-
tures to himself chain-gangs and the usual accessories to convict-
ism, as can be imagined. My business was at Freemantle, where
I was to take ship for Nicol Bay, or Tien Tsin, as the fisheries
are called.
Freemantle is twelve miles from Perth by a good road, or two
hours’ steam down Swan River. Its appearance is not inviting.
The large gaol, or “ establishment,” as they politely term it, is the
most conspicfious building in the town. All the houses are of
sandstone, many of them white-washed; and the roads are white
as snow —the glare in the summer sun being dazzling and painful.
I found that the regular and favourite trader Eliza had just sailed
for the New Country, and I must wait for six weeks for her return,
or go .up in a small cutter of about twenty tons, which might sail
in about three weeks’ time. The intelligence did not give me


any great pleasure, and I was rather inclined to curse my ill-luck ;
but in a few days I got reconciled, and even began to like the
place. I found everybody kind and friendly; and day after day
passed in pleasant company {some of the most agreeable I must
admit were “ ticketers”). I really enjoyed pic-nics up the Swan,
drives to Perth, trips to Garden Island or Rottnest, and literary
discussions in the small parlour of the j oiliest hotel I ever saw in
my life. Freemantle has about 2000 inhabitants ; and, at the
time I speak of, transportation to Western Australia had not
ceased—one shipment arrived while I was there, and I had the
melancholy satisfaction of seeing three hundred of my erring
fellow-countrymen in durance vile. I visited the “ establishment”
—in company with a high official—and had all the arrangements
explained, but failed to see any measures for reformation. I was
shown over the native prison on Rottnest Island, and'moralized
on the justice of confining the aboriginal possessors of the soil
for eating mutton which they found running on their own land —
which mutton, when in life, had driven their herds of kangaroo
from the country. In fact, I think I saw everything worthy of
note, besides forming the acquaintance of the editors of the local
journal, two gentlemen of whom I cannot speak in too high
terms.
A month passed, and I was informed that the cutter Warrior
would sail in two days. I was by no means tired of Freemantle,
but I thought it my duty to my employer to take the first vessel
that offered; so I went down to the wharf to have a look at her.
Viewed from any point, she was not a beauty—as a sailor, I could
see she would not be likely to claw off a lee shore, or make a
formidable “ day’s work her mast seemed good, and her rigging
was wire, and well set up ; but her sails were by no means new,
and a man who was pumping her out had taken a seat as if he
did not anticipate a speedy termination to his labour. Looking
at her as a probable passenger, I liked her still less : in the first
place, she was beastly dirty; a small American stove in a packing-
case on deck did not promise a good cuisine , and a ragged, tarry
unwashed and unkempt boy, peering into a saucepan to ascertain
the state of a sheep’s head, made the prospect of eatable food
seem still more remote.


I left the deck, and went down the ladder that led to the den
called by courtesy a cabin, and my feet were on the floor almost
before my head was below the cover of the “ companion.” The
hold was quite open, and full of cargo as far as a little table,
evidently meant to sustain the weight of such viands as might be
supplied on the voyage. A swinging “ tell-tale compass,” that
could be seen from the deck, and was lighted by the same candle
that would illumine the cabin ; an aneroid, some oilskins, and
two sou’-wester hats were the most prominent articles that first
met my view. When my eye got accustomed to the comparative
darkness, I could see two men—one was lying half in and half
out of two bunks against the bare side of the cutter, his half-
closed eyes and ceaseless sway to and fro showed he was inebri-
ated, and his general appearance gave the idea of a man about to
have delirium tremens ; the other occupant of the dirty den was
a tall, stupid, but honest-looking sailor who was seated on the
sideboard of the opposite bunk, and regarded me and the ine-
briate alternately with a melancholy air. “ Good morning,’ I
said loudly, and the tall sailor, in a gruff but cheery voice,
returned my salutation.
“ Ullo ! who the devil’r youl” said the figure on the opposite
side.
« Hush, skipper,” interposed the other; and, turning to me,
apologetically, he said in a low tone, “ 1 his is the cap n, sir;
he’s been havin’ a spree, and I’m tryin’ to get him square ; he’s
a first-rate fellow when he’s off the loose. Can Ido anythin
for you, sir ? ”
The creature, who was such a first-rate fellow when off the
loose, tried repeatedly to join in the conversation, and did manage
to let off a few specimens of ornate blasphemy. I told the mate
(as I found the man was) the object of my visit, and he referred
me to the agent, advising me to wait for the Eliza, as the W%rnor
was rather small for passengers —“ although she’s a fine sea-goin
craft, as stiff as a church in a breeze; and you ’ll like Billy,” he
added, a fond smile spreading itself over his countenance, “when
he gets right. He’s a first-rater at sea, when he can’t get any
drink.”
Doubting whether I should share in the mate’s affection for
the gentleman in the cabin, I took my leave, and called at Messrs.


Stephen and Co.’s, merchants and shipping agents. Mr. Stephen
seemed to think that a trip in the Warrior must be the most
pleasant thing out, and a visit to Port Walcott a consummation
greatly to be desired. He congratulated me on my choice of
vessels ; and asked me only for the passage, to mark his
appreciation of my powers of discrimination. I paid the money,
letting him know in a few words that his tall talk did not deceive
me, and got my luggage into the hold, reserving only a small
carpet-bag; for the passage could not in any reason last longer
than ten days, as a southerly wind blows off the coast all day and
every day for nine months m the year. We were delayed some
three days after that.
Billy proved a sore trial to his fidus Achates— he would rush
off at unseasonable hours, when the mate was off his guard, and
stow away in some low “ pub ” till the police got on his track,
and restored him to the disconsolate Mr. Stephen and his other
friends—the thought of kicking him ashore, and getting a decent
man never entered their heads, for all declared he was a first-rate
fellow when “ square.” Of course, the whole port was acquainted
with Billy’s delinquency and my predicament; and I was known
amongst his brother mariners and sympathising boatmen as
“ Billy’s passenger.” At last we were to start; Billy was dead
drunk, and drugged to sleep ; two sheep and a lot of timber were
on the deck; I had said good bye for the twentieth time to a
crowd of friends, some of whom accompanied me to the wharf,
as this was positively my “ last appearance ; ” the pawl of the
v inch rattled merrily, as the chain came through the hawse-pipe;
the anchor was aweigh ; and, as we paid off on the port-tack for
a board to clear the light-house point, there arose a cheer from
those on the wharf which was not the less demonstrative on the
sudden appearance of Bill in his shirt, gesticulating, and dancing
a pas sent expressive of exultation.
We were not long in clearing the point. Billy was induced to
go below by the mate, and sank again into a drunken fit, rather
than a sleep. Ihe big mainsail of the cutter was boomed out,
the square yard was run up, and we sped before the strong
southerly wind at the rate of something like five and a-half miles
E


an hour, the Warrior plunging and snortihg along like a cart-horse
with a bad cold. By night we were about twenty miles from the
mouth of the Swan, and I looked half regretfully at the light-
house on Rottnest Island, that flashed out for five seconds in every
minute. I thought, should I ever see again any of those friends I
had just left % They were acquaintances of a few weeks only,
but my regret at leaving some was none the less keen for the
brevity of our intercourse. Where a mutual liking or respect is
the result of only a short acquaintance, it is often more vigorous
than one of longer duration; in a few weeks or months, perhaps,
one is more guarded, more careful to hide his defects, and make
the most of his good qualities. Continued friendships are some-
times apt to be kept up for convenience : had I stayed in Swan.
River, my list of friends would, doubtless, have dwindled down
as I discovered or disclosed faults or objectionable peculiarities;
whilst, as it was, I left many who had learnt the bright side of my
character, and esteemed me for what I actually was. I lay on
the skylight then, thinking, half pleasantly at the probability of
prosecuting the object of my journey, half sadly at having left
friends, whilst more than one face came vividly before me—some
were women’s.
It was summer, and the night was warm enough to enjoy a
pleasant change from many weary days of oppressive heat. We
were running up along the land, at a respectful distance from it,
for the coast is girded by reefs and islets. T. he Warrior , as she
ploughed, with a very heavy furrow, through the dark sea, raised
small phosphorescent billows that shone with a dazzling brilliancy
and threatened to engulph the blustering little craft. North-half-
west had been Billy’s course before stumbling off below, but the
Warrior was too independent to confine herself to one particular
point—she veered about like a politician : now, her head was to
the eastward of North, and anon nearly due West \ but she was
still averaging about her course, bn the whole.
I did not stay on deck long; I was tired, and I must own
that I had conformed to a custom which is “quite colonial,”
and would be far “ more honoured in the breach than in the
observance ” —that is, bidding a bibulous farewell, so, after a


contemplative smoke, I tumbled below. The boy was at the
tiller, and the mate was trying to make head or tail out of some-
thing the captain was saying in a husky voice. His appearance
was startling, and his eyes had the wild rolling expression gf a
dipsomaniac.
, Nothe-half-west will fetch the Ellen,” he was saying, confi-
dentially; “jam the tiller down and flatten in your sheets; I’ll
give it over I will, by G— ! ” and here he swore a fearful oath.
Keep off, d n you,” he shrieked ; then, changing his tone, and
fancying he was amongst his boon companions, he shouted, “ Fill
’em up again, Harwood ; and put ’em down to Billy—he’s good
pay.”
The mate paci fied him, after a while j and I threw my rug
uround me, and rolled into a bunk. I slept pretty well; but,
several times, the now delirious captain awoke me by his noise
and raving. He was all over the world in a moment : now, in a
collier, bound for Shields ; then, up the Levant, trading in the
Mediterranean ; or was whaling in the Arctic Seas. “ Lower your
piece, he would say at one time ; “Come, on with your swords,”
he would cry, fancying he was cutting-in a whale; then he would
bellow out, “ Curse you—shoot the black devil ! ” and he would
be down in the bright Pacific, getting labour for Fijian planters.
I was out pretty early the next morning ; no land was in
sight, although we were steering a nearly due Northerly course.
Billy was better, and almost rational, though the glare had not
left his eyes ; he paced the deck uneasily, glancing now at the
foam, as we dashed through the water at the terrific rate of six
miles an hour; now towards the no longer visible land. He
talked to himself continually, or held animated conversations
with Imaginary listeners. The day passed as the preceding one
had : I slept a little in the afternoon, after an indifferent breakfast
and a still less inviting dinner. The sleep, or the prevailing dull-
ness, predisposed me for more slumber, or laziness I imagine. I
read a few pages from a book that might have been enlivening at
any other time, but now seemed pointless and uninteresting. I
smoked a few pipes, and tried to elicit some amusement from
Billy’s vagaries, which were hourly getting more marked and


pointed. Night came ; I did a little more deck-pacing and rumi-
nating, trying to conjure up pleasant reminiscences—but happy
thoughts would not come. Between eight and nine o’clock, I
thought I would go to bed again—so I smoked my final pipe,
took a “wee drap” from my flask, had a glance at the compass
and a bit of a look-out to windward (dictated by my old-sailor
instincts), and rolled into the uninviting domicile allotted me.
I was not much alarmed at my position, notwithstanding our
commander’s state ; we were, I calculated, abreast of the Hout-
mann’s Abrolhos, a chain of islands and reefs some forty miles
off the main land, and to-morrow would see us clear of them and
of all dangers ; and my knowledge of navigation would be suffi-
cient, if needed, to take us round the Nor’-west Cape to Tien-
Tsin. Of the Abrolhos, volumes might be written —no place in
the Australias offers so rich a field for the novelist or the romance
writer. The scene of wrecks, with all their attendant horrors—
even to murder and cannibalism; and the receptacle of hidden
treasure, no place offers a better locale for an Australian Dumas
or Marryat.
I soon slept, rocked and soothed by the regular see-saw like
motion of the old Warrior: everything was conducive to slumber
—the pendulum movement of the swinging compass, the creaking
of the main boom, and the sighing monotony of the timbers and
cabin-fittings, as the strain came to starboad or port, as the vessel
lurched steadily through the yielding water. I must have slept
soundly, for, when I woke, the scene seemed to have changed ;
instead of the regular roll, the vessel was steady—except an occa-
sional pitch, or a heavy lurch to windward, she was seemingly
motionless, or as sailors say, “ as steady as a church.”
Before I was fairly awake, or had my eyes open, I knew the
vessel was “on a wind.” This did not interest me at first, but a
few minutes’ reflection told me there was something wrong —our
course must have been altered, for the wind, as I said before,
never changes for nine months in the year, that is, away from the
land and out of the influence of the land and sea breezes. My
bunk was on the port side, and was to leeward, therefore the ves-
sel was on the starboard tack; with the wind at South she would be


heading about East by South, for the hissing noise told me we
were not close hauled. Looking round in the half-dark cabin, I
could see the captain poring over a chart and laying off the
vessel’s course; and I shall never forget his face—it seemed as if
the arch-fiend himself must have taken possession of the man. He
was chuckling and jabbering; and, as he laid the parallel ruler on
the chart, a devilish smile of insane triumph passed over his face.
“ That will do, that will do nicely,” I heard him mutter; “ all
together, all together. I would not curse Ellen, and I could not
die alone. Oh !it will be in good company—a fine reception
day for Old Nick.”
A teirible suspicion came over me—this madman, this cunning
maniac was planning our destruction~what could Ido 1 It is a
dangerous thing to take command from a master on the high
seas, d hen how could I ascertain that my suspicions were cor-
rect? I looked at my watch, it was past midnight. We might
have been three or four hours running to certain death. What
could Ido 1 Alarm the two men 1 They would not, perhaps, be-
lieve me. I waited in fearful suspense, and in a minute Billy put
his head up the hatch and said to some one at the tiller,
“ E>ue East now will fetch Champion Bay, steer steady; ” and
then he looked towards my bunk, and again muttered “ in good
company, in good company.”
The next ten minutes were an age. I lay in an agony of fear.
To die with this man, to perish thus without a chance of escape,
and just as life was becoming dear to me—what would my friends
say when I did not return I —a thousand fancies crowded upon
me, and every event of my life passed in review with lightning-
like rapidity. At the end of that time he slept, a fitful sleep but
apparently a sound one. Silently I crept from my bunk, took the
compasses, calculated our distance run, measured it on the lati-
tude scale at the side of the chart and found, just where I made
our position, a small mark, his doubtless. Breathlessly I put the
parallel ruler to East on the guide-compass and extended them to
our position. My worst fears were realised. East, with the vari-
ation, would take us right into the reef separating the two southern-
most islets of the Abrolhos. One moment, and I stood on the
ladder leading to the deck.


“ What made the captain alter the course V' I asked quickly.
“ He ’s running for Champion Bay,” was the reply; “he don’t
feel well.”
“ When did he haul on the wind ? ” was my next query.
“ Ten o’clock, sir,” said the man.
“ Good God ! ” I said, “ three hours at this rate,” and I ran
forward —to see looming ahead a seething mass of foam and rocks
almost under our forefoot.
“ Put your helm up,” I shrieked; “ hard a starboard for your
life; let go your mainsheet.”
The rpan put the helm up, and was about to let go the main-
sheet, when the madman rushed up.
“ Who dares disobey my orders 1 Damn you, put your helm
down ! ” he cried, as he threw himself on the man, and held him
and the tiller with the strength given by frenzy.
“Ha ! ha! ha ! ” he yelled, as the doomed craft plunged
towards her grave and ours, “ Hurrah ! hurrah ! Billy will be
free, and go to hell in good company.”
Not a moment was to be lost; already the water whitened
under our stem —the roar of tossing foam was becoming appal-
ling—the rocks loomed out of the darkness dose to our bowsprit,
or were clothed in a mantle of white by the violence of the'waves
that dashed over them. Springing aft, I cut the main-sheet with a
knife I fortunately had with me, then rushed to assist the man at
the tiller whom the captain held fast—the mate, too, roused by the
noise and my cries, leaped on deck —not a moment too soon. It
required all our united strength to disengage the wretched man s
hold from the tiller, which we then put hard a starboard. The
old Warrior paid off slowly, so slowly that we thought nothing
could save her or us; we were already half in the breakers when her
head came to the Westward of North, and the boom jibed with a
violence that threatened to snap the mast-head. We had forced
the maniac down below and fastened the cabin hatch over him ;
the mate lay out on the boom and gathered in the end of the
main-sheet that had unrove; then we flattened in the mainsail, and
brought the cutter to the wind on the port tack. Slowly the old
tub gathered way. It was by no means a lee shore, or our
chance of escape would have been poor, in fact, for some minutes


it seemed doubtful whether the swell would not set us on to the
reef. But gradually we increased our distance till, at last, we were
able to bear away and stand on our course, thankful that I under-
stood enough navigation to spoil Master Billy’s nice plan, for the
mate .and the foremast hands implicitly believed his tale about
making for Champion Bay, which port was to the Eastward of us,
but barred by the reefs and islands forming the Abrolhos.
When we uncovered the hatch we found that our amiable
commander had amused himself by breaking up and tearing every
thing he could get at. We secured him, and I took charge of the
vessel. He recovered, and by the time we were round the Nor’-
West Cape was well enough to take command again, and the last
time I saw him he was qualifying himself for another attack of
D. Ts.
LINES TO A LADY
WHOM I HAD SEEN ONLY IN A PHOTOGRAPH.
DERWENT M. COLERIDGE.
EEING the sun’s reflection of your face,
KgSjfl Portraiture truest of all artists true !
And, looking there, I vainly try and guess
What like, my dainty lady fair, are you !
Well, to begin :—You’ve laughing, loving eyes,
Foreshading out a laughter-loving heart—
Mind, don’t be angry if I’m wrong, my dear,
I’ve not seen you, but only view your Carte.
Then for your mouth—ah ! now I can speak out,
For genius lingers in each lip-curve fine ;
There’s passion, too, has put its impress on
Each smiling dimple, each truth-telling line.
For mouth’s the tell-tale, say what people may
Of speaking eyes— they tell whate’er they will;
But show me lips , and let me kiss them once,
I’ll tell their secret, be they e’er so still.


TO THE WANNON ROSE .
DERWENT M. COLERIDGE.
To meet, to know, to love, and then to part,
Is the sad tale of many a human heart.
— S. T. Coleridge.
I.
O meet , as when you crossed my path
PS f|| Some few short weeks ago,
Like a Northern Light in a sailor’s sight
In the darksome realms of snow;
Then first to cherish
Thoughts of unbounded happiness,
Hope doomed to perish,
For something whispered to my heart
In threatening warning, “ We must part.”
ir.
To know you better every day,
And each day to discover
Some new-born goodness in your heart
That first I had passed over,
There were so many ;
Yet, as my pulses beat with gladness,
Hope I’d scarce any —
Its voice was dying in my heart —
For something told me “We should part.”
111.
To love —and how can I but love,
For all you say “ forget” ;
Then let the sun, that rose to-day,
[On thy head rest its warmest ray !]
Forget to-night to set !
No, darling, no, that cannot be !
Henceforth—if but in memory
Around me hovering—
Thy gentle spirit, ever near me,
Shall come at night in dreams to cheer me :
With soft hand covering
The wound that’s rankling in my heart—
Since now I know that “ We must part.”


THE LAST FAREWELL;
A STORY OF A SHIPWRECK.
GEORGE GORDON M'CRAE.
° n a an d wintry day
jrj •*• sto °d bare-headed on the pier
pja|s|| see a vesse i sa ii away,
tfjrfQi Through mist and sleet,
—rjaaj nc j drifting spray,
With all I held most dear.
The farewell signal at the “ fore,”
Shook shivering in the wailing wind ;
The last mute token that she wore
For mourners on the wave-beat shore,
Left all in tears behind.
And o’er the stern a maiden leaned ;
Her pallid face her fingers screened,
And mournfully she sighed—
Perchance for one but half resigned ;
And fled—urged on by whistling wind,
And fiercely-running tide !
Great Heaven ! She raised her eyes to mine,
That swam in floods of blinding tears,
And waved her hand. I knew the sign :
T was “ Thine alone !—Yes ! ever thine ;
Thine, though we part for years ! ”
I gazed upon the less’ning sail;
I marked the moody storm-cloud pale
That brooded o’er the sea,
While rain fell fast,
And sighing blast
Heeled o’er the ship to lee.
Then launched I, on the rushing air,
One long, last, fond and fervent prayer
For one so dear to me.
There, from the leaning bulwark, waved
A kerchief in the wind—that raved,
And woke to wrath the sea.


I climbed a new-moored vessel’s side,
As,she lay tossing on the tide ;
And, clambering to the bowsprit head,
With features drawn, and heart like lead,
Watched the receding form.
My aching vision pierced the gloom
Of gathering mist and rolling water,
And still descried the kerchief white
That marked the spot where last I sought her,
Long, long I stood, and wildly waved
Love’s answer to the fading token ;
Till, lost to sight, she disappeared,
And Love’s last signal-words were spoken.
•*•*»***
Softly I turned, and left the beach ;
Nor sought for interchange of speech
With anyone I met.
I only strove to fly the thought
That any farewell-image brought:
Though I could ne’er forget !
Days, weeks and months had passed —a year ;
Yet Hope restrained the rising tear,
Till—on one fatal night of fear,
By Fate herself contrived—
I thought, I felt , that hope was vain ;
Despair came with his icy chain,
And bound it round my heart.
Next dreary morn a letter came,
Directed in some unknown hand ;
And, hemming in my weary name,
There ran a black and deathly band.
Then, I knew all I felt before
Standing by night upon the shore —
And the sad words the stranger sent
Confirmed that dark presentiment!
Yes ! all was over. All had passed ;
And calm now reigned where ruled the blast.
But, ah ! the ship that sailed away
And left me lone, and sadly sighing,
No more shall moor in yonder bay,
With fluttering flags and ensign flying ;




Drawn by George Milner Stephen.
LITTLE LILY.


And she that waved her long farewell
With tears of woe, and silent sorrow,
Shall never mark the sand and shell
With footprints on a glad to-morrow ;
Nor see, upon the sea-plashed shore,
Her anxious lover’s shadowy form :
For barque and she return no more—
Since both have perished in the storm.
LITTLE LILY.
HAROLD W. H. STEPHEN.
DITTLE Lily,
Pretty Lily,
Lily of the winsome ways,
By her charms, and by her beauty,
Won my heart in by-gone days.
Little Lily,
Fairy Lily,
Coyest maiden ever seen,
Loved me dearly—so she told me
In the days when I was green.
Little Lily,
Cruel Lily,
Worldliest of all her sex,
Threw me over for another:
Conduct sure a saint would vex !
Little Lily,
Silly Lily,
Married, like a fool, for cash :
Her spouse was old but very rich :
Me she looked upon as trash.
Little Lily,
Blighted Lily,
Drooped and withered in a year,
Took to flirting and to scandal,
Did such things I blushed to hear.


Little Lily,
Wicked Lily,
Broke the heart of that old man :
I’d forget her, oh ! so gladly !
Hate her though I never can.
Little Lily,
Stupid Lily !
I am rich and happy yet ;
Married too, for love, not money ;
Which is better, you can bet.
Little Lily,
Lonely Lily,
Homeless, friendless, and despised !
Girls, take warning by her story —
Worth, not wealth, should be most prized.
THE SECRET.
SAMUEL HAWKER BANKS.
QUESTION.
Ste|ssj]LD friend! what makes your heart so light,
our spirits always gay —
From when the bright Sun glads our sight
Until the close of day ?
You ever seem in joy to live—
No wrinkle on your brow ;
Upon my life, I much would give
Your secret but to know !
ANSWER.
Owe no man aught, nor wrong your friend, —
Still to yourself be true ;
Use no deceit, for, in the end,
It but recoils on you ;
Let nothing bring blush to your cheek
Save labour’s healthful glow :
Another word I need not speak- -
You now my secret know !


GOING DOWN IN THE WORLD.
RICHARD E. LEE.
I ! QMEBODY has said, somewhere, that “ he was a bold
man who first swallowed an oyster.” To my mind,
he was a bolder man who first went down a shaft. To
be sure, according to the doctrine of probabilities, he
must have been pretty well used to it ; because it is not unreason-
able to suppose that the first man who went down a shaft was the
sinker thereof—and, therefore, was enabled to do “ his spiriting
gently” by usage. But to undertake the feat without previous
experience; to thrust one’s leg through an ominous noose, seize
a sperm candle in the right fist, and plunge boldly into the Cim-
merian darkness, only relieved by a tiny ray of light (which you
are cheeringly informed is a candle in the workings, some two
hundred feet below), requires either a profound degree of igno-
rance to produce the desired amount of unconscious bliss, or a
combination of nerve and courage, which, if displayed in another
sphere, would gain for the possesspr the Victoria Cross. It was
in the former state of blissful ignorance that I made rny first dive
into the bowels of the earth. Ladies are said to treasure through
life a remembrance of their “first ball”—I shall never forget the
horrors of my “ first shaft.”
I was not “ alone in my glory,” however. Besides the veteran
claim-holder, who was to act as cicero?ie , there were my friends
Bluffins and Muggles. Bluffins is a jovial miller, with a very keen
eye to the main chance ; who, being desirous of investing in
reefs, had determined to visit the cradle of the gold and satisfy
himself. Indeed, it was Bluffins who persuaded me to accompany
him. “Go down below! ” he exclaimed, in reply to a feeble
remonstrance, “ to be sure I shall; and so shall you, too!
Danger 1 Bosh 1 Don’t the men go up and down a dozen times
a-day, and think nothing of it ? Danger—bosh ! ” I was abso


lutely bullied into accompanying him ; and I am free to confess
that I revile the memory of Bluffins to this hour. But—ha !ha !
I was avenged !
Muggles is by no means the same kind of man as the irre-
pressible Bluffins. He is a quiet, hesitating sort of fellow. I
always believed him to be a bit of a coward at heart, and I was,
therefore, astounded to hear him say, in reply to my confident
friend’s invitation, “ Well, yes, as you are —hem—both going, I—
hem —hum—don’t mind making one.” Muggles rose fifty per
cent, in my estimation at once. He went much higher before our
enterprise was over.
Arrived “ on the claim,” we were ushered into a small room,
and various articles of miner’s wearing apparel handed to us, with
an injunction to a get into ’em sharp. d his being accomplished,
we presented an unique appearance. Bluffins, who is a fop, wore
patent-leather boots, which peeped out incongruously from beneath
a pair of clay-soiled moleskin inexpressibles. I had struggled
into a sou’-wester hat, which seemed rather calculated to inter-
fere with my vision. It was not until my return to “ bank” that
I discovered I had put it on wrong side foremost.
At length our conductor, thrusting one leg through the rope,
holding on with one hand, and carrying a lighted candle in
the other, swung off from the top, and started to show us the
way. For a few yards we could see him descending, guiding
himself, as he told us to do, by his feet, and “ keeping his face
to the foot-wall.” Then he was swallowed up in the darkness,
and we could just see the gleam of his candle, getting fainter and
fainter, until it disappeared altogether, and a shout from below,
accompanied by raps on the signal-plate, told us that our guide
was safely landed.
“ Who goes next 1 ” was now the question. Bluffins, whose
visage had lengthened considerably while our conductor was
descending, obstinately refused to be the next. I fancied his
courage, like that of Bob Acres, was oozing out at his fingers’
ends; at any rate, his hands shook considerably. I was quite as
obstinate as he was; and, moreover, I was perfectly sincere in
my declaration that I didn’t care if we remained on top altogether.


Muggles, however, destroyed my hopes of a reprieve, by silently
getting into the rope, candle in hand, and calling to the man at
the whim to—“ hem—lower away.” He, too, was safely landed.
I now began to realise the fact that Bluffins was afraid, and I
determined to make him go down. I therefore presented myself
as the next to be operated on, and with ghastly jocularity inviting
Bluffins to “ meet me at Philippi,” away I went. I remembered
my instructions, —“ Keep your face to the foot-wall, don’t be
frightened; and when you come to the underlay, seize the rope,
and walk down backwards.” Alas ! I felt like the small boy in
the fight who was advised by the lookers-on to “go in and win.”
The theory was beautiful, but the practice of it was impossible.
I spun round like a top; I “looked up” and endeavoured to
imagine it was all right; but I didn’t like it. The narrow
opening of the shaft above me grew smaller; the encouraging
voices of the miners below, watching the descent of the “ new
chum,” grew more distinct; but I felt as though I had been going
down that shaft for ages, and that I should never get to the
bottom, I was undergoing the torture of Sisyphus reversed.
When I was down about three million feet, according to my
calculation (I believe the real distance was somewhere about 100
feet), I dropped my candle. More spinning and dizziness, until
I came to the underlay, and heard those below shout, “Now
walk!” The ruling passion was strong, even in this direful
extremity, and I muttered to myself, “ Now, Walker!” Then I
felt myself rolling down a wet and shiny surface, and held on to
the rope like grim Death as I turned over and over, until a friendly
pair of arms seized me, and I was deposited on a heap of quartz,
at the bottom of the shaft. I was out of breath, very dirty, and
not a little frightened ; but I glanced upwards, I saw a dark body
cutting out the light, knew that Bluffins was “ dreeing his weird,”
and I was at peace. Poor Bluffins ! He never had a chance
from the beginning. He dropped his candle directly he started,
he spun round like an eel on a fishing line, and the underlay
finished him. He rolled down in a collapsed mass of pure fright.
For fully ten minutes he sat gasping and panting; and when I
ventured to remind him that the danger was all bosh, the men
going up and down a dozen times a day and thinking nothing


of it, he requested me in a feeble tone, but with considerable
earnestness, to visit a certain gentleman whose domains are
popularly supposed to be somewhere in the direction we had
come.
After a tour round the workings, looking at the veins, and
admiring the well-defined ribs of quartz traversing the rock, the
gold in some of them plainly visible even to our unpractised eyes,
our conductor shouted, “ Show us a clean face ! ” Taking these
words in their literal sense, I looked round, only to see a collection
of dirty visages ; and wondered where the clean one was to come
from. One of the men, however, enlightened me by dashing a
bucket of water on the face of the rock, and we were invited to
inspect it. There it was—the root of all evil, the motive power
of the world, the
Slave of the dark and dirty mine—
As poor Leyden termed it. There was the precious metal, thickly
studding a narrow vein of quartz, about six inches wide, which
ran along the rock. We were in too rough a place to moralise,
so I bottled up my sentiment, and we followed our guide over a
heap of stone into another chamber, while a “shot” was fired.
In a few minutes the miners joined us, having lit the fuse. While
waiting for it to explode, our time was beguiled by soothing anec-
dotes of accidents caused by blasting. Over our heads were
several massive beams, and one, about three feet through, was
nearly cut in half by the effects of a blast. Bluffins grew visibly
uneasy during these recitals, and suddenly announced his intention
of going up at once. He speedily abandoned the project, how-
ever, on being informed that any such attempt made at that
moment would probably result in his propulsion up the shaft
without the aid of the rope, by the agency of the blast. It turned
out that the shot had missed fire; and after waiting for an hour
to make sure, we returned to the bottom of the shaft, and were
severally hauled up. The ascent was quite as disagreeable in its
way as the descent, and I felt immensely relieved when the
topman lifted me out of the shaft, and I found myself once more
standing on terra firma. I have been down many shafts since
then, but the sensations of my first descent are quite fresh in my
recollection.


Bluffins did n’t invest. He said it was “too risky.” I believe
he does n’t brag very much of his first and only descent. Muggles
has astonished us all by taking to the business of a mining
manager. He picked up his information somehow—or else he
knew more than we gave him credit for. At any rate, he is
doing well in his new sphere, and is manager of more than one
company—“ on gold.”
ABORIGINAL DEATH-SONG.
HENRY KENDALL.
of the flying and fierce,
I fPnS Tops of the sharp-headed spear,
-ITT”! Hard by the thickets that pierce,
Lo ! they are nimble and near.
Women are we, and the wives
Strong Arrawatta hath won ;
Weary—because of our lives,
Sick of the face of the sun.
Koola, our love and our light,
What have they done unto you ?
Man of the star-reaching sight,
Dipped in the fire and the dew ?
Black-headed snakes in the grass
Struck at the fleet-footed lord :
Still is his voice at the pass,
Soundless his steps at the ford.
Far by the forested glen,
Starkly he lies in the rain :
Rings of the councils of men
Shout for their leader in vain.
Yea, and the fish-river clear
Never shall blacken below
Spear and the shadow of spear,
Bow and the shadow of bow.


Hunter and climber of trees,
Now doth his tomahawk rust
(Dread of the cunning wild bees),
Hidden in hillocks of dust.
We who were followed and bound,
Dashed under-foot by the foe,
Sit with our eyes to the ground,
Faint from the brand and the blow :
Dumb with the sorrow that kills—
Sorrow for brother and chief,
Terror of thundering hills—
Having no hope in our grief;
.Seeing the fathers are far,
Seeking the spoils of the dead
Left on the paths of the war,
Matted, and mangled, and red.
TO- .
HENRY KENDALL.
O-NIGHT the sea sends up a gulf-like sound;
{§ 2k| And ancient rhymes are ringing in my head,
The many lilts of song we sang and said,
My friend and brother, when we journeyed round
Our haunts at Wollongong, that classic ground
For me at least, a lingerer deeply read
And steeped in beauty. Oft in trance I tread
Those shining shores, and hear your talk of Fame
With thought-flushed face, and heart so well assured
(Beholding through the woodland’s bright distress
The moon half-pillaged of her loveliness,)
Of this wild dreamer : Had you but endured
A dubious dark, you might have won a name
Willi brighter bays than / can ever claim.


CAVE CANEM.
ALFRED W. EAST.
The rain did fa’, the wind did blench,
And splettet the little wee duggee recht in tench !
—Old Song.
‘ McSweeney did eat a dog-curry. There’s no
MRS two ways about it—he eat it!
BimwHfwiiTij He always said he did not; or, rather, he has
since said so. The dislike must have been an after-thought.
Who was McSweeney ?
Good gracious me! if you begin to question me already, I
shall never get through with my story. Let me tell it my own
way—it is worth hearing. I have eaten dog at a native feast in
Honolulu—eat it of premeditation and aforethought, and rose
inestimably in the good graces of the dusky beauties who sur-
rounded the hospitable mat, as the dark morsels descended slowly
into the realms of the gastric juices.
Under the foregoing circumstances, I feel justified in giving
an opinion on dog. In fact, lam a good judge of dogs. It’s
no use trying to impose upon me. In an instant I should detect
the cheat, if an Italian greyhound cut short at the knees were
introduced to me as a Skye terrier. I have faith in the dog.
Somebody has said he is man’s best friend. I doubt this axiom
when he is troubled with hydrophobia, or, not being registered, is
troubled by the police.
Nevertheless, dog is good. I have said.
What about McSweeney ?
For goodness sake, don’t be impatient; lam coming to that
directly.
Now, be it understood, the dogs, which in Honolulu die that
man may live, are of a particular description. Doomed, from
youth up, to be ultimately intoduced to a knife—or a knife into
them, which come to the same thing in the end—they are most


carefully bred; they had need be, intended, as they are, to serve
as bread and meat to the interesting poii eaters, who killed the
first and the best Cook that ever landed on their shores.
Should Alexis Soyer have a statue ?
Why not he, as well as any other Cook ? It costs nothing—a
granite pedestal, a stick, and the thing’s complete !
Return we to our muttons—or, rather, to our dogs :
Now McSweeney was a funny dog—a most amusing dog;
though I say not that he was a cani-hsd when he eat dog. He
always told me that he was born in Clonmel; though he assured
me he had forgotten the number, as on the like interesting occa-
sions all the children were invariably sent to stay with an aunt on
the mother’s side.
Consequently, he was an Irishman.
Well, what of that? Are there not thousands of Irishmen?
When first ushered into this world—l wonder when the second
ushering took place, I never heard of that—poor Mac was a mere
baby; and being, as Irishmen generally are, very pugnacious,
was always in arms.
I never heard when he cut his first tooth, or if I did I have
forgotten. He must have cut it at some time or other, and
several others, too, or he could not have eaten dog-curry.
Like the generality of babies, as he grew older he grew
bigger, and was christened; even his Christian name has escaped
my memory—l think it was Edmund. Nevertheless, and not-
withstanding, we were fast friends—while it lasted.
What lasted ?
I ’ll tell my story in my own way, or drop it. It’s fact I’m
telling you.
That Mac was rudimented and breeched, and birched, I verily
believe. I have heard him quote dog-Latin ; I never saw him in
short-clothes ; and all boys who have arrived at man’s estate, and
are fit for anything, must have been birched at some time or other.
I have heard him say, Cave Canem meant, beware of the cane.
Ah, Mac ! you should have wared the dog !
Time, however, ever swinging his noiseless scythe, mowing
down young and old, spared McSweeney; and the bud of pro-
mise burst forth in a blooming midshipman.


A proud and noble lad stood on the deck of an East Indiaman.
A brass band played round his cap, brass buttons variegated his
adolescent breast, and salt-horse was in his bread-basket.
He took unkindly to rum, and abhorred the smell thereof.
He liked it afterwards.
Beloved by his comrades, he ascended the mizen rigging. Of
course, he descended it again, and rose to be third mate.
’T was then I met him.
We sailed together: I as midshipman, he as my superior
officer.
We cemented our friendship with a bout of fisty-cuffs ; the
result of the combat was a draw ; we both got more than we
asked for, and never asked for any more.
Pass we in silence the events of that tireful East India voyage.
We were at anchor in the Hooghly. We were at two anchors
in the Hooghly. Away over beyond Fort William, over beyond
the Maidhan, lay the City of Palaces —a whitened sepulchre, its
narrow noisome streets but ill according with its outer aspect
towards the river.
There, too, lay Wilson’s Auckland Hotel.
I liked the potato-chops and curries I got there.
I got them when I had rupees.
When I had only pice, I got my curries from the dingy-
wallah.
One evening the hatches were on, and the sun was setting.
The corpse of a departed native swung listlessly athwart our
cables.
There were two round turns in our cables.
We had not moored with a swivel, because we hadn’t got one.
The current disturbed the carrion,—a crow pecked it.
There was a strong smell.
The crow continued to peck.
I felt peckish, and inclined to crow, for I had bought a duck,
and given it to Buxoo, the dingy wallah, to curry for me. The
smell thereof was savoury in my nostrils.
It was done.
“ All in vain,” cried the jackal, in his vernacular ; “ I’ve got
a dead Hindoo ! ” From the company’s gardens the flying-foxes


took their flight to their feeding-grounds—wherever they may
happen to have been, and the croaking of myriads of frogs broke
the silence of the balmy eve. I heeded not; for had I not a
curried duck before me ! was not McSweeney by my side; was
not the clattering of fork and spoon even pleasanter in mine ear
than the rippling of the Hooghly’s muddy stream ?
Ah, yes ! Again I say, “It was done ! ”
“De mortuis nil nisi bonum” “Of the dead, nothing but the
bones,” said Mac, with his dog-Latin again.
I have said it was done. I said not that Mac had done. No;
far from this being the case, all-forgetful of the hospitality I had
extended to him, Mac went on deck and questioned Buxoo as to
the material used in the production of that delicious curry.
Bah ! His ingratitude “ stank in my nostrils.”
I forgot the dead Hindoo, as I thought of it.
Said Buxoo, in his broken English, in reply to Mac’s query,
“ Dock, Sahib—dock curry.”
“ Ha, ha,” shouted Mac in his glee, “ he’s been eating dog.”
“ N’e, Sahib, not dog —dock curry, Sahib.”
However Mac was not to be convinced. Holding to his own
opinion still, he declared for dog, told everybody I had been eat-
ing dog, said nothing about his share in the transaction, and
doomed me to the infamy of being looked upon as a dog-eating
Christian.
As a Persian would have despised me, was I despised among
my fellow men.
Liberty men barked at me as they passed our ship.
My messmates jeered me.
My officers grinned at me.
Friends, asking me to dinner, politely intimated that if I ex-
pected dog curry, I must bring it with me.
I rebelled, and got roasted alive.
I suffered; oh, how I suffered !
Indignation stirred the very depths of my soul.
I vowed vengeance.
I waited.
I waited, yes, many long, long years I waited, till my heart
almost sank within me.


That eventful voyage completed, Mac and I parted. We
corresponded; but I could hardly send him a hind quarter of
dog in a letter, for at that time Australian preserved meats had
not been invented, and the Crimean war was not even dreamt of.
I promised to tell you about McSweeney and the dog curry /
Well, I know I did, but you are so dreadfully impatient, be-
sides you seem to have forgotten etiquette. I have only just
introduced you to Mac, and told you how he dined with me, and
now you want to dine with him without an invitation ; you must
wait—even as I waited for many years, you must wait a few
minutes.
During those years, that mournful period, I endeavoured to
familiarise myself with dogs, and to cultivate their tastes. When,
with my old friend Blanche, I tried new guns at the Red House,
Battersea. 1 partook of “ dog’s hind leg ” for my lunch—there
rarely was anything else to be found there unless we took it our-
selves. When banquetting in the bosoms of happy families, —
happy because virtuous, —I assisted them in demolishing the
washing-day’s “dog in the blanket.” When, at sea, the blustering
gale had blown up an appetite I devoured “ dog’s body ” vora-
ciously. I was getting up my mental muscles for the final tussle
with mine inimical friend.
I spoke of dog, I thought of dog, I dreamt of dog, I even
poetized about dog.
Asked by a female relative of a certain age, from whom I had
expectations, to write a few lines in her album on the death of a
dear and lately departed friend of hers, I indited the following,—
In Memoriam.
Was ever grief like mine ? My Charlie’s dead !
For him full many a bitter tear I've shed ;
He breathed his last in arms which ne’er have pressed
Another loved one to this aching breast.
He’s gone, and lam left alone to bear
The sorrows to which each below is heir;
Would I were laid beside him in the grave,
From which the fondest care has failed to save.


True, I’ve a husband left—but what of that ?
His only use is buying me a hat,
A bonnet, dress, or shawl, as case may be,
But as to loving him—good gracious me !
Who could compare a husband, wretched noodle,
With the soft charms of a white curly poodle !
Its brown eyes formed for love, its little feet
Pattering beside me up and down the street.
No ! Charlie’s gone ! Since then nor cat, nor bird,
Husband, nor friend, have these fond heartstrings stirred ;
My soul lies heavy, heavy as a log,
Pity me, friends ! Did you e’er lose a dog ?
Alas ! no need to say what became of my expectations.
I don’t much care about the log line, but I could n’t get any-
thing else in just then, I was in a hurry.
Doggrel!
I know it’s doggrel, and, therefore, all the better suited to my
theme. If Charles Dickens could permit Mrs. Leo Hunter to
make “ log” rhyme with “frog,” surely I, who am no lion hunter like
the Rev. Dr. Cummings, of South Africa, who deserted from the
Cape Mounted Trifles and built a church, but simply a poor in-
significant dog-hunter, may be permitted to take a like liberty.
But I digress.
Always faithful in redeeming any promise I may have made,
for my word is my bond, though I cannot raise any money on it,
it not being transferable; I will now proceed to relate to you
as succinctly as I possibly can how I triumphed and McSweeney
fell.
Allans I
Once again I am in Calcutta.
lam second officer of a mail steamer; Mac is second’officer
of the Ellenboro’. We are still fast friends, though rankling deep
in my bosom lies the remembrance of past injustice.
As before, the jackal seeks his supper, the flying fox flaps his
wings lazily o’er the Hooghly’s turgid stream, and the bullfrog gets
himself up for a croak.
I have done the deed.


Two days ago I have bought a mongrel pup; two days have I
kept him fasting, to the intent that his little carcase might sweeten;
his life-blood has ebbed, and he has gone to pot, that McSweeney
may dine and I may be revenged. I have tasted the mess; it is
savoury. Piping hot, it goes on board his vessel. It is four bells.
Two notes accompany it; the one to Porteous, chief officer, saith,
“ Eat not; explain hereafter.” The other to McSweeney conveys
my compliments.
“ Hallo,” says Mac, “a curry from E. —it’s bound to be good.
I never knew such a fellow for curry; I shan’t eat anything else
for my dinner.”
Mac, Mac ! Cave canem !
He has dined.
I am in his presence.
He thanks me warmly.
I tell him I thank him for his approval.
I produce an ear and a paw of the animal he has been eating.
His face blanches.
He goes on deck.
He is ill.
Ah, Mac, never more while life lasts shall you eat curry again ;
your chicken has come home to roost.
The next morning liberty men, returning to their ships, barked
at Mac.
Mac suffered in silence.
I silently rejoiced.
Vengeance was mine!
I have now told you how McSweeney eat the dog curry, and
how by dogged obstinacy I triumphantly vindicated my character.
As I have already admitted, I since lost it at Honolulu.
No matter, it never was very good.
I have done.


LOVE'S CAREER.
SAMUEL HAWKER BANKS.
rose like morning, did that love of ours,
Ou3 dazzlin S splendour, darting golden fire !
■ I No shadows darkened its too blissful hours#
And life wherein to love our sole desire.
Its noon was clouded—still a transient beam
Would flit across, and cheer us with its light,
Disclosing heaven yet there. Nor did we deem
Its day would e’er be followed by a night.
Its evening was a calm ! The glorious sun
At last descended ; still some light remained
To show that day had been—its course then run :
And those, whom else were one, the gloom now twained !
Love’s green had turned into the yellow sere—
Like leaves of Autumn, ere they fall to earth :
horeshading out a Winter dark and drear—
The death of all to which Spring e’er gave birth.
And then the black night came, and poor Love died— .
But only as a flower which Winter chill
Doth breathe upon—yet scarce to death allied,
For where’s the power can Love entirely kill ?
From out its grave the form it sometimes rears
Of what it once hath been, and death defies;
And thus, throughout our full extent of years,
Love’s power is felt—for true love never dies.


JIM'S SHARE.
GARNET WALCH.
■ ELL, mate, it’s snug here by the logs—
That’s peppermint—burns like a match ;
There’s room for us two, an’ the dogs
(Lie down, you Scotch thief, and don’t scratch !)
' Your moke’s all serene, never fret;
He’s along of my old chesnut mare —
On the lucerne they ’ll soon put a set;
But there’s plenty for both, and to spare ;
Outside, though, it’s cold mate, it’s cold—
A regular sneezer, I know ;
And the moon—she’s about a week old—
Seems, somehow, to make the cold grow.
*******
Me ! “going to sleep !” no !no fear !
I was havin’ a bit of a think.
Asked me twice before I could hear ?
Well, I never had one blessed wink !
W hat was it you wanted to say ?
Oh ! “ why am I dullish to-night ?”
It’s the twentieth, ain’t it, to-day ?
Of course—l can’t help but be right.
Why, mate, I’d go twelve month or more
Without askin’ or keepin’ no count ;
An’, sure as this day’s to the fore,
I’d spot it—for any amount.
A conjuror, am I ? no fear—
It’s nothin’ but instinct, d’ ye see,
Not magic—though nigh on as queer :
A regular riddle-me-ree.
Well, now for the yarn : it ain’t long.
In sixty I worked —wait a minute,
I ’ll light up—a story’s no song ;
I may as well smoke while I spin it.
In sixty, I worked on Dead Horse
With a mate as was called Jim the Swell—
Not his right name, you see ; but, of course,
With us diggers it did just as well.


It was n’t his togs that was fine—
’T was his ways, and his gentle-like talk ;
Not soapy—that was n’t his line—
But pure milk : not half water, half chalk—
Just a gentleman, down to his toes ;
But, for all he was scholar an’ that,
He flattened old Bully Black’s nose,
An sunk more in a day than Big Pat.
Him an’ me quite promiskus had met
(He was pretty hard up at that time,
And I had a few notes to let);
So we chummed, an’ we got along prime—
-1 hat’s as far as our hittin’ it goes ;
Hut one thing we never could hit :
And that was the stuff. I suppose
We bottomed on six—not a bit,
Not even the colour ! At last
e were stumped—every token cleaned out 1
By the time that the Autumn was past
We had n’t enough for a shout.
But still we worked on—same old tune :
For nothin’ but mullock come up !
1 ill, one day—the seventh of June —
Jim took bad—(sah-h ! stop that yer pup)—
It was tyford : I think that’s the name—
At least our old Pill-box said so—
Old Byles,—but, I’m dashed ! when he came
He told me straight off’t was no go—
Jim was booked—(curse the pipe ! it won’t draw);
But, bless you ! Jim —he did n’t know :
He was ravin’ ! My word, he did jaw—
Like a Parliament House in full blow :
Mostly talk of the old folks at home,
Mixed with lingo I don’t understand —
Maybe Latin or Greek, or some pome ;
An’ part of it, mate, was real grand ;
An’ part like soft music—so sweet !
One word to my heart, mate, went slap—
’l was a name he would often repeat—
A girl’s name —his sweetheart’s—poor chap !
But this part don’t interest
So I’d better dry up —no ? —poor Jim !
Of that cove I could talk till all’s blue.
Look here, mate, I cottoned to him !


Well, at last he got straight in his head—
The sixteenth, yes, that was the day :
I was kneelin’ ’longside of his bed,
When he woke—l was tryin’ to pray.
He lifted himself up, quite strong ;
Says I, Why, my oath ! it’s all right!
Next minute I saw ’twas all wrong !
Then he turned—and he felt for the light.
Says he—l remember each word
Plain as print in a book—(dash this pipe !)
Says he, “ Bill, I’ve been listening, and heard—
“ But it’s no use, old man” —(where’s my wipe ?
That smoke there’s a waterin’ my eyes !) —
“ It’s no use, Bill—l’d live if I could,
“For you, and the rest whom I prize ;
“ But He, who does all things for good,
“ Calls me home—not to dear England’s shore,
“ But where there’s no trouble or pain !
“ So, Bill, don’t you fret any more ;
“ Come, partner, /do not complain !
“ I’m sadly afraid, dear old boy,
4 4 That I Ve taxed all your powers as a friend ;
44 But though Fortune, till now, has proved coy,
44 Jonah’s going—and matters will mend !
44 Yes, that’s right, hold my hand, hold it tight;
44 Let me die with the feel of your grip !
44 Now listen—l’m losing the light,
44 So take the last words from my lip :
44 In my box all my letters are kept
(You ’ll find the addresses with ease) ;
44 Send all to my mother, except
44 One packet—send that to her, please—
-44 To her, whose sweet name is engraved
44 On this locket that’s next to my heart:
44 1 dare say of her I have raved
(h, God ! it will break her dear heart!) ;
44 Send the locket, and with it some hair—
-4 • My diary too, that must go ;
44 God bless you, old boy ! You ’ll take care
44 To tell it them gently, I know.
44 Now, Bill, lay me down ; and good bye—
-44 Good bye—dear old fellow —good bye—
“ Goodbye!" *****
There—that’s out of my throat —I can speak ;
I did all the partner had said ;


An’ we buried him close to the creek,
Where the couch-grass waves over his head.
Ev’ry man on the flat left his claim,
For Jim was respected by all ;
Why ! even the storekeepers came—
An’ the four we owed most held the pall.
*******
Hold hard—l ain’t finished my talk :
There's the curiousest part got to come—
An’, mind you, there’s no Charley Pork ;
Though it’s rum, mate —by thunder—it’s rum.
Well, I went back to harness next day,
But I hadn’t much stomach for work ;
Howsever, the bills were to pay,
So I knowed’t wouldn’t do for to shirk.
All day I stuck at it like wax ;
No luck—not the shade of a grain !
Thinks I, I had better make tracks :
Go prospectin’—or hire out again.
So I tumbles up, had half a pipe—
Mind you, this was the twentieth of June ;
Then the moon rose, round, ruddy and ripe—
All the world like a red-hot spittoon.
I looked the old gal in the face,
As much as to say, How d’ ye do ;
Then I made for the hut at snail’s pace ;
An’, as I went on, the cold grew.
I hadn’t a long way to go —
’Bout five hundred yards, maybe less ;
But, somehow, I had to go slow—
An’ I felt precious queer, I confess.
What with nursin’ the young ’un so long,
An’ frettin’ a bit at his loss ;
An’ the style things was all goin’ wrong —
I was sickish an’ weaklike, an’ cross.
So I slouched towards the hut, on the rise ;
An’ the nearer I got I felt worse ;
An’ the grass-trees in front, blame my eyes,
Seemed like plumes on the top of a hearse.
There wasn’t a sound to be heard ;
The bush was as still as the dead ;
Not even a breath of wind stirred
In the leaves of the gums overhead—
But the moonlight was bright as the day,
Blue, beautiful, liquid and clear


It shone—in its cruel, cold way,
An’ lit up the bush far an’ near ;
It flooded the clearin’ with light;
It poured on the hut, slabs an’ roof;
An’ it showed me a blood-curdlin’ sight,
Which you may not believe—but I v’e proof!
Inside —by the window—there sat
A figure I knew at a glance :
’T was my partner’s—my davy on that;
I’m not the right sort to romance.
At first, mate, the head was bent low ;
But, after a second or more,
’T was lifted up, solemn an’ slow :
The young ’un ! as plain as that floor ;
But, mate, not his face as he died—
Not pinched up, an’ haggard, an’ worn,
With his hair (Jim’s partickilar pride)
Cropped as close as a sheep that’s been shorn—
But his face as I knew him at first,
With its beautiful golden-brown hair,
Before matters had come to the worst,
Or’t was altered by sickness an’ care.
He looked at me straight for a while,
An’ pointed down close to his side ;
Then smiled such a heavenly smile,
Like the smile on his face when he died.
“ All fancy ! ” —no fear—not so fast :
I told you I’d proof, an’ I have ;
But that I shall keep for the last.
Just wait till I’ve done—do you sav ?
I rushed to the door of the hut—
Threw it open, but no one was there
(If you don’t count the kangaroo slut
Sound asleep under poor old Jim’s chair) ;
The winder was shut close an’ snug;
An’ the table, where Jim used to write,
With its makeshift for cloth—an old rug —
Stood where it could best catch the light.
’T was here that the figure had sat,
An’ had pointed down here —as I said.
I looked on the table—my hat
Fairly lifted with fright off my head,
For there, on some paper I ’d bought
For to write to Jim’s friends ’cross the wave,


These freshly-wrote words my eyes caught :
“Dig nine yards due east of my grave!”
The writing was Jim’s —just the same
As I’d seen many times, and knowed well;
An’ underneath all was his name,
His right name, an’ not Jim the Swell.
That night, mate, I think you ’ll have guessed,
I did n’t do much of a doss ;
For when I turned in ’t was half dressed—
An’ nothin’ but tumble an’ toss.
At daylight, I off’s to the spot —
Nine yards to the East of his grave :
By tea-time—you see that there pot,
That was full, —forty pounds, and a shave !
“ Forty pounds weight of what ! ” why, of gold :
’T was a pocket—d’ ye take ?—I had struck.
Well, there is n’t much more to be told ;
But that warn’t all of my luck :
Three days, an’ the patch was played out.
I paid all our debts on the flat;
Gave the boys round a spread, an’ a shout;
An’ cleared with five thousand !—how’s that ?
I took a trip home on the strength ;
Saw Jim’s mother— God bless her white hair !
How she cried when I told her, full length,
’Bout Jim’s death, and then forked out his share.
I did n’t let on how it came :
I hinted he dug it himself—
In a lie like that there there’s no shame !
Do you think (hat there is, now, yourself ?
Six months, an’ I did the back trip ;
An’ with what there was left of my half,
I went in for Sandy Creek scrip ;
An’ they slaughtered me, mate, like a calf.
Then, I’d up-an’-down luck, as we say;
But there war n’t no more pockets for me :
So I chucked up the shovel one day,—
An’ here I am—shepherd : d ’ye see ?
It’s but a dull life, at the best ;
Though the tucker an’ pay are both right;
But I’m old, an’ I must have my rest—
More to me, now, than cash, a long sight !
“ Show the proof? ” I don’t want no remind :
Here it is—in this old leather bag ;


Here’s the paper, an’ Jim’s name full signed ;
Ain’t it worn through more like to a rag.
*******
What, mate ; you his brother ! —don’t gas—
Don’t you try any rises with me !
To that hand you had better cry “ pass,”
Or the old man an’ you won’t agree ;
You ’re in earnest —you are ?—just come here ;
Let’s look at your mug in the light !
If it ain’t—well, I’m blessed !—this start’s queer ;
An' the twentieth of June , too, to-night I
“ Away in the States when he died ?”
Were you, now ! —an’ been lookin’ for me ?
“For the old ’un you wish to pervide ?”
Your fist on it ! Ah ! did you see
The white hands that hovered above
As you gave me that true British grip ?
They were Jim’s ! an’ they brought us his love !
It’s all right—old partner —this trip !
ALONZO DE GUZMAN:
A LAY OF YE TAMBAROORA DIGGINGS.
RICHARD E. LEE.
spIIpMITE the harsh and clanging cymbals, let the brazen trumpets sound ;
Bring the bands of howling darkies from the music-halls around :
■ Bid them sing the glowing praises of the Children of the Sun,
And especially De Guzman’s, as the hero of my fun !
Dark as night was bold Alonzo, son of Afric’s sultry clime,
Shipped to Cuba by his captors, as a slave, when in his prime;
But he felt the spark of Freedom burn within his manly heart,
So he knifed his brutal owner, and concluded to depart.
Stowed away, he lay in silence, till the ocean spread around,
Then he joined the hardy seamen of the craft for Sydney bound ;
Pulled, and hauled, and reefed, and bellowed, till in port the vessel moored.
And De Guzman joyful landed, of his liberty assured.
Not a moment did he tarry, e’en to take a nip or two
To the jolly Flag of Freedom that had brought him safely through ;
But his swag he quickly shouldered, bade his shipmates all good-bye,
And was off to Tambaroora in the twinkling of an eye !
G


Many weary miles he plodded, many times he went astray ;
Jeered by ribald bullock-drivers with “ Hi! Gollybosh—good day ! ”
But he heeded not their laughter, though their chaff flew thick and fast,
Till the modern El Dorado held his coloured form at last!
There all men are free and equal—if they hold a miner’s right,—
And the best man on the diggings is the hero in a fight;
Many battles fought Alonzo, ever vanquishing his man,
Till his fame, throughout the township, as a mighty bruiser ran.
Joyful cried the stalwart diggers, “ He’s a downright plum, you know ;
It will never do to lose him, we must let him ‘ have a show ! ’ ”
So they kindly took his money (all the cash with which he came),
And bestowed on him a pickaxe, and a fourth share in a claim.
Fiercely delved the bold De Guzman, till he reached the stubborn rock ;
Then with gad and drill he laboured at the hard and flinty block :
Till his mates, who cheered his progress, said, “ The sinking hard has got ;
We must blast it, bold Alonzo—watch us putting in a shot! ”
Then De Guzman marked them drilling, saw them tamp and light the fuse, —
Heard the loud reverberations through the rock their growling lose ;
Watched his mate the shaft descending—heard him bellow, “ Blow me tight!
Here ’s a vein that equals Krohmann’s ! Holler, boys, we’ve struck it right ! ”
Like a Rothschild felt Alonzo, as he straightway sold his share,
Driving round the muddy township in a gallant drag and pair ;
Who so free as he at “ shouting ” ? Who so careless of his “ tin ” ?
Never heeding, as he frolicked, that his “ pile ” was getting thin !
Gloomy looked the bold Alonzo, as in durance vile he lay,
Charged with vagrancy, and finding all his friends had flown away ;
Gone the stream of sparkling Piper —gone the happy-tights of old—
And he found the sudden ardour of his boon companions cold.
Then rheumatics came and seized him, doubled up his stalwart frame;
And the men he once had vanquished, of his helplessness made game;
Fiercely spake the stern policeman, “ Come, clear out of this, you scamp ! ”
And when last I saw De Guzman, he was dolefully on tramp !
Smite the harsh and clanging cymbals, let the brazen trumpets sound ;
Bring the bands of howling darkies from the music-halls around :
Let them sing of bold Alonzo, ebon child of Afric’s sun—
Of his “ pile ” at Tambaroora, and how very soon ’t was done !


THE DAY OF SMALL THINGS.
THOMAS MOSER.
F there be one subject which the colonial moralist or
jp social reformer takes for a stock text more often than
another it is the lack of “home influence.” The
newspaper editor, whose ingenuity is sorely tasked to
provide material for his periodical dish of literary pabulum, can
always find it at hand in penning a wholesome homily upon the
demoralisation of the rising generation. The judge, with the
perpetually recurring case of some youthful witness appearing
before him exhibiting ignorance of the grossest kind, seizes the
occasion to address the jury upon the melancholy example of the
lack of “ home influence” so immediately brought under his notice.
The preacher finds a fruitful theme, as he denounces dissipation
and immorality, in appealing to Christian sympathisers, if they cannot
save the old, at least to guard the young; while clerical and lay
orators, who periodically appear on public platforms to plead the
cause of orphan and ragged schools, expend their powers upon the
evil results arising from the neglect of “home influence” in the
colonies. That we as a body are “ worse than other Galilseans ”
may possibly be a matter of opinion; but while we are very
properly denounced for our shortcomings, something may be said
of the peculiar circumstances under which we live. We may cry
peccavimus !or apply to our hearts the flattering unction so far as
its lubricating effect will act as an emollient—
* * * Video vieliora proboque
Inferiora sequor.
wring our hands at our hard fate, and promise amendment. The
question is—What are we to blame ? Suppose we begin with the
climate. It is trying, no doubt. Our livers are perpetually going
wrong, and we help them by stimulants. We work hard to-day,


and prepare ourselves for to-morrow’s duties by eating hearty
dinners at late hours. Paterfamilias at seven o’clock in an
evening is generally a used-up man. He particularly wishes
that the children should be in bed, and he composes himself to
read the daily papers, to smoke the calumet of peace, and thence
to bed himself. 1 ake him as a whole, and he is not a family man
and when his means allow him to retire from business, he finds
that his family have grown beyond his control. They know more
of the ways of the world than he does \ and, in many cases, having
been led to look upon him more as the head of the household,
and in the light of a general relieving-officer, they know nothing
at all about the inner springs of his heart. All the outer charac-
teristics may be plain enough; that he is an affectionate parent,
having the interests of his family at heart, ever candid and open
with them, eager to counsel and assist them, may be readily
understood; but the association of parent and child in its integrity
is wanting. The pleasures or sorrows of the child are to him
unknown. His companionship is that of a guardian. He loses
sight of the great fact that to form the character of a child he
must become a child. As the power of any public speaker arises
from his capacity to put himself on an intellectual level with his
audience, so must he who would influence a child not only use its
own language, but adapt himself to its habits, its pursuits, and its
sympathies.
Now, the question is, what time has the ordinary man of
business for domestic duties? The peculiarity of the Northern
hemisphere is that a long twilight in summer gives opportunities
for domestic reunions after the day’s work is completed. The
long winter evenings give similar advantages, whereas in the
Southern hemisphere the transition from day to night is the work
of but, comparatively speaking, a few moments. Hence it is that
there rarely is that domestic association betwixt father and child
as in the mother country. The training of a family depends in
the colonies more immediately on the mother, and who can doubt
but that the responsibility is greater than she can bear, and one
that she clearly has no right to have imposed upon her to such an
extent. A woman’s weakness is as soon detected by a child as by


a man, and the tender chord is manipulated with cunning by tiny
fingers. The child’s faults are too often hid from the father, either
to avoid annoying him or to save the child from rigorous punish-
ment, and mischief is done this way; or what is more common,
when one parent punishes, the other pardons, simply to save
himself personal annoyance. The father sees too little of his
children as a rule in the colony, and circumstances too often
preclude him from seeing more.
The tendency to “despise the day of all small things” in
domestic economy is, moreover, a serious evil in too many colonial
households. There is an absence, generally speaking, of all outside
civilising influences. The bark hut and the sapling fence suggest
squalor and wretchedness, be the internal economy ever so complete.
There is no individuality about the place, and what a child’s
reminiscence of home hereafter must be, if it is to be fixed by
external surroundings, it is difficult to imagine. The traveller from
the boundary of one colony to another, or, as he has been termed,
“ the navigator of the ocean of gum,” finds but little change of
scene, so far as the artifice of man helps him. One homestead is
like another in five cases out of six, and the son of the soil who
can boast a peach tree near his hut may be usually considered a
remarkably civilised man.
It may be asserted that the motto “ Homo noscitur ab cede” is as
good as “ Homo noscitur a sociis that a man’s Lares and Penates,
be they ever of such a lowly order, are types of his character.
We are fortified in this view from our youth up—from the hour
when elderly spinster friends, bent upon training the young twig,
indelibly impressed upon our young memories that lovely poem,
“ ’T is the voice of the sluggard,” which, it will be remembered,
particularly alludes to the virtuous author of this respectable ode
visiting the sluggard’s premises. “A man of words and not of
deeds” was in a similar childish poem “likened to a garden full of
weeds,” and, in a word, the language of flowers played an influential
part in childish education. The family garden, of a truth, was
“ God’s acre,” and how many lessons, moral and religious, have
not been instilled into youthful minds through the medium of the
leaf, the bud, and the flower! English Hodge, on his pauper


wages, and with his late hours, can still find time to train a creeper
or to bud a rose; his humble flower patch is weeded by little
fingers; but Colonial Hodge, with no poetry in his composition,
grows peaches because he can eat them, and perchance if he can
get some ragged passiflora, in the hope that, Briareus-like, it will
in time stretch its hundred arms around his verandah posts, he
may exert himself to dig a hole and plant it, but there the matter
ends; and if its stalks survive the teeth of goats, or its roots the
snout of a pig, it grows up unkempt and forlorn, to run in wildness
over his hut, to shade his door-step in the heat, and to breed
centipedes in the roof. Colonial Hodge careth not for flowers.
Whether “he considereth the lilies” may be doubted; but if he
does, he keeps no practical examples to illustrate to his children
the results of his meditations.
There is no occasion to run botanically insane, or to scour the
fields of literature, and pile Pelion on Ossa in the way of quotation
from authors inspired and uninspired, to prove that the reverence
of Nature’s God, instilled through Nature itself, is the keystone
of all religious feeling. That, without the voice of the Creator
being heard through the creature, the result of all Christian
teaching becomes a wild mystery, the handmaid of superstition.
This has been done by better hands than his who now wields this
pen. Sung by bard, expounded by preacher, and declaimed by
orator, it stands a recognized fact which no man can gainsay.
Then why not grow flowers ? The climate t In the torrid regions,
perhaps, this does affect the question slightly; but, somehow,
while the imported Hodge neglects, and the native Hodge despises,
German Hodge manages in the wilderness to rear his plants, and
the domestic contrast is usually against the two former, any way
we take it. With the British and native element, the outer garnish-
ing of the house is the exception—with the German, the rule. Let
us say nothing about what those dreary buildings, yclept country
schools, might be made under the hands of juvenile horticulturists.
Let us say nothing of what object-lessons, illustrated by Nature’s
loveliest handicraft, might teach, and what morals they might
inculcate. The climate is the grand excuse. Whg,i a comfort , we
have one ! !


The “ day of small things” brings us to the homely considera-
tion of pet animals. How our early English associations carry
us back to the days of pet cats, dogs, birds and rabbits, whose
names are yet “ familiar as household words!” They have long gone
to their happy hunting-grounds ; but how many of us could, even
now, if we visited the home garden, point out the spot where their
remains were interred amid lamentations and tears ! In fancy, we
can fix upon one spot in a shaded corner where lay the bones of a
grimalkin whose fecundity—had its fruits not met with an early
death at the hands of a grim groom, the family executioner in
such cases —would, by this time, have made it the maternal ancestor
of generations, to be calculated by the Binomial Theorem, or some
mathematical formula to be worked out on Babbage’s machine.
A paralytic canary, too, haunts our memory —who rejoiced in the
name of Dick, and who lived songless for some years to the sur-
prise of the family, when the extraordinary discovery was made that
Dick was a hen ; but who died with an epicene mystery about him
to the last. There are few of us who cannot cherish such “ memory
of small things ” in our sere and yellow days with some pleasure !
How beautifully Charles Dickens tints the picture of the love of
pets, when Dotheboys Hall breaks up and the last despised
outcast child flies from its wretched walls with but one object of
affection—a little bird, which is found dead in the cage beside the
fainting child ! But how few country households in the colonies
can exhibit dumb pets ! One meets occasionally with a screaming
parrot, a demented cockatoo, or a misanthropical magpie; but
there the matter ends. Buffetted by infant hands, the targets for
infantile missiles, or the objects of infant torture, these ill-starred
birds do penance for the ravages of their ancestors upon the
paternal corn-cobs or wheat-fields.
It is a harsh thing to say, but the Australian youth has small
sympathy with dumb creation. The picture of “ Cornstalk proper”
on a half-starved horse, his cabbage-tree hat at the back of his ears,
his long hair greased and sticking out behind like the top-knot of
a curlew, standing in his stirrups, and propelling his wretched
beast to its utmost stride by digging it in the sides with a rusty
spur,—is one which may be seen almost any day in a provincial


town ; but especially if it should happen to be a Sabbath day, and
the thermometer 98° in the shade. There is a degree of callous-
ness about the native youth, when a dumb animal is in the case,
peculiar to him. He is passionately fond of horses ; but his
estimate of their value, and his appreciation of their virtues, does
not arise from any sympathy with the finer instincts of the animals,
which he never studies, but solely from the experience he has of
their respective powers of endurance, tested under circumstances
often bordering on brutality. This opinion, unfortunately, is justi-
fied by too many examples in the country districts ; and, where
the law does step in to punish the perpetration of cruelty to
dumb creatures, the delinquent views the proceeding, not only
with astonishment, but as an act of undue severity.
There is much to be said for such an anomalous state of
things. A native youth, viewed from a national point of view, is
anything but a coward. Rude and rough, he may be ; but he is
not destitute of either sympathy or natural affection. And this
utter disregard for the feelings of dumb animals—unfortunately
the rule in the bush districts—arises from the peculiar course of
training he goes through. Employed more or less in the working
of stock, and having to deal with them in a but half-domesticated
state, he is taught to apply skill with physical force to subdue
them ; and, so long as their subjugation is brought about, without
destroying them or injuring their market value, it matters but
little how severe or how brutal are the means adopted to effect the
required end. Practically, the humanizing effect of intimacy with
the brute creation is never tried upon him. No lesson as to his
own life is taught him by the study of these dumb messengers of
God. No appeal can be made to his sympathies by some homely
application of the trusting confidence the dumb animal exhibits in
man, when the subject of his care and attention. How strikingly
the prophet of old used the simile as he smote the heart of the
Jewish monarch in his withering denunciation of his great sin !
The poor man had nothing save one little ewe lamb, which he had bought
and nourished up : and it grew up together with his children : it did eat of his
own meat and drank of his own cup, and lay in his bosom, and was unto him
as a daughter !


Granting that, in the country districts, not only are our children
unable to get pet animals whose habits are such as to encourage
tenderness of feeling, or whose instincts are of a high order—save
dogs—a good deal might be done through our public schools.
An energetic clergyman in the interior, writing to the author some
months ago upon the subject of the introduction of sericulture
into our public schools as a pastime during play-hours, says, “ I
wish we had as many flower-beds and bird-cages outside as we
have maps in.” “Try,” says Dr. John Brown, in his Horce Sub-
secivce, “ to get the resident teacher inside the skin , and who is
forever giving lessons.” “ The mind,” says Montaigne, “ should
be forged rather than furnished—fed rather than filled.”
External aids are required to effect this. “My first great
lesson,” said one of our brightest literary ornaments of the mother-
country, “in the power of mutual reliance and co-operative energy
was taught me by Lord Brougham, through the glass pane of a
beehive.” What a scope is given for the teacher as his pupils
crowd round a beehive, and watch day by day the movements of
the “insect nation,” the growth of their labours, and the mighty
results of co-operation ! “ What knowledge,” says Dr. Brown, as
he dilates upon the text, “ Ylpiorov arct ara
TrXpprj airov tv np oraxut,” * “is the child picking up, as he
looks into everything he sees, and takes photographs upon his
retina—the camera hicida of his mind, which never fade ; of every
midge that washes its face, as a cat does, and preens its wings ;
every ladybird that alights on his knee, and folds and unfolds her
gauzy pinions under their spotted and glorious lids. How more
real is not only this little knowledge in his entire nature than the
poor being who can maunder amazingly the entire circle of human
science at second, or it may be at twentieth hand !” The secret
of the foundation of national character is to be found in studying,
in the education of our youth, “ the day of small things.” Be the
external influences brought to bear ever so small, if they be drawn
from the book of Nature, its Great Author uses them in His own
way, not only in expanding the infant intellect to contemplate his
* “ First, the grass; then, the ear; then, the full corn in the ear.”


Maker’s wisdom, but in inculcating, through the observation of the
habits of the least of His creatures, many of the social virtues which
make man useful to man. No better example need be required,
to illustrate the lesson which the least of God’s creatures teaches,
than the beautiful simile of the poor hen, at the approach of
danger, calling her errant brood under wing, selected by Him
who in His bitter agony wept over the stubborn city of Jerusalem,
His warning slighted, and His affection spurned.
DEATH OF ACIS.
HENRY KENDALL.
SILVER slope, a fall of firs,
A league of gleaming grasses ;
And fiery cones and sultry spurs,
And swarthy pits and passes.
The long-haired Cyclops bated breath—
And bit his lips, and hearkened ;
And dug and dragged the stone of death
By ways that dipped and darkened.
Across a tract of furnaced flints
There came a wind of water
From yellow banks, with tender hints
Of Tethys’ white-haired daughter.
She sat amongst wild-singing weeds
By beds of myrrh and moly ;
And Acis made a flute of reeds,
And drew its accents slowly ;
And taught its spirit subtle sounds
That leaped beyond suppression ;
And paused and panted on the bounds
Of fierce and fitful passion.


Then he who shaped the cunning tune,
By keen delight made bolder,
Fell fainting, like a fervid noon,
Upon the sea-nymph’s shoulder.
A sweet luxurious maiden-mouth
Where love began—not ended ;
Hair fragrant with the rose-strewn South ;
Soft eyes, and swift, and splendid,
Sicilian suns had laid a dower
Of life and light about her :
Her beauty was a gracious flower
The heart fell dead without her.
“ Ah Galatea,” said Polypheme,
“ I would that I could find thee
Some finest tone of hill or stream
Wherewith to lull and bind thee !
“ What lyre is left of marvellous range
Whose subtle strings, containing
Some note supreme, might catch and change,
Or set thy passion waning
“ Thy passion for the fair-haired youth
Whose bright light feet perplex me
By ledges rude—on paths uncouth,
And broken ways that vex me.
‘ ‘ Ah ! turn to me—else violent sleep
Shall track the cunning lover ;
And thou wilt wait, and thou wilt weep,
When I his haunts discover!”
But golden Galatea laughed—
And Thoosa’s son, like thunder,
Broke through a rifted runnel shaft
And dashed its rocks asunder ;
And poised the bulk, and hurled the stone,
And crushed the hidden Ads ;
And struck with sorrow drear and lone
The sweetest of all faces.


To Zeus, the mighty Father, she
With plaint and prayer departed ;
Then from fierce H£tna to the sea
A fountained water started !
A lucent stream of lutes and lights,
Cool haunt of flower and feather,
Whose silver days and yellow nights
Made years of hallowed weather.
Here Galatea was wont to come,
And rest beside the river,
Because in faint soft-blowing foam
Her shepherd lived for ever.
Notes. The word “feather” is a common poetical metonymy for “bird.” Zeus, the
Greek name of Jove. The “stone of death” was the one with which the Cyclops killed
Acis. .Polyphemus is sometimes called Polypheme. Thoosa was the giant’s mother, and
1 ethys the mother of Galatea.
L’ARRIVÉE.
GEORGE GORDON M‘CRAE.
jh'gigsillKE a pale tower of cloudy grey she stood,
3 Hpj Set in the pale grey distance of the morn,
And as I gazed she grew, advancing swift
Like some fair ship that leaves old horizons
And paths o’er watery wastes to seek for new.
On ! ever on ! in buoyancy of youth—
On ! clad in joyous garments like the Spring,
With rosy blushes like the glad young day,
And smiles ineffable, and eyes sun-bright—
Forth from her neck a silken ribbon flew
That shimmered faintly like a kite’s long train
Against the blue expanse of cloudless sky ;
Or, like the rippling cobweb line that floats,
Half animate, in wavering fathoms from
Some cannoned frigate’s lofty royal mast.
On ! on ! she glided still—l felt the breeze
That whispered of her, as her arching foot—
That glinted like a sun-kist, curling wave—
Tossed up the snowdrift of her kirtle’s hem,
Like the swift clouds of driving foam that fly
Chased from their slumbers by a dancing prow.


Drawn by George Gordon McCrae.
ARRIVÉE.




HANS VON SCHLOGGENBOCHS:
A LEGEND OF PRAGUE.
HAROLD W. H. STEPHEN.
PART I.—THE GHOST.
NCE upon a time, in those good old days when Bohemia
was a separate kingdom, there lived in the ancient city
of Prague a certain young man rejoicing in the un-
poetic, but aristocratic appellation of Schloggenbochs.
Johann, or Hans, von Schloggenbochs was the last of his race. He
could trace his pedigree, with unerring accuracy, right up to Noah,
and was proportionately proud; though, Heaven knows, other
sources of pride had he none. His worldly wealth was comprised
in the clothes he wore; an enormous meerschaum pipe; a ragged
and discoloured dressing-gown, and a gorgeous smoking-cap.
The Schloggenbochses were always an extravagant race—the
love of display being inherent in their nature ; and each successive
holder of the family property, for the last hundred years or so,
had done his best to dissipate his patrimony; so that, when our
hero came into possession, he found it so encumbered by mort-
gages that the yearly interest exceeded the rent-roll. Graf Bart
von Schinkenstein, a neighbouring proprietor, whose family had
proceeded on an exactly opposite principle to that of the Schlog-
genbochses, generously offered to relieve him of his difficulties.
Said Bart, “ Thou art young —thou art strong. Betake thee
to Prague, and seek thy fortune. Here is the wherewithal to keep
thee for one year in luxury, or ten in competence. In return, thou
shalt make over to me thy interest in the property.”
Hans stayed not to consider, but closed the bargain; the
prospect of a twelve months’ spree in Prague proving too much
for him. Thus did he, as he afterwards somewhat inaccurately
and irreverently remarked, “ sell his birthright for a mess of
potash.”


Of course, he would not have been a Schloggenbochs if he had
preferred ten years of uneventful competence to one of exciting
luxury. No, he went the whole hog—and ruffled it with the best
as long as his money lasted.
At the time our tale commences, he had arrived at his last
kreuzer, and knew not where to turn him for aid. For some
months he had been, in a measure, living on the charity of his
friends ; but now a crisis had come in his affairs. His former
intimates had grown strangely forgetful and short-sighted; and
recognitions in the streets, and salutations in the market-place,
were becoming rare events with him. True, he was not without
visitors. The stairs leading to his room in the upper story of a
house in the Juden-Gasse were worn by the footmarks of many a
weary creditor, who vainly sought even a trifle on account of his
little bill from the improvident Hans. He was in the hands of
the Jews —that race which rules the money-market of the world,
and has for ages furnished extravagant youth with the means of
pursuing its road to ruin. He was now in pawn. He had so
systematically bragged of his rich relatives —of the maiden aunt
who doated on him as the apple of her eye—of the childless
uncle, the possessor of countless gulden —and of other similarly
rich and benevolent persons from whom he had expectations, that
even the children of Israel had some little faith in his future sol-
vency ; and it was to prevent his emigration, that old Isaac Ben
Doodleum, his principal creditor, had offered him a temporary
asylum under his roof.
Now everybody knows that the Jews’ quarter in Prague is not
the most desirable locality in the world to reside in. The streets
are narrow, steep, roughly paved and badly lighted; whilst the
mingled odours of garlic, bad tobacco, rotten fish and old clothes
combine to make up a whole rather the reverse of satisfactory to
a Christian nobleman. Add to this, that, night and day, in fair
weather and in foul, one’s ears are assailed by the solicitations of
the vendors of second-hand goods, from the gruff bass of the
burly Israelite of forty, to the shrill, squeaking treble of the maiden
of sweet fifteen ; and we can readily imagine that dire necessity
alone could reconcile so aristocratic a youth as Hans von Schlog


genbochs to residence in such a locality. Truth to tell, he had
no choice ; and, being on the whole of a contented disposition,
he made the best of a bad job, and resigned himself to his fate
with enviable equanimity.
The novelty of the situation had its charm, and Hans was
somewhat blase. He had, too, a special predilection for the
Hebrew order of beauty. In his estimation, a nice plump young
Jewess, with beady black eyes and jetty curly hair, was
A thing of beauty, and a joy for ever—
that is, not exactly for ever, but until such time as the plumpness
degenerated into obesity—when, of course, it could not be sup-
posed that a gentleman of Hans’ refined taste could feel any
further interest in a lady of sixteen stone or so.
At first, Hans had not, altogether, so bad a time of it in his
new abode. Several young damsels of unquestionable personal
attractions, had exhibited a decided inclination to initiate an
acquaintance with the stranger. Some of these Hans had deter-
mined to cultivate; but he discovered he was not altogether the free
agent he imagined. He was watched. Old Isaac was not the
sort to lose sight of a man who owed him so much ; and Hans
was not long in finding out that his every movement was subject
to the supervision of a myrmidon of his landlord and creditor.
This was annoying ; but here, again, Hans displayed the ingenuity
of his nature. He made friends with his follower. This gentle-
man was only too proud to be seen in intimate communion with
such a swell, and henceforth Hans had an easy time of it. He
was burdened with a spy on his actions, certainly, but he enjoyed
himself everywhere at the spy’s expense, as he soon discovered
that gentleman’s aristocratic tendencies, and failed not to avail
himself of the discovery by sponging upon him on all occasions.
In one particular, only, did he find his new friend inexorable.
All communion with the female inhabitants of the quarter had
been strictly prohibited, and Hans’ utmost entreaties failed to
move his follower to consent to the slightest infringement of the
regulation. Young Sol (his name was Solomon Meyer) was a
man of honour, though a tuft-hunter, and he knew the danger of


admitting such a dare-devil of a spendthrift to the society of the
gentler sex. Woman, all the world over, is alike. However
good and pure a woman may be, she has always, deep-hidden in
her breast, a sympathy with the wild and reckless. Vice, to her,
may be hateful in the abstract; but its practitioner, when young
and handsome, enjoys always a preference over the, perhaps
equally good-looking, but moral youth, A good young man—a
model character—an eminently respectable person—is all very
well for a brother ; but for a lover — c'est tout-a-fait autre
chose.
It was a beautiful summer evening—Let the reader imagine
the conventional description. The writer could give a most
eloquent and picturesque account of the state of the sky, &c.,
but it has been done before by G. P. R. James, and a host of
swells to whom the reader’s humble servant is but as the frog to
the ox; and, bearing in mind the fate of the former, he will
abstain from ambitious rivalry, lest he also “ bust” in the attempt.
Suffice it, therefore, to say it was a beautiful evening.
On a tombstone in the ancient Jewish burial-ground (stated
to have been in use for a thousand years) sat Hans von Schlog-
genbochs. In his hand he held a toothpick, with which he
daintily extracted the remains of a raw herring which had lodged
between his teeth. He was in a meditative humour. The herring
before-mentioned had made him sad. It was the last of the
barrel, and he knew not when he should taste its like again. He
was, for a time at least, his own master, as Sol was engaged at his
evening’s repast,
Hans thought of many things—of his wasted fortune, and he
cursed his ancestors —of his clamorous creditors, and he cursed
the Jews. Arrived at this stage, his attention was attracted by
the inscription on a neighbouring tomb. It set forth the virtues
of a deceased Hebrew, who in his day had been the leading
usurer in Prague. The tomb was quite covered with pebbles,
placed there in memory of the departed by pious relatives and
friends, of his own persuasion.
“ Donnerwetter ! ” said Hans, bitterly. “ Here’s a scoundrel,
who, living, was never contented with less than sixty per cent., and


is made a little hero of when dead. It’s an insult to a Christian to
look at his tomb.”
Thus muttering, he gazed around cautiously, and, satisfied
that he was entirely unobserved, proceeded to brush away the
pious memorials which had excited his ire. Suddenly he heard a
snort of defiance behind him, and; on turning round, his blood
curdled at the sight that met his gaze. Robed in a long black
gaberdine, and wearing the flat barret cap—the distinctive badges
of his race stood the ghost of the gentleman whose tomb he had
just desecrated.
Hans knew who it was at once, but being never wholly at a
loss, murmured, in somewhat trembling accents, “Now, what’s
your little game ? ”
“Hans von Schloggenbochs,” began the Ghost, “thou hast
perpetrated a vile act. Respect the ashes of the dead, and restore
those pebbles to the place where they were put by the hands of
the faithful.”
“And what if I don’t?” asked Hans.
“ Thou shalt have my curse,” retorted the angered Ghost.
“Is that all, old flick?” said Hans; “that won’t hurt much, I
should think.”
“Trifler! Beware!!” thundered the Ghost. “If I can do
-thee no other harm, I can at least haunt thee ! ”
Ah ! said Hans, I dare say we shall get on pretty well
together. I’m often hard up for a mate. May I ask can you
play Sechs-und-Seekszig ? ”
This was too much for the Ghost, and with a howl of baffled
rage he descended into the earth, leaving behind him a strong
smell of sulphur and garlic.
Hans was laughing over his discomfiture when he suddenly
appeared again, holding in his hand a leather bottle.
“Here we are again,” said the Ghost, gravely.
“So I perceive,” said Hans. “ May I enquire is that schnapps
you’ve brought with you ? ”
The Ghost groaned at this irreverence, and proceeded to
inform Hans that it was not. He could not rest, he said, in his
grave. He was dishonoured and an outcast amongst ghosts, until
H


such time as the injury done him had been repaired. Would
Hans in mercy, replace the pebbles ?
A sudden thought struck Hans all of a heap. He reflected
that this Ghost had once possessed enormous wealth. What
more likely than that he had concealed some portion of it ? The
hiding of treasure was a custom of the age, as the Jews were
always in fear of being despoiled by the authorities.—Hans offered
to comply with the Ghost’s request for a reasonable sum in ready
money or jewels.
The Ghost sighed and shook his head.
“ Gold and silver have I none,” said he ; “ but take this bottle.
It contains a wonderful elixir, which will cure every disease under
the sun, save one. It will always remain full, and by a judicious
use of its contents thou mayest attain to greater wealth than I
ever enjoyed.”
Hans perceived the truth of this remark at once, and eagerly
snatched the bottle, promising compliance with the Ghost’s
request.
“ Whilst thou retainest that bottle,” said the Ghost, “ thou
wilt be free from all diseases and disorders, save one alone. But
remember, thou canst not refuse to use it for the benefit of anyone
who demands it of thee thrice.”
“ All right, old boy,” said Hans; “ but tell us what the one
disease is I have to fear.”
“ I cannot,” said the Ghost; “ thou wilt thyself find out ere
long. Shouldst thou ever attempt the cure of this unknown
disease, it will at once attack thee, and all thy worldly cares will
soon be over.”
With these words he again vanished, but this time a keen
observer might have discovered a malicious grin of satisfaction on
his bony face. Hans did not notice it, however, and, after care-
fully gathering up the pebbles as he had promised, he went back
to his lodgings, happy in the conscious possession of a fortune in
the leather bottle.


PART II. —THE DOCTOR.
In a gorgeously furnished apartment in the Hradschin Palace
sat Hans von Schloggenbochs. All things had prospered with
him since he had obtained possession of the magic bottle. Barely
six months had elapsed and he was already Court Physician, and
in the receipt of an enormous income from his private practice.
Still he was not happy. He was haunted by a perpetual appre-
hension of every fresh disease he was called upon to cure. He
had made his first essay with fear and trembling. On his return
home with the magic bottle he had encountered a litter, in which
was conveyed the comatose body of a wealthy Jew, who had
fallen down in the street in a fit of apoplexy. Hans saw his
opportunity, and hastened to avail himself of it, though not
without a cold shiver and a strange throbbing of the jugular, as
he contemplated the possibility of his also falling a victim to that
dire disorder.
But “ faint heart never won fair lady,” and Hans felt that it
was, so to say, “ make or break ” with him. He commanded the
bearers to halt, and announced his intention of at once proceeding
to the cure of the sufferer. The bearers were incredulous at first,
knowing Hans but too well, and suspecting a practical joke. His
earnest manner, however, together with their own utter lack of
interest in the fate of their burden, combined to overcome their
scruples, and they did as they were desired. Hans was not long
in forcing a few drops of the magic liquid down the throat of the
sufferer. The effect was marvellous. At the time of his seizure
he had been engaged in instructing his legal adviser to proceed
against an insolvent nobleman whose bills he had discounted.
He had got as far as “ sell him”—when his utterance was checked
by the flow of blood to his head, and he fell inanimate. No
sooner had he swallowed the magic fluid than he rose with a
bound, and shrieked with gasping utterance the word “ Up ! ”
As may easily be imagined, the bystanders were amazed at
such procedure. Hans alone conjectured, and truly, that he was
but carrying out the train of thought which was interrupted by the


fit. “ Sell him up ” was what he would have said, and, being in
complete ignorance of what had occurred in the interim, he
naturally concluded the sentence.
Of course there were explanations and congratulations, and
jabber enough over the affair, whilst Hans was intoxicated with
delight at discovering that, as far as one disorder at least was
concerned, he was invulnerable.
The rich Jew being also grateful, as is indeed the custom of
his nation, failed not to liberally reward his physician, and with
the money thus obtained, Hans succeeded in establishing himself
in genteel apartments in another quarter of the town. He called
himself Doctor von Schloggenbochs, and announced himself as
able to cure any attack of an apoplectic nature, no matter at what
stage it had arrived. His former associates at first derided him,
and accused him of an attempt to swindle the public; but one or
two notable cures completely established his reputation, and he
was not long in attaining high favour as a consulting physician.
The worst of the matter, however, was, that not content with his
repeated assurance that he had made apoplexy his special study,
and had even neglected other branches to pursue his favourite
one, his friends and admirers would insist upon his advising them
upon their other disorders. Hans resisted their entreaties in
every instance, but not being able to refuse after the third appli-
cation, he gradually found his list of diseases increase to such an
extent, that at the moment when we introduced him to our
readers at the commencement of this chapter, he was busily
engaged trying to discover what still remained for him to dread.
It is perhaps as well to state that his extraordinary cures had
attracted the attention of even His Majesty King Nepomuck
XXIX., who at that time occupied the throne of Bohemia, and
that, on the recommendation of the Lord High Chamberlain, he
had been appointed to the honourable position of Court Physician,
and assigned apartments in the royal palace.
Hans was thus at the zenith of his fame, and yet, as before
remarked, he was not happy. Do what he would, some fresh
disease would somehow crop up to torment him, and with each
fresh application of the elixir he endured increased torment. His


last operation had been on a Maid of Honor, who was afflicted
with a tremendous wart on her nose. By the aid of his magic
mixture (which was capable of external as well as internal applica-
tion), Hans had succeeded in removing the incubus ; but the
bystanders (it must not be supposed that a young man of Hans’s
considerable personal attractions was permitted to perform so
delicate an operation without suitable supervision) failed not to
remark the extraordinary grimaces and tremblings of the doctor,
and one virgin of some forty summers maliciously insinuated that
he seemed to take a deeper interest in his patient’s sufferings than
was legitimate in a respectable physician.
Hans did not care, however; the operation was successful, and
no signs of excrescence were visible on his own proboscis, so he
went home comparatively happy.
He had just returned from this visit, and after inquiry had
arrived at the conclusion that now, at last, he had tried his specific
on every known disease, except the gout; and he mentally swore a
terrific oath that he would murder the man who tempted him to
make the experiment, on what he was satisfied was the one
disorder he had to dread.
He had just come to this conclusion, when his valet-de-chambre
entered and announced the Most Noble Graf Bart von Schinken-
stein. Hans turned to greet his old friend, but the intended
words of welcome merged into a groan as his eye met the dismal
figure which approached him. Bart von Schinkenstein—the
stalwart reiter—the mighty jager—was now a helpless cripple, and
made his entrance hobbling on crutches, with one foot swathed in
ominous flannel bandages.
With a sickly smile, Hans greeted his guest, and motioned
him to a seat. For the life of him, he could not offer his hand to
him who, he felt inwardly convinced, was about to drive him to
extremities.
Count Bart, with many a groan and muttered anathema,
inducted himself into a chair, thinking how prosperity had changed
his former friend, and disgusted with the coolness of his reception.
“ Hans,” quoth he, “ thou art proud.”
“Not much,” said Hans; “I’m only busy. May it please
you to state what you want, as my time is very fully occupied.”


“ I will not detain thee long,” replied the Count; “ I came
merely to consult ”
“To consult?” interrupted Hans. “This is not the day. I
regret I cannot attend to you at present. Permit me to order
your carriage.” Thus saying, he moved towards the bell-rope.
“ Stop !! ” thundered the Count. “By the beard of Saint
Nepomuck, thou shalt hear me ! What! Here am I, thy country-
man and neighbour, come all this distance to consult thee, and
thou darest to put me off 1 ? I’ll let thee know that Bart von
Schinkenstein has not forgotten how to revenge an insult.”
Hans saw his opportunity, and became cool in proportion to
his antagonist’s rage. Mildly referring the Count to a friend, he
turned to depart, when he was again recalled by a yell from his
aggrieved suitor, who was undergoing the most infernal torture.
“ It seems you are in pain,” said Hans.
“In pain ? ” roared the Count. “In hell! Man—if you have
not the heart of a stone, relieve me. I have an attack of”
“ Gout,” said Hans ; “ I saw it in your face. Well, go home
and live cleanly; I cannot cure thee.”
“What?” replied the Count. “And wilt thou not even
prescribe for me ? Give me some of thy wonderful medicine,
then.”
“ Hah ! ” said Hans, a sharp pain piercing through his marrow,
as he thought of the possible consequences of any further solicita-
tions, “ Thou hast heard of it, then ? Well, it will avail thee
naught. I cannot cure thee.”
“ Pooh ! ” said the Count, “ tell that to the marines ! I have
heard it is thy custom thus to deny the merits of thy discovery.
Come, hand it over.”
“ Man,” said Hans, trembling and growing paler every minute,
“ ask but once again, and I shoot thee on the spot,” and he drew
a beautifully-finished Derringer out of his boot, and presented it
at the head of his tormentor.
“ Shoot and be d d ! ” said the Count. “As well die as
live to suffer this torture. Wilt thou give me to drink of thy
medicine ? ”
A loud report rang through the chamber ere the sentence was
half completed, but the Count had seen what was coming, and


ducked in time to avoid the bullet; and, when the smoke cleared
off, Hans, to his dismay, perceived his quondam friend still
sitting in his chair, and glaring at him with the ferocity of a
Bengal tiger.
The game was up—Hans could no more refuse his aid. He
rapidly ran over in his own mind the list of known disorders, in
the hope that one at least might have escaped him. But, no—
he was despairingly obliged to admit that his enumeration had
only proved too faithful, and that he had prescribed for every
disease under the Sun, from small-pox and typhus-fever, down to
corns and bunions. After nerving himself by a draught of Nier-
steiner hock, he approached his patient with the mystic bottle
and wine-glass. Said he, pouring out the usual quantity,
“ Bart von Schinkenstein, thou hast demanded thy cure. I
will accomplish it; but at the risk of my own life—drink ! ”
The Count, nothing loth, seized the glass, and, nodding to
Hans, wished him luck and drank it off. Hans suffered indes-
cribable torture until the last drop had disappeared down the
gullet of his friend. What was his joy and amazement to per-
ceive that no twinge of pain assailed him, and that he stood sound
and scathless, where, he thought he would have lain a miserable
cripple !
“ Hurrah ! ” shouted he, in the exuberance of his joy, and
capered madly about the chamber. The Count was not long in
discovering that he also was sound and well, and joined his friend
in his dance of delight. When they were entirely worn out, these
two, once more reconciled, sat down to a cozy chat and a smoke.
Hans produced a jar of Canaster and a flagon of Bockbier, and
they sat far into the night carousing.
Want of space necessitates the curtailment of this portion of
our hero’s adventures. Suffice it to say that he was now happy.
Henceforth, he had nothing to dread. Every disease had given
place at the bidding of the wondrous elixir, and Hans was on the
high road to fortune.


PART III. —THE RRINCESS.
The Princess Hildegonde was generally allowed to be the most
beautiful maiden in the world. She was none of your tall, stately,
stand-off-the-grass young ladies, but a tiny little darling, with the
rosiest cheeks ever seen, and a pair of laughing blue eyes which
won her love from all who met their gaze. Her hair was of the
fashionable golden tint, and hung in heavy ringlets round a head
whose perfect shape was in itself a beauty. Her ears, hands, and
feet were all on the tiniest scale ; and her nose was that matchless
combination of saucy mirth and good-humour, termed by the
French retrousse.
All the celebrated painters of the day had attempted her por-
trait, and each in succession had made a most lamentable failure.
As for the sculptors—they, hearing of her marvellous beauty,
flocked in crowds to the Court of Bohemia, but a sight of the
Princess was enough for them. What could they do with a beauty
with a snub nose ? The Roman and Grecian profile they could
reproduce with effect—but a snub! Forbid it, Praxiteles ! It
would be an anachronism—an absurdity, and no one of them had
courage to dare the attempt. But the poets made up for these
failures. In every species of verse and rhyme, they, sang her
praises till the whole civilized world resounded with the name of
Hildegonde the Peerless.
Yet this young lady had no lovers. Strange as it may appear,
everybody admired her—everybody would have liked to have had
her for a sister—but nobody cared to have her for a wife. The
fact is, she was too perfect. Each intending suitor backed out
after a short courtship, satisfied that so much grace and goodness
could not fail to despise a husband who did not come up to her
own standard of excellence.
King Nepomuck, her father, was in despair. He had tried
every conceivable dodge to secure her a fitting mate —even condes-
cending to advertise for one in the columns of the Prague Morning
Herald. As for the Princess, she was far too light-hearted to
worry herself about such a contemptible thing as a husband, and


she flitted about as merrily as a kitten from morning till night,
singing, dancing, and conducting herself in every way as unlike
a princess as possible.
At last the old King hit upon an idea, or else an idea struck
him. History does not relate which was the .striker, but as
the result was the same, posterity can scarcely be regarded as
much of a loser by the omission.
The idea was a Tournament.
It had been done before certainly, but that was no reason it
should not be tried again j and, as all the young kings and princes
within reach had shied off the match, it was only right to give
common people a chance. Three-sheet posters, therefore, were
placarded over the walls of the town, announcing that a grand
tournament would be held on the Feast of St. Nepomuck, the
patron saint of Prague, when the hand of the Princess Hilde-
gonde would be bestowed upon the champion of the day. A
double-column advertisement was inserted in the Morning Herald
for three weeks beforehand ; and, to give extra publicity to the
affair, the bellman was sent round every evening to proclaim it to
the masses. It will thus be seen that no expense was spared at
the outset, the King being satisfied that economy in advertising is
a great mistake where notoriety is desired. His Majesty had even
thought of a block, but wood-cutting was very dear, and he con-
cluded that double-demy bills and three-sheet posters would be
quite enough to do the business effectively.
At length the eventful day arrived. The lists were erected in
a large field in the environs of the city, and the whole population
turned out to a man to witness the spectacle. Three stands were
erected : one for the King and Court ; another for the gentry and
higher order of tradesmen, and the third, known as the “ Derby
Stand,” for the people.
On a magnificent dais overhung by a canopy of crimson silk,
sat His Majesty the King. His nobles and attendant courtiers
were grouped around him after the most approved fashion.
Indeed, to secure perfect accuracy in the grouping, the services
of the stage-manager of the Court Theatre had been called into
requisition ; and he had certainly succeeded in preparing a striking


tableau. The ladies mustered in great force, forming a perfect
blaze of beauty around the throne reserved for the Queen of the
Lists—a position to which, of course, the Princess Hildegonde
was alone entitled, both by virtue of her exalted rank and her
exceeding beauty. The “ saddling bell” had been rung some
time, and knights in every description of armour might be seen
caracolling around to show the paces of their steeds and the
excellence of their horsemanship. Still the Princess did not
appear. The monarch was wrath.
“ By ’r Lady,” said he, “ this is a beastly shame.”
“ It is that same,” echoed the Baron Ryhan von O’Vlaherti.
“Who told you to shove in your oar?” said the King. “Just you
clap a stopper on your jawing-tackle till you ’re asked your opinion.”
The abashed Baron muttered some allusion to the piper that
performed before Moses which, luckily, did not reach His Majesty’s
ears; and further conversation was suspended whilst the Herald
made the usual proclamation.
At its conclusion, the King looked anxiously around for the
Princess, but failing to discover her, and being vexed at the delay,
he appointed the Countess Elfrida von Hagelwetter to the vacant
post. The announcement was received with acclamation by the
crowd, as a matter of course, though the Countess could scarcely
lay claim to the possession of unusual beauty. She said she was
thirty, but a certain irreverent young noble hinted that so exces-
sively wiry a moustache must have required a longer term of years
to arrive at its present luxuriance.
But nobody cared openly to express dissatisfaction at the
King’s choice, as it was now easy to see he was not in a humour
to be trifled with. His relapse into nautical lingo, when reproving
the Baron O’Vlaherti, was in itself a proof that he was in a dreadful
rage—as it was well-known that His Majesty never used such
expressions except under dire provocation.
Nevertheless, on the whole, the people were satisfied. They
came to see the show, and cared little for the spectators —their
attention being concentrated on the combatants.
At length the starter’s flag fell, and two gallant knights led off
the tournament.


Now the reader may, perhaps, imagine that he or she is going
to be favoured with an elaborate description of the tilting, &c.
The writer, however, is not very well up in mediaeval manners and
customs, and begs to refer the inquisitive to Sir Walter Scott’s
“ Ivanhoe,” and Froissart’s “ Chronicles,” from both of which
sources ample information may be obtained.
Well, the contest waged with varied issue for many hours,
until at last a course was announced to be run between our friend
Doctor Hans von Schloggenbochs and an unknown knight who
had just entered the arena. Hans had hitherto taken no part in
the jousting. Prosperity had made him fat and lazy; and,
though fully determined to do his best to secure the prize, he
decided to reserve himself as long as possible. He was, therefore,
quite fresh, and as strong as a young bull. His antagonist was some-
what undersized in appearance, but sat his horse like a very Bayard.
The trumpets sounded; the people shouted, and the knights,
with lance in rest, rushed madly onward at the rate of some two
hundred miles an hour. The shock of their collision made the
very earth tremble. The unknown knight shivered his lance on
the crest of his opponent, but was unhorsed by Hans whose lance
caught him under the gorget and fairly lifted him out of his saddle.
With piercing shrieks, a young squire rushed into the arena, and
knelt by the body of the vanquished knight. Such very unusual
conduct created no little sensation, and a special messenger was
despatched by the King to make enquiry as to the cause of the
tumult. Meanwhile, an officious page who was standing near had
hastily thrown up the vizor of the unknown knight—when, to the
consternation and horror of the assemblage, the features of the
beautiful Princess Hildegonde were disclosed to view !
Here was a pretty go !!
Such a hurrying and a scurrying had never before been
witnessed in any lists in Christendom. Everyone suggested his
favourite restorative, and it was not until the King himself stood
by the body of his hapless daughter that something like order was
restored. After shedding a few dozen tears, and swearing a few
dozen oaths, His Majesty declared the tournament adjourned
sine die , and commanded that the Princess should be at once
conveyed to the palace.


Arrived there, a solemn consultation was held by the surgeons
attached to the household, when it was unanimously decided that
nothing could be done, as the lady’s back was broken. The head
of the staff hazarded an opinion that the Princess might recover
consciousness ere long, and that she might also live for a consider-
able time; but that the lower part of her anatomy was perfectly
paralysed, so that her future existence must needs be passed in
a recumbent position.
This was, of course, very jolly news for the King. He stamped
and swore and raved, but all to no purpose. He then paid a visit
to the neighboring cathedral, and prostrating himself on the marble
pavement before the silver shrine of St. Nepomuck, he earnestly
besought his patron saint for aid. While in this position, for the
second time in this history, an idea struck him, or he struck an
idea.—He had not yet consulted Schloggenbochs. That wonderful
physician must surely be able to do something to remedy the evil
he had caused. Much comforted by this reflection, His Majesty
arose, and, wiping his eyes, returned to the Hradschin.
Hans was not long in making his appearance. Indeed, he
had not much choice in the matter, as, no sooner was the identity
of the strange knight discovered, than he was taken into custody
by the police for an assault with intent to do grievous bodily
injury. An hour or two in the lock-up had made a woful altera-
tion in his appearance. His fat had not had time to disappear
entirely, but still a great portion of it was gone, and his skin was
loose and flabby in consequence. A pale greenish tint scarcely
added to the beauty of his features, whilst his pendulous nose and
cheeks were marked by the track of many a little rivulet of tears.
He had been weeping bitterly. Not for the Princess, but for
himself; indeed, poor Hans was in a fair way to die of what the
French call pitie de soi-meme.
“ Monster ! ” began the King, who could not bring himself to
a milder greeting to the man who had done his daughter so dire
an injury, “ Monster ! ”
“ That’s me,” said Hans, shaking in his shoes.
His Majesty was somewhat taken aback at this seeming effron-
tery, and paused to consider what he should say next. Taking
advantage of his silence, Hans burst loose from his guards, and


casting himself on his knees before the King, besought in piteous
tones for mercy.
“ I didn’t go to do it,” said he, blubbering; “ I thought it was
a man.”
“ Slave,” said the King, “ knowest thou what thou deservest ?
Had I not bethought me of thy wondrous talent as a mediciner,
ere this thou hadst been broken on the wheel. But, go —cure my
daughter, and I will pardon thee.”
“ Alas ! ” said Hans, “ may it please your most gracious
Majesty, I cannot. lam merely a physician, and understand me
not in the art of surgery.”
“ Minion ! thou liest! ” said the King, and he held before the
abashed gaze of the trembling Hans a copy of that morning’s
Herald. “ Here—here is proof that thou art able to cure all
known ailments. Shall I read thee thine own advertisement?”
Hans trembled, for he saw he was in for it. The advertise-
ment read as follows :
Joy to the World !
No more pain—no more sickness.
HANS VON SCHLOGGENBOCHS, M.D.,
Hereby announces to the public that he is able, at a moment’s notice, to cure
any disease under the sun.
His celebrated
Elixir Vit^e,
Which is compounded of perfectly harmless drugs, combined with a volatile
essence hitherto unknown, will restore health to the
most debilitated.
Numberless cures of all manner of disorders have been effected by the agency
of this most marvellous medicine.
Sold in bottles, at 6,8, and 10 gulden apiece.
A considerable saving may be effected by taking the larger sizes.
Caution.—The inventor’s name is stamped on the wrapper and on the seal.
Dr. von Schloggenbochs may be consulted daily from lo a.m, till 4 p.m.
Consultation by letter.—Fee 10 gulden.
Dr. von S. cheerfully proffers his services to the suffering poor gratuitously, on
the recommendation of a clergyman or a magistrate.


In the face of such an announcement, what could poor Hans
do 1 As a successful practitioner he had many enemies, and even
the Medical Society scouted him, on the ground of his being an
advertising doctor. He knew full well that he would meet with
few defenders, and, after a short inward struggle, he informed the
King that he was willing to attempt the cure of Her Royal
Highness, but could not vouch for a satisfactory result.
The King was pleased with this ready compliance, and, to add
greater inducement, promised him, as a reward in the event of his
success, the hand of the Princess in marriage. Hans was then led
to Her Royal Highness’ apartment, where she lay insensible, as
when she fell from her steed.
Somewhat comforted by the prospect of such an unhoped-for
reward, Hans set about his business in the orthodox fashion. He
first seized the lady’s wrist, and, pulling out his watch, pretended
to count the beats of her pulse. Heaven knows his own was
beating too violently for him to take any note of hers, even had
he possessed sufficient knowledge so to do. It was, however,
“ business,” and Hans was not the sort of man to neglect any of
the usual preliminaries. On releasing the Princess’ hand, he
shook his head after the most approved manner of medical men.
Then forcing open her mouth, he inspected her tongue and throat.
The King was inclined to think all this preliminary examination
somewhat unnecessary in the case of a broken back, but like a
wise man he held his peace, being fully aware that the doctor is
“ boss ” in the sick-room, and that any interference with him would
be regarded as ill-advised by everyone. In the meanwhile Hans
had gone through some further mummery, and after asking some
questions of the head nurse (his brother medicos had declined to
meet him in consultation), he produced the famous leather bottle,
and, forcing open the lady’s mouth, poured a few drops down her
throat.
Who can tell the agony of apprehension with which he awaited
the result? His bones ached all over, and a splitting pain in the
small of his back seemed but the forerunner of further disasters.
From some unexplained cause the elixir was somewhat longer
than usual in taking effect, and in the interim Hans suffered the


most indescribable tortures. He made sure that now at last he
was done for, for either the medicine would fail to cure, when he
would infallibly fall a prey to the wrath of the King, or a broken
back might be the one disease he had to dread. Either way the
subject was too awful for contemplation, and Hans, with many a
groan, anathematised the ambitious folly which had led him to
take part in the tournament.
At last a sudden noise broke the silence which had for some
few minutes reigned in the apartment. The Princess had sneezed !
Joy!
She sneezed again ! Hans and the King went nearly mad
with excitement.
Once more she was about to sneeze, when she opened her
eyes and saw a strange man in the room. Like a decently-brought-
up young woman, she incontinently shrieked, and plunged her
head beneath the bed-clothes.
Victory ! Victory ! !
Hans seized the King’s hand—the King cast his other arm
about Hans’ neck, and they mutually embraced, shedding tears of
unmixed joy and gratification.
Is it necessary to tell how the cure was completed; how Hans
married the Princess, and how he was created His Serene Trans-
parency the Grand Duke of Potztausend-Donnerwetter ?
All these events occurred in due course, and Hans had arrived
at the very pinnacle of greatness.
PART IV. —THE JEWESS.
His Serene Transparency the Grand Duke of Potztausend-Donner-
wetter was a very great man indeed at the Court of Bohemia.
The King was of a somewhat sluggish disposition, and was only
too glad to relieve himself of any trouble. Now our old friend
Hans, as the reader has perceived by this time, was ambitious and
energetic. He had, it is true, increased in bulk somewhat rapidly
of late—still he was as eager in the pursuit of pleasure and self-
aggrandisement as ever; and, consequently, as soon as he had


become familiarised with his new position, he was not slow in
offering to relieve His Majesty of such of the cares of State as
could be transferred from the royal shoulders. He was perfectly
successful in his machinations ; and now, when we again present
him to the reader, he was in effect the virtual sovereign of the realm.
As a king, Hans might fairly be regarded as a success. He
relieved his subjects from many obnoxious taxes, and gave every
encouragement to the popular sports of the day—even condes-
cending on occasion to act himself as stakeholder at a grand bull
or cock-fight.
It was, however, remarked that he was very particular in
enforcing the laws against the Jews. Under his regime their
disabilities were multiplied to an unprecedented extent, so that
their lives became a perfect burden to them; and, though they are
not given to suicide as a rule, it became quite a common thing to
hear of a coroner’s inquest on the body of some unfortunate
descendant of Abraham.
They were also made to bear the burden of any deficit in the
national revenue. At such times as the exchequer required
replenishing, the Comptroller of the Revenue would pay a visit to
the Jewish quarter and select some half-dozen of the wealthier
inhabitants, on whom he would make a requisition for the required
sum. In the event of refusal, the method of procedure was
exceedingly simple ; the non-compliant were at once conveyed to
the palace, and there, under the personal supervision of His
Serene Transparency, subjected to such diverting tortures as
almost invariably resulted in their acceding to the demand.
It was Hans who first invented the torture by roasting over a
slow fire ; afterwards used with so much effect by our own King
John, of Magna Charta celebrity. Nevertheless, there was a
certain amount of humour in Hans’ proceedings. He fixed a
regular scale of charges: thus the loss of a finger was estimated
at a hundred gulden; an eye, one thousand ; an arm, one thou-
sand—and so on. The result of this was that, erelong, nearly
every male inhabitant of the Jews’ quarter became more or less
dilapidated.—The Jews are an obstinate race, and rarely yield
without a struggle.


Gn.
Kr.
To One ear cut off ...
2
fifteen stripes with a hazel rod, at per stripe...
IS
One roasting over a slow fire
5
Coals and firewood for same
i
Use of gridiron ...
r
Total
9
15
In one particular, alone, may it be said that our friend Hans
somewhat overstepped the bounds which separate justice from
cruelty. His terrible hatred to the race led him to add insult to
injury, and so, on each occasion when it was found necessary
to resort to extreme measures against an unfortunate Hebrew, the
wretched man, after undergoing dreadful torture and eventually
submitting to the requirements of his persecutors, was, ere he was
permitted to depart, called upon, not only to pay interest on the
sum claimed, calculated up to the moment of payment, but also
to settle the little bill incurred to the executioner and his assist-
ants. One of these curious documents has been handed down to
posterity, and we hasten to lay a translation of it before our
readers. It runs as follows :
Isaac, otherwise Ikey Moses, the Jew,
Qr. to His Majesty King Nepomuck.
Received , with thanks,
NEPOMUCK.
Per H. S. T.
Hans was scarcely as happy in his matrimonial arrangements
as might have been desired. His august spouse was the exact
reverse of his ideal of beauty, whilst the lady herself was a
regular man-hater, as was evinced by her conduct at the Tourna-
ment, whereto she had gone, she afterwards avowed, with the
express intention of killing off as many of the hated sex as
possible. This ill-matched pair, however, if they did not love,
did not hate one another, and they were both far too well bred to
quarrel. They were not long in arriving at a mutual understand-
ing—whereby it was agreed that each should act independently of
the other, except in cases where the interest of the other party
i


was concerned. In the humbler walks of life, such a state of
things could scarcely exist without unhappiness somewhere ; but
it is the privilege of royalty to dispense with affection in its
alliances, and every prince and princess is, from earliest youth,
instructed to look forward to a mariage de convenance as his or
her inevitable fate.
It was night. A calm, still summer evening, and all the world
seemed to be abroad in search of pleasure. The waters of the
grand old Moldau were covered with boats, canoe-shaped, and
filled with mirth-seeking roysterers. The restaurant on the
Sophien Insel was brilliantly lighted up by a thousand wax
candles, and the Chinese lanterns,. hanging in the lime and
chesnut trees which surrounded it, gave quite an air of Oriental
magnificence to the scene.
Within the restaurant, most of the haute noblesse of the city
were congregated, either listening to the musical performances
which were going on in the grand saloon, or engaged in the
fashionable game of monte in an inner chamber.
The Grand Duke, as might be expected of him, was numbered
amongst these last: and no more ardent devotee of the Goddess
Chance ever backed a colour. He was especially enamoured of
the game of monte , which had only lately been introduced at
Prague by the Spanish Ambassador. Seated at his right hand
was our old friend—Bart von Schinkenstein. Bart had bidden
adieu to the gout for ever, and had recovered all his youthful
vigour and gaiety. He and Hans were now boon companions,
and many a rare lark had they together; indeed, the whole city
rang with their deeds and those of their chosen friends, who were,
of course, the most dissipated among the youthful nobility of Prague.
Hans had lost heavily this evening, and being at last convinced
that he was out of luck, rose from his seat and strolled into the
grand saloon. Here he was followed by Bart, and the two for a
while amused themselves by criticising the singers and the audience
whilst they smoked their cigars and sipped their petits-verres.
A Polish young lady of considerable personal attractions,
named Elise Sadiswowski, was just concluding the popular ballad
entitled “ Liebe unter den Rosen,” when a most unseemly uproar


in the entrance hall caused a temporary interruption. Hans, in
high dudgeon at this disturbance of his enjoyment of a favourite
morsean, demanded of the gentlemanly lessee, Herr von Tynd, an
explanation of the cause of the tumult.
“ May it please your Serene Transparency—it is a Jew,” said
Herr von Tynd.
“ But it doesn’t please my Serene Transparency, Sir ! A Jew
indeed! Let him be drowned. Or—stay. Take him to the
rifle-gallery. We need a new target. Bart, I’ll shoot you for a
thousand gulden.”
So it was arranged, and Herr von Tynd departed to see the
order duly executed. He soon returned, however; and this time
bringing with him the unfortunate cause of all the disturbance.
As may easily be imagined, this was rather too much for Hans’
powers of endurance ; and he was about to order the immediate
annihilation of the offender, when his attention was attracted by
a piteous cry from that party, whom he then discovered to be his
former landlord, Isaac Ben Doodleum. Herr von Tynd hastened
to explain that he had hesitated to comply with Hans’ orders, as
the Jew had informed him that he had pressing business with His
Serene Transparency himself.
Here Isaac broke in ; “ Yesh, ma tear —that ish, your Tghness
I hash pus’ness with you. Ma shild—ma daughter Rebecca
ish sick unto death—have mercy on the poor old Shew, and cure
his daughter, tear ! Shtrike ma dead, if I vont pay you veil.”
Hans considered a minute, and consulted with Bart von
Schinkenstein. His losses at play had made frightful inroads on
the royal treasure, and a supply of ready cash would be highly
acceptable.
It would not be amiss here to state that Hans had not altoge-
ther renounced practice, as he found that the elixir lost its charm
and remained inoperative in the hands of any other than himself;
and, apart from the question of fees, his natural humanity impelled
him to relieve suffering where it involved but little trouble.
Besides, his position required that he should be popular with all
classes; and no more efficacious means could be found to attain
this end, than the gratuitous use of the wonderful elixir.


“ Dog,” said Hans, “ I knew not that thou hadst a daughter.”
“ Ah, ma coot young man—that ish your ’lghness —I vash
obliged to keep the gal close ven you vash around. She is a
nishe gal —a real pooty gal —I gives you my vord. ” And the
wretched old father, in his desire to secure such valuable assist-
ance, actually winked at Hans in the most unpaternal manner 1
“ Is she young ? ” asked Hans.
“ Shixteen—shoost shixteen—l gives you ma vord,” replied old
Isaac.
“Young and pretty,” mused Hans, “I think I’ll go. Come
along, Bart ; but remember, thou unbeliever, if the girl answers
not to sample, woe betide thy ugly carcass! ”
With this threat, he hastened to his State canoe, followed by
Bart and the Jew.
But a narrow strip of water separates the Sophien Insel from
the land, and they were not long in crossing it; Isaac then
assumed the lead, and guided them by many intricate by-ways to
his house. Bart von Schinkenstein, to whom the Jews’ quarter
was a terra incognita, was excessively disgusted at all he saw and
heard, and more than once attempted to dissuade Hans from
prosecuting the adventure. Our hero, however, whose long resi-
dence in the locality had made him familiar with its sights and
sounds, paid little attention to his friend’s observations, his
thoughts being busily engaged on his future patient. As before
remarked, he held the Jewish order of beauty in high estimation,
and he was not sorry to have an opportunity of making the
acquaintance of a lady who, he doubted not, would prove a very
fair specimen of her nation.
After a tedious progress up the steep banks which overhung
the river, they arrived at Isaac’s residence a tall, gloomy
mansion, surrounded by dirt and squalor, and bearing in its
exterior no evidence of the wealth of its proprietor.
A strange chill came over Hans as he crossed those well-
remembered portals, and he felt almost inclined to turn back, but
a timely recollection of the unmerciful chaffing he would thereby
subject himself to, restrained him, and he followed his former
creditor into the house.


Isaac led them at first into an apartment on the ground floor
the garnishing of which was humble and unpretending, and left
them for a while, in order to prepare his daughter to receive her
distinguished visitor. A dreary interval of a few minutes passed
m total silence, for Bart was sulky, and Hans had not yet
concluded his speculations regarding the lady. At last Isaac
reappeared, and, after apologising for his absence, led them
upstairs to his daughter’s room.
On entering, they were amazed at the contrast between it and
the apartment they had just left. There, all was plain and
unpretending—here everything was gorgeous and magnificent.
As, no doubt, the reader is sufficiently acquainted with the interior
of the gilded saloons of the aristocracy, a description •of Miss
Rebecca’s apartment is unnecessary, suffice it to say, that even
the fastidious Bart was compelled to admit that no expense had
been spared in fitting it up, and that everything was first-class
and no mistake.
Reclining on a sofa in a little alcove, lay the fair, or rather
dark mistress of the bower. (It was not exactly a “ bower,” but
the writer wishes to show that he has at least some slight know-
ledge of the correct way to spin a yarn of the days of chivalry, and
Scott and G. P. R. James always used the term in treating of a
lady’s chamber. It is not so common, too, as “ boudoir; ” and
besides, quite enough French phrases and words have already
been used in this history; so that, if on no other grounds, we will
stick to “ bower,” however inappropriate it may seem to the
hypercritical.)
But this digression is keeping a lady waiting, not to speak of
two awfully swell noblemen, and a respectable gentleman of the
Hebrew persuasion. We will therefore introduce her at once.
Seen by the soft crimson light of a coloured lantern which
depended from the ceiling, the lady Rebecca seemed possessed of
almost supernatural beauty. She was of the purest blood, and
an aristocrat of the most aristocratic nation in the world.
Everybody has seen a pretty Jewess—to realise Rebecca, let the
reader take the finest specimen of the type that he can remember,
and multiply her beauty by one million—he will then fall far short


of the glorious reality. Even Bart von Schinkenstein, who took
no interest in the race, was knocked all of a heap, so to say;
whilst Hans —well —his state beggars description.
No sumptuary laws could reach the Jews in the privacy of
their own dwellings, and Rebecca therefore, could, and did, give
free rein to her fancy in the matter of dress. She affected the
Oriental style —partly as being an approximation to the probable
costume of her ancestors, and partly (we suspect, principally)
because it set off her glorious beauty to the best advantage. She
was now attired a la Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, in Turkish
trousers, &c., &c., and Hans, to whom the dress was a novelty,
blushed crimson at the sight, but the more hardened Bart merely
chuckled, and thought he rather liked the style.
Whilst Hans, usually so bold and even impudent, approached
with faltering, diffident step, the lady, with a languid smile, thanked
him for his condescension in coming to visit her, and requested
him to be seated.
Old Isaac, seeing that the doctor’s admiration for his patient
was likely to drive all thoughts of her illness out of his head, made
no scruple to proceed at once to business. He informed Hans
that his daughter had grown weaker and weaker day by day, and
was in fact pining to death j though none of the physicians who
had hitherto attended her, had been able to discover in her any
organic disease, or even functional derangement.
Hans felt slightly alarmed at this preamble, thinking of the
possible consequences which might accrue to himself in treating
an unknown disorder j but a glance at the fair patient banished
all scruples from his mind at once. So fair a creature must not,
should not, die, if he could prevent it, and, without resorting to
any of his usual preliminaries, he at once hauled out the magic
bottle, and handed it to the lady.
She applied it to her lips, and as she did so, Hans again felt
the same cold shiver which he had experienced on entering the
house. As the liquid trickled down her throat, he trembled
more violently, and when she slowly removed the bottle from her
lips, he felt a throb of pain in his heart, followed by a rush of
blood to the head, which made him stagger like a drunken man.


The Fair Rebecca, feeling immensely revived, turned to thank
her benefactor, when she perceived by the strange pallor of his
countenance that he was suffering, and anxiously enquired what
was the matter.
“ Nothing,” said Hans, “ no—thing—oh ! oh ! ” and he stag-
gered and would have fallen, had not Bart seized him by the
arm.
Isaac, not sorry to have an opportunity to get rid of such a
dangerous customer, suggested that a removal to the open air
might revive His Serene Transparency, who, he opined, was
affected by the close atmosphere of the sick-room.
Hans would have resisted, but was by this time speechless;
and Bart made no more ado about it, but slung him over his
shoulder like a sack of flour, and carried him down stairs and out
into the street. Here Hans felt somewhat better, and would have
returned, being anxious to prosecute his acquaintance with the
lovely Jewess, but Bart insisted upon hisjgoing home at once;
representing to him that neither he nor the lady were in fit state
to hold converse, and that plenty of opportunities would not be
wanting in the future, as he could readily prevent the departure of
Isaac and his daughter from Prague, even had they been inclined
to such an extreme measure.
Hans saw the force of the argument, but had suddenly become
so violently enamoured of his late patient, that he felt as if he
could not exist out of her sight, and he persisted in turning
towards the house. His strength failed him, however, ere he
could reach the knocker, and he fell prone on the pavement, with
his head in the gutter. Bart immediately summoned a litter, and
conveyed him, still inanimate to the palace. Arrived there, he
was bled and put to bed.
Ere morning Hans was delirious.
He was ill at last—but with what disease ?
What was the matter with him ?


PART V.—THE GRAF.
Love was the disease which had so suddenly attacked him. Yes,
he whose heart had hitherto proved invulnerable to the charms of
the fair sex, however his senses might have been affected, had at
last fallen a victim to the passion he despised.
Now, in those days, love was quite a different sensation to
what it is at the present time. Now-a-days, the Girl of the Period
falls in love and recovers herself with amazing rapidity; whilst the
Man of the Period is usually too much engrossed with the cares of
business and the pursuit of wealth, to be able to waste his time in
so frivolous an occupation. The auri sacra fames is an admir-
able antidote against sentimentality. It is only the idle man who
can afford the time to brood over a rejected suit; and, thanks to
modern civilization, idle men are becoming rarer every day.
But in the days when Hans von Schloggenbochs cumbered the
earth, it was altogether different. The only real business of the
upper classes was war ; and, however pugilistically inclined a man
may be, he cannot be fighting all and every day the year round—
and thus there was plenty of leisure time to make love. And so
the tender passion flourished, and attained a force and vitality
which we degenerates can scarcely comprehend.
There is no doubt about it, Hans was very bad indeed. At
one moment, fierce desire gnawed his vitals and stung him to the
pitch of desperation ; at another, he was seized with a devouring
melancholy, combined with distrust of himself and despair of
success.
As soon as he had recovered the strength of which the sudden-
ness of the seizure had deprived him, he lost no time in prose-
cuting his suit with the beautiful cause of his illness. The lady,
however, remained obdurate —the magic draught had cured her,
no doubt; but it had, at the same time, figuratively speaking,
turned her to stone. The object of her former affection, Solomon
Meyer, whom we have lost sight of for some time, no longer
possessed the power to cause one extra throb in her pulse, or
raise even the faintest tinge to her cheek. He was one of those


gross, sensual beings to whom all the finer feelings of our nature
are a mystery. He admired the lady, much in the same sort of
way as he would have admired a beautiful horse, and was per-
fectly willing to make her his wife, but so sensitive a creature as
Rebecca was (before she had drank of the elixir) could not be
content with so material a worship, and hence her sickness. Now,
all things were changed. She was utterly indifferent as to hex-
future mate, and received Sol’s attentions with precisely the same
cold smile as she did those of Hans ; and so, day by day, our
hero grew weaker, until at last he was unable to rise from his bed.
All the physicians in the kingdom prescribed for him in vain ;
while his wife, the Princess Hildegonde, nursed him with exemplary
patience. T hough she did not love him, still as marriage was her
fate she would do her duty, and, after all, he was infinitely better
than a husband who might pester her with caresses and evidences
of a love she could not return.
One day, when Hans was very far gone indeed, his old friend
Bait von Schinkenstein came to pay him a visit. Bart was inex-
pressibly shocked to see the ravages which the fell disease had
made in so short a time, and tenderly enquired if he could be of
any service to him after an event had taken place which his
appearance indicated could not be far distant.
Hans expressed himself obliged for the offer, but said he
cared little what became of anything after his death—except,
perhaps, that it might afford him some slight satisfaction if Bart
would see that the persecution of the Jews was carried on with
proper vigour.
Bart promised faithfully that he would not fail to urge on the
King and the Council of State to greater severity if ever he
detected the slightest symptoms of relenting on their part.
This assurance somewhat comforted Hans, and he suddenly
bethought him of a means of revenge on the Ghost—the cause
of all his distress. He requested Bart to visit the tomb of that
worthy and, not only to brush off all the pebbles, but also to
cause the inscription to be erased and a more fitting one placed
in its stead; the new inscription to set forth, in the strongest
possible language, the fact that the deceased had been in life a
notorious usurer and skinflint, &c., &c.


Bart hesitated to consent to this extraordinary request, and
enquired its object; and Hans, feeling himself to be at the point
of death, revealed to his friend the secret cause of all his good
and ill luck, and the adventure with the Ghost.
No sooner had he concluded than Bart gave a great bound in
his chair, which went nigh to frighten the small remnant of life
out of poor Hans’ body.
“ I have it! ” shouted he, joyfully.
“ Have what ? ” asked Hans, faintly. “ I pray thee not to
make so much row. lam weak, and thy impetuosity scareth me.”
“ Hans,” said Bart, “ I will cure thee.”
“Thou?” returned Hans, incredulously. “And how wilt
thou set about it ? ”
“By means of the Ghost, the cause of all the mischief. We
will, together, visit his tomb, and it may be that I shall succeed
in insulting him sufficiently to cause his reappearance. What
sayest thou 1 ”
“Not a bad notion,” said Hans, “ I’m on.”
The preparations were soon made. Hans was placed in a
gorgeous litter, and borne to the cemetery ; having reached which,
the bearers set their burden on the ground in the immediate
vicinity of the well-known tomb, and departed, leaving Hans and
Bart alone.
The latter then commenced his incantation. In the first place,
he contemptuously brushed off all the pebbles, as Hans had done
before. It seemed, however, as if the Ghost had suspected the
plot, for he made no sign ; and Bart was compelled to proceed
further in the way of insult. He, therefore, produced a paint-pot
and brushes, and, obliterating the old inscription, wrote up in its
stead a series of abusive epithets, applied to the deceased. Still
the Ghost did not appear, and Bart then determined to make his
grand coup.
From the interior of the litter he produced a roast sucking-pig,
and, placing it on the tombstone, proceeded to cut it up and
eat it.
Now no respectable Hebrew Ghost could be expected to put
up with this last enormity, and Hans and Bart felt that if this did
not “ fetch him,” nothing else would.




Drawn by Montagu Scott.
T HE JNCANTATION.


They were not deceived.
Slowly and sadly, as if reluctantly, the Ghost rose up from
behind the tomb, and confronted our friends. An expression of
outraged dignity added no little to the majesty of his appearance,
as he gently but firmly remonstrated with the disturbers of his
peace.
Bart was frightened ; but Hans, to whom the sight of his
enemy seemed to give new life, demanded of the Ghost his
instant cure in return for the restoration of the tomb to its pristine
condition.
The Ghost hesitated; and Bart, recovering his courage, deter-
mined to bring matters to a crisis. Seizing a leg of the deceased
porker, he hurled it with all the force he could command at the
head of the Ghost. .It hit him in the mouth, and broke two of
his front teeth short off.
The Ghost yelled a short sharp yell—not unlike the bark of a
dog.
Hans tremblingly awaited the result of this temerity; but
Bart had not yet finished. Seizing a calabash of holy-water
which he had deposited in readiness prior to commencing opera-
tions, he dashed its contents over the outraged Ghost.
Oh, then, was n’t there a fizzing and a spluttering, and a
cursing ! The Ghost howled and danced about as if possessed,
while Bart fairly rolled on the ground in fits of laughter at his
contortions.
But now a terrible thing happened. From every tomb around
there rose up the ghost of a departed Hebrew. The celebrated
ghost-scene in “ Robert the Devil” was a fool to it. Huddling
around their offended brother, the ghosts jibbered and gnashed
their fleshless jaws together till it seemed as if they were bent on
smashing every tooth left them,
Hans curled up in deadly terror at the bottom of the litter,
but the undaunted Bart boldly confronted them. At the outset
he had, it is true, for a moment, given way; but his spirit rose as
the peril approached, and he reflected that he was a Christian
knight—and, as such (in his opinion), able for a thousand Jews,
dead or alive.


Meanwhile, the Ghost marshalled his brethren into something
like order, and prepared to attack his enemies.
Bart, however, was a man of resources, and had come pre-
pared for any emergency. Once more he put his hand into the
litter, and this time drew forth a bone.
Yes —a common leg-bone.
The Ghost thought it might be pig, and, snorting with disgust,
advanced to the attack. Ere, however, he had approached nigh
enough to seize his intended victim, he was undeceived.
Bart waived the bone in the air, and every ghost felt him-
self at once compelled to drop on his knees. Another waive,
and they sank upon their faces, grovelling to the earth their
rusty joints cricking and grinding like a cart-wheel that needs
greasing.
The bone was a relic.
It was one of the fourteen thigh-bones of St. Godolphus
which are preserved in various parts of Europe.
Bart, by aid of great interest, had succeeded in obtaining the
loan of it from the cathedral.
St. Godolphus, in his lifetime, had burned many a Jew, and
was proportionately dreaded by the race.
The victory was complete.
Not a single ghost dared to resist so powerful a spell; and,
when Bart demanded their instant departure, they disappeared as
one man —leaving only behind them the Ghost, whom Bart had
specially excepted.
An agreement was then drawn up by which Hans, for his part,
undertook to preserve inviolate the tombs in the Hebrew cemetery
and restore the defiled one to its former condition. He also
agreed not to persecute the Jews to any greater extent than
former rulers of Bohemia had done. In return for this, the Ghost
undertook to restore him to health, and to ensure him a perfect
immunity from all diseases as long as he lived. This was duly
signed, sealed and delivered in the presence of the noble Graf
Bart von Schinkenstein; and the Ghost then stooped, and, raising
a handful of dirt, flung it over Hans and incontinently cured
him.


Wishing the friends a good-day, the Ghost then sank into the
earth, having previously gathered up and replaced in his jaw the
teeth so rudely ejected by Bart.
The bearers were then summoned, and the necessary repairs
to the tomb accomplished and our friends departed arm-in-arm
rejoicing, and wakening the echoes of the old burial-ground by
the stentorian tones of their voices as they sang the favourite
ballad;
Schmeisst ’n ’raus den Juden Itzig.
And so our story ends happily after all. Hans and his wife
gradually acquired a sincere liking for one another; and, with the
advent of children, that liking ripened into love—so that when,
on the death of King Nepomuck, Hans ascended the throne of
Bohemia, no more happy couple existed in the kingdom.
Bart von Schinkenstein fell in love with the fair Rebecca, and
she, the Ghost’s spell having been removed, reciprocated his senti-
ments ; and, finally, much to the disgust of Old Isaac, she was
baptised and married to our old friend.
Sol Meyer grieved a little, at first, but it was at the loss of the
fortune—not the lady. He afterwards married the widow of a
rich pawnbroker, and succeeded to the business. In the early
days of the reign of Hans’ eldest son, Sol, then a very old man,
was roasted to death after the approved fashion, for failing to
comply with an unusually exorbitant demand.
Those readers who feel any curiosity as to the fate of the
Ghost, may be glad to hear that he has never had occasion to
make his reappearance on earth. His tomb remains undisturbed
to this very hour; and is especially noticeable, owing to the
unusually large heap of stones which has accumulated upon it
during the centuries which have elapsed since he was first laid
therein.


PRAYER AND PRAISE.
MASONIC ODE.
SAMUEL HAWKER BANKS.
I.
regaj|j|REAT Architect of the Universe ! bestow
EUrl Upon the Craftsmen Thine especial care ;
J * M I So guide their actions while they lodge below,
That they may ever work within the Square—
And from Thine own pure teachings ne’er remove :
Their Compass, truth ; integrity their guard,—
In them unite the virtues good to love,
That they may surely merit Thy reward !
ii.
Man’s work is vain, indeed, without Thy aid
And guidance, Master, wise, and good, and great !
By whose supreme decree was planned and laid
This structure grand : who, from Thine holy seat
In Heaven beholdest the works of Thine own hand—
Whilst all Thy creatures need Thy constant care ;
Thou showerest forth Thy blessings o’er the land—
Nor art unmindful of the sea and air !
111.
The Beauty of Thy Temple we admire ;
And praise the Wisdom of its wondrous plan !
Thy watchful care and love we still desire
For weak and helpless, erring, sinful man !
Our Labour done, Refresh us with Thy grace;
Remove the veil that we the Light may see I
O, give us Strength Thy promise to embrace,
And fit us for eternal Rest with Thee !


BASIL MOSS.
HENRY KENDALL.
rej«p~s!>3S iING, mountain-wind, thy strong, superior song
Thy haughty alpine anthem, over tracts
Whose passes and whose swift rock-straitened streams
Catch mighty life and voice from thee, and make
A lordly harmony in sea-chafed heights.
Sing, mountain-wind, and take thine ancient tone,
The grand, austere, imperial utterance
Which drives my soul before it back to days
In one dark hour of which, when Storm rode high
Past broken hills, and when the polar gale
Roared round the Otway with the bitter breath
That speaks for ever of the White South Land
Alone with God and Silence in the cold,
I heard the touching tale of Basil Moss,
A story shining with a woman’s love !
And who that knows that love can ever doubt
How dear, divine, sublime a thing it is ;
For while the tale of Basil Moss was one
Not blackened with those stark, Satanic sins
Which call for superhuman sacrifice,
Still, from the records of the world’s sad life,
This great, sweet, gladdening fact at length we ’ve learned.
There’s not a depth to which a man can fall,
No slough of crime in which such one can lie
Stoned with the scorn and curses of his kind,
But that some tender woman can be found
To love and shield him still.
What was the fate
Of Basil Moss who, thirty years ago,
A brave, high-minded, but impetuous youth,
Left happy homesteads in the sweetest isle
That wears the sober light of Northern suns ?
What happened him, the man who crossed far, fierce
Sea-circles of the hoarse Atlantic—who,
Without a friend to help him in the world,
Commenced his battle in this fair young land,
A Levite in the Temple Beautiful


Of Art, who struggled hard, but found that here
Both Bard and Painter learn, by bitter ways,
That they are aliens in the working world,
And that all Heaven’s templed clouds at morn
And sunset do not weigh one loaf of bread !
This was his tale. For years he kept himself
Erect, and looked his troubles in the face
And grappled them ; and, being helped at last
By one who found she loved him, who became
The patient sharer of his lot austere,
He beat them bravely back ; but, like the heads
Of Lerna’s fabled hydra, they returned
From day to day in numbers multiplied ;
And so it came to pass that Basil Moss
(Who was, though brave, no mental Hercules,
Who hid beneath a calmness forced, the keen
Heart-breaking sensibility—which is
The awful, wild, specific curse that clings
Forever to the Poet’s twofold life)
Gave way at last; but not before the hand
Of sickness fell upon him —not before
The drooping form and sad averted eyes
Of hectic Hope, that figure far and faint,
Had given all his later thoughts a tongue—
“ It is too late —too late !”
There is no need
To tell the elders of the English world
What followed this. From step to step, the man—
Now fairly gripped by fierce Intemperance —
Descended in the social scale ; and though
He struggled hard at times to break away,
And take the old free, dauntless stand again,
He came to be as helpless as a child,
And Darkness settled on the face of things,
And Hope fell dead, and Will was paralyzed.
Yet sometimes, in the gloomy breaks between
Each fit of madness issuing from his sin,
He used to wander through familiar woods
With God’s glad breezes blowing in his face,
And try to feel as he was wont to feel
In other years ; but never could he find
Again his old enthusiastic sense
Of Beauty; never could he exorcise


The evil spell which seemed to shackle down
The fine, keen, subtle faculty that used
To see into the heart of loveliness ;
And therefore Basil learned to shun the haunts
Where Nature holds her chiefest courts, because
They forced upon him in the saddest light
The fact of what he was, and once had been.
So fared the drunkard for five awful years
The last of which, while lighting singing dells,
With many a flame of flowers, found Basil Moss
Cooped with his wife in one small wretched room;
And there, one night, the man, when ill and weak—
A sufferer from his latest bout of sin—
Moaned, stricken sorely with a fourfold sense
Of all the degradation he had brought
Upon himself, and on his patient wife ;
And while he wrestled with his strong remorse
He looked upon a sweet but pallid face,
And cried, “ My God ! is this the trusting girl
I swore to Ipve, to shield, to cherish so
But ten years back ? O, what a liar lam!”
She, shivering in a thin and faded dress
Beside a handful of pale, smouldering fire,
On hearing Basil s words, moved on her chair,
And, turning to him blue, beseeching eyes,
And pinched, pathetic features, faintly said—
“ O, Basil, love ! now that you seem to feel
And understand how much I’ve suffered since
You first gave way—now that you comprehend
The bitter heartwear, darling, that has brought
The swift sad silver to this hair of mine
Which should have come with Age—which came with Pain,
Do make one more attempt to free yourself
From what is slowly killing both of us ;
And if you do the thing I ask of you,
If you but try this once, we may indeed—
We may be happy yet,”
Then Basil Moss,
Remembering in his marvellous agony
How often he had found her in the dead
Of icy nights with uncomplaining eyes,
A watcher in a cheerless room for him ;
And thinking, too, that often, while he threw
His scanty earnings over reeking bars,
K‘


The darling that he really loved through all
Was left without enough to eat —then Moss,
I say, sprang to his feet with sinews set
And knotted brows, and throat that gasped for air,
And cried aloud—“ My poor, poor girl, I will."
And so he did ; and fought this time the fight
Out to the bitter end ; and with the help
Of prayers and unremitting tenderness,
He gained the victory at last ; but not —■
No, not before the agony and sweat
Of fierce Gethsemanes had come to him ;
And not before the awful nightly trials,
When, set in mental furnaces of flame,
With eyes that ached and wooed in vain for sleep,
He had to fight the devil holding out
The cup of Lethe to his fevered lips ;
But still he conquered ; and the end was this,
That though he often had to face the eyes
Of that bleak Virtue which is not of Christ
(Because the gracious Lord of Love was one with Him
Who blessed the dying thief upon the cross),
He held his way with no unfaltering steps,
And gathered hope and light, and never missed
To do a good thing for the sake of good.
And every day that glided through the world
Saw some fine instance of his bright reform,
And some assurance he would never fall
Into the pits and traps of hell again.
And thus it came to pass that Basil’s name
Grew sweet with men ; and, when he died, his end
Was calm —was evening-like, and beautiful.
Here ends the tale of Basil Moss. To wives
Who suffer as the Painter’s darling did,
I dedicate these lines ; and hope they ’ll bear
In mind those efforts of her lovely life
Which saved her husband’s soul; and proved that while
A man who sins can entertain remorse,
He is not wholly lost. If such as they
But follow her, they may be sure of this,
That Love, that sweet authentic messenger
From God, can never fail while there is left
Within the fallen one a single pulse
Of what the angels call humanity.


CHARLTON GRANGE.
O fortunatos nimium, sua si bona nôrint, Agricolas.
PEMBROKE L. MURRAY.
PpSpfl HARLTON GRANGE, the homestead of the Charlton
Run, is about as unlike the ideal of a home-station in
the “ far interior” as anything can well be. No dense
. groves of gum-trees encircle it about; no broken and
rugged range of mountain lends picturesqueness to its immediate
vicinity ;it is neither the rude and primitive dwelling of squattoc-
racy in its Age of Iron, nor the stately chateau of squattocracy in
its Age of Gold.
Picture to yourself an undulating landscape of meadow, through
which a limpid stream slips quietly along its devious course ;—on
through many a broad acre of arable land, here, pausing as it
were, upon its way in quiet corners to form deep and placid
pools crowned with pearly water-lilies, that fling rich festoons
across its surface; —here, hurrying away through a narrower
channel rippled by the overhanging grasses, and by the graceful
reeds that bend to its caress; here, babbling and brawling across the
“ Stony Ford” ; —here, becoming a broader and shallower sheet,
where the horses and cattle in the home-paddock are wont to
quench their thirst; —here, again, its course diverted for the
purpose, it embraces an artificially-constructed islet, arched over
with weeping willows; —then away again, far away, over rocky
clefts where eels and blackfish congregate, and where the station
urchins love to fish—past the boundary-rider’s hut, past the boun-
dary fence—away, far away.
On the bank near the bend formed by the willowed islet is
the Old Man’s garden, tilled by two sturdy disciples of Old Adam,
under whose care it blushes with flower and is burdened with
fruit; and in the Old Man’s garden is Charlton Grange, the


residence of the Old Man himself. A cottage —or, rather, half-a-
dozen cottages thrown into one —untarnished in the integrity of
its whitewash, immaculate in porches and rustic lattices and bay-
windows, and ivied patches of verandah —with its stack of chim-
neys, its snug stables and coach-buildings : placidity and intense
respectability are its exterior characteristics.
On the other bank of the river—the Rabba Rabba (a foaming
torrent in Winter, a mild streamlet in Summer), never descended
so low in geographical nomenclature as the designation of a
“ creek”—is a cluster of buildings or little hamlet. This is com-
posed of the cottage and garden of McTavish, the manager, with
his wife and yearly increasing family ; the abode of Saunders, the
“ working overseer” ; the “ men’s hut,” the “ traveller’s hut,” the
store, the bakery, the wool-shed, the sleeping-hut, and the hut of
Jack Mole, the ploughman and bullock-driver, who is married. I
was nearly forgetting the “ school,” where daily instruction is
imparted to a small swarm of younkers, McTavishes, Saunderses,
and Moles, with the children of Buist, the boundary-rider, and of
Duncan and Wallis, the “cockatoo” settlers, and others. For be
it observed that Charlton is a station where men stay a long time.
Length of servitude at Charlton is not measured by days, or weeks,
or months, but by years. Old Jack, the cook, has been five-and-
twenty years baking mutton and bread (the age of “ damper ” has
passed into a tradition at Charlton), and boiling “ doughboys.”
He was a sailor in his youth, was Old Jack, and can spin a sailor
yarn still; but his pleasantest associations are those connected
with the run. And there is a sleek, contented, indolent expres-
sion, and a corporeal stoutness about the Old Man’s retainers,
from which one may argue that they do not find their lot cast in
particularly unpleasant places. To resume our sketch, however :
Yonder track winding away round the slope of that luxuriantly-
grassed ridge to the right will conduct you to the Jericho-road
(Jericho is the nearest considerable town); and that grove of
wattles to the left stretches away for miles, till it loses itself in
the growth of denser timber. And a famous grove of wattles it
is : gilded every Spring with the perfume-laden blossoms interlaced
with sprays of cool, green foliage.




Drawn by Montagu Scott
FLORA.


The Old Man, to whom I have had to refer casually, was
Robert Charlton, Esq., J.P., but more popularly known at Jericho
and by the squattocracy of the district as Bob Charlton. Bob
Charlton was of a rare species. Endowed with the instincts and
capabilities of your fox-hunting, port-loving, hard-headed and
large-hearted English squire, he had, in days of yore, paid a visit to
the colony with a few thousands to invest—supposing he cared to
invest them, and not take them and himself back to England. He
had been afforded the opportunity to spend his money on one of
the richest squattages ever on the eve of ruin through mismanage-
ment ; and, having invested in it, he was so lucky as to be able
to secure the services of McTavish to take care of it for him.
Good care McTavish had taken ; he saw that his patron knew
little enough of sheep-farming, and he had guided him as the
impetuous horse is restrained by the light finger of the experi-
enced rider. Piece by piece the superintending authority crept
away from Charlton to McTavish, and finally the duties of the
former became confined to merely revisional work. Fortunately,
McTavish was as honest as he was skilful; he desired only a
good salary, and he had his desire. So Bob Charlton shot,
fished, hunted, and visited the neighbouring seigneurs and friends
in Jericho. He was usually driven to the latter place, and on his
return was generally awakened with a flushed face and watery
eyes, and alighted in the court-yard somewhat heavily. There
was a little of the vinous, too, in the paternal solicitude with
which he would assist Flora Charlton to alight; and in his chival-
rous manner of conducting her within. Truth to tell, Bob loved
his glass of wine; and no man knew a good glass of wine better.
At the head of his own hospitable board; at a roystering dinner-
party in Jericho, or at his club “in town,” none could play the
genial host or the jovial companion with better spirit.
Flora Charlton, Bob’s eldest, sunny faced, bright-eyed Flora,
with the luxuriance of jetty tresses, the port of a princess, and the
winning grace of a lady, was the belle not only of the station, but
of the entire district. People on the station had prophesied very
little good of Flora’s childish quick temper and flightiness; and
dismal auguries were based upon her hoydenish enjoyment of boyish


exercises, the temper with which she defied alike governess and
parent (Bob’s wife had left him a widower when Flora was nine
years of age), and the daring with which she would mount a
half-broken horse, or venture upon journeys of exploration and
discovery, uncounselled and unaccompanied.
Bob, however, was no admirer of the Australian style una-
dorned. At the age of thirteen, therefore, Flora was removed to
a “young lady’s academy” at Melbourne ; and there she remained,
with few intermissions, for the ensuing three or four years. When
she returned, subdued, but not starched ; educated, but not made
artificial—a pure Australian diamond, cut and polished—she
became at once the reigning beauty of those parts. Certes, there
was much to charm in Flora Charlton ; whether mounted upon a
thoroughbred, dashing, with flushed cheeks and streaming ringlets,
through timber; presiding at the homestead with a quiet grace and
dignity that would have befitted the presidency over a much more
numerous household, in a much more fashionable precinct; leading
the dance in the few balls given at Jericho on race-days or the
like ; or visiting the wives of her father’s retainers, listening, with
exemplary fortitude, to Mrs. Mole’s domestic recitals, or the
Presbyterianisms of the worthy Mrs. Buist, a bony Scotchwoman
“ fra the Hielans.”
In the neighbourhood of Charlton Grange there were but two
marriageable men in her own sphere of life —Frank Farryher, the
youngest of the firm of Farryher Brothers, and the manager for
that firm of Wychitella Run ; and Tom McDermott, of Hossulton.
These men were the antitheses of each other. Frank Farryher,
the Adonis of the district, had been city bred and trained.
Nobody else in that part of the country had been known to sport
daily such white waistcoats, such neckties, or such gloves ; to
swear at a defaulting labourer or an obstinate animal with such
easy grace; to smoke such cigars ; or to read French periodicals
and romances. For all that, Frank, while affecting to despise
any kind of exertion, and to be of a laissez faire sort of dis-
position, had a shrewd head for business, and a thorough com-
prehension of his duties—well masked, however, under a veil of
diffidence.


Tom McDermott was of a type ordinary enough. Small
farmer in his origin; wealthy squatter in his ultimatum ; endowed
with a small taste of education, an ardent admiration of rum and
tobacco, the habits of a Vandal, and a not unkindly disposition.
He had had too much to do in his younger days to think of
marriage; in his latter days the passion for the sex troubled him
little, and a bachelor he remained at eight-and-forty. It will thus
be perceived that, in the nautical phrase, the one man had
“crawled through the cabin-windows” to his command, while the
other had “crept in through the hawse-hole” (whatever that may
be) to his.
McDermott, it may be imagined, was scarcely a person who
would be likely to attract the volatile and refined Flora Charlton;
and, indeed, he himself had so long ceased to contemplate matri-
mony, that he had paid a good many visits to the Grange before
the charms of the young lady began to create any impression upon
his tough old heart. Ultimately, however, it occurred to him
that Miss Flora was “ a doosed fine gal, and no mistake; ” and,
pondering over this undeniable fact, the consideration arose
whether it was worth his while to unite her fortune to his, and
bring her home as the mistress of Hossulton. For, be it observed,
the consideration that she might possibly not be particularly
ecstatic at the prospect thus afforded never for one moment
occurred to him. That he, Tom McDermott, the knowingest
judge of stock in the whole country, whose cattle took prizes at
Skipton show; whose run was worth —well, never mind how many
thousands per annum—who had stoutly resisted the baited hooks
held out for him by Mrs. Plumpton, of the “ Squatter’s Arms,”
Jericho; by the three Miss Scrumps, the saddler’s daughters ; and
by other damsels, who keenly appreciated the advantages pre-
viously hinted at —that he, Tom McDermott, should have to do
more than ask and be accepted, never entered into his contempla-
tion of the subject. And the idea of marrying Flora Charlton
remained for a long time in a chrysalis-like state, maturing, as it
were, in his mind before it expanded into full form, and he
stoutly resolved that coute qui coute the deed should be done.


Now, Frank Farryher had arrived at the same determination,
and with equal confidence as to the result. In the first place, he
was not unwilling to promote a bond of alliance between himself
and Bob Charlton, whose run “ marched,” in the Scotch phrase,
with Wychitella; that is to say, the boundaries ran side by side.
In the next place, Flora was a young lady whom he deemed in
every way worthy of exercising sway over his territory, or the
feminine subjects thereupon ; in the next place, he became a little
smitten himself, and deemed that, like “ the hooknosed fellow of
Rome,” he had but to “ come, see, and overcome.”
About a year before the lords of Wychitella and Hossulton
thus magnanimously resolved, a tall and rather handsome, but
effeminate-looking, young man arrived one evening at the Grange,
and enquired for Mr. Charlton. The new comer, as Old Jack, the
cook, confidentially remarked to Red Bill, the fencer, was “ a new
chum, and no mistake about that.” He carried his swag, as
though some tyrant had strapped it immovably upon his back,
and it were death to shift it; he stared about him as curiously as
though he had for the first time in his life arrived at a Tartar
village; his silk hat evoked the merriment of all the beholders,
while his gloves, tight trousers, stand-up collar, and flaming neck-
tie excited alternate admiration and disgust. Even the station
dogs smelt inquisitively after him, as a phenomenon by no means
ordinarily encountered in their way. To Bob Charlton, who
surveyed the unexpected arrival with surprise, he told his story.
He had, he said, walked over from Knapton (a village about four
miles away, where Cobb’s coach stopped to change), and brought
Mr. Charlton a note from the latter’s solicitors, Pennington and
Clutch, of Chancery-lane. The purport of the epistle was brief.
Harry St. George was a young fellow of good family, but little
wit ; arrived from England in banishment, and with a few pounds,
he had squandered them in cafes, billiard-rooms, and other resorts
of fastness and folly. Pennington and Clutch, to whom he had
had letters from home, had assisted him as far as they deemed it
prudent to do so ; but ultimately finding that no sedentary occupa-
tion was likely to retain him, they had recommended a little


“ colonial experience,” or station life, by way of keeping out of
mischief until advices from England arrived. Finding him willing
to sojourn amongst the gums for a period, they had given him
a letter to Bob Charlton, earnestly requesting the latter to retain
him on the Grange for a month or two.
Good-natured Bob was not averse to obliging the professional
men with whom he had had twenty years’ dealings. So he invited
Mr. Harry St. George to dinner incontinently, and over their
wine and cigars in the ivied verandah endeavoured to obtain some
insight into his antecedents. But of these the squatter learned
little or nothing, beyond what Pennington and Clutch had told
him. The new-comer appeared perfectly self-possessed, frank,
and by no means disinclined to chat; but upon his own affairs he
seemed reticent enough. Next morning he was consigned to the
care of McTavish, with whom he took up his quarters.
Harry St. George rapidly became a favourite. Perfectly
ignorant and inexperienced in all matters appertaining to bush
life, he nevertheless speedily adapted himself to it, and displayed
an amazing aptitude to learn. The first time he mounted a horse
his perplexity and discomfort caused much amusement; and the
animal itself, a quiet one enough, appeared disconcerted by the
unusual incubus upon its back. On the following day Harry was
inveigled upon a restive brute, which began to gyrate about with
him, “ pig-jumping” and plunging, and causing the rider to assume
attitudes which elicited unqualified delight to the grinning by-
standers, and were, Mr. Mole somewhat vaguely remarked, “as
good as a play.” Finally, the beast gave a wheel and a lash out,
and down came the rider.
Bob Charlton, who had arrived upon the scene shortly before
Harry had come to grief, shouted, “ Never mind, Mr. St. George;
that’s the way to learn to ride. Get on him again; and stick on, lad! ”
“ It’s all very well to say ‘stick on/” cried poor Harry; “but
how am I to manage it ? ”
“ Sit well back—not like a sack of flour,” replied the squatter;
“ feel his mouth with the rein, stick your knees into him, keep
your hands away from the pummel of the saddle and the horse’s
mane, and your legs away from his ribs.”


“ Well,” replied Harry, “ here goes again.”
And, so saying, he watched his opportunity, leaped into the
saddle ; and, to the surprise of everybody, carried out the squatter’s
recommendations so perfectly that he not only sat the horse but
rapidly mastered him. Nor was he ever thrown again.
So it was with stock-riding, sheep-drafting, mustering and the
like. The details of work on the run were rapidly mastered by
the young “Jackeroo,” whose geniality rapidly ingratiated him
with all the “ hands.” Charlton, in his rides and drives about
the country, found him a more refined and amusing companion
than McTavish; and, finally, St. George’s post became somewhat
analogous to that of aide-de-camp to the squatter, whom he accom-
panied in his tours of inspection, hunting and shooting excursions,
and even visits to the neighbouring home-stations and to Jericho,
and who listened with unfeigned interest to the young fellow’s
sketches of life in London and Paris. And, after it transpired
that Harry played a fair game of chess, and could take a hand in
a rubber of whist, he received many invitations to pass an evening
at the homestead.
He thus formed the acquaintance of Miss Flora, for whose
album he drew sketches of scenery, and caricatures not devoid of
humour, and wrote stanzas not remarkable for any peculiar merit
in a literary point of view. He also not unfrequently was required
to squire the young lady to and from the neighbouring station,
Fernside, the mistress of which was Flora’s aunt, and only female
relative in the district Nor was there considered to be any
impropriety in this: the idea of love-passages between Miss
Charlton and the penniless cadet being too preposterous to enter
old Bob’s imagination. He forgot that to be young, not devoid
of good looks, accomplished—and, above all, what the sex term
“ interesting”—is a sure passport to a young woman’s favour.
St. George and McDermott, also, became great friends, though
the mode in which their introduction was brought about was
rather out of the ordinary course. St. George had been laying
poisoned baits for certain warrigals, or dingoes, the inhabitants of
a belt of mallee, and who had been helping themselves rather
freely to lambs. So dainty morsels of flesh flavoured with strych


nine were laid for their especial behoof; and all the Charlton
dogs were muzzled. But their aboriginal acquaintances were, by
far, too artful to be beguiled in this manner. They would n’t eat
the baits, and be killed; but one of Mr. McDermott’s kangaroo-
dogs did , and great was the lamentation at Hossulton, and
shocking were the oaths, and dire the threats of vengeance on the
part of Tom McDermott, —who was a profane old Pagan.
A day or two after the canine tragedy, Mr. McDermott was
prowling round his boundary, when he encountered St. George
leisurely jogging along; an enormous meerschaum in his mouth,
a bag of poisoned morsels strapped to his saddle, and a couple of
muzzled dogs at his horse’s heels. There was no escaping from
it: here was the culprit, caught in flagrante delicto. A torrent of
execration poured from the lips of the enraged squatter. Harry’s
calm and monosyllabic rejoinders, so far from having the effect of
“ pouring oil upon the troubled waters,” took the contrary form
of “ putting fat on the fire.” But, when McDermott proceeded to
the length of threatening St. George with grievous bodily injuries,
the latter, to his assailant’s great surprise, quietly slipped from the
saddle, pulled off his coat and waistcoat, rolled up his shirt-sleeves,
and dared the other to “ come on,”
To do McDermott justice, he was never known to decline such
an invitation. He did “ come on,” accordingly; and the result
was such a display of science on the part of the stripling as
not only astonished the heavier man, but literally confused and
staggered him. At the end of ten minutes’ combatting McDermott
gave in, declared that St. George was a lad of spirit, and protested
that they must become better acquainted. So they did; and
very many subsequent evenings were spent by Harry at Hos-
sulton consuming spirits and tobacco in company with McDermott
and Strangles, his confidential overseer.
Thus matters went on ; the one or two months of Harry’s
sojourn at Charlton Grange lengthened into fourteen, and still he
remained, evincing no desire to change his mode of living, and
gradually becoming one of the ordinary appendages of the run.
One evening, when St. George was passing away the hours
with McDermott and the overseer, promoting the interests of free


trade in the articles of rum and tobacco, the squatter, after the
fifth tumbler, grew, as he usually did at such a time, confidential.
“ Harry,” said he; “I ’ve been turnin’ and revolvin’ in my
mind about matrimony.”
“ Indeed ! ” replied St. George.
“Yes,” rejoined the other. “Ye see a single man’s a miser-
able beggar at the best of times. No one to care for him—
nobody to keep a parcel of scoundrels from plunderin’ his house ;
and no company to cheer him, except the likes o’ you, Strangles,
or you, Harry.”
The overseer grunted his acknowledgments of the implied
compliment. Harry laughed.
“Well,” proceeded McDermott, “naterally the subjeck brings
us to the purpriety of taking a wife; and that conducts us to
another subjeck —who to marry.”
“ For the matter o’ that,” growled the overseer, “ there’s
wimmin enough to snap ye up if you only gives ’em half a chance.
I could n’t do it, though —noways.”
Strangles was hardly an object for the attentions of the fair
sex, being as hideous as a Satyr.
“ You shut yer foolish mouth. Nobody wanted to have your
opinion on that matter,” replied his patron. “ Now, 'what I was
thinkin’ was this. Arter all, there’s nothing like an English gal.
Have you got any sisters, Harry ? ”
“Yes —two,” answered that individual.
“Hah! Well, now, d’ye think—(puff—puff—puff)—d’ye
think either on ’em’d fancy me ? ” enquired McDermott.
“I don’t know,” said St. George. “They might. Women
have strange tastes sometimes.”
The squatter looked for a few moments suspiciously at his
• young friend; but as the features of the latter remained unmoved,
McDermott proceeded. The object of his query was to ascertain
whether Harry could pave the way for him with either of his fair
relatives.
« But,” objected Harry, “ why go so far for a bride where there
are any number of jolly girls in this country that would be glad to
have you 1 ”


“ N—no,” answered his host, with a half sigh. “ There’s ony
one I ever fancied; and that—help yourself and pass the bottle—
that was Flora Charlton.”
“Well, why didn’t yer arst her for to marry yer right off?”
interjected the stolid Strangles, who would have bargained for a
wife as he would for a yoke of bullocks.
“Well, boys—(mind ye, I don’t want this to go flyin’ over the
country)—truth is, I did I” replied McDermott.
“The d 1 you did!” exclaimed Harry, becoming very
much flushed of a sudden. But the idea of old red-haired,
stubbly-bearded Tom thus addressing himself to the high-minded
Flora Charlton was too ludicrous, and he burst into a laugh, in
which, to the extreme discomfiture of McDermott, Strangles
cordially joined.
“What d’ you mean, what d’ye mean?” shouted the squatter
—“ a couple of idiots, a sittin’ there grinnin’ like Cheshire cats !
I’ve half a mind to knock yer heads off for yer.”
Having been mollified with some difficulty, McDermott was
induced to renew his confidences. Said he:
“Well, I called over the other arternoon, and findin’her in
and by herself, I thought that a good opportunity. So arter
she’d been playin’ me a toon on the pyanner, I took my chance,
went down on my knee all reg’lar, and told her I’d wanted to
marry her.”
Here a long drink intercepted the thread of the story.
“Well, well?” broke in the impatient listeners.
“Well,” replied Tom, “she up and says, says she, ‘No, thank
you—( mimicking ) —No, thank you, Mr. McDermott. I feel
honoured by your preference; but don’t say anything more about
it please.’ There’s a little Fury for yer ! ”
“ And what did you say ? ” enquired Harry.
“What was I to say?” rejoined the other. “ I felt cussedly
foolish ; so I just ups and says, says I, ‘ Thanky, Miss Flora, I’m
very much obliged to yer, indeed. I was ony jokin’ that’s all,
and did n’t mean it.’ That floored her, I tell yer. Was n’t goin’
to laugh at me , if I know it.”


A few days afterwards St. George and Miss Charlton were
returning from Fernside together, when they were overtaken, some
miles from the Grange, by a heavy shower of rain.
“Miss Charlton,” said St. George, “this shower cannot last
long. Let us pull up for a few minutes beneath yonder knoll of
trees.”
His fair companion assenting, they took refuge accordingly,
and at Harry’s further suggestion, dismounted, and crept beneath
the huge forky arms of a giant of the bush.
“ I fear you will still be wet,” Miss Charlton, observed Harry ,
« but if you will allow me, I will spread my overcoat upon your
shoulders.”
So saying, he unstrapped an ample Inverness from his saddle,
and enveloped Flora in its folds.
“You are too kind, Mr. St. George,” replied she; “but do
you know I fear very much that these pleasant excursions must
be terminated. Oh, how it rains ! ”
“Terminated?” echoed Harry; “and why?”
« Because—that is, Mr. St. George,” answered the young lady,
“ Papa is thoughtless, and never troubles himself with conjectures
about the world. But people will really begin to remark upon it,
if you and I are seen so much together. Just fancy if anyone
could see us now ! ”
Patter, patter, patter, patter, went the rain.
« So that you see, Mr. St. George, I—really—l must return to
my old squire, Jack, the groom.”
Patter, patter, patter. A long pause.
«I feel that you are right,” replied Harry at length. “ And
yet it is hard —very hard.”
“ why should it be ? ” replied his companion, playfully.
“ why why ? ” rejoined Harry, passionately. “ Miss Charlton
—Flora, you must see that I love you—madly love you.”
Patter, patter, patter.
“ After I had become a discontented, querulous monomaniac,
seeking pleasure in new scenes and new excitement, and finding
none, it was your sweet presence that weaned my mind to health
and vigour again ; it was you also who taught me to find happiness


where I least expected it, and showed me that all the morbid
excitements of a city life pall before the pure, healthy manhood
of him who lives amongst the handiworks of Nature. Ah why
turn away from me?” ’
“ Mn St Geor ge,” at length replied Flora, who had become
very pale, “ this is cowardly—this is unmanly. Why address to
me overtures which you know it is my duty to repulse ? ”
Because lam but an humble dependant upon the station of
which your father is the proprietor,” muttered Harry, bitterly.
“ Th is is ungenerous, ” replied the young lady. “ Mr. St.
George, if you really entertain any affection for me, desist—and
let us forget what has passed.”
“ I cannot leave you thus,” exclaimed Harry. “ Hear me,
Flora. If I can win by my own exertions a fair competence, will
you then accept me 1 I am young; I can work as other men
have, and ascend step by step the ladder that leads to eminence.
Will you accord me this chance 1 Ah, you consent —you cannot
deny it. You love me then, and will grant my request.”
“ I will, Harry,” replied the blushing maiden. “ Yes ; come to
me in such a position that I may accept you, and I will. And
there’s my hand upon it! ”
The sun burst forth in a blaze of glorious light, irradiating the
rain-drops that still fell from the leaves, and awakening the greet-
ings of a cloud of parrots, and other noisy denizens of the
feathered tribe.
*******
Whilst this scene was enacting, Frank Farryher and Bob
Charlton were seated in the little room that did duty at Charlton
Grange as study, and office—where accounts were kept and wages
paid.
You see, Charlton,” said Farryher, “ I really have entertained
a very sincere regard for your daughter for a long time. And,
after all, an alliance of that kind will be the best that could be
formed, for all parties. All that land banking the river to the
free-selectors’ places, that you want to complete your Barracee
paddock, might be passed over; and then there are those horse-


paddocks, that would be far handier to my homestead than yours.
Besides, no one knows what may come to pass in the future, you
know.”
Bob Charlton did know ; and a vision of his posterity coming
into possession of all the broad acres and square miles, open
meadows, hills and gorges of floated
before him. Besides, Frank Farryher was really a good fellow
and a tall.
“ Well, Farryher,” replied Charlton “ take another glass of
wine, and go on your way rejoicing. If you can get Floras
consent you shall have mine ; and I 11 do the ‘ heavy father
business, and bless you both.”
“ Perhaps, then, you would n’t mind mentioning the matter to
Miss Flora,” observed Farryher.
Bob Charlton mentioned the matter to Miss Flora; and
Miss Flora, to the unqualified surprise of her papa, quietly but
firmly declined to receive Mr. Farryher as a suitor. And Bob
Charlton stormed and raged at the obstinacy and wrong-headed-
ness of women; and his daughter wept, and ultimately was
commanded, upon pam of her father s severest displeasure, to
accept Mr. Farryher’s hand whenever it should be offered.
A day or two afterwards, as Bob Charlton was sitting at
breakfast, MbT. avish was announced, and appeared with a very
grave countenance.
“ Well, McTavish, man, what brings you here so early?”
enquired Mr. Charlton. “ Have some breakfast.”
“ Thank ye, IVe breakfasted an hour ago, Mr. Charlton,”
replied the overseer.
“ Well, what’s wrong? What’s the matter with you—is
anybody ill 1 ” enquired the squatter.
“ No, sir ; not that I know,” replied the other. “ But when I
rose this morning and went to the stable, I found that my two
saddle-horses were gone.”
“ What—stolen ? ” enquired Bob.
“ Dear knows, sir,” answered McTavish ; “ but when I came
to look about I found that some careless fellow had left the gate of
the home-station paddock open, and that alt the horses was gone.


“ The deuce they were,” replied Charlton. “ Well, take my
saddle-horse, and get them in. A careless thing to do.”
“ Well, sir,” went on the other, “ but your mare’s gone, too.
Your stable’s as empty as mine, sir. And, more than that, the
bush-paddock gate’s open, and so all the beasts are far enough
away by this time.”
Bob Charlton looked astounded. “ Why, the horse-stealers
must be about,” cried he. “ This has been design, not accident.”
“ Not a doubt of it,” replied McTavish.
Seeing that there was still something untold, the squatter then
exclaimed, “ What are you standing gaping at ? Go on ; anything
else gone 1 ”
“Yes, sir,” responded the overseer, slowly; “Mr. Harry St.
George is gone.”
Bob Charlton stared with eyes of wonderment upon the
speaker. Then, suddenly, a horrid thought stole upon him.
Uttering an execration, he leaped from his seat and rushed to
Flora’s apartment. It was untenanted, and had been so all night.
Never was sturdy squatter more thoroughly thrown off his
equilibrium than was Bob Charlton upon making this discovery.
He reeled, and would have fallen had he not clutched at a chair,
into which he sank. It was plain enough. An elopement.
“ Oh, the scoundrel—the double-dyed villain ! I ’ll shoot him,
by heavens—like a dog! Quick, my boots and spurs ; rouse out
Quickstep and Fleta, and —”
“ Yes,” replied the more philosophical overseer, “ when we
can get ’em. Jack O’Donnell has gone off to Buist’s for a horse,
to run ’em in with. That’s a good seven mile to walk ; but we
can’t help it.”
It was mid-day before the cavalcade turned out in pursuit.
Bob Charlton knew well enough that the fugitives dared not make
for Jericho, where both were well known. He conjectured,
therefore, that they had shaped their course for Branxholme, a
little town about five-and-thirty miles distant; and, thanks to their
having helped themselves to the two swiftest and staunchest
saddle-horses on the run had, doubtless, already arrived there.
L


However, as little time as possible was lost. Both Farryher
and McDermott, who happened to ride over to the Grange that
morning, joined in the pursuit; Farryher fulminating dire threats
against Master Harry, for his daring abduction of the young lady;
and McDermott avowing, with oaths peculiar to himself, that it
was the rummiest start ever he heard of.
I shall not attempt to describe the chase —if chase it might be
called, where the runaways had obtained such a start. Suffice it
to say, that neither whip nor spur were spared ; and that the
good nags chosen for the occasion did their devoir bravely. By
evening, the party clattered into Branxholme.
Now, if the kind reader who has followed this veracious
narrative so far, imagine that Bob Charlton and his friends
arrived too late; that the knot had been already tied, and that
Mrs. St. George (Miss Charlton no longer) implored her papa’s
forgiveness ; that floods of tears were shed, and so on—if the
reader imagine that that is all that remains to be told, he is very
much mistaken. Harry St. George, as he might have anticipated
before he undertook so rash and ill-advised a proceeding, was
unable to find any minister of religion ready to credit his hastily-
concocted narrative, or to perform the marriage-ceremony. Ques-
tions were asked, and delays required, which were fatal to the
lovers. There was not another town within eighty miles, and
it was impossible to push for it without affording some rest and
refreshment to the young lady. Mr. St. George was at a nonplus.
As they were discussing a meal which Harry had ordered at the
principal hostelry, the sounds of horse’s hoofs broke in upon the
ears of the lovers.
“ By Jove, they are here ! ” exclaimed Harry, leaping up and
running to the window.
And, sure enough, a few minutes afterwards, the door flew
open, and in rushed Mr. Charlton, Frank Farryher, Tom McDer-
mott, and McTavish.
“ So, sir,” exclaimed the enraged parent, “ we’ve caught you,
have we ! And a pretty rascal you are ! ”
“ Oh, papa,” pleaded the trembling Flora.


“ Don’t speak to me, you disgraceful girl —I blush for you,”
roared the indignant squatter.
“ By Heaven, sir,” said Frank Farryher, excitedly to Harry ;
“if it were not that I think you unworthy of notice, I’d blow your
brains out.”
“ And I’d punch your head for yer,” followed the practical
McDermott. “Upon my soul, you’ve got a pretty cheek I’m
blest if you have n’t! ”
“ To turn all my horses adrift—”
“ To entice Miss Charlton away —”
“ To seize my best saddle-mare —”
“ To dare to think of marrying this lady —”
“ Gentlemen,” replied St. George, when his antagonists paused
at length for breath —“ gentlemen, you are rather too many for
me. If you ’ll excuse me, I ’ll leave the field for the present in
your possession.” And, turning abruptly, he left the room before
any interference could be offered. A moment afterwards, he was
seen to ride furiously down the street.
“As great a coward as he is a scoundrel,” observed Bob
Charlton. “ Flora, my girl,” added he sadly, “ I did hope that
your choice would have fallen upon a man.
*******
It was resolved that the party should remain at Branxholme
for the night. Two or three hours passed away. Charlton was
smoking pipe after pipe in gloomy silence. His tobacco seemed
to have lost its flavour, as also had the wine which he had
ordered, but partaken very slightly of. Frank Farryher was
drowning chagrin in a game of billiards, and lom McDermott
was holding forth to McTavish and a select party in the bar.
Suddenly a knock came to the door, and a waiter informed Mi,
Charlton that a gentleman wished to speak with him.
“ Show him in,” said the squatter. “ Who can it be, 1
wonder ? ”
But upon the gentleman himself entering the apartment, Bob
Charlton leaped from his seat with an exclamation of pleasure.
“ What, Hilbert! my old Trinity chum! what has brought
you from Gippsland so suddenly 1 ”


“ Why, I wished to surprise you, old fellow,” replied the other,
a stalwart, but jovial-looking man, who had long passed his prime,
but bore his years bravely. Hilbert and Charlton had been
college friends, and had come to cast their lot in Victoria at about
the same time; but their stations were far apart, and it was but
seldom that they saw each other.
After first greetings had passed, Bob Charlton said,
‘ I feel truly glad that you Ve come, Hilbert; for at the
present time the advice and assistance of a man like yourself is
valuable.”
“ Why, have you been getting into, trouble then ? Dropping
money, eh ? ” asked Hilbert.
“Nothing of that sort,” returned Charlton. “Listen a few
moments.”
But as he spoke the door again opened, and Mr. St. George
walked quietly into the apartment.
“How dare you, scoundrel, intrude yourself here?” said
Charlton.
“ Softly, softly, my dear friend,” said Hilbert; “ this is harsh
language.”
“ Harsh ? ” cried the other. “ This young villain here, whom
I received upon the station and treated like a son ”
“ Wished to treat you as a father-in-law, I believe,” interposed
Hilbert. “ But I think there ’s a mistake here. This is my son.”
“Your son?” exclaimed the petrified Bob Charlton.
“My scapegrace son—Harry St. George Hilbert,” replied the
other.
There was a pause. Bob Charlton stared from one to another
with an expression of semi-idiotcy. Suddenly he recovered him-
self, and shouted, “Flora.”
“ Yes, papa,” said that young lady, gliding into the apartment.
“ Did you know that this gentleman’s name was Hilbert ? ”
“ Yes, papa.”
“The d 1 you did ! And when did you find it out?”
“ Two days ago, papa.”
“ And why, in the name of all that’s wonderful, did n’t you
tell me?”


“ I meant to, papa ; but you were so cross, and threatened to
force me to marry Mr. Farryher, and so, and so ”
“ And so you concerted with this pretty gentlemen to terrify
your old father half out of his senses ? ”
“Yes, papa.”
“It is, indeed true, Sir,” said our hero. “ So, Mr. Farryher,”
added he to that gentleman, who, with Mr. McDermott, had
re-appeared upon the scene, “ I ’m quite prepared to blow out
your brains, if you think proper ; or to indulge in a second round
of hard blows, Mr. McDermott, if you feel inclined.”
But neither gentleman cared about breaking the peace.
An eclairfflsement , of course, ensued. Harry, an erratic
fellow, had taken the strange whim into his head to visit his
father’s old friend, whom he had not seen since he was a boy, in
a different name, and under an assumed character. I his had
been easily managed. Harry fell in love with flora, but resolved
only to woo and win her as a penniless adventurer. Ausus et
afflict is melius co7ifidere rebus.
I have little to add. It was clear enough that Frank Farryher’s
hopes of a matrimonial alliance with the house of Charlton were
destined to be nipped in the bud. But he was too much of a
philosopher to break his heart about the matter, and had too
much good sense to press claims for the hand of a young lady
who had so unmistakeably manifested her preference for another.
As for Tom McDermott, we have seen how his love-suit pros-
pered ; and, upon Harry’s identity being established, he was the
first to congratulate Mr. Hilbert, junior, and to swear that he
had believed all along that the young fellow had not been the
greenhorn he had represented himself to be.
Next day there was quite a jovial return journey to Charlton
Grange; and, in due time, the wedding was celebrated. There
was such a flow of champagne as was quite unprecedented in the
district; and strong waters and malt liquors were so abundant m
the kitchen that not one of the “hands” was able to turn his
hand to anything for the ensuing three days.


LITTLE THINGS.
SAMUEL HAWKER BANKS.
I HE little things which make life fair
Are just as beautiful as rare ;
; ’T is these, we oft so lightly heed,
Which gladden hearts or make them bleed ;
’T is these which lend to life a charm,
Or chill its hopes when fresh and warm.
The tree which mocked the wildest storm
May fall from ravage of a worm,
Did not the woodman’s kindly care
Remove the canker lurking there :
So we—who larger wounds defy—
To one small grief may yield and die ;
And greatest gifts are held less dear
Than sympathetic word or tear.
BERTIE AND I.
DERWENT M. COLERIDGE.
and I—
raja All one autumn afternoon—
■ Bertie and I
Down by the harbour’s side we sat,
And we talked and gossiped of this and that,
Bertie and I.
Hand locked in hand, by the harbour’s side,
Bertie and I;
And she crooned her story of struggle and strife ;
A story of love—and a woman’s life.
We there agreed to be man and wife,
Bertie and I.
I wonder if ever we shall be wed,
Bertie and I.
I only know that to Heaven I ’ll pray,
To bring, in its own good time, a day
When we ’ll be one for ever and aye,
Bertie and I.




Drawn by Montagu Scott.
MY SWEETHEART LONG AGO.


MY SWEETHEART LONG AGO.
GROSVENOR BUNSTER.
SEE her now, while sitting here
I Within tny cottage door ;
Watching the streams of golden light,
I The sun casts o’er the floor ;
And thinking that those dancing gleams,
Which set all things aglow,
Are like the smiles I wot she smiled—
My sweetheart long ago.
I see her now : her gipsy face,
So coyly looking down,
And mark the rich red of her cheeks
Glow through their skin of brown.
I see her eyes—dark blue or grey ;
Or were they hazel ? No !
They had so many changing lights—
My sweetheart long ago.
I see her now : her roguish look,
Her brow so smooth and fair ;
I see her little oval face,
And clusters of dark hair.
I hear her voice—ah ! such a voice,
So winning, soft, and low ;
The purring of the harvest breeze —
My sweetheart long ago.
I see her now : her pretty ears,
Twin moss-birds growing there,
Which peep forth from the shining mass
Of glorious brown hair ;
I see her dainty little feet,
As tripping to and fro,
They creep out ’neath her petticoat —
My sweetheart long ago.


I see her now—her small brown hands :
I’ve ne’er seen any such,
Since when, in coy yet gentle mood,
My cheek she’d haply touch ;
Or smooth my hair, or press my hand,
As she has turned to go,
When we had spent the trysting time—
My sweetheart long ago.
I see her now—’t is Sunday morn,
So still the little town,
And we are gathered in the church :
The old church they’ve pulled down.
I see her as she kneels to pray—
To pray? Ah ! well I know,
To whom my prayers were given then—
My sweetheart long ago.
I see her now : her bonnet tied
Beneath her dimpled chin ;
Her arch brown face, so eloquent,
Saint Anthony might win ;
And when, perchance, she’d glance at me.
The Parson’s tongue might flow
With silver words, I took no heed—
My sweetheart long ago.
I see her now : in muslin white,
A rosebud in her hair ;
No other ornament needs she,
No jewel need she wear.
For diamonds hath she not her eyes?
Which streams of sparkles throw ;
For rubies hath she not her lips ?
My sweetheart long ago.
I kissed her once—not on her mouth—
Ah ! what a fool was I!
She chid me not, and stood quite still,
And no one else was by—
But on her cheek, which blushed hot red.
As I whispered soft and low,
“I love you dear, I love you dear”—
My sweetheart long ago.


I told her this, and pressed her close
Unto my swelling breast,
And asked my darling for her love,
I loving her the best.
She shook her head, and glancing up,
Laughed, as she answered, “ No
Then darted from my eager arms—
My sweetheart long ago.
And thus she’d tease me, always thus :
Now frowning in disdain ;
Now smiling tenderly, when she
Saw my distress and pain.
And well I know she loved me then,
But she would ne’er say so,
Though sore I pleaded for the words —
My sweetheart long ago.
They tell me she is now a wife,
And mother of a brood
Of hearty youngsters, boys and girls—
Well, well, this news is good.
I hope she’s happy—free from grief;
I’d dearly like to know,
For, Oh ! I love—shall always love
My sweetheart long ago.
I wonder if her graceful form
Has grown to matron size ;
I wonder if the tender light
Still lingers in her eyes ;
I wonder if she’s merry now,
Sweet-tempered still, or no ;
I wonder if she’s greatly changed—
My sweetheart long ago.
I wonder if the silver threads
Have stolen into her hair ;
I wonder if her gentle soul
Is saddened much by care ;
I wonder if the signs of Time
Upon her fair brow show ;
Nay, nay, she is the same dear girl—-
My sweetheart long ago.


Ah ! sweetheart dear, ne’er in this life
Shall you and I meet more ;
Ne’er I to speak, nor you to list,
To those fond words of yore.
Yet, darling, still my love is strong,
And stronger will it grow,
As year by year doth pass away —
My sweetheart long ago.
For if life’s cares and changes mark
Their stern prints on the face,
The loving heart is armour proof,
Against Time’s swiftest race ;
And e’en when old, as day by day,
We all of us must grow,
Remembrance keeps us youthful yet —
My sweetheart long ago.
No more. The mood has passed away.
Where are the golden gleams,
That set my saddened soul aflame
With such fond, foolish dreams ?
The sun hath fled, and with him gone
The warm and genial glow,
Which bred these musings o’er old times —
My sweetheart long ago.


WHATANIDEA , THE YALTER GAL:
A TALE OF THE FAR FAR WEST.
ALFRED W. EAST.
CHAPTER I.—BIRTH, ETC.
KPINE —for I the narrator am—Whatanidea, has been an
eventful history, abounding in the most astonishing
episodes. To many, the brief account of my life that
1 I am about to give may appear almost incredible.
Bah ! at the doubters I snap my mental fingers. Ever since Noe
was, disbelievers have troubled the world. Is it not an acknow-
ledged fact that “ Truth is stranger than fiction” ? I have always
heard so, and faithfully believed in the apothegm. Truth, then,
being stranger than fiction, what more reasonable than to argue in
this wise ; the more physically and morally outrageously false a
story may appear, the greater the probability of its being truthful.
This being admitted, “ all things equal,” as reads the advertise-
ment inviting tenders for the mail service via California—such
nonsense, too; surely they will require the steamers’ services
before their tenders’—what follows must necessarily be accepted
as strictly veracious. Q.E.D.
I was born in the State of Nevada, U.S., and first saw light in
the bed of a creek that, fortunately, at the time of the little
stranger’s advent, was dry. (I trust to be far from a stranger,
little or great, after the next half-hour’s social chat with you, my
dear reader.) I have since seen that creek swollen and o’er-
topping its banks, a rapid and boisterous current, tearing up its
bed, and transferring the soil—the scene was one of those alkaline
plains lying between Reno and Battle Mount, now stations on the
great railway traversing the continent, so that the damage done
was immaterial, —further down ! down !! down !!! till it settled,
and waited for the next fresh from the melting snows of the
Sierra Nevadas to make it, “ peeler” fashion, “ move on.” This


action of the water I have always been taught to believe, was the
origin of Torrent’s Act for the transfer of land. This is, however,
neither here nor there. At least, I know it is not here; it was
there —but it matters not, and I like to be particular.
The precise date of my nativity I do not give. I have it only at
second hand. Registration was amongst our people, a thing as un-
known as is a coal-field in Victoria—Australia, I refer to. Proof
I cannot produce ; so, I will pass on to the next point of interest.
My mother was a daughter of the noble race whose sires first
inhabited the earth in those vast solitudes. Not to make a long
story of a short one, she was a Digger Indian. Her father —my
maternal grandfather, you must know, was a great chief —owned
three holes in the ground, and was consulted by the tribe on all
occasions when our braves excursioned to Sacramento City to beg,
borrow, or steal anything and everything they could lay hands on.
He was a noble old fellow, was grandfather, but rather dirty in his
habits ; he had, also, a penchant for fat worms and mice. Well,
poor old man, he got none too many of them. My mother was,
thus, a princess of high rank, and would, doubtless, have prided
herself much thereon, had she only known how to. My maternal
grandmother I never saw ; I have an idea that I never had one.
My father was a white. He came from “ Down East.” He had
been residing for years with a friend at Sing Sing, who held a very
high position —I think they called him “ governor,” or something
of that sort, —but, falling out with him on account of his insisting
upon presenting father with a cat (father always hated cats, even
those rare specimens known among unnaturalists as the multicaudal
addendi ) father left him, without so much as giving him the
“ good-day,” and ran West as hard as—to use his own words —-
he could foot it. Father joined our tribe because he’d been a
digger himself once, and rather liked burrowing in the ground.
He used to say, “ A pint of good brandy is better than a whole
stack of bad quartz.” Grandfather gave him a life-tenure of a
ready-made underground habitation on his marriage, and then
father became a chief, too. He was not so high as grandfather,
but bigger ; and when he called grandfather an “ all-fired nigger,”
grandfather did n’t like it, he said it weakened his influence, and


made his knees shake. Father was a warrior. How he did lay
into them thieving Apache rascals—“ bad cess to them, thin,” sez
I he always came off victorious; was never scalped but once in
his life, and then the hair never grew again; and gloried in me,
his dark-eyed “ cuss,” as he used to call me—or, sometimes, by
way of variation, his “ dark-eyed golden gal,” or his “ petsy-wetsy
rattlesnake.” The origin of these peculiar names I shall give
you “ bymby.”
Father was an awful fellow for fun : he ’d think no more of
ripping up half-a-dozen of the tribe, by way of a joke, than he
would of eating his breakfast. The mantelpiece, in one of his
holes, was densely crowded with bottles containing, preserved in
spirits, the noses and ears of enemies and the eyes of friends,
bitten off or gouged out pour s’amuser, et encourager les autres —
Fiench picked up at a boarding-school afterwards.
Father was a mighty hunter, and this is how I came to be
named “ Whatanidea.” Father had been on the rampage , Indian
term for chasse, only that the horn he carried contained about
three gallons of right Nantz, and was not a mere wind instrument,
like those beggarly things Louis Napoleon hunted hares with—
Ah, well; poor fellow ! Let us forgive his faults, he’s fallen very
low. Still is he useful to Eugenie—she need never complain of
want of sleep or money so long as she has her Nap. But this is
ultra vires —entirely outside the thirty-nine articles—so I continue.
I had not been born five minutes, and mother had only had time
to sing
Trois impair et passe
Coquiit, va-t-en a la chdsse ;
which, translated from the Indian dialect, is equivalent to our
Baby, baby, bunting,
Daddy’s gone a hunting,
when father came back. At his wampum belt—we were a free-
trading community, and very often lifted a drunken trapper’s
peltries—hung a score of mice, and one of the finest and plumpest
buck rats I think I ever saw (I was a precocious child, and took
all this in at a glance), and his game-bag was stuffed to repletion
with cockroaches, white ants, and other delicacies of the season.


“ Yah, golly ! what you got dar ? ” he cried. Father was a
good linguist, having been educated at West Point College, County
Cornwall, Asturias ; where, likewise, many of the most talented
Ethiopian delineators —we called them “Nigger Minstrels” in
those days —were dragged up, including that noted hussey lately
singing in the antipodes.*
“ Scpxaw,” answered an elderly lady in a mob cap, a tarlatan
gusset, and a gin bottle ] adding “ Aue, kai tamaru, meaning,
“ What shall we name her 1 ”
Now, father, being a man whose dander was easy riz, got his
back up at the idea of having a daughter born unto him instead
of a son and heir, turned sharply on his heel —I think it was the
left one, but am not sure —and ejaculated “ What an idea ! ”
never, for a moment, dreaming of the consequences. When,
however, an hour later, he went to my mother’s bedside to consult
her as to what should be my name, who should be my godfathers
and godmothers, and where I should be tattoed, they turned my
little carcase wrong side up, and exposed to his view in large blue
letters the name I had already received, and never could lose
again, it was WHATANIDEA !
That night the whole settlement, wearied out with vainly
endeavouring to pronounce my name properly —they persisted in
giving it as “ Votahidea”—got drunk: how, I never could dis-
cover That father had heaps of kegs of “ old rye,” I was well
aware, but I never knew him drink that; his favourite beverage
was Hennessey’s “ battle-axe,” and that the tribe most certainly
never got a sup of. Nevertheless, drunk they were ; and awfully
rusty they cut up next morning, when father, who was a judge
a Rustos Gustos—J edge Flannigan, av yez plase ! fined them a
dollar all round ; and then, to ease his conscience, lest they should
die on his hands, sold them “ hairs of the dog that bit them at
twenty-five cents a nobbier —for father was a just and upright
judge, and did n’t give a picayune neither for man nor beast.
Mother, too, did not do badly on this festive occasion. Father
gave her a calabash full of Bay rum. Of this she partook so
* This concentration of talent is now “ Far upon the Sea,”—if he’s not yet landed.


freely that (owing, as I suppose, to this my early introduction to
the delicious mixture), I have ever since been partial to a “ doctor.”
Ihe next morning, mother, who was naturally very delicate, was
ordered to restrict her diet to soda and sherry, so her helpless
offspring was taken out into the back-kitchen, swaddled up, and
converted in a brace of shakes into a papoose. My word ! but
it was disgusting. My little arms had no sooner been laced to
my sides, than a fly settled on my nose. I could not scratch nor
swear. What was I to do ? I had it—l set up a fearful yell;
the whole camp stampeded, and vacated the vast corrals father
had had built for the public pound which he kept. Mother, she
moaned out “ Drat the child !” “ Don’t swear,” said the parson ;
and then an opportune fit of sneezing relieved me for a time of
my tormentor.
Mother always maintained it was a dispensation,—leastways,
after she had performed her second pilgrimage to Mecca. Mother
never talked much about Mecca, but she told me Mocha coffee
was good with firewater in it. I have since satisfied myself by
personal observation that her judgment was correct.
I may now inform you of the reasons entertained by father
for giving me the peculiar nick-names I mentioned a short time
time since: they were “Golden Gal” and “Rattlesnake,” if I
remember rightly ; and both sprang from the same source. Thus
it happened : When I was about ten months old, I got, one day
I was teething at the time—spasmodically fractious, and bit off
the neck of my feeding-bottle. I immediately went off in titanic
convulsions, from which I recovered only to find myself four
years and four months old, slowly recovering from an attack of
yellow fever. For three years and a-half I had regularly every
day undergone the “vomito” and the death-rattle.
Ihe effect of the fever was to leave me with a complexion as
“ yaller ash a guinea,” and which no preparation—l Ve tried every-
one invented during the present century—has been potent to
change or efface. I give you my word that, after my morning’s
ablutions under the pump, and the friction of a coarse Russian
towel, ray face has shone like burnished copper. I “looked
quite brazen,” father said—hence the name “ Yaller Gal,” And,


what with occasionally practising the death-rattle for so long a
period, I had become so thoroughly perfect that on my fifth birth-
day I rattled down a rattlesnake forty-seven feet long—rattled him
into fits ; and then, securing his jaws with my crochet-need e—
was at that time preparing an antimaccassar for the Nevada
annexe at the World’s Exhibition in London (I did nt send it,
for the Government proving penurious, the whole thing tell
through, much to my indignation)—l led him captive into cap-
tivity. For three days I made much of him; the fourth day
made more : I had him barbacued d la maitre iThotel, and served
up for father’s dinner. Father eat the whole lot barring about
half a cwt, which he had soused for his supper. Father made
his own vinegar. He would worry mother till she got as sour
and as crabbed as verjuice, when he’d say “ Come, Schaaf s
Kopf (heart’s darling) and take a turn in the Botanic Gardens
at which mother would dry her eyes, wash her old mug, and start
before you could say “ Jack Robinson.” ,
Mary Ann-my Mary Ann-she was my fille de chambre and
came from Paris direct—would immediately empty the washhand-
basin into the family vinegar-vault, wherein was deposited of an
evening the biggest lie the family could tell; this, combining w
the alkali of the soap, evolved it, whilst the dirt, sin mg _
bottom, left a liquor of a bright amber colour that only required
distillation to convert it into Champions XXXX .
On this occasion, not the only one by many that we dined off
rattlesnakes, I, feeling somewhat unwell, contented myself with the
serpent’s fry, served up with brain sauce. It was very good, and
I could have eaten more had I had it. It was entirely owing to
this circumstance that I was called “ Rattlesnake
When I was seven years old, father took me down to the city
of San Francisco, walking all the way, as father said it was vulgar
to go in the “ kyars.” I can well recollect, as we wearily crossed
the range in Old Fremont’s tracks, how father promised me a bow
and arrow, if at school, where he was about to take me, lon my
part would promise to cut everyone of my schoolfellows out of
their beaus, and narrow my affections till ne’er a man m the wor
should 1 esteem a dump. I gave him my word, and arrove m


San Francisco. I went to Woodward’s Gardens, and there I saw
a Rarey-show, and a man making wild horses docile by strapping
up their limbs so tight together that they could n’t kick a dead
midge off a thistledown. I took a leaf out of his book, and read
it afterwards in the wilderness. And I see the Sea Lions at Cliff
House—lions, indeed ! they looked just like such lions as you
may saw in George-street any afternoon when the Civil Service
is disengaged— spooney and mooney they looked. Indeed, the
greater part of their time they were half-seas over. I took a leaf
or two out of their book, but eventually used them as pipe-lights
for father.
No ; brothers did n’t smoke ? I had brothers and sisters, too,
of both sexes ; but mother, who was never very strong, had them
all drowned except me. So we left ’Frisco, and calling on our
return at Sacramento, the capital of the State, father delivered his
letter of introduction from Major Bradley—him as was afterwards
Governor of the State of Nevada, but that was after my time—to
the principal of the Ladies’ Joint Endeavour Local Board for the
Improvement of the Sex and its Ultimate Abolition. I was took
m “ tu wunst” ; and, disdaining to weep for my sire, commenced
my education “ tu wunst.”
I said I was precocious, you’d a sed so, tu, hed yer seen what
I picked up in three months’ time. At the end of my first quarter,
I had emptied all the teachers’ brain-pans, and commenced
teaching the lady-principal how to play Poker-Euchre, when—but
I must not anticipate—when an event occurred that changed the
whole current of nty life and me, for I both grew and lived fast
now, and from a chjld of seven years and three months—l like to
be exact—to a vengeful woman of two-and-twenty on her last
birthday, was simply ap. affair of Hi, Presto! Cockalorum; and
the thing was done. What an idea, indeed ! to think that What-
anidee could be insulted with impunity.


CHAPTER II. —DEATH OF MARCUS.
Obeying father’s high behests, I had succeeded in making myself
personally obnoxious to every inmate of Astor House. The heart
of each of my companions was broken, crushed, ground to powder
—fine as the Bruce’s. There remained not one single “Di tanti
I balpiti ” (/talian), “ The beating of my own poor heart” (American),
in the whole of that vast edifice. They, inexperienced chits, had
dared to love Marcus, heir presumptive to old Mother Skilliwags,
our lady principal—he— had dared to love ME, Whatanidea !
We were sitting, that is to say, Old Skilliwags and I, at a
golden-legged, marble-topped, Pembroke table, in one of those
magnificent bar-rooms, which, but little esteemed by the native
born of those parts, are the admiration of the civilized world.
Cards, dice, rouge et noir , and billiard-cues, lay in a promiscuous
heap before us. Several quart flagons stood convenient to our
elbows, for the heat was oppressive, and Lager-beer foamed in
our estimation. I had just, having packed my tickets, got four
aces and a king in my hand, and was suavely observing to my
playmate, “ Say, old gal,. I ’ll see you a hundred better,” when that
egregious ass, Marcus, rushed in. Slipping on the marble floor,
till his knees struck sparks from it, he commenced a most violent
declaration in full form. “You love my dog,” moaned he, “fWe
me ! ”
“Git eout,” I shouted; “yon air a mean critter, or you’d
never try to take me thus at a disadvantage. No, sir; I subscribe
to the Declaration of Independence, and would sooner die a free-
born virgin than wed a man. You have earned my most deadly
scorn, my fiercest hatred. To-morrow, at n a.m. sharp, meet me
at the corner of Bush and Montgomery streets; mayhap a ifttle
practice in the public shooting-gallery there, may teach you better
manners.”
Two men were standing at the bar, conversing in whispers.
One, I knew by his white furred hat, long blue-tailed coat, and
short striped inexpressibles, to be an enlightened citizen of the
finest country under the sun; the other, from his top-boots, gold


repeater by Barraud and Lund, and his expletives, I took to be a
British Lord.
1 hunder ! ” said the first, “ that girl’s got good grit in her.”
“ I believe you, my buoy,” replied the second.
My conjecture, then, as to his nationality had been right.
“ Lord Bedford ? ” I enquired.
“ The same to you, ma’am, and many of them,” he politely
answered.
“You will greatly oblige me, my dear fellah, by kicking that
cur into the street, for IVe got thin boots on,” said I, winking at
him twice with both eyes. •
No sooner was the request made than complied with. The
spot on which Marcus once more took earth was marked, until the
corporation levelled the roadway again, with a hole big enough for
a grave for two, and a half-one over.
“ I ’ll marry you,” says my lord, quite civil-like.
All my admiration for that noble man drove straight out of me
on the instant. Shaking my hand menacingly at him, I sang
“ Britons nev& shall be slaves.” Alas, with all his burly strength,
he was but as a child in an affair of the heart, and I had the satis-
faction of leaving him on the floor in the throes of apoplexy, to
which the English, I’m told, are very subject. I never saw him
again. I heard, some years afterwards, that having vainly adver-
tised for me in the London Times and the Protestant Standard. ,
until he had exhausted his princely fortune, he had, through his
interest at the Court of Washington—he had made Grant a
present of a box of magnificent Houndsditch Havannahs—been
appointed Bishop of Cuba, with sole right of manufacturing his
own Regalias. To him, 1 believe, we are indebted for those
beautiful lines commencing—
Why do I weep for thee ?
Why can’t I sleep for thee ?
Yes ; it’s too deep for me :
I give it up.
Will he ever win a martyr’s crown ? I fear not; for crowns
and half-crowns are scarce where he now resides, the sovereign
remedy is unknown, and dollars—worth 2d. more than Uncle


Sam’s, any how—are the only currency. Gold has been heard of,
it’s true, but that’s all paid away in lottery prizes. Vale, good,
kind, generous old man ! I wonder does he ever think of me,
Whatanidea !
To return, however, to Marcus.
“ Madam,” said I, resuming my seat, and addressing his
venerable maternal relative, “ Madam we ’ll finish this game over
your first-born’s coffin.”
“ Alas ! ” she answered, “ he’s my youngest and last.
“ Why, you abominable old Catamaran,” I retorted, how can
that be 1 ? You never had another ?
“ Well, I can’t exactly say,” she replied. “I think this
Lager’s got into my head; for my brain’s going flappity-whackit
like hasty pudding.”
I really felt sorry for the to-be-childless, hapless old one, so
making her swallow a jorum of rum-hot with chilies in it, which
settled her business right up, I gave her in charge to the police as
a vagrant, and hurried off home. One of my enemies had fallen
flat in the street. Serve her right! Sfeven years ago she had
dared to smack me, —Whatanidea !
Marcus, I heard from the groom, who always followed the
establishment whenever we took horse exercise, was practising
pistol shooting with young Cyrus Legrand in the stable. Not
daring to enter the house until dark, as the girls had threatened
to raise a funereal pile with their panniers—the donkeys—and
holocaust him, if he showed there, he and Cyrus were taking it in
turns to fire at each other with blank cartridges, so that he— the
murtherous villain—might be prepared for me on the morrow. I
at once telegraphed to father for the bow and arrows he had
promised me, and requested him to come over without loss of
time and act as my second in the drama that was to ensue, dhen
taking off my u little high-heeled boots, I stole secuiely up stairs
to Marcus’ bed-room, took his six-shooter from its case, un-
screwed the nipples, shook out the powder, returned the nipples,,
and recapped them. This duty—one I considered I owed to
society —completed, I forthwith took a street car for the post-
office.


Now, our people are great on postal facilities. Yes, sir!
Thus it happened that, on alighting, I found father already waiting
to receive me, with my toxopholite uniform—l was a cadet of the
Robin Hood Cxuard bow and arrows all complete. His expedi-
tion may be accounted for as followsHe happened at the time
of my despatching my telegram to be under contract to supply the
Emigrants ’ Gap Chronicle with the latest news, and to this intent
had tapped the wires. My message thus went right slick into his
hands. Collecting a sheaf of arrows from many a narrow escape
he had had from his old foes, the Apaches, and knocking down
Chang Lin, a gigantic Chinaman, who objected to his proceeding,
he quickly converted the Celestial’s bamboo into a Tartar bow,
and replied to my summons by return of post.
“Lord Sakes, how you’ve grow’d,” says he; “why, you’re
quite a woman, Ratty ! ”
You see father moved in polite circles, or he would never have
mentioned Lord Sakes’ name so familiarly.
“ And so like your poor mother.”
“Ah ! ” sobbed lon that noble bosom. “ What of her 1 Tell
me, father; tell me of my sainted mother ! She is not dead ? ”
“ Well no, not adzackly dead,” says father; “ but nigh as good ;
she’s bolted with a Mormon elder.” And then, seeing that I
could hardly restrain my tears, he added, “ But never mind; I ’ll
soon get you another.”
“Oh !” I cried, “this is doubly hard ; I never had a grand-
mother, and now my own mother has forsaken me. Alas ! poor
semi-orphan ! ”
“ Ratty,” said father, “ don’t unsex yourself; remember what
Admiral Jem Fisk said when he threw his castor.into the Erie
Ring, ‘Victory or Westminster Abbey.’ You’ve got William Tell
before you and me at your back ; rally up, and take a drink, for
you must go right through your man to-morrow.”
I brushed away a falling tear, put myself outside a flask of
Nantz, threw back my elfin locks on my voluptuous shoulders,
and, beckoning father to follow me, strode on. Those who
marked me, as I passed downwards to take the cars for the
Golden City, said, in after years, that a halo as of future glory


shone round my Dolly Varden hat like the illuminations at
Woodward’s Gardens on the glorious 4th July.
“ 1 ’n bet any gentleman ten to one in gold coin against Marcus
for the Trial Stakes,” shouted a man with a hooked nose, a pocket-
book, and two corkscrew ringlets.
No one answered him.
As is customary in like cases, I made my will you will
recollect I had attained my majority—and wrote to mother,
requesting her to forgive me what I was about to do and never
to return to my father. Even in that hour of agony I could
remember him —poor father ! I then retired to rest, and, having
taken thirty grains of Chloral Hydrate, soon fell fast asleep
guilty consciences get restless after forty.
At dawn I sprang from my couch, and looked forth from my
lattice casement. The air was bright and balmy. The sun,
o’ertopping the distant hills, threw long shadows into the coming
day. In distant lands the lark, high springing in the air, cai oiled
forth his matin song, whilst the quail, lovely even in death,
sweetly simmered on the toast at home. It was a glorious
opening, a peaceful commencement to a well, 111 not dwell on
a scene that has ever since been too hallowed in my memory for
even casual thought.
What was Marcus doing ? Aye, what indeed ! I never
knew.
We breakfasted in the fine old oak parlour of the Grand
Hotel, the same room in which General Jackson took the oath so
often, when, retired from war’s alarms, he wrote those two cele-
brated works, entitled “ San Francisco and London, a Contrast,
and “ Poltheton Kaimos, a Polemical Treatise on American
Blasphemy.” No wonder if his writings are somewhat obscure,
the sombre air of that room would have satisfied M. Dante,
the pedantic prig, who could find it in his heart to giowl at the
Infernal Regions, withal it was an honorable embassy he headed.
After breakfast, the use of the bow being unknown to me, I
practised for an hour, shooting my arrows through father s
extended fingers. He found me an apt pupil; I never hit them
once. Then, with commendable punctuality, at a quarter before


the appointed time we quitted our hostelry, and advanced in
double columns of companies to the scene of action.
On arrival I found Marcus had already taken up his ground.
He was strongly entrenched behind a lamp-post. Leaving father
in reserve round the corner, and instructing him to maintain his
position at all hazards, I broke into skirmishing order, under a
heavy fire from Marcus—Tut! What said I, a heavy fire?
Nonsense. Snap ! snap ! snap ! snap ! snap ! snap ! —in the words
of the song, “ were the only sounds I heard.”
“ Whatanidea, _ angelic being,” said Marcus, “ suppose I may
reckon myself a corpse. Will you give me half an hour to get
measured for my coffin ? ”
“ Nary a minute,” I replied. “You have often derided my
attempts at French cooking, and declared my dishes the last
thing in the world you would take. Your idea was correct. I
now let you taste a saute de cerveille of my own invention—you ’ll
never want another.” And I blew out his brains with a cloth
yard shaft.
Signalling the cornet of the German band, playing in the next
street, I ordered him to sound the Landsturm advance, and soon
had the pleasure of seeing father advancing in quarter distance
column, right in front, as steadily as if on parade. He shortly, on
the move, changed front to the rear by the countermarch of sub-
divisions round the centre; then rapidly deploying on the right
centre company, he threw his flank companies up, blew his nose,
and prayed blessings on my head.
“Glorious girl, and worthy to be daughter of thy sire,” he
exclaimed, “ here on the field of glory take thy promotion. Rise
up, my Anaconda; Rattlesnake no longer ! ”
The troops wept.
“ What ho, without, who waits there ? ” shouted father; “ bring
up the artillery.”
A ragged urchin brought him his Trabucos. He asked father
for a cent; father told him he must be hard up for sense to prefer
such a request at so solemn a moment. The boy called father
“ a derned skunk,” and departed.
Mayhap you don’t know what a Trabucos is. Well, a Trabucos
is a combination of blunderbuss and umbrella, first introduced


to the Spaniards (see Prescott) during the reign of Ferdinand and
Isabella.* It was the origin of the sword-stick of later days, but
being esteemed a dangerous weapon, as people opening the
umbrella would sometimes, by mistake, pull the trigger, it was
finally suppressed by the Edict of Nantes —Will, and Mary, V.,
Cap. XII., Section 5. All that remained in Europe were bought
up by the Swiss Government, and by them shipped at Geneva,
sent down the Rhone, and thence smuggled into Alabama, just
before the outbreak of the fratricidal war between Lincoln and
Davis. During that tremendous conflict, the North took all the
Trabucos prisoners, and lodged them in the armoury at Sing Sing,
whence father got his. You see I’m strictly adhering to the
truth, and adducing proof on all occasions—as if I could lie;
Whatanidea!
Thus died out the first love of my maiden heart, but I kept
his revolver in memory of him.
Leaving the sad scene, we met a gentleman in a long grey
coat, with a pewter star on his left breast; him father ordered to
remove the carrion to the dead-house. He touched the peak of
his cap, and said, in a stage whisper, “ Haerf a dollar.” Father
gave him an eagle—glance, and passed on. Mischief came of
that glance ; but of that anon.
Now, who should be the first person I met on the Barbary
Coast but my dear old friend, Lola Montes, at that time doing
the Spider Dance at the Bella Union. I was a victim to upward-
hardishness, and frankly told her so. Generous to a fault, Lola
shouted at once, and while enjoying our liquor, made the following
proposition to me :
“In Omaha,” said Lola, “ lives an Australian squatter, an
M.L.C., who refused to take a ticket for my benefit when playing
at the Royal in Melbourne. I would have finished him there and
then, but G e C —pp —n —you know who I mean —said £ he
didn’t see it in the bond.’ Now, I want to horsewhip that man
* The eminent novelist, G. P. R. James, in his “ Personal Recollections of the Second
Punic War,” ascribes the merit—if merit there was —of the invention of the Trabucos to
Christopher Columbus, who is also said to have discovered America ; but about this, I think,
there must be some mistake, for it is reported that he found several parties already located
there, known as Inkers, one of whom carried his, C. C.’s, carpet-bag up to the “Sun”
Hotel.


to-night—l can easily do it travelling by express—and you must
take my place at the California. Trench will make it all right,
and you shall take the whole proceeds of the house.”
So it was arranged. Bills were got out, announcing the
appearance, for that night only, of “ Whatanidea, the Manslayer,”
as performed by her one thousand nights before the crowned
heads of Europe, including H. R.H. the P eof W s, under
a bond of SIO,OOO. Everything came off d merveille. The house
was crammed, and I netted $4325, gold coin. They didn’t
come their currency dodge with me.
Next morning, under father’s advice, I made a few purchases,
amongst others, photographs of all the American Presidents, the
great, noble, and wise men who had continually troubled and
humbled the British Lion, from the days, long past, when Pope
Gregory, reviewing a British light infantry regiment in the Slave
Market at Rome, complimented the troops by calling them
angels—he never saw our Lafayette guards—down to Old Abe.
Johnson wasn’t yet born. Then having forwarded the balance of
my cash in gold bars, by express, we took the cars for home
again. “ Home, sweet home.” There’s nothing like it, even if
it be only a human warren.
CHAPTER III.—AND LAST.
Before reaching home, however, I had got much both to see
and to learn. That monstre , brigand\ voleur Santiago del Bacchio
had, as it afterwards appeared, got wind of my treasure, and
determined, fair means or foul, that he should possess both me
and it. He very nearly did so, as you shall hear.
All had gone well with us up to the tressle bridge, just before
rounding Cape Horn, when, in the act of throwing away the
crumbs of my last cranberry pie—l had only eaten three that
morning, I assure you—l chanced to look along the road. There
in front of us, about five hundred yards off, I saw a mountain
howitzer on the track, surrounded by about a score of swarthy
brigands; whilst nearer by about three hundred yards stood a


noble and commanding figure in green velvet. It was Del Bacchic T
He waved his hand. “ Boom,” remarked the cannon, as a charge
of grape tore up our eng/ne and bust our boiler. Quick as the
lightning’s flash, Del Bacchio threw himself prostrate on his face.
He remained uninjured. Not so his jacket, for the escaping water,
which fell on him in a torrent, flattened down the nap. Now had
I an opportunity of noticing the man’s profound presence of mind.
Rushing to the baggage car, he burst the lock with his pistol,
and tearing some brown paper off a parcel directed to “ Baring
Bros., London,” applied it to the injured garment. On this he
permitted the steam, still rushing furiously from our rent boiler,
to play. It raised the nap again, as by a miracle.
He approached the window out of which I was observing his
actions, and, bowing politely, said,
“ Senorita, Bella Donna, mia carissima , be ke-ind enough to
hand me your keys.”
“ Vamos usted con Diabolo ,” I replied, in excellent Spanish.
“ Encore qnatre sous et en haut va V ane /” he yelled.
“ Accipe hoc ” was my rejoinder, as with poor Marcus’s six-
shooter, I put a bullet in each of his limbs —reserving the other
two for my own defence.
u Poiz-tausend noch-ein-mal screamed a German, my vis-a-
vis; but why he could not have said “ two thousand pots” at
once, Ido not understand. “ Sie/i dock den Schhngel an /” May
I be ; but no, I won’t swear—if he wasn’t picking the
bullets out with his machete , and plugging up the holes with
“ Eucalypti Heraldi.” The effect was marvellous. He was at
work again in an instant.
“ Your eyes, mademoiselle, hit harder than lead pellets, thirty
to the pound. My fellows have got your money; come you
with me,” said he.
What could I dol I tore myself from my father’s arms and
went; the man had cast a magic spell over me, that I was
powerless to resist.
By this time a train coming the other way, attempting to pass
ours on a single line of rails, made a miserable failure of it, and
hurled itself, ours, and their separate contents, into the abyss that


yawned at our feet. The last sad glimpse I caught of father was
his miserable carcase doing Catherine wheels, six or seven hundred
feet in the air. “ Helas /” je me disais, “ c’est dommage si je ne
snis pas orpheline cette fois fi.”
Up !up! !up !!! We were ascending the rugged mountain.
Up, ever up, we toiled. I, borne on the shoulders of four gigantic
brigands, in a palkee, more gorgeous than Eastern Potentate or
Despoiler e’er rode in—it was a delicate attention of Santiago’s,
who had had it made expressly for me. Did I feel fear ? No. Cold ?
Yes, horribly! It was the cold made my teeth chatter. Up !
till my breath began to fail me, and my pulse beat 172 in the
shade. I know, for I counted. The bulb of my pocket thermo-
meter had collapsed, but my aneroid on the back of it showed the
tremendous elevation we had attained. I thought at first my
bearers were tight, but the impression was false; they were only
slightly elevated. We were fast approaching the Col de Glace , the
most dangerous part of the Sierra.
“ Ouf! maledeito /” sighed my supporters —I do n’t mean my
what-d’ye-call-’ems.
“ Mother of Moses, aint she a boomer,” moaned the Kangaroo
Slayer, so called because there was a time when he had thought of
emigrating to Australia.
Yet were all these noble men of pur sang, grandees of
Castille and Arragon. What will not beauty do ? Ah ! what
indeed !
In about an hour’s time we arrived at a well-built three-storied
hostelry, which I confess I was much surprised to find in such an
out-of-the-way place. Swinging noiselessly in the evening breeze
- Santiago, always thoughtful where I was concerned, had had
the hinges greased, so that the creaking should not disturb me, —
was a large and magnificently-painted sign-board, a gem by Titian.
On one side was depicted a stout jolly-looking buccaneer ; under-
neath, appeared the legend, in letters of solid gold, “ Fat Morgan.”
On the other, was shown the same daring individual—after dining
(presumedly) on the premises. He lay back in his chair, and
looked as if he were about to die of a surfeit; underneath this
was writ, “Fata Morgana” (Chocktaw for “ Fatter Morgan.”)


“ Who, in the name of Goodness, could have been fool enough
to build such a palatial residence in so remote a district ?” I
asked myself, aloud.
“ No hablo Italiano” said a voice at my elbow. I turned,
and met the soul-stirring eyes of Santiago fixed on me. He was
A ruffian—one forever linked and bound
To guilt and infamy.
Would’st thou know more? My story is an old one.
Yet, nevertheless, was he a most perfect gentleman. Blushing
until I felt all the carmine of my impulsive nature meeting at the
back of my neck, I accepted his proffered arm, and marched
into the salle a manger.
The dinner was plain, but well cooked. There were not any
butchers’ shops in those regions; but there was a French cook
belonging to the establishment. The menu , so far as I can now
remember, consisted principally of fried ortolans dla soubise;
Croquettes de Bee de moineaux ; Asperge a la maitre d’ hotel , stuffed
with truffles, and a splendid mushroom pasty seasoned with
venison stock. The entrees were tree-oysters boiled in champagne,
and eel cutlets with just a of garlic. Santiago was a true
Spaniard. The wines were Chablis, Alicante, Riesling, and Gro-
seille-mousseux.
After dinner, my host lighted me to ray chamber, which was
most gorgeously furnished in the Lottis Quatorze style; and,
handing me my chamber-candlestick, most respectfully squeezed
my hand till the blood spurted from under my finger nails.
“ To-morrow, at noon, the priest unites us,” he said, and then
departed.
To-morrow, at noon! Was I, then, lost? Must 1 unite
myself with this crimson-dyed villain? Not quite. I knew a
trick worth two of that. I dissembled. In a case lying on my
window-sill I found a banjo, and a book of instruction to begin-
ners on that dulcet instrument. Hah ! I had it. For two hours
I studied that book. At a quarter past ten, although it was
snowing heavily —the Australian mail got snowed up that night
I threw open my casement. Underneath, as I suspected, prowled
Santiago, armed to the teeth, and they holding a Malay kreese,


which I could have sworn, from the smell, was poisoned. I struck
a chord, two chords, many chords. In a volume of melody, I
poured forth my soul, and skinned my finger tips. I sang
Santiago, toi que j ’aime
Et qut ref us mon a —
No more ! The daring robber, terror of the Pacific Slope,
trembled as he caught the soul-inspiring strain. In an agony of
frenzy, he fired all his pistols in the air—and then, deep down
into his gallant heart pierced his vengeful knife.
“ Please, let me come upstairs and die,” he said.
“ With pleasure,” I replied; and in these arms, now old
and withered, Del Bacchio breathed his last. Not, however,
without having made the following confession ; every word of
which I took down on the spot in short-hand —Pitman’s system I
always used, the best, no matter what, in opposition, members
may say to the contrary.
THE BRIGAND’S STORY.
My name aint Del Bacchio at all : it’s simply plain John Smith—
you may have heard of the Smiths, they are a large family. This
house, and all that’s in it, is your late father’s property, but he
never knew it, for I stole the title-deeds out of Strachan, Paul
and Bates’ cellars before you were born. It is hardly in a moment
like this I would deceive you. No; /had the pub. built. My
men struck for an advance of wages, so I turned Boniface, and
made them sign an agreement to deal with me and nobody else. I
have a day over the bar. It’s all yours, now. Mind!
Marrian’s No.— 3 will always—stand—ten gallons of —stringy.
Hold me ! I faint!
(I gave him a glass—of water, as I thought. Snatched at
hazard from the spirit-case, I did not notice it was labelled “Oil,
of Vitriol.” It revived him; and he continued.)
I die without a —regret. I have—done—much—good in—my
—time—kiss—one—little—glass—rum— —hot—AH !
He was dead.
I took possession of my property, for trouble had much aged
me.


I was now forty seven, and had given up all thoughts of getting
married. I buried poor John Smith under a weeping willow.
His band dispersed, singing “O, see how brightly,” and the
drinking-song from the duet in D by Diabelli, but not before I
had done myself the pleasure of sending an arrow through the
heart of Pietro, the late John’s lieutenant—the brute having
forgotten to dot the ion his master’s tombstone. Poor Pietro !
he carried that arrow to his grave, as maddened with the pain, he
threw himself head first from the steeple of our little parish-
church.
I had just gone up to try on ray new mourning—Mdlle.
Fifine Delamotte had made it, and it had been the admiration of
Kearney-street for the whole month past, —when I heard a voice
in the hall enquiring for me. It was the States’ Marshal, who,
with the States’ Iroupe, a whole posse coiuitcitus , and several
Life-Guardsmen and policemen, had come to make tender inqui-
ries for Marcus. I immediately barricaded the staircase, and —
not to be taken at disadvantage if I could help it—had the port-
cullis lowered, stationed matchlock men at every window, and
hoisted a petard on the time-worn beacon. Then, sounding a
parley on the horn of the chase and the clarion of war, I waived
my handkerchief, and admitted him to the presence.
Politely bowing, he said, “ Air you Laura Fair 1”
« n oj si r !” says I, “ I’m a lower affair altogether.”
“ Sorry to trouble you, ma’am,” says he, “ but if you ’ll kindly
pack up your duds and surrender, I shall feel obliged.”
“ See you further first, and then I won’t,” I replied, as my
raven tresses turned grey in the light of the sinking fire. My
trouble had been too hegwy for me, and I was now eighty-five
years old. s
“ Promise me,” sas I, “ that none of your ruffians shall lay
hands on me, and you may come up” —I was sitting on the ivory
and ebony dais Santiago had captured from the baggage of the
cruel Bajazet, when he deserted from the Janissaries. He gave
the promise, and ascended.
I begged him to be seated, poured him out a tumbler of
Xeres, and endeavoured to argue the question with him. It was


all of no use ; so, thrusting a few thousand dollars into my purse
for present necessity, I tapped him quietly on the head with a
Collins’ No. 7 axe, which, mounted in gold (18 carat) and jewelled
in four holes, the mountaineers always keep handy to break up
their favourite Wallsend coal. As he didn’t speak again, I con-
cluded he’d turned sulky, so I opened the landing-window and
dropped forty feet to the ground. The snow broke my fall, and,
in less time than it takes me to pen this—although I went through
a thousand extraordinary adventures in the meantime, which I
can’t stop to tell you now—l was standing on the outward edge
of the cutting round Cape Horn, admiring the scenery. Far
below, nearly three thousand yards, meandered, what to me
appeared a rippling stream —it was a mighty torrent, and millions
of grizzly bears were slaking their thirst from its placid bosom.
I felt rather down in the mouth, and inclined to melancholy.
“ Shade of my sire !” I cried, “ where art thou 1 Behold thy
child, now trembling on the verge of eternity. Few women live
to my age, who have sorrowed as I have. Father ! Father !!
where art thou ? ”
“ Here !” came the mighty response from a crag, jutting out
immediately above my head, “here, mi a carissima!”
I turned —alas too suddenly. There, undoubtedly, stood
father with two wooden legs and both arms in slings, alive and well,
but the earth on which I stood, loosened by the last winter’s rains,
and detached by my hasty movement, vibrated for a, moment,
toppled over, and then, with a mighty rush, took its way down-
wards. The mountain side sloped at an angle of IX3-L 0 from the
perpendicular. The pace was terrific. It became more and
more so. My brain reeled again, and my senses promised to
leave me. “ Ah,” thought I, “it is the pace that kills.” A
check ; another ; a violent concussion. I was buried, fifty yards
deep, in the debris of that avalanche. Why the deuce could n’t the
engineer have given sufficient batter to the slope ? Ah ! why ?
Father, it would seem, had escaped,—l had passed away.
Kind and charitable leader ! ray bones, yet undiscovered,
ache for decent sepulture. My last resting-place has never yet
been disturbed. Should any of you, perusers of this sad history,


ever travel in that neighbourhood, —should you see the horny-
handed sons of toil working at the base of that fatal mountain, —■
speak to them, I pray you, a word for poor lost “ Anaconda” (I
was promoted, as you know, on the field of battle), —say to them,
“ Seek her remains.” In the fourth tooth from the back—double
molar —left side, lower jaw, the finder will discover a gold stopping.
He may keep it for his pains. I shall never want it more. But,
in the time to come, when, reunited to my sire in the happy
hunting-grounds, we, reclining on a well-aired cloud —I abhor
damp—shall pledge ourselves in bumpers of “ comet nectar” —
very choice, 17 s. a dozen, bottles returned, —it will please poor
Whatanidea to know that her cocoanut has not been lost to
posterity, •
My tale, I fear, is somewhat incoherent. I can’t help it.
There is some soul of good in things evil,
Would men observedly distil it out,
always keeping the weather-eye lifting on the guager.
If I have not shown sufficient command over my feelings, I
pray you pardon the wanderings of an o’erwrought brain. Score
it up to disappointed love, if you will; but don’t bother me with
criticism, for I can’t abear it. I dare say the Editor of the *** ,
for instance —if he got the chance —would endorse this, my
effusion, with the damnatory remark, “ This tale is pointless, and
not worth printing.” I don’t say he wouldn’t be perfectly justi-
fied in doing so.
Farewell, ke-ind reader, F-a-r-e-w-c-1-1 !
Afterthought.
A few months ago, a party of three, circumambient tourists,
halted in the valley below Cape Horn. They had been shooting
grizzlies, not unsuccessfully, as their game-bags, filled to repletion,
amply testified, and were about to prepare their evening meal —
a dead bear having been commissioned to furnish the steaks
therefor —when, of a sudden, he who travelled incognito as the
Abbe S. Gredin exclaimed, in an excited tone of voice,


Diahle done ! Vat sail zis zings pe ? ”
He was pointing, with his index finger, to
All rushed to read the inscription.
Lisped the Earl of Stilton, on beholding it, —“ Gwoodneth
gwathiouth me: ain t that old gal done lying yet ? What an idea ! ”
1 o him, in explanation, Mr. Horace Greeley—“ Wal, strainger
guess our people can lie some, when they ’re minded to.”
“ Th at ’th tho," murmured the Earl, in reply.
Reverently doffing their skull-cases, those three gallant gentle-
men dropt a tear, apiece, to the memory of the “blest shade,” and
then, the steaks being ready, fell to, like good trenchermen, and
supped.
I'hey heard afterwards, when in Omaha, that the finder of the
gold stopping, who had, theretofore, been a wild, harum-scarum
sort of fellow, had, thereupon, turned sublimely virtuous, given
over truth perverting—confessing himself dead licked in that line
of business-opened a gambling-saloon, bought a corner lot
eminently adapted for a hotel or a police-station, and prospered.
“ That man, sir,” said their informant, “ was one in a hundred.
Remembering that £ lt’s never too late to mend’ until the soles
have dropped off, and the uppers gone lost, he drank himself to
death m six months, leaving me the Yaller Gal’s stopping in his
will. Here it is,” he continued, producing a—something, “ and
1 reckm you kin have it for $25 gold coin.”
N .


Poor, lost Whatanidea’s legatee it was, who had “bossed” the
humble tribute to departed worth which our tourists, that selfsame
bear-supper evening, used as a target; the bear’s meaj, or the
whisky —they never knew which —having got into their heads. —
Vale !
WRITING BY THE MAIL;
A BREAKFAST-ROOM COMEDIETTA.
HENRY WISE.
Locality —Loveina Cottage, Darling Point. lime— Morning after “Mail
night. ” Scene —Breakfast-table.
DRAMATIS PERSONAS.
Sam Sprightly, a mercantile clerk
Susan Sprightly, his wife
A newly married couple.
Mrs. Sprightly,—Well, my clear,
how did you like the play last
night ?
Mr. Sprightly.—Play! my love?
It was 7 uork, and no mistake.
Mrs. S. —Reverse it. Take Miss
and no work, you mean.
Mr. S.—Madam !
Mrs. S. —What were you doing
in town last night till past twelve
o’clock ?
Mr. S. — Writing , my dear wife,
at the office.
Mrs. S. — Wronging your dear wife
at the theatre, you mean.
Mr. S. —For the life of me, I can-
not divine what you are aiming at.
Come, Susie, out with it.


Mrs. S.—So I will. [ Pulls out of her pocket a champagne cork ,
the claw of a lobster , the end of a cigar , a play-bill , and a lady's
glove.] THERE!!!
Mr. S. —Why, my dear, you have been plundering some gay
young bachelor of his trophies of dissipation. Fie !
Mrs. S. —Don’t dear me. No; I found these “trophies of
dissipation,” as you call them, this morning, in the pockets of one
who presumes to consider himself a respectable married man.
Mr. S. —And who is this marital monster of iniquity ?
Mrs. S.—Well, Well! Your assumed innocence is about the
cleverest piece of acting I ever saw—worthy of Charley Young, 1
declare.
Mr. S.—Why, zounds ! you don’t mean to insinuate you found
them in my pockets ?
Mrs. S. —I do, and there is the coat. \Exhibits it.]
Mr. S. —How the deuce did they get there ?
Mrs. S.—l should think you are as able to answer, as put that
question,
Mr. S. —( Examines coat.) Oh ! I have it, Susie. I’ll bet you
a blue bonnet to a black hat, you did not find those things in my
pockets.
Mrs. S. —Betting is said to be the argument of a fool; how-
ever, I’ll humour you. Done !
Mr. S.—- You are, my dear.
Mrs. S. —How?
Mr. S.—My bachelor friend and fellow-clerk, Jack Wild, has
the good taste —(ahem!) —to copy your hubby in the matter of
dress; I see I wore his top-coat home last night, mistaking it for
mine. I shall, therefore, have the pleasure, my love, of deducting
the price of my new hat from your pin-money next month.
Ha ! ha !! ha !!!
Mrs. S.— (Crying.) Oh! oh !—S—Sa—Sam—l—a—am—a
—H—lit—little—g—go—goo— goose.
Mr. S.—With onions ; you will get sage in time.
Mrs. S.—l—l—l* 11 never, never, never be jealous again.
Mr. S.—Don’t—you see it’s a losing game—in future you ’ll
not be so ready to


Mrs. S.—Do what, darling 1
Mr. S. —Judge a man by the coat he wears, eh !
Mrs. S. —Forgive?
Mr. S.—Forgiven.
* # * * *
Moral.
Young wives,—don’t ransack, or dip too deep, into your husband’s
pockets.


THE BARON’S REVENGE :
A LAY OF Y E “MOYEN AGE.”
RICHARD E. LEE.
Pill I I ZURSE it is, that Baron bold, returned from Palestine—
Iml l Where ’ h y the score > th e Paynim dogs he clove unto the chine)—
Returned, the lauded of his king, to Warwick’s fair domains,
lo clasp again his Isabel, and thrash his feudal swains.
Yet fain would he, in secrecy, behold the changes shown,
Since outward bound, for Holy Land, he left his dame alone
“I hold her true,” he muttered oft ; “ I know her faith right well—
I ’ll prove it, too, in Palmer’s weeds, and staff, and cockle-shell! ”
He bloweth at the castle horn ; the warder grim remarks,
“ Who’s that ?It "s time for shutting up—you’d better stow your larks ! ”
A pilgrim faint, from Palestine. I bring your lady news
Of bold Fitzurse ” the janitor remarked, “ Your toil you’ll lose !
“ She ’ s U P this moment in the tower, with Guy, the miller’s son,
And Alice, widow of De Vert—the feasting has begun ;
You need n t spin your telegrams—the Hebron Times we’ve read,
And in King Richard’s army-list we found Fitzurse was dead !
“ Go od riddance of bad rubbish, too ! He had a weighty fist—
And, through his knuckledusters, oft the sullen earth I’ve kist;
But walk in, Palmer, never mind, Fitzurse was all my eye ;
Our lady weds again, to-day—she makes herself a Guy ! ”
Ho word he spake—that Palmer grim—but followed in the rear ;
Then sought the castle buttery, and quaffed the castle beer;
Like soapsuds down a gully-hole, it whistled down his throat;
He swigged as though his aim was good to empt’ the castle moat.
“ Arouse, arouse ! grey Palmer ! ” quoth the seneschal, “ I wot
A parlous opportunity for largesse thou hast got ;
Our lady knows that thou art here—and, by my halidame,
She’s sent for thee to tell her of the bold Fitzurse’s fame ! ”
He stood within the presence then, that Palmer worn and grey,
And muttered, “Jumping Moses ! soon there ’ll be Old Nick to pay ! ”
For there, before his horrent gaze, sat Lady Isabel
Upon the knee of miller Guy, as though she loved him well!


“My lay is brief ”— ’t was thus he spake,—“ At Ascalon he died ;
Yet, ere he yielded up his breath, to me, his squire, he cried :
‘ Bear to my peerless Isabel my parting words, and say
I trust she ’ll make the tenants all cash-up on quarter-day !
“ ‘ Say that I fought unto the last, until—not worth a rap—
I had to shy the sponge up to a Saracenic chap ;
And say—remember these remarks —the last before I die —
For love of me she ’ll straightway hang that scoundrel miller, Guy ! ’ ”
“ And is he dead ? ” the lady cried, “You bet your life on that ! ”
The Palmer said—“ As dead as beer that’s soured within the vat !
Of course his last behest you ’ll heed, and scrag the miller’s son ? ”
“ ’T is not for Joseph ! ” said the dame, “ my hand bold Guy has won !
“ Fitzurse, no doubt, was very brave ; but then he was a bear—
He used to stamp upon my corns, and then he’d curse and swear;
While Guy is meek and gentle, so, I think the chap will do—
But poor Fitzurse, we ’ll drink to him, and Palmer, here’s to you ! ”
His robe the Palmer tore in half—his staff he flung aside ;
Then, robed in mail, he took a step, a knight in all his pride ;
The lady screamed, and started up, then blushed through all her paint,
And cried, “ Fitzurse—by all that’s blue—run Guy—l think I ’ll faint ! ”
Perhaps you think that Baron bold then seized, the guilty pair,
And to the block their erring heads escorted then and there ?
Ah ! no—with vengeance more refined, his fiery soul was strung
He swore that ere they welcomed death their heart-strings should be wrung !
He made of Guy—that wretched youth—a being full of cares :
A miserable-looking wretch, who dealt in mining shares !
While, as for Lady Isabel—hers was a fearful end :
To travel round among fair dames—without a Giecian Bend !


LAURA;
“C’EST L’AMOUR, L’AMOUR, L’AMOUR.”
DERWENT M. COLERIDGE.
down in a corner of my chest, wherein reside all
N my bachelor belongings, my Lares and Penates —far
jjj |k|jyP| down in the right-hand corner on the lock side, buried
:&™as§aj beneath a very barrow of papers, home letters, bills,
unpublished poems, et id genus omne , tied round with a piece of
very dirty white ribbon, is an old, torn, rusty pocket-book. Now
and again, when rooting amongst the papers to find something
that, with may-be a little touching up or so, might do for publica-
tion, I light upon it. Reverently I take it up; and looking round
to see that no one is near, reverently and tenderly do I press it
to my lips; then, with a sigh, restore it to its corner, cover it
rapidly with its paper cere-clothes, close and lock the box, and go
smoke a retrospective pipe. Once every year I open it—and
only once—on the anniversary of perhaps the saddest day in all
my life. I open it, and find therein a letter—a piece of poetry
written in pencil, under-scored, and corrected in a different hand:
apparently a lesson of some kind—some dead flowers, and a lock
of hair—common and ordinary contents enough you ’ll say for an
old bachelor’s pocket-book—souvenirs of some old love affair of
younger days. And you are right, that old, worn book is the
grave wherein are the earthly remains of a long-buried love; the
memory and spirit whereof still lives in Love’s own immortality—
in the far and innermost recesses of my heart.
Twice ten years have nearly passed since that bitter day,
when half distraught with grief and disappointment, with every
hope and ambition crushed out of my heart, I laid those relics by.
Back through those twenty years will I take my memory, and try,
as best I may (and if so be the reader care to listen) to tell their
little history.


I was a schoolmaster, teaching in the model schools of one
(it matters not which) of the sister colonies ; and on a certain day,
between morning and afternoon school—having to remain on the
premises in charge of the boys who, living at a distance, brought
their dinners with them, as well as of those who were kept in for
punishment—l had sauntered round to the girls’ side, on the
chance of getting a chat with some of the pupil-teachers—unseen
by the Argus-eyed Minerva-like mistress. I had a slight weak-
ness, you must know, for a certain Kate, whose glorious black
eyes and arch demure smiles were a good deal oftener in my
thoughts than was good for me or for my pupils. Blackboard or
map, it was all the same, between me and it, they were dancing
and scintillating till I scarce knew whether it were map or black-
board—whether the lesson were a proposition of Euclid or the
watersheds of Asia. In a word, I was getting most confoundedly
spoony, having visions of an up-country school, myself the master,
she the mistress, and all that sort of thing. Whether she had any
idea of the state of affairs I hardly know; though I suppose her
woman’s instinct gave her a pretty fair hint thereon ; for our
conversation had as yet scarcely bordered on even a flirtation ;
being for the most part confined to the most unmitigated “ shop,”
;such as the probable date of old Blossom, the Inspector’s, next
visit, the positive unfairness of his questions, and the chance
either of her getting a rise, with a higher class of pupil-teachership,
or even emerging from her then chrysalis state into the butterfly-
hood of assistant-schoolmistress.
I said just now that we never even flirted, yet somehow or
other we always managed to come together for a minute or two
during the two schools ; and so it was on the day in question,
when, after a few casual remarks, Kate said,
“ By the way, Mr. , have you seen the new girl ? ”
“ New girl ? No ! but I suppose you ’ve new girls every week.
What is there particular about this one ? ”
“ Well, nothing particular, only she’s quite grown up—eighteen
I believe—and oh ! she is so pretty; and fancy, coming to school
at that age as a scholar, not even a pupil-teacher—why, she’s
older than any of us. Is n’t it strange ?


Oh ! said I, ee I suppose her education has been neglected,
and she prefers, like a sensible girl, coming here to wasting her
time at some trumpery ladies’ academy.”
And so the subject dropped. We were renewing our confab,
when to our mutual horror, Minerva’s strident voice was heard
within the school calling me. Kate fled ignominiously, and I, in
fear and trembling, sought the dreadful presence. I expected an
awful lecture, for I was for ever in hot water with the Goddess
(though withal a great favourite), for gossiping with the teachers—
in her chaste eyes a most high misdemeanor; but to my extreme
delight I found she only wanted me to hang up some new map,
that had come down from the Board-office for the girls’ class-
room.
1 o get there, I had to pass through the large school-room, which
was then occupied by some half-dozen girls or so, reading, or
eating their dinners in some cases doing both at the same time.
Somewhat apart from the rest, writing at one of the lower desks,
was a strange young lady—evidently Kate’s “new girl.” As I
passed, I naturally turned my head to see what manner of young
lady she might be, when she suddenly looked up, and caught me
in the very act of staring at her —in flagrante delicto.
Hem!! what a face! Well might poor Kate have said she
was pretty. She was beautiful! A pale oval face, with great,
grey eyes, shadowed by a veil of long silken lashes—but there—
why attempt to describe, where all description would fall short of
the reality. The closest I can think of is delightful William
Mackworth Praed’s :
Sad, delicate, and five feet one,
Her face was oval, and her eye
Was like the heaven in Italy,
Serenely blue and softly bright,
Made up of languish and of light;
And her neck, save where the locks of brown,
Like a sweet Summer mist, fell droopingly down,
Was as soft and as white as the snow ere the earth
Has sullied the hue of its heavenly birth.
She was simply beautiful; but of a beauty that relied more on
colouring and expression than on features. Her figure petite , yet


perfect in its form and modelling. A soft, low, contralto voice, dis-
coursed most eloquent music to my only too readily listening ears.
How glad I was, then, that I had not spoken to poor Kate —
how rejoiced I had not compromised myself.
A month or more elapsed before Laura and I exchanged a
word. It was a strange catastrophe that brought us together.
It was the custom of the school to receive music lessons two
afternoons in the week—on which occasions the two head classes
of boys and girls were amalgamated. It was my duty to bring
the boys into the girls’ class-room, and to remain there during the
lesson, to keep order, and take down such names as the singing-
master wished for punishment, or what not. \
Laura, I must tell you, was not musical—could n’t sing a note,
—and yet she was desired by Miss Perch (Minerva, as I call her)
to accompany the girls in the capacity of monitress.
A word anent the singing-master. He was a West Indian
creole —exceedingly clever —very passionate, and a most unmiti-
gated, irrecoverable cad, a martinet, and a bully. True, he got
his pupils on most wonderfully. More than one or two who
learned their first sol fa from him are now starring it in different
parts of the world, the wonder of admiring audiences. However,
to my story.
On a certain afternoon, ray friend, the singing-master —I ’ll call
him Black, for convenience (it’s as good a name as any other,
and he was half black, to boot)—Black, I say, was in an unusually
bullying humour. His lunch had disagreed with him, or some-
thing. Be that as it may, nothing seemed to go right. The cane
was swinging right and left about the poor boys’ shoulders. At
last, he turned on the girls : a bar had gone wrong, and nothing
would suit his lordship, but they must sing it separately.
To Laura, as the head of the class, he came first. She quietly,
told him she could not sing, being only there in charge of the
other girls; and he must excuse her from complying with his
request.
At this, his bullying, half-nigger blood showed out. He told
her she should sing—or —he raised his cane. Laura rose calmly,
and looked at him.


“ Will you sing ? Yes, or no.”
“ No, sir; I will not. Please let me pass.”
I rose, at this, to remonstrate with the hound ; but too late.
Down came the cane on Laura’s shoulders. Well, after this , I
don’t distinctly remember what happened. It was all hubbub,
screams, and confusion. I know I gave him a most tremendous
thrashing with his own cane ; after which, hat in hand, I led poor
trembling Laura from the school in face of master, mistress,
teachers and pupils, as if she had been a duchess.
Well, I need not say we neither of us returned. There was
some idea of a summons for assault. Her father, an old cavalry-
man, talked horsewhip, for a week or more; but, as the poor
whelp had already been thrashed within an inch of his life, Laura
persuaded the old gentleman to keep quiet. And this is how our
acquaintance began. We needed no introduction now. That
very day Laura brought me to her home; and, on that very day,
we were engaged.
Of course, the old folks did n’t know that; that was a secret,
as yet, between Laura and myself. I was to be her tutor —to
come three evenings in the week to her house, to teach her French
and German.
Ah ! those were the happy halcyon days. Days of love and
innocence—for I was a good man then, really and truly good—all
through the period of our courtship.
In the ordinary course of things our secret oozed out, as such
secrets ever will. I spoke to the old people, and gained their
consent conditionally. We were to wait a year; and if, at the end,
we were both of the same mind, and I in a position to warrant it,
then we might be married. And so on—and so on— et cetera.
Of course, I had long ago written home and told them about
Laura; had sent her likeness; and she herself had written a
postcript to the letter, We were, both—as you may suppose—
waiting most anxiously for the reply. At last the mail arrived,
and—letters. How well I recollect the day—we went together to
the Post-office, enquired for and got the letters, and then away
to a quiet seat we knew of— in the gardens outside the city—to
read and discuss them, uninterrupted, at our leisure.


As with Laura’s people, so with mine—they gave their consent
conditionally. I was to go home to England first; and then, if I
thought fit, return and marry Laura.
“ Will you go, dear Arthur?” said Laura, laying her little hand
on mine, and looking up with her great grey eyes into my face.
“ Will you go ? But, of course, you must —your mother wishes
it. They’ve sent the money for your passage ; and I suppose it’s
for the best in the end—but—but—•”
“ But what, pussy ? ”
“ Why, you will forget me amongst all the grand ladies there;
and that’s why they’ve sent for you—”
“ Nonsense, Laura. You pay but a poor compliment to my
truth and fealty if you fancy that a few months’ absence, a few
fresh faces could—”
“ Forgive me—forgive me, Arthur ! I did not mean it. But a
whole year—and youaway —’twill seemsolong—what shalll —what
can Ido ? But you will write to me every mail, won’t you ? ”
“Of course I shall; but I say, Laura ? ”
“Well?”
“ What’s to prevent your coming, too ? What say you,
darling 1 ”
“ Oh, Arthur, would it were possible ! That would, indeed,
be happiness ! But they would never let me. It is but folly to
dream of it.”
“ Well, at any rate, let us try: your parents can but say no.”
But Laura only shook her head. She knew her old father’s
iron will—kind and indulgent though he were ; loving her as the
apple of his eye. His fiat had gone forth :we were to wait a
year—and a year we should have to wait, will-he nill-he, whether
we would or no.
* * * «- -x- # *
And now, for a month or more, I was up to my eyes in prepa-
ration for my home voyage. There were such a multitude of
things—animal, vegetable and mineral —to be procured and
brought together. Imprimis , my dear mother wanted a pair of
parroquets for her aviary; and my sister, of course, was dying
for a tame ’possum. Such a heterogeneous museum of curios


sure man never took home before or since. Quandong ear-rings
and bracelets, for cousins innumerable of the feminine gender;
ditto pins and sleeve-links, for cousins masculine; emu-egg
goblets, photographic views without end or number, a cockatoo, a
kangaroo-rat, a stuffed platypus, ditto flying-fox, and a heap of
things besides.
I had transferred what pupils I was teaching to another peda-
gogue, and gave myself up to the duties of collecting for my
gallery of curiosities. I need not say that Laura went with me
everywhere, up and down the town, into the oddest and most
inconceivable places did we go, strolling about from morning till
evening ; and many’s the laugh the old people would enjoy over
our purchases. It was a favourite joke of her father’s to ask
which of the three ships such a thing was going in—maintaining
that not one vessel, smaller than the Great Eastern, could carry
me and my belongings.
At last the day came when the good ship Poictiers was adver-
vertised to sail. My passage was taken, my cabin was chosen •
and, m time, the last, sad evening came. Laura had be-curtained
my little bunk, made me a most elaborated trash-bag, and had
done all the little, last sad offices she could, and then we had to
say—good-bye!
The old folks had been very kind—let us be as much together
as we pleased for the last few days. I little thought, then, they
were to be the last indeed. For, tho’ sad enough at having to
leave my darling for so long a time—yet was I going in the hope
and assurance of the happiness and joy of my return.
Twelve long years had passed since I had seen my people—
during which period my brother and sister had grown from children
into man and womanhood. How strange, I thought, would the
feeling be of having a grown-up sister. Why, I should be half
afraid to kiss her ! And, then, what a hero in a small way I
should be ! What yarns I should have to tell—what adventures,
possible and impossible, to narrate. Munchausen would be very
gospel to me for truth.
And yet, with all these anticipations—in spite of all my
castle-building, I was sorrowful enough.


I need not, I am sure, rake up again the details of our Good-
bye scene. We were to part that night, at the old house. The
ship was to sail at daybreak; so I thought it best to go on board
that night, straight from Laura’s.
The hands of the clock pointed to 10-15.
« Well, my boy,” said the old gentleman, “ time’s up. Bid
Laura good-bye while I get my great-coat.”
He was going on board with me. Laura, of course, would
have gone, but her mother thought it best not. So a compromise
was made, and her father went instead. The old lady retired
from the room, and we were alone—alone and together for the
last time. Poor girl! she bore up as bravely as she could —nay,
even tried a little badinage about flirting with the young lady
passengers on board \ but it would n’t do. One convulsive sob
one long, long clinging kiss, and—it was over.
“ Keep up, Arthur,” said her father, as he hurried me into a
cab. “ A year will soon be over, and then you can have her all
to yourself.”
* # * * * * *
On my arrival from England I found, of course, letters from
Laura ; and I need hardly say that never a mail came without
one. She and my sister, too, started a most terrific correspond-
ence. Whatever they found to say to one another, Heaven only
knows—l was never let look at the letters. But young ladies
letters to one another are one of those mysteries hidden, for
some wise purpose of Providence, from the ken of the masculine
gender.
This for eight or nine months; but at last a mail and no letter
from Laura. What did it mean 1 True, there might be a hundred
and one reasons for her not writing. She might have missed the
mail —might be away on a visit—yet, somehow on other I had a
presentiment of something going wrong. She was ill —but then,
I thought, if too ill to write, her mother would have written to
me for her. However, no letter came, and nothing to do
but to wait patiently till the next mail. And what an anxious
time it was —the longest, dreariest month I ever knew. And
when, at last, it ended—letters ah! but with the terrible,


heart-chilling black border we all know so well. I had no need
to open them—could not read them for some days. A fall from
a horse had killed her—not instantly ; she lived some few days.
One short letter—that in the old pocket-book—she wrote me,
and in it was the lock of hair and part of the first nosegay I had
given her.
*******
Very soon after this, I applied for and obtained a situation in
another of the colonies, and almost immediately left England.
Once every year I make a pilgrimage to the far-off cemetery
where my darling is buried. It is then and there that I open the
old brown pocket-book, and read her last sad words; and, ere I
leave, I pluck some flowers to take with me from
Camp's ©rave,
SYDNEY HARBOUR.
HENRY KENDALL.
HERE Hornby, like a mighty fallen star,
Burns through the darkness with a splendid ring
Of tenfold light; and where the awful face
Of Sydney’s northern headland stares all night
On dark, determined waters from the east,
From year to year a wild, Titanic voice
Of fierce aggressive Sea shoots up, and makes,
V hen Storm sails high through drifts of driving sleet,
And in the days when limpid waters glass
December’s sunny hair and forest face,
A roaring, down by immemorial caves—
A thunder in the everlasting hills.
But, calm and lucid as an English lake,
Beloved by beams and wooed by wind and wing,
Shut in from tempest-trampled wastes of wave,
And sheltered from white wraths of surge by walls—
Grand ramparts founded by the hand of God,


The lordly Harbour gleams ! Yea, like a shield
Of marvellous gold dropt in his fiery flight
By some lost angel in the elder days,
When Satan faced and fought Omnipotence,
It shines amongst fair-flowering hills, and flows
By dells of glimmering greenness manifold ;
And all day long when soft-eyed Spring comes round
With gracious gifts of bird, and leaf, and grass;
And through the noon when sumptuous Summer sleeps
By yellowing runnels under beetling cliffs,
This royal Water blossoms far and wide
With ships from all the comers of the world.
And while sweet Autumn with her gipsy face
Stands in the gardens, splashed from heel to thigh
With spinning vine-blood —yea, and when the mild,
Wan face of our Australian Winter looks
Across the congregated southern fens,
Then low, melodious, shell-like songs are heard
Beneath proud hulls and pompous clouds of sail,
By yellow beaches under lisping leaves,
In hidden nooks to Youth and Beauty dear, ,
And where the ear may catch the counter-voice
Of Ocean, travelling over far, blue tracts.
Moreover, when the Moon is gazing down
Upon her lovely reflex in the wave,
(What time she, sitting in the zenith, makes
A silver silence over stirless woods),
Then, where its echoes start at sudden bells,
And where its waters gleam with flying lights,
The Haven lies, in all its beauty clad,
More lovely even than the golden lakes
The poet saw, while dreaming splendid dreams
Which showed his soul the far Hesperides.


From Nature by Mrs. Milner Stephen
SYDNEY HARBOUR.




THE OLD HUT:
A LEGEND OF SYDNEY HARBOUR.
SAMUEL HAWKER BANKS.
[The incidents comprised in the following imperfectly narrated story were communicated to
the author, when a boy, by an old man whose adverse fortune—rather, perhaps, than any pre-
conceived action of his own—had forced him into the compulsory service of the Government,
and at the time spoken of was employed in Neutral Bay—where the author, also, was then
residing; and the scanty particulars were recalled to memory for the use of the Punch Staff
Papers. At the period just now referred to it was not an uncommon circumstance for men—
especially in their convivial moments—to speak boastfully of what they had been “ sent out ”
for, or of what they knew of crime in connection with others ; and—though in some cases
such relations might justly have been deemed pernicious to the young mind, more particularly
in the absence of good moral training—they generally created a feeling of detestation, rather
than desire to emulate the deeds described. The old man told the story as something which
he remembered in reference to the old hut, which it was the custom of us youngsters, new to
the country and its floral beauties, to visit occasionally in the Springtime in search of flowers,
for the growth of which the locality was, and is still famous ; and the hut, from its situation
and ruined state, was the object of much interest to our romantic minds, which greedily
received and tenaciously retained anything related in connection with it. In justice to “ Old
Bark,” as my informant was called, I may remark that we never, even remotely, associated
him with the circumstances of his “ yarn,” which might or might not have had a foundation
on truth. “ Ah,” said he, “if this ’ere ’ut could speak we should ’ear of some rum doin’s.
About twenty year agone, there was an old fellow and his darter as lived ’ere together—very
good and quiet sort of people ; she was about fifteen, and a very nice-lookin’ gal. The old
chap well, he warn t more nor fifty—used to cut wood and boat it into Sydney. Some of
the chaps at ’s, thinkin’ the old fellow had some money planted, and maybe havin’ a
eye on the gal, laid out for this tin. Two on ’em went over one night and settled the old man
on the beach when he come back from Sydney, and, to prevent bein’ bowled out, took off the
gal in the boat, which was found smashed up outside at Long Reef, about a week or so arter
the men was missed The men never turned up again—’t was supposed they was drownded,
as it ’ad been blowin’ a gale o’ wind about that time. The gal was met with ; but she was a
little ‘gone’ arter that, and couldn’t remember nothin’.” Such was Old Bark’s story, and
my data for the poem. Civilization, as it is wont, has to some extent destroyed the natural
beauty of the locality described, though it is still the occasional haunt of those in search of
the picturesque whom, it is hoped, this legend will not so intimidate as to cause them to
forego one pleasure in connection therewith. lam indebted to the kindness of Mr, J. H.
Flynn, artist, and Mr. Hknry Collis, engraver, for the accompanying views.]
f the Southern side of the Northern shore,
: * f t, AAbout two miles from the city away—
J It might be less, or it might be more,
But which we cannot here venture to say—
""Mi] a l one hut was standing in days of yore,
The ruins of which may be seen to-day ;
’ T was built in an almost forgotten time,
When men took a pride in boasting of crime.
O


The site of the hut is a point of land
At the head of a bay ; and the south-west gale
Oft lashes the waves on the neighbouring strand,
And sweeps o’er the ridge with a blast and a wail;
But, sheltered anddone, the ruins still stand—
Gloomy and silent—well suiting the tale
That is told of a soul untimely driven
From its earthly home—unfitted, unshriven !
Surrounding the ruins may yet be seen
The trace of a garden once kept with care ;
And the grass on the mound is soft and green ;
The rose-tree, untended, flourishes there.
Behind, on the hill-side, huge rocks between,
The sweet native-rose, and the waratah rare,
In beauty still bloom—unchecked by the crime
Committed so near in a long-past time !
To the left of the hut is a lovely dell,
Rock-floored, and o’ergrown with mosses ; while vines,
Festooning the roof, form grottoes, which tell
It seldom the form of a human enshrines.


The deadly-fanged snake and the adder here dwell,
And who in its shade from the heat e’er reclines,
Or drinks from its stream clear, running, and pure,
Must watch that from danger he may be secure.
The air in our Springtime is soft, and sweet
The perfume, breeze-borne, from numberless flowers
Which bloom here in beauty, embracing the feet
Of those who may stray in these bee-haunted bowers ;
And loving ones here, in some shaded retreat,
In happiness pass the fast-fleeting hours.
Little deem they, while beguiling the time,
How near is the scene of a terrible crime.
And yet there’s a legend, fearful and wild,
Told of this lovely romantic spot:
How an aged man, with his daughter, mild
And pretty, and young, once dwelt in the cot ;
Her tenderness all his lone hours beguiled ;
And both were content with their humble lot.
The maid was a legacy Fate had left
To the poor old man when of wife bereft.
’T was a happy home, for their wants were few,
And these his toil as a woodman supplied
From the forest which then around them grew ;
His boat was the only one care beside
Which the old man had, —and thus the hours flew.
For no brighter lot had the maid ever sighed ;
She scarcely remembered the land of her birth
Far over the wave—the fairest of earth,
And mother of many—enshrined in the sea—
Gem of the Ocean—home of the brave :
On which whoever their feet set are free
From lash of the tyrant, from chain of the slave !
A land where they fear not to bend the knee
In worship to God, His mercy to crave !
And this home they left for ours, at a time
When this sunny land was the haunt of crime.
At morn, and at eve, as both had been taught—
At rising, and ere on their beds they laid—
That best of all books from its place was brought.
And read by the sire to the listening maid;


And then in a prayer to God they sought
Throughout their lives for His fatherly aid :
’T is the only way—with a heart sincere—
To gain for our sorrows some comfort here !
As the story is told, the old man plied
His axe in the forest throughout the day
Till a favouring wind, or a friendly tide,
Should give him a chance of leaving the bay
With a load to the shore on the opposite side.
His course past the island called ‘ * Pinchgut ” * lay :
This then was a barren and rugged pile
Of rocks, and whilom a place for the vile.
He absent, his daughter would time employ
In duties domestic ; or the lone hours beguiled
With pastimes the youthful ever enjoy :
Making a posy of native flowers wild,
Or seeking ’mong shells on the beach a toy ;
Whilst she, in beauty and health, ever smiled !
’T is sad to know, in that innocent time,
She ever was victim of fearful crime.
It sometimes happened that far in the night
The time drew on ere the old man returned
To his hut in the bay ; and then a light
His loving child near to the window burned,
To pilot him into the sheltered bight ;
Thus led, he, on rounding the point, discerned
The spot where his boat could in safety lie
On the sandy beach, and the storm defy.
At these times the maiden would wait and watch
Hour after hour—in hope and in fear—
Fora sound from the beach, or a hand on the latch,
To hail with a kiss the one held so dear.
Ah ! did she suspect the presence of wretch
Was guiltily lurking the old hut near ;
Or his fellow, who lingered on the shore
For him whom his child would never see more ?
♦ This island —on which is erected an embrasured wall mounted with guns, presenting a
very formidable appearance to the eastward—is now called Fort Denison. A tower on
north-eastern extremity is furnished at night with a red (fixed) light, which serves as a guide
to the channel for vessels entering. The island is just one mile from Bradley’s Head.


The moon had gone down in the western sky,
Which the sombre clouds had now overcast;
And the night was wild, for the wind was high,
And rushed from the south-west in angry blast;
And ere the old man with his boat drew nigh
To his home in the bay, the night had passed ;
And the morning dawned heavy and dull —not fair :
And still no boat! —but, the man was there !
Ah ! where was the boat; and where was the maid ?
Where were the bloodhounds who lurking did lie
On that dismal night for criminal raid ?
Did no one list’ to the shriek, and the cry
Sent up from the bay for mercy and aid :
The dying man’s groan, and the ravished one’s sigh ?
None heard —none knew —in that terrible time,
Save One—tire certain Avenger of crime !
Ay, swifter than ever the lightning’s flame
Pierced the submissive encompassing air :
As sure as was ever the surest aim :
So swift and so sure was the Nemesis there !
For certain will Vengeance its victim claim —
Nor ever the guilty, or blood-stained spare !
Or sooner, or later, the branded one
Encounters the peril he flies to shun !
The Sun through the haze in his splendour arose,
And smilingly looked o’er the eastern hill—
(While flowers, responsive, their petals unclose) —
Then joyously danced his bright beams on each rill
Which ran o’er the rocks in search of repose ;
And birds did their wild-notes merrily trill—
Unchecked in their mirth by the two-fold crime
Committed so near in that fearful time.
Few were the people who passed that way—
Still fewer were those who called at the cot ;
At length, some seekers of pleasure, one day
Approached in a boat that lonely spot.
But he whom they found there unheeding lay ;
They spoke, but the old man answered them not !
Nor saw he with whom the ravishers sped,
When far from the scenes of their crimes they fled


The hut was entered, but nothing of life—
No creature, except a poor cat—was seen ;
No trace was there of the terrible strife :
No clue could the friendly visitors glean.
But soon was the hideous story rife,
And spread far and wide ; and many, in teen,
Lamented the' fate of the man found there,
And sighed for the absent one, young and fair.
****** i
And many remembered that stormy night
When the wind from the south-west fiercely blew ;
And many awoke from their sleep in a fright,
And closer around them covering drew ;
Thought of the sea and its crest of white, —
But knew not of one doomed boat and her crew
Then borne away on the wings of the blast,
As the Heads on that fatal night they passed.
Nor knew they of her whom the criminal pair
Were taking far from her desolate home ;
And whose cries for mercy, piercing the air,
Were drowned by the wind, or mocked by the foam, —


Till yielding in sorrow, in shame, and despair,
She prayed for, not dreaded, the life to come !
But one friend was near in that terrible time—
The Help in our need —the Avenger of crime !
*******
The morning looked haggard and worn, they say,
As if it had struggled the live-long night
To break through the gloom with a cheering ray ;
vVhile the sated storm flew past, as the light
Disclosed the fate of its murderous prey ;
And sea-birds flew round, in fear at the sight
Of the mangled forms— which the sickened wave
Disdained to receive in an Ocean grave !
*******
Five miles from North Head, if north-west you steer,
A reef from the coast-line runs into the sea
For nearly a mile ; and boatmen all fear
A danger so great with the land on their lee :
With a south-west wind, at night, to clear
This reef, you must run with your sheet full free ;
And here, borne down by the waves and the blast,
The hapless boat and those in her were cast!
But He who raises the storm, and doth guide
Its course on its furious path, was by—
He, from whom man not one secret can hide !
He, from whose vengeance’t is useless to fly—
Those who in faith on His goodness confide
Never His fatherly care will deny !
He was at hand in that terrible time,
And saved the innocent victim oL crime !
But ne’er she remembered that fatal night !
Though life had been left her, Reason had fled ;
Thenceforth no joy could her young heart delight—
Nor mourned she, nor ever did one tear shed.
Far better, perhaps, when Sorrow doth smite,
To sense the victim were utterly dead.
Who knows, but their world is free from care ?
With Reason, we oft are the slaves of Despair !


’T is said that at nights when the south-west blast
Across the chilled waters flies on its way,
A figure is seen, grim, gory and ghast,
Close to the hut in that then lonely bay ;
Those near at the time in terror rush past,
Glad from the vision to hasten away —
Or hail it, to quiet their human fears :
But it never heeds them, answers, nor hears !
*******
The flowers still bloom on the side of the hill,
And with their soft fragrance enrich all the air ;
The gaily-plumed wild-birds merrily trill
Their songs from the trees which yet flourish there j
And loving ones stray in the shaded paths still,
Away from the world, its trouble and care ;
And all Nature smiles—unchecked by the crime
Committed so near in a long-past time.
But not of this lovely sequestered place
Are told all the stories of by-gone times:
What wonder, indeed, if we sometimes trace
The trail of the serpent—marked by the crimes
Of those who humanity often disgrace ;
Or the guilt which our fairer page begrimes ?
We only can hope, and pray, for a time
Of peace and good-will—untarnished by crime !


A ROUNDABOUT PAPER.
GROSVENOR BUNSTER.
’T is from high life high characters are drawn:
A saint in crape is twice a saint in lawn ;
A judge is just; a chanc’llor juster still ;
A gownsman learned ; a bishop—what you will;
Wise, if a minister ; but if a king,
More wise, more just, more learned, more everything!
In life’s low vale, the soil the virtues like :
They please as beauties—here, as wonders strike ;
Though the same sun, with all diffusive rays,
Blush in the rose, and in the diamond blaze.
We own the stronger effort of his power,
And always set the gem above the flower.— Pope.
POPE knew the world ; and the world in his day
was pretty much the world in ours. Humbug was as
fresh and hearty when the little crooked genius spat
forth his venom at it, as it is now. To be sure it
made a braver appearance then, with its ruffles, and swords, and
bag-wigs, and furbelows ; but it was the same Humbug which
we now behold in broadcloth and crinoline. For the matter of
that, it was the same Humbug which walked the streets of Rome
and Athens, Jerusalem, Antioch, and Babylon ; which fought in
the Crusades, and made merry with Vikings ; came over with the
Conqueror, and grew into a huge prosperity with Wolsey. In a
word, it was the same Humbug which sprang into life with civili-
zation, and fattens and flourishes in the march of Progress.
Of the many forms which Humbug assumes, the most repulsive
is that of Cant. There are jovial, honest, merry-making forms of
Humbug; but Cant is its sneaking, underhand, sly, lying and
unworthy aspect. And yet, how easy to detect Cant. In the
upturned eye, the snuffling tone, the straight up-and-down black
suit of clothes, we discern it in its most vulgar shape; but it is
no less easily discovered under the mask of heartiness, good
nature, and honest friendship. The Cant of the warm grip of


the hand ; the happily-toned expression of good-will; the kindly
inquiries—is as palpable as any. And this is the kind of Cant
we meet every day. This is the kind of Cant which misleads
greenhorns; which they mistake for earnestness and truth, until
they put it to the test—when lo ! the mask falls to show the
grinning skull.
Tell me now, you who have lived—what is Friendship, Love,
Respect, Honour ? What is the thing called Conscience ? What
is Honesty ? I assure you that my liver is in perfect order ; that
I am not suffering from megrims ; that nothing has occurred to
annoy me, —and yet, ladies and gentlemen, I lay my hand upon
my heart and swear to you that I sum up all these virtues in the
word “ Cant.” Do not mistake me, however : I speak of virtues
here, as applied; not in the abstract. I speak as a man of the
world, who, without a tinge of cynicism, protests that we are all
playing a farce. Don’t you know it ? Don’t you know that, were
your secret thoughts laid bare, you would appear a very miserable
creature indeed—a creature of ingratitude, falsehood, envy, and
hate ? Ah, me ! if we were stripped of our Cant what ghastly
imposters we should appear.
Last Sunday I happened to pass a church. The service was
just concluded, and crowds of well-dressed men and women —
Cant calls them ladies and gentlemen—were passing out. On
the kerbstone sat one of those amiable old ladies who are popu-
larly known as “ Johnny Warders.” She was very drunk, very
dirty, and very disreputable ; and 1 could mark how carefully
those of her own sex who had just listened to Christ’s teachings,
gathered up their skirts as they passed the wretched old creature.
I did not see one look of pity or compassion in the faces of those
who looked upon her. And presently the clergyman came forth,
and passed her by with a gaze of aversion. Yet, doubtless, he
could preach a very pretty homily on Christ’s goodness to sinners,
however fallen. This Mary Magdalene, to be sure, was old and
withered, drunken and dirty ; but, my God ! ladies and gentlemen,
she was a human being—the handiwork of the Almighty who
made your dainty flesh and blood. Ah, the Cant of Christians
is surely very general. I give you my word that I went up to the


old woman and gave her sixpence. I know she spent it in rum;
but what would you? What comfort but rum for the poor
wretch ? Let Cant answer.
The church I spoke of is a most beautiful edifice. It is
furnished most comfortably. In hot weather it is as cool as a
cellar; in cold weather it is carefully warmed. I should say that
several thousand pounds have been spent on it. Worship in
such a church must really be a luxury. But how get away from
this ? The money spent upon this and other churches might have
saved many a poor wretch from death or crime ; reared many a
youngster in worldly respectability. It strikes me that the founder
of Christianity did not ask for such luxurious churches. He was
content with God’s church : the hill tops, the woods, the mountain
side, the plain, were His cathedrals—the smile of Nature, the
green sward, the fragrant flowers, the fitting furniture. And when
at his feet there gathered the rich and poor, the rags of the one
were as proper in his sight as the rich robes of the other. Ask
an ill-dressed man or woman why they don’t go to church, and
the answer is—in the true servility of Cant—“ I’m too shabby.”
And the ministers and their congregations endorse this Cant; so
that it comes to pass if a poor devil can never raise a good coat
to worship in, he stands a fair chance of damnation. All because
of the coat ? It is wonderful how these small matters tell on our
destinies !
The Cant which divides Christianity into sects is, perhaps,
the most unworthy of all. Believe me, there is no hatred so
bitter as that which religious sects bear towards each other. In
his secret soul, the average Baptist entertains the belief that all
who are not dipped in water shall be baptised in fire. These
people hold to formula as the machinery of salvation. I ask you,
how many people understand what is meant by inward prayer :
the prayer which is not of any set form, to be said at any set
time; but that which springs into sudden birth in the heart, and
finds its eloquence in tears ? Ah ! you good people, you little
know what slaves you are to Cant.
A good man, and one who is as free from religious cant as any
man I have met, recently gave a lecture in which he asked “ Will


Evil last for ever ?” If I mistake not, he contended that it would
not; and his view is consistent with his large and humane
character. But surely, Evil will last as long as Hypocrisy lasts ;
as long as we hide truth under the mask of Cant ; as long as we
preach homilies on Charity and pass the drunken outcast by as
an abominable thing. And this word “ Charity” is suggestive. I
firmly believe that two-thirds of the charity done is the conse-
quence of the utterance, “ Charity covereth a multitude of sins.”
Like the rich merchant who, when dying, asked the pastor whether
he thought he could secure salvation by leaving to found
a church, and was answered cautiously that, at any rate, the expe-
riment was worth trying—those who “ give to the poor,” do so
that they may “ lay up riches in Heaven.” They don’t give
because their hearts beat with sympathy or pity—they give to buy
consideration. It is Cant which misleads them.
But, passing from religious to social Cant. We all know what
Humbugs we are. Why, but an hour ago, a writer came into the
presence of three or four fellow-scribblers, and read a paper he
had composed. We all gave him praise, and he went away
elated. Yet I vow that the echo of his footsteps had scarce died
away, ere the composition was in process of cruel criticism. It
never occurred to those who conducted the dissection that they
were perpetrating a most unworthy lie; that they had been guilty
of one of the most revolting—though most common—phases
of Cant. I don’t pretend to be better than my fellows; but I
own that I felt sickened. And this is the kind of thing that goes
on every day. This is the kind of thing which speaks in sympa-
thetic voice to a friend who has lost a wife or a child; which bids
us put on a lugrubrious face at a funeral; which induces us to
pay for a costly hearse and plumes and mutes and all the para-
phernalia of unutterable woe, when we cart the poor corse to the
grave—the whole being a lie and a sham. This is the kind of
Cant which makes us woo the heiress, for whom we have no more
love than for our mistress; but whose money gilds repulsion.
This is the Cant which makes us bow down before those who are
in power, or who have wealth; while, God knows, in our secret
souls, we hate them for being better off.


Political Cant is a matter of course. When Mr. Parkes, or Sir
James Martin, or Mr. Robertson, or Mr. Duffy (and what a genius
has Mr. Duffy for Cant) utter their patriotisms, we know what
they mean. We clap our hands and cry bravo, and applaud
their fine sayings, just as we applaud the actress who beats her
breast and weeps, and makes us weep, when simulating passion.
There can be no harm in this transparent Cant, which can
deceive no one, save, indeed, those yokels who fed Mr. Duffy and
his troop of imbeciles when they went round Victoria “ on the
stump.” Indeed I can understand that a man can tell a lie so
often as to believe in it himself; and lam sure that some of our
politicians seem to believe. Carlyle says that “It is possible to
be sincere, even in Cant;” and, truly, I think so. The philo-
sopher ought to know; for, in my view, he is the very Apostle
of Cant. His Germanised bad English is Cant: the more so
that it is the most servile affectation. But, for that matter, it
would be easy to show the Cant of some of our master-minds.
Thackeray’s Cant is transparent enough; so is Browning’s; so is
Tennyson’s—and (Prince of all) Victor Hugo’s. I think that, of
all writers, Swinburne is freest from Cant, and so he is
properly abused. Not that I think it a decent or advisable thing
to call a spade a spade always ; but the Cant which goes out of
the way to call it an agricultural implement, is atrocious.
But enough. One could gossip on this subject for ever. I
know that I have hit the mark, though I may have shot my shaft
awkwardly; and lam sure many an honest man and woman will
agree with me. Let me say my last: I know of one thing, only,
which is untinged and unsullied by Cant —the one pure, self-
sacrificing, Christ-like element of human nature —a mother’s love
for her children.
And so I squeeze the lemon dry.


THE SPIRIT OF THE VALE:
A LEGEND OF Y E CUDGEGONG.
SAMUEL HAWKER BANKS.
RssrssjlN the country to the westward runs a river through a vale
§p| p| Hemmed by mountains high and rugged;’t is the scene of this sad tale,
Rich in pastures is the valley—rich in diamonds and gold ;
And of by-gone times, in gossip, many stories have been told.
Dark and grim have been the doings done upon this river’s bank,
Witnessed only by the curlew haunting rushes long and rank ;
But the river, swift and silent, —helper in transactions dread—
Tells no secret of the living—murmurs nothing of the dead !
On this river, it is spoken, there resided, years ago,
Squatter tall and stout, and hirsute—for his beard it long did grow ;
And this person had a station ! he, besides, had flocks of sheep—
And a hut, likewise a stockyard where he cattle oft would keep.
Ask me not to tell the country whence at first the squatter came ;
Ask me not his occupation—lastly, ask me not his name.
History says he was a shepherd when he first did pitch his camp
On the Cudgegong’s swift water —which he reached from off the tramp.
History says that this same squatter, when his master’s flocks he tailed,
Grudged that master his possessions, and his own hard fate bewailed !
So it came to pass these worthies very soon positions changed :
Squatter, he became a shepherd—shepherd as a squatter ranged !
He grew rich, and waxed mighty—in the land became a prince
Sheepish rather, but, no matter—such have been before and since !
Then he felt himself quite lonely—weary of his single life :
Soon resolved his state to alter, and as quickly found a wife.
He had sons and daughters many : he was lord of many lands—
With his stock, and with his acres, soon, of course, his mind expands !
He remembered how his childhood with much hardship had been fraught ;
And he said, “ Now I am wealthy, I must have my children taught ! ”


In the city was a paper {not a daily issue then) —
Much perused by great and lowly, much respected by all men ;
That, its words were words of wisdom—men were lavish in its praise :
But intelligence was taken to the bush by men with drays.
In that paper this said squatter then inserted sundry “ ads.,”
For a governess and tutor for his daughters and his lads ;
And, in course of time, he got them ; history doth further say
That, though he was very wealthy, these two got but little pay !
Which, of course, must be a libel—not a libel that is true,—
Present writer don’t believe it, no more, reader, than do you.
Who’d believe there e’er was squatter who could ever meanly act ?
No one ; then, my gentle reader, it can’t really be a fact!
Tutor was a man of thirty, and the lady twenty-six—
Just as near as anybody could a lady’s number fix ;
That she was the tutor’s loved-one many people did suspect:
If they stood in such relation they both well the secret kept.
But, in course of time, the squatter—who was married, bear in mind
To the lady took a fancy, and was, more than proper, kind ;
She, poor creature, was attracted by the hirsute squatter’s wealth—
And his promise of protection : so they met and loved by stealth.
And they went on, loved and loving, did the squatter and the maid,
Till of busy tongues the former all at once became afraid ;
Then the tutor, he was challenged as the author of the wrong—
And as quickly was requested tracks to make from Cudgegong.
******
Swift and silent ran the river through its mazy path of plain—
Heedless quite of depths and shallows—onwards rushing to the main :
Bearing on its placid bosom shade of cloud by day and night;
Sounds of gladness, wronged one’s curses, groans which might the day affright!
******
Gone the tutor ; wherefore, maiden, did’st not also fly the scene—
Placing miles of boundless forest thee and station both between ?
Wherefore stay in trusting folly—hoping vainly for the time
Thou could’st save thy maiden honour, guiltless stand of social crime ?
******
Gone the maiden ! whither went she ? To the place from whence she came ?
Did she fly to shield the squatter, or to hide her bitter shame ?
Wherefore choose the hour of midnight for her sorrow-stricken flight ?
Not alone left she the station ! broke for her no morning’s light !


Dark and silent ran the river—darker made by night’s black shroud;
E’en the gentle stars did hide them, lurked behind the thickened cloud !
Leaves of Eucalyptus shiver in the sad and moaning air—
Broken then by howl of dingo, terror-driven from his lair,
Startled by the tread of humans—feet of some one and the maid,
Who had sought that place in darkness, treading down the crispy blade—
Broken, too, by cry of horror ; broken, too, by cry of pain ;
Broken, too, by plash of water ! then, in silence, hushed again !
******
Ran the river, brightly, clearly—threading on its mazy way ;
On its banks the wild-bird lingered, gladdened by the light of day !
Sheep and cattle browsed and fattened ; people toiled in heathful glee ;
Yet some tongues were heard in question—“ Wherefore did the maiden flee?”
Of her fate none asked the squatter —how could he a doubt dispel ?
Went she not to seek the tutor, who had wrought the saddening spell ?
Happy in his home and station, squatter lived admired of men !
Who dare stain his reputation—who dare doubt his honour then ?
******
Years have passed, yet runs the river—urging onwards to the main ;
But the township and the village, with their commerce, deck the plain !
Gone is squatter to his fathers—loud in men’s lament and praise ;
Nearly gone is the rememberance of those dark and direful days.
But, when nights are moonless, starless, there’s a figure seen to glide
Close by Cudgegong’s swift waters, through the rushes by its side.
Maid, once fair and sorrow-laden ! go, vexed spirit, to the blest—
Leave to Heaven thy guilty wronger ! thou , at least, deservest rest!


MEN OF LETTERS IN NEW SOUTH
WALES.
HENRY KENDALL.
Kl ROB ABLY many readers of The Punch Staff Papers
| may remember that a few years ago, Mr. G. B. Barton,
\ one of the most painstaking and conscientious writers
it that the colonies have produced, edited a volume
called Literature in New South Wales. They may recollect, also,
that he prefixed to it a long and somewhat querulous paper, in
which he undertook to show the unenviable position occupied by
men of letters in this colony—that is to say, by men of letters
whose best-known writings are purely of an aesthetic character,
and whose peculiar temperament unfits them for the hard dry
work of the journalist. Now, notwithstanding the severe handling
Mr. Barton was subjected to in certain quarters, I—in common I
hope with most people really interested in the advance of Aus-
tralian belles-lettres —agree with most that he said; but, at the
same time, it is my impression that while he was far too lenient in
several of his paragraphs, he was (unintentionally no doubt)
unjustly severe in others. And because I hold this view—because
I think he said too little where he ought to have said much, and
too much where he should have said little, I put the present
article before the public, in the hope that it will do away with
many of the false ideas likely to have been created by the mistakes
which I assume he has made.
In taking up the task I have imposed upon myself, I am fully
aware of the many difficulties which stare me in the face. A man
whose name has been coupled with Australian literature for some
years past, and whose first and only introduction to the public
was through his writings, cannot be too careful in a case like the
present. He is called upon, on the one hand, to avoid egotism,
and, on the other, to keep clear of that affected humility which
p


must fill every wholesome-hearted reader with disgust. He is
required to write without regard to the power and prejudices of a
frequently too sensitive Press ; and, in short, to tell the truth
without the least fear of the consequences. This is what I shall
endeavour to do.
More than eighty-four years have elapsed since Arthur Phillip
first landed, and initiated civilization on these shores. The mar-
vellous progress that the colony has made since then is known, I
presume, to almost every member of the community—that is to
say, to almost every one of us who can read, write, and think.
Where vast belts of forest used to stand, cities have started up
almost as rapidly as Troy did to the music of Apollo ; where
there was once nothing for the eye to rest upon but brown, sun-
baked waste, the iron horse now rushes between noble townships,
and great breadths of cultivated country; and where the silence
in the old days was only broken by the occasional footfall of the
savage, or the monotonous cry of the curlew, the ridges and
gullies at the present date resound with the songs of the miner,
the blows of the pick, and the harsh, grating noises of the
crushing-machine. There is little need, however, to go into all
this. I only refer to the changes that have taken place just to
remind the reader of the wonderful strides New South Wales has
mkde in one direction, before proceeding to speak of her unique
backwardness in another.
For while all this social and commercial progress has been
going on —while every possible effort has been made by the
colony for the attainment of physical prosperity and wealth —
almost next to nothing has been done with regard to its intellec-
tual advance; or, in other words, towards the creation and
fostering of a native literature. Not that we have never had
amongst us men with that aboriginal and plenary power which
constitutes the authentic insignia—so to speak — of genius :on
the contrary, I think I could point to several who, if they had
been placed in happier worldly circumstances, and under a differ-
ent face of heaven, would have secured a permanent and honor-
able footing in the world of letters. Were Mr, Barton in my
place, he would at this point quote poor Dan Deniehy as an


example ; but I shall do nothing of the sort. For, in face of the
enthusiastic appraisement in Literature in New South Wales , and
notwithstanding the eulogiums of Messrs. Stenhouse, Dailey, and
others, I cannot help coming to the conclusion that Deniehy’s
mind was essentially mimetic—that, in fact, he was nothing more
than a brilliant scholar with a marvellous but sometimes mischie-
vous memory, with a keen, bright critical faculty, with a prose
style which, though sometimes clear and effective, was too often
marred by affectation, and imitations of De Quincey at his worst,
but without an iota of what men all over the civilized world
recognise as originality. In fact, if I may be allowed to carry on
this parenthetical paragraph a little further, Deniehy seems to me
to have been right when he set Charles Harpur above himself.
In the fine strong spirit that so prematurely flickered away into
the dark down there at Euroma—notwithstanding its courage, its
capacity for endurance, and its patience under the heaviest trials
we had a much nearer approach to the creative faculty. Un-
couth, unlettered, crabbed in style as he was, Charles Harpur,
nevertheless, must be accerdited with having stood up on his own
feet, and uttered his message without any assistance from men or
books. Even the author of Literature in New South Wales admits
that he caught his inspiration from no other sources than the wild
scenery and rude society in which he was placed ; but Mr. Barton,
following the track of others, goes on to say that he (Harpur) was
“ unmusical.” He was nothing of the kind. Those who have
criticised him never seem to have taken into consideration his
life and physical surroundings ; and hence such hasty and incorrect
assumptions. Harpur was a son of the forests—a man of the
back-woods—a dweller in unquiet and uncouth country ; and his
songs are accordingly saturated with the strange, fitful music of
waste, broken up places. Here was a singer whose genius was
ripened—so to speak—by the sun and winds of outside wilder-
nesses : mountains were his sponsors ; and from them he received
his lyrical education. As Tennyson’s elder songs are filled with
the mournful, monotonous harmony sweeping across the Lincoln-
shire fens, so Harpur’s most characteristic, and most maligned,
lyrics have, incorporated with them, the full, strong, lawless music


of the Australian hills. And because this music—native to
rugged places where cliff and gorge, and tree conspire to break it
into fragments—has a rhythm of its own altogether unlike that
which pulsates through the sustained winds of the open lowlands
—a rhythm restless and broken, but, for all that, melodious—
these songs of my countryman have fallen under the ban.
Assuredly, there are critics and critics.
However—to return to the cardinal subject in hand : the
position of men of letters in New South Wales. As I have
already stated, while we have had, and have still, men amongst
us with sufficient native power to become the fathers of a striking
antipodean literature, there has been little, if anything, achieved
towards its creation. To the uninitiated reader, our position will,
as a matter of course, appear paradoxical, Why, he may ask, is
this the case ? In a new country possessing a flora and fauna
not to be found in any other part of the world —in the midst of a
virgin society whose inner history has yet to be mirrored in prose
and verse—set face to face with strange colouring and novel forms
of life, how is it that these spirits armed with the requisite facul-
ties have done nothing ? Is it because they have been, and are
still, swallowed up in the commercial vortex; or is it that they
they are indolent dreamers of the Coleridge stamp? To all
these possible inquiries, I reply with an emphatic No! The
reason that genius has never proved its presence here may be set
down in half-a-dozen words. Genius has never had the chance.
With a view to make the foregoing clear, I will now proceed
to sketch the austere situation occupied till this day by the colo-
nial literati. With one or two exceptions, the whole of them are
poor; and the most of them have no means of livelihood other
than the pen. It is with these last that I intend to deal; because
they form that specific section of the New South Wales lettered
classes which drew from Mr. Barton the best and most pertinent
of his passages, and which has embodied the only noticeable
writers- the colony has yet produced. What then is the history of
these people—these men acknowledged to be “ clever,” and
assuredly in straitened circumstances? Simply this. Many—
indeed the most of them, enter the field while mere youths, full


of enthusiasm, elated with consciousness that in the unique life
and scenery around them they can find ample material for the
exercise of their respective gifts; but the end invariably is disap-
pointment and sorrow. They very soon come to realise that
Australia is a new country; that society here is still in an unsettled,
chaotic state ; that the large bulk of the population have yet to
get their money before they can enjoy leisure; that the wealthy
classes —the geebung aristocracy, as they are called—are formed
for the most part of illiterate people, who have risen from the
ranks ; and, in short, that there is not the ghost of a chance for a
writer attempting to get his living by offering to the public work
not lying within the domains of journalism. So it comes to pass
that those who happen to be lucky enough, and who possess the
necessary aptitude, join the Press, and in due time forget their
early aspirations and become plodding, satisfied newspaper hacks.
The men who are not so fortunate—God help them !
After glancing at the foregoing, the reader will not wonder to
hear that, although attempt after attempt has been made to
establish one, we have no literary magazine or other journal of
the kind in the colony; nor is it at all likely that we shall have
such a thing for many years to come. Consequently, colonial
men of letters are without a local outlet for their higher concep-
tions—notwithstanding the fact that many of them would be
willing enough to present their work to the public without regard
to monetary advantages. In implying, however, that they are
utterly without a local medium, I am perhaps stepping beyond the
bounds of the exact truth ; it being only fair to state that one or
two of the metropolitan newspapers have, from time to time,
gone out of their way to make room for sesthetical papers and
other articles coming within the province of belles-lettres. But
this has proceeded from sheer courtesy on the part of the pro-
prietors—the literary man being invariably looked upon as the
person obliged. And, taking everything into consideration, Ido
not see my way to find fault with the view adopted. It is all
very well for Mr. Barton and others to complain that the more
influential newspapers of New South Wales will not pay for con-
tributions when they are of the magazine stamp ; but it strikes


me that, in view of the state of society which I have just des-
cribed, it would be a very singular thing if they did. Apart from
this, it hardly appears fair to blame a journal professing to be
merely a newspaper, and having for its constituents commercial
men—and commercial men only—for not sacrificing its space and
capital for articles that the large body of the public would never
take the trouble to glance at.
From what has been set down in this somewhat hurriedly-
written paper, people living beyond the colony may guess pretty
accurately the experience of its literati , and the unenviable
standing which they hold. The question will doubtless occur—
who are to be held responsible for such a melancholy state of
things? Not the unsettled, roving community who, as herein-
before stated, have to make their money before they can rest and
read. Not the illiterate wealthy; because it is very clear that
grapes are never found growing on thistles. Not—certainly not
the Press; because it consists entirely of newspapers dependent
upon men who discover more music in the clink of coin than in
the grandest symphony Beethoven ever composed, and who
rarely look inside a book. It is at other doors that the fault lies;
and the day will come when those who are really culpable in the
matter will be judged severely enough for their shortcomings. I
have been alluding—and I say it fearlessly—to that influential
class in our midst who are lettered as well as leisured ; and from
whom accredited colonial writers naturally expect countenance.
A just recognition on the part of these men—these scholars,
university professors, judges, barristers, etc. —a just recognition ,
and nothing more —would help the cause of Australian polite
letters to a degree that they themselves appear to have no con-
ception of. To put the matter in a clearer light, the countenance
of scholars moving amongst the wealthier circles of the com-
munity would so influence the ignorant, and therefore credulous,
rich that they would come to buy, for the sake of show, that
which they might never read. But the people thus having it in
their power to develope our intellectual resources—the great
grammarians who walk to and fro in society with the dignified air
of the elder gods—seem wilfully to have come to the determina


tion to ignore them altogether. For example, I have heard more
than one scholar question the necessity for Australian belles-lettres.
Why, they have asked, should we foster a new and immature
growth when we have the magnificent literary possessions of the
old country at hand ? By this, they infer an intention on our
part to create a literature utterly independent of what is justly a
source of pride to Englishmen ; but we have no such purpose in
our heads. What colonial men of letters are really anxious to do
ought to be obvious enough. They look upon the grand results
of British genius with as much exalted joy as their fathers did ;
but, at the same time, they naturally desire to take advantage of
the novel elements by which they are surrounded, and to gather
from these (speaking figuratively) fresh sap for the ancient stock.
Another objection set up by our learned Laodiceans is that Aus-
tralian literati have not come forward with anything to entitle
them to the encouragement which they look for. The answer is
—what chance have they had to do so ? But granting, for the
sake of argument, that the opportunity has been afforded them ;
and that the results before us show all that they can produce,
there is still sufficient argument for their vindication. Most things
have a poor and pale beginning : as, for instance, the faint dawn
is for ever the precursor of the strong, brilliant noon. To put it
another way, the song of the skylark is not the less attractive
because it is without the sublimity of sound contained in the
organ anthem; and though we cannot find in a mountain rill the
majesty of mighty rivers, it has still a beauty, and music, and
sweetness of its own. There is no need to go on in this strain.
In the face of all the chilling neglect of which I have spoken—
in the teeth of poverty hardly surpassed by that of Johnson and
Savage in their Grub-street days, some noble prose writers have
held their own in Australia; and, more than once, there have been
heard amongst us breaths from that divine Spirit of Song whose
grander gleamings and pulses are to be found in the poetry of
men like Byron and Shelley, and whose habitation is not one
small island, but the universe.


“THE SWORD."
GEORGE GORDON M'CRAE.
* PfTfpbS WAS in the old Conscription days,
EH rl When War’s recruiting drum was beating—
And stern Bellona tuned her lays
To wives’ and children’s cries, entreating—
That through the crowd passed young Pierre,
Forth from the Mairie’s columned entry,
His face all fire, his brow all care—
The silent Conscript passed the sentry ;
Bordered with naked leafless elms,
And crushed the crisp snow ’neath his feet,
(As spurning grief that overwhelms)
He traversed faubourg, place and lane,
The level paths, the rising ridges ;
Nor paused until he reached the Seine,
Where Henri Quartre* near the bridge is.
There halting—it was growing dark—
He peered across the snow-strewn spaces
To seek a well-known love-lit spark—
His Pharos—(where a gentle face is).
But, seeing nought, he turned again,
Still sadly trudging through the snow
Until he reached the Madelaine,
And there—hard by—a window-pane
Lit with an honest glow.
Forth at his knock his sister came,
And leaped to kiss his chilly cheek ;
And one whose brow was all aflame,
Who grasped his hand but could not speak—
This was his father, old and gray,
Soldier of France in many a battle :
He sternly waved the girl away,
Stabbed by her merry, artless prattle.
Then leading listless young Pierre,
Like some sleep-walker in a dream,
He laid him in an antique chair,
Red with the fire-light’s twinkling gleam.
“ Pierre ! ” said he, “ My son, go forth,
“ Though it be sore thus soon to sunder ;
* The statue of Henri Quatre on the Pont Neuf.


“ If I bequeath my greatest worth
“ In thee to France, no man can wonder.
‘ ‘ And as a soldier needs a sword,
“ A noble weapon I ’II bestow !
“ Regarding this—one little word :
“ It was Napoleon's long ago.
“ This now shrunk hip He girt it on
“ Long since. (His service turned me white!)
“ This sword I wore at Ascalon ;
“ Unchanged still—its blade is bright,
* ‘ Save one red speck above the hilt.
“ Come, soldier boy ! and see it here,
‘ ‘ Where the Imperial cipher’s gilt.
“ Son ! ’t was thy mother’s parting tear ! ”
The old man viewed the gleaming blade,
Ere he returned it to its sheath,
With all the grace of past parade ;
Then hung it up his spurs beneath.
“ Pierre ! ” he cried, in that clear tone
That once so thrilled the rank and file,
“ Pierre !—Quick !—March ! I’d be alone,
“ And commune with myself awhile,”
*****
They sate, and vainly strove awhile
To pass the time with misplaced laughter ;
And all that well-intended guile
That veils a grief to follow after.
The mother had no heart to chide
Pierre’s Marie —for their mutual losses
Would make her seem a widowed bride
To share with her, war’s bitter crosses—
Pierre sat silent by the fire,
His fond arm round his sad-eyed beauty ;
His mother thought on son and sire,
Perplexed sore ’tween love and duty ;
And young Pauline, Pierre’s only sister,
Knelt on the carpet by his chair,
Raising her rose-lips till he kissed her,
And passed her white hand thro’ his hair.
A strange sad group of love and sorrow,
Where vain regrets with gentle sighs,
Tried to forget the stern to-morrow,
With store of tears for aching eyes.


The silent snow-stars, in a cloud,
Fell through the leafless boughs from Heaven,
To pile upon dead earth a shroud ;
And as the clock was striking seven,
The horse-patrol, the ghastly street
Made echo to their crashing sabres ;
While the sharp ring of chargers’ feet
Roused Paris to her daily labours.
Challenge, reply, and countersign,
“ All’s well! ” —and “ Pass ! ” —the sentries’ hollo,
Were ushers to the dim sunshine,
That heralded a day to follow ;
As in the study, past the hall,
Where Pierre had left his father reading,
A noise was heard—a heavy fall:
He rushed, and found the old man bleeding.
Too late ! —The soldier’s soul had fled,
Than his no Arab’s aim was truer ;
Too late ! —The o’er-tasked man lay dead,
Beyond reproach—alas ! —past cure.
The half-drawn sword beside him lay
(As in the camp) upon the table,
And the dull lamp’s last flickering ray
Went out as sun-lit spire and gable ;
A pistol in his hand he held,
Blood from his breast was trickling slowly
Into a pool, that gradual swelled,
Beneath a pillow crushed and lowly.
Now —ere he closed Death’s door—Pierre
Perceived a narrow strip of paper
Hang curling from the scabbard rare,
’T was written on ! —(he lit a taper),
Then softly drew the glittering sword,
With its phylactery twining round it,
And, having read it word for word,
Replaced it gently where he found it.
* * * * *
“HE WAS HIS MOTHER’S ONLY SON,
AND SHE A WIDOW,”* —sad inscription !
Himself, for whom the deed was done,
Free now for ever from conscription.
* The first Napoleon exempted in all cases the only sons of widows—the conscription was
never meant to take effect in such cases.


THE PHILOSOPHY OF CRITICISM.
SAMUEL HAWKER BANKS.
SAPERE est et principium et fans. — PLINY
knowledge of the art of Criticism is a quali-
II fication very generally assumed but rarely possessed;
pf * n literature, perhaps, more than in any branch of
Art. In others, we deem a practical or highly-trained
theoretical knowledge necessary, and accept the dictum of none
but those whom we believe to possess the necessary attributes ;
as, for instance, if we desired an opinion of the excellence or
imperfectness of a steam-engine, it is probable we should prefer
the judgment of an engineer to that of an engine-driver. In
literature, however, an acquaintance with the nine parts of speech,
and the opportunity of expressing a written or oral opinion are
all the requisites necessary—in the estimation of many—to make
the perfect Critic, and it is with this class it is now contemplated
to deal.
Our greatest of all bards, philosophers and historians—the
immortal Shakspere —who, happily for himself and for us, lived
in an age less prolific of literary wasps and critical light-weights
than is ours ; and whose imagination, unfettered or misdirected
by such “ puny whipsters ” as those with whom the modern
aspirant for literary fame or the devoted ethicist is more than
likely to come into contact, and live in dread or contempt of —
was enabled to glance
From heaven to earth, from earth to heaven,
and give, unquestioned and indisputably,
To airy nothing
A local habitation and a name, —
has complained of the “ throwing about of brains” even in his
time, and instances “ philosophy” as the only means of finding
out the something referred to, as above and beyond any other


human means. And this is the touchstone of true Criticism.
Let the Critic—whose acumen we might otherwise doubt—only
apply this principle faithfully, and anyone entitled to the distinction
of excellence, comparative or superlative, will assuredly receive
it. “ Truth is immortal, and will live—error is mortal, and will
die,” is an aphorism as applicable to the Critic of Art as it is to
Art itself, or its illustrators. The soul of the ideal is the beautiful
—the soul of the beautiful is the true! and if this be kept in
view by both Author and Critic—truth being the idol of the one,
and honesty the primary attribute of the other, the position of
neither will be jeopardised, while the benefit will be mutual if not
universal.
The Critic sometimes forgets in course of review that the matter
of which he attempts analysis is also placed before the public—
the same ultimate tribunal before which he arraigns himself—and
where he stands in as much danger of adverse opinion as the
author whose work he has pronounced upon favourably or other-
wise ; and the first qualification of a Critic must be ability to
reason out the matter before him, — or, as our own late, lamented
Deniehy has put it, to view it “ as any man of intelligence and
sensibility regards a fine picture— till it co7nes out on him , and he
has grasped it” ; and it is also essential that he should check the
wild romantic fancies of an overstrained imagination, as being
pernicious in effect, and beyond the purpose of true Art. The
capacity to do this, especially in reference to literature, is not
nearly so general as is pretension to it. Art in writing—poetry,
for instance (esteemed the deepest form of literature—the written
out and musical worship of the beautiful—the “ link connecting
the Divine in literature with the Diviner and the Divinest which
are found in Christianity”) A ' —has its rules arbitrary and coercive,
apart from the requirements of the sense; and skill is requisite
in the critic to detect infringement of those rules, or subversion
of the sense by too close observation, or a perversion of them.
Pope tells us that
The sound must seem an echo to the sense ;
* See Rev. George Gilfillan’s Introduction to “ Pasquin’s Age of Lead."


yet how many there are who, in admiration of the one, entirely
lose sight of the other. A truth is no more nor less a truth in
verse than it is in prose—both being but the “ dress of thought”
in expression ; but who will gainsay the additional beauty of the
former, or doubt its greater difficulty of construction, with or
without sound? Notwithstanding these admissions, however; in
face, too, of the acknowledged almost universal ignorance of its
laws and requirements, and disability to sound all its depths and
shoals on the part of those who sit in judgment upon it—to say
nothing of exterior warping influences, personal jealousies, and
the thousand-and-one other agents commissioned to applaud to
the echo which applauds again, or consign to depths Lethean
and eternal, —notwithstanding all these, there is no qualification
more universally claimed nor more generally exercised than is that
of absolute and unimpeachable ability to criticise this branch of
literature ; nor is there a section of Art—for Criticism is a high
Art—in which there are as many pretenders and so few experts.
Poetry, it may be observed—and here I desire to drawn attention
to the difference, often undistinguished, between poetry proper
and the mere jingle of rhyme honoured by the sublimer title—is
almost invariably made the target for the shafts of censure, and
the tirade misnamed Criticism the foundation on which the edifice
of unmerited distinction shall be raised, or the petard by which an
honorable and well-earned reputation shall be fragmented,—the
operator in either case, perhaps, being a creature passionate
without passion or the perception or admiration of it, —classed in
the rank and file as a reasoning being, but without the power of
reasoning; having nothing, in brief, but the will to do harm, and
the opportunity of effecting his purpose.
The able and honest Critic is the true conservator of Art. He
it is who preserves its landmarks and limits ; hedges it around
with an impregnable barrier, and protects it from the inroads of
those who would sacrifice it on unworthy altars, or make it the
medium of still more unworthy purposes. The Critic it is who
should guard the fold of Art, lest, in the garb of its peaceful
and loving inmates, the wolf enter to destroy them or to “ steal
away their brains,” or anyone, not a Levite in the Temple,


obtain a place therein ; and, beyond these, it is the Critic who,
after reasoning upon and finding out the “heart of the mystery”
set before him for discovery, should give to the world the honest
result of his research, with an analytical description of what he
has found, not only in justice to himself and him whose work he
pronounces upon, but for the enlightenment of those who —
though seldom slow to receive the revelation with appreciative
thankfulness —are, nevertheless, too apathetic, too superficial in
their search, or quite unable to discover it for themselves.
Assertion never was, nor never will be, proof—though it is too
often allowed to pass for it; and the reviewer who rests merely
upon a “ Sir Oracle” assertion, and fails to reason out the matter
entrusted to him, is unworthy of his office, and will assuredly not
succeed in securing the respect of either the author or the reader,
if he does not live long enough to lose respect for himself. I
scarcely know which is the more dangerous {since the effect
varies with the organization of those to whom the practice is
applied): injudicious praise or undeserved censure. In my
experience, in colonial literature only, I have known the former to
entirely destroy those who, with care and honest censure or
direction, might have achieved excellence, but who, in conse-
quence of fulsome and unmerited encomium, and the credit of
virtues not possessed, have been wrecked on the reefs of vanity
and self-conceit; while, on the other hand, I know an instance
where a contemptuous sneer, rather than an adverse review,
operated less as a deterrent (the effect contemplated) than as an
incentive to further if not better exertion. Either extreme, how-
ever, is dangerous to the object, and unquestionably degrading to
the author of it.
The exercise of Philosophy in Criticism is the only safeguard
for either Author or Critic—but the philosophy must appear, or
neither author nor reader will be content. The wisest judgment
sometimes errs—a human weakness; but, as Sir Toby Belch says,
in Twelfth Night , “ Give me your reason, most excellent knight!”
Find a fault, friend Critic, and you may; but be generous in your
justice, and accompany it with your reason—we will then argue
the matter out with you, if it be worth an argument, in perfect


good-fellowship if we perceive not the picture as you indicate it;
or we’ll confess if you have shown it to us aright. Divest yourself
of every personal feeling, and disassociate the author from his
thoughts and his expression of them. Note if the discovered
fault be one of judgment or a design of the will; and charge not
errors of the head to the account of the heart. Combine, if you
possibly can, in the exercise of your high functions, the qualities
of judge and friend. Pope asks :
But where’s the man who counsel can bestow,
Still pleased to teach, and yet too proud to know ?
Unbiassed or by favour or by spite ;
Not dully prepossessed, nor blindly right;
Though learned, well bred ; and, though well bred, sincere ;
Modestly bold and humanly severe ;
Who, to a friend his faults can freely show, —
And gladly praise tbe merits of a foe ?
If unknown to our finished English Poet, whose lines I have
quoted, doubtless such critics have been and still are ; and I have
little hesitation in expressing a belief in the present existence of
men who have not only written criticisms specially flavoured to
the taste of their friends and embittered to disgust the palates
of their foes, and have been suborned to praise or damn with
equal disregard to honesty and truth—but who have gone even to
the length of writing their own reviews, sustaining a reputation
thereon till they came within the ken of those who, discerning
the cheat, threw a light into the dark places ; while it is quite
notorious that the auri sacra fames has influenced judgments, and
its gratification or otherwise decided their tendency—and this not
alone in connection with literature. If such yet exist, let us hope
for their speedy extirmination. Believing in a millennium of
truth and honesty in Criticism,-we will await its coming hopefully,
even though we should doubt its present existence.
Though previously unnoticed, it may not be out of place to
mention moral courage as an essential possession by the Critic
to enable him fearlessly to enunciate what his experience and
opportunities put him in the position of doing. If his premises
are properly taken, the exhibition of the quality named will be


his protection from the charge of improper influences,—as, if
false, it will cause his overthrow; inasmuch as it will, in the last-
mentioned case, bear the appearance of pertinacity—which, in a
bad cause, will assuredly invite hostility of a literary if not of a
personal character.
T° the Author halting in suspense for the pronunciation of
the verdict which is to make or mar him ; and to him suffering
from unmerited chastisement, or inflated by the brerth of praise
undeserved, I would use the words of a poet whose name has
escaped my memory—
Truth crushed to earth will rise again :
The eternal years of God’s are hers !
But error, wounded writhes in pain,
And dies amid its worshippers !
And to the Critic—again in the language of Pope, in his second
Essay on Criticism—
A perfect judge will read each work of wit
With the same spirit that the author writ:
Survey the whole, nor seek slight faults to find
Where Nature moves, and rapture warms the mind.
The limited space at my disposal prevents further discussion
on Criticism in reference to Art in general; and I rest here in the
hope that sufficient has been advanced to establish the principle
that no system of Criticism can be perfect or reliable if there is
an absence of Philosophy.
Gibbs, Shallard, & Co., General Printers and Lithographers, 108 Pitt Street.








