

PUNISHMENT
FOR
WAR CRIMES
A Document issued by The Inter-Allied Information Committee
London
THE INTER-ALLIED DECLARATION
SIGNED AT ST. JAMES’S PALACE
LONDON
ON 13th JANUARY, 1942
AND RELATIVE DOCUMENTS


Les soussignes,
reoresentant le Gouvernement beige, le Comite national francais, le
Gouvemement hellenique, le Gouvernement luxembourgeois, le
Gouvernement norvegien, le Gouvemement des Pays-Bas, le Gouverne-
ment polonais, le Gouvemement tchecoslovaque et le Gouvernement
yougoslave,
Constatant que l’Allemagne, des le debut du present conflit ouvert
par sa politique degression, a instaure dans les pays occupes un regime
de terreur, caracterise notamment par des emprisonnements, des
expulsions en masse, des executions d’otages et des massacres,
que ces violences sont egalement pratiquees par les allies et
associes du Reich et, dans certains pays, par des complices de l’occupant,_
qu’une solidarite internationale est necessaire pour eviter que
la repression de ces violences ne s’exerce par la simple vindicte publique,
et pour repondre au sentiment de justice du monde civilise,
rappelant que le droit des gens, et notamment la Convention
signee a La Haye en 1907 sur les lois et coutumes de la guerre sur
terre, ne permet aux belligerents, dans les pays occupes, ni les violences
centre les civils, ni le mepris des lois en vigueur, ni le renversement
des institutions national.es,
(1) affirment que les violences ainsi exercees contre les popu-
lations sjviles n'ont rien de commun ni avec la notion de
l’acte de guerre, ni avec celle du crime politique, telles que
les con?oivent les nations civilisees,
(2) prennent acte des declarations faites a cet egard le 25 octobre
1941 par M. le President des Etats-Unis d’Amerique et
par M. le Premier Ministre Britannique,
(3) placent parmi les buts principaux de guerre le chatiment
par les voies d’une justice organisee, des coupables ou
responsables de ces crimes,—qu’ils ies aient ordonnes,
perpetres, ou qu’ils y aient participes,
(4) decident de veiller dans un esprit de solidarite internationale
a ce que (a) les coupables et responsables, a quelque
nationalite qu’ils appartiennent, soient recherches, livres
a la justice et juges, (6) les sentences prononcees soient
executees.
En foi de quoi, les soussignes dument autorises a cet effet ont
signe la pr&ente Declaration.
Fait en neuf exemplaires , a Londres, le treize janvier, mil neuf cent
quarante deux.
THE DECLARATION SIGNED BY THE REPRESENTATIVES
OF NINE OCCUPIED COUNTRIES


INTRODUCTORY NOTE
The recent crimes committed by the Axis against the civilian populations
of Occupied countries on the European continent have made it desirable to
remind the world of the proceedings of the Conference at St. James’s Palace
on January 13th last, on the subject of the punishment for war crimes. The
following pages contain the text of a Joint Declaration by Belgium, Czecho-
slovakia, Free France, Greece, Holland, Luxembourg, Norway, Poland and
Yugoslavia, on the punishment for war crimes; the welcoming speech of Mr.
Anthony Eden; and the utterances of the statesmen representing the above
allied countries under enemy Occupation, made before signing the said Declara-
tion on January 13th, 1942, at St. James’s Palace, London.
Evidence which reached the Allied Governments leaves no doubt that in
attempting to establish a totalitarian order in Europe, the occupiers have set
aside the restraining influence of the laws of war and the laws of Nations and
committed crimes intended to cripple the vital force of the nations they have
temporarily subjugated. Against so much illegality and inhumanity the Allied
Governments deemed it their duty to issue a stern warning, while wishing to
adhere, in spite of the Nazi example, to what President Roosevelt called “the
basic principle long adopted by civilised peoples that no man should be punished
for the deed of another. ’ ’
In resolving that war crimes should not be left unpunished* they echoed the
statements made already by the President of the U.S.A. and by the British
Prime Minister, on October 25, 1941. “Frightfulness,”' said President Roose-
velt, 4 4 only sows the seeds of hatred which will one day bring a fearful retribu-
tion.” And Mr. Winston Churchill concluded: “Retribution for these crimes
must henceforward take its place among the major purposes of the war.”
London, July, 1942.
THE DECLARATION
The undersigned
representing the Government of Belgium, the Government of Czechoslovakia,
the Free French National Committee, the Government of Greece, the Govern-
ment of Luxembourg, the Government of the Netherlands, the Government of
Norway, the Government of Poland and the Government of Yugoslavia:
“Whereas Germany, since the beginning of the present conflict which
arose out of her policy of aggression, has instituted in the Occupied countries a
regime of terror characterised amongst other things by imprisonments, mass
expulsions, the execution of hostages and massacres,
And whereas these acts of violence are being similarly committed by the
Allies and Associates of the Reich and, in certain countries, by the accomplices
of the occupying Power,
And whereas international solidarity is necessary in order to avoid the
repression of these acts of violence simply by acts of vengeance on the part of
the general public, and in order to satisfy the sense of justice of the civilised
world,
Recalling that international law, and in particular the Convention signed
at The Hague in 1907 regarding the laws and customs of land warfare, do not
permit belligerents in Occupied countries to commit acts of violence against
•civilians, to disregard the laws in force, or to overthrow national institutions,


(1) affirm that acts of violence thus inflicted upon the civilian populations
have nothing in common with the conceptions of an act of war or of
a political crime as understood by civilised nations,
(2) take note of the declarations made in this respect on 25th October, 1941,
by the President of the United States of America and by the British
Prime Minister,
(3) place among their principal war aims the punishment, through the
channel of organised justice, of those guilty of or responsible for
these crimes, whether they have ordered them, perpetrated them or
participated in them,
(4) resolve to see to it in a spirit of international solidarity that (a) those
guilty or responsible, whatever their nationality, are sought out, handed
over to justice and judged, ( b ) that the sentences pronounced are
carried out.
In faith whereof the undersigned duly authorised to this effect have signed
the present Declaration. ’ ’
Done in London, in nine copies, January 13, 1942.
THE SIGNATORIES TO THE DECLARATION
The Inter-Allied Conference met on January 13th, 1942, at St. James’s
Palace, which had been placed at its disposal for that purpose by the British
Government. The following representatives of the Allied Governments took
part in the Conference:
BELGIUM .. .. M. Hubert Pierlot, Prime Minister and Minister of Education
M. Paul Henri Spaak, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister
of Labour and Social Welfare
CZECHOSLOVAKIA .. Mgr. Jan Sramek, Prime Minister
M. Hubert Ripka, Minister of State
FREE FRANCE .. General Charles de Gaulle, President of the Free* French
Committee
M. Maurice Dejean, National Commissioner for Foreign Affairs
GREECE .. .. M. Emmanuel Tsouderos, Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs
M. S. Dimitrakakis, Minister of Justice
LUXEMBOURG .. M. Joseph Bech, Minister of State and Minister for Foreign
Affairs
M. Victor Bodson, Minister of Justice
THE NETHERLANDS Prof. P. S. Gerbrandy, Prime Minister
Jhr. E. F. M. J. Michiels van Verduynen, Minister without Port-
folio and Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs
NORWAY .. .. M. Trygve Lie, Minister for Foreign Affairs
M. Terje Wold, Minister of Justice
POLAND .. .. General Wladyslaw Sikorski, Prime Minister
Count Edward Raczynski, Minister for Foreign Affairs {Acting)
YUGOSLAVIA .. .. M. Slobodan Yovanovitch, Prime Minister, Minister of the
Interior and Deputy Minister of the Army, Navy and Air Force
M.' Momtchilo Nintchitch, Minister for Foreign Affairs
* On July 14th, the day of celebration of the fall of the Bastille, the title “The Free
French” was officially changed to that of “The Fighting French.”


GUESTS AT THE CONFERENCE TABLE.
GREAT BRITAIN* .. slr. Anthony Eden, H.M. Principal Secretary of State Tor
Foreign Affairs
AUSTRALIA .. .. Mr. Bruce, High Commissioner
CANADA .. .. Mr. Massey, High Commissioner
INDIA Duke of Devonshire, Representative of India
NEW ZEALAND .. ‘Mr. Jordan, High Commissioner
UNION OF SOUTH Mr. Waterson, High Commissioner
AFRICA
THE UNITED STATES Mr. Anthony J. Drexel Biddle, Jnr., American Ambassador to
OF AMERICA* Poland, Belgium, the Netherlands and Norway, and American
Minister to Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia and Greece
THE U.S.S.R.* .. .. M. Alexander Bogomolov, Ambassador of the Soviet Union
to Poland, Minister to Czechoslovakia, Norway, Greece and
Yugoslavia
CHINA* . . .. .. Mr. Wunsz King, Chinese Minister to the Netherlands, Charge
d'Affaires to the Governments of Belgium and Czechoslovakia.
* Page 15 for the text of the statements made by President Roosevelt and Mr. Winston
Churchill for reference to The Molotov Notes on German Atrocities, and for the text of a
letter from Mr. Wunsz King.
SPEECHES BY THE DELEGATES AND GUESTS†
The Rt. Hon. Anthony Eden,
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.
We have had a number of Inter-Allied meetings at St. James’s Palace in
recent months. This, however, is the first which has been convened on the
initiative of the Allied Governments now established in this country. Its
purpose is to make plain the attitude of these Governments to the cruel and
tragic events now taking place in their countries.
Our chairman, the representative of Poland, has been so kind as to ask me
to speak to you before the formal business of the meeting. I myself—and I
am sure that I am also speaking for the representatives of the Dominions who
are present to-day—am very glad to have been able to accept the invitation of
the Allied Governments to be present as an observer, and I wish to thank them
for their courtesy in delaying this meeting until after my return from Moscow.
His Majesty’s Government are glad that the Allied Governments should
have wished to hold this meeting at St. James’s Palace. This historic building
has become in a very real sense a centre for the resistance of the oppressed
nations of Europe to German aggression. Never has it had a more inspiring
role to play.
To-day’s meeting will once more show the world that the German so-called
“New Order’’ in Europe is a sham. This false facade has completely failed to
conceal the tyranny that lies behind it, the oppression and the brutalities which
have everywhere marked the entry of German troops and of the Gestapo into
the Occupied Countries of Europe.
To-day’s meeting is also a message of encouragement sent out to the op-
pressed populations of Europe. Their tenacity and courage are contributing
to our ultimate victory.
t Some of the speeches were delivered in the French language ; for convenience they are
reproduced in English.


How different is the atmosphere to-day, how different was the atmosphere of
the recent conversations at Washington and Moscow from that of the meeting
at Berlin a few weeks ago attended by the quislings of Europe and by the
satellites of the Third Reich !
The quislings have little reason to look to the future with any hope. But we
are meeting at a moment when, despite all present sufferings and anxieties, the
peoples for whom you speak can look forward to the future with growing
confidence.
It is fitting that this meeting should be called by those most directly con-
cerned, the Governments of the occupied territories. It is fitting that they
should take the initiative in declaring the principles by which they will be
guided on their return to their liberated countries.
All the nations represented round this table have suffered in different degrees
from ruthless aggressors. Their united strength, now at last being harnessed
to the common cause, will ensure its victory and the establishment and main-
tenance of a just and lasting peace.
Chairman, General Wladyslaw Sikorski,
Prime Minister of Poland, Chairman of the Conference.
Your Excellencies, Gentlemen,
In the first place, allow me to thank the Belgian Government, the French
National Committee, and the Governments of Greece, Luxembourg, Norway,
the Netherlands, Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia for the honour they have
paid to my country and myself in electing me as Cliairman of this meeting for
the signing of our common Declaration relating to war crimes.
Allow me also, in the names of the representatives of all the Governments
signing the Declaration, to express our deep gratitude to the British Govern-
ment, and in particular to Mr. Anthony Eden for their kindness in acting as
our hosts to-day in St. James’s Palace.
I would like also to express the warm thanks of us all to Mr. Drexel Biddle,
United States Ambassador, to M. Bogomolov, Ambassador of the U.S.S.R.,
and to M. Wunsz King, Chinese Minister; to Mr. Bruce, High Commissioner
of Australia, Mr. Massey, High Commissioner of Canada, Mr. Jordan, High
Commissioner of New Zealand, Mr. Waterson, High Commissioner of South
Africa and to the Duke of Devonshire, representative of India, for honouring
our meeting with their presence, and to their Governments for having thus
shown their sympathy for the fate of the countries where life goes on under the
yoke of the oppressor.
The full value of the Declaration which we are about to sign will not be
revealed until the day of final victory, when the hour of victory has actually
sounded, yet it has at this moment an essentially practical significance: on the
one hand it serves as a warning to all those who oppress or help to oppress our
civil populations by making them clearly understand that there can be no crime
without punishment; on the other it gives a gleam of hope and comfort to all
those millions of men and women who while still fulfilling their daily tasks in
their Occupied Fatherland, will henceforward know that punishment awaits the
enemy’s acts of violence, that there is no suffering without redress.
Thus in a solemn act of the interested Governments those principles of
justice are confirmed which were formulated on October 25, 1941, by the two
great leaders of the democratic group, President Roosevelt and Mr. Winston
Churchill.
The text of the Declaration which we are about to sign is as follows: —
{Here General Sikorski called upon the Secretary-General of the Conference
to read the Declaration which appears on p. 2 of this Statement.)


As can be seen, the Declaration resolutely turns International Law in a new
direction without, however, establishing all the details. It expresses the prin-
ciple of the united repression of acts which normally would be considered
crimes against common law if they had been committed in peace time, and
which will not rest unpunished on the pretext that they have been committed in
war time.
I will now ask the delegates of the signatory countries to state in the name of
their respective Governments their adherence to the Declaration and then to
sign, in turn, the Document which is in front of us.
M. Pierlot,
Prime Minister of Belgium.
The question of the punishment of war crimes was raised at the end of
the last war. It was never settled. It is the subject of a very solemn
declaration found among the articles of the Versailles Treaty, but has remained
a dead letter.
Thus, the horrors which marked the invasion of Belgium in 1914 remained
unpunished. In making this statement, lam thinking of the massacre of the
population of the peaceful village of Rossignol. Relentlessly tracked down,
torn from their homes, 150 of these wretched men and women were shot one
by one and heaped up into a common grave.
Four years later, after victory had been won, the man—if so he can be
called—who had ordered this massacre, General von Tessmar, was still living
in freedom in the Rhineland under the very eyes of the Army of Occupation.
The time of tentative actions, of weaknesses, of abdications had already begun.
We know where twenty years of this policy have led us. The lack of firmness
and cohesion shown by the conquerors not only allowed Germany to re-arm
until she became the strongest nation, it also helped to encourage, in actual
warfare, a repetition of those barbarous methods of which Germany had
shown herself guilty.
Is it surprising, then, that these questions should monopolise the attention
of nations who twice have fallen into German clutches? Certainly, as time
goes on, they are becoming more and more confident in the outcome of
the conflict, in spite of all the sacrifices which will be exacted by victory and,
anxious not to commit the same errors which would result in the same catas-
trophes, they are entering into a mutual agreement to apply just sanctions to
war crimes.
No matter how severe the necessities of war may be, civilised nations have,
nevertheless, recognised and proclaimed rules which every belligerent ought to
obey, and also every man, friend or foe, who would bear arms so as to win for
himself the title of soldier, and not that of bandit. I mean a respect for the life
of a combatant who surrenders unconditionally—for the lives and homes of
defenceless populations.
Moreover, people who violate these principles are responsible to common
law. In each one of the countries represented here, the perpetrator of such
crimes is liable for punishment, whatever his standing or nationality. It is
difficult to see why the fact that he belongs to an enemy country should render
him immune from punishment.
Let us never again forget this: the finest principles, the most firmly established
laws and moral codes, run every risk of being ignored unless sanctions are
applied. Since time immemorial, man’s conscience has disapproved of killing
and stealing, and yet, in all the countries which to-day we call civilised, high
roads only became safe when the authority of their ruler became strong enough


to seize, in the act, the perpetrators of acts of brigandage, and to have them well
and truly hanged.
Exemplary punishment to fit the greatness of the crime is a satisfaction
urgently demanded by the conscience of the oppressed peoples, by their need
for justice as well as their desire for security. The effectiveness of the warning
which we are giving to-day will be all the greater since the premonitory signs of
the enemy’s defeat will hasten the hour of final reckoning.
Twice a victim of German barbarity, Belgium is more acutely aware than
most nations of the necessity of this decision that we are about to take. lam
sure my words will meet with the approval of all my fellow-countrymen when I
say that for my country this does not merely mean arf empty demonstration but
rather an obligation which we have incurred with other nations, a steadfast
resolution which will be carried into execution as soon as might is once mofe
in the service of right.
M. Jan Šrámek,
Prime Minister of Czechoslovakia.
The Government of the Czechoslovak Republic heartily supports this declara-
tion in the firm conviction that its signature is endorsed by the whole Czecho-
slovak nation.
In the list of German atrocities there is not one which has not been com-
mitted against the Czechoslovak people. Hundreds of Czechoslovak citizens
have been executed or tortured to death; tens of thousands have been thrown
into prison or into concentration camps; hundreds of thousands have been
made to do forced labour; the population of whole districts have been expelled
to make room for German intruders; universities have been shut; secondary
schools are being suppressed by the dozen; schoolmasters and priests are being
persecuted; the patrimony of Czechoslovakia is being arbitrarily transferred to
the Germans; the Czechoslovak people are being barred from all leading
positions, systematically impoverished intellectually, oppressed and morally
humiliated. .
All these crimes committed by the Germans call for, and will in the future
call for, retribution. Justice will be asked for by thousands of Czechoslovak
citizens who have been morally and physically broken in prisons and concen-
tration camps; it wilj be demanded by the children of innocent citizens executed
or tortured to death; it will be exacted by the whole nation, which has been
reduced to material and moral misery.
The Czechoslovak Government has not failed to denounce to the civilised
world on several occasions the terror let loose by the German invader in the
Czechoslovak homeland. * Nor has it failed to demand clearly and firmly due
punishment for all the German crimes committed in Czechoslovakia. It is
happy to know that its voice will be heard more especially to-day on the
occasion of the solemn declaration made by the nine European countries which
are occupied by Germany.
The crimes committed by Germany and her satellites have no counterpart in
the history of the world. It is not a question of mere occasional crimes due
to the existence of a state of war and the consequent deterioration of normal
behaviour which are the deplorable consequences of every war. On the contrary,
what is in question is a criminal campaign well thought out and prepared in
advance down to the smallest detail, and springing from the spirit of pan-
Germanism and Nazi ideology. The German people have been prepared for
this campaign during many decades. The belief in the superiority of the
German race to whom everything is permissible vis-a-vis the other nations; the


vain spirit of domination and expansion demanding for Germany supremacy
over the whole world; the slogans “blood and soil” and “by blood and the
sword”—and that always means the blood of others, never German blood-
have been impressed upon the German nation by its leaders and have ended
by becoming the gospel of the German people. The result of all this is the
criminal campaign undertaken on an unlimited scale by Germany in the
Occupied Countries.
It is as a result of the perverted ideology of the German people that, when in
1938 Hitler began his conquest of the world, followed by the plundering of the
conquered countries and the massacre of their populations, the German leaders
had at their disposal a machine as sure and as brutal as the Gestapo and other
organs of the German arbitrary rule.
Between the German leaders and their executive organs there exists a hier-
archy of grades, but one can scarcely speak of a difference in ideology and bad
faith. That is. why the Declaration rightly stipulates that all those guilty of or
responsible for the crimes committed in Occupied Countries shall be punished,
whether they have ordered them, perpetrated them or participated in them.
The Czechoslovak Government takes special note of the fact that this
Declaration brings out the need for international solidarity so that none of the
German crimes escapes punishment. In addition, the Declaration clearly lays
down that the crimes committed by Germany against the civilian populations
cannot be classified either as acts of war or political crimes. The Czechoslovak
Government earnestly hopes that this conception of law will become an
integral part of the ideology of the whole civilised world and will make it
possible—after the war—to search for every culprit, to deliver him to justice,
to judge him and to carry out the sentence passed.
In the firm hope that justice will triumph I append my signature.
General Charles De Gaulle,
President of the Free French National Committee.
The French National Committee approves all the more the Joint Declaration
read to us by General Sikorski, since France has been invaded by Germany
three times within a period of seventy years, and'has therefore suffered thrice in
less than a century the atrocities inevitably accompanying all German Occu-
pation. ■ ■ •'
But, as the strength of the Reich grew, the extent and violence of these atroci-
ties increased. To-day our enemies, by placing all their technique and all their
skill at the service of their ferocity, have succeeded in establishing in Europe a
more frightful regime of terror than that installed by the Barbarian hordes at
the beginning of the Middle Ages.
In signing this Joint Declaration to-day, we mean, like all the representatives
of Occupied Countries, to declare solemnly that Germany alone is responsible
for the outbreak of this war and that she shares with her allies and accomplices
responsibility for all the atrocities that proceed from it. We demonstrate our
firm intention to see to it that all the guilty parties and men who are responsible
in any should not be allowed to evade just punishment as did those of the
other war.
But if it is legitimate and necessary to ensure full punishment for crimes com-
mitted, it is quite as legitimate and necessary to take the essential measures so
that a renewal of such crimes should be made impossible. We are certain
that the solidarity which unites martyrised -Europe to-day will continue to
manifest itself to-morrow, when our task will consist in ensuring that Germany
will never again be in a position to harm the world.


M. Emmanuel Tsouderos,
Prime Minister of Greece.
At the beginning of October, shortly after my arrival in London, I received an
official report giving a most harrowing account of the crude and horrible
crimes committed by the Germans in Crete. ,
Yielding to' the impulse of natural indignation which came over me, 1 wrote
at once to Mr. Churchill to say that the perpetration of such foul crimes should
not remain unpunished. My action was favourably received by the British
Government, and press. ..
During the last war manifestations of collective barbarism on a large scale
began to make their appearance among certain peoples of the European Con-
tinent. The idea that whole nations can be exterminated or uprooted seems to
have been revived in our time with extreme violence. This .conception is
purely , a German one, and the Balkans witnessed its application during the last
war, in Greek and Serbian Macedonia, by those faithful satellites and imitators
of the Germans—the Bulgars. The sanguinary methods then applied are being
repeated to-day on an even wider scale. ,
Crete has been devastated from end to end, and more than a thousand.
Cretans have been executed, against every principle of right, law or justice.
Many villages have been deliberately burnt and razed to the ground, since the
island was conquered by the enemy. .
In Macedonia the situation is equally grim, and in the rich provinces occupied
by the Bulgars it is even more tragic. Flourishing towns have been destroyed
by the Bulgarian Forces; their peaceful inhabitants have been massacred in cold
blood by the mechanised detachments of these savages. Many thousands ol
innocent victims have been done to death and more than 100,000 have been
driven from their homes and forced to seek refuge in Southern Greece, where
famine is already rampant. ,
In a memorandum which I have the honour to lay before this Conference, and
which will be distributed to the participating Governments, I have tried to
retrace the methods of extermination practised in cold blood by the Germans,
Italians, and Bulgars, with the object of bringing about, with famine as their
grim ally, the destruction of the Greek population in order that Italians and
Bulgars may establish themselves permanently in Greece.
It is our duty to put an end to this state of affairs, and the means advocated
by our present Declaration should surely be attempted. u . ,
Certainly the rise of the totalitarian systems, the re-shuffling of values, which
they have created, their deification of violence and of war, are at the root ol
present calamities and constitute phenomena whose outstanding characteristic
is that they are collective. For this .reason the only effective remedy tor the
evil must be collective also. . . , ,
The responsible peoples must be forced as far as possible to repair the damage
which they have done, and the means must be taken from them which would
enable them once more to perpetrate those crimes which the Germans have
already committed on two occasions, and the Bulgars on three within the last
quarter of a century. . . f _
These seem to me to be the most effective measures for preventing a luture
recrudescence of the horrors to which thousands of innocent victims are being
It is true that collective madness and passion are powerful incentives indeed,
but they do not entirely eliminate in each individual the very real instinct ol
self-preservation; this instinct can be exploited. Henceforth butchers, gaolers,
and looters of every kind, will no longer be allowed individually to elude their
responsibilities on the specious pretext that they are acting under orders Irom
above. A new principle of International Penal Law has come into being. It
will doubtless serve to forestall some further misdeeds. Moreover—lor one


should never cease to have faith in human nature—it is possible that by this
means among the least corrupt an awakening of the individual conscience which
appears to-day to be so profoundly drugged, may perhaps be provoked. If
this happens the most redoubtable menace to the gregarious instinct of the
totalitarian peoples will have at last become operative. It is with this hope that
I have affixed the signature of Greece to this common Declaration.
M. Joseph Bech,
Minister of State, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg.
Never in the course of history has a reign of terror been prepared and organised
with more cynicism and applied with more brutality than that which the Axis
Powers are inflicting on the unhappy populations of our countries.
My country, like yours, is suffering terribly under the yoke of the implacable
enemy. Luxembourg has been, de facto, incorporated in the Third Reich.
Its institutions and constitutional liberties have been abolished and the Gestapo,
assisted by a few traitors, reigns there as master. The racial laws have been
introduced, and also the abominable National-Socialist conception of collective
crime. Our monks, our priests, our Jews, our officials, our intellectuals and
our workers have been expelled or deported individually and in groups. Hos-
tages have been seized and the prisons are filled with Luxembourg patriots.
Hundreds of others have been deported to concentration camps in Germany, or
condemned to forced labour in the stone quarries and on the roads. Our
young men and our young girls have been deported to labour camps where they
are exposed to the worst dangers.
Loyalty to one’s country is considered by those who are for the time being
the masters as treachery, and any who offer resistance to the usurper are
punished as criminals.
You can understand, therefore, what unnamed sufferings are endured by a
small faithful nation which is resisting with a unanimity which is practically
universal. Together with your martyred populations— to whom I give heartfelt
homage; some of them are suffering incomparably, more than ours—together
with yours, my country cries out for justice!
President Roosevelt and Mr. Winston Churchill, in their rightful condemna-
tion of such acts, have made themselves the interpreters of the conscience of
outraged humanity. Since then the world has learnt with horror the revelation
of the systematic massacre of the civil population of Russia.
The application of the principles laid down in the Declaration submitted for
our signatures, will prevent the war criminals from evading their just punish-
ment.
It is useless for the oppressor to try hypocritically to cover his misdeeds with
false legal justifications, for this is only another barbarous development of his
philosophic and political conceptions.
It will be useless when the day of victory comes for the torturers of our
peoples to claim that they only did what they were ordered to do and acted
according to their laws. These laws and the application of them are now
stigmatised by the Declaration of the governments of the Occupied Countries
as being contrary to law, the moral law as well as national and international
law.
The guilty will be liable to the laws of the countries in which their crimes have
been committed. If need be, our national legislative systems must be adapted
to the aims laid down in our common Declaration and, if necessary, the re-
pression of such crimes must be organised on an international basis.
The solemn Declaration we are now making is a proof of the united front
formed by the nations which have been victims of aggression by the Axis


Powers. To war criminals and traitors it will bring the certainty and the fear
that they will be sought out and brought to justice.
Our populations, together with the whole civilised world, will find in this
Declaration the comfort that is given to the conscience of mankind by the
assurance that justice will be done, sternly but calmly.
Jhr. E. F. M. J. Michiels van Verduynen,
Minister without Portfolio and Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Netherlands.
It was natural that in the presence of the rule of terror imposed by Germany
and her accomplices on the civil populations of the Occupied Countries, the
Governments interested should take concerted action to reach a common
attitude towards the culprits.
The understanding between our governments has been rapidly realised, ana
to-day we meet in this historic room, put at our disposal by our English allies,
to proceed with the solemn signing of the Declaration we have established.
In this Declaration we denounce to the world the brutality of the enemy, and
we undertake to assure the punishment of the guilty. .
It constitutes an act of faith for the future, and a promise. On one hand it
marks our unflinching faith in victory, and on the other it expresses our firm
will to see that-justice is done. It binds us to a wide collaboration and co-
operation. This understanding inaugurates a new era in the domain ot
repression of the crimes which we have just denounced. In. pursuing this aim*,
we are performing a sacred duty towards our oppressed peoples.
Gentlemen, it is not sufficient to wish for justice, it must also be organised.
We have begun this task by laying the foundations of a system which will be
put at the service of law as soon as circumstances allow. And this collaboration
which we have so happily inaugurated will not stop at the repression of the
crimes of our enemies, but will extend throughout all spheres of human activity
for the well-being of mankind in a world delivered from anguish and slavery.
And it is in this spirit that the Netherlands Government is glad to co-operate by
appending its signature to this Declaration, to the applicatiqn of which we will
give our full support.
M. Terje Wold,
Norwegian Minister of Justice.
The Norwegian Government wish to express their agreement with the general
Declaration made by the Allied Powers. -it i
For almost a thousand years Norway has been a community where laws rule.
In one of our oldest law books, which was compiled about 900 years ago, it
was laid down that the country must be governed by law and not spoilt by
lawlessness, and since that time our people have enjoyed personal security and
legal protection. This principle has penetrated very deeply in the minds ot our
people, so deeply that it could even be considered as the real basis on which
our community is founded.
It is, therefore, all the more a crime that the Germans have attempted to
devastate our whole community and to enforce upon us their system of lawless-
ness, violence and cruelty, and the crimes committed by them and the arbitrary
and brutal way in which the population is now treated must not go unpunished.
However, in spite of their ruthlessness the Nazis have not succeeded in
subduing the Norwegian people, whose resistance against oppression is stiffer


than ever before. The occupants have sensed the icy contempt in which our
whole population holds them and they are now revenging themselves by whole-
sale murder, ill-treatment and terrorism. This further manifestation of German
brutality has been received by our people with dignity and even icier contempt
and has merely served to conceive in them a growing hatred and a demand for
tne punishment of all these crimes and atrocities.
All the messages we receive indicate that although, thanks to German-ex-
p oitation, the people of Norway are living on the verge of starvation this
winter, what they long for above all is the restoration of their liberty and the
rightful punishment of the criminal intruders.
I believe that, in the future, it will be quite impossible to maintain communi-
ties based on freedom and respect for the law if the Nazi criminals do not meet
their doom and receive the punishment they deserve.
Jhe Norwegian Government welcome this Declaration as an expression of
solidarity between all Occupied Countries, and we find it an important and
necessary measure in the defence of our future civilisation. We are willing to
do our very utmost to co-operate with all the other Allies to ensure that these
Nazi criminals—for they are nothing but criminals—shall find retribution
whenever and wherever they may be apprehended.
Count E. Raczynski,
Ambassador of Poland to the Court of St. James and Acting Foreign Minister.
Poland, like Belgium in 1914, was the first in this war to submit to the onslaught
ot the German war machine. The Reich violated Polish soil on the Ist Sep-
tember, 1939 and its invading armies marched upon Warsaw, which was sub-
jected to a terrible fate. And twenty months later, when it was Russia’s turn
to be attacked, Germany transformed the rest of the Republic into a theatre of
war. Because she resisted the German power by force of arms, Poland was
immediately submitted to a regime of Occupation the barbarity of which is
unheard-of, a regime which has for its aim the destruction of all the nation’s
vital torces—-its culture, traditions and economic achievements. The whole
civilian population is a victim to this desire of the Reich, as is also every indi-
vidual who lives deprived of his rights and cannot even be sure of his life his
honour or his property.
More than 80,000 citizens have been shot; tens of thousands, including
representatives of intellectual circles, have died in concentration camps; hun-
dreds of thousands have died of starvation or of misery inflicted by the aggressor.
ccordmg to statistics, mortality has risen four to five times since before the
J var - Hundreds of thousands of citizens haye been sent to the Reich for
torced labour And in addition, there are nearly two millions of deportees
deprived of all their property. Millions are still awaiting the fate to be meted
out to them by the occupant. The schools are closed. The churches are
dishonoured, the clergy are hunted down. The museums, libraries, all that
stands tor national culture, have been pillaged to benefit a greater Germany.
And m the Gouvernement-General the executioner Doctor Frank surpasses
Cmwention succeec^n £ i* l violating the provisions of the Hague
From amongst the innumerable acts perpetrated by Germany, legislative or
administrative, which fill civilised men with horror and amazement, I will quote
only one, that of Quarter-Master Muller, issued by order of the Generalissimo
von Brauchitsch on October 1, 1939. This decree extends to conquered Polish
provinces the German penal code and authorises German tribunals to judge
Poles for deeds committed before the outbreak of war. ” The order, further-
more, states that the penalties foreseen in this code may be applied also to


persons under age, provided the German judges are satisfied that the maturity
of these youngsters is sufficiently advanced. However shocking such a juridical
construction may be, it nevertheless cynically serves the interests of the
German nation”; it facilitates the extermination of the youth of another race.
But all these wrongs, inflicted on a nation which, united and resolute, was
the first to seize arms for the defence of its country and of Europe, must, when
the time comes, be made good by Germany. The wrongs committed against
the civilian population will be treated as offences against the common law, with
all the law’s severity. The final victory of the Allies will find its measure in
the reparation of the wrongs inflicted, and the punishment of the offences
committed, individually or collectively. . ,
In this spirit the Polish Government accedes to the present Declaration.
M. Slobodan Yovanovitch,
Prime Minister of Yugoslavia.
The Royal Yugoslav Government attaches the utmost importance to the
Declaration which we have just signed in the presence of the eminent repre-
sentatives of the Allies. .
The crimes which the Germans, their satellites and the traitor-accomplices
have perpetrated against the unfortunate Yugoslav population have no pre-
cedent in the history of the civilised world.
Since the tragic morning of the 6th April, when Germany cunningly launched
the air attack against the unprotected inhabitants of the open city of Beograd,
the most terrible atrocities have been and continue to be committed against a
people which has not itself committed any crime except to refuse to accept a
new order contrary to its own ideals of national independence, democratic
liberty and international justice.
Hundreds of thousands of Yugoslavs have already fallen victims to the
invader and his accomplices. Some other hundreds of thousands have been
forced to abandon their homes, to leave room for the conquerors. Entire
localities have been destroyed and the inhabitants almost completely massacred
to punish innocent people for the resistance which the Yugoslav army is con-
tinuing to oppose to the aggressors.
Nothing can justify these atrocities. They will not be forgottea and the
culprits should be certain, from now on, that they will have to expiate all their
crimes, after the day of victory, of which the first glimmers can already be
perceived on the horizon darkened by so many sufferings.
In adhering, by this common Declaration, to the. declaration already made
by the President of the U.S.A. and the Prime Minister of Great Britain, we
place definitely among our. principal war aims the just punishment for these
crimes.
The Royal Yugoslav Government hopes that we shall not rest there and that
the solidarity shown to-day will serve to form a moral and juridical basis of a
really new order, wherein no possibility will be left for the repetition of such
returns to barbarism.


FOOTNOTES
1. The statesmen who met at St. James’
Palace developed the principles that had bee
previously proclaimed on October 25, 1941
by the President of the United States anc
the British Prime Minister.
The statement issued by President Roose
velt from the White House reads as. follows
‘‘The practice of executing scores o
innocent hostages in reprisal for isolatec
attacks on Germans in countries tern
porarily under the Nazi heel revolts a work
already inured to suffering and brutality.
“Civilised peoples lortg ago adopted the
basic principle that no man should be
punished for the deed of another. Un
able to apprehend the persons involved in
these attacks, the Nazis characteristically
slaughter 50 or 100 innocent persons.
“Those who would ‘collaborate’ with
Hitler or try to appease him cannot ignore
this ghastly warning. The Nazis might have
learned from the last war the impossibility
of breaking men’s spirit by terrorism
Instead they develop their Lebensraum anc
a “New Order” by depths of frightfulness
which even they have never approaches
before.
“These are acts of desperate men who
know in their hearts they cannot win.
Frightfulness can never bring peace to
Europe. It only sows seeds of hatred which
will one day bring a fearful retribution.”
The British Declaration, issued at the same
time by the Prime Minister, Mr. Winston S.
Churchill, from No. 10, Downing Street,
reads as follows:
“His Majesty’s Government associate
themselves fully with the sentiments of
horror and condemnation expressed by the
President of the United States upon the
Nazi butcheries in France. These cold-
blooded executions of innocent people will
only recoil upon the savages who order and
execute them.
“The butcheries in France are an example
of what Hitler’s Nazis are doing in many
other countries under their yoke. The
atrocities in Poland, in Yugoslavia, in
Norway, in Holland, in Belgium and above
all behind the German fronts in Russia,
surpass anything that has been known
since the darkest and most bestial ages of
mankind. They are but a foretaste of what
Hitler would inflict upon the British and
American peoples if only he could get the
power.
“Retribution for these crimes must hence-
forward take its place among the major
purposes of the war. ’ ’
2. In two circular Notes signed by M.
Molotov, dated November 27, 1941 and
January 6, 1942 respectively, the Soviet
Government laid emphasis upon “German
atrocities against Red Army prisoners” and
“Atrocities against the civilian population.’
In the latter Note, of January 6th, M. Moloto
insisted upon “the unprecedented picture o
universal robbery, devastation, abominabl
violence, outrages and massacres per
petrated by the German Fascist invader
against the peaceful population during thei
offensive, occupation and retreat.” Furthe
the Note states that “irrefutable facts prov
that the regime of plunder and bloody terro
against the non-combatant population o
occupied towns and villages constitutes no
merely the excesses of individual German
officers and soldiers, but a definite systen
previously planned and encouraged by the
German Government and the German High
Command, which deliberately foster the mos
brutal instincts among soldiers and officer
in their army ...” The Note adds: “The
Soviet Government and its organs are con
ducting detailed registration of all these evi
crimes of the Hitlerite army. This is demandec
by the angered Soviet people who cal
for vengeance ...” In the concluding
chapter it says ‘ ‘ The Soviet Government . .
lays all the responsibility for these inhuman
and rapacious acts committed by the German
troops, on the criminal Hitlerite Government
of Germany,”
(From. The Molotov Notes on German
Atrocities published by H.M. Stationery
Office, London, 1942, 20 pages.)
3. Letter from the Chinese Minister to
the Netherlands Government and Charge
d’Affaires to the Belgian and Czechoslovak
Governments, Mr. Wunsz King.
Chinese Legation,
London.
January 9th, 1942.
Excellency,
I have the honour to acknowledge the
receipt of the Note of the 6th instant which
the Czechoslovak Ministry of Foreign Affairs
was good enough to have addressed, in the
name of the Czechoslovak Government and
eight other Governments in Europe, to this
Legation, inviting me to be present on the
occasion of the signing of a Declaration
relating to the punishment of the crimes
committed in territories occupied by the
enemy. A copy of the Declaration has been
handed to me separately.
I now have the honour to inform you that
I am instructed by my Government to accept
this invitation and at the same time to make
fully clear its stand in regard to the problem
which forms the subject matter of the joint
Declaration.
In authorizing me to participate in the
ceremony at the meeting of the 13th, the
Chinese Government wishes to subscribe to
the principles outlined in the Declaration by
which the crimes committed by the enemy
occupying authorities are solemnly con-
demned and the authors are to be held


To be purchased from His Majesty’s Stationery Office at: York House, Kings way, London,
W C 2- 120 George Street, Edinburgh 2; 39-41 King Street, Manchester 2; 1 St. Andrew s
Crescent, Cardiff; 80 Chichester Street, Belfast; or through any bookseller. Price 2d. net or
25 copies for 3s. Od. net.
MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN 81837. Wt. 1584. 20,000. 9/42. U.B.L G42BT
accountable therefor, as it is also its intention
to apply the same principles to the Japanese
occupying authorities in China when the time
comes.
In those Chinese territories at present under
Japanese occupation, the Chinese people
have during long years past fallen victim to
the acts of barbarism and violence per-
petrated by the Japanese, such as the mass
murder of civilians, the wilful destruction of
cultural and educational institutions, the
systematic endeavour to deprave the Chinese
race by means of narcotic drugs, and other
acts too many and too repulsive to be
mentioned here.
The Chinese Government believes that the
elementary principles of justice and morality
cannot be vindicated unless the wrongs thus
done to the Chinese people as those done to
other peoples are equally righted and the
guilty persons equally dealt with according
to law.
I have the honour to be, Excellency,
Your obedient servant,
(Sgd.) Wunsz King.
His Excellency Dr. Hubert Ripka, Acting
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Czecho-
slovak Republic, London.
CROWN COPYRIGHT RESERVED
