

NEW SOUTH WALES
PURE FOOD ACT
NO, 31, 1908
AND
REGULATIONS THEREUNDER
[REVISED ISSUE, APRIL, 1932]
PRICE, 2s.
f 80955 —a
Sydney;
Alfred Jambs Kent, 1.5.0., Government Printer
193*


This Act is amended by Act No. 7, 1915; Act
No. 10, 1915; and Act No. 48, 1920.
New South Wales.
ANNO OCTAVO
EDWARDI VII EEGrIS.
Act No. 31, 1908.
An Act for securing the wholesomeness and
purity of food and drugs, and fixing
standards for the same; for preventing the
sale or other disposition, or the use of
articles dangerous or injurious to health;
for the prevention of deception and fraud;
to amend the Public Health Act, 1902; and
for purposes consequent thereon or incidental
thereto. [Assented to, 24th December,
1908.]
t 80953—A BE


BE it enacted by tlie King’s Most Excellent Majesty,
by and with the advice and consent of the Legis-
lative Council and Legislative Assembly of New South
Wales in Parliament assembled, and by the authority of
the same, as follows :
PART I.
PRELIMINARY.
1. This Act may be cited as the “ Pure Food Act,
1908,” and shall be construed with the Public Health
Act, 1902, hereinafter called the Principal Act, and
shall come into force on the first day of July, one thousand
nine hundred and nine.
2. This Act is divided into Parts, as follows :
PART I. —Preliminary— ss. 1-9.
PART II. — Prohibited articles — ss. 10-21.
PART 111. — Inspection and analysis — ss. 22-25.
PART IV. —Offences and legal procedure— ss.
36-50.
PART Y. — General and supplemental — ss. 51-55.
Repeals.
3. Section three, so far as it defines “ food,” and
section seventy-six to ninety-three inclusive of the
Principal Act are repealed.
Definitions.
4. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
“ Appliance ” includes any instrument or contrivance
which is held out to any person or to the public
as of use for curative purposes.
“ Article ” includes any substance, compound, or
appliance.
“ Authorised ” means authorised either generally or
specially in writing by the board, and when
referring to an officer of a local authority means
so authorised by such local authority.
“ Board ”
Short title,
construction,
and com-
mencement.
Division of
Act into
Parts.
Rej'eal.
Interpretation.
Principal Act,
ss. 76 and 79 ;
Pure Food Act
(Vic.), s. 3.
Appliance,
Article.
Authorised.
Pure Food.


“ Board ” means Board of Health.
“ Council ” means council of a municipality or shire. (
“ Drug ” includes medicines for internal and external:
consumption or use by man, and soaps, dusting
powders, essences, and unguents used by man;
and disinfectants, germicides, antiseptics, and
preservatives used for any purpose.
“ Food,” or “ article of food,” means article used for:
food or drink by man, and includes confectionery,'
and any article that enters into or is used in the
composition or preparation of food, and any
spices, flavouring substances, essences, and
colouring matters so used.
“ Local authority ” means council of a municipality
or of a shire, and with respect to any police :
district outside a municipality or shire means
such member of the police force as may be
appointed by the board under the Principal Act
to be a local authority.
“ Municipality ” includes the city of Sydney.
“ Officer ” includes any medical officer of health,
assistant medical officer of health, officer of the
board or of a local authority, or any superin-
tendent, inspector, sub-inspector, or sergeant of
police, or any constable specially authorised by
the Inspector-General, or by any superintendent
of police.
“ Package ” includes anything in or by which goods
are cased, covered, enclosed, contained, or
packed.
~ Place ” includes any house, premises, or building. :
“Prescribed” means prescribed by this Act or the:
regulations.
“ Prohibited article ” means article, the manufacture,:
sale, or use of, or other dealing with which in 1
its then state or condition is prohibited by this
Act, or the regulations, either absolutely or
conditionally.
“ Regulation ”
Board,
Council.
Drug, i
Food, or
article
of food.
Local
authority.
Municipality,
Officer.
Package.
Place.
Prescribed.
Prohibited
article.
Pure Food.


“ Regulation ” means regulation made under this
Act.
“ Retail trades ” shall mean trading with the con-
sumers.
“ Belling,” “ Sale ” and “ Sold ” are to be construed
in relation to the definition of the expression
“ To sell.”
“ To advertise ” means to publish, in a newspaper or
public print circulating in New 1 South Wales, or
to publish by distributing through the post
office, or otherwise, hand-bills, circulars, posters,
or other written or printed matter.
“ To sell,” includes to barter, and also includes to
offer or attempt to sell, or receive for sale, or
have in possession for sale, or expose for sale,
or send forward or deliver for sale, or cause or
suffer or allow to be sold, offered, or exposed
for sale, but refers only to selling for consumption
or use by man.
“ Writing.” Expressions referring to writing include
printing, stencilling, typing, and any mode of
representing or reproducing words or figures in
a visible form.
5. For the purposes of this Act an article of food or
a drug is adulterated or falsely described —•
(a) when it contains, or is mixed or diluted with,
any substance in any quantity or in any propor-
tion which diminishes in any manner its food
value or nutritive properties as compared with
such article in a pure or normal state and in an
undeteriorated or sound condition; or
(b) when it contains or is mixed or diluted with any
substance of lower commercial value than such,
article in a pure or normal state, and in an
undeteriorated or sound condition ; or
(c) when, either wholly or in part, ft does not
comply with a standard therefor prescribed by
any regulation; or
(d) when it contains any substance prohibited by the
regulations; or
(e)
Regulation.
Retail trades.
Sale.
To advertise.
To sell.
Writing.
Adulteration
or false
description.
Pure Food
Act (Vic.),
s. 24.
U.S.A. Pure
Foods Act,
1906, s. 7.
Pure Food.


(e) when, it contains any substance concerning which
any restrictive regulation has been made in
excess of any quantity or proportion permitted
by such regulation; or
(f) when it is mixed, coloured, powdered, coated, or
stained in a manner whereby damage or
inferiority may be concealed; or
(g) when it consists wholly or in part of a filthy,
decomposed, or putrid animal or vegetable
substance, or of any portion of an animal unfit
for food, whether manufactured or not; or
(h) when it is the product of a diseased animal, or
of one which has died otherwise than by
slaughter; or
(i) when it is damaged, deteriorated, or perished; or
(j) when any valuable constituent of the article has
been wholly or in part abstracted; or
(k) when it is in any package, and the contents of
the package as originally put up have been
removed in whole or in part and other contents
have been placed in such package, or if it fails
to bear on the package, or on a label attached
thereto, a statement of the quantity or pro-
portion of any morphine, opium, cocaine, heroin,
alpha or beta eucaine, chloroform, cannabis
indica, chloral hydrate, or acentanilide, or any
derivative or preparation of any such substances
contained therein or any other substance specified
by the regulations as necessary to be so stated;
or
(l) when it is in package form, and the contents are
stated in terms of weight or measure, and they
are not correctly stated on the outside of such
package as provided by this Act;
(m) when it is in package form and the package, or
any label attached thereto, bears a statement,
design, or device regarding such article of food
or drug, or the ingredients or substance contained
therein, which is false or misleading in any
particular :
Provided
5
Pure Food.
Act No. 31, 1908.


Provided that in a prosecution or other proceeding
under this Act for selling an article of food or a drug to
which paragraph (a) or paragraph (b) applies, such article
or drug shall not be deemed to be adulterated or falsely
described if it is sold as a mixture in accordance with the
provisions of this Act :
Provided further that nothing in this Act shall be
construed as requiring proprietors or manufacturers of
proprietary foods or drugs which contain no unwholesome
added ingredient to disclose their. trade formulae, except
in so far as the provisions of this Act may require to secure
freedom from adulteration or false description.
Advisory committee.
6. The Governor shall appoint, for the purposes of
this Act, an advisory committee. Such committee may
be so appointed from the following persons : —■
the president of the Board of Health, who shall
preside;
the professor of Chemistry in the University of
Sydney;
a bacteriologist;
a legally qualified medical practitioner;
the medical officer of health, metropolitan combined
sanitary districts;
the senior analyst in the Department of Public
Health;
a representative of the Pharmacy Board;
a representative of the Chamber of Commerce;
a representative of the Chamber of Manufactures;
and
persons not less than one nor more than three in
number conversant with trade requirements.
(2) The persons so appointed shall act for no longer
period than two years from the date of their appointment,
but may be reappointed.
(3) Any member of the committee may be removed
by the Governor on the recommendation of the board.
7.
Pure Food.


7. (1) At all meetings of the committee the chairman
shall have a vote, and in the event of an equality of votes
a second or casting vote.
(2) Any five members of the committee shall;
constitute a quorum.
(3) The Governor may make regulations relating to
the meetings of the committee.
8. The members of the committee, other than those
employed in the public service shall be paid attendance
fees of such amount as may be prescribed by regulations,
but such fees shall not exceed two guineas per member
per sitting.
Administration of Act.
9. The administration and the enforcing of the pro-
visions of this Act shall primarily be the duty of the
Board of Health, but may, by the direction of the
Governor, be left in any case to the local authority, who
shall, however, be subject to the provisions of section
twenty-four of the Public Health Act, 1902.
Procedure at ;
meetings of
committee.
Pure Food
Act (Vic.),
s. 40.
Fees of
members.
Ibid..
Administra-
tion of Act.
PART II.
PROHIBITED ARTICLES.
Sale of food and drugs.
10. No person shall sell any article of food or any drug
which is adulterated or falsely described, or which is
packed or enclosed for sale in any manner contrary to
any provision of this Act.
11- (1) No person shall for purposes of sale—
(a) mix, or cause or permit to he mixed, any ingre-
dient or material with any article of food, or
colour any such article, or cause or permit the
same to be coloured, so as in any such case to
render such article dangerous or injurious to
health; oi
(b)
Adulterated
food.
Ibid., s. 35.
Mixing food
or drugs
so as to be
injurious
to health.
Principal Act.
s. 87.
Pure Food.


(b) mix, or cause or permit to be mixed, any ingre-
dient or material with, any drug, or colour any
such drug, or cause or permit the same to be
coloured, so as to affect injuriously the quality
or potency of such drug.
(2) No person shall sell any food or drug mixed
s with any such ingredient or material, or so coloured as
aforesaid, whereby such food or drug is rendered dan-
gerous or injurious to health, or whereby its quality or
potency is injuriously affected.
12. (l) No person shall —
(a) for purposes of sale, mix, or cause or permit to
be mixed, any ingredient or material with any
> food or drug in order thereby fraudulently to
increase its weight, bulk, or measure, or to
conceal its inferior quality; or
(b) sell any food or drug mixed with any ingredient
or material whereby the weight, bulk, or
measure of such food or drug has been fraudu-
lently increased, or its inferior quality concealed.
(2) No person shall—
(a) sell any food or drug which is not of the nature,
substance, or quality of the food or drug
demanded by the purchaser; or
(b) sell any compounded food or drug which is not
composed of ingredients in accordance with the
demand of the purchaser.
v o) In any prosecution under this section it shall
be no defence to prove that the food or the drug, the
subject of the prosecution, though defective in nature, or
in substance, or in quality, was not defective in all three
respects.
(4) For the purposes of this section, any drug sold
under any name included in the British Pharmacopoeia
which does not comply with the description given of and
tests prescribed for such drug in the latest edition, with
amendments, of the British Pharmacopoeia shall, unless
such drug be included in a list of exceptions published,in
the Gazette, under the authority of the Minister, be
deemed to be a drug which is not of the substance of the
drug demanded by the purchaser.
13.
Selling food
or drugs so as
to be inju-
rious to
health.
Mixing or
selling food
to increase
bulk.
Principal Act,
s, 88.
Selling food
or drugs not
of the nature
demanded.
As to
defences.
Drugs to
comply with
tests specified
in the British
Pharmaco-
pceia.
Ibid., s. 91.
Pure Food.


13. (i) Where any person sells a food or drug which
is a mixture, the ingredients shall be pure and in an
undeteriorated and sound condition, and such person
shall deliver the mixture to the purchaser in a package,
on or attached to which shall be a statement or label,
legibly and uniformly written, stating that the food or
drug is a mixture, and the names of the ingredients, and
when the mixture is a food, the proportion of ingredients
when so prescribed :
Provided that it shall not be necessary so to attach
a statement or label in the case of —
(a) an article of food or a drug generally known to
users as a compounded article or a drug not
recognised by the British Pharmacopoeia mixed
with any matter or ingredient not injurious to
health, and not intended fraudulently to increase
its bulk, weight, or measure, or to conceal its
inferior quality; or
(b) a drug supplied by prescription or order signed
by a legally qualified medical practitioner for
any person then under his care and treatment;
or
(c) a mixture exempted from this section by the
regulations, which exemption may be applied to
classes of articles; or
(d) a mixture supplied by a registered pharmacist
for immediate consumption on his premises.
(2) No person shall sell any food or drug which
is a mixture in respect of which the provisions of this
section have been contravened, or have not been complied
with.
Food in packages.
14. (1) Except in the case of a package of food which
has been exempted from any or all of the provisions of
this section by the regulations, there shall be legibly and-
durably written on or attached to every -package of food
packed or enclosed for sale a statement or label mdicating
tTTe U'illlU ham” or description, the net weight or the
number, true measure or volume of the contents thereof,
and the name and address of the vendor or the maker
thereof,
Sale of
mixture.
See Principal
Act, s. SO.
Packages to
be labelled
with descrip-
tion, weight,
&c., of
contents.
.Pure Food
Act (Vic.),
s. 15.
Pure Food.


thereof, or of the agent therefor or the owner of rights of
manufacture : Provided that where such vendor, maker,
agent, or owner is a company registered under the Com-
panies Act, 1899, or is a firm having its name registered
under the Registration of Firms Act, 1902, the address of
such company or firm may be omitted. No person shall,
after the expiration of six months from the commencement
of this Act, sell in a package any food unless such a
statement or label is written on or attached to such
package as required by this section.
(2) In the case of any liquors paying excise or
customs duty, the measures set forth in any Act dealing
with such liquors shall be held to satisfy the requirements
of this section in regard to measure.
(3) Weights and measures closely approximating
those indicated on the statement or label will be allowed,
but the degree of approximation may befixed by the
regulations, either generally or with respect to particular
articles of food.
15. Where any food or drug in connection with which
there is a contravention of any of the provisions of this
Act is sold in a closed package to any officer, any person
who appears from any statement or label thereon, or
attached thereto, to have imported, manufactured, or
prepared such food or drug, or to have ehclosSd it in
sucFpackage, shall, unless he proves to the contrary, be
deemed-tn hawe so imported, manufactured, prepared, or
enclosed such food or drug, and (unless the contravention
is shown to be due to the default of the person on whose
premises the package is found, or to deterioration or other
causes beyond the control of the person named on the
package or label) shall be guilty of an offence against
this Act.
Advertised articles.
16. (1) The board may, and on the recommendation
of the advisory committee shall, cause to be examined any
food, drug, or appliance which is advertised, for the
purpose of ascertaining its composition and properties,
and shall compare the results of the examination with
any
Liquors,
Approximate
weights and
measures.
Liability
of person
named on
package.
Pure Food
Act (Vic.),\
». 10. '
Examination
and report
upon food,
drugs, and
appliances
advertised.
Pure Food.


any advertisement which relates to the food, drug, or
appliance, and with the price at which it is sold, and
shall prepare and forward to the Minister a report upon
the whole matter, which may include any comment
which the board thinks desirable in the public interest.
(2) The board may thereupon, with the approval
of the Minister, cause the report to be published in the
Gazette, and in any newspaper or public print which
circulates within New South Wales, and to be distributed
among the public in any other way, and no action shall
lie in respect of such publication.
(3) Any proprietor or manager of a newspaper or
public print may republish therein any such report which
has been published by the board as aforesaid, and no
action shall he against such proprietor or manager in
respect of the republication.
17. (1) The Governor, on the recommendation of the
board, or of a District Court judge on appeal, may, by;
notification in the Gazette, and in any newspaper circu-
lating in New South Wales, prohibit, and after the date :
therein mentioned, the advertising or sale of any food or
drug or appliance which, in the opinion of the board or
of the said judge, is injurious to life or health, or which
by reason of its inactivity or inefficiency is useless for
the advertised purposes of cure.
(2) No person shall advertise or sell any food or
drug or appliance in contravention of any notification as
aforesaid, and no proprietor or manager of a newspaper
or other public print shall publish any advertisement
prohibited under this section, and no person shall print
any such advertisement.
(3) Provided that the prohibition shall not apply
to the advertisement in bona fide trade journals and
price lists of drugs by or on behalf of manufacturers to
the retail trades only, nor to the sale of drugs supplied
by prescription or order signed by a legally qualified
medical practitioner, and by him given to any person
then under his care and treatment as such practitioner,
or to any other person on his behalf.
Disinfectants
Prohibition
of sale of
injurious
drugs or
appliances.
Advertise-
ment.
Saving,
Pure Food.


Disinfectants and preservatives.
18. (l) The Governor, on the recommendation of the
board, or of a District Court judge on appeal, by noti-
fication in the Gazette, may prohibit the sale of any
substance or compound as a disinfectant, germicide,
antiseptic, or preservative.
(2) No person shall sell any substance or compound
so prohibited.
19- (l) The board, by notification in the Gazette, may
require concerning any substance or compound sold or
intended to be sold as a disinfectant, germicide, antiseptic
or preservative, that such information or directions as it
deems fit shall be set out on a statement or label written
on or attached to any package containing the same.
(2) No person shall sell any such substance or
compound unless such information or directions are set
out as aforesaid.
Appeal.
20. Any person deeming himself aggrieved by any
report or recommendation of the board under section
sixteen or section seventeen or section eighteen may
appeal therefrom to a District Court judge, who may
hear and determine such appeal, and may vary the
report or recommendation or rescind the same and make
a fresh report or recommendation. No such report shall
be published or prohibition made pending such appeal.
Such hearing may be in private.
The Governor may make regulations prescribing in
what cases and to whom notice shall be given of any
such report or recommendation of the board, and regu-
lating appeals under this section.
Mill.
21. (1) No person shall sell for the food of man the
milk of a cow in his milking herd which is suffering from
any disease.
(2)
Prohibition
of sale of
disinfectants
and preser-
vatives.
Labelling of
disinfectant.
Appeal.
Sale of ft ilk
of infected
cow.
Pure Food.


(2) The fact that a diseased cow is in the milking
herd of a person who sells milk shall be prima facie
evidence that the milk of such cow has been sold for the
food of man.
(3) The Governor, on the recommendation of the
board, may declare from time to time what are diseases
in cattle for the purposes of this section.
Evidence of
sale of milk.
PART III.
INSPECTION AND ANALYSIS.
Inspection and removal of food, drugs, or articles.
22. (1) Any officer may enter and inspect any place
which, he has reasonable ground for believing is kept or
used for the sale, storage, delivery, conveyance, manu-
facture, or preparation for sale of any article used, or
which he has reasonable grounds for believing is intended
to be used, as a food or drug; or which he has reasonable
grounds for believing is a prohibited article; and may
inspect any such article: Provided that where such
officer is an officer of the board or of a local authority, or
is a member of the police force, he must have the
authority in writing of the board or of the local authority,
or of the Inspector-General of Police, as the case may be.
Such authority may be general, or may be limited to a
specified place.
(2) When any such article is usually sold,
delivered, conveyed, manufactured, or prepared for sale
during the night, such entry and inspection may be made
at any reasonable time in the day or night; otherwise,
such entry and inspection shall only be made at a
reasonable time in the day.
(3) Any officer may inspect any article used, or
which he has reasonable grounds for believing is intended
to be used, as a food or drug, or which he has reasonable
grounds for believing is a prohibited article, and which
is
Entry and
inspection ef
place and
animals or
articles
therein.
Health Act
(Vic.), 1890,
s. 52.
Pure Pood
Act (Vic.),
ss. 4, 5.
Time for
entering and
inspection.
Inspection ol
articles con-
veyed through
streets.
Pure Food Act
(Vic.), ss. 4. 6.
Pure Food.


is being conveyed through any public street or road, or
conveyed by water in any vessel or boat, or by railway,
for the purposes of trade, sale, or delivery.
(4) Where the officer is an officer of a local
authority, his powers under this section may be exercised
within the area of the local authority, and on any part
of a road, river, stream, or watercourse, the centre or
middle line of which forms a common boundary between
such area and any adjoining area.
(5) Any officer may —
(a) examine and open any such article or any
package enclosing the same in any such place,
or conveyed as aforesaid;
(b) remove for examination or analysis portions or
samples of any such article;
(c) weigh, count, measure, gauge, or mark such
article or package, and fasten, secure, or seal
the same, or any door or opening affording
access to the same;
(d) seize any such article which is, or appears to
him to be, dangerous or injurious to health or
unwholesome, or unfit for use, or to be a pro-
hibited article, and any package or vessel
enclosing or containing the same.
(6) Any justice may thereupon grant a summons
calling upon the owner of the article, or the person in
whose possession it has been found, to appear before any
police or stipendiary magistrate, or any two justices in
petty sessions, to show cause why the article and the
package or vessel aforesaid should not be forfeited and
destroyed.
(7) Upon the said owner or person so appearing,
or if after being so summoned he fails to appear, the said
magistrate or justices may, after inquiry into the matter,
and if satisfied by reasonable proof —
(a) that the article is used or is intended to be sold
or used as food, and was unfit for human con-
sumption; or
(b)
Examination,
seizure, and
destruction
of articles.
Pure Food
Act (Vie.),
ss. 4, 5.
Summons.
See Principal
Act, s. 85.
Proceedings
upon such
summons.
Pure Food.


(b) that the article is used or is intended to be sold or
used as a drug, and was unfit for use, or might,
if sold to a purchaser and used by him in a proper
manner, injuriously affect him; or
(c) that the article is a prohibited article;
adjudge such article, and also every such package or
vessel to be forfeited, and the same shall be destroyed.
In default of such reasonable proof the article and the
said package or vessel shall be forthwith restored to the
owner or person in whose possession they were found.
(8) In every such proceeding the presence of food
in any place shall be evidence that such food was intended
to be sold or used for human consumption; and the
presence of drugs in any place shall be evidence that such
drugs were intended to be sold or used.
(9) This section shall, without restricting its
general application, extend and apply to articles packed,
bottled, or tinned, or sold or offered for sale, or made up
or included in or prepared or cooked for any meal to be
consumed on the premises at any shop, factory, eating-
house, licensed house, or any place or premises or
elsewhere.
Purchase of samples for analysis.
23. (l) On payment or tender to any person selling
or manufacturing or preparing for sale any food or drug, |
or to his agent or servant, or to any person in charge of
the food or drug, of the current market value thereof or
at the rate of payment prescribed, any officer may demand ■
and select and take or obtain samples of the said food
or drug as required by him for the purposes of this Act.
(2) Any such officer may require the said person
or his agent or servant to show and permit the inspection
of any package or vessel in which such food or drug is at
the time kept, and may take or draw, or may require
the said person to take or draw, therefrom the samples
demanded ;
Provided that where any food or drug is kept for retail
sale in a closed package, no person shall be required by
any officer to sell less than the whole of such package.
(31
Evidence,
Application
of section.
Pure Pood
Act (Vic.),
ss. 4. 5.
Power to
demand,
select, and
take samples.
Ibid., s. 13.
See Principal
Act, s. 79.
Pure Food.


(3) If any rates have been fixed by regulation for
the payment for samples of any food or drug it shall not
be necessary for any officer to tender any higher price
for such sample.
(4) Any person may, on payment of the prescribed
fee together with the cost of the sample, require any
officer to purchase a sample of any food or drug and submit
the same for analysis.
Procedure on taking sample.
24. (1) The person purchasing or the officer taking or
' obtaining any food or drug with the intention of sub-
mitting it to analysis shall thereupon notify such intention
, to any person then present, being the owner or his agent
or servant or other person in charge of such food or drug.
(2) The said person or officer shall divide any
such food or drug into three parts, to be then and there
separated, and each part to be labelled or marked and
sealed or fastened up in such manner as its nature will
permit, and shall then deliver one of the said parts to
the owner, agent, servant, or person aforesaid, and shall
retain one of the said parts for future comparison, and
submit the third part to an analyst.
(3) Provided that when any food or drug is
contained in a bottle, tin, or other package in such
quantity that its division into three parts, as hereinbefore
provided, would furnish parts insufficient for accurate
analysis, additional bottles, tins, or packages which
purport to contain a similar food or drug under the same
brand or label, may be taken or obtained, and the contents
of two or more bottles, tins, or packages may be mixed
together and the mixture divided and submitted for
analysis as hereinbefore provided.
25. Where the person purchasing or the officer takes
or obtains a sample of any food or drug in a locality
which is situated outside a radius of fifteen miles from
the General Post Office, at Sydney, such sample may be
forwarded to an analyst through the post office, as a
registered article, or may be forwarded under seal in any
other
Manner in
which sample
may be
dealt with.
Principal Act,
s. 80.
Division of
sample.
Where
quantity in
package is
insufficient
lor analysis.
Forwarding
of sample by
post.
Pure Food.


other convenient way, in which, case the certificate of the
analyst that, on receipt by him, the seal was unbroken
shall be sufficient evidence of identity. Any charge for
postage or carriage shall be deemed one of the expenses
of the analysis.
Analysis by direction of councils.
26. The board may require any council to submit for<
analysis during each year not less than three samples or'
portions of articles of food or drugs for each thousand'
persons of the population of its area. The articles to be
so submitted for analysis may from time to time be,
specified by the board on the recommendation of the
advisory committee.
Appointment of analysts.
27. The Governor may appoint persons to be analysts,,
and may make regulations concerning their qualifications,'
and shall prepare a fist of analysts and annually revise
such fist.
28. A council may by itself, or in combination with
one or more other councils, subject to the approval of the|
Governor, appoint an analyst to analyse samples taken
within its area, or their areas, and may remunerate him
from the funds of the councils, either by salary or by fees.
The analysis.
29. Any analyst analysing any food, drug, or article
submitted to him in pursuance of this Act may give a,
certificate in the form prescribed of the result of the
analysis.
In any legal proceedings under this Act the production
of a certificate, purporting to be signed by an analyst,
shall be prima facie evidence of the identity of the food,
drug, or article analysed, and of the result of the analysis,
without proof of the signature of the person appearing to
have signed the same.
30.
Councils to
submit
samples for
analysis.
Pure Pood
Act (Vie.),
s. 17.
Appointment
of analysts.
Analysts
of local
authorities.
Certificate of
analyst to be
evidence.
Principal Act,
s. 82.
Pure Food.


30. Where any method of analysis has been prescribed
for the analysis of any food, drug, or article, any analyst,
either for the prosecution or defence in any proceedings
under this Act, must in his certificate of analysis declare
that he has followed the prescribed method in his analysis.
But evidence shall be admissible on the part of the defence
of analysis made by other than the prescribed method,
and to show that the prescribed method is not correct.
31. For the purpose of determining the degree of
strength of any spirits, such apparatus shall be used and
such method observed as may be prescribed.
32. Any analyst who offends against any of the
provisions of this Act, or of the regulations respecting any
method of analysis prescribed may, if the board is
satisfied that the offence has been wilfully committed, be
disqualified by the board for appointment as an analyst
for such period as the board thinks fit.
33. (1) Where the prosecutor, in any case under this
Act, had caused the food, drug, or article forming the
subject of prosecution to be analysed by an analyst, the
court may, in case of a conviction, assess the reasonable
expense of and attending such analysis, and award the
same against the defendant as part of the costs of the
prosecution;
Provided that before the making of such analysis the
person prosecuted has had reasonable notice of the time
and place of the intended production of the food or drug
to t£e analyst for examination with the name of such
analyst, and has been allowed to attend on such pro-
duction.
(2) The court may also, in case of any conviction
under this Act, assess and award against the defendant
as part of the costs of the prosecution the expenses
incurred by the prosecutor in travelling to and attending
the trial, including the proportionate part of his salary
while so engaged.
34. A copy of the result of any analysis of any food,
drug, or article taken or obtained by the person pur-
chasing or an officer shall, on demand, be supplied by
the board, or the local authority which has caused the
analysis to be made to the person from whom the food,
drug,
Certificate of
analysis.
Pure Food
Act (Vic.),
s. 19.
Mode of de-
termining
strength of
liquors.
Ibid.
Disqualifi-
cation of
analyst for
non-com-
pliance.
Ibid.
Costs of
analysis.
Principal Act,
s. 83.
Copy of result
of analysis.
Pure Food
Act (Vic.),
s. 19.
Pure Food,


drug, or article was taken or obtained, and to the
manufacturer or his agent in New South Wales on
payment of a fee, to be fixed by the board or such
authority, not exceeding ten shillings and sixpence.
35. No person shall, for trade purposes or advertise-
ment, use any analysis made for the purposes of this Act.
Any person who contravenes this section shall be
liable to a penalty not exceeding ten pounds.
Analysis not
to be referred
to for trade
purposes.
PART IV.
OFFENCES AND LEGAL PROCEDURE.
Penalties.
36. (1) If any person contravenes or does not comply
with or is guilty of an offence against any provision of
this Act, and no other penalty-is by this Act pyproaily
provided in that behalf, he shall be liable on conviction
for the first offence to a penalty not exceeding twenty
pounds, and for a second offence to a penalty not exceeding
fifty pounds, and for any subsequent offence to a penalty
not exceeding one hundred pounds.
(2) Where a person is found guilty of an offence
under this Act, and if the certificate of the Government
analyst states that the adulterated article has been so
adulterated as to be injurious to health, or if the offence,
in the opinion of the court, was committed wilfully or
by the culpable negligence of the person accused, that
person shall be liable, in addition to or in lieu of such
penalty (if the court is of opinion that a penalty will not
meet the circumstances of the case), to imprisonment,
with or without hard labour, for a period not exceeding
six months.
37. If any person, who is not authorised so to do,
removes, erases, alters, breaks, or opens any mark, seal,
or fastening placed by any officer upon any food, drug,
article, or package, or upon any door or opening affording
access to the same, he shall be liable to a penalty not
exceeding twenty pounds.
38.
Penalty for
offence
against this
Act.
Pure Food
Act (Vic.),
s. 30.
Imprison-
ment in
certain cases
Interference
with official
marks or
seals.
Ibid., s. 10.
Pure Food.


38. Any person who—
(a) assaults, intimidates, obstructs, or attempts to
obstruct in any manner any officer or authorised
person in the exercise of his powers or in the
discharge of his duties under this Act; or
(b) refuses to allow to be taken any sample de-
manded in accordance with this Act or tho
regulations; or
(c) gives, procures, offers, or promises any bribe
recompense or reward to influence any officer or
person as aforesaid in the exercise of his powers
or in the discharge of his duties as aforesaid;
or
(d) retakes or attempts to retake any food, drug,
or article seized or sold under this Act, or resists
or attempts to prevent such seizure, «
shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding twenty pounds.
Forfeiture.
39. (1) In the case of any conviction under this Act,
any food, drug, or article to which the conviction relates
may, by order of the court, become and be forfeited to
His Majesty. Such forfeiture may extend to the whole
of the article, and to the whole of any similar article,
and to all packages or vessels containing any similar
article belonging to the defendant, or found on the
defendant’s premises, or in his possession at the time of
the committing of the offence.
(2) All articles forfeited under this Act shall be
disposed of as the board may direct.
Legal Procedure.
40. Penalties and forfeitures imposed by or under
this Act or the regulations may be recovered and enforced
in a summary way by a stipendiary or police magistrate
or any two justices in petty sessions.
41. When any food, drug, or article has been taken or
obtained for analysis, no prosecution under this Act in
respect thereof shall be instituted after the expiration of
fifty days from the time when it was so taken or
obtained. 42.
Obstruction
of officer in
■discharge of
his duties.
Pure Food
Act (Vie.),
a 14.
Forfeiture
of arioles of
food or
appliance.
Ibid., s. 38.
Recovery of
penalties.
Limit of time
forprosecu-
jm 's 2i
* ■’ s ' '
Pure Food.


42. In any prosecution concerning any food, drug,
or article, the summons shall not be made returnable in
less time than ten days from the day on which it was
served.
43. In every prosecution concerning any food, drug,
or article, there shall be served with the summons a copy
of any analyst’s certificate that may have been obtained
on behalf of the prosecution.
44. Where any sample of any article of food or drug
for sale procured by any officer has been proved by
analysis to have been adulterated or falsely described,
and an officer has in pursuance of this Act seized, marked,
fastened or secured such article in any place, proof of the
possession by any person in such place of such article
shall be deemed prima facie evidence that the same is in
his possession for sale in contravention of this Act.
45. No witness on behalf of any prosecution under
this Act shall be compelled to disclose the fact that he
received any information, or the nature of such infor-
mation, or the name of any person who gave such
information. No officer appearing as a witness shall be
compelled to produce any reports made or received by
him confidentially in his official capacity or containing
confidential information.
46. The onus of proof that any food or drug has not
been sold for consumption or use by man shall be on the
defendant.
Guarantee.
,«. (1) Where after the first day of December, one
thousand nine hundred and nine, any person is prosecuted
under this Act for the sale of any food, drug, or article
which is adulterated or falsely described, or is mixed,
coloured, composed or constituted in contravention of
any provision of this Act, he shall be entitled to be
discharged from such prosecution upon proving—
(l) that he has received from the person from whom
he purchased such food, drug, or article, or his
duly authorised agent, a guarantee in writing
that the same is not adulterated, falsely described,
or mixed, coloured, composed, or constituted as
aforesaid; and
(2)
Eetuni day of
summons.
Copy of
analyst’s
certificate.
Pure Food
Act (Vic.),
s. 22.
Possession
prima facie
evidence of
contravention
of Act.
Ibid,, s. 9.
Source of
information
or reports.
Ibid., s. 10.
Onus of proof.
Ibid., s. 37.
Guarantee
a defence to
prosecution.
Pure Food.


(2) that he had no reason to believe that the same
was adulterated or falsely described; and
(3) that he sold it in the same state as when he
purchased it,
subject to the following conditions :
(a) The person giving the guarantee must be resi-
dent in New South Wales, or, if a company,
must have a registered office in New South
Wales.
(b) The guarantee must state the name and the
address of the place of business of guarantor,
and the name under which he trades.
(c) A guarantee may be general or specific.
(d) A general guarantee shall apply to the sale of
the description of goods or classes of goods
named therein, and a copy of the same shall be
filed in the Treasury. A serial number shall be
allotted to each such guarantee, which number
shall be placed by the guarantor on each package
of such goods sold by him, with the words,
“ Guaranteed under the Pure Food Act, 1908,”
with the name of the guarantor inserted as
prescribed. Such guarantee shall not apply to
any package of goods unless such number and
words are placed thereon.
(e) A specific guarantee shall apply to the sale of
specific goods, and shall refer to a bill of sale,
invoice, bill of lading, or other document describ-
ing the goods and the weight, measure, and
number of the same, but shall not be available
as a defence unless the defendant has, within
seven days after service of the summons, sent
to the purchaser a copy of such guarantee with
a written notice stating that he intends to rely on
the same as a defence, and specifying the name
and address of the place of business of the
person giving the guarantee, and has also sent
a like notice of his intention to the person giving
the guarantee.
(f)
Pure Food.


(f) The person by whom any guarantee is alleged to
have been given under this section shall be
entitled to give or tender evidence at the
hearing, and the court may, if it thinks fit,
adjourn the hearing to enable him to do so.
(g) The form of guarantee under this section may
be prescribed by the regulations.
(2) Any person who gives any such guarantee
which is false shall, in addition to any penalty for the
sale of any food, drug, or article in contravention of this
Act, be guilty of an offence against this Act, unless he
proves that when he gave the guarantee he had reason to
believe that the statements or descriptions contained
therein were true.
(3) Proceedings under the last preceding subsec-
tion against the person who has given the guarantee may
be taken before a court having jurisdiction in the place
where the food, drug, or article was sold, as before a court
having jurisdiction in the place where the guarantee was
given.
Prosecution of agent or servant.
48. In any prosecution under this Act for the sale of
any food, drug, or article, it shall be no defence that the 1
defendant is only the agent or servant of the owner of,
or person dealing in the food, drug, or article, or having
the same for sale, but the agent or servant and the owner 1
or person aforesaid shall be liable :
Provided that a servant shall not be liable if he proves
that the offence was committed in a store, shop, stall, or
other similar place in which business was, at the time of
the committing of the offence, conducted under the
personal superintendence of the owner of the business or
some manager or other person representing such owner.
49. (1) If the defendant, being an agent or servant,,
proves that he sold the food, drug, or article without *
knowledge that any provision of this Act with regard to ’
the nature, substance, quality, description, labelling, con- 1
stituents, or mode of manufacture of the food, drug, or ■
article, or any package in which it was contained, had
been contravened or had not been complied with, he may,
whether
Penalty on
guarantor.
Proceedings
for such
penalty.
Agent or
servant liable
in addition to
principal.
Principal Act,
s. 93.
Agent or
servant may
recover from
principal.
See principal
Act.
Pure Food.


whether his principal or employer has or has not been
convicted and fined, recover in any court of competent juris-
diction from his principal or employer the amount of any
penalty in which he himself has been convicted in respect
of such prosecution, together with the costs- thereof paid
or payable by him upon his conviction, and those paid
or payable by him in and about his defence to the prose-
cution.
(2) Where an agent or servant has been convicted
as aforesaid, the convicting justices may, if they think
fit, suspend the operation of the conviction for any period
not exceeding three months, to enable him to recover
from his principal or employer the penalty and costs as
aforesaid.
50. When a defendant prosecuted for the sale of any
food, drug, or article which is adulterated or falsely
described, or which is mixed, coloured, composed or
constituted in contravention of any provision of this
Act, is the servant of a person who purchased such food,
drug, or article under a guarantee in accordance with
section forty-four, he shall be entitled to be discharged
from such prosecution on proving that he had no reason to
believe that the food, drug, or article was adulterated or
falsely described, or was sold in a state different from
that in which it was purchased by the person employing
him, or was other than that demanded by the prosecutor.
Prosecution
of employee
for selling
adulterated
article.
PART V.
GENERAL AND SUPPLEMENTAL.
Miscellaneous.
51. (l) If, in the opinion of the president of the
board, there is reasonable ground for suspecting that
any person is in possession, for the purposes of sale, or
for manufacturing or preparing for sale, of any food, drug,
or article, in contravention of this Act, he may require
such person to produce for his inspection, or to produce
to
Power to
require infor-
mation to
be made
available.
Pure Food
Act (Vic.),
s. 11.
Pure Food.


to any officer authorised by him in that behalf, any books
of the nature of store records, or which deal with the
reception, possession, or delivery of any food, drug, or
article.
(2) The said president may make, or cause to he
made, copies of or extracts from any such books, and such
copies or extracts, certified as such by any specially
authorised officer, shall be deemed to be true and correct
copies or extracts.
(3) Any person refusing to comply with any
requirement of the president under this section shall be
liable to a penalty not exceeding ten pounds.
(4) Any officer who does not maintain, and aid in
maintaining, the secrecy of all matters which come to
his knowledge in the performance of his official duties
under this section, or who communicates any such matter
to any person, except for the purpose of carrying into effect
the provisions of this Act, shall be liable, on conviction,
to a penalty not exceeding fifty pounds.
52. No article of food sold under any fancy, suggestive>
proprietary, or registered name, and which is a substitute>
or is intended to be, or may be used as a substitute, either
wholly or in part, for any article of food, shall by reason
only of being so sold under such name be exempt from
the provisions of this Act.
53. (I) Where any person or any of his servants or
agents has been convicted of an offence against the
provisions of this Act relating to the sale of any food,
drug, or article, and such person or any of his servants
or agents is subsequently convicted of any such offence, a
notification of the name of such person may be published
by the board in the Gazette, within twenty-one days
after such last conviction, together with the address of his
place of business, the trade or company name under
which he trades, and a description of the nature of the
offence, the decision of the court, and the penalty imposed,
and any forfeiture incurred.
(2) When the food, drug, or article was supplied
to the said person by some other person, and was sold by
the first mentioned person in the state in which he
received it, then the name of the supplier, and the address
of
Suggestive
names for
articles
of food.
Pure Food
Act (Vic.),
s. 34.
Publication
of names of
offenders.
See ibid., s. 39
Pure Food.


of his place of business, and the nature of the trade
carried on by him, may, after notice to such supplier,
also be included in the notification.
(3) Such notification may, if the board so direct,
be republished in any newspaper circulating in New
South Wales, and no action for such republication shall lie
against the proprietor, publisher, or printer of such
newspaper.
(4) During the pendency of any appeal against a
conviction for any offence, a notification as aforesaid in
respect of such offence shall not be published by the
board, but may be so published within twenty-one days
after a final order has been made on appeal affirming the
conviction or dismissing the appeal.
Regulations.
54. (l) The board, on the recommendation of the
advisory committee, shall make regulations which may
vary in their application according to time and place or
the destination of the article referred to in the regu-
lation —■
prescribing standards for the composition, strength,
purity or quality of any food or drug, or for the
nature or proportion of any substance which
may be mixed with or used in the preparation
or preservation thereof, or prohibiting the addi-
tion of any substance to any article of food;
prohibiting in the manufacture, preparation, storing,
preservation, packing, or in the delivering of
any article of food for sale, the use of appliances
containing any substance that may be specified
and any substance in or exceeding any proportion
that may be specified, and prohibiting the sale
of such appliances;
prohibiting such modes of manufacture and of pre-
paration or preservation of articles of food as
may be specified;
prescribing the method of analysing any food, drug,
or article submitted for analysis under this Act;
exempting
Regulations
made on
recommen-
dation of
advisory
committee.
Pure Food
Act (Vic.),
s. 41.
Pure Food.


exempting any package or food or drug from any
provision of this Act relating to marking or
labelling;
prohibiting the use of substances or methods that
may be specified in the catching, feeding, or
drugging of animals shortly prior to death, such
animals being intended for sale for the food of
man;
requiring the destruction or denaturation of articles
of food that have become deteriorated or im-
poverished in such degree as may be specified,
and of such articles of food as may be specified;
requiring statements or labels that may be specified
to be written on or attached to articles of food,
or to packages containing such articles, and pro-
hibiting the use in such statements or labels of
words that may be specified;
fixing rates for payment for samples of food or drugs
taken or obtained under this Act, and for
payment of analysts;
prescribing penalties not exceeding twenty pounds or
a continuing penalty not exceeding two pounds
per diem for a contravention of any regulation;
and
generally for carrying out the provisions of this Act,
and for securing the wholesomeness, cleanliness,
freedom from contamination, and adulteration of
any food, drug, or article, and for securing the
cleanliness of receptacles, places, and vehicles
used for the manufacture, preparation, storage,
packing, carriage, or dehvery of any food, drug,
or article.
(2) In this section the word “ specified ” means
specified in any regulation.
55. (1) Regulations of the board made in pursuance
of this Act, on being approved by the Governor and 1
published in the Gazette, shall, if not disallowed as
hereinafter provided, and if not repugnant to this Act or
to _ any regulations made by the Governor under the
Principal Act, have the force of law.
(2)
Pure Food.


(2) All such regulations on being gazetted shall be
laid before both Houses of Parliament within fourteen
days if Parliament is then sitting, and, if not sitting,
then within fourteen days after the next meeting of
Parliament. But if either House of the Parliament passes
a resolution, of which notice has been given, at any time
within fifteen sitting days after such regulations have
been laid before such House disallowing any regulation,
such regulation shall thereupon cease to have effect.
Pure Food.




REGULATIONS.
PURE FOOD ACT, 1908.
[Published in Government Gazette No. 92 of 17th July, 1931, and amended
in Government Gazettes No. 125 of 18th September, 1931, and No. 35 of
18th March, 1932.]
[2557] Office of the Minister for Health,
Sydney, 17th July, 1931.
HIS Excellency the Governor, -with the advice of the Executive Council, has
approved of the subjoined Regulations under the Pure Food Act, 1908,
which have been made by the Board of Health, on the recommendation of
the Advisory Committee, under the powers conferred by that Act.
W. T. ELY, Minister for Health. '
PURE FOOD ACT, 1908'.
All previous Regulations made under the provisions of the Pure Food
Act, 1908, are hereby repealed and the following- substituted therefor.
In these Regulations the expression “ The Act ” means the Pure Food
Act, 1908.
GENERAL REGULATIONS.
I.—Labels.
(1) Except in the case of a package of food which has been exempted by
any Regulation from all or any of the requirements of this subclause, there
shall be legibly and durably written on or attached to every package of fdod
packed or enclosed for sale, a label containing in addition to any informa-
tion required by the Act to be indicated, the following particulars:—
(a) The name of the substance or product.
( b ) In case of compounded, mixed, or blended foods, words which indi-
cate that the contents are compounded, mixed, or blended, together
with the words “ Compound,” “ Blend,” or other words, as the case
may require.
(c) Name and business address of manufacturer or importer, or vendor,
or packer.
(2) All the particulars required by the Act or Regulations to be contained
in a label shall be printed in a portion of the label, which shall be directly
attached to the package, and shall be in a position equally prominent with
t 80955—8
NEW SOUTH WALES.


that of the name of the substance or product and the name of the manu-
facturer. Upon this portion of the label there shall be no other words than
the actual words required by the Act or Regulations.
(3) Except where otherwise specifically provided in these Regulations the
statements required by the Act and Regulations to be contained in a label
shall appear together in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than,
sis points face measurement printed in such colours as to afford a distinct
colour contrast to the ground. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
in these Regulations contained, words required to be written in a label in
letters of not less than six points face measurement may be written in letters,
of proportionately reduced size when the package is so small as to prevent
the use of letters of the prescribed size.
(4) A label shall not include any comment on, reference to, or explana-
tion of any statement required by the Act or by the Regulations -which,
directly or by implication, contradicts, qualifies, or modifies such statement
of the contents in such label.
(5) There shall not be written in the statement or label attached to any
package containing any article of food the word “ imitation ”or any word or
words implying that the article is a substitute for any food, unless the use of
the said word or words is specifically required or permitted by these Regula-
tions.
(6) No label which describes any article of food shall include the word
“pure” or any word of the same significance, unless the article is of the-
composition, strength, purity or quality prescribed by the Act or by the-
Regulations, and unless it is free from added foreign substances.
2. —Preservatives.
(1) The addition of a preservative substance to any article of food, except
as specifically permitted by the Regulations, is hereby prohibited. -^
(2) “ Preservative ” means any substance which is capable of inhibiting,,
retarding or arresting the process of fermentation, acidification or other de-
composition of food or of masking any of the evidences of putrefaction, and
includes benzoic acid and benzoates, sulphur dioxide and sulphites, boric
acid, salicylic acid, hypochlorites; but does not include salt (sodium chlo-
ride), saltpetre (sodium or potassium nitrate), sugars, acetic acid or vinegar,,
alcohol or potable spirits, herbs, hop extract, spices and essential oils used,
for flavouring purposes or any substance added to food by the process of
curing known as “ smoking.”
(3) Where the addition of a preservative substance to an article of food
is specifically permitted by these Regulations no more than one kind of'
preservative substance shall bo added to any one kind of food, or to any
mixture of two or more kinds of food.
(4) Articles of food prepared in part from food in which a preservative is.
permitted shall not contain more preservative than results from the addi-
tion of the preservatised food or foods.
(5) There shall be written in the label attached to every package contain-
ing any food mixed with a preservative substance, in bold-faced sans-serif
capital letters of not less than six points face measurement, a statement in
the folio-wing form: —
PRESERVATIZED.
THIS FOOD CONTAINS NOT MORE THAN [here insert the
number ] GRAINS OF [here insert the chemical name of the preservative']
TO THE \here insert the uord “pound” in ike case of solid food, or the
word ‘■‘pint” in the case of liquid food.]
2


(6) There shall be written in the label attached to the package containing
any substance intended for use as a food preservative a statement showing
the chemical name of the substance for which preservative action is
claimed, and the proportion present, in the following form;—■
“ This package contains per cent, of ”
3. —Flavourings and Colourings.
(1) The addition of a flavouring substance, or of a colouring substance,
to any article of food, except as specifically permitted by the Regulations, is
hereby prohibited.
(2) When a colouring or a flavouring has been added to any article of food
there shall be written in the label attached to any package of food so
•coloured or so flavoured, in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less
than six points face measurement, a statement in that one of the three forms
following wdiich indicates the fact of admixed colouring, or of admixed
flavouring, or of both, as the case may require:—
ARTIFICIALLY COLOURED.
ARTIFICIALLY FLAVOURED.
ARTIFICIALLY COLOURED AND FLAVOURED.
Provided that subelause (2) of this Regulation shall not apply to the
following foods: —
Cheese (all classes).
Confectionery.
Pastry.
Ice cream and flavoured ices.
Fruit jelly crystals.
Nor to the colouring of the following articles:—
Butter.
Sausage skins.
Soft cured fish with annatto.
Vor to the colouring of the following articles when they are artificially
coloured with caramel only:—
Spirits.
Vinegar.
Sauces.
Non-excisable fermented drinks.
Summer or “ temperance ” drinks.
Aerated waters and cordials.
Imitation fruit flavour, or imitation fruit essences, or imitation fruit
extract.
RTor to the flavouring of the following articles:—
Cocoa.
Chocolate.
Preparations of cocoa and chocolate.
4.—Packages, Containers, and Appliances.
Every person engaged in the manufacture, preparation, storing, preserva-
tion, packing or delivery of any article of food for sale shall observe the
following rules: —
(1) A package, container or appliance shall not be used in connection
with moist food, if it has in contact with the food a surface com-
posed of lead or zinc.


Regulation.
Arsenic calculated
as Grains As 2 0 3 .
Lead calculated as
Grains of Metal.
Tin calculated,
as Grains of
Metal.
Cream, of tartar
1/100 per lb.
1/7 per lb.
Nil.
Acid phosphate
1/100 „
1/7
Nil.
Baking powder
i/ioo „
1/7
Nil.
Custard powder
1/100 „
1/7
Nil.
Malt and malt preparations included
in Regulation 18
1/100 „
1/7
2 per lb.
Vegetables (fresh)
1/100 „
3/100 „
Nil.
„ (canned)
1/100 „
1/7
2 per lb.
Gelatine
3/100 „
1/7
Nil.
Milk and milk products (in tins)
Nil.
Nil.
2 per lb..
Sauces
1/100 per pint.
1/7 per pint.
Nil.
Vinegar
1/100 „
1/7
1/7 per lb.
Nil.
Pickles
1/100 per lb.
Nil.
Glucose
1/100 „
1/7
Nil.
„ (iii tins)
1/100 „
1/7
2 per lb.
Honey
Nil.
1/7
2 „
Fruit and fruit products (in tins)
1/100 per lb.
1/7
2 „
JNon-excisable fermented drinks
1 /100 per gal.
1/100 per gal.
Nil.
Summer or temperance drinks
1/100 „
1/100 „
Nil.
Ale and beer
1/100 „
1/100 „
Nil.
Bish, meat, and other foods in tins not
elsewhere included
1/100 per lb.
1/7 per lb.
2 per lb.
Fresh fruit
1/100 „
3/100 „
Nil.
Notes.—(a) The proportions here specified refer to total contents of container.
(6) One-hundredth grain arsenic per pound equals 1-4 parts per million.
(c) One-seventh grain load per pound equals twenty parts per million.
(2) A package, container or appliance shall not he used if it yields to
food coming in contact with it, any poisonous or injurious sub-
stance.
(3) A package, container or appliance made of tin plate shall not, if
soldered, be used for holding food, unless it be outside soldered, or
if lacquered, unless the lacquer completely covers the tinned sur-
face within the package, container or appliance.
5. —Poisonous Metals in Foods.
Flo food substance shall contain any antimony, arsenic, lead, tin, or other
poisonous metal, or compound of any of them.
Provided that each food substance specified in the following table may
contain arsenic, lead or tin, or their compounds, in a quantity not exceed-
ing that specified in the table opposite to the name of such food.
Provided that when any of the above substances are used as ingredients
in the preparation of other foodstuffs, the latter may contain the amounts
of poisonous metals unavoidably introduced thereby.
Provided also that any substance other than those in the above list which
is used in the preparation of food shall, if standardised in the latest edition
of the British Pharmacopoeia or British Pharmaceutical Codex comply with
such standard also in regard to poisonous metallic content.


6. —Prescribed Sizes of Letters.
The following shall he the sizes and descriptions of the letters used in
labels: —
72 points—
ADAMS
48 points—
GREEN
30 points—-
JONES
24 points—
BROWN
18 points—
CONTINENTAL
12 points—-
UNSURPASSABLE
10 points—
DISAPPEARANCES
8 points—
SCIENTIFIC
6 points—
UN SO PH IST! CAT ED
7. —Boiler Preservatives.
No person shall use, or cause or suffer to be used, in any boiler for
producing steam which is brought into contact with food in the process of
manufacture for sale, any boiler preservative containing any of the follow-
ing substances or compounds of them: —
Arsenic. Antimony.
8. —Insecticides and Vermin Exterminators.
No person shall keep, spread, or use, or suffer to be kept, spread, or used,
any preparation containing arsenic, strychnine, or other poison, so as to
expose any food for sale to risk of contamination therewith.


9. — Artificial Sweetening Substances.
No food substance stall contain any saccharin, saxin, dulcin, glucin, or
other synthetic sweetening substance, except as specifically allowed by the
Regulations.
10.— Exemptions from Certain Labelling Provisions.
Packages of food named or indicated hereunder shall be exempt from all
the provisions of the Act or Regulations which require that every package
of food packed or enclosed for sale shall bear a label, except such require-
ments as to labelling with regard to quality, flavouring, colouring, preserva-
tion or medication as are specifically required by the Act or these Regula-
tions
(1) Food substances, weighed, counted, or measured in the presence
of the purchaser.
(2) Bread (all varieties).
(3) Pood substances not being mixtures put up in unsealed paper
packages on retail traders’ premises for ready sale over the counter.
(4) Meat as standardized by Regulation 19 (1), (2), (3), (4), and (5),
with the exception of oysters in bottles.
SPECIFIC REGULATIONS.
11. — Flour, Bread, and Meals.
Flour.
(1) Flour is the fine, clean, and sound product obtained by bolting wheat-
meal. It shall not be chemically bleached; it shall contain not more than
thirteen and five-tenths parts per centum of moisture, not less than one and
two-tenths parts per centum of nitrogen, not more than five-tenths of one
part per centum of fibre, and shall yield not more than one part per centum
of ash. It shall not contain any foreign matter.
Whole-wheat Flour.
(1a) Whole-wheat flour is the product obtained by grinding wheat without
any process of sieving. It shall be clean and sound and obtained from
well-cleaned, sound milling wheat, and it shall contain all the constituents
of such wheat. It shall contain not more than fourteen parts per centum
of moisture. It shall not contain any added substance. Mixtures of flour
and bran shall not be deemed to be whole-wheat flour.
Self-raising Flour.
(2) Self-raising flour is flour, with or without the addition of not more
than ten parts per centum of other wholesome foodstuffs, to which the
ingredients of baking powder have been added. It shall liberate not less
than forty-five grains of carbon dioxide per pound when moistened and
heated, and it shall contain not more than ten grains of sulphates, calculated
as calcium sulphate, per pound.
Labelling.
Every package containing any self-raising flour or other flour to which
has been added an acid phosphate shall have in the label immediately fol-
lowing the name of the food the words
PREPARED WITH ACID PHOSPHATE BAKING POWDER
in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than six points face
measurement.


Bread.
(3) Bread is the porous substance obtained by the moistening, kneading,
panification, and baking of flour, with provision for the mechanical separa-
tion of the dough by air or carbonic acid gas, and properly baked. It shall
contain not more than forty-five parts per centum of water in any part of
the loaf; it shall yield not more than two parts per centum of total ash, nor
more than two-tenths of one part per centum of ash insoluble in decinormal
solution of hydrochloric acid. It shall not contain any foreign mineral sub-
stance except salt (sodium chloride) ; and ten grammes of the crumb taken
from the centre of the loaf shall not contain more acid than is required for
the neutralization of two cubic centimetres of decinormal solution of sodium
hydroxide.
Whole-wheat Bread.
(4) Whole-wheat bread is the porous substance obtained by baking dough
made from whole-wheat flour, to which not more than twenty parts per
centum of flour may be added, with provision for “ raising ” by air or carbon
dioxide. It may contain salt and milk or dried milk.
Brown, Barley, and Bye Bread.
(5) Brown bread (varieties), or bread made from other than wheat grain,
is the porous substance obtained by the moistening, kneading, panification,
and baking of the meal obtained by grinding sound clean grain. It may
contain malt extract.
Diabetic Bread, Diabetic Flour, or other Diabetic Food.
(6) There shall be written in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not
less than ten points face measurement on the label attached to every pack-
age containing bread, flour, or other food labelled as being specially suitable!
for persons suffering from diabetes, a statement in the following form;—
This (here insert the name of the article) contains not more than (here
insert the number of parts per centum) parts per centum of car-
bohydrates present in the form of starch and/or water soluble
carbohydrates.
Oatmeal.
(7) Oatmeal is the meal produced by grinding oats (Arena saliva ) after
removal of the husk. It shall contain not less than five parts per centum
of fat or of ethereal extract, and not more than two and five-tenths parts
per centum of meal derived from grain other than oats.
Bice.
(8) Eice is the husked grain of Oryza sativa.
Polished Bice.
(9) Polished rice is rice polished with or without talc. It may coni air*
glucose, not more than five-tenths of one part per centum of talc, and no*:
more than a trace of permitted colouring matter. It shall not contain any
other foreign substance.
Bice Flour or Ground Bice.
(10) Eice flour, or ground rice, is the meal obtained by grinding husked
rice. It shall yield not more than one and five-tenths parts per centum of
ash. It shall not contain any foreign substance.


Maize Meal.
(11) Maize meal is the meal obtained by grinding maize. It shall contain
not less than one and one-tenth parts per centum of nitrogen, and shall
yield not more than one and six-tenths parts per centum of ash.
Mixed Meals.
(12) There shall be written in the label attached to every package which
contains a mixture of meals of diverse origin the words MIXED
MEALS in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than
eighteen points face measurement, in such colours as to afford a distinct
colour contrast to the ground. The said words shall constitute the first line
of the label, and no other word shall appear on the same lino. There shall
also be written in the label in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less
than ten points face measurement, a statement of the kinds and approximate
proportions of the meals of which the mixture is composed in the following
form: THIS PACKAGE CONTAINS
[here insert the names of the several meals, and a statement of the approxi-
mate proportion of each of them contained in the mixture .]
Corn Flour.
(13) Corn flour is the starch powder derived from any variety of corn or
grain. It shall yield not more than seven-tenths of one part per centum of
ash.
12.—Cream of Tartar.
Cream of tartar shall contain not less than ninety-nine parts per centum
of acid tartrates, calculated as potassium acid tartrate (KHCJLOo); and
not more than one part per centum of sulphates, calculated as calcium
sulphate (CaSCh).
13. —Acid Phosphate Powder.
(1) Acid phosphate powder is any acid phosphate which, with or without
starch or other wholesome farinaceous substance, can be used to replace
cream of tartar in the preparation of a chemical leaven for baking purposes.
(2) Its available acidity shall be such that if 1.98 grammes of the powder
is dissolved in 10 cubic centimetres of a normal solution of sodium
hydroxide, the mixture shall have an acid reaction when tested with phenol-
phthalcin. It shall not contain more than two parts per centum of sul-
phates, calculated as calcium sulphate (CaSCh). It shall not contain more
than three-tenths of one part per centum of any compound of aluminium,
calculated as alumina (AhOs).
Labelling.
(3) The words “ cream of tartar,” or any contraction of them, or any
words which resemble or suggest cream of tartar or tartaric acid, shall not
appear in any label on a package containing an acid phosphate powder.
Every package containing an acid phosphate for use in food, or containing
any baking powder to which has been added an acid phosphate shall have as
the first words in the label the words ACID PHOSPHATE
in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than twelve points face
measurement.


14.—Baking Powder.
(1) Baking powder is a salt, or a mixture of salts, with or a
farinaceous diluent substance which evolves carbon dioxide on being mois-
tened and heated, and which may be used in the preparation of food as a
chemical leaven. It shall contain not more than one and five-tenths parts
per centum of sulphates, calculated as calcium sulphate (CaSOO ; and shall
yield not less than ten parts per centum by weight of carbon dioxide.
It shall not contain more than one-tenth of one part per centum of
aluminium compounds, calculated as alumina (AhCfi).
Labelling.
(2) The word “ egg' ” and expressions or devices which imply or suggest
the presence of egg or the equivalent of egg shall not be written on or
attached to any package which contains baking powder.
15.— Custard Powder.
(1) Custard powder or blanc mange powder is a powder prepared from
starch with or without other food substances, with or without permitted
colouring and/or flavouring matter.
Labelling.
(2) The word “ egg ” or the word “ cream ” or expressions or devices
which imply or suggest the presence or the equivalent of egg or cream shall
not be written on or attached to any package which contains custard powder.
1G. — Infants’ Food.
(1) Infants’ Food is any food described or sold as suitable for infants.
(2) It shall not contain more than three-tenths of one part per centum
of fibre, nor any mineral substance insoluble in decinormal hydrochloric
acid, nor any preservative, and shall be free from rancidity.
(3) Any infants’ food sold as suitable for infants under the age of six
months, when prepared for use in accordance with the directions for an
infant aged one month, shall contain not less than two and one-tenth parts
per centum of fat, and not less than four parts per centum of lactose, or
other water soluble carbohydrate.
(4) There shall be legibly and prominently written in the label attached
to every package of infants’ food packed or enclosed for sale—■
(a) The date when the food was packed.
( b) A statement of the source or sources of the proteins and 'fats, and
of the nature of the carbohydrates present.
(c) A statement showing the percentage composition of the food when
prepared in accordance with the accompanying instructions for an
infant aged one month.
( d ) A statement showing the average percentage composition of human
milk.
For the purpose of this Eegulation, the average percentage com-
position of human milk shall be deemed to be —
Proteins . . . . . . . . 1.5 per cent.
Fat 3.S per cent.
Lactose .. . . . . . . .. 0.3 per cent.
Ash . . . . .. .. . . 0.2 per cent.


Composition of food for
an infant aged one month —
Human Milk. Prepared Food.
Proteins
1.5 per cent.
Pat
3.5 „
Lactose
6.5 „
Other carbohydrates
Nil
Ash
0.2 „
Food value, ex-
pressed as Cal-
ories, in one day’s
food
400 (approx.)
(e) A statement showing the food expressed as Calories, con-
tained in the quantity of prepared food recommended to be given
per day at the age of one month; and a statement of the average
number of Calories required per day by an infant aged one month,
which for the purposes of this Regulation shall be taken as 400
Calories.
(/) The statements of percentage composition and of the number of
Calories required in the three immediately preceding paragraphs
shall appear in the following form: —•
.(g) Exact directions as to the method of preparing the food, such direc-
tions to include a statement of the weight corresponding to the
measure of the amount of food directed to be used in the prepara-
tion.
’Xh) A statement of the average amount of prepared food to be given to
an infant at one time, and the number of times such amount is to
be given per day; such statement to be given for each month of
age up to six months.
Provided that the statements referred to in paragraphs (c), (d), (e), (/).
and ( h ) of this Regulation need not appear if the label contains the words,
“UNSUITABLE FOR I N FANTS UN DER TH E AGE OF SIX MONTHS,”
in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than six points face
measurement.
1Y. —Invalids* Pood.
(1) Invalids’ food is any food described or sold as an article of food suit-
able for invalids. It shall be composed of food substances modified, pre-
pared, or compounded so as to possess special nutritive and assimilative
properties which render it specially suitable for use as food by invalids.
(2) Invalids’ foods shall not contain any preservative or other foreign
substance.
Labelling.
(3) There shall be written in the label attached to any package containing
any article of food described as or purporting to be invalids’ food, a state-
ment of the ingredients contained in it on which the claim of special suit-
ability for invalids is based.
18. — Malt, Malt Extract, &c.
Malt.
(1) Malt is the seed of barley or of some other cereal, which has been
caused to germinate, and which has been subsequently dried.


Malt Extract,
(2) Malt extract is tlie substance obtained by evaporating an aqueous
extract of malt at a temperature not exceeding 55° C. It shall contain
not less than seventy parts per centum of the total solids derived wholly from
malt. Its diastasic power shall be such that one hundred grains of the
extract will in thirty minutes, at a temperature of 40° C., convert two hun-
dred and fifty grains of pure anhydrous potato starch into an equivalent
amount of maltose, as estimated by the Harrison-Gair method.
Balters' or “Commercial” Molt Extract, or Bakers’ Maltose.
(3) Bakers’ or “commercial” malt extract, or bakers’ maltose, shall con-
tain not less than'seventy parts per centum of solids wholly derived from
malt.
Liquid Malt Extract.
(4) Liquid malt extract shall contain not less than fifty parts per centum
of solids wholly derived from malt. It shall possess diastasic power corre-
sponding to that of malt extract.
Malt Extract and Cod-Liver Oil.
(5) Malt extract and cod-liver oil is an emulsion composed of malt extract
and cod-liver oil. The proportion of cod-liver oil present shall be not less
than fifteen parts per centum by weight. The proportions of the ingre-
dients present shall be declared on the label in the following form in bold-
faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than six points face measurement,
CONTAINING NOT LESS THAN [ here insert the number of parts per
centum ] PARTS PER CENT. BY WEIGHT OFCOD-LIVER OIL.
19.- —Meat, Frozen and Manufactured Meat, &c.
Meat.
(1) Meat is the edible part of any mammal, fish, fowl, crustacean,
mollusc, or other animal in good health and condition at the time of
slaughter, generally used as food, properly dressed. If it bears a name
descriptive of its kind, composition, or origin, it shall correspond thereto.
Fresh and Chilled Meat.
(2) Fresh or chilled meat is meat which has been kept at any temperature
above its freezing point.
Frozen Meat.
(3) Frozen or refrigerated meat is meat which has boon reduced to a
temperature "which is below its freezing point.
Corned , Fielded, or Salted Meat.
(4) Corned, pickled, or salted meat is uncooked meat prepared with salt,
saltpetre (potassium or sodium nitrate), sugar, vinegar, or spices, either
singly or in combination.
SmoJced Meat.
(5) Smoked meat is corned, pickled, or salted uncooked meat treated with
smoke.
Soft-Cured Fish.
(6) The colouring of soft-cured fish with annatto is hereby permitted
without declaration.


21 lanufaciured Meats.
(7) Manufactured meats, other than those specifically standardised, are
meats simple or mixed, whole, minced, or comminuted, cooked or uncooked,
in bulk or in package, with or without the addition of salt, saltpetre
(potassium or sodium nitrate), sugar, vinegar, spices, herbs, smoke, edible
oils, or rendered meat fat, singly or in combination.
Labelling.
(8) There shall be written in the label attached to every package which
contains manufactured meat or meats a statement of the name or names of
the contained meats in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than
six points face measurement.
Dripping.
(9) Dripping is clean fat rendered from meat. It shall not contain any
foreign substance except salt (sodium chloride). It shall be free from
rancidity; it shall contain not more than two parts per centum of free fatty
acid calculated as oleic acid, not more than one part per centum of foreign
matter, and not more than two parts per centum of water.
Lard.
(10) Lard is the clean fat rendered from the meat of the hog. It shall be
free from rancidity; it shall contain not more than two parts per centum
of free fatty acid calculated as oleic acid, not more than one part per centum
of substance other than hog fat unavoidably incorporated with it in course
of rendering, and not more than one part per centum of water. It shall not
contain any foreign substance.
Minced Meat.
(11) Minced meat is chopped or comminuted fresh or chilled meat.
It shall contain no preservative, no farinaceous substance nor any other
foreign substance,
Sausage Meat, or Saveloy Sausage Meat.
(12) Sausage meat, or saveloy sausage meat, is chopped or comminuted
meat, with or without salt, sugar, spices, herbs, saltpetre (potassium or
sodium nitrate), and wholesome farinaceous substances. It shall contain
not less than seventy-five parts per centum of meat of the kind or kinds
designated in the label attached to the outside of the package in which it is
contained, and not more than six parts per centum of starch.
Provided that if sausage meat or saveloy sausage meat be sold enclosed
in a skin of animal origin, the said skin shall be deemed to be an integral
portion of the said meat.
Prohibition.
(13) Saltpetre (potassium or sodium nitrate) shall nor be mixed with
salted, pickled, or corned, smoked, or manufactured meat, sausage meat or
saveloy sausage meat in any larger proportion than fourteen grains per
pound calculated as IQSTCb.
Potassium or sodium nitrite may replace or be used in combination with
potassium or sodium nitrate, but not in larger proportion than one grain
per pound calculated as KNO„, provided that the total amount of nitrate
and nitrite present shall not be greater than fourteen grains per pound.
Permitted Colouring Matter.
(14) The colouring of the skins aforesaid with any permitted colouring
matter is hereby permitted without declaration on the label.


Preservative.
(15) (a) The addition to sausage meat, or saveloy sausage meat, of the
preservative substance sulphur dioxide (or sulphites calculated as sulphur
dioxide) in proportion not exceeding three and five-tenths grains to the
pound is hereby permitted.
(b) The presence in cooked, smoked, or dried sausage meat, brawn,
potted meat, and cooked pressed meat, of the preservative substance sulphur
•dioxide (or sulphites calculated as sulphur dioxide) in proportion not
•exceeding one and eight-tenths grains to the pound, is hereby permitted.
Meat Extract, Meat Essence, or Meat Juice.
(16) Meat extract, meat essence, or meat juice, is the product obtained
from meat by extraction, expression, or concentration. It shall contain the
protein of flesh, but no extract of yeast or other foreign substance, except
salt and condiments, and, in the case of meat juice, glycerine, provided
that the presence and amount per centum of glycerine be declared on the
label.
Labelling.
(17) In the label attached to every package which contains meat extract,
meat essence, or meat juice, there shall be written in bold-faced sans-serif
■capital letters of not less than six points face measurement the name or
names of the kind or kinds of meat from which its contents have been
prepared.
Meat Paste.
(18) Meat paste is a paste prepared with meat, with or without farina-
ceous material and other wholesome food and flavouring substances.
Labelling.
(19) There shall be written in the label attached to every package which
contains meat paste, in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than
six points face measurement, a statement of the proportion of meat con-
tained in the paste in the following form;— THIS PASTE CONTAINS
NOT LESS THAN [here insert ihe name or names of the meat nr meats
accompanied by a statement of the approximate proportion.']
Oyster and Other Shell Fish.
(20) (a) Mo person shall pack or sell oysters or other shell .fish which
have been procured from any area prohibited under the provisions of any
Act.
Labelling.
( b ) Mo person shall sell any oysters or other shell fish in containers,
unless there is attached thereto a label in which is written in bold-faced
sans-serif capital letters of not less than eight points face measurement
the following particulars:—
Marne and address of vendor.
Trade description of contents.
The date of removal from shell.
Particulars of source of supply and from whom and whero
obtained.
Provided that clause (b) shall not apply to oysters or other shell fish
sold in the shell, or served for any meal, or processed and packed in her-
metically sealed containers.


Fish Paste.
(21) The colouring of fish paste with any permitted colouring matter is
hereby permitted subject to declaration.
20. Vegetables.
(1) Vegetables are the succulent, clean, and sound edible parts of her-
baceous plants commonly used for food.
(2) Dried or dehydrated vegetables are the clean, sound products obtained
by the desiccation of properly matured and prepared vegetables under con-
ditions such that no harmful substance is absorbed by or mixed with them.
(3) Canned or tinned vegetables are properly matured and prepared fresh
vegetables, with or without salt, sterilised by heat, and packed in hermeti-
cally sealed containers.
21. Gelatine.
(1) Gelatine sold for consumption by man is the clean, wholesome pro-
duct obtained from skin, membranes, bones, and other collagenous bodies.
It shall yield not more than three parts per centum of ash. A five per
centum aqueous solution shall form a jelly when kept at a temperature of
Cs° F. for two hours. A five per centum aqueous solution prepared with
sterilised water at a temperature not exceeding 90° F. shall not become
alkaline, or emit any unpleasant odour after standing for forty-eight hours
in a Petri dish at a temperature of 80° F. It shall not contain more than
thirty parts per million of copper, nor more than one hundred parts per
million of zinc.
Preservative.
(2) Gelatine may contain sulphur dioxide (or sulphites calculated as
sulphur dioxide) in proportion not exceeding seven grains of sulphur
dioxide to the pound of dry, marketable gelatine, sold for consumption by
man. Declaration on the label of the presence of sulphur dioxide or of
sulphites, in gelatine sold for consumption by man is not required unless
the proportion contained in it exceeds five-tenths of one grain of sulphur
dioxide to the pound.
Labelling.
(3) There shall be written in the label attached to every package which
contains gelatine sold for consumption by man, in bold-faced sans-serif
capital letters, of not less than eight points face measurement, the words
FOR FOOD. The said words shall form the first line of the label, and
no other word shall appear on the same line.
22. —Edible Fats and Oils, and Salad Oils.
General Standard.
(1) Edible fats and edible oils, or salad oils, arc the fats and oils com-
monly recognised as wholesome foodstuff's. They shall be free from ran-
cidity and decomposition, and from offensive odour and taste, and shall
contain not more than one part per centum of free fatty acids calculated
as oleic acid. They shall not contain any mineral oil.
Labelling.
(2) There shall be written in the label attached to every package which
contains any edible fat, or any edible oil or salad oil, or a mixture of such
fats or oils of diverse origin, a statement, in bold-faced sans-serif capital


letters of not less than six points face measurement, of the kind, or in the
case of a mixture, of the kinds and the proportions of fats and oils which
the package contains.
In the case of a mixture of one or more edible oils or fats with olive oil,
such statement shall be in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters not exceed-
ing- six points face measurement of the kinds and the proportions of fats
and oils which the package contains.
Olive Oil.
(3) Olive oil is the oil obtained by expression from the sound mature
fruit of the cultivated olive tree ( Olea europea Li). It shall have a specific
gravity of from 0.913 to 0.919 at a temperature of CO degrees F., a refractive
index of from 1.4660 to 1.4720 at a temperature of 77 degrees F., a saponi-
fication value of from 185 to 196, and an iodine value of from 79 to 90. It
shall contain not more than three parts per centum of free fatty acids,
calculated as oleic acid, and shall otherwise conform to the general standard
for edible fats and oils. It shall not contain any other oil.
“Lucca” Oil, “Sublime Salad” Oil, and “Virgin” Oil.
(4) “ Lucca ” oil, “ sublime salad ” oil, or “ virgin ” oil is an oil which
conforms with the standard for olive oil and with the general standard for
■edible fats and oils.
Labelling.
(5) There shall not be written on or attached to any package containing
any edible oil for sale which does not conform with the standard for olive oil
and with the general standard for edible oils and fats, the word “ olive,” or
the word “Lucca,” or the words “ sublime salad,” or the word “ virgin ” or
any expression which resembles or suggests the said words or any of them.
Provided that this paragraph shall not apply to a statement of the kinds
of oils contained in a mixture of edible fats and oils required by paragraph
(2) of this Eegulation.
23. —Margarine.
(1) “Margarine” includes all substances made from animal o? vegetable
fats or oils in imitation or semblance- of butter, and all preparations
resembling butter, the fatty contents of which are not derived exclusively
from milk.
(2) Margarine shall be mixed with not less than one part of potato-starch
or Queensland arrowroot ( Ccmna eclulis ) per one thousand parts of mar-
garine; or, alternatively, not less than five parts per centum by weight of
sesame oil. It shall conform with the general standard for edible fats and
•oils; it shall not contain more than sixteen parts per centum of water, nor
more than ten parts per centum of butter fat; and it shall not contain any
other substance except salt (sodium chloride) and milk solids.
(3) The sesame oil added to margarine in accordance with this Keguln-
tion shall give the following chemical reaction; —■
A mixture of one part by volume of sesame oil and ninety-nine |iarts
of cotton-seed oil or of earth-nut oil, with one hundred parts of fuming
hydrochloric acid of a specific gravity of 1.19 and a few drops of a 2'
per centum alcoholic solution of furfural, well shaken, shall, after allow-
ing to separate, show a distinct red colouration in the acid layer. The
furfural should be recently distilled and showing little odour.
15


(4) All margarine shall contain the prescribed percentage of starch or of
sesame oil. Ko starch, except as aforesaid, and no sesame oil, except that
giving the aforesaid reaction, shall be used. The fat contained in mar-
garine shall have a maximum Kirschner value of 4.5.
Labelling.
(6) There shall be written in the label attached to every package which
contains margarine in hold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than
thirty points face measurement, the word
MARGARINE.
There shall he conspicuously attached to every vessel used to hold mar-
garine for consumption on the premises hy customers in any place where
food is sold the word MARGARINE written in black
bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than eighteen points face
measurement.
The words “ butter,” or “ butterine,” and expressions which include or
resemble the said words, shall not be written in the statement or label
written on or attached to any package which contains margarine, nor on any
vessels used as aforesaid.
24. —Milk.
(1) Milk is the lacteal secretion of the cow, but does not include lacteal
secretion obtained from the cow during fifteen days immediately before and
ten days immediately following on parturition. It shall be clean and fresh,
and shall be obtained by completely emptying the udder of the healthy cow
properly fed and kept.
It shall contain not less than eight and five-tenths parts per centum of
milk solids not fat, and three and two-tenths parts per centum of milk fat.
Its freezing point shall not lie between zero Centigrade and —0.35 degrees
Centigrade, ns determined in the Hortvct Cryoscopc. When 10 cubic cen-
timetres of the milk require more than 1.0 cubic centimetres of deoinormal
sodium hydrate solution for its neutralisation, using’ phonolphthalein as
indicator, 0.003 degree Centigrade shall be added to the observed figure for
each 0.1 cubic centimetre of decinormal sodium hydrate required in excess
of I.G cubic centimetres, thus bringing the corrected freezing point closer to
zero. The freezing point of milk shall not be determined when ton cubic
centimetres of the milk require more than 4 cubic centimetres of decinormal
sodium hydrate for its neutralisation.
Raiv Millc.
(2) Eaw Milk is milk which has not been subjected to any process or
treatment other than cleansing and cooling, and contains not more than
300,000 micro-organisms per cubic centimetre, and no bacillus coli in one-
hundredth part of a cubic centimetre.
Pasteurised Milh.
(3) Pasteurised Milk is milk which—
(i) has been effectively pasteurised by one of the following methods: —•
(a) by heating all of the milk to a temperature of not less
than IYB and not more than 188 degrees Fahrenheit, and
immediately afterwards reducing it to a temperature
below 40 degrees Fahrenheit;
16


( h ) by heating all of the milk to a temperature of not less
than 142 and not more than 148 degrees Fahrenheit, and
holding it at such temperature for not less than thirty
minutes and immediately afterwards reducing it to a
temperature below 40 degrees Fahrenheit.
(ii) contains not more than 200,000 micro-organisms per cubic centi-
metre at any time after pasteurisation and contains no bacillus
coli in one-tenth of a cubic centimetre.
Special Raw Milk.
(4) Special Eaw Milk is milk which—
(i) is obtained from a dairy herd or herds certified free from tuber-
culosis by the Department of Agriculture, Department of Public
Health, or a Veterinary Surgeon approved by the Board, and
to which herd or herds no animal is admitted before being so
certified to be free from tuberculosis;
(ii) contains not more than 50,000 micro-organisms per cubic centi-
metre and no bacillus coli in one-tenth of a cubic centimetre;
(iii) is delivered to the customer in bottles sealed with an approved
seal with the designation “ Special Kaw Milk ” clearly shown
thereon together with the name and address of the dairyman on
whose dairy premises the milk was produced, and the day such
milk was produced, and, save with the written consent of the
Board, no other word or device;
(iv) is not subjected to any other treatment than cleansing and cooling.
Special Pasteurised Milk.
(5) Special Pasteurised Milk is milk which —
(i) is obtained from a dairy herd or herds certified free from tuber-
culosis by the Department of Agriculture, Department of Public
Health, or a Veterinary Surgeon approved by the Board, and to
which herd or herds no animal is admitted before being so certified
to be free from tuberculosis;
(ii) contains not more than 50,000 micro-organisms per cubic centi-
metre, and no bacillus coli in one-tenth of a cubic centimetre;
(iii) is delivered to the consumer in bottles sealed with an approved
seal with the designation “ Special Pasteurised Milk ” clearly
shown thereon together with the name and address of the dairy-
man on whose dairy premises the milk was produced, and the day
such milk was produced, and, save with the written consent of
the Board no other word or device;
(iv) is treated by heating all of the milk to a temperature of not less
than 142 and not more than 148 degrees Fahrenheit, and holding
it at such temperature for not less than thirty minutes and imme-
diately afterwards reducing it to a temperature below 40 degrees
Fahrenheit.
Cream.
(6) Cream is that portion of milk in which, either through rest or
mechanical separation, the greater part of the milk-fat has become con-
centrated. It shall not contain any foreign substance. All cream shall be
sold under one or other of the following denominations: —
Cream which shall mean cream containing not less than thirty-five parts
per centum of milk-fak
17


Reduced Cream •which shall mean cream containing not less than
twenty-five parts per centum of milk-fat.
Labelling.
(7) There shall be written in the label attached to every package which
contains cream the words
CREAM 01 REDUCED CREAM
as the case may be, together with the words
CONTAINING [here insert the number of parts per centum ]
PARTS PER CENT. OF MILK FAT
in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than twelve points face
measurement.
Shim or Separated Milk.
(8) Skim or separated milk shall contain not less than eight and eight-
tenths parts per centum of milk solids not fat.
Labelling of Vessels Containing Shim or Separated Milk.
(9) No person shall carry for sale in any can, vessel, or measure any
skim milk or separated milk, unless the said can, vessel, or measure is
durably and conspicuously marked on the outside with the words
SKIM MILK
The said words shall be conspicuously displayed on the side, shoulder, or
neck of the can, vessel, or measure in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of
not less than seventy-two points face measurement.
Every person who sells skim or separated milk shall, with every quantity
delivered to a customer, deliver also to the person receiving it, a label
printed in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than foruty-eight
points face measurement, statins 1 —
SKIM MILK
UNFIT FOR
INFANTS.


Unsweetened Condensed Milh.
(10) Unsweetened condensed milk is milk which has been condensed by
the evaporation of a portion of its water content, - and sterilised by heat. It
shall contain not less than twenty-eight parts per centum of total milk
solids, and not less than eight parts per centum of milk-fat. It shall be
free from odours and colours foreign to the fresh preparation. It shall not
contain any foreign substance.
Sweetened Condensed Milk.
(11) S-weetened condensed milk is milk which has been condensed by the
evaporation of a portion of its water content, and to which cane sugar has
been added. It shall contain not less than thirty-one parts per centum of
total milk solids, and not less than nine parts per centum of milk-fat. It
shall be free from odours and colours foreign to the fresh preparation. It
shall not contain any foreign substance except cane sugar.
Sweetened Condensed Skim or Separated Milk.
(12) Sweetened condensed skim or separated milk is skimmed or
separated milk which has been condensed by the evaporation of a portion
of its water content, and to which cane sugar has been added. It shall
contain not less than tw r enty-six and five-tenths parts per centum of milk
solids not fat. It shall be free from odours and colours foreign to the
fresh preparation. It shall not contain any foreign substance except cane
sugar.
Unsweetened Condensed Shim or Separated Milk.
(13) Unsweetened condensed skim or separated milk is skimmed or
separated milk which has been condensed by the evaporation of a portion
of its water content, and sterilized by heat. It shall contain not less than
twenty-six and five-tenths parts per centum of milk solids not fat. It shall
be free from odours and colours foreign to the fresh preparation.
Labelling.
(14) There shall be written in the label attached to every package which
contains any sweetened or unsweetened condensed skim or separated milk the
"oris UNFIT FOR INFANTS in bold-faced sans-serif
capital letters of not less than twelve points face measurement. The said
words shall be the first words of the label, and no other words shall be
written in the same line or lines. Additionally, there shall be written across
the face of the whole of the label, in a diagonal line, the words in such
colours as to afford a distinct colour contrast to the ground.
SKIM
MILK
in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than forty-eight points
face measurement.


Concentrated Milk.
(15) Concentrated milk shall be milk which has been concentrated by
the evaporation of portion of its water content. It shall contain not less
than thirty-seven parts per centum of total milk solids, and not less than
ten parts per centum shall be milk-fat. It shall not contain any foreign
substance, except boron compounds calculated as boric acid in proportion
not exceeding three-tenths of one part per centum.
When sffered for sale it shall be in hermetically-sealed containers, the
total capacity of which shall not exceed two gallons.
In the label attached to every package containing concentrated milk there
shall be written in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than ten
points face measurement a statement in the following form: —
CONCENTRATED MILK, PRESER-
VATISED,CONTAINING NOT MORE
THAN -3 PER CENT.BORIC ACID,UN-
FIT FOR INFANTS AND INVALIDS.
“Normal Milk.”
(16) For the purposes of this Regulation, “Normal Milk ” shall be milk
containing not less than three and five-tenths parts per centum of milk-fat,
and eight and five-tenths per centum of milk solids not fat.
Labelling.
(17) There shall be written in the label attached to every package which
contains condensed or concentrated milk, in bold-faced sans-serif capital
letters of not less than six points face measurement, directions for making,
with its contents, milk of a composition at least equal to that of normal
milk, as follows; —
“TO MAKE A FLUID NOT BELOW THE COMPOSITION OF
‘NORMAL MILK' ADD [»«« liutrt the mmber ufpart*] PARTS OF WATER
BY VOLUME TO ONE PART BY VOLU M E OF TH IS MILK."
25.— Dried Milk.
(1) Dried milk is milk which, after the greater part of its water-
content has been removed, has been reduced to a powder. It shall be free
from rancidity. It shall not contain any foreign substance.
(2) There shall be written in the label attached to every package con-
taining dried milk directions for making, with its contents, by dilution
with water, a fluid which shall conform to the standard for “ Normal
Milk” as prescribed in Regulation 24 (16).
26. —Dried Skim Milk or Dried Separated Milk.
(1) Dried skim milk or dried separated milk is skim milk or separated
milk which, after the removal of at least ninety parts per centum of its
water-content, has been reduced to a powder. It shall not contain any
foreign substance. When it is dissolved in or treated with water in the
proportion set out in any label accompanying it, the resulting liquid shall
contain not less than eight and eight-tenths parts per centum of milk
solids not fat.


Labelling.
(2) There shall be written in the label attached to every package which
contains any dried skim milk or dried separated milk the words
UNFIT FOR INFANTS
in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than twelve points face
measurement. They shall occupy one line wholly. Additionally, there
shall be written across the face of the label, in a diagonal line, the words
in such colours as to afford a distinct colour contrast to the ground.
SKIM
MILK
in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than forty-eight points
face measurement.
27. — Milk Fat or Hotter Fat.
Milk-fat or butter-fat is the fat of milk. It shall have a Eeichert-Meissl
number not less than twenty-four (24) as determined by the Eeichert-
Meissl-Leffman-Beam method with the Polenske apparatus, and a specific
(40°C )
gravity not less than 0.905 0 ’ and a Polenske number not more than
14. U U.
three and one-half (3.5).
28. — Butter.
(1) Butter is the clean, non-rancid, fatty substance obtained by churning
milk or cream. It shall contain not less than eighty parts per centum of
milk-fat, not more than sixteen parts per centum of water, nor more than
four parts per centum of salt; it shall not be mixed with any foreign fat
or oil, and it shall not contain any foreign substance except salt (sodium
chloride).
Renovated, Milled, or Process Butter.
(2) Eenovated, milled, or process butter is the product obtained by re-
working butter without- the addition of any substance except milk, cream,
water, and salt. It shall conform with the standard for butter.
Labelling.
(3) There shall be written in the statement or label attached to every
package which contains renovated, milled, or process butter, in bold-faced
sans-serif capital letters of not less than thirty points face measurement,
printed in such colours as to afford a distinct colour contrast to the ground,
the words
RENOVATED
BUTTER.


Packages or Wrappers.
(4) Butter for retail sale may be packed or wrapped in cardboard con-
tainers provided the internal surfaces of such containers are coated com-
pletely with pure paraffin and no person shall pack for sale or sell butter
in cardboard containers unless such containers are coated as prescribed by
this regulation.
29. — Cheese.
Cheese.
(1) Cheese is the solid or semi-solid product obtained by coagulating
milk, cream, or skim milk wdth rennet or acid. It may contain ripening
ferments, seasonings, salt (sodium chloride) and permitted colopring
matter. It shall not contain any foreign fat.
For the purposes of this Eegulation milk shall be deemed to be the milk
of any domestic animal.
Cream Cheese.
(2) Cream cheese shall contain not less than sixty parts per centum of
milk fat in its water-free substance.
Full or Whole Milk Cheese.
Co) Full or whole milk cheese shall contain not less than fifty parts
per centum of milk fat in its 'water-free substance.
Skim-Milk Cheese.
(4) Skim-milk cheese is cheese which contains less than thirty parts per
centum of milk fat in its water-free substance.
Cheese (not described as Cream Cheese, Full or Whole Milk Cheese, or
Skim-Milk Cheese).
(5) Cheese which is not described as cream cheese, full or whole milk
cheese, or skim-milk cheese shall contain not less than thirty parts per
centum of milk fat in its w T ater-free substance.
Cheese Paste.
(6) Cheese paste is a paste prepared from cheese, with or without whole-
some foodstuffs and condiments.
Preservative.
Cl) The addition to cheese paste of sulphur dioxide (or sulphites cal-
culated as sulphur dioxide) in proportion not exceeding two grains to the
pound is hereby permitted.
Labelling.
(8) There shall be written in the statement or label attached to every
package which contains skim-milk cheese, in bold-faced sans-serif capital
letters of not less than eighteen points face measurement, in such colours
as to afford a distinct colour contrast to the ground, the words
SKIM-MILK CHEESE.
Rennet.
(9) Eennet shall not contain any preservative other than salt or glycerine.
Provided that in Eennet used only for cheese-making, a proportion not
exceeding four parts per centum of boric acid may be permitted.


30.—Tea.
(1) Tea is the leaves and leaf-buds of species of Thea prepared by fer-
menting and drying or firing. It shall not contain any exhausted or partly
exhausted leaves, nor any foreign matter, and it shall not be inferior in
composition or in quality to the standard fixed by the Minister for Trade
and Customs under the provisions of the Commonwealth Customs Act,
for the time being in force.
Tea Dust.
(2) Tea dust and tea siftings and fannings are respectively the dust
and the siftings and fannings of tea which conforms with the general
standard for tea. It shall yield not more than five parts per centum of
ash insoluble in water.
81. —Coffee.
(1) Coffee is the seed of one or more of the species of Coffea.
Ground Coffee.
(2) Ground coffee is coffee roasted and ground or otherwise prepared in a
form suitable for making an infusion or a decoction. It shall contain the
fat naturally present in the food, not more than one part per centum of
sugars, and shall yield not more than six parts per centum of ash (of which
the proportion soluble in -water shall be not less than seventy-five parts per
centum). It shall not contain any foreign substance.
Chicory.
(") Chicory is the dried and roasted root of Cichorium intybus.
Coffee and Chicory.
(4) Coffee and chicory is a mixture of ground coffee and ground chicory.
It shall contain not less than fifty parts per centum by weight of coffee. It
shall not contain any foreign substance.
Labelling.
(5) There shall be written in the label attached to every package which
contains coffee mixed with chicory the words “ Coffee and Chicory ” in
larger letters than those of any other word on the label, immediately fol-
lowed by a statement of the percentage proportion in which the ingredients
of the mixture are present, written in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters
of not less than twelve points face measurement, in the following form,: —
CONTAINING NOT LESS THAN
insert the number of parts per centum ] PARTS PER
CENT. OF COFFEE.
(6) The word “ coffee ” and expressions which include the word “ coffee ”
shall not appear in any statement or label written on or attached to any
package which contains a mixture of coffee and chicory, unless it be con-
joined with the words “ and chicory,” or unless the whole phrase “ coffee
and chicory ” be uniformly written in the manner prescribed in clause 5 of
this Eegulation.


32.—Coffee Essence or Coffee Extract, and Coffee .and Chicory
Essence on Extract.
(1) Coffee essence or coffee extract shall be prepared from coffee with or
without the addition of sugar and/or glycerine and shall contain not less
than five-tenths of one part per centum of caffeine.
(2) Coffee and chicory essence or coffee and chicory extract shall be
prepared from coffee, chicory, with or without the addition of sugar and/or
glycerine. It shall contain not less than fifty parts per centum of coffee
extract, nor less than one-fourth of one part per centum of caffeine.
Labelling.
(3) The word “ coffee ” and expressions which include the word “ coffee ”
shall not be written in any label attached to any package which contains
coffee and chicory essence or extract, unless it be conjoined with the words
“ and chicory,” nor unless the whole phrase “ coffee and chicory ” be uni-
formly written in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than twelve
points face measurement, in distinct colour contrast.
Coffee and Milh.
(4) Coffee and milk shall be prepared from condensed milk, sugar, and
coffee extract. It shall contain not less than twelve one-hundreths of one
part per centum of caffeine.
S3.—Cocoa.
General Standard for Cocoa Beans, Cocoa Nibs, and Cocoa Paste.
(1) Cocoa beans are the seeds of *Theohroma cacao, L.; cocoa nibs, or
cracked cocoa, is the roasted, broken cocoa bean freed from its shell or husk,
with or without the germ.
(2) Cocoa paste, cocoa mass, or cocoa slab is the solid or semi-solid mass
produced by grinding cocoa nibs. It shall contain not less than forty-eight
parts per centum of cocoa fat. The water- and fat-free residue of cocoa
paste shall contain not more than nineteen parts per centum of starch
naturally present in cocoa nibs or cracked cocoa (as determined by a diastase
method) ; not more than six and one-third parts per centum of crude fibre;
not more than eight parts per centum of total ash; not more than five and
five-tenths parts per centum of ash insoluble in water; and not more than
four-tenths of one part per centum of ferric oxide.
Cocoa or Cocoa Powder.
(3) Cocoa, or powdered cocoa, is powdered cocoa paste, deprived or not of
a portion of its fat. Its water-free and fat-free residue shall conform with
the general standard contained in clause (2) of this Regulation.
Soluble Cocoa or Cocoa Essence.
(4) Soluble cocoa, or cocoa essence, is the product obtained by treating
cocoa paste, deprived or not of a portion of its fat, with alkali or alkaline
salt. It shall contain not more than three parts per centum of added alkali
or alkaline salt estimated as potassium carbonate, and its water-free, fat-
free and alkali-free residue shall conform with the general standard con-
tained in clause (2) above.


Prepared Cocoa.
(5) Prepared, compounded, homoeopathic, or sweetened cocoa is cocoa oi
soluble cocoa mixed with other wholesome foodstuffs. It shall contain not
less than twenty parts per centum, of fat-free cocoa, and its water-free and
fat-free cocoa content shall conform with the general standard contained in
clause (2) of this Regulation.
Labelling.
(6) There shall be written in the label attached to every package which
contains prepared, compounded, homoeopathic, or sweetened cocoa, or cocoa
mixed with other wholesome foodstuffs, in bold-faced sans-serif capital
letters of not less than eight points face measurement, a statement in the
following form;—
CONTAINING NOT LESS THAN [here insert the number of parts
per centum ] PARTS PER CENT. OF DRY FAT-FREE COCOA.
Chocolate.
(Y) Chocolate paste, confectioners’ chocolate, chocolate coatings and
chocolate powder are cocoa paste or soluble cocoa mixed with sugar, with
or without addition or subtraction of cocoa fat, and with or without spices
or harmless flavourings. They shall contain not less than ten parts per centum
of fat-free cocoa, and the water-free, fat-free, and alkali-free cocoa content
shall conform with the general standard contained in clause (2) of this
Regulation.
Permitted Addition.
(8) The addition of harmless flavourings to cocoa, chocolate, and prepara-
tions of cocoa and chocolate, is hereby permitted without declaration.
Prohibition.
(9) The addition of cocoa husks, any weighting substance, paraffin or
foreign fat to cocoa or to any preparation of cocoa, is hereby prohibited.
Cocoa and Milh and Chocolate and Milh.
(10) Cocoa and milk, and chocolate and milk shall be prepared from
condensed milk, sugar, and cocoa. It shall contain not less than eight parts
per centum of fat-free cocoa.
34. —Spices, Mixed Spices, and Condiments.
Spices.
(1) Spices are the sound, aromatic, vegetable substances commonly used
as condiments, in their natural condition, without any reduction or extrac-
tion of their natural oils.
Mixed Spice.
(2) Mixed spice is a mixture of two or more of the sound, aromatic, vege-
table substances commonly used as condiments, in their natural condition,
without any reduction or extraction of their natural oils, ground and mixed.
It shall not contain any added substance.
Cinnamon.
(3) Cinnamon is the dried inner bark of Cinnamomum Zeylanicum.
(4) Powdered cinnamon shall not contain any cassia nor any other
foreign vegetable substance. It shall contain not more than eight parts per
centum of total ash and not more than, two parts per centum of ash in-
soluble in hydrochloric acid.


Cassia and Cassia Biids.
(5) Cassia and Cassia buds are respectively the dried bark and the dried
immature fruit of Cinnamomum cassia.
Cloves.
(6) Cloves are the dried flower-buds of Eugenia caryophyllata. They
shall not contain any exhausted or partly-exhausted cloves, nor any foreign
vegetable or mineral substance, nor more than five parts per centum by
weight of clove stems.
Ginger.
(7) Ginger is the washed and dried, or the decorticated and dried, rhizome
of Zingiber officinale. It shall not contain: —
(a) any exhausted or partly exhausted ginger;
( b ) any foreign vegetable or mineral matter;
(c) more than seven parts per centum of total ash, of which not less
than two parts shall be soluble in cold water;
( d ) more than one part per centum of Urns calculated as CaO.;
( e ) less than twelve parts per centum of cold water extract.
Limed Ginger or Bleached Ginger.
(8) Limed ginger or bleached ginger is whole ginger coated with car-
bonate of lime, and contains not more than ten parts per centum of ash, not
more than four parts per centum of carbonate of lime, and conforms in
other respects to the standard for ginger.
Ground Ginger.
(9) Ground ginger shall be prepared either from ginger or limed ginger.
It shall conform to the standard for limed ginger.
Mace and Nutmeg.
(10) llace is the dried arillus of Myristica fragrant. It shall not contain
the arillus of any other variety of Myristcia, including M. malabarica or
fatua (Bombay mace), and M. argenlea (wild mace).
(11) Hutmeg is the dried seed of If. fragrans deprived of its testa.
(12') Ground nutmeg shall not contain any foreign substance.
Blade Pepper.
(13) Black pepper is the dried immature berry of Piper nigrum, L.
.When ground it shall contain not less than six parts per centum of extract
soluble in ether, not more than seven parts per centum of total ash, and not
less than eight parts per centum of extractive matter soluble in absolute
alcohol.
White Pepper.
(14) White pepper is the dried mature berry of Piper nigrum, L., from
which the outer coating has been removed. It shall contain not less than
six parts per centum of extract soluble in ether, not more than two and
five-tenths parts per centum of ash, and not less than seven parts per centum
of extractive matter soluble in absolute alcohoL


Ground Mixed Pepper.
(15) Ground mixed pepper is ground white and black pepper. The propor-
tion of ground black pepper shall not exceed fifty parts per centum, by
weight, of the whole. It shall not contain any foreign substance.
Cayenne Pepper.
(16) Cayenne pepper or cayenne is the dried fruit of species of Capsicum,
powdered or ground. It shall contain not less than fifteen parts per centum
of ether extractives, and shall yield not more than six parts per centum of
total ash. It shall not contain any foreign substance.
Prohibition.
(IT) The addition of starch or colouring matter, or any other foreign
substance, to black pepper or white pepper or cayenne pepper or cayenne
is hereby prohibited.
Mustard.
(18) Mustard is the ground seed of Sinapis alha, Brassica juncea, or
Brassica nigra. One hundred parts shall yield not more than eight parts
of total ash. It shall not contain more than two and five-tenths piarts per
centum of starch, nor any other foreign substance.
Mustard Pastes.
(19) Mustard pastes are mustard mixed with water, salt (sodium
chloride), verjuice, white wane, vinegar, tartaric or citric acid, sugar, tur-
meric, and spices, singly or in combination. They shall not contain any
substance or substances other than those specified.
Salt.
(20) Salt shall be clean, free from dirt, and shall contain not more than
one-tenth of one part per centum of substances insoluble in hot decinormal
hydrochloric acid.
35. —Sauces.
General Standard for Sauces.
(1) Sauces are liquid or semi-liquid mixtures of wholesome foodstuffs
and condiments. Permitted colouring and harmless flavouring substances
may be used in sauces unless specially prohibited.
(2) Tomato sauce, tomato ketchup, tomato catchup, tomato relish, or any
term conveying to the public that the product is a form of tomato sauce,
is sauce prepared from sound and ripe tomatoes with or without the
addition of sugar, salt, vinegar, onions, garlic, eschalots, spices or condi-
ments. It shall not contain any other foreign vegetable substance and shall
otherwise conform to the general standard for sauces. It shall contain not
less than four parts per centum of tomato solids exclusive of sugars, deter-
mined by the prescribed method. The addition of tamarinds, glucose, gela-
tine, gum tragacanth, agar agar, pectin, starch, saccharin, or artificial
colouring matter, is hereby prohibited.
(3) Chutney is a preparation made from sound fruits and vegetables. It
shall not contain any colouring matter except caramel and shall otherwise
conform to the general standard for sauces.


Labelling.
(4) The use of the word “ sauce ” on any label attached to a package con-
taining chutney is prohibited.
The label attached to any package containing chutney shall bear the word.
CHUTNEY
in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than twenty-four points
face measurement, which may be preceded by a word in bold-faced sans-
serif capital letters of not more than ten points face measurement, descrip-
tive of the contents, such as
TOMATO CHUTNEY, FRUIT CHUTNEY,
MANGO CHUTNEY,
&c., provided that such fruit or vegetable is present to the extent of not less
than 50 parts per centum of the total fruits and/or vegetables.
Provided also that in the case of chutney made from fruit and/or vege-
tables other than tomatoes, the kind of chutney may bo stated in letters of
any size, and if the chutney is named after any particular kind of fruit or
vegetable that kind of fruit or vegetable shall be present in proportion of
not loss than fifty parts per centum of the total fruit and/or vegetable
contents.
Prohibition.
(5) The word “ tomato ” or any pictorial design or device suggesting
tomato shall not appear on the label unless the preparation conforms to the
standard for tomato sauce.
Provided that a statement immediately under the word chutney—“pre-
pared from (here state the name of the fruits or vegetables) and tomatoes ”
in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters not exceeding S' points face measure-
ment is allowed.
Preservative.
(6) There may be added to tomato sauce and chutney, benzoic acid (or
benzoates calculated as benzoic acid) in the proportion of one-tenth of one
part per centum.
36.—Method for the Determination op Non-sugar Organic Tomato Solids
in Tomato Sauce.
(1) Preparation of Sample.—Proceed as directed in Method No. 12,
“ Association of Official Agricultural Chemists,” “ Methods of Analysis,”
1925 edition, p. 220.
(2) Total Solids. —Weigh about 6 grammes of the sample prepared as
above into a flat-bottomed glass dish having a diameter of approximately 7
e.m. and a depth of 3 c.m. Distribute evenly in a thin layer over the
bottom of the dish. If the sample is very thick it is advisable to add 1 c.c.
of distilled water to aid the even distribution. Evaporate on steam bath for
thirty minutes, and dry in steam oven for four hours at a temperature of
98°—100° C. Cool in desiccator and weigh.
(3) Ash. —Evaporate 5-10 grammes of the sample to dryness in a plati-
num dish on steam bath. Char thoroughly, being careful to avoid loss of
salt. Exhaust the char with 25 c.c. of hot distilled water, breaking the
material with a glass rod if necessary. Collect the insoluble residue on a


9 c.m. asUess filter paper. Wash the dish and filter paper with successive
portions of 15 c.c. and 10 c.c. of hot distilled water. Place filter paper and
contents back in dish, dry, and ignite at a temperature not exceeding dull
redness until free from carbon. Add the filtrate in dish; evaporate on steam
bath; dry to constant weight in air oven at a temperature of 100° —105° C.
Cool in desiccator and weigh.
Sugars.
(4) Reducing sugars before inversion—
For products containing 10-20 per centum invert sugar. Weigh 10
grammes of the sample. Dilute with about 100 c.c. of distilled
water and transfer to a 500 c.c. graduated flask. Clarify, using a
slight excess of neutral lead acetate solution; dilute to mark, and
filter. Remove the excess lead with dry potassium oxalate, filter
and determine reducing sugar by Method No. 35 A.O.A.G. Methods
of Analysis, 1925 edition, p. 190, using 50 c.c. of filtrate.
For products containing less than 10 per centum or more than 20 per
centum invert sugar. Vary the amount of sample weighed, so
that the 50 c.c. of filtrate will give a reduction of about one-half
the Fehling’s solution used (50 c.c.).
Express the results obtained as percentage of invert sugar before inver-
sion.
(5) Reducing sugars after inversion.—Proceed as directed in Method No.
21 A.O.A.C. Methods of Analysis, 1925 edition, p. 221, using 50 c.c. of the
final filtrate obtained in (4) for the estimation of the reducing sugars before
inversion. Express the results obtained as percentage of invert sugar after
inversion.
(6) Sucrose. —The difference between the percentages of invert sugar
before and after inversion (4) and (5) multiplied by 0.95 gives the per-
centage of sucrose (cane sugar).
(7) Total Sugars.—Total sugars are the sum of invert sugar before
inversion and sucrose (cane sugar).
(8) Non-Sugar Organic Tomato Solids. —The percentage of non-sugar
organic tomato solids is obtained by subtracting the sum of the percentages
of total sugars and ash from the percentage of total solids.
37. Vinegar.
General Standard for Vinegar.
(1) (a) Vinegar is the liquid produced by alcoholic and/or acetous fer-
mentations of one or more of the following; Malt, spirit, wine, cider,
alcoholic liquors, fruit, honey, glucose, sugar (including unrefined crystal
sugar and refinery syrups) or molasses.
I,abetting.
(b) There shall he written in the following form in the label attached
to every package containing vinegar the words
VINEGAR MADE FROM
[here insert the mime or names of the substance or substances from which
the vinegar was ■produced.']


Distilled Vinegar.
(2) (a) Distilled vinegar is the liquid produced by the distillation of
vinegar.
Labelling.
(5) There shall be written in the following form in the label
attached to every package containing distilled vinegar the words
DISTILLED VINEGAR.
DISTILLED FROM [here insert the source of the
vinegar.l
Blended Vinegar.
(3) (a) Blended vinegar is the liquid produced by mixing vinegar with
distilled vinegar. It shall contain not less than fifty parts per centum of
vinegar as defined in paragraph (1) (a) of this regulation.
Labelling.
(6) There shall be written in the label attached to every package
containing blended vinegar the words
BLENDED VINEGAR.
Imitation Vinegar.
(4) (a) Imitation vinegar is a mixture of water and acetic acid. It shall
conform with the standards for vinegar in clause (5), General, with the
exception that it shall not contain any lead or copper as allowed in sub-
clause (e) thereof.
Labelling.
(b) There shall be written in the label attached to every package
containing imitation vinegar the words
IMITATION VINEGAR.
General.
(5) (a) Every variety of vinegar shall contain not less than 4 grammes
of acetic acid in one hundred cubic centimetres.
( b ) Caramel may be used as a colouring in any variety of vinegar
without declaration in the label.
O) Flavouring may be used in any variety of vinegar, provided its
nature is declared in the label.
(d) No vinegar shall contain any mineral acid.
(e) The presence of not more than one-seventh of one grain of lead
or not more than one-half of one grain of copper per pint is permitted.
(/) Particulars specifically required to be included in any label by
this regulation shall appear in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not
less than twelve points face measurement.
88.—Essence of Imitation Vinegar.
(1) Mixtures sold for the purpose of making imitation vinegar by dilution
with water shall be mixtures of acetic acid with water and harmless
flavouring substances and coloured or not with caramel. They shall not
contain any mineral acid, lead or copper.


Labelling.
(2) There shall be written in the label attached to every package which
contains a mixture sold for the purpose of making- imitation vinegar the
words
ESSENCE OF IMITATION VINEGAR
in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than twelve points face
measurement. The label shall bear directions for dilution with water so
that the resultant fluid shall contain not less than four grammes of acetic
acid in one hundred cubic centimetres.
39. — Pickles.
(1) Pickles are sound vegetables or sound fruits preserved in salt, vine-
gar, acetic acid, or lactic acid, with or without spices, condiments, or sugar,
and with or without permitted colouring or harmless flavouring substances.
They shall not contain any foreign mineral substance, except salt (sodium
chloride), not more than fourteen grains of saltpetre (potassium or sodium
nitrate calculated as ENCb) to the pound.
Pickles which have been made with bleached vegetables shall contain not
more than five grains per pound sulphurous acid (free or combined) de-
rived from the bleaching process. In the case of pickled onions, only, there
may be added an amount of saccharin not exceeding three grains to the
pound.
40. — Sugar and Starch Sugar (Glucose).
Sugar.
(1) Sugar is the product chemically known as sucrose.
(2) Granulated, loaf, cut, milled, and powdered sugar shall contain at
least ninety-nine and five-tenths parts per centum of sucrose.
Solid Glucose (Starch Sugar).
(3) Solid Glucose is the solid product obtained by hydrolizing wholesome
starch until there is present not less than seventy parts per centum of
reducing sugars calculated as dextrose.
The ash present in solid glucose shall not exceed one part per centum.
Glucose Syrup.
(4) Glucose syrup is the clear, viscous product resulting from the partial
hydrolysis of wholesome starch, and consists of a mixture of dextrin and
reducing sugars. It shall have a specific gravity of from 3.393 to 1.455
(41° to 45° Beaume) at a temperature of 37.5° C. It may contain sulphur
dioxide not exceeding tivo grains to the pound.
At a specific gravity of 1.398 it shall not contain more than twenty-one
parts per centum of water, and at 1.455 not more than fourteen parts per
centum of water, and corresponding amounts between these gravities.
It shall not contain more than one part per centum of ash, calculated on
the basis of a specific gravity of 1.398.
Labelling.
(5) Every package of solid glucose shall bear a label in which shall be
written in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than twelve points
face measurement the words
SOLID GLUCOSE
followed by a statement of the percentage proportion of reducing sugars
present calculated as dextrose.


In the label attached to every package of Glucose Syrup there shall be
written in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than twelve points
face measurement the words
GLUCOSE SYRUP
followed by a statement of the specific gravity of such syrup, and the
percentage proportion of water contained therein.
Icing Mixture.
(&) Icing Mixture is a mixture of sugar, cornflour, with or without other
food substances and with or without permitted colouring and/or flavouring
matter. The proportion of cornflour together with other added fruit sub-
stances shall not exceed five per centum.
41. —Honey.
Honey is the necta? and saccharine exudations of plants, gathered, modi-
fied, and stored by the honey bee. It shall contain not more than twenty
parts per centum of water, not less than sixty parts per centum of reducing
sugars, and it shall not yield more than three-fourths of one part per cen-
tum of ash. It shall not contain any added sugar or glucose, artificial
sweetening substance, added colouring matter, or other foreign substance.
42. —Confectionery.
General Standard for Confectionery.
(1) Confectionery is the product made from sugar, glucose, or other
carbohydrate sweetening substances, with or without the addition of per-
mitted colouring and harmless flavouring substances, and with or without
other food substances, such as butter, wholesale edible fats, fresh eggs,
milk, chocolate, nuts, and fruits. It shall not contain any paraffin, resin,
foreign mineral substance, nor any drug against which there is a restrictive
law or regulation in force, nor shall it contain more than one part per cen-
tum of alcohol, nor any whole or crushed uncooked grain.
Provided that nothing in this Regulation contained shall be taken to pro-
hibit the manufacture by confectioners of lozenges and the like which con-
tain a drug concerning wffiich any restrictive law or regulation is in force,
for wholesale supply to the order of a registered pharmacist, or wholesale
druggist.
(2') Ho person shall refill with confectionery for sale any once-used
package which is made wholly or in part of wood, paper, cardboard, or the
like absorbent material.
(3) Saccharin in proportion not exceeding three grains per pound may-
be added to confectionery which contains not less than twenty parts per
centum of gum arable and/or gelatine, together with not less than forty
parts per centum of total sugar and glucose.
(4) There shall be written in the label attached to every package which
contains confectionery medicated by the addition of any drug named or
included in Regulation 69 the word
MEDICATED
in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than twelve points face
measurement.
(5) Ho person shall sell any package containing any confectionery in
respect of which any of the provisions of clauses (2) and (4) of this
regulation have not been complied with.


43.—Pastry.
(1) The word “Pastry” shall include pastry, cakes, and biscuits. Pastry
is a product of the mixture of two or more of the following substances,
selected, combined, and cooked as may be desired: —Various kinds of flour
or starch, water, fresh, condensed, concentrated, skim, or separated milk,
•cream, fresh eggs, butter, edible fats or oils, sugar, honey or molasses, nuts,
almonds, oleaginous or other seeds, sound fruits or preparations of sound
fruits, other wholesome food-substances, harmless flavourings, or permitted
colourings. Pastry shall not contain any preservative substance except
such as is specifically permitted in the ingredients used, nor any artificial
sweetening substance, mineral oil or mineral fat, alum, or sulphate of
copper.
44. —Ice Cream and Flavoured Ice.
Ice Cream.
(1) Ice-cream is a foodstuff prepared from milk or cream or wholesome
milk-products, with cane sugar, with or without the addition of other whole-
some sugars, with or without fresh eggs, flavoured with fruit or with the
juice or pulp of fruit, or with nuts or with harmless vegetable flavouring
substances or essences, coloured or not with permitted colouring substances,
and with or without candied fruits, liqueurs, or spirits, singly or in combina-
tion, sterilised by boiling, or pasteurised by being kept at a temperature of
not less than 156° F. for twenty minutes, or of not less than 165° F.
for ten minutes, and subsequently frozen. Ice-cream shall contain not less
-than ten parts per centum of milk fat. Ice-cream shall not contain any
drug against which there is a restrictive law or regulation in force, nor shall
it contain moi - e than one part per centum of alcohol.
Permitted Addition.
(2) The addition of gelatine to ice-cream, in proportion not exceeding
one part per centum, is hereby permitted.
Flavoured Ices.
(3) Vanilla ice, strawberry ice, or other flavoured ice is a preparation of
•wholesome foodstuffs, with or without addition of harmless vegetable sub-
stances or essences, or of permitted colouring matter, sterilised by boiling
or pasteurised by being kept at a temperature of not less than 156° F. for
twenty minutes or not less than 165° F. for ten minutes, and subse-
quently frozen.
Prohibitions.
(4) Ho person shall refill with ice-cream or with flavoured ice for sale any
once-used package which is made wholly or in part of wood, paper, card-
board, or the like absorbent material.
(5) Ho person shall sell any ice-cream or flavoured ice of which the nature
or flavour is indicated or declared by the name of any fruit or fruits,
flavoured wholly or in part with any substance other than the fruit or fruits
named, unless the said name is conjoined with the word “ Imitation.”
(6) Ho person shall sell any package containing any ice-cream or ices in
respect of which any of the provisions of clause (4) of this Regulation have
not been complied with.
t 80955—C


45. —Fruits and Fruit Products.
(1) Fruits are the clean, sound, edible, fleshy fructifications of plants
distinguished by their sweet, acid and ethereal flavours.
(2) Preserved fruit is fruit preserved by any preserving process, includ-
ing drying. It shall not contain foreign substance except sugar, and, in
respect of dried fruits only, sulphur dioxide and glycerine: Provided that
permitted colouring matter may be added to raspberries, strawberries, cher-
ries, and crystallised fruits.
(3) (a) Dried fruits may be treated with glycerine and/or an emulsion
or solution containing not more than ten parts per centum of liquid paraffin
(Paraffinum Liquiduin B-P. ), and, for the purpose of bleaching, with sul-
phur dioxide gas.
(&) The presence in or on dried fruit of not more than twenty grains
of liquid paraffin per pound, and not more than fourteen grains of sulphur
dioxide per pound, unavoidably remaining from the process of bleaching,
shall not be deemed to constitute a contravention of this Regulation.
(c) Declaration of the presence of sulphur dioxide in dried fruit is
not required.
Jam and Conserve.
(4) Jam or conserve is the product obtained by boiling not less than
forty-five parts per centum by weight of one kind of sound fruit with sugar.
It shall not contain any added gelatine, starch, apple pulp (except in the
ease of apple jam), nor any other added substance except spices, apple
juice, and glucose. Provided that the proportion of added apple juice shall
in no case exceed five parts per centum. Provided also that the addition
of permitted colouring matter to raspberry jam, strawberry jam, or plum
jam, shall not be deemed a contravention of this Regulation, and provided
further that the addition of not more than fifteen parts per centum of solid
glucose or glucose syrup is permitted.
Labelling.
(5) There shall be written in the label attached to every package which
contains jam or conserve, in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less
than eighteen points face measurement the words
JAM » CONSERVE
as the ease may require; and in the case of Jam or Conserve to which
glucose has been added there shall be written in bold faced sans-serif capital
letters of not less than ten points face measurements the words
PREPARED WITH NOT MORE THAN (here insert
the number of parts per cent.) PARTS PER CENTUM OF
GLUCOSE.
Marmalade.
(6) Marmalade is the product obtained by boiling sound citrus fruit
cr fruits with sugar. It shall not contain any added substance except
glucose.


Labelling.
(7) There shall be written in the label attached to every x>ackage con-
taining marmalade in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than
eighteen points face measurement the word
MARMALADE.
Mixed Jam.
(8) Mixed jam is the product obtained by boiling not less than forty-
five parts per centum by weight of two or more varieties of sound fruit
with sugar. Mixed jam shall not contain any' vegetable substance other
than that derived from fruits of the varieties designated on the label, except
•spices, apple juice, in proportion not exceeding five parts per centum and
glucose in proportion not exceeding fifteen parts per centum. It shall not
contain any added gelatine, starch, or other foreign substance.
Labelling.
(9) There shall be written in the label attached to every package which
contains mixed jam in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than
eighteen points face measurement the name of the fruits from which the
mixture has been prepared, and the fruit which is named first shall be
present in the contents of the package in larger proxjortion than any other
fruit. In the case of a mixed jam to which glucose has been added, there
shall bo written in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than ten
points face measurement the words
PREPARED WITH NOT MORE THAN (hen insert the
number of parts per centum) PARTS PER CENTUM OF
GLUCOSE.
Fruit Jelly.
(10) Fruit jelly is the product obtained by boiling the juice of sound fruit
or fruits with sugar and/or glucose. It shall not contain any vegetable
substance other than that derived from sound fruit of the variety or varie-
ties designated in the label, nor any added gelatine, starch, or other foreign
substance except pectin.
Labelling.
(11) There shall be written in the label attached to every package which
contains fruit jelly in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than
eighteen points face measurement the words
FRUIT JELLY
and the name or names of the variety or varieties of fruit from which the
contents have been prepared, and the product of the fruit which is named
first shall be present in the contents of the package in larger proportion
than the product of any other fruit.
Permitted Addition.
(12) To jam, mixed jam or fruit jelly which does not contain apple juice
there may be added fruit pectin (calculated as calcium pectate) in propor-
tion not exceeding three-tenths of one part per centum, and of fruit acids
in proportion not exceeding five-tenths of one part per centum.


Lemon Cheese, Lemon Butter, and Ljemon Filling.
(13) Lemon cheese, lemon butter, and lemon filling are products pre-
pared from butter, eggs, lemon flavouring substances, permitted colouring-
matter and sugar, with or without the addition of not more than fifteen
parts per centum of solid glucose or glucose syrup.
Prohibition.
(14) The addition to any of these preparations of foreign fats, starch,
gelatine, or preservative substance is hereby prohibited.
46. Fruit Jelly Crystals a'nd Jelly Crystals.
Fruit Jelly Crystals.
(1) Fruit jelly crystals are a confection of gelatine, sugar, and citric
acid or tartaric acid, flavoured with wholesome substances wholly derived
from sound fruits or from other sound vegetable substances, and with or
without harmless colouring matter.
Tjabelling.
(2) There shall bo written in the label attached to every package which
contains fruit jelly crystals, in bold faced sans-serif capital letters of not
less than eight points face measurement, the words
FRUIT JELLY CRYSTALS,
accompanied by the name of the fruit from which the contents of th»
package have been prepared.
Jelly Crystals.
(8) Jelly crystals are a confection of gelatine, sugar, and citric or
tartaric acid, coloured and flavoured with harmless colouring matter and
harmless flavouring substances.
Labelling.
(4) There shall bo written in the label attached to every package which
contains jelly crystals the words
JELLY CRYSTALS
in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than eight points face
measurement, accompanied by the words
ARTIFICIALLY COLOURED AND FLAVOURED
In bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than six points face
measurement.
47. —Essences.
General Standard for Essences.
(1) Essences are preparations of wholesome flavouring substances in
ethylic alcohol, or in water, or in both, or in some other harmless vehicle,
with or withou.-. permitted colouring matter.
Oil of Lemon.
(2) Oil of lemon is the volatile oil obtained from the fresh peel of the,
lemon ( Citrus lunonum, Li).
It shall have a specific gravity at IS.S°C. of not less than 0.854 nor more
than 0.862; it shall have an optical rotation at 20°C. of not less than
+ 56° nor more than -j- 65° ; it shall have a refractive index at 25° C.,
of not less than 1.470 and not more than 1.480; and it shall contain not less
than 8.5 per centum of aldehydes calculated as Citral (CVIIuO).


Culinary Essence of Lemon.
(3) Culinary Essence of lemon is the flavouring extract prepared from
oil of lemon, or from lemon peel, or from both. It shall contain not less
than ten parts per centum by volume of oil of lemon, and it shall conform
with the general standard of essences.
Imitation Essence of Lemon.
(4) Imitation Essence of Lemon is any flavouring essence prepared as
a substitute for essence of lemon. It shall contain not leas than four-
tenths of one part per centum by weight of citral and shall conform in
other respects with the general standard for essences.
Labelling.
(5) There shall be written on or attached to every package which con-
tains Imitation Essence of Lemon a statement or label in which shall
appear in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than six points face
measurement the words
IMITATION ESSENCE OF LEMON.
Vanilla.
(6) Yanilla is the dried fruit of Vanilla planifolia.
Vanilla. Essenc e.
(7) Yanilla essence is an alcoholic extract of vanilla. It shall contain
not less than fifty parts per centum by volume of alcohol and not less than
one-tenth of one part per centum of vanillin. It shall not contain foreign
colouring matter or any foreign substance except sugar. It shall contain
two and one-tenth grammes of total solids other than sugar in 100 cubic
centimetres. It shall have a lead number of not less than 0.55 as deter-
mined by Wichmann’s method.
Yanilla Substitutes.
Labelling,
(8) There shall be written in the label attached to every package con-
taining a substance which consists wholly or in part of a substitute for
vanilla or for vanilla essence, in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of
larger size than any other printed matter on the label, the words,
IMITATION VANILLA
01
IMITATION VANILLA ESSENCE
m the case may be.
Prohibition.
(9) The word “Yanilla” or words “ Yanilla Essence” or similar words
or expressions implying that the preparation is vanilla or vanilla essence
shall not'be written in the statement or label attached to a package con-
taining a substance which consists wholly or in part of a substitute for
vanilla or for vanilla essence, unless conjoined with the word “Imitation,”
in the following form, “Imitation Yanilla,” or “Imitation Yanilla
Essence,” as the case may be.


Imitation Fruit Flavours or Imitation Fruit Essences or Imitation
Fruit Extracts.
(10) Imitation Fruit Flavours, Esences, or Extracts shall be prepara-
tions intended for flavouring’ purposes and which do not owe their com-
position to the fruit or fruits named in the label.
Labelling.
(11) There shall be written in the label attached to every package con-
taining Imitation Fruit Flavour or Imitation Fruit Essence or Imitation
Fruit Extract in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than twelve
points face measurement the words
IMITATION FRUIT FLAVOUR,
IMITATION FRUIT ESSENCE,
or
IMITATION FRUIT EXTRACT,
as the case may be.
Preservative.
(12) To Imitation Fruit Flavours or Imitation Fruit Essences or Imita-
tion Fruit Extracts, there may be added sulphur dioxide (or sulphites
calculated as sulphur dioxide) or benzoic acid (or benzoates calculated as
benzoic acid) or salicylic acid, one but not more in proportion in the case
of sulphur dioxide or salicylic acid, two grains to the pint or in the case of
benzoic acid, seven grains to the point.
Prohibition.
(13) Any description, design, or device which indicates or suggests that
the contents of any package which contains an imitation fruit flavour or
imitation fruit essence or imitation fruit extract consists wholly or in part
of any natural fruit juice shall not be written in any statement or label
attached to any such package, and no floral design shall appear upon any
such package.
48. —Citric and Tartaric Acids.
Citric and tartaric acids shall contain not more than one one-hundredth
part of a grain of arsenic (calculated as arsenious oxide), nor more than
one-seventh of a grain of lead, to the pound and shall conform in other
respects to the description and tests respectively prescribed for them in the
(British Pharmacopoeia.
49. —Potable Water.
(1) Potable water is water which conforms with one or more of the
following conditions; — (a) That it has been obtained from a source
approved in writing for the purpose by the Director-General of Public
Health; (6) that it has been distilled, boiled, or otherwise treated by a
process which has been approved for the purpose by the Director-General
of Public Health: Provided that potable water shall contain not more than
one hundred micro-organisms in one cubic centimetre, no pathogenic micro-
organisms, no poisonous chemical constituents, nor sediment; shall be
colourless; and shall have been so kept between its collection or sterilization
and its sale or use in manufacture as to preserve it from contamination.
(2) Ho person shall use or cause or suffer to be used, in the preparation
of any food or drug for sale, any water other than potable water.


50. —Ice.
Ice is the product obtained by freezing potable water. It shall be made,
stored, handled and delivered under such conditions as to prevent its con-
tamination.
51.—Aerated Waters.
General Standard for Aerated Waters.
(1) Aerated waters are potable waters impregnated with carbon dioxide,
or with oxygen, or with both, under pressure, with or without admixture
of soda, potash, lithia, or the like salts. They shall not contain any lead or
other poisonous metal, nor any foreign substance.
Soda Water.
(2) Soda water is potable water impregnated with carbon dioxide, or with
oxygen, or with both, with or without sodium bicarbonate. It shall con-
form with the general standard for aerated waters.
Lithia, Potash, and Seltzer Waters.
(8) Lithia, potash, and seltzer waters are waters which conform with
the general standard for aerated waters. Lithia water and potash water
shall contain respectively not less than five grains of lithium carbonate,
and not less than fifteen grains of potassium bicarbonate, to the pint.
Seltzer water shall contain not less than fifteen grains of sodium chloride,
not less than two grains of sodium bicarbonate, not less than four grains
of magnesium chloride, and not less than four grains of calcium chloride,
to the pint.
Labelling.
(4) There shall be written in the label attached to every package con-
taining an aerated water mixed with a salt, or with salts, in bold-faced sans-
serif capital letters of not less than six points face measurement, the name
of the salt or salts, and the minimum percentage proportion in which each
is present.
Provided that it shall not be necessary so to label lithia, soda, potash,,
and seltzer waters composed as prescribed in this regulation.
52. — Fruit Squash.
(1) Fruit Squash shall be the expressed juice of the sound fruit with or
without its pulp. It shall not contain any added substance save sugar,
glucose, glycerine (in proportion not exceeding ten per cent.), preservative,
and permitted colouring matter. It shall not contain any other ingredient.
The juice content of lemon squash shall contain not more than one
per cent, of insoluble solids. The juice content of orange squash shall
contain not more than 1.5 per cent, of insoluble solids. The insoluble
solids in each case to be determined after drying at 100° C.
Provided that to fruit squash other than lemon squash may be added
lemon juice not exceeding twenty-five parts per centum of the total juice
content.
Fresh Fruit Squash Brinies.
(2) (a) Fresh Fruit Squash Drinks are beverages newly prepared on the
premises for immediate consumption, and shall be composed of freshly-
made fruit squash -with or without sugar, and water or carbonated water.
They shall not contain a" 11 other ingredient.


Provided that to Fresh Fruit Squash Drinks other than lemon squash
drink may be added fresh lemon juice in proportion not exceeding five parts
per centum by weight.
(h) Any beverage sold or intended for sale for consumption at the
place of business of the vendor as a Fresh Fruit Squash Drink, or as a
Fresh Fruit Drink not otherwise specifically described, shall comply with the
standard for Fresh Fruit Squash Drinks.
Preservative.
(3) To Fruit Squash which does not contain any glycerine there may be
added either sulphur dioxide (or sulphites calculated as sulphur dioxide) or
salicylic acid in proportion not exceeding two grains to the pint, or benzoic
acid (or benzoates calculated as benzoic acid) in proportion not exceeding
seven grains to the pint.
Fresh Fruit Squash Drinks shall not contain any preservative.
Note. —On and after the Ist July, 1932, the use of salicylic acid will be
prohibited.
Prohibition.
(4) The word Squash,” “ Crash,” “ Crunch,” “ Squeeze,” or any word
of similar significance shall not be applied to any beverage unless such
beverage complies with one or other of the standards prescribed in (1) or
(2) of this Regulation.
Labelling.
f 5) Every package which contains Fruit Squash shall bear a label in
which shall be written in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not lot*
than twelve points face measurement a statement in the following form: —■
[here insert the name of the fruif] SQUASH
(sweetened or unsweetened).
53. — Fruit Juices.
(1) Fruit Juices are the clean unformentod juices, with or without the
soft tissue of the juice cells, obtained from sound ripe fruit. They shall
contain all the constituents naturally present in the juices of the fruits
from which they have been prepared. They shall not contain any foreign
substance except preservative and permitted colouring matter.
(2) Concentrated Fruit Juices shall consist of fruit juices, with or with-
out the soft tissue of the juice cells, from which at least fifty parts per
centum of the water naturally present has been evaporated. They shall
not contain any foreign substance except preservative and permitted
colouring matter.
Lime Juice.
(3) Lime Juice is the expressed juice of the sound fruit of Citrus medico-,
variety aeida, with or without the soft tissue of the juice cells. It shall
contain not less than 6.5 parts per centum of citric acid naturally present
in the fruit.
Lemon Juice.
(4) Lemon Juice is the expressed juice of the sound fruit of Citrus
tnedica, variety limonum, with or without the soft tissue of the juice cells.
It shall contain not less than 5.5 parts per centum of citric acid naturally
present in the fruit.


Preservative.
(5) To Fruit Juices there may be added sulphur dioxide (or sulphites
calculated as sulphur dioxide) or salicylic acid in proportion not exceeding
two grains to the pint, or benzoic acid (or benzoates calculated as benzoic
acid) in proportion, not exceeding seven grains to the pint.
Labelling.
(6) Every package which contains fruit juice shall bear a label in which,
shall be written in letters of not less than twelve points face measurement
the words
FRUIT JUICE, CONCENTRATED
FRUIT JUICE, LIME JUICE
or
.LEMON JUICE
as the case may require, together with —in the ease of fruit juice, other than
lime juice or lemon juice and concentrated fruit juice—the name or names
of the fruit or fruits from which its contents have been prepared.
Note. — On and after the Ist July, 1932, the use of salicylic acid will be
prohibited.
54. — Fruit Juice Cordials axd Syrups.
(1) Fruit Juice Cordials and Syrups shall be composed of the juice with
or without its pulp, of sound fruit or fruits, potable water, and sugar with
or without the addition of glucose, with or without the addition of citric
or tartaric acid, lemon juice, and permitted colouring matter. They shall
contain not less than twenty parts per centum by weight of fruit juice,
with or without its pulp, of the kind after which the cordial is named,
or in the case of pineapple, strawberry, and passion fruit, not less than
12.5 pgrts per centum by weight of fruit juice, with or without its pulp, of
the kind after which the cordial is named. They shall contain not less than
twenty-five parts per centum by weight of cane sugar. They shall not con-
tain any flavouring substance other than that naturally present in the fruit
or fruits from which they have been prepared. They shall not contain any
other substance except glycerine, which may be present in proportion not
exceeding ten parts per centum by weight, or permitted preservative.
LAme Juice Cordial or Syrup.
(2) Lime Juice Cordial or Syrup shall be composed of lime juice, sugar,
and potable water. It shall contain not less than 1.3 parts per centum of
citric acid naturally present in the fruit. It shall not contain any added
substance excexit glycerine, which may be present in proportion not exceed-
ing ten parts per centum by weight, and caramel.
Lemon Juice Cordial or Syrup.
(3) Lemon Juice Cordial or Syrup shall be composed of lemon juice,
sugar, and potable water. It shall contain not less than 1.2 parts per
centum of citric acid naturally present in the fruit. It shall not contain
miy added substance except glycerine, which may be present in proportion
not exceeding ten parts per centum by weight.


Labelling.
(4) Every package which contains a Fruit Juice Cordial or Syrup shall
bear a label in which shall be written in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters
of not loss than twelve points face measurement the words
FRUIT JUICE CORDIAL
or
FRUIT JUICE SYRUP
and the name of the principal fruit from which its contents have been
prepared.
Preservative.
(5) To Fruit Juice Cordials or Syrups which do not contain glycerine
there may he added sulphur dioxide (or sulphites calculated as sulphur
dioxide) or salicylic acid in proportion not exceeding two grains to the pint,
or benzoic acid (or benzoates calculated as benzoic acid) not exceeding seven
grains to the pint.
Note. —On and after the Ist July, 1932, the use of salicylic acid will be
prohibited.
55. —Raspberry Vinegar.
(1) Raspberry Vinegar shall contain not less than twenty parts per
centum by weight of raspberry juice, not less than twenty-five parts per
centum by weight of sugar, not more than ten parts per centum by weight
of glycerine, and not more than two parts per centum of acetic acid. It
may contain permitted colouring matter.
Preservative.
(2) To raspberry vinegar which does not contain any glycerine there
may be added sulphur dioxide (or sulphites calculated as sulphur dioxide)
or benzoic acid (or benzoates calculated as benzoic acid) one, but not both,
in proportion not exceeding, in the case of sulphur dioxide, two grains to
the pint, or, in the case of benzoic acid, seven grains to the pint.
■5O. — Flavoured Cordials and Syrups.
(1) Flavoured cordials and syrups shall be composed of potable water,
.sound fruit or vegetable essences, extracts or infusions, and sugar, with
or without the addition of glucose, with or without the addition of citric
or tartaric acid, and with or without the addition of permitted colouring
matter. They shall contain not less than twenty-five parts per centum by
weight of sugar. They shall not contain any flavouring substance other
than that naturally present in the fruit or vegetable essences, extracts or
infusions from which they have been prepared. They may contain glycerine
in proportion not exceeding ten parts per centum by weight.
Labelling.
(2) Every package which contains flavoured cordial or syrup shall bear a
label on which shall be written the words
FLAVOURED CORDIAL
or
FLAVOURED SYRUP


in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than twelve points face
measurement preceded by the name or names of the fruit or vegetable
extract or extracts from which its contents have been prepared.
Ho pictorial representation or design suggesting the presence of fruit
shall appear on any. label attached to any package containing flavoured
cordial or syrup.
57. — Imitation Cordials and Syrups.
(1) Imitation Cordials and Syrups shall be composed of potable water,
with harmless flavouring substances containing synthetic or other artificial
compounds, and sugar, with or without the addition of glucose, citric acid,
tartaric acid, acetic acid, vinegar, permitted colouring matter, and glycerine.
They shall contain not less than twenty-five parts per centum by weight
of sugar, and may contain not more than ten parts per centum by weight
of glycerine.
(2) Concentrated Imitation Cordials are concentrated preparations of
potable water, imitation fruit or vegetable essences or extracts, with or
without sugar, glucose, citric acid, tartaric acid, acetic acid, vinegar, and
permitted colouring matter.
Labelling.
(3) (a) Every package containing Imitation Cordials or Syrups shall
bear a label in which shall be written in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters
of not less than eighteen points face measurement the words
IMITATION CORDIAL
or
IMITATION SYRUP
as the case may require, followed immediately by the name of the flavour.
( b ) Every package containing Concentrated Imitation Cordial shall
bear a label which shall include —
(i) in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than twelve
points face measurement the words
CONCENTRATED IMITATION
or
IMITATION CORDIAL EXTRACT
or other words of a like meaning, followed immediately by the
name of the flavour, and
(ii) directions for the preparation of Imitation Cordials and Syrups
and/or of beverages complying with the standard for summer or
temperance drinks as prescribed by Regulation Ho. 59.
Prohibition.
(-1) Expressions, floral or other designs, or devices which indicate or
suggest that the contents of any package which contains any Imitation
Cordial or Syrup or Concentrated Imitation Cordial consist wholly or in
part of any natural fruit juices shall not be written in any label attached
to any such package, and no floral or fruit design shall appear upon any
other part of the package or wrapper.


Preservative.
(5) (a) To Imitation Cordials and Syrups which do not contain any
glycerine there may be added sulphur dioxide (or sulphites calculated as
sulphur dioxide) or salicylic acid, or benzoic acid (or benzoates calculated
as benzoic acid) one, but not more, in proportion not exceeding two grains
to the pint in the case of sulphur dioxide or salicylic acid, or seven grains
to the pint in the case of benzoic acid.
(b) In the case of Concentrated Imitation Cordials there may be
added sulphur dioxide or salicylic acid or benzoic acid, in such propor-
tions that when diluted to the standard prescribed for Imitation Cordials
and Syrups, the diluted product shall not contain a greater proportion of
preservative than that permitted in Imitation Cordials and Syrups.
Not];.—On and after the Ist July, 1932, the use of salicylic acid will be
prohibited.
58. —Eon-Excisable Fermented Drinks.
(1) Non-excisable fermented drinks shall be composed of potable water
with vegetable extractives or infusions, and sugar, with or without the
addition of glucose, vegetable flavouring substances, citric or tartaric acid,
and permitted colouring. They shall not contain more than two parts per
centum of proof spirit.
(2) The addition of saccharin to non-exeisable fermented drinks, in pro-
portion not exceeding three grains to the gallon, is hereby permitted.
Preservatives.
(3) To non-excisable fermented drinks there may be added sulphur
dioxide (or sulphites calculated as sulphur dioxide) in proportion not
exceeding one-half of one grain to the pint, or benzoic acid (or benzoates
calculated as benzoic acid) in proportion not exceeding one grain and three-
quarters of one grain to the pint.
59. —Summer on Temperance Drinks,
(1) Summer or temperance drinks not otherwise standardised in these
Eegulations shall be composed of potable water, with or without sugar,
glucose, and harmless flavouring essences, or fruit and vegetable extrac-
tives and infusions, impregnated with carbon dioxide, with or without citric
or tartaric acid, and with or without permitted colouring matter and
preservative.
Labelling.
(2) (a) Every summer or temperance drink shall bear a label in which
shall be written in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than
twelve points face measurement the name of the beverage.
(b) Where any summer or temperance driuk is made from either a
fruit squash or a fruit juice cordial, as standardised in these Eegulations,
by the addition of water impregnated with carbon dioxide, and no other
Ingredient has been added save permitted preservative, then such bever-
ages, provided they contain not less than three per cent, of fruit Juice, or
two per cent, of fruit juice in the case of strawberry, pineapple or passion-
fruit, may bear a label without qualification, with the name of the fruit


from which they have been prepared, or may be labelled “Fruit Juice,”
such words to be immediately followed by the words “ and soda ” in letter*
of the same size and type as the words “ Fruit Juice.”
(c) No summer or temperance drink, unless derived from a fruit
squash or fruit juice cordial, as set out in subclause (b) shall bear on its
label the name of any fruit unless qualified as prescribed in subclauses (d)
and (e) of this Regulation. The use of any fruit or floral design which
suggests the presence of fruit is prohibited in respect of any summer or
temperance drink which does not comply with subclause (b) hereof.
id) Where any summer or temperance drink other than lemonade,
ginger ale, or kola, is made from a flavoured cordial, as standardised, by
the addition of water impregnated with carbon dioxide, and no other ingre-
dient has been added save permitted preservative, and the name or names
of any fruit or vegetable appears on the label, then such name or names
shall be immediately followed by the word “ flavour ” in bold-faced sans-
serif capital letters of not less than twelve points face measurement, in the
same size of type as the name of any fruit mentioned in the label.
Where a drink of this kind contains a fruit juice, no amount of
fruit pulp shall be added in excess of the amount naturally present in the
actual fruit juice incorporated in the drink.
(e) Where any summer or temperance drink other than lemonade,
ginger ale, or kola, is made from an imitation cordial, or contains any
synthetic essence or synthetic extract, and where the name of any fruit
occurs on the label the word
SIVISTATION
shall be written in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than
twelve points face measurement immediately before and in the same size of
type as the name of the beverage or the fruit.
A beverage of this description shall not contain any fruit pulp.
Preservative.
(3) To summer or temperance drinks there may be added sulphur dioxide
(or sulphites calculated as sulphur dioxide), or salicylic acid, or benzoic acid
(or benzoates calculated as benzoic acid), one, but not more, in proportion
not exceeding one-half of one grain to a pint in the case of sulphur dioxide
or salicylic acid, or three and one-half grains to the pint in the case of
benzoic acid.
Note. —On and after the Ist July, 1932, the use of salicylic acid -will
be prohibited.
60. —Compound Cordials.
(1) Compound cordials are cordials not otherwise standardised, such as
orange bitters, sarsaparilla, ginger, non-alcoholic bitters, peppermint, cloves,
tonic bitters, and the like preparations. They shall consist of potable
water with vegetable extracts or infusions or tinctures, or any combination
of such vegetable extracts or infusions or tinctures, and sugar, with or
without glucose, with or without citric or tartaric acid, harmless vegetable
flavouring substances, harmless colouring matter, and glycerine, provided
the proportion of glycerine shall not exceed ten parts per centum by weight.


Labelling.
(2) There shall be written in the label attached to every package which
contains compound cordial in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less
than twelve points face measurement the words
COMPOUND CORDIAL,
The said words shall be the first words on the label and no other word shall
appear on the same line.
Preservative.
(3) To compound cordials which do not contain any glycerine there may
be added sulphur dioxide (or sulphites calculated ns sulphur dioxide), or
salicylic acid or benzoic acid (or benzoates calculated as benzoic acid), one,
but not more, in proportion not exceeding two grains to the pint in the
case of sulphur dioxide or salicylic acid, or seven grains to the pint in the
case of benzoic acid.
Rote. —On and after the Ist July, 1932, the use of salicylic acid will be
prohibited.
61.—Medicinal Beverages.
(1) Medicinal beverages are preparations sold for use as beverages and for
which medicinal properties are claimed. The constituent from ■which the
preparation is named shall be present in sufficient proportion to have medi-
cinal value, and shall bo the principal medicinal constituent in the prepara-
tion.
Quinine Tonic Waters.
(2) Any drink sold under a name or trade description which includes
the word “ Quinine ” shall contain quinine or a compound of quinine (cal-
culated as quinine hydrochloride) in proportion of not less than one-third
of one grain to the pint.
Labelling.
(3) There shall be written on the label attached to every package which
contains a medicinal beverage (including quinine tonic water) a statement,
in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than eight points face
measurement, of the proportion or proportions of the ingredient or ingre-
dients present for which medicinal value is claimed.
62. —Medicated Wine.
General Standard.
(1) Unless otherwise standardized in these Regulations, medicated wine
is wine to which any drug included in the British Pharmacopoeia or
British Pharmaceutical Codex has been added, and the drug shall be present
in such proportion that each fluid ounce of wine shall contain not less than
the minimum dose of such drug as stated in the said Pharmacopoeia oy
Codex.


Labelling.
(2) There shall be written in the label attached to every package contain-
ing medicated wine as defined in clause (1) of this '.Regulation, and in the
label attached to every package of meat wine, malt wine, and mixed medi-
cated wine, as hereinafter defined;—
(a) the words
MEDICATED WINE
in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than eighteen
points face measurement.
(b) the name in English of the drug or drugs, or substance with which
such wine is medicated.
(c) the quantity of the wine to be taken for a dose.
(d) the percentage of alcohol by volume present in the wine, and
(e) the words
THIS PREPARATION IS TO BE
USED AS A MEDICINE ONLY
in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than twelve points face
measurement.
Meat Wine.
(•!) Meat wine or beef wine, or any wine which purports to contain any
extract of meat or beef, is wine conforming to the general standard for
wine, to which has been added meat extract, so that the resultant wine
contains not less than two and one-half per centum of meat extract which
for the purposes of this regulation shall be deemed to contain eight parts
per centum of nitrogen derived from meat.
Malt Wine.
(4) Malt wine or any wine which purports to contain any malt extract
is wine conforming to the general standard for wine, to which has been
added malt extract, so that the resultant wine contains not less than three
parts per centum of malt extract.
Mixed Medicated Wines.
(') Any medicated wine containing more than one substance for which
medicinal value is indicated or claimed shall conform to the prescribed stan-
dard for each substance.
Bestrictions.
(6) Xo person, other than a registered pharmacist, a licensed victualler,
or a licensed wine-seller, shall sell any medicated wine as a beverage or by
the glass or otherwise than in the unbroken original immediate container
in which he has received such medicated wine.
And no person shall sell any such medicated wine unless it is labelled in
strict conformity with the requirements of these Regulations.
63. — Quinine Tonic Wine.
(1) Quinine tonic wine is wine containing quinine or a compound of
quinine (calculated as quinine hydrochloride) in proportion of not less than
five- and not more than twenty grains per pint.


Labelling.
(2) There shall be written in the label attached to every package of
quinine tonic wine a statement, in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of
not less than eight points face measurement, of the proportion of quinine
contained therein, in the following form;—
THIS QUININE WINE CONTAINS \liere insert the
number of grains] GRAINS OF QUININE PER PINT.
IT DOES NOT CONFORM WITH THE STAN-
DARD FIXED BY THE BRITISH PHARMACO-
POEIA:
Provided that quinine tonic wine which contains not less than twenty-
grains per pint of quinine (calculated as quinine hydrochloride) need not
bear the statement “It does not conform with the standard fixed by the
British Phannacopceia.”
64. —Cider and Perry.
Cider and perry are the products of the alcoholic fermentation of the
juice or must of sound apples and pears respectively. They may contain
sulphur dioxide (or sulphites calculated as sulphur dioxide), in proportion
not exceeding fourteen grains to the gallon; but they shall not contain any
foreign essence or foreign flavouring substance, or salicylic acid or other
preservative.
65.—Ale, Beer, and Stout.
(1) Malt ale or malt beer is a fermented liquid, containing not less than
1.2 parts per centum of alcohol by volume, brewed from barley, malt and
hops exclusively.
(2) Ale, beer, porter, or stout, is a fermented liquid, containing not less
than 1.2 parts per centum of alcohol by volume, prepared from grain,
It shall be brewed from a mash of malted or other grain and sugar and/or
glucose with hops and/or other harmless vegetable bitters.
(3) Malt ale or malt beer, ale, beer, porter or stout in bulk shall not
contain more than two grains of free sulphur dioxide or more than five
grains of total sulphur dioxide or alternatively not more than seven grains
of benzoic acid, or two grains of salicylic acid per gallon.
Mote.—On and after the Ist July, 1932, the use of salicylic acid will be
prohibited.
66.—Spirits.
(1) Spirits shall be in accordance with the standard fixed by the Minister
for Trade and Customs under the provisions of the Commonwealth Spirits
Act for the time being in force.
Labelling of Spirits Bottled from Imported Bulk.
(2) All spirits sold in bottles under the label or name of any manufac-
turer, packer, or agent, and which have been bottled from imported bulk
unless bottled in Bond under Commonwealth Supervision and so labelled
shall contain in the label describing such spirits a declaration in the
following form: —
“Bottled by [ here insert the name and address of bottler ].


67. — Standard of Strength for Spirits.
The standards of strength for brandy, whisky, rum, and gin shall be not
more than thirty-five degrees under proof.
63.— Drugs.
(1) Drugs which are included in the latest edition with amendments of
the British Pharmacopoeia and British Pharmaceutical Codex, shall conform
with the descriptions and tests respectively prescribed for them in the said
Pharmacopoeia and Pharmaceutical Codex, unless otherwise stardardised in
these Regulations, or in any Act in force, or in Regulations made there-
under.
Provided that wherever a drug is mentioned in both the British Pharma-
copoeia and the British Pharmaceutical Codex, the standard of the British
Pharmacopoeia shall prevail.
Provided that in any preparation intended solely for external use, where
olive oil or Arachis oil is indicated in the British Pharmacopoeia or British
Pharmaceutical Codex, cotton seed oil may be used in lieu thereof, except
where otherwise provided in these Regulations.
Provided that in a preparation where wine is used as specified in the
British Pharmacopoeia or British Pharmaceutical Codex, it shall not be
deemed to be adulterated in so far as it is compounded with wine, as already
defined in these Regulations, of Australian origin, containing not less than
twenty-eight parts per centum of proof spirit.
(2) The following drugs are hereby exempted from so much of the pro-
visions of the Regulations as require that they shall be compounded with
alcohol, and the said drugs shall not be deemed to be adulterated in so far as
they are compounded with an equivalent proportion of a methylated spirit
free from pyridine:—
Linimentum Aconiti
Linimentum Belladonna
Linimentum Camphoric Am-
moniatum
Linimentum Crotonis
Linimentum Opii
Linimentum Saponis
Linimentum S inapis
Linimentum Aconiti Compor
situm
Linimentum Capsici
Tinctura lodi Fortis
Liniments prepared specially
for the eradication of Pedi-
culi, and labelled accord-
ingly.
and such others as may from time to time he provided for by Regulations
issued by the Minister for Trade and Customs under the Commonwealth
Spirits Act for the time being in force.
(3) FTo drug shall be deemed to be a preparation of chloroform, provided
it contains not more than one-fourth of one part per centum of chloroform.
(4) A drug bearing a name recognised in the latest edition of the British
Pharmaceutical Codex -which does not conform to the description and tests
prescribed in the said Cordex, and which is not standardised in the Act or
in the Regulations, shall not on that account be deemed to be adulterated,
provided —
( a ) Its standard of strength, quality or purity is declared in the label.
(b) It conforms to such declared standard.


(c) The label bears a statement in sans-serif capital letters of not less
than twelve points face measurement, in the following form: —
[Here insert the name of the drug'] NOT IN ACCORD-
ANCE WITH THE BRITISH PHAR-
MACEUTICAL CODEX.
09.— Declaration or Certain* Drugs.
(1) The following substances are hereby specified for the purposes of
paragraph (It) of section 5 of the Act as necessary to be stated: —
Acetanilide
Acetylsalicyllc Acid
Aconite
Adrenalin, or its substitutes
Alcohol
Alphacaine (A. Eueaine
or Eueaine A.)
Aminophenols
Amyl nitrite
Anilides
Antimony
Arsenic
Barbitone (Veronal)
Barium
Belladonna
Benzamine (Betacaine B.
Eueaine or Eueaine B.)
Bromine, or chemical compounds
containing Bromine
Cannabas indica
Cantharidos
Carbolic acid and its homologues
Chlorbutol (Acetone Chloroform
or Chloretone)
Chloral
Chloroform
Coca
Copper
Cotton Boot
Creosote
Digitalis
Ergot
Ether
Gelsemium
Hydrocyanic Acid
Hydroquinone
Hyoscyamus
lodine, or chemical compounds
containing iodine, excepting
iodoform and its substitutes
Isopral
Lead
Lobelia
Mercury
Kapbtbols
Hitroglycerin
Hux Vomica
Oil of Parsley
Oil of Pennyroyal
Oil of Eue
Oil of Savin
Oil of Tansy
Opium
Paraldehyde
Parapbenylonediamine, or other
irritant organic bases
Phenacetin
Pbenazone
Phenetidines
Phosphorus
Proponal
Pyrazolones
Pyrogallic Acid
Quinolines
Besorcin
Stramonium
Strophanthus
Sulphonal
Trional
- and Any preparation, alkaloid, glncoside or poisonous chemical derivative
thereof or any medicinal preparation of animal tissues or micro-organisms.


(2) The statement required by paragraph (I) of section 5 of the Act, shall
be written in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than six points
face measurement, and shall be in the following form; —
THIS PACKAGE CONTAINS [or alternatively] THE CONTENTS OF
THIS PACKAGE INCLUDE [here insert the name of the drug or drugs required
to he declared , and the uuantitg or proportion of each contained in the mixture or packaged
or EACH OF THESE TABLETS [pastilles, cachets, or capsules] CONTAINS
[here insert the name of each substance required to he declared , and the quantity or proportion of
each contained in each tablet, past-illcachet, capsule, etc.].
(3) Any substance included in subelause (1) of this regulation but not
specifically named in the list, shall be described by the name most com-
monly applied to the substance in the English language in the Pharma-
copoeia of Great Britain or of the United States of America, or in the
British Pharmaceutical Codex.
(4) This regulation shall not apply to a drug dispensed and supplied on
prescription or order signed by a legally qualified medical practitioner, nor
to a mixture supplied by a registered pharmacist extemporaneously pre-
pared for a specific and individual case.
(5) The requirements of this regulation relating to the declaration of
alcohol shall not apply to liquor as defined in the Liquor Act, 1912, nor to
preparations containing less than 17| per cent, of proof spirit nor to
essences.
70. —Methylated Spirit.
(1) Methylated spirit is spirit methylated in accordance with any regula-
tion under the Commonwealth Spirits Act, It shall have a strength of not
less than sixty-five degrees over proof.
(2) Mo drug for internal use shall contain any methylated spirit.
71.— Eucalyptus Oil.
Eucalyptus oil prepared for internal use or inhalation by man is the
essential oil distilled from the leaves of one or more species of Eucalyptus.
It shall conform to the standard contained in the British Pharmacopoeia.
72. —Soap.
General Standard for Soap.
(1) Soap is a product derived from the action of a solution of alkali on
fats, oils, or resins. It shall contain not less than fifty-nine parts per
centum of fatty acids of which not more than one-third may be resin
acids. It shall contain not more than one-tenth of one part per centum of
free caustic alkali, and not more than three parts per centum of carbonate
of soda. It shall not contain any other substance except water, perfume,
and harmless colouring matter.
Soap Mixture.
(2) Soap Mixture is a product derived from the action of a solution
of alkali on fats, oils, or resins. It shall contain not less than fifty-three
parts per centum of fatty acids of which not more than one-third may be
resin acids. It shall contain not more than one-tenth of one part per
centum of free caustic alkali. It shall not contain any other substance
except carbonate of soda and/or silicate of soda, and/or hydro-carbons,
water, perfume, or colouring matter.


Abrasive Soap Mixture.
(3) Soap mixtures which are sold for abrasive purposes, and which are
not suitable for general toilet use, may contain any proportion of an
abrasive mineral substance.
Medicated Soap.
(4) Medicated soap is soap which conforms with the general standard
for soap mixed with a drug of recognised therapeutic properties, or with
a disinfectant.
Borax Soap.
(5) Borax soap is soap which conforms with the general standard for soap
mixed with not less than two parts per centum of borax.
Castile Soap.
(6) Castile soap shall be a soap prepared by the action of sodium
hydroxide on olive oil. It shall conform to the general standard for soap.
Carbolic Soap.
(7) Carbolic soap shall conform with the general standard for soap,
and shall contain not less than three parts per centum of carbolic acid or its
homologues.
Soft Soap.
(9) Soft soap is a product derived from the action of a solution of
caustic potash with or without caustic soda, on fats, oils, or resins. It shall
contain not less than forty parts per centum of fatty acids, of which
not more than one-third may be resin acids. It may contain not more
than three parts per centum of potassium silicate.
Soap Powder or Extract.
(9) This Regulation shall not apply to mixtures of dried and powdered
soap with soda, commonly colled soap powder, or extract of soap.
Toilet Soaps and Shaving Soap.
(10) (a) All toilet soaps, shaving sticks, shaving cakes, or other solids
purporting to be suitable for toilet or shaving shall conform with the
general standard for soap.
(b) This Regulation shall not apply to liquid soap for use in lava-
tory toilet fittings.
73. —Disinfectants, Germicides, Antiseptics and Deodorants.
Lysol.
Any substance sold as Lysol shall be a solution of Cresol in a liquid
vegetable soap. It shall contain not less than 48 parts per centum nor more
than 52 parrs per centum by volume of cresol. The soap shall be made from
potash or caustic soda or a mixture of both and vegetable oil, miscible to
clear solutions in all proportions with water.
74. —Permitted Colouring Matters.
(1) The following substances shall be permitted colouring matters within
the meaning and for the purposes of the Regulations;—
Caramel.
Cochineal.
Saffron.


Chlorophyll and other vegetable colouring matters (except Gamboge
and other harmful vegetable colouring matters, the use of which
is hereby prohibited.)
Coal Tar Dyes as follows: —
Bed Shades—
-31 Azogeranine, Kiton Eed G, Acetyl Rose 2GL.
57 Lissamine Eed 68, Amidonaphthol Eed 68, Kiton Eed
68, Acetyl Eose 6BL.
79 Ponceau 2R.
85 Benzyl Bordeaux B.
179 Carmoisine, Cardinal 38.
184 Amaranth, Brilliant Bordeaux B.
185 Brilliant Scarlet 4R, Brilliant Ponceau SR.
225 Chlorazol Pink Y, Eosophenine 108, Eosophenine
Pink, Azomine Past Pink B.
677 Eoseine, Magenta.
749 Ehodamine B.
771 Eosine BS, Eosine Scarlet.
773 Erythrosine.
777 Rose Bengale.
80 Ponceau 3E.
Orange Shades —
150 Orange I.
151 Orange R.
Yellow Shades —
10 FTaphthol Yellow.
C4O Tartar Yellow, Acid Yellow 79210, Tartratol Yellow.
655 Auramine 0.
22 Yellow AB.
61 Yellow 08.
Green Shades —
662 Brilliant Green Crystals Y.
666 Acid Green G.
670 Light Green S.F. (Yellowish), Fast Green FCF.
Blue Shades —■
289 Ooomassie FTavy Blue, Cyanine Navy Blue.
518 Chlorazol Sky Blue FF, Paramine Sky Blue FF.
661 Turquoise Blue G.
707 Soluble Blue.
1180 Indigo Carmine.
Brown Shades —■
331 Bismarck Brown.
Violet Shade —■
680 Methyl Yiolet.
Black Shades—
-861 Induline.
865 FTigroslne.
(The numbers quoted are those given in the Society of Byers and
Colourists' Colour Index, edited by F. M. Rowe, first edition, 1924.)


Labelling of Colouring Mailer.
(2) Goal tar dyes which are sold for the purposes of colouring food sh.il!
have on the label of the package containing the colour the number under
which the colour is indexed in Lowe’s Colour Index.
When more than one colour is contained in the package the Index number
of each colour in the mixture shall be placed thereon.
75.—- Protection of Food and Drugs from Contamination.
(1) Every person who is engaged in the manufacture, preparation, stor-
age, packing, carriage, or delivery of foods or drugs for sale shall, when so
engaged, maintain his clothing and his body clean.
(2) Ho person who is suffering from any infectious or contagious disease,
skin eruption, consumption (phthisis), or any loathsome or venereal disease,
or who is wearing unclean or medicated bandages, shall engage in the
manufacture, preparation, storage, packing, carriage, or delivery for sale
of any food or drug, or of any article used or intended to be used as a food
or drug.
(3) Ho person shall spit, and no person shall smoke or chew tobacco
■while engaged in the manufacture, packing, storing, or delivery of any food
or drug for sale, and no person shall urinate, spit, or smoke or chew tobacco
in any place used for the manufacture, preparation, or delivery of such food
or drug; Provided that this clause of this Regulation shall not apply to the
packing, storing’, or delivery of any food or drug which is enclosed in an
hermetically sealed container.
(4) Every person who is in possession of any food or drug for sale, or
who is engaged in the manufacture, preparation, storage, packing, carriage,
or delivery of any food or drug for sale, shall keep at all times such food
or drug, and all receptacles, implements, vehicles, articles, utensils, tools
of trade, benches, fittings, machinery, and other appliances used for or in
connection with food or drugs for sale, clean, free from dust, foul odours,
flies, or other insects.
(5) Ho person shall manufacture, prepare, pack, store, or offer or expose
for sale any article of food, or a drug (a) in any place which is at any
time used as a sleeping apartment, or which is in direct communication
with a sleeping apartment, or with any stable, urinal, privy, or ivater-closet,
or (h) in any place in which anything is kept, or any animal is allowed to
be, or any work is carried on, whereby such article of food or drug is
liable to be contaminated or its wholesomeness or cleanliness injuriously
affected.
(6) Ho person shall use any vehicle, conveyance, or receptacle which is
not clam in the carriage or delivery of any food or drug for sale; no
person shall use any such vehicle, conveyance, or receptacle for the carriage
nr containing of any matter whereby the wholesomeness, cleanliness, and
freedom from contamination of any food or drug for sale carried or con-
tained or usually carried or contained in the vehicle, conveyance, or recep-
tacle would or might be endangered.
(7) Every person who sells any food which is ordinarily consumed in the
state in which it is sold shall protect such food, until it is delivered to a
purchaser, from dust, flies, or other insects, or any unwholesome matter
by storage in covered receptacles, by covering with gauze, or by other
effectual means; and no vendor shall carry such food through the streets
unless it be protected as aforesaid.


(8) No person shall sell any article of food which is ordinarily con-
sumed in the same state in which it is sold, so packed that it can come into
contact with paper or other material which is not clean, or with any writing
or printing upon any paper or other material.
(9) No person shall expose without adequate protection against flies and
dust, any article of food which is ordinarily consumed in the same state in
which it is sold, in any window space which is not so constructed as to
protect the food from flies and dust; this subclause shall not extend to fruit
or vegetables.
(10) No person shall display food for sale in any street or other open
space at a lower level than 18 inches above the ground, unless such food
is adequately protected against pollution by dogs.
(11) No person shall in any public or private bar, restaurant, dining-
room, tea-room, refreshment stall or booth, or in any place where food is
sold, use any drinking vessel, spoon or fork for or in connection with the
sale or delivery of food unless such vessel, spoon or fork has been thoroughly
cleansed with clean water, and kept clean. In any of the above-mentioned
places where clean water under pressure is available, or in which clean
water under pressure can be made available, the cleansing of all drinking
vessels shall be done by means of clean and clear running water.
(12) No person shall use or have in his possession for use for the delivery
of food for sale any drinking vessel, of which any edge liable to come into
contact with the mouth or lips, is broken or rough.
(IS) The occupier of any premises used for the manufacture, prepara-
tion, or storage of food for sale shall provide and maintain in a convenient
position upon his premises for the use of his employees adequate washing
appliances for the hands, together with a sufiicient supply of soap and clean
water, and a sufficient supply of clean towels.
(14) No person shall carry for sale or delivery on the footboard or
exterior of any vehicle any bread, meat, milk, or any article of food which
is usually consumed in the same state in which it is sold, unless it is so
enclosed, or contained in a receptacle so constructed as to prevent such
article of food from being contaminated by flies or dust.
(15) No person who sells bread or meat, and no employee of such person
shall (a) receive into any place or vehicle for the reception or storage of
bread or meat for sale, or (b) sell any bread or meat which has been
returned after having been previously delivered at any dwelling or to any
private consumer.
(16) Every person who uses any room, compartment, premises, or place
for or in connection with the manufacture, preparation, packing, storage,
carriage, or delivery for sale of any article of food or drug, shall keep such
room, compartment, premises, or place clean, free from foul odours, free
from rats, mice, cockroaches, flies, spiders, bugs, moths, and all other
vermin, and shall cause the walls and all floors and ceilings to be properly
constructed of some rigid smooth-faced material and kept in good repair.
(17) No person shall enclose or carry or store wheat, oats, maize, potatoes,
onions, fruit, or any other article of food for sale in any bag or sack or
similar receptacle which has at any time contained, or has been used for
the conveyance of bone-dust or superphosphate or any other manure or
mixture of manures, or any poisons or harmful material.
(18) Where oysters or other shell-fish are exposed or prepared for sale,
only clean waiter shall be used in the operation of opening or dipping such
■oysters or shell-fish.


(19) No unclean case, basket, or other receptacle shall be used for con-
taining, or packing fish for sale.
(20) All cases, baskets, or other receptacles in which fish are contained,
packed, or consigned for sale shall be thoroughly cleansed by the consignee
of the fish, or by some person acting on his behalf, immediately the fish are
removed therefrom.
(21) No person shall engage in the process known as re-packing tea by
means of stamping with the feet covered or uncovered; all such re-packing
shall be done by means of clean iron weights, or wood blocks, or other clean
methods, and the tea shall be protected from contamination during the
process.
(22) No person shall use for the preparation of food for sale any vessel
or copper which is used for. boiling clothes.
(23) No person shall use any receptacle, vessel, appliance, or vehicle in
connection with the preparation, storage, packing, carriage, or delivery of
any food , for sale, unless such receptacle, vessel, appliance, or vehicle is
constructed of such material and in such a manner as to be easily cleansed
and kept clean.
(24) Every person packing or serving food for sale shall exercise care to
avoid any unnecessary human contact with such food during such packing
or serving, and for such purpose shall observe the following require-
ments :
(а) He shall not serve unwrapped sweets or any sticky substance with
the fingers, but shall use a scoop or other suitable implement for
every such purpose.
(б) He shall not serve bacon, ham, cheese, smallgoods, or cooked meat
with the fingers, but shall use a fork or other suitable implement
for every such purpose.
(c) He shall not apply his fingers to his mouth, eye, ear, or nose during
the performance of such packing or serving.
(d) He shall not use his breath to open any bag or wrapper.
(c) He shall not wipe his hands upon his clothing or by any other
means than with a clean towel.
(f) He shall not permit any other person to handle with the fingers any
food which he himself is prohibited by these Regulations from
handling with the fingers.
(25) No person engaged in the preparation of food for sale shall apply
to the mouth any appliance used for or in connection with the preparation
of such food.
(26) Every person engaged in the manufacture or preparation or storage
of food for sale shall upon every occasion after visiting any urinal, privy,
closet, or other similar convenience and before resuming work wash his
hands thoroughly with soap and clean water.
(27) No person shall use for the purpose of kneading, covering, or work-
ing dough in the manufacture or preparation of bread or pastry, any un-
clean or second-hand bags or other material which is unclean or liable to
contaminate such dough.
(28) No person shall deliver to a customer any article of food which is
ordinarily consumed in the same state in which it is sold unless such food
is completely wrapped in clean unprinted paper or other suitable material,
provided that this clause shall not apply to bread delivered to a customer


at Ills place of residence in a clean basket covered with clean canvas or
other clean washing material, provided further that this Regulation shall
not apply to foodstuffs sold for immediate consumption on the premises
nor to fruit or vegetables.
(29) A copy of this Regulation shall be conspicuously displayed in every
place where any food or drug is prepared, stored, or deposited for sale, and
shall be there constantly maintained clean, visible, and legible, by the
proprietor, manager, or person in charge thereof. A copy of this Regula-
tion shall be supplied by the Department of Public Health to any such
proprietor, manager, or person, on demand.
(30) If any person contravene any of the provisions of this Regxdation
he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding £2O.
76. — For Securing the Cleanliness and Freedom from Contamination
of Meat Products.
For the purposes of this Regulation—
“ Meat ” includes carcases, butcher’s meat, bones, fat, blood, and grease
for human consumption, but does not include tinned or canned
goods.
“ Refuse ” includes condemned and diseased carcases, and meat, waste,
refuse, bones, fat, blood, and grease either unfit or not intended
for human consumption, offal, and other like substances.
Butcher’s shop ” includes every shop or store in or in connection with
which butcher’s meat for human consumption is sold.
(1) Ho person shall use, or suffer to be used, any room or place for the
boning, curing, canning, salting, mincing, or other similar process of pre-
paration of meat for sale for human food, unless the following conditions
are observed: —
(a) The floor shall be of tiles, concrete, cement, or some other material
impervious to water, having a smooth surface, and graded and
drained, so that all liquids spilt on it may flow off it without
impediment.
(h) If any such floor be constructed of tiles, the joints between the
tiles shall be of a material which is impervious to water.
(c) Such floors shall at all times be kept in good repair, smooth, and
free from cracks and inequalities, and free from accumulations
of fat, dirt, grease, or debris of meat.
(d) Such floors shall be thoroughly cleansed at least once daily with
the aid of hot water, and they shall at all times be kept in a
state of reasonable cleanliness.
(2) Ho person shall keep, or suffer to remain, any bones or waste matters
of any kind in any room or on any floor in or on which any process of
preparation of any meat for sale for human food is, or usually is, carried
on, unless such bones or waste matters are contained in a vessel made of
metal, and provided with a close-fitting cover. He shall cause such vessel,
if retained in the room, to be emptied and cleansed within eight hours after
any bones or waste matter have been placed in it.


(3) No person shall use, or suffer to be used, any room or place for tha
boning, curing, canning, salting, mincing, or other similar process of pre-
paration of meat for sale for human food, unless its internal walls;—-
(a) Are faced with tiles, concrete, cement, or other material impervious
to water, and
(&) Are kept constantly clean, either by washing with water or by
limewashing from time to time:
Provided that such walls may be constructed of wood if the internal sur-
faces be covered with flat iron painted white to a height of 6 feet from the
floor, and if the portions of the walls above the iron be kept constantly clean
either by painting white and washing from time to time, or by limowashing
from time to time.
(4) No person shall use any room or place for the boning, curing, can-
ning, salting, mincing, or other similar process of the preparation of meat
for sale for human food which is in direct communication with any sleeping
apartment, or with any stable, urinal, privy, or water-closet, or which has
within it any undisconnected opening into any sewer.
(5) No person shall use any premises as a butcher’s shop unless it is
constructed and arranged according to the following specifications:—
(a) The floor shall be constructed of cement, concrete, brick, tiles, or
other approved and suitable non-absorbent material.
(h) The inner walls shall have a minimum height of 10 feet, lined with
white or coloured tiles, cemented, or constructed of other impervi-
ous and non-absorbent material, with white unbroken smooth
surface capable of being easily washed.
(r) The ceiling shall be constructed of such material as to offer the
least possible opportunity for the lodgment of dust, flies, and other
insects.
(d) The windows shall be of glass or closely fitting wire or approved
gauze, and the window opening shall be not less than one-half of
the area of the inside front wall of the shop; and every doorway
shall be provided with a light swing frame, closely fitting and self-
closing, and covered with wire or approved gauze of a maximum
mesh of one-sixteenth part of an inch; and every ventilative or
other opening shall be covered with similar gauze.
( e ) Every external door of every butcher’s shop shall be kept closed,
except when in use for the purpose of ingress thereto or egress
therefrom.
(/) An opening, other than by the street door and window (protected
by gauze as aforesaid), shall be provided either in the back or side
wall. Such means of ventilation shall be always in operation, shall
have an effective area equal to not less than 2 per cent, of the
floor space of the said shop, and shall extend to within 12 inches
from the ceiling.
( g ) Every butcher’s shop where water under pressure is available, or
where it can be reasonably made available, shall be provided with
a lavatory basin, protected by a screen, with water laid on thereto.
(K) No inlet to a drain or gully trap shall be within a butcher’s shop
unless provided with a disconnecting trap.


(6) No person shall use or permit to be used any butcher’s shop—
(a) for domestic purposes, or
(h) as a sleeping apartment, or
(c) for any purpose incompatible with cleanliness and good sanitary
condition of the shop and of the fittings and instruments used
therein and of the meat exposed therein, or
( d ) into which a sleeping-room opens directly, or
(«) for the storage or preparation for sale or the sale of any food other
than meat or meat products.
(7) No person shall use, or permit to be used, any butcher’s shop which
has a window or other opening in an external wall within a distance of 30
feet of any fowlhouso, stable, ash-heap, privy, earth-closet, or urinal, or
which is in direct communication with a water-closet.
(8) The occupier of every butcher’s shop shall provide facilities for the
cleansing of all fittings, instruments, and conveyors used therein, and for
the provision of boiling water for such cleansing.
(9) The proprietor, manager, or person in charge of a butcher’s shop
shall cause the following rules to be carried out; —
(a) The floors, walls, ceilings, and fittings in every butcher’s shop, and
all instruments and appliances used shall be kept scrupulously
clean.
(h) All waggons, carts, trollies, baskets, trays, and containers of every
kind shall be cleansed daily.
(c) All waste matters shall be removed from every butcher’s shop daily,
and no scrap meat, fat, oifal, bones, or other waste matters from
the butcher’s shop shall be cast, deposited, or be allowed to remain
in any manure heap or pit, or upon any part of the premises
attached to any butcher’s shop other than in a suitable covered
receptacle provided for the purpose and removed daily.
( d ) No copper or other cooking apparatus used in connection with
the sale or cooking of meat shall be used for general laundry work.
(e) Every vehicle used for delivering meat to retail customers shall be
so constructed with due regard to ventilation as to prevent access
of flies and dust to the interior, and shall at all times be kept
closed, except when in use for loading and unloading.
(/) Every vehicle used for the transport of any meat for sale shall be
kept constantly clean and in good repair. Every such vehicle shall
be thoroughly scraped and washed, or otherwise cleansed, and, if
straw be used in it, such straw shall be clean, and every such
vehicle shall be thoroughly cleansed at the completion of each day
on which such vehicle has been used.
(10) (a) No person shall place or allow to stand upon any public footpath
or pavement any meat for sale or any package or other vessel or
utensil used for the carriage of meat for sale.
( h ) No person shall use for the carriage of meat for sale any cart
which has at any time been used for the carting of manure or any
refuse or any article likely to contaminate meat.


( c ) No person shall convey or deliver, or cause to be conveyed or
delivered, any meat for sale unless such meat whilst being con-
veyed or delivered is kept covered and enclosed so as to protect
the same from dust, flies, or other impurities.
( d ) No person shall use any vessel for the storage or carriage of meat
for sale, the substance, construction, or condition of which is likely
to contaminate meat or depreciate its nutritive value.
(e) No person in charge of a butcher’s shop shall suffer any meat to
hang, protrude, or be exposed, either wholly or in part, beyond
the line of the glass or gauze of the window of any butcher’s shop.
(/) No person shall sell any meat or portion of any carcase which
has been blown or spouted.
(g) No person shall use any vehicle for the transport of any meat
for sale unless it shall be so constructed or so covered as to prevent
access of flies, dust, or other impurities to the meat carried therein.
( h ) No person shall consign meat for sale for transit by rail or boat
except in vehicles or in packages so constructed as to exclude dust
or other impurities and protect meat from flies.
({) All persons who are engaged in the wholesale or retail storage
or delivery of meat for sale, whether in any shop or not, shall at
all times when they are so engaged wear clean overalls and aprons,
made of washable material, which shall completely cover their
clothes.
O’) All persons engaged in the transport and delivery of carcase meat
to butchers’ shops, or elsewhere, shall at all times when they are
so employed wear caps, constantly covered with a detachable cover
made of washable material, and they shall wear clean overalls
made of washable material which shall completely cover their
clothes.
(k) No person shall deliver meat sold to a retail customer unless such
meat is first completely wrapped in clean unprinted paper.
( [I ) No person (i) who is suffering from an infectious disease whether
notifiable by law or not, or suffering from objectionable or con-
tagious skin affections, such as itch or syphilitic lesions, or (ii)
who is wearing unclean or medicated bandages, shall take part or
be employed in the conveyance, handling, or treatment of meat
for sale, or the sale of meat.
( tn ) No person shall use any paper, rag, bagging, or other absorbent
material as packing or otherwise in the interior of any sausage-
filling machine.
(n) No person shall inject into meat for sale any brine which has been
previously used, or which is not clean and free from foreign matter
and impurities.
(11) A copy of this Eegulation shall be conspicuously displayed in
•very butcher’s shop, and in every place where the boning, curing, canning,
•siting, mincing, or other similar process of preparation of meat for sale
for human food is carried on, and shall be there constantly maintained,
dean; visible, and legible, by the proprietor, manager, or person in charge
thereof.’
A copy of this Eegulation shall be supplied by the Department of Public
Health to any such proprietor, manager, or person, on demand.
(12) If any person contravenes any of the provisions of this Eegulation
he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding twenty pounds (£2O).


77. —For Securing the Cleanliness a'nd Freedom from Contamination of
Milk.
(1) No person shall, by himself or by his agent or servant, sell in any
place of public resort, or distribute on a round from house to house, any
milk or cream or separated milk from any vehicle, or from any can of more
than one quart capacity carried by hand, unless his name and address are
conspicuously inscribed on the said vehicle or the said can; and no other
name and address shall be inscribed on the said vehicle or can.
(2) No person shall allow his hands or any part of his body to come into
contact with any milk or cream for sale.
(3) No person shall apply to his mouth any vessel or utensil which con-
tains, or which comes into contact with, any milk or cream for sale.
(4) No person shall keep, store, carry, or place, or suffer to be kept,
stored, carried, or placed, any milk or cream for sale, or in course of
delivery to any customer, so as to be exposed to flies or dust, or as to be
accessible to any animal.
(5) No person shall suffer the interior of any vessel used for containing
or for measuring milk or cream for sale to be exposed to flies or dust.
(6) No person shall milk any cow, or cause or suffer any cow under hia
control to be milked, for the purpose of obtaining milk or cream for sale —
unless
(a) at the time of milking the udder and teats of the cow are clean;
and
( h ) the hands of the person milking such cow are clean and free from
all contamination or infection.
(7) No person shall use, or suffer or cause to be used, for closing, or
helping to close, any churn, tin, or other vessel containing milk or cream
for sale any rag, canvas, paper, wood, or other absorbent material: Pro-
vided that the use of clean unused parchment paper shall not be regarded
as a contravention of this Regulation.
(8) No person shall spit, and no person shall smoke or chew tobacco
while engaged in the production, storage, or distribution of milk or cream
for sale.
(9) No person while carrying milk or cream for sale, or for delivery to a
customer, shall carry or convey water, separated or skim milk, or any other
fluid capable of being used for diluting milk or cream.
(10) Milk or cream shall not be delivered by any person in wholesale
quantity to a milk-vendor for retail sale at any place other than the milk-
vendor’s registered premises or a depot situated, constructed and main-
tained so as to protect the said milk or cream as far as possible from con-
tamination by flies and dust. Milk or cream in containers, cans, churns,
or other receptacles, and intended for sale in bulk, shall not be deposited
on any footpath, roadway, or open space.
This clause shall not apply in cases where milk is delivered personally to
a vendor or his agent.
(11) No person suffering from any skin affection, consumption
(phthisis), chronic cough, or any loathsome or venereal disease, or wearing
unclean or medicated bandages, shall handle milk, cream, butter, or any
dairy produce for sale, or any utensil used in the sale or distribution of
such produce.


(12) No person shall keep, measure, carry, or deliver any milk or cream
for sale, or cause or suffer any such milk or cream to be kept, measured,
carried or delivered in any vessel which is not clean, or which is not kept
in such a state of repair as to be free from dents, which may interfere with
the thorough and easy cleansing of such vessel, or which is not provided
'with a close-fitting lid.
(13) No person shall use soap or other temporary stopping likely to con-
taminate milk or cream to stop a hole in a can or vessel used for contain-
ing or conveying milk or cream for sale.
(14) No person shall use for the purpose of boiling’ clothes, or for any
other domestic purpose, any vessels or coppers used for the boiling of water
for sterilising milk or cream cans.
(15) No person shall for the purpose of containing or conveying milk or
cream for sale —
(a) use vessels or measures of copper, brass, or zinc, unless they are
coated internally with tin; or
(b) use rusty vessels or vessels with cracked or broken enamel or
vessels of clay or similar material with cracked or damaged glaz-
ing, or any vessels in such a condition that they could give off
particles to the milk or cream or influence its composition.
(1G) No person shall use any vessel for containing or conveying milk or
cream for sale which has not an opening wide enough to allow every internal
part thereof to be seen and to permit the hand entering for cleansing
purposes.
(17) No person shall use for containing, measuring, or carrying any milk
or cream for sale or for delivery to any customer, any vessel with rough
or torn edges or with a rough or damaged surface liable to come into con-
tact with the milk or cream.
(18) No person shall—
(<7) store or keep for sale or sell milk or cream in any place in which
is stored, kept, or sold, any fish, meat (except fish and meat in her-
metically sealed tins), kerosene, or any other substance by which
milk or cream for sale is liable to be contaminated; or
(h) keep milk or cream for sale in any room used as a sleeping room,
whether continuously or occasionally, or in any room communicat-
ing directly with a sleeping room.
(19) Every person engaged in the distribution, storage, packing, carriage,
or delivery of milk or cream for sale shall keep the premises, receptacles,
implements, vehicles, articles, utensils, tools of trade, benches, fittings,
machinery and other appliances used for or in connection with milk or
cream for sale, clean, free from dust, foul odours, flies or other insects.
(20) No person shall use or suffer to be used any premises for or in con-
nection with the distribution, storage, packing, bottling, or delivery of milk
or cream for sale, unless the following conditions arc observed; —
(a) The floors shall be constructed of cement or other impervious
material and shall be effectively graded and drained.
(h) The inner walls shall be lined with cement or other impervious
and non-absorbent material, with smooth surface capable of being
easily washed and cleansed.


( c) The ceiling- shall be constructed of such material as to offer the
least possible opportunity for the lodgment of dust, flies and other
insects.
id) Every room used for or in connection with the distribution, stor-
age, packing, bottling, or delivery of milk or cream for sale, shall
be provided with at least one window capable of being opened
directly to the outer air. The window shall be of glass and shall
have a superficial area not less than one-tenth of the floor area of
the room.
(e) Every such room shall have, in addition to any window opening,
at least 24 square inches of unobstructed ventilation to the outer
air at or near the ceiling level for each 100 square feet or part
thereof of floor area.
(f) All doorways shall be provided with a light swing frame close-
fitting and self-closing, which frame and all windows or other
openings shall be covered with wire gauze of a maximum mesh of
l-16th part of an inch.
(g) Adequate equipment shall be available and shall be maintained in
efficient condition for the effective cleansing, sterilising, filling,
capping, or other treatment of all bottles or other containers used
in connection with any- process.
Provided that the requirements of this sub-regulation shall not apply- to
a small retail shop of a milk vendor nor to dairy premises, defined under the
Dairies Supervision Act, 1901, where the bottling of milk or cream for sale
is not carried out in the shop or premises.
(21) The proprietor, manager, or person in charge of any premises used
for or in connection with the carriage or delivery- of milk or cream for sale
shall cause the following rules to be carried out: —
(a) Every vehicle used for the carriage or delivery of milk or cream
for sale shall be constructed and maintained so as to keep such
milk or cream clean and wholesome and free from contamination.
(h) All measures used in connection with such vehicle shall be stored
within a suitable box provided with an impervious inner recept-
acle which can be easily removed for cleansing purposes.
(c) All milk or cream tanks or other containers and all taps thereon
shall be of a design and constructed and maintained so as to allow
such tanks, containers, or taps to he easily cleansed.
id) Such vehicle shall not be used for purposes other than for the car-
riage or distribution for sale of milk or cream or other milk pro-
ducts.
ie) Such vehicle shall not be used for the transport or carriage of milk
or cream for sale in bulk unless such milk or cream and the con-
tainers holding same are at all times during transit effectively-
protected from dust, flies, and sun’s rays.
(22) Where any- dog, pig, cat, or poultry is kept upon any- premises upon
which milk or cream for sale is treated, stored, deposited, or sold, the per-
son in charge of such premises shall take adequate steps to prevent such
dog, pig, cat, or poultry from having access to any portion of the premises
in which milk or cream is treated, stored, deposited or sold.


(23) The proprietor, manager, or person in charge of any premises used
for or in connection with the production, distribution, storage or delivery
of milk or cream for sale shall —
(a) Provide facilities for the cleansing and sterilizing hy steam or
boiling water or both, of all utensils, containers and appliances
used.
(5) Cause such utensils, containers and appliances to he thoroughly
washed immediately after use and then sterilised.
■(c) Prevent such utensils, containers, and appliances being used unless
they have been effectively cleansed and sterilised by means of
equipment used exclusively for that purpose.
id) Cause any bottle or other container in which milk or cream is sold
by retail to be thoroughly washed immediately after return to such
premises and then sterilised.
(«) Prevent any bottle or other container in which milk or cream is
sold by retail, being used unless it has been effectively cleansed and
sterilised by means of equipment used exclusively for the purpose.
(24) No person shall —
(a) Place milk or cream for sale in any bottle or other container in
which milk or cream is sold by retail;
(b) Sell or deliver milk or cream in any such bottle or container;
unless such bottle or container has been effectively cleansed and sterilised
hy means of equipment used exclusively for the purpose.
(25) In every place where milk or cream is sold, and in every place where
any cow is milked for the purpose of obtaining milk or cream for sale, a
copy of this Regulation shall be conspicuously displayed, and shall be there
constantly maintained clean, visible, and legible by the proprietor, man-
ager, or person in charge thereof.
A copy of this Regulation shall be supplied by the Department of Public
Health to any such proprietor, manager, or person, on demand.
(26) If any person contravene any of the provisions of this Regulation
he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding £2O.
"78.— Providing for the Cleanliness and Freedom from Contamination
of Ice-cream and Ices.
(1) No person shall manufacture, store, or deposit any ice-cream or ices
for sale, or suffer them to bo so manufactured, stored, or deposited in any
■open shed or unenclosed space.
(2) No person shall manufacture, store, or deposit any ice-cream or ices
for sale, or suffer them to be so manufactured, stored, or deposited in any
room or building—
(a) unless such room or building is provided with tight, close-jointed
walls and floors;
(b) unless its internal walls are covered with tiles, smooth metal, or
smooth plaster, cement, or wood, painted or colour-washed, or fre-
quently limewashed;
(c) unless its floors are constructed of cement, concrete, tiles, or well-
smoothed wood;
id) unless it is well-lighted and ventilated;
( e ) unless all interior surfaces of the floors and walls thereof are kept
constantly clean.


(3) No person shall suffer the interior of any vessel used for containing
ice-cream or ices for sale to be exposed to flies or dust.
(4) No person shall manufacture, store, or deposit ice-cream or ices for
sale, nor suffer them to be manufactured, stored, or deposited
(a) in any dwelling-room, or
(b) in any room communicating directly with a privy or water-closet,
or stable, or with an apartment used for sleeping, or
(c) in any room having an opening communicating directly with any
drain or sewer.
(5) No person engaged in the manufacture or sale of ice-cream or of ices,
shall suffer his hands or any part of his person to come in contact with any
ice-cream or ices for sale.
(6) No person shall manufacture, store, or deposit any ice-cream or ices
for sale in any vessel which is not clean; and every person engaged in the
manufacture or sale of ice-cream or ices shall at all times maintain all
vessels and utensils used for, containing, or coming into contact with ice-
cream or ices for sale in a condition of cleanliness, and shall at all times
protect the contents thereof from contamination.
(7) No person shall sell any ice-cream or ices which, after having been,
once frozen, have run down or melted, and which have been again frozen.
(8) A copy of this Regulation shall be conspicuously displayed in every
place where ice-cream or ices are made for sale, and shall be there constantly
maintained clean, visible, and legible by the proprietor, manager, or person
in charge thereof.
A copy of this Regulation shall be supplied by the Department of Public
Health to any such proprietor, manager or person, on demand.
(9) If any person contravene any of the provisions of this Regulation,
he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding £2O.
79. — Forms of Guarantee under Section 47 of the Act.
(1) A general guarantee given by an individual shall be in the following
form:—
I, , being a resident in New South Wales, carrying on
business at , under the name of , do hereby
guarantee that the goods or classes of goods hereunder described
are, as sold by me, and marked with the serial number allotted and
with the words of guarantee prescribed in paragraph ( d ) of sub-
section 3 of section 47 of the Pure Food Act, 1908, not adulterated,
falsely described, mixed, coloured, composed or constituted in con-
travention of any provision of the said Act.
Goods and classes of goods guaranteed: —
Guarantor.
Witness. ■
Filed in the Treasury
Serial No. allotted
t 80955—D


(2) A general guarantee given by a company shall be in the following
form:—■
The Company, having a registered office in New South
Wales, and carrying on business at under the name of
, doth hereby guarantee that the goods or classes of goods
hereunder set out are, as sold by the company and marked with the
serial number allotted, and with the words of guarantee prescribed
in paragraph (d) of subsection 3 of section 47 of the Pure Food
Act, 1908, not adulterated, falsely described, mixed, coloured, com-
posed, or constituted in contravention of any provision of the said
Act.
Goods and classes of goods guaranteed :—
Seal of Company.
Witness.
Filed in the Treasury
Serial No. allotted.
(3) A specific guarantee given by an individual shall be in the following
form: —
I, , being a resident in New South Wales, carrying on
business at under the name of , do
hereby guarantee that the goods hereunder specified and contained
in the bill of sale, invoice, bill of lading, or other document describ-
ing the goods and their weight, measure, and number of the same,
referred to herein or attached hereto, are not adulterated, falsely
described, mixed, coloured, composed or constituted in contraven-
tion of any provision of the Pure Food Act, 1908.
Goods guaranteed ; —•
[ Description of hill of sale, invoice, hill of lading, or other document .]
Guarantor.
Witness.
day of
(4) A specific guarantee given by a company shall be in the following
form:—
The Company, having a registered office in New South
Wales, and carrying on business at under the name
of , doth hereby guarantee that the goods hereunder
specified and contained in the bill of sale, invoice, bill of lading, or
other document describing the goods and the weight, measure, and
number of the same, referred to herein or attached hereto, are not
adulterated- falsely described, mixed, coloured, composed or con-
stituted in contravention of any provision of the Pure Food Act,
1908.
Goods guaranteed: —
[Description of hill of sale, invoice, hill of lading, or other document. ]
Seal of the Company.
Witness.
clay of


(5) The serial number allotted to each general guarantee shall be placed
by the guarantor on each package of the goods or classes of goods named in
the guarantee, in the following form; —
[Here insert the allotted number ] guaranteed under the Pure Food Act,
1908, N.S.W., by [ here insert the name of the registered guarantor and
repeat the allotted number.']
The said words and variations of the said words having a similar mean-
ing, shall not be exhibited, save in a label or statement written on a package
containing a food or drug in which the said words may be written in
accordance with the provisions of this regulation.
(6) ISTo person shall sell any food or drug contained in a package on or
attached to which is a statement or label containing any expression which
implies that the contents are guaranteed under the provisions of section 47
of the Pure Food Act, 1908, of New South Wales, unless a general guarantee
applicable to the food or drug for sale contained in the package has been
given as provided by the said section.
(7) If any person sells any food or drug contained in a package in
respect of which any of the provisions contained in clauses (5) and (6) of
this Eegulation is contravened, he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding
£3O.
80. —Method of Procedure for the Prohibition or the Advertisement os
Sale of Cf.rtain Foods, Drugs, Appliances, &c.
(1) On receipt from the Board of Health of any report or recommendation
made under the provisions of the Pure Food Act, 1908, sections 16, 17, and
18, the Minister shall notify in the Government Gazette, and in two or more
newspapers, of which one at least shall be published at Sydney, that he has
received such report or recommendation in the form contained in the
Schedule hereto.
(2) Any person who deems himself aggrieved by any such report or
recommendation may lodge notice of appeal with the Registrar of the
District Court at Sydney at any time, being not more than thirty days
after publication of the aforesaid notice in the Government Gazette.
Schedule.
Office of the Minister for Health,
Sydney, 17th July, 1931.
PURE FOOD ACT, 1908.
I hereby give notice that I have received a (.report or recommendation, as
the case may be), made by the Board of Health, in virtue of the powers
conferred upon it by sections 16,17, and 18 of the abovenamed Act on (here
insert the name of the food, drug, &c.), and that any person directly in-
terested in the sale thereof, or his authorised representative, may inspect
a copy of the said (report or recommendation as the case may be), pn
application at this office on or before the day of , 19 .
[ Minister's signature.]


81.—Prohibited Colourings.
The addition of any of the following substances to an article of food is
prohibited, except in the cases in which such addition is specifically author-
ised by these regulations
Arsenic, antimony, barium, chromium, cobalt, nickel, copper, iron, lead,
manganese, mercury, tin, zinc, gamboge, picric acid, and any harm-
ful substance.
/ 82.—Trade-marks.
(1) Exemptions from/so much of the provisions of the Pure Food Act,
1908, section 14, as requires that there shall be legibly written on or
attached to every package or enclosed for sale a label or
statement indicating the name and acldress of the vendor or the maker
thereof, or the agent therefor, or the owner of the rights of manufacture,
may be granted on application made to the Board of Health by the said
vendor, maker, agent, or owner, or by'his duly appointed representative in
this State, under the following conditions: —
(a) The goods in respect of which exemption is sought shall bear a
trade-mark duly registered under the laws in force in Hew South
Wales.
(i) The application shall be accompanied
(1) by evidence that applicant (if not a principal) is author-
ised by his principal to apply;
(2) by a certified copy of the entry in the register of trade-
marks, relating to the trade-mark; and
(3) by a declaration that the registered name and address are
the present name and address of the proprietor of the
trade-mark.
(c) The application shall further be accompanied by a signed list of the
kinds or descriptions of foqdato which the trade-mark or trade-
marks is or are to be appHecL'’
( d ) Exemption granted under the privilege of this Regulation shall
cease and determine upon assignment or transmission of the trade-
mark by the registered proprietor thereof, or upon the registered
address ceasing to be the address of such proprietor, unless the
Board upon application made for the purpose determines that the
exemption shall continue to operate.
S 3 of Analysts eligible for Appointment for the
Purposes of the Act.
A person applying for appointment as analyst shall satisfy the Board of
Health—
(a) that he is a Graduate in Science of the University of Sydney, or
of some other University approved by the Board; that the Univer-
sity course has included not less than three years’ study of
chemistry, and that he has had practical experience in pure or
applied chemistry for a period of not less than two years subsequent
to graduation; or


(b) that he is the holder of a diploma in chemistry granted by acme
body approved by the Board; and that his general and chemical
training is equivalent to that required by paragraph (o) of this
Regulation, and that he has had practical experience in pure or
applied chemistry for a period of not less than two years subse-
quent to the period of systematic training; or
(c) that he is a person whose general and chemical training and ex-
perience are equivalent to that required by paragraph (a) of this
Regulation.
84. —Form of Analyst's Certificate.
Every certificate given by an Analyst of the result of his analysis of any
food or drug shall be in the following form;—
PURE FOOD ACT, 1908.
Analyst's Certificate.
I, , an Analyst duly appointed under the provision*
of the Pure Food Act, 1908, hereby certify that the seal on the sample
of received by me on the day of
and marked was unbroken.
I further certify that I have analysed the said sample, and that the result
of such analysis is as follows; —
(Here insert the result of analysis, and remarks.)
Signed the day of 19
Analyst’s signature
Address
When a method of analysis is prescribed the Analyst shall state that that
method has been followed.
85. —Fee to be Prepaid for Analysis.
The fee to be prepaid by a person who requires any officer to purchase a
sample of any food or drug and submit the same for analysis shall be three
pounds thirteen shillings.
86. —Rates of Payment for Samples.
Whenever the current market value of any food, drug or article exceeds
ten shillings, the rate of payment for any sample of such article demanded,
selected, taken, or obtained by an officer shall be ten shillings.
87. —Prescribing Method for the Determination of Citral — (a) in Oil op
Lemon; and (h) Essence of Lemon.
(a) Twenty grams of oil of lemon are mixed with 20 cubic centimetres
of - solution of hydroxylamine hydrochloride in SO per cent, alcohol, and
to the mixture is added 8 cubic centimetres of r alcoholic potash and 20
cubic centimetres of strong alcohol. The mixture is boiled gently under a
reflux condenser for half an hour, and then allowed to cool. The condenser
is washed down, and the contents of the flask diluted with 250 cubic centi-
metres of water, and neutralised to phenolphthaloin by - alcoholic potash.
The liquid is then titrated with v sulphuric acid until a drop taken from the
liquid, and brought into contact, on a white plate, with a very dilute


aqueous solution of methyl orange, shows that neutralisation is complete.
The number of cubic centimetres of acid required is subtracted from the
number used in a blank experiment (carried out in exactly the same
manner, but without any oil of lemon). The figure so obtained, when
multiplied by 0.076, gives the weight of citral in 20 grams of oil of lemon.
(5) Fifty grams or a suitable quantity of essence of lemon are mixed
with 20 cubic centimetres of £ solution of hydroxylamine hydrochloride
in SO per cent, alcohol, and to the mixture is added 15 cubic centimetres of
£ alcoholic potash. The mixture is boiled gently under a reflux condenser
for half an hour and then allowed to cool. The condenser is washed down,
and the contents of the flask diluted with 250 cubic centimetres of water
and neutralised to phenolphthalein by £ alcoholic potash. The liquid is
titrated with £ sulphuric acid in the manner described under (a). The
number of cubic centimetres of acid required is abstracted from the num-
ber used in a blank experiment (carried out in exactly the same manner,
but without any essence of lemon). The figure so obtained when multiplied
by 0.0152 gives the weight of citral in the quantity of essence of lemon
taken for analysis.
88. —Prescribing Apparatus and Method foi; Determining the Strength
of Spirits or Alcoholic Liquors in Accordance with Section 31 of
the Act.
Apparatus required.
(1) A revenue still, made either of glass or copper, consisting of a flask
holding about one quarter of a litre connected with an efficient condensing
arrangement.
(2) A glass flask, with a gauged mark on its neck, having a capacity
of from 50 to 100 cubic centimetres.
(3) A chemical balance to carry 100 grams, and to be sensitive to 1 milli-
gram.
(4) A correctly adjusted set of weights, ranging from 1 milligram to 50
grams.
(5) One chemical thermometer, graduated on the stem in degrees Centi-
grade or Fahrenheit.
(0) A specific gravity flask, having a capacity from about 25 to about 50
cubic centimetres, provided with overflow side tube and cap, and a ground
stopper in the neck, through which passes a thermometer.
(7) The set of alcohol tables contained in “A Treatise on Alcohol” by
Stevenson (published in London by Gurney and Jackson), or other standard
treatise.
Method of Testing the Strength of Spirits.
The degree of strength of spirituous liquors shall be determined in the
following manner:—
From 50 to 100 cubic centimetres (preferably the larger amount) of the
sample to be tested shall be measured at a temperature of 15|
degrees Centigrade or 60 degrees Fahrenheit in the gauged flask,
and completely transferred to the still by emptying the flask of its
contents as far as possible, and then washing out the flask with two
successive portions of five cubic centimetres each of distilled
water.
The liquid shall then be distilled, until at least three-fourths have
passed over, and the distillate shall be collected in the gauged flask


iii which the sample to be tested was first measured. The voluma
of the liquid is brought up to the gauged mark at a temperature oS
151 degrees Centigrade or 60 degrees Fahrenheit by the addition
of distilled water.
The specific gravity of the distillate shall be taken by filling the specific
gravity flask with the same, at a temperature of 15J degrees
Centigrade or 60 degrees Fahrenheit. From the book of spirit
tables mentioned above, the equivalent proportion of proof spirit
and of absolute alcohol by weight and volume may then be obtained.
In the case of alcoholic liquors and tinctures, containing more than sixty
per cent, of alcohol, it shall be necessary to first dilute the sample to twice
its original bulk by the addition of distilled water. The dilution shall be
carried out at a temperature of 15J degrees Centigrade or 60 degrees
Fahrenheit.
In the case of alcoholic liquors or tinctures containing a volatile sub-
stance, or substance other than alcohol, it shall be necessary to take such
precaution as shall render the distillate free therefrom.
89.— Prescribing the Method op Labelling of Food Treated by Sulphur
Dioxide Gas.
Every person who sells any food treated in accordance with the provisions
of the Food Preservation by Sulphur Dioxide Enabling Act, 1920, shall
affix to such food (or when the food is sold in a package, to the package) in
a conspicuous position so as to be readily-visible to the purchaser, a label
having the word “ Preservatised ” in bold-faced sans serif capital letters of
not less than seventy-two points face measurement, immediately followed
by the w'ords “by sulphur dioxide gas” in bold-faced sans serif capital letters
of not less than thirty points face measurement.
90. —Penalties for Breaches.
Except where a penalty is otherwise provided in the Act or in any Ecgu-
lations made under the Act, any person who contravenes or fails to comply
with any provision of such Eegulations or sells any food or drug contained
in a package which is not labelled as prescribed by the Eegulations, shall be
liable, on conviction, to a penalty of not more than £2O, and for a continu-
ing offence not more than £2 for every day during which the offence shall
be continued.
PURE FOOD ACT, 1908.
Whereas it is enacted by section 19, subsection (1) of the Pure Food
Act, 1908, that the Board of Health by notification in the Gazette may
require concerning any substance or compound sold or intended to be
sold as a disinfectant, germicide, antiseptic or preservative that such
information or directions as it deems fit shall be set out on a statement
of label written on or attached to any package containing the same; How
therefore the Board of Health hereby notifies that for the purposes of the
said section the requirements as set out in the Schedule hereunder shall
be observed in respect of Disinfectants and Germicides, Antiseptics and
Deodorants,
Dated this 17th day of July, 1931.
By order of the Board,
T. H. NEELY,
Secretary.


Schedule.
1. The words “ Disinfectant ” and “ Germicide ” shall each mean any
substance or compound which in any label or statement accompanying it
is said to be capable of killing the germs of disease;
the words “ Antiseptic ” and “ Preservative ” shall each mean any sub-
stance or compound which in any label or statement accompanying it is
said to be capable of preventing the development of germs and the decom-
position of animal or vegetable substances; and
the word “ Deodorant ” shall mean any substance or compound which
in any label or statement accompanying it is said to be capable of pre-
venting, neutralising, or destroying offensive odours.
Labelling of Disinfectants and Germicides.
2. There shall be written in the label attached to every package which
contains or purports to contain a disinfectant or germicide, in bold-faced
sans-serif capital letters of not less than twelve points face measurement, in
such colours as to afford a distinct colour contrast to the ground the word
DISINFECTANT
or the word
GERMICIDE
or both such w r ords. The said word or words shall be the first word or
words on the label and no other -words shall appear in the same line.
3. There shall also be written in the label attached to every package
which contains or purports to contain a disinfectant or germicide, explicit
information and directions as to the strength or proportion of the substance
or compound, and the manner in which, and the time during which the
same must be used or allowed to act in order that it may be effective as a
disinfectant or germicide.
4. No person shall sell any package on which the word DISINFECTANT
or the word GERMICIDE appears in any label accompanying it which
contains any substance or compound which when used in the strength or
proportion and for the time set forth in the label is not effective for the
purpose of killing the germs of diseases.
Labelling of Antiseptics.
5. There shall be written in the label attached to every package which
contains or purports to contain an antiseptic, in bold-faced sans-serif capital
letters of not less than twelve points face measurement, in such colours
as to afford a distinct colour contrast to the ground, the word
ANTISEPTIC.
The said word shall be the first word on the label, and no other word
or words shall appear in the same line.
6. There shall also be written in the label attached to every package which
contains or purports to contain an antiseptic, explicit information and,
in legible type, directions as to the strength or proportion of the substance
or compound, and the manner in which the same must be used or allowed
to act in order that it may be effective as an antiseptic.


7. No person shall sell any package on which the word “ Antiseptic ” or
the word “ Preservative ” appears in any label accompanying it which con-
tains any substance or compound which when used in the strength or pro-
portion set forth in the label is not effective for the purpose of preventing
the development of germs and the decomposition of animal or vegetable
substances.
Labelling of Deodorants.
8. There shall be written in the label attached to every package which
contains or purports to contain any substance described as a deodorant, in
bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not less than eighteen points face
measurement, in such colours as to afford a distinct colour contrast to the
ground, the word
DEODORANT.
The said word shall be immediately followed by the words
THIS SUBSTANCE IS NOT A DISIN-
FECTANT OR GERMICIDE,
which words shall be written in bold-faced sans-serif capital letters of not
less than twelve points face measurement.
9. There shall also be written in the label attached to every package
which contains or purports to contain a deodorant, explicit information and
directions as to the strength or proportion of the substance or compound,
and the manner in which, and the time during which, the same must be
used or allowed to act in order that it may be effective as a deodorant.
10. No person shall pack or sell a disinfectant or poisonous substance of
any description in a container which bears upon it any brand, mark, or
statement indicating the presence in such container of food, or which may
be capable of misleading a purchaser into the belief that the contents of
such container are for the purpose of human consumption.
PURE FOOD ACT, 1908.
WHEREAS it is enacted by section 34 of the Pure Food Act, 1908, that
the Board of Health shall fix the fee to be paid for a copy of the result of
any analysis of any food, drug or article taken or obtained under the
Act: Now, therefore, the Board of Health hereby notifies that for the pur-
poses for the said section the fee to be paid for each and every copy sup-
plied in accordance with the said section shall be five shillings.
Dated this 17th day of July, 1931.
By order of the Board,
T. H. NEELY,
Secretary.


Subject.
Regulation.
Section of
No.
Page.
Act.
37
30
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
48
38
5
4
13
8
13
8
2
2
48
38
Act—
9
1
1
2
Adulterated food or drugs—
5 (g)
12 (2)(3)
3 (i)
5(f)
11
5(a)(b)
prohibited by regulations
5 (d) (e)
12(1)
12(2)
5(h)
10
5 (c)
5(g)
Advertisement of food, drugs or appliances —
4
6-8
17
16
80
67
3, 51
3, 39
51
39
51
39
51
39
51
39
Agent—
48, 50
49
Alcohol—
37
29
68
49
Alcoholic liquors—•
66
48
88
70
5, 65
4,48
INDEX.


Subiect.
[ Regulation.
Section of
Act.
No.
Page.
Analysis—■
by direction of councils
26
certificate of
29
copy of result of
34
costs of
33
method of
30
samples for
23-25
use of, for purpose of trade
35
Analyst—
appointment of
27, 28
disqualification, of .
32
Animals —
product of diseased. {See Adulterated
food or drug.)
putrid matter. (See Adulterated food or
drug.)
Analyst’s—
certificate, form of
84
69
fees for analysis
85
69
fee for copy of certificate
73
qualifications
83
68
Animals, exclusion of
75
54
Annatto
3, 19
3, 11
Antimony
5, 81
4, 68
Antiseptics and deodorants
73
52, 72
Apparatus for testing spirits
88
70
Appeals against prohibition
80
67
Appliances, definition
4
3
4
Arsenic in food
5, 8, 81
4, 5, 68
Artificial colouring substances
3
3
Artificial flavouring substances
3
3
beverages
57
43
imitation cordials and syrups
57
43
Artificial sweetening substances
9
6
Bakers’ maltose
18
11
Baking powder
5, 14
4, 9
Barium
81
68
Barley bread
11
7
Beer
5, 65
4, 48
malt
65
48
Benzoic acid
2
2
Beverage—
medicinal
61
46
non-alcoholic, flavoured
57, 60
43, 45
Bismarck brown
74
53
Board of Health —
administration of Act by
9
information may be required by
51
Boiler preservatives
7
5
Bone dust bags
75
55
Borax soap
72
52
Brandy, standard of strength for
67
49
Breaches, penalties for (not otherwise provided)
90
71


Subject.
Regulation.
Section of
iSo.
Page.
Act.
11
11
7
11
ii
ii
55
ii
38 (c)
12 (4)
ii
7
10
6
76
59, 60
Butcher’s shop —
76
58
76
57
Butter
3, 28
3. 21
27
21
Butter, lemon
45
36
28
99
28
21
23
16
23
16
74
52
3
3
34
26.
Cayenne pepper
34
27
84
69
73
84
69
•Cheese
3, 29
3, 22
3. 29
3, 22
3, 29
3, 45
3, 22
3, 36
3, 29
3, 29
3, 22
3, 22
Chicory
31
23
3, 33
33
3, 25
25
coatings, confections, paste, powder, &c.
Chromium
3, 33
81
3, 25
68
Chutney
3, 35
3, 27, 28
64
48
37
29
34
25
Citral in oil of lemon and essence of—
87
69
87
69
Citric acid
48
38
Cleanliness of—
75
54
75
54
75
55
75
54
34
26
74
53
81
68
74


Subject.
Regulation.
Section of
3To.
Page.
Act.
Cocoa
3, 33
3, 24
compounded
3, 33
3, 25
essence
3, 33
3, 24
homoeopathic
3, 33
3, 25
mass
3, 33
3, 24
mixed
3, 33
3, 25
paste
3, 33
3, 24
powder
3, 33
3, 24
preparations of
3, 33
3,25
prepared .
3, 33
3, 25
slab
3, 33
3, 24
soluble or cocoa essence
3, 33
3, 24
sweetened
3, 33
3, 25
Cocoa and milk
3, 33
3, 25
Codex, pharmaceutical
68
49
Cod liver oil and malt extract
18
11
Coflee
31
23
and chicory
31
23
essence or coffee and chicory
extract
32
24
Cofiee extract
32
24
ground
31
23
and milk
32
24
Colourings, artificial —
declaration of
3
3
labelling, when used
3, 74
3, 54
permitted defined
74
54
permitted without declaration
3
3
prohibited
3, 81
3, 68
Compound cordials
60
45
Condensed milk —
concentrated
5, 24
4, 20
sweetened
5, 24
4, 19
sweetened condensed, skim or separated...
5, 24
4, 19
unsweetened condensed
5,24
4, 19
skim or separated
5, 24
4, 19
Concentrated milk
24
20
Condiments and spices
34
25
Confectionery
3, 42
3, 32
boxes, refilling of
42
32
medicated
42
32
Conserves and jams
45
34
Containers
4
3
Contamination of food and drugs
75
54
ice cream and ices
78
64
meat
76
57
milk
77
61
Contradictory matter in labelling
1
2
Copper
81
68
Coppers, use of
75, 76, 77
56, 59, 62
Cordials- —
concentrated imitation cordials
57
43
compound
60
45
fruit juice and syrups
54
41
flavoured cordials and syrups
56
42
imitation cordials and syrups
57
43
lemon juice cordials and syrups
54
41
lime juice cordials and syrups
54
41


Subject.
Regulation.
Section of
Act.
No.
Page.
Com-flour
11
8
Cream
24
17
reduced
24
18
Cream of tartar
5, 12
4, 8
substitutes
13
8
Crystals —fruit and fruit jelly
3, 46
3, 36
Custard powder
5, 15
4, 9
Declaration of certain drugs
69
50
Delivered bread and meat not to be returned ...
75
55
Deodorants and antiseptics
73
52, 72
Diabetic products —bread, flour and food
11
7
Disinfectant —
included in “ drug ” (q.v.)
4
labels on
19
sale may be prohibited
18
Disinfectants
73
52, 72
Distilled vinegar
37
30
District Court, appeal to
20
Dried milk
25
20
skim or dried separated
26
20
fruit
45
34
Drink, included in “ food ” (q.v.)
4
Drinking vessels
75
55
Drinks, non-excisable fermented
3, 5, 58
3, 4, 44
summer or temperance
3, 5, 59
3, 5, 44
Dripping
19
12
Drug—
adulterated. (See Adulterated food or
drug.)
16
advertisement, of report on
17
prohibition of
4
definition .'
falsely described. (See Falsely described
food or drugs.)
test of British Pharmacopoeia
12(4)
Drugs
68
49
declaration of
69
50
exemptions under section 12. (See List at
end of regulations)
68
49
standards for
68
49
Drugs and food, protection from contamination
of
75
54
Dust, exclusion of
75
54
Edible fats and oils
22
14
Entry, generally
22
Essences
47
36
imitation fruit
47
38
imitation vanilla
47,
37
lemon culinary
47
37
meat essence
19
13
prescribing method for the determination
of citral
87
69
vanilla
47
37
substitute
47
37
Eucalyptus oil
71
51
Evidence, possession of articles
44


Subject.
Regulation.
Section of
No.
Page.
Act.
Exemption from certain labelling—•
provisions, name and address of vendor,
&c
i
1
provisions of section 14
10
6
statement of trade description, section 14
1
1
Exterminators, vermin
8
5
Extract of malt
18
10
bakers’ or commercial
18
11
liquid
18
11
with cod liver oil
18
11
Extract of coffee, and coflee and chicory
32
24
meat
19
13
soap
72
52
Extract imitation fruit
47
38
False or misleading matter on labels
1
2
Falsely described food or drug—■
label incorrect
package tampered with
incorrectly described
sale of
Fats and oils, edible
22
14
5 (1) (m)
5(k)
5 (k) (1) (m)
10
Fees for —
analysis
analyst’s certificate
85
69
84
73
Fermented drinks, non-excisable
3, 5, 58
3,4,44
Fish in tins
5
4
in shell (oysters, &c.)
19, 75
13, 55
paste
5, 19
4, 14
soft, cured
3, 19
3, 11
Flavoured drinks —
imitation
57
43
cordials and syrups
56
42
summer or temperance
3, 5, 69
3, 4, 44
Flavoured ices
3, 44
3, 33
vinegar
37
30
Flavourings and colourings
3
3
imitation
3, 47
3, 38
permitted without declaration
3
3
prohibited
3
3
Flavours, imitation fruit
47
38
Floors, impervious
76
57
rigid, smooth
75
55
Flour
11
6
corn
11
8
diabetic
11
7
rice
11
7
self-raising
11
6
whole wheat
11
6
Food—
adulterated. (See Adulterated food or
drug.)
advertisement of, report on
prohibition on
16
17
falsely described. (See Falsely describee
food or drug)
label on package of
substitutes for, application of Act to
5
14
52


Subject.
Regulation.
Section of
No.
Page.
Act.
Food—
in bulk for re-sale
10
6
preparation and storage of
75
54
substances sold with directions to dilute...
16. 24, 25
9, 20
Foods—
diabetic food, bread and flour
11
7
infants’
16
9
invalids’
17
10
poisonous metals in
5
4
Forbidden matter in labelling
1
2
Forfeiture of articles
Forks, cleanliness of
75
55
39
Forms of guarantee
79
65
Frozen meat
19
11
Fruit and fruit products
5, 45
4, 34
conserves
45
34
dried fruits
45
34
fruit jelly
45
35
fruits, fresh
5, 45
4, 34
jams
45
34
mixed
45
35
lemon cheese, lemon butter, and lemon
filling
3, 45
3, 36
marmalade
45
34
preserved
45
34
Fruit juices
lemon juice
53
40
53
40
lime juice
53
40
Fruit juice, cordials and syrups
54
41
lemon juice, cordial and syrup
54
41
lime juice, cordial and syrup
54
41
Gamboge
74, 81
S3, 68
Gelatine
5, 21
4, 14
Germicides
73
52, 72
Gin
67
49
Ginger
34
26
ground
34
26
limed or bleached
34
26
Glucose
5, 40, 45
4, 31, 34
solid
40
31
syrup
40
31
vinegar
37
29
Ground black pepper
34
26
ginger
34
26
mixed pepper
34
27
nutmeg
34
26
rice
11
7
white pepper
34
26
Guarantee—
a defence to prosecution
forms of
79
65
47
Handling of food
75, 76, 77
54, 57, 61
drugs
75
54
Honey
5, 41
4, 32
vinegar
37
29


Subject.
Regulation.
Section ot
Vo.
Page.
M
Ice
50
39
cream and ices
3, 44
8, 33
prohibition
44
33
providing for cleanliness and freedom from
contamination
78
64
Icing mixture
40
32
Imitation cordials and syrups
87
43
fruit flavours
3,47
3, 38
essence
3,47
3,38
extract
3,47
3, 38
(prohibition)
47, 57
38, 43
essence of lemon
47
37
vinegar
38
30
vinegar
37
30
Infants’ foods
16
9
Infectious disease
75, 76, 77
54, 60, 61
Ingredient—
abstracted from article. {See Adulterated
food or drug.)
inferior. (See Adulterated food or drug.)
label, describing
quality of
to conceal quality
to increase bulk
use of injurious or inferior
Insects, exclusion of
75
54
13
13
12(1)
12 (!)
Insecticides
8
5
Inspection —
of articles, &o
procedure on
Invalids’ foods
17
10
22
22
Iron
81
68
Jam, marmalade
45
34
and conserve
45
34
mixed
45
35
Jelly-
crystals
46
36
fruit
3,46
3, 36
Jelly, fruit
45
35
Label —
incorrect. {See Falsely described food or
drug.)
liability of person named on
on mixture
on package of food
Labelling
1
1
15
13
14
exemption from provisions of section 14...
10
6
1
2
use of word “ guaranteed ”
79
65
Labels
1
1
Lacquer
4
4
Lard
19
12
Lead
4, 5, 81
3. 4, 68
and 2inc material
4,81
3, 68
f 80955—E


Subject,
Regulation,
Section of
Ko,
Page.
Act.
Lemon —
culinary essence of
47
37
oil of
47
36
prescribing method for the determination
of citral
87
69
Lemon butter, lemon cheese, lemon filling
45
3, 36
Lemon juice
53
40
cordial or syrup
54
41
squash
52
39
Letters
prescribed size of
6
5
liquors—
alcoholic
65, 66, 67
48, 49
statement of measures on. (And see
Food.)
lithia water
51
39
14 (2)
Local Authority—
administration of Act by
definition
Lucca oil, sublime oil, or virgin oil
22
15
9
4
tysol
73
52
Mace and nutmeg
34
26
Maize meal and mixed meals
11
8
Malt
5, 18
4, 10
ale, malt beer
65
48
and malt preparations
5, 18
4, 10
“ Commercial malt extract or maltose,”
bakers
18
11
extract
5, 18
4, 11
and cod liver oil
18
11
Malt extract, liquid
18
11
vinegar
37
29
wine
62
47
Manganese
81
68
Manure bags
75
55
Margarine
23
15
Marmalade
45
34
Meals
ii
6
maize-meal
ii
8
mixed meals
ii
8
oatmeal
ii
7
Meat
19
11
oomed, salted, pickled and smoked
19
11
definition of
19, 76
11, 57
extract, essence, or juice
19
13
fresh and chilled
19
11
frozen
19
11
manufactured
19
12
prohibition
19
12
minced meat, sausage meat, and saveloy
sausage meat
19
12
pastes, meat
5, 19
4, 13
permitted colouring matter
19
12
protection from contamination of
76
57
returned
75
55
Meat wine
62
47


Subject.
, Regulation.
Section ot
No.
Page.
Act,
Medical appliance. (See appliance.)
Medicated confectionery
42
32
soap
72
52
wine
62
46
do mixed
62
47
Medicine, alcohol in
68
49
Medicinal beverages
61
46
Metal containers
4
3
Metals, poisonous in foods
5
4
Method of determination of citral in oil of lemon
and essence of lemon
87
69
Method of testing the strength of spirits
88
70
Methylated spirit
70
51
Mercury
81
68
Milk
5, 24
4, 16
concentrated
24
20
condensed, sweetened
24
19
unsweetened
24
19
dried
25
20
skim or dried separated
26
20
milk and chocolate
33
25
coffee
32
24
milk fat or butter fat
27
21
milk products in tins
5, 24
4, 20
normal milk
24
20
pasteurised milk
24
16
special
24
17
raw
24
16
special
sale of infected
24
17
21
securing cleanliness and freedom from
contamination
77
61
skim or separated
24
18
condensed, sweetened
24
19
unsweetened
24
19
milk cheese
29
22
Milled butter
28
21
Minced meat
19
12
Misleading statements, &C., on labels
1
2
6
Mixed meal
11
8
jams
45
35
medicated wine
62
47
spice and condiments
34
25
Mixture. (See Ingredient.)
34
Mustard
27
pastes
34
27
Nickel
81
68
Non-exoisable fermented drinks
Notification disinfectant
3, 5, 58
3, 4, 44
71
drugs
fee for analyst certificate
68
49
73
of receipt of report under sections
16, 17 and 18 of the Act
80
67
Nutmeg and mace
34
26
Oatmeal
11
7


Subject.
Emulation.
Section of
No.
Faffe
Art.
Offence—
10
35
article not of nature demanded, selling ...
12 (2) (8)
36 (1)
36 (1)
18
19
10
47(2)
12 (1)
12(1)
11
11
36 (2)
61 (4)
38 (a)
37
14(1)
21
13
containing inferior ingredients ...
13
36 (2)
10
18
19
sample refusing to give. (And see Pro-
38(b)
53
Officer—
38 (o)
4
51 (4)
22
37
38
Oil—
71
51
22
15
47
36
prescribing method for, and
determination of citral
87
22
69
15
22
15
22
15
22
14
52
39
19, 75
13, 56
Package—
4
13, 14
15
10
tampered with. {See Falsely described
food or drug.)
4
3
28
22


Subject.
Regulation.
Section of
No.
Page.
Act.
75
56
75, 76, 77
55, 56,60,61
19
13
3, 43
3, 33
86
69
35, 45
27, 35
Penalties and breaches not elsewhere provided
Pepper—
90
34
71
26
34
27
34
27
34
26
34
27
54
08, 69
49, 51
19
11
5, 39
4, 31
81
68
Places for preparation, storage and sale of food
75
54
5
4
a
7
65
48
49
38
51
39
19
13
Powders —
5, 14
4, 9
4, 9
55
Prescribed apparatus for determining the
strength of spirits or alcoholic liquors
Prescribed method for determination of citral
88
87
70
69
Prescribed method for the determination of
non-sugar organic tomato solids in tomato
36
28
Preparation and storage of food and drugs ...
Preservative —
75
54
4
Preservatives—
0
2
2
2
7
2
2
0
2
Procedure —
48
49
39
47
analyses. {See Analysis.)
22
41
46
44
40
t 80955 -F


Subject.
j Eesrutation,
1
1
Section cf
i
Jib.
Page.
Act.
Procedure— continued.
return day of summons
seizure of articles
service of analyst’s certificate
source of information or reports
Publication—
of names of offenders
of reports on advertisements
Process butter
28
21
42
22
43
45
53
16
Prohibited colourings
81
68
preservatives
2
2
Prohibition of advertisement or sale of certain
foods, drugs, appliances, &c
80
67
Prohibitions, method of procedure
80
67
Protection of food and drugs from contamina-
tion
75
54
Protection of ice-cream from contamination ...
78
64
Pure fruit cordials and juices
53, 54
40, 41
Qualifications of analysts
83
68
Quinine tonic waters
61
46
wine
63
47
Raspberry vinegar
55
42
Rates of payment for samples
86
69
Receptacles and appliances
75, 76, 77, 78
54, 57, 61, 63
Reduced cream
24
18
Refreshment stalls, &c
75
55
Refuse, definition of
76
57
Registered trade-mark, exemption from
82
68
Regulation, exhibition of
75, 76, 77, 78
57, 60, 64, 65
Regulation
ingredients prohibited by. (See Adulte-
rated food or drug.)
repeal
Rennet
29
22
54, 56
3
Renovated butter
28
21
Renovation of buildings
75
65
Restaurants, bars, &c
75
55
Rice
11
7
ground rice
11
7
polished rice
11
7
rice flour
11
7
Rum, standard of strength for
67
49
Rye bread
11
7
Saccharin
9, 42, 58
6, 32, 44
Saffron
74
52
Salad oil
22
15
Sale, definition
Salicylic acid
2
2
4
Salt
2, 19, 34
2, 11, 27
JSaltpetro, prohibition
?, 19
2. 11
Samples—
rates of payment for
86
69
38(b)
23
24,25
refusing to give
taking
procedure on


Subject.
Regulation.
Section of
No.
Page.
Act.
3, 5, 35
3, 4, 27
27
35
35
27
36
28
19
12
3
3
19
12
80
67
Seizure—
22
22
11
6
51
39
19, 75
13, 55
i
6
5
Skim milk—
26
20
24
19
24
19
29
22
24
18
3
3
75
54
75
54
75, 77
19
54, 61
11
72
51
72
52
72
52
72
52
72
52
4
72
52
72
51
72
52
72
52
72
52
72
52
51
39
51, 52, 54, 58,
39, 41, 44
3, 11
4
59.
3, 19
4
40
31
34
25
34
25
34
25
3, 66
3, 48
apparatus, and method of determining
88
70
70
51
75, 77
54, 61
75
55
Squash—
39
fruit squash, lemon squash, orange squash
52
39


Subject.
Regulation.
1
Section of
No.
Page.
Act.
Standard—
non-eompliance with. (See Adulterated
food or drug.)
49
Standard for drugs
68
strength of spirits
67
49
Starch, sugar
40
31
Storage and preparation of food and drugs
75
54
Stout
65
48
Strychnine
8
5
Sublime salad oil
22
15
j
Substitute for article of food, application of tlie
52
Act to
Substituted—
cream of tartar ,,
13
8
vanilla
47
37
Sugar
40
31
cut, granulated, loaf, milled
40
31
glucose svrup
40
31
powdered
40
31
solid glucose
40
31
Sulphur dioxide gas
89
71
Summer or temperance drinks
3, 5, 59
3, 4, 44
Sweetening substances, artificial, prohibited ...
Syrup—
lemon juice
9
6
54
41
lime juice
64
41
Syrups—
flavoured cordials, or
56
42
fruit juice cordials, or
54
41
imitation cordials, or
57
4o
lemon juice cordial, or
54
41
lime juice cordial, or
54
41
Tartaric acid
48
58
Tea
30
23
dust
30
23
packing of
75
56
rooms, &c
75
55
Tsmperance drinks
3, 5. 59
3, 4, 44
Tin in food
5, 81
4, 68
plate material
4
4
Tomato—
catchup
35
27
ketchup
35
27
method of analysis
36
28
relish
35
27
sauce
35
27
solids, method for determination of
36
28
Trade formulae, saving as to
Trade marks
82
68
5
exemption for
82
68
registered
82
68
Type, prescribed size of letters
6
5
Vanilla
47
37
essence
47
37
substitutes
47
37
prohibition
47
37


Subject.
Regulation.
Section ot
No.
Pago.
Aft.
Vegetable—
putrid matter. (See Adulterated food or
drug.)
Vegetables—
dried, canned and fresh
5, 20
4, 14
Vehicles—
cleanliness of
75, 76
54, 59
construction of
75, 76
56, 69, 60
Venereal diseases, persons suffering from
75, 76, 77
54, 60, 61
Vermin exterminators
8
5
Vinegar
3, 5, 37
3, 4, 29
alcohol, cider, fruit, glucose, honey, malt,
spirit, sugar, wine, molasses
37
29
blended
37
30
distilled
37
30
flavoured
37
30
imitation
37
30
essence of
38
30
raspberry
55
42
Virgin oil
22
15
Water —
and ice
50
39
aerated
51
39
lithia
51
39
potable
49
38
potash
51
39
quinine tonic
61
46
seltzer
51
39
soda
51
39
Whisky—
standard of strength
67
49
Wine, malt
62
47
Wine, meat
62
47
medicated
62
46
mixed
62
47
quinine tonic
63
47
vinegar
37
29
Wrappers, cleanliness of
75, 76
55, 60
Zinc
4, 81
3, 68
materials
4
3
Sydney: Alfred James Kent, 1.5.0., Government Printer—l 932.


