

Parity Series—No. 2. .
australaslan Mbtte Cross Xeafliie.
Purity
and
Impurity.
A BOOKLET
FOR LADS.
' Price; ©ne Penny.


Australasian White Crose League.
PATRONS
His Excellency the Governor-General.
His Excellency the Governor of Now South Wales.
~ ~ ~ New Zealand.
The Marquis of Linlithgow.
His Grace the Archbishop of Sydney.
The Right Reverend Moderator of Presbyterian Church of
Australia.
*
The President of the Australasian Methodist Conference.
OBJECTS.
PKOMOTIITO-
I.—Purity among Men and Bcye
11. A Chivalrous Respect for Womanhood.
111. The Preservation of the Young fica Contamination.
IV. A Higher Tone of Public Opinion.
The Society emphasises obligations already binding on Chris*
(lam ; It docs not Impose new ones.
THE “WHITE CROSS OBLIGATIONS."
1. To treat all girls and women with respect, and
endeavour to protect them from wrong and
degradation.
2. To endeavour to put down all indecent language
and coarse jests.
3. To maintain the law of purity as equally bind-
ing on men and women.
4. To endeavour to spread these principles among
my companions, and to try and help my younger
brothers.
• „ 5. To use every possible means to fulfil the com-
Jifcand, “ Keep THYSELF pure.”


PVRTTV SERIES No. 2,
PURITY AND IMPURITY
BY
RICHARD ARTHUR M.A., M.D.
WRITTEN ESPECIALLY FOR GIVING TO LADS OF
15 YEARS AND UPWARDS WHO ARE GOING
OUT INTO THE WORLD.
Price: One Penny.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & CO. PROPY,, LTD.,
Melbourne, Sydney,. Adelaide, Brisbane,
and London.


Australasian White Cross League,
56 ELIZABETH STREET, SYDNEY.
Or Box 1280 G.P.O.
Hon. Secretary ■ - Mr. W. E WILSON
Hon. Treasurer - - - - Dr RICHARD ARTHUR
Suggested Ways of Giving Help.
1. Warning lads, or taking care that they are
warned against impurity by competent persons,
as fathers, elder brothers, clergymen, or the
family doctor.
2. Circulating White Cross literature, which can be
had from the General Secretary and Booksellers
Booklets for men, and for lads over 15 years, Id
Miss' Hopkins’ book, “ The Power of Woman
hood .* or Mothers and Sons.” Is. a copy.
** The Story of Life,” 6d.
3. Endeavouring to induce clergymen, schoolmaster*
and others to read the literature, and arrangv
with General Secretary for lectures to men, and
to boys over 14 years, in class or mass meetings.
4. Subscribing a small sum annually to aid the
movement.


PURITY AND IMPURITY.
Addressed to LADS and YOUNG MEN.
My Duak Lad,
The subject of this booklet is of the
greatest importance to you. All life lies before
you, with its numberless temptations and
dangers. You cannot hope to escape from
them, and so you must be prepared io meet and
overcome them. And because the temptation
to what is called impurity will probably be
stronger than any other, this booklet is written
to give you advice and warning about some
matters which are very seldom spoken about.
This booklet deals with the subjects of purity
and impurity. I will tell you what is meant by
purity. Purity is rightfulness in thought, in
word, and in deed with regard to the relations
between the sexes. You are old enough to under-
stand what is meant by these relations. You
know that God has ordained these relations in
order that the human race may be continued on
the earth. He has given to man this wonder-
ful power of reproducing his like, and, to prompt
him to do this, has implanted what is cal ed
sexual desire in him. Now, let us recognise at
once that there is nothing sinful, or worthy of
condemnation either in this sexual impulse, or


in the relation between the sexes. God has
ordered them both, and they are, therefore,
perfectly natural and good. These relations can
he thought about seriously and reverently, as it
is only fitting they should, when we remember
their wonderful significance. They can be
spoken of if the need arise, with equal serious-
ness and reverence, and in Christian marriage
men and women can enter into these relations
with perfect purity.
But, unfortunately, round about these rela-
tions, as about all other things human, much
that is wrong and sinful has grown up, and
these evils constitute impurity in its various
forms. Impurity is the opposite of purity. It
is unrightfulness in thought, in word, and in
act with regard to the sexual relations, or to
the things pertaining to them.
This sin of impurity is one of the most
degrading and harmful of all sins. It seems
almost to be denounced more than other forms
of wrong-doing in the Bible, and we will see
later how Nature, which is another revelation
of God, marks her condemnation of it by
frightful penalties.
It is necessary to speak of the various ways
impurity assails—not that these are agreeable
or desirable things to speak of, but because all
young fellows starting in life must know of the
dangers they will have to face.


Firstly, then, all impurity begins in impurity
of thought. If there were no impure thoughts,
there would be no impure words or deeds. Men
allow evil ideas to take possession of their
minds, and their words and actions are natur-
ally in keeping with what they think. And so,
if a man speak or act impurely, we may know
that his mind is defiled.
One result, then, of impure thoughts is im-
pure language. You know too well, I am
afraid, what is meant by this. It is all the foul
and degrading conversation about sexual
matters which is so common in schools, and
offices, and workshops. It is the indecent jests
about women, the coarse stories about the ways
in which life is created, which, far from being
looked on as subjects for ribaldry and scoffing,
should be viewed with the greatest reverence,
and never spoken of lightly. You know of the
tale that you would not dare to repeat before
your mother, or any woman or girl you re-
spected and loved ; of the filthy talk that can
only be carried on in whispers and in secret.
This is impurity in speech, and I would ear-
nestly warn you to have nothing to do with it.
Do not allow your lips to be sullied and defiled
by this loathsome thing. There is no sin which
has a more deteriorating effect upon the
soul. The boy or man who is constantly


repeating what are called “ smutty stories,”
will lose all respect and reverence for woman-
kind ; and his mind, instead of being filled with
high and noble thoughts, will be permanently
tainted and besmirched by the filth he grovels
in. If you wish to be worthy of the name of a
man and a gentleman decide that you shall
never be guilty of this sin. Keep your lips
pure. Speak only with respect and reverence
of all women, thus honouring the woman who
suffered and underwent much danger that you
might come into the world. Remember that,
as someone has said, “ the chamber of birth is
as sacred as the chamber of death,” and that if
you speak lightly and indecently of these things
you insult the mother who bore you. And you
must not only keep your own lips clean, but you
must try to put down impure language in
others. When the loud, empty laughter goes
round at some indecent joke you must not join
in it, You must show in some way or other
that you think it degrading and unmanly. If
you have courage, speak out boldly against such
language. You may be met by jeers, but you
can be sure that your reproof and example will
have effect, and that you will come to be looked
upon as one who has no sympathy with these
things. It is impossible to estimate how much
a lad in a shop or office who sets his face


sternly against all indecent conversation may
be able to influence his companions, and lead
them to see the shamefulness and wrong of all
impure language, Beware, then, of the first
great form of impurity.
The next form is that of impurity in act.
There is much in this that it is not pleasant to
have to speak of. And, because it is unpleasant,
many parents and guardians of young people
have shrunk from instructing and warning those
committed to their charge, and the young have
gone astray through ignorance and thoughtless-
ness. For this reason this booklet has been
written ; and, after haying read it, you will not
be able to say you have waUjed into wrong-doing
with your eyes blind-folded!? If you choose sin,
and incur the inevitable penalties —physical and
moral—which sin exacts, you will do so with
your eyes open, and will be able to blame no
one but yourself.
There are two forms of impurity by which
young men are tempted, and I must tell you of
them both.
The first form concerns immediately only the
person who indulges in it, and is known as the
vice of self-abuse. Self-abuse is a practice by
which what is called in the Bible “ the seed,”
and by doctors ‘‘ the semen ” is made to flow
away from the body. Now, this vice is very


common. Many lads learn it at school from
their older companions, and they practise it in
perfect ignorance of the terrible effects it has
upon the body and mind if long persisted in.
Generally they give it up at once when they find
out it will do them harm. And so this is
written to warn all young lads against this evil.
For, if this vice is persisted in, it may take
such a hold upon the person that he cannot stop
it even if he tries to do so, and in time he
utterly ruins his body and brain. The seed is
a very valuable substance, and if it is drained
away continually, all the strength and vigour
leave the body. The boy or man who practises
this vice becomes stunted in growth and en-
feebled in mind. He becomes unfit for games
and athletics of any kind, and he is not able to
study or devote his attention properly to any
object. And, more than this, he may bring
disease upon himself. He may so lower his
health that he falls an easy victim to that ter-
rible malady, consumption, or he becomes sub-
ject to epileptic fits ; or, worst of all, he may so
injure his brain that he develops insanity in
one or other of its dreadful forms. If you were
to visit any lunatic asylum the doctor in charge
could point out to you patients, young and old,
who were there simply because they had prac-
tised this injurious apd debasing vice. Now


to be forewarned is to be forearmed, and you
must see that you combat strenuously any temp-
tation to fall into a habit so harmful both to
body and mind.
I must add a word of advice to anyone who
may have been led into this vice through
ignorance, and who is, perhaps, alarmed at the
thought of the effects it may produce, even
after he has abandoned the practice itself.
To such a one I would say, “Never, as you
value your health and peace of mind be in-
duced to consult one of those quacks who
advertise that they can cure all the diseases
which young men suffer from. You will find
dozens of advertisements in some newspapers
inserted by men who state that they are
specialists in the treatment of “ nervous
debility,” “ loss of manhood,” “ weakness re-
sulting from sexual wrong-doing,” etc., etc. Or
you may come across one of their pamphlets,
which are distributed broadcast among young
men, and which are full of terrifying state-
ments about the results which self-abuse brings
about. These men make an infamous liveli-
hood by trading on the ignorance and fears of
lads and young men. Many a lad who has had
practically nothing the matter with him, has
been robbed of most of his earnings, and kept
for years in a state of mental depression and


suffering through having placed himself in the
hands of nno of these men.
I counsel you, if you should at any time have
any anxiety about yourself, to go to the medical
man who attends your family, and tell him
unreservedly what is troubling you. In most
cases, he will be able to assure you that there is
really nothing the matter, or that at most some
medicine and change of diet will set you right.
There is one matter about which young men so
often give themselves much needless worry, and
which drives them to consult those quacks, that
I will speak about it here. Many lads, some of
whom have practised self-abuse, and others who
have never done so, have occasionally, while
asleep, an emission of semen. This alarms some
of them very greatly, as they believe this loss of
the seed will injure their health. Now, I may
say at once, that in most cases this emission is
not unnatural. It is merely a sort of overflow
of the semen, and if it do not occur oftener
than once in ten days or a fortnight, there need
be no cause for anxiety. Sleeping on a hard bed,
with few bedclothes, avoiding late suppers, and
lying on the side instead of the back, will
generally cause these emissions to be less
frequent. If they should occur oftener—say
several times a week, and are followed by a
feeling of languor and depression, then it wi'l


be wise to seek the advice of some respectable
doctor, who will probably soon cure the condi-
tion.
The next form of impurity in act is the one
which involves another person—the woman.
This sin is that spoken of and denounced in the
Bible as fornication, adultery, etc., and so often
is it mentioned that it seems as if it were
singled out for special condemnation. St. Paul
tells us that our bodies are the temples of the
Holy Spirit, and that anyone who commits this
sin defiles this temple. I want you especially
to reflect on the nature of this sin. It is,
perhaps, the most cowardly and degrading sin
that a man can be guilty of; and for this
reason, that he not only sins against himself,
but he brings shame and ruin on another
person, and this a woman who, from her weak-
ness and oftentimes ignorance, should receive
instead the pity and protection of the man.
For the man—who is nearly always the
aggressor in this sin —obtains the gratification
of his desires, and seems very often to escape
any punishment for his wrong-doing,
woman may intmr lifelong disgrace, and
may even lose her life as a result of it. I want
you to realise that if you injure a poor girl in
this way, you rob her of 'her virtue which is
looked upon as more precious to women than


life itself. I want you to realise that if her
wrong-doing is discovered, all, even the most
impure men, will regard her with scorn. No
matter how deeply she repent, every one will
turn against her. She may be driven out of her
home or situation, and forced to adopt that
woeful calling of selling herself to men to obtain
bread. There are thousands of such women
to-day who were once happy and innocent girls,
with a prospect of a life of joy and usefulness
before them, but who were induced to take the
first downward step by some man that chose to
gratify his desires at the cost of a ruined life to
another.
I want you also to realise that a single act
of wrong-doing may result in the woman
becoming a mother with all that this involves.
It means that what should bring gladness and
pride to the heart of a woman, brings nothing
but sickening fear ajid loathing. For the infant
which she will bear will be the brand of her
shame —a millstone round her neck to prevent
her from ever again taking her place among her
friends and equals. It means that, mad with
despair, she may attempt to take her own life
or that of her helpless infant, and have to stand
in the criminal’s dock to be tried for murder.
Ask yourself in this case who is the real mur-
derer—the desperate forsaken mother, or the


dastardly coward who will hardly ever come
forward and confess that his is the blame, for he
was the father of the babe ? I would like you
to read George Eliot’s great novel, “ Adam
Bede.” Here you will find depicted with won-
derful power and truth this Very tragedy of a
young and ignorant girl led astray by a man
much her superior in social station, and ending
by being tried for the murder of her child.
There are some who may say, it would be very
wrong to ruin a pure girl, but it is not so bad'
when one of these already fallen women is con
cerned. But we must realise that everyone
who sins with such an one, helps her further on
her downward path, and makes it more and
more difficult for her ever to return to purity
of life. And the life of these poor women is
inconceivably terrible. They are outcasts con-
demned and despised by all, even by those who
have caused their ruin, and it is only by inces-
sant drinking that they are able to drown their
cares and shame, and lead the life they do. I
would have you to think of your own sister, or
some other one dear to you, driven to such a
life, and then realise that it is some other man’s
sister you might be tempted to ruin. Would
you not choose a horsewhip for the man who
would attempt to insult or injure in any way a
sister of yours 1 And since this is so, would


you not be deserving of similar treatment if
you brought shame and ruin on any woman 1
There is one other thing to be mentioned
before I cease to speak of impurity. It is
always true that •' What a man sows, that will
he reap,” and so we find that, as a rule, the
body cannot escape from the effects of impurity
in living. 1 have told you that Nature has
imposed penalties, in the form of diseases, which
may be acquired by anyone who indulges in
impurity, and it is right that you should know
of the existence of these. Now, these diseases
never arise in married life if both the husband
and wife have been pure before marriage. The
most striking feature of these diseases is their
extreme contagiousness, and therefore, it is
almost inevitable for a man who indulges in
impurity, to, sooner or later, acquire one or
other of them. But you must realise that the
first lapse into sin may be the time when this
infection is received. I have known of lads of
16 and 17 years of age, who from the first and
only indulgence in impurity, have acquired foul
disease which would blast their lives. Another
feature of these diseases is their persistence.
Some doctors believe that one, the worst of all,
cannot be cured at all. It may seem to dis-
appear, and yet burst out in some loathsome
and frightful form, 10, 20, and even 30 years


afterwards, when the fact that it once existed
has been entirely forgotten.
The man suffering from this disease is worse
than a leper. For some years he is far more
dangerous to those around him, for while leprosy
is hardly if at all contagious, this disease may
tie communicated in various ways to others.
Pure ami innocent girls have been affected by
being kissed by men diseased in this way, the
poison of the disease being inoculated into
their lips, and other men have unwittingly'
acquired it by 7 smoking a pipe belonging to an
infected person. It would be the wisest thing
for the community to shut up all persons—both
men and women—suffering from this disease,
until they could be certified as no longer a
source of danger to other people.
The contagiousness and persistence of this
disease are the causes of the most terrible
result that arises from it A young man some-
times becomes affected whilst “ sowing his wild
oats,” as it is called. A y'ear or two afterwards
he marries a girl whom he loves and respects,
and with whom he hopes to pass a long and
happy life. He forgets the past, and thinks he
shall not reap what ho sowed. But suddenly'
his wife shows symptoms of the foul disease he
himself suffered from. The husband, who was
to have cherished and guarded her, has brought


her sham" and sickness, and perhaps life-long
suffering. But this is not all. This disease
alone of all diseases is truly hereditary. The
child that she bears comes into the world with
the stamp of the father’s sin upon it The life
blood that it has received from its mother has
been poisoned, and the infant, if it be born
alive, soon becomes sickly, and often dies. If it
survive, it grows up stunted both in body and
mind, sometimes fit only for an asylum for
idiots. Here in the most terrible way do we
see the sins of the father visited upon the
children, for these poor little innocent ones are
ruined even before they enter the world
Do you not see now that it is your duty, not
only to God and yourself, but also for the sake
of the woman whom some day you may wed,
and the unborn children, who may call you
father, to keep yourself from this evil thing ?
Would you ever dream of marrying a girl whom
you suspected to be impure? You would not.
You must realise then, that if spotless chastity
be necessary for her, it is equally so for you, and
determine to go to your future wife, not defiled
by impurity, and perhaps afflicted by loathsome
disease, but with the same purity you expect
and reverence in her.
And this brings me to the last and most
important thing X have to say. It is this. You


must not ho pure only because it is dangerous
to yourself to be impure. You must be pure,
not from any ignoble motive like that, but
because it is the manly, the noble, the Christ-
like course in life. You must set up before
yourself a high ideal of true manliness, and
determine, however hard it may be, that you
will seek to live up to it, God helping you. You
must make up jour mind that you will always
treat all women with courtesy and reverence. I
say you must respect all women, even those who
do not respect themselves, and, therefore, might
not expect reverent treatment from you. It has
been said that the days of chivalry are gone.
It is for you to prove that this is not so. You
can constitute yourself the knight, the guardian
cf every woman—because she is a woman, and,
therefore, entitled to your help and protection.
You must guard her against all wrong—the
wrong you might be tempted to do to her your-
self, and the wrong she might suffer from others.
It is a terrible thought that the only tiling
which often stands between a young girl and
her utter disgrace and ruin is the power of
resistance which she herself possesses against
attacks on her virtue. Should this power
become weakened by fear, by vanity, or, saddest
of all, by love for her seducer, her fall is inevit-
able. Now r , you must determine that with you


this 51i3.1l not Vjg so. TVjg of lior
weakness must build up around the woman an
impregnable wall of defence, You must take
upon yourself the burden of self-control, and
say. “ However much temptation may urge me
from within or without, I shall not commit this
grievous sin against myself and another.”
it will be needful for you to keep this resolve
ever before you, to watch and pray, for you will
be tempted, and strongly tempted. Ido not want
to deceive you in this matter. This sex instinct
within you is very powerful, and you will need
to be always on your guard. But though it
is so strong, it can be mastered. Every young
man can and must practise perfect self-control.
Give no heed to the infamous falsehoods of those
who may say that it is necessary, and, therefore,
right for a young man to sin. Some of the most
eminent of English doctors have pronounced
this a lie of the Devil. Nothing but strength,
both of body and mind, comes from perfect
chastity. So you must set yourself to acquire
the most rigorous control over your thoughts
and desires. You must learn, as Professor
Huxley said, to have your passions so under
the restraint of your will that they can be called
to heel at any time. The struggle may be hard,
but your character will be built up and
strengthened by this struggle as it could in no


othei way. And you will have your reward.
Your life will be clean and healthy. You will
be able to look all men and women in the face
without shame ; by your conscious efforts you
will grow to have purer and nobler conceptions
of womanhood, and to shrink more and more
from anything that is unclean and impure. You
will influence those around you in the same
direction, saving them from the evils you avoid
yourself. When you come to marry the woman
you love and respect, you will have the con-
sciousness that you have no disgraceful past to
conceal from her, and that there is no possibility
of bringing disease upon her and her children.
And when you come to die, yours will be the
glad knowledge that, whatever else your short-
comings may have been, you have at least not
brought shame and ruin on any woman ; and
both in life and in death you will realise the
promise to the pure in heart that they shall see
God.
I wish to end by giving you a few hints as
to how you may keep under control, and avoid
rousing this sexual h sbinct within you. By
attending to these, the struggle for purity may
gradually be made easier.
The first thing is to strive to always have the
mind well occupied. It is idleness which allows
evil thoughts to creep in. Endeavour then,


to have something to fill up your spare
time, especially your evenings, Join a debat-
ing society, or go in for some course of study
at home. Then the body must be exercised
too. Every lad should be an athlete, unless lie
have some bodily defect which forbids it. (Ho
in for cricket, football, gymnastics, etc., and
keep yourself always in training—in good con-
dition. Take a cold bath in the morning, all
the year round if you can stand it; if not, a
cold sponge and rub down with a rbtlgh towel.
Sleep on a hard bed, with as few bed-clothes as
possible, and rise early. As to your food, avoid
much meat, tea and coffee, late suppers, and,
above all, never touch alcohol in any form.
There is nothing so potent in raising passion
and lessening the power of self-control as drink
of any kind. Every young man should be a
staunch abstainer, He has everything to gain,
and nothing to lose by being so.
Then you must avoid the things and sur-
roundings which appeal to and excite passion.
You cannot play with fire and not run the risk
of being burnt. Thus, you must withdraw
yourself from compinions whose speech and
actions are impure if they will not give them up.
You must carefully shun any of the indecent
books and pictures which are, unfortunately, so
common. A few minutes with one of these may


defile your mind wi‘h impure images, which
will remain firmly fixed in your thoughts all
your life. And though I do not wish to seem
Puritanical, or lay needless restraints upon you,
I would advise you to consider carefully the
possible influences of two very common sources
of amusement—theatre going and dancing.
Now, I am not prepared to say that there are
not many good people who do both of these
without harm to themselves. But the theatre,
undoubtedly, does offer much to influence the
passions of young men, and this is true also of
dancing. It will rest with you then to deter-
mine whether in your struggle for self-control
it will not be wise to deny yourself both these
amusements. I must also warn you against be-
coming acquainted with girls not in the same
social station as yourself. It is not uncommon
for young men to speak to girls they may meet
on the streets at night. Now, in itself, there
may be nothing really wrong in this ; but it is
unwise and inexpedient. If you cannot meet
these girls openly at their homes or in-
vite them to yours, it is only right not
to seek their acquaintanceship. There is
this reason, too, that so many poor girls who
are led astray are seduced by men their superiors
in social station—though in that only. On the
other hand, I am far from recommending you


to shun female society. Social intercourse with
girls of your own rank and age will be a means
of innocent recreation, and will have a refining
and ennobling influence on you. But remember
to always treat those girls with deference and
respect. Do not indulge in, the indiscriminate
kissing and embracing which, I am afraid, is not
uncommon, There may be no particular harm
in it, but still it tends to lessen the modesty and
self -respect of the girl, and does not increase the
man’s respect for her. Determine to reserve
these for the one girl who is to be all the world
to you. This brings me to say that it is a good
thing for a man to marry young, it circum-
stances will permit him to do so. Ido not for
a moment recommend rash and hasty marriages,
but I do say that after you have passed your
majority, it is quite fitting for you to be on the
outlook for your future wife who is to comfort
and inspirit you through life, and make it
brighter and nobler for you. Believe in the
possibility of a deep, pure, lasting love between
man and woman, whatever may be said to the
contrary. This love is one of the chief glories
of this world. And having mot your love, if
you are too young or not in a position to marry,
you can determine to wait patiently like Jacob
for Rachel, and work for the means which will
enable you to live your lives together. I


believe that the consciousness of possessing and
responding to the affection of a pure and high-
minded girl is one of the' most potent ways of
preserving a young naf from the slightest taint
of impurity.
Lastly, but not leastly, do what you can to
help on the great cause of Purity, This can be
best done by joining some branch of the White
Cross Movement, and taking the White Cross
Pledge, which is as follows
I SOLEMN! Y PROMISE B Y THE .
HELP OF GOD—
I. To treat all girls and women with respect ,
and endeavour to protect them from
wrong and degradaiiqn.
11. To endeavour to put down all indecent
language and coarse jests.
HI To maintain the law of Purity as
equally binding upon men and women.
IV. To endeavor to spread %hese principles
among my companions, and to try
and help my younger brothers.
V. To use every possible means to fulfil
the command,
“ KEEP THYSELF PURE ”


I would also recommend you to take every
opportunity of reading the wonderful “ White
Cross ” booklets, written by Miss Ellice Hop-
kins, and others, and of giving them to your
friends.
Life lies before you to make or to mar. By
Divine help you may attain to the ideal con-
tained in the “ White Cross ” pledge. It is for
you to pray for the strength which shall keep
you faithful unto death.
Printed by William Brooks & 00., Ltd , 17 On,stlereijh-3t., Sydney


Aids to health and Cimtity,
The following suggestions are supplied through the
courtesy of a Doctor of Medicine, who is also a
Fellow of the Royal Society
Moderation in eating and drinking.. Avoid late suppers, and
the use of intoxicants.
Sleep on a hard bed, and on .your side—not on your back.
Too little clothing rather than too much, and keep your bedroom
window open. In the morning get up as soon as you awake. If
you awake in the night, to urinate is sometimes a good plan.
There is no greater aid to chastity than plenty of cold water.
If possible, take a cold bath every morning ; failing this, sponge
lordly, or better still—all over with cold water, and dry yourself
energetically with a rough towel, rubbing the limbs towards the
extremities. Keep all parts of the clean, and to
prevent irritation, remove all under the foreskin.
The bowels should be opened regularly every day.
Take plenty of exercise, and let your time be fully occupied.
Breathe through the nose, and accustom yourself to fullyinflate
your lungs.
If you are troubled with night discharges, and they do not
occur more than once or twice a fortnight, there is no cause for
alarm. Should you wish for advice, visit a properly qualified
medical man, and under no circumstances go to quacks.
The pernicious habit of self-abuse is ruinous both to the
body and the mental powers. No one can hope to obtain to a
virile manhood who indulges in this debasing practice.
To gain a mastery over the body, the mind must be kept
pure. Don’t think of wrong things, or read or look at anything
that exdites impure thoughts. Try and put down all smutty
talk, and If coarse jests are made, do not laugh.
Theprevalenthabit of cigarette smoking is injurious to all—
especially is it to be avoided by youths, in whom it -undoubtedly
induces a lack of proper sexual control.
The best way to overcome your passions, is to be filled
with » nsthi« nation for saving others.
NATIONAL übraryopaustkau*


lUhite (src& Publications.
s. d.
I, What is the White Cro_ 5 League.
Bishop Barry - 0 1
11. Purity and !n ptoiij —fur lads 15
years - 0 1
Hi. The Choice Detwten Purity and
impurity fm am, . 0 1
IV. The Training <.f hildren in Purity
—for parouU, - 0 1
V. True Manliness-for men, J. E. H. 0 1
“ The Power . of Womanhood or
Mothers Sii*ws ” Ice Hopkins 1 0
“ The Story of life, ” Ellice Hopkins - 0 6
“The Vestibule of. iir! Life”—tor girls,
Rev. F. B Mtvnr, B.A. - 0 J
“ The Holy Temple”—for lads, Rev. F. B.
Meyer, B.A. - 1
Dr. Sperry’s ConTh ential Talks with
Young Mei -10
Dr. Sperry’s ConfiJential Talks with
Young Women - 1 0
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY
Proprietary, Limited,
Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, Brisbane, and
London.
