





SUSEYISM,
OR THE
OXFORD TRACTARIAN SCHOOL,
BY
THE RIGHT HON. T. B, MACAULAY,
M. P. FOR EDINBURGH.
REPRINTED FROM THE EDINBURGH REVIEW.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY D. L. WELCH,
ATLAS OFFICE, 450, GEORGE STREET.


INTRODUCTION.
The republication of tbe following pages will, it is hoped, have the
effect of making widely known the precise object which the Pu-
seyites are endeavouring to accomplish. That object it will be seen
is nothing less than the subjugation of the human mind once more
to the dictation of a priesthood, claiming supernatural gifts, and
desirous of elevating faith upon the ruins of reason. In England
the base attempt has failed —the might of intellect has proved too
much for the weakness of superstition. Puseyism has been held up
to public scorn and indignation—its infatuated and its dishonest
promoters have been weighed in the scale and found wanting. Its
exterior holiness was unable to veil its inward loathsomeness; and
the good sense of the British nation has achieved another triumph
over the snares of priestcraft. In this Colony, however, those two
misguided zealots, Messrs. Walsh and Sconce, under the patronage
and guidance of the Bishop, have not yet been convinced of the
hopelessness of the task which they have undertaken. In order
that the few dupes who still blindly adhere to them may be
enlightened, and that, their doctrines may meet with that contempt
and thorough detestation here which have been accorded to them
in the Mother Country, this splendid Essay of one of the great
master spirits of the age is presented to the people of this Colony,
in the earnest hope that it will be widely circulated and attentively
perused.


The following is a List of the Works referred to through the
Pamphlet.
Tracis fur the Times. By Members of the University of Oxford.
5 vols. Bvo. 1833—10.
Church Principles considered in their Results. By W. E. Glad-
stone, Esq., M.P. Bvo. London: 1840.
Ancient Christianity, and the Doctrines of the Oxford Tracts.
By the Author of Spiritual Despotism. Vols. I. and 11.
London.
The Divine Rule of Faith and Practice; or, a Defence of the
Catholic Doctrine that Holy Scripture has been, since the
times qf the Apostles, the sole Divine Rule of Faith and
Practice in the Church, against the Dangerous Errors of the
Authors of the “ Tracts for the Times,” and the Romanists.
By William Goode, M.A., of Trinity College, Cambridge.
2 vols. Bvo. London.
The Kingdom of Christ delineated; in Two Essays, on our Lord's
own Account of his Person and of the Nature of his Kingdom,
and on the Constitution, Powers, and Ministry of a Christian
Church, as appointed by Himself. By Richard Whately,
D.D., Archbishop of Dublin. Bvo. London: 1841.
Oxford Divinity compared with that of the Romish and Anglican
Churches, with a Special View of the Doctrine of Justification
by Faith. By the Right Rev. C. P. M‘llvaine, D.D., Bishop
of Ohio. Bvo. London: 1841.
The Church of the Fathers. 12mo. London : 1842.
The Voice of the Anglican Church, being the declared Opinions of
her Bishops on the Doctrines of the Oxford Tract Writers.
12mo. London: 1843.
Anglo-Catholicism not Apostolical; being an Enquiry into the
Scriptural Authority of the Leading Doctrines advocated in
“ The Tracts for the Times.” By W. Lindsay Alexander,
M.A. Bvo. Edinburgh: 1843.


PUSETISM,
OR
THE OXFORD TRACTARIAN SCHOOL.
It may sound paradoxical, but it is nevertheless true, that
with the disciples of the Oxford Tract School* we have no
manner of controversy. Their principles, logical and ethical,
are so totally different from our own, that we feel it as impos-
sible to argue w ith them as w ith beings of a different species.
There may be worlds, say some philosophers, where truth and
falsehood change natures—where the three angles of a triangle
are no longer equal to two right angles, and where a crime of
unusual turpitude may inspire absolute envy. We are far
from saying that the gentlemen above mentioned are qualified
to he inhabitants of such a world; hut we repeat that we
have just as little dispute with them as if they were. With
men who can be guilty of so grotesque a petitio principii as
to suppose that to those who question the arrogant and ex-
clusive claims of the Episcopal Clergy, and who “ask by what
authority they speak,” it can be any answer to cite the words,
“ He that despiseth you despiseth me,” and “ whosesoever
sins ye remit they are remitted ”f —with men who think that
no “serious” person can treat lightly their doctrine of Apos-
tolical succession, and that if there be, it is to some purpose
to quote the text, “Esau, a profane person, who for one morsel
of meat, sold his birthright”!—with men who can so wrest
the meaning of common terms as to represent the change
• We have employed the term Puteyiitn, simply as the ordinary name by
which a certain system of doctrines has come to be popularly designated,
and by which it is therefore most readily recognised, it is not intended to
imply that the Reverend Gentleman from whose name the term has been
derived, would subscribe to every statement or opinion contained in the
works of the School to which he belongs: but his own writings leave us no
doubt, that in all the more important he cordially concurs. Still, we should
hare preferred a name not derived from an individual, had we known of any
such as widely used and as generally understood. The Oxford party, it is
true, vehemently protest against being designated by any name (whether de-
rived from an individual or not) which would imply that they consented a
particular School or Sect, on the ground that their doctrines are not those of
a school or sect, but of the u Catholic Church I” But in this we cannot
humour them ; they are in our judgment decidedly a “Sect,** and nothing
more*
t Tracts, Vol. i. No. 17, p. 0.
X Tracts, No. 19, p, 4.
IS


effected in the eucharistic elements by the words of conse-
cration, to be as much a miracle as that performed at the mar-
riage feast at Cana*—with men who are so enamoured of the
veriest dreams and whimsies of the Fathers, as to bespeak all
reverence for that fancy of Justin and others, that the “ ass
and the colt ” for which Christ sent his disciples, are to be
interpreted severally of the “ Jewish and the Gentile be-
lievers,” and also to attach much weight to that of Origen,
who rather expounds them of the “ old and the new Testa-
ments ” —with men who can treat with gravity the various
patristic expositions of the “ five barley loaves,” which some
suppose to indicate the “ five senses,” and others the “ live
books of Moses ”f —with men who can lay down the general
principle, that we are to “maintain before we have proved,”
“ that we must believe in order to judge,” “that this seeming
paradox is the secret of happiness,” “ and that never to have
been troubled with a doubt about the truth of what has been
taught us, is the happiest state of mind,”these writers at
the same time declaring that the immense majority of man-
kind are brought up in this same quiet reception of the most
fatal delusions—with men who can believe that the true doc-
trine of Christian baptism will prove a preservative against
forming either a Neptunian or Vulcanian theory of geology;
and that the vertebral “column and its lateral processes”
were designed to afford a type and adumbration of the cross §
—with men who think the words ton to poieite eis ten emen
anamnesin are the most natural words for our Lord to have
used, if he meant to say “ Sacrifice this in remembrance of
me”(|—with men who can believe that St. Antony’s non-
sensical conflicts with devils may not unworthily be compared
with the temptations of our Lord in the wilderness, and that
the grotesque portents with which his “ life ” abounds may
be attributed to diabolical agency^—with men who can write
or defend such a Tract as Number Ninety, and at once swear
to the Articles and explain them away—with men who think
that there is no reason to believe that “ the private student of
Scripture would ordinarily gain a knowledge of the Gospel
from itand who “ confess a satisfaction in the infliction of
penalties for the expression of new doctrines or a change of
communion”**—with men who can affirm and believe such
things, and many others equally strange, we repeat we can
have personally as little controversy as with those inhabitants
• Br. Crlt., Vol. xxvli. p. 259, 260.
f Tracts, No. 89.
j Tracis, No 85, p. 85, 73; Br. Cr., No. 63, p. 39, 83.
$ Sewell's Christian Morals, p 324. See also Tract No. 89, sec. vi. vii,
|I Froude’s Remains, Second Part, Vol. i. p. 81, &c.
f Newman’s Church of the Fathers, p. 360.
•• Br. Cr., No. 59. p. 105.


of Saturn, who, according to Voltaire’s lively little tale, have
seventy-two senses, and have discovered in matter no less than
three hundred essential properties. The power's of specu-
lation of these gentlemen are either so much above our own,
or so much below them—their notions of right and wrong so
transcendently ridiculous, or so transcendently sublime—that
there can be nothing in common between us. Thousands, we
know, are ready to resolve the mystery of their conduct by
saying, “ Surely these men are either great knaves or great
foolsbut in the exercise of that charity which hopelh all
things, we will not assume the former; and in the exercise of
that charity which belicvtth all things, we will not assume the
latter. We regard them simply as an unexplained phenome-
non; we stare at them as at a new comet, devoutly hoping at
the same time that they may be found to move in a highly
hyperbolical trajectory, and that, having swept across our sys-
tem, they will vanish and return no more.
It is not to them, then, that we address ourselves; but to
the thousands of our readers who may have neither lime nor
inclination to peruse the voluminous productions of their
School. For their sakes we shall attempt something like a
systematic exposition, once for all, of its principal doctrines,
and they can then decide whether or not it is their duty to
accept them.
It is now about ten years since the founders of this school
set about achieving their great miracle of putting the “ dial”
of the world “ ten degrees backward.” Their first proceedings
were comparatively moderate. They had arrived at the con-
clusion that the Church of England had become more “ Pro-
testant than the Reformation that she had somehow swung
loose from her moorings, and had insensibly drifted with the
tide to a point very different from that at which the pilots of
the Reformation had anchored her; that the spirit of the
English Church resides rather in the Liturgy and Rubric, than
in the Articles, and that the former ought to interpret the
latter; that certain “great and precious truths” had nigh
gone out of date, and that certain high “ gifts ” and prero-
gatives of the Church had come to be cheaply rated. They
further thought that these “ precious truths ” required to be
restored, and these high “ gifts” to be vindicated.
To diffuse their views they commenced that remarkable
series of publications well known by the name of the “ Ox-
ford Tracts ;” at an early stage of which appeared Mr. New-
man’s Via Media, or middle toad to heaven, between Ro-
manism and Protestantism. This Via Media appeared to
many nothing more or less than the “old Roman road”
uncovered and made passable. What was thus early sus-
pected was in due time made manifest. No matter bow com-
b 3


paratively moderate the first pretensions of these writers; it
was soon seen that their system of doctrine and ritual was
fast assuming’ a form not essentially different from that of
undisguised Romanism. Flushed with success, and forgetting
all caution, they rapidly developed, partly in the Tracts and
partly in separate works, principles at which the Protestant
world stood aghast. In a word, the system closely resembled
that of Rome; it was, as geometricians say, a similar figure,
only with not so large a perimeter.
They affirmed, as we shall fully show hereafter, that the
Scriptures were not the sole and absolute rule of faith ; that
tradition was supplemental to it, and that what if unanimously
taught was of co-ordinate authority; that a fully developed
Christianity must be sought somewhere or other, (nobody
knows where,) within the first (nobody knows how many) cen-
turies ; they spoke contemptuously of Chillingworth’s cele-
brated maxim, and elevated that of Vincent of Lerins into its
place: in defiance of the first principles of the Reformation,
they advocated “ Reserve ” in the communication of religious
knowledge, and avowed their preference of the ancient di\ci-
plina arcani ;* they spoke in terms of superstitious reverence
of the Fathers, and eagerly defended many of their most
egregious fooleries ;f they denied most contemptuously “ the
right of private judgment,” and inculcated a blind, unques-
tioning acquiescence in the assurances of the Priest. As they
had advocated principles which would justify nearly all the
abuses of Rome, so they learned to speak of the abuses to
which those principles had led in a new dialect—in terras
which would have made the hair of Cranmer or of Ridley
stand on end. They apologised for her errors, and, as they
were bidden, “ spoke gently of her fall.” They were rewarded
(significant omen!) with the friendly greetings of the Roman-
ists in return ; and condescendingly assured that “ they were
not far from the kingdom of God.”£ All this will be fully
proved hereafter, if indeed there are now any who stand in
need of such proof.
But their zeal somewhat outran discretion. They were not
yet quite perfect in the art of poisoning. Instead of adminis-
tering it in homoeopathic doses, in invisible elements, by means
of perfumed gloves or sweet confectionary; their impatience
• Nos. 80 and 87, Tracts on “ Reserve.”
t TractB9—On “Ancient Mysticism.”passim.
% “It seems impossible,” says Dr. Wiseman, “to read the works of the
Oxford divines, and especially to follow them chronologically, without dis-
covering a daily approach towards our holy church, both in doctrine and
affectionate feeling To suppose them (without an insincerity
which they have given us no right to charge them with) to love the parts of
a system and wish for them, while they would reject the root and only secure
support of them—the system itself—is, to my mind, revolting!/ contra-
dictory.”


Could not brook the long delay required by so tedious a pro-
cess. They exchanged the gentle decoction of laurel leaves
for prussic acid; till at last, in Number Ninety, which ought
by right to be called the “ Art of Perjury made Easy,” they
administered so strong a dose, that even the Ostrich-stomach
of the Church could no longer endure it. She threw off the
nauseous compound with a convulsive effort, and refused to
take any further preparations from the laboratory of these
modem “ Subties.”
But though the Oxford Tracts were at length silenced by
authorities unwontedly patient of scandal, the poison was too
widely diffused to admit of any sudden and instant counter-
action. Accordingly, in periodical publications of all sorts
and sizes—in Reviews, Magazines, and Newspapers, in flimsy
pamphlets and bulky volumes, in letters, in dialogues, in tales
and novels, in poetry, in congenial fiction and perverted his-
tory, in every form of typography, and in every species of
composition—have the very same, nay, still more outrageous
doctrines been industriously propagated. Of this, too, we
shall give full proof *
Thus it was seen that the Via Media, instead of being a
road running between Protestantism and Romanism, and
parallel to both, branched off at a large angle from the for-
mer, and, after traversing a short interval of moss and hog,
which quaked most fearfully under the traveller’s uncertain
tread, struck into that “ broad,” well-beaten, and crowded road
which leads to Rome and “ destruction ” at the same time.
If the Oxford Tract writers had strictly adhered to what
appeared to he their original intention, as stated in the Via
Media, it would have been difficult, at all events, for a clerical
antagonist to know how to deal with them ; as they, for simi-
lar reasons, would have found it equally difficult to know how
to deal with him. While the Oxford party maintain that the
spirit of the Church resides rather in the Liturgy and Rubric
than in the Articles, their opponents plead that the spirit of
the Church resides rather in the Articles than in the Liturgy
and Rubric; and these last, if change must come, would fain
have the latter brought into harmony with the former; rather
than the former misinterpreted into agreement with the latter.
• The Oxford Tract writers and their adherents, have shown bat small
practical regard to that principle of unquestioning obedience which forms a
prime article of their faith. They suppressed the ‘‘Tracts,** it is true—an
act of obedience which, considering that they have since propagated the same
doctrines with ondiminished zeal, and even openly defended Number Ninety
itself, the Bishop of Oxford has acknowledged, in a recent charge, with a
gratitude which looks almost ludicrous. They seem to have understood the
objection of their superior to be to the title of the books, not to the doctrines
they contained—to the label on the bottle, not to the poison in it. Their
obedience was of the same kind with that of the dutiful son mentioned in
the Gospel, Mho said to his father, “ I go, sir,” but went not.


Which of these two parties is more near the truth in its no-
tions, we shall not particularly enquire. Never having our-
selves sworn and subscribed an ex animo assent to “ all and
every thing ” contained in the “ Articles, Book of Common
Prayer, Rubric, and Canons,” we feel at perfect liberty to ad-
mire and revere whatsoever we deem excellent in the consti-
tution, doctrines, or ritual of the Church of England, without
pledging ourselves to admire or revere all. Considering the
circumstances under which the Church was founded, the na-
tion’s recent escape from the grossest Popery—the prejudices
which required conciliation—the different, and in some res-
pects contradictory, interests that were to be adjusted—the
explicit admissions of the most eminent Reformers, that they
could not do all they wished, and that they were compelled
to content themselves with doing what they could—we cannot
wonder that some portions of the Articles and Formularies of
the Church should be hard to be reconciled. As little can we
wonder that those who have sworn an ex animo assent to “ all
and every thing in them,” should, after so miscellaneous a
feast, feel now and then a little dyspeptic. They may well
he pardoned if they make some desperate efforts to show that
they are not inconsistent; and even applauded, if they take
the more rational course of recommending that any expres-
sions which trouble conscience should be rectified and ad-
justed. Meantime, as it is impossible that inconsistency
should itself be consistent, it is no matter of surprise that these
two parties should feel it more easy to refute each other’s
opinions than to establish their own. One appeals to the
Liturgy—the other to the Articles—each can prove the other
partially wrong, but neither can prove itself wholly right. In
a word, it is a war of reprisals; each takes out its “ letter of
marque,” and proceeds to burn and pillage on its adversary’s
coast; and returning in anticipated triumph—finds equal
desolation on its own.
Meantime, one thing is clear. The much boasted unity of
the Church—that unity which Mr. Gladstone vaunts, and
which Mr. Newman sorrowfully laments is not to be found,*
(not agreeing, it appears, even as to whether they are dis-
agreed,)—is something like the unity of chaos. There was
hut one chaos, it is true, but in that one there was infinite
confusion.
Whether absolute unity be desirable, we have our doubts;
* In the English Church we shall hardly And ten or twenty neighbouring
clergymen who agree together; and that, not in the non-essentials of religion*
but as to what are its elementary and necessary doctrines; or as to the fact,
whether there are any necessary doctrines at all—any distinct and definite
faith required for salvation.”— Lectures on the Prophetical Office of the
Church, p. 391. Again—“ In the English Church, by itself, may be found
differences at great as those which separate it from Greece or Pome.”—
P. 310.


that it is impossible of attainment, we have none. We see
the very men who have sworn assent to the very same docu-
ments exhibit almost every variety and shade of theological
opinion. From every zone, every latitude of theology, has the
Church collected its specimens." Each extreme, and all be-
tween, is there; from the mere ethical declaimer who has
successfully laboured to expel from his discourse every dis-
tinctive trace of Christianity, except what may be found in
the text and the benediction, to the fanatic who suffers
“ grace ” wellnigh to exclude “ morality ” —from the most
rigid Arminianism to the most rigid Calvinism—from high-
church doctrines like those of Laud, to low-church doctrines
like those of Hoadley—from a theory of the sacraments like
that of Dr. Hook, to a theory of the sacraments like that of
Mr. Noel.*
The argumentum ad hominem, however, with which the
Oxford Tractists (had they restricted themselves to what
seemed their original object) might have met their clerical
opponents, is of no avail against those—whether in the
Church or out of it—who have not sworn and subscribed an
ex animo assent to her public documents; and further, as they
have not restricted themselves to that object, but have affirmed
doctrines and developed a theory essentially inconsistent with
Protestantism, it is competent to every body to affirm that
they do not of right belong to the Church of England,
though they remain within her pale, and most unworthily eat
her bread.
Of this any one may convince himself who will take the
trouble to examine the Oxford Tracts seriatim —more especially
those from Number Seventy to Number Ninety. But there
are two facts more easily appreciable by the public. The first
is, that the Tracis have been suppressed by authority —none
can deny that. The second is, that the ablest and most in-
fluential Prelates have, in “ Charges” and other publications,
delivered their express testimony against them, in every tone
of lamentation, reproof, rebuke: they do not disguise their
mingled shame, sorrow, and consternation, that such doctrines
should have been promulgated by clergymen of their own
communion. Those who please may see this collection of
testimonies set forth in one of the publications at the head of
this article—“ The Voice of the Anglican Church.” Nor must
it be forgotten that this series of testimonies derives additional
force from the fact, that there is so much in the Oxford Tracts
to gratify Episcopal vanity, and to strengthen Episcopal pre-
tensions. Nothing surely but an imperative sense of truth
and duty could have extorted them, in the face of the pleasing
• Tbe reatJermay *ee this point more fully treated in our Article on Glad-
itooe’a “ Church and Slate,” Vol. Ixlx. pp. 205—271.


adulations with which the “Tracts” abound. It is hard to be
compelled to strike the parasite in the very act of sycophancy ;
and frequent and most fulsome was the flattery with which
these right reverend men were assailed. Their office and pre-
rogatives were studiously magnified ; they were addressed in
the humblest tones of awe and veneration;* they were com-
pared to the Apostles, not only in their office and dignity—but
(let not the reader smile) in their sufferings. f How pleasant
for a worthy gentleman of princely revenue and baronial dig-
nity, to be told that he is at the same time a sort of martyr,
and may aspire to combine the character of prince and an-
chorite in his own proper person. We have much sincere
respect for the Bench of Bishops; but amongst the marks of
“ apostolical succession,” we certainly had imagined that
“ privations and sufferings ” were not generally included. We
repeat, then, that our Prelates have done themselves much
credit in so loudly condemning this new heresy. We only
hope that they will act consistently with their protests in the
discharge of their public duties, and in the employment of
their private patronage.
In attempting to give some account of the principal opinions
held by the new School, we do not mean to deny that some of
them are held, with certain modifications, by many who would
strenuously remonstrate against being classed in the same
category with its founders; nay, we shall not charge all who
avow a general coincidence with holding every one to the same
extent. “Private judgment,” proscribed as it has been, has
been at work here too, and left these men little reason to boast
of their unity. We shall content ourselves with developing
the system as explained in the Oxford Tracts, and in works
avowedly written in approval or defence of them.
Neither will our space permit us to attempt more than a ge-
neral statement of the opinions in question. Some of the
particular doctrines most in favour with the Oxford Theolo-
• “To them (the Bishops) we willingly ami affectionately relinquish their
high privileges and honours; we encroach not upon the rights of the Suc-
cessors of the Apostles [these are not our capitals]; we touch not their
sword and crosier/*... ..Exalt our holy fathers, the Bishops, as the represen-
tatives of the Apostles and the angels of the Churches, and magnify your
office as being ordained by them to take part in their ministry/’—(Tracts, No.
I, p. 1. 4. Addressed to the Clergy.)
+ “ Again, it may be asked, who are at this time the successors and spiritual
descendants of the Apostles? 1 shall surprise some people by the answer 1
shall give, though it is very clear, and there is no doubt about it — the
Bishops. They stand in the place of the Apostles as far as the office of
ruling is concerned; and whatever we ought to do , Had we lived when the
Apostles were alive, the same ought we to do for the Bishops, lie that
despiseth them, despiseth the Apostles But I must now men-
tion the more painful part of the subject, ». e. the sufferings of the Bishops,
which is the second mark of their being our living Apostles. I may say.
Bishops have undergone this (rial in every age/’—(No, 10, p. 3,9; also Vol.
i., passim.)


gians, we have already pretty fully considered ;* and some
others may, hereafter, come under our review.
1. These writers maintain, in its fullest integrity and extent,
the doctrine of Apostolical Succession-! They affirm that
the spiritual blessings of Christianity are, so far as we know or
have any right to infer, ordinarily restricted to the channel of
an Episcopally-ordained ministry; that no minister is a true
member even of that ministry, unless found in the line of the
succession—in other words, dulysordained by a Bishop duly
consecrated; whose due consecration again depends on that of
a whole series of Bishops from the time of the Apostles; that
ministers not so ordained have no right to preach the gospel,
and cannot efficaciously administer the sacraments, let them
be as holy as they may; that all who are so ordained may do
both, let them be as unholy as they will;}: that accordingly,
Philip Doddridge and Robert Hall were no true Christian minis-
ters, but that Jonathan Swift and Lawrence Sterne were. All
this we know is very mysterious; but then, as the Tracts say, so
are many other things which we nevertheless believe; and why
not this? It is better “to believe than to reason ’’ on such a
subject; or believe first and reason afterwards. “ Let us believe
what we do not see and know ... Let us maintain before we have
proved. This seeming paradox §is the secret of happiness.”
Thus, seeing is not believing, as the vulgar suppose, but be-
• See the articles on Dr. Pusey’a Fifth of November Sermon, (Vol. Ixvi. p.
396.) —On Gladstone’s “ Chnrch and State,” (Vol. Isix. p. 231.) —On Tract
Number Ninety, (April 1341.) —On the “ Right of Private Judgment, and
Sewell’s Christian Morals,” in the Number for Jan. 1842.
t Why should we ta1k....50 little of an Apostolic Succession"? Why
should we not seriously endeavour to Impress our people with this plain
truth CO —that by separating themselves from our communion, they separate
themselves not only from a decent, orderly, useful society, but from the
only Church in this realm which has a right to be quite sure she has the
Lord’s body to give to his people .”—(Tracts, vol. i., No. 4, p. 5.)
“ As to th efact of the Apostolical Succession, i.e. that our present Bishops
are the heirs ant! representatives of the Apostles by successive transmission
of the prerogative of being so, this is too notorious to require proof. Every
link in the chain is known from St. Peter to our present Metropolitans.”—
(No. 7, p. 2.)
Dr. Hook says, “ Wc ask what was the fact, and the fact was this: that
the officer whom we oowcalla Bishop, was at firstcallcd an Apostle ; although
afterwards it was thought better to confine the title of Apostle to those who
had aeon the Lord Jesos, while their successors, exercising the same rights
and authority, though unendowed with miraculous powers, contented them-
selves with the designation of Bishops.” It is the prerogative of men of this
school to talk nonsense; but really Dr. Hook abuses his privilege. It re-
minds one of what a l*<Jy said to PellUon, “Really, Monsieur Pellison, you
abuse your sex’s privilege—of being ugly.
J “The unworthiness of man, then, cannot prevent the goodness of God
from flowing in those channels In which be has destined it to flow; and
the Christian congregations of the present day, who sit at the feet of minis-
ters duly ordained, have the same reason for reverencing In them the suc-
cessors of the Apostles, as the primitive Churches of Ephesus and of Crete
had for honoring in Timothy and In Titus the Apostolic authority of him who
bad appointed them.’’—(No. 5, p. 10, ll.)
$ No. 85, p. 85.
B 5


lieving is seeing ; and you will, in due time, know the “ bles-
sedness ”of such child-like docility.* But it is necessary to
dwell a little on the arguments of the opposite party, in order
to do full justice to the hardihood of the required act of
faith.
Whether we consider the palpable absurdity of this doctrine,
its utter destitution of historic evidence, or the outrage it im-
plies ou all Christian charity, it is equally revolting. The
arguments against it are infinite, the evidence for it absolutely
nothing. It rests not upon one doubtful assumption but upon
fifty; and when these are compounded together, according to
Whately’s receipt for gauging the force of arguments, it defies
the power of any calculus invented by man, to determine the
ratio of improbability. First, the very basis on which it rests
—the claim of Episcopacy itself to be considered undoubtedly
and exclusively of Apostolical origin —has been most fiercely
disputed by men of equal erudition and acuteness; and, so far
as can be judged, of equal integrity and piety. When one
reflects how much can be plausibly aud ingeniously adduced
on both sides, and that it would require half a volume only to
give an abstract of the arguments; one would think that the
only lesson which could or would be learned from the contro-
versy, would be the duty of mutual charity; and a disposition
to concede that the blessings of Christianity are compatible
with various systems of Church polity. God forbid that we
should for a moment admit that they are restricted to any
one!
But this first proposition, however doubtful, is susceptible of
evidence almost demonstrative, compared with that offered for
half a dozen others involved in the integral reception of the
doctrine of Apostolical succession. Accordingly, there are
thousands of Episcopalians, who, while they affirm a prepon-
derance of evidence on behalf of Episcopacy, contemptuously
repudiate this incomprehensible dogma: of these Archbishop
Whately is an illustrious example.
The theory is, that each Bishop, from the Apostolic times,
has received in his consecration a mysterious “ gift,” and also
transmits to every Priest in his ordination a mysterious “ gift,”
* “ I readily allow,” say* one Tractist on the doctrine of the Sitccessii n,
“ that this view of onr calling has something in it too high and mysterious to
be fully understood by unlearned Christians. Cut the learned, surely, are
Just as unequal to it. It is part of that ineffable mystery called in onr Creed
the Communion of Saints; and, with all other Christian mysteries, is above
the understanding of all alike, yet practically alike within reach of all who
are willing to embrace it by true Faith.’’ —(Vol. i. No. 4, p. 6.)
It may be profitable to us to reflect, that doctrines, which we believe to
be most true, and which are received as such by the most profound and en*
Urged intellects, and which rest upon the most irrefragable proofs, yet may
be above our disputative powers, and can be treated by as only with re-
ference to our conduct."—(No. 19, p. 3, On Arguing concerning the Aposto-
lical Succession)


indicated in the respective offices by the awful words, “Receive
the Holy Ghost that on this the right of Priests to assume
their functions, and the preternatural grace of the sacraments
administered by them, depends; that Bishops, once consecra-
ted, instantly become a sort of Leyden jar of spiritual elec-
tricity, and are invested with the remarkable property of
transmitting the “ gift ”to others; that this has been the case
from the primitive age till now; that this high gift has been
incorruptibly transmitted through the hands of impure, pro-
fligate, heretical ecclesiastics, as ignorant and flagitious as any
of their lay contemporaries; that, in fact, these “ gifts ” are
perfectly irrespective of the moral character and qualifications
both of Bishop and Priest, and reside in equal integrity in
a Bonner or a Cranmer —a Parson Adams or a Parson Trul-
liber.
Numberless are thdlquestions which reason and charity
forthwith put to the advocates oi this doctrine, to none of
which will they deign an answer except the one already given
—that believing is seeing, and implicit faith the highest de-
monstration. What is imparted? what transmitted? Is it
something or nothing? Is consecration or ordination accom-
panied (as in primitive times) by miraculous powers, by any
invigoration of intellect, by increase of knowledge, by greater
purity of heart ? It is not pretended ; and, if it were, facts
contradict it, as all history testifies: the ecclesiastic who is ig-
norant or impure before ordination, is just as much so after-
wards. Do the parties themselves profess to be conscious of
receiving the gift ? No. Is the conveyance made evident to
us by any proof which certifies any fact whatsoever—by sense,
experience, or consciousness? It is not affirmed. In a word,
it appears to be a nonentity inscribed with a very formidable
name—a very substantial shadow; and dispute respecting it
appears about as hopeful as that concerning the “indelible
character” imparted in the unreiterable sacraments of the
Romish Church ;of which Campbell archly says—“ As to the
uhi of the character, there was no less variety of sentiments—
some placing it in the essence of the soul, others in the un-
derstanding; some in the will, and others more plausibly in
the imagination; others even in the hands and tongue ; but,
by the general voice, the body was excluded. So that the
whole of what they agreed in amounts to this, that in the un-
reiterable sacraments, as they call them, something, they know
• ** Thus we have confessed before God our belief that through the Bishop
who ordained os we received the Holy Ghost, the power to bind anti to loose,
to administer the sartaments and to preach. Now, how Is be able to give
these great gifts? Whence is his right ? Are these words idle, (which would
be taking God’s name in vain,) or do they express merely a wish, (which
sorely 5s very far below their meaning,) or do they not rather indicate that
the speaker is conveying a gift ? (Tracts, Vol. i. No. 1. p- 3.)


not what, is imprinted, they know not how, on something in
the soul of the recipient, they know not where, which never
can be deleted.”
Again, who can certify that this gift has been incorrnptibly
transmitted through the impurities, heresies, and ignorance of
the dark ages? Is there nothing that can invalidate Orders?
“ Yes,” say some of these men, “ error in fundamentals will.”
Others affirm it will not; but still, with that superstitious re-
verence for forms which ever attends neglect of the substance,
declare that they may be invalidated “if the formalities of
consecration have not been duly observed!” Either answer
will serve the purpose. If error in essentials is sufficient to
invalidate Orders, we ask—had the Romish Church so erred
when you separated from her? If she had, her own Orders
were invalid, and she could not transmit yours. If she had
not, as you all affirm that nothing bu#heresy in fundamentals
can justify separation, you are schismatics, and your own
Orders are invalid.
What are the conditions on which the validity of Orders de-
pends, or whether any thing can annul them* except some
informality in ordination itself, our Anglican friends are very
reluctant to state. That they do not insist on all those condi-
tions of the Romish Church which made Chillingworth say,
that “ of a hundred seeming Priests, it was doubtful whether
there “ was one true one,” is certain; and it is equally certain
that they are discreet in adopting such a course. The Fathers,
indeed, often insist upon purity of life and integrity of doctrine
as necessary to authenticate the claims of a successor of the
Apostles; but it would not be convienent, with the ecclesiasti-
cal history of the middle ages spread out before us, to insist
strongly on any such requisites; it being certain that in those
ages there has been no lack of simoniacal, atheistical, and
profligate Prelates; though, if simony, atheism, and profligacy
will not annul “ holy orders,” truly we know not what will.
The majority', therefore, seem to have determined that there is
hardly any amount of doctrinal pravily or practical licentious-
ness which could repel the indwelling spirit of holiness—
though, incomprehensible dogma! an error in the form of
consecration may! Be it so. The chances are still infinite
that there have not been flaws somewhere or other in the long
chain of the succession—and though these may be few, yet as
• Mr. Gladstone thinks of nothing bat the forms. He says, ** Again, with
respect to the daikness of the middle ages, 1 apprehend that the high and
even superstitions reverence then paid to the office of the priesthood, tells
positively and most strongly in favour of the succession, because it thus be-
comes so much the more highly improbable that forma so sacred should have
been neglected, that unauthorized intrusion should have been either permitted
or attempted/'—Gladstone on Church Principles . (Chap. v. p. 236 )
See Tracts, No. 15, pp. 9, 10, 11, for some curious statements on this
sni'ject.


no one knows where the fatal breach may be, it is sufficient to
spread universal panic through the whole Church. What
Bishop can be sure that he and his predecessors in the same
line have always been duly consecrated? or what presbyter,
that he was ordained by a Bishop who had a right to ordain
him ? Who will undertake to trace up his spiritual pedigree
unbroken to the very age of the Apostles, or give us a complete
catalogue of his spiritual ancestry ?
We can imagine the perplexity of a presbyter thus cast in
doubt as to whether or not he has ever had the invaluable
“ gift ” of Apostolical succession conferred upon him. As
that “ gift ” is neither tangible nor visible, the subject neither
of experience nor consciousness;—as it cannot be known by
any “effects” produced by it, (for that mysterious efficacy
which attends thfi administration of rites at its possessor’s
hands, is like the gift which qualifies him to administer them,
also invisible and intangible,)—he may imagine, unhappy
man 1 that he has been “ regenerating ” infants by baptism,
when he has been simply sprinkling them with water. “ What
is the matter?” the spectator of his distractions might ask.
“ What have you lost?” “Lost?” would be the reply. “1
fear I have lost my apostolical succession, or rather, “my
misery is that I do not know and cannot tell whether I ever
had it to lose! ” It is of no use here to suggest the usual
questions, “ When did you see it last? When were you last
conscious of possessing it?” What a peculiar property is
that of which, though so invaluable—nay, on which the whole
efficacy of the Christian ministry depends—a man has no
positive evidence to show whether he ever had it or not! which,
if ever conferred, was conferred without his knowledge; and
which, if it could be taken away, would still leave him igno-
rant, not only when, where, and how the theft was committed,
but whether it had ever been committed or not? The sym-
pathizing friend might, probably, remind him, that as he
was not sure he had ever had it, so, perhaps, he still had it
without knowing it? “ Perhaps!" he would reply; “hut
it is certainty I want.” “ Well,” it might be said, “ Mr.
Gladstone assures you, that, on the most moderate compu-
tation, your chances are as 8000 to 1 that you have it!”
“ Pish 1” the distracted man would exclaim, “ what does
Mr. Gladstone know about the matter?” And, truly, to
that query we know not well what answer the friend could
make.
It is true, however, that Mr. Gladstone, in his Church
Principles, proposes to remove any such perilous doubts as
may arise from the historic difficulties against the doctrine
of succession, (on which we have said the less, as they
are so unanswerably, as we think, urged in our Article on


liis first work,*) by nothin" less than mathematical evi-
dence! It is a novelty to find him reasoning at anytime;
and mathematical accuracy is indeed more than we looked
for. But it is a perversion of language, and an insult to the
human understanding, to talk of mathematical evidence in
such a question. Though mathematical in form, the argu-
ment, treating it seriously and decorously, yields but a pro-
bable conclusion. By a novel application of the theory of
ratios and proportion he endeavours to show that, on the least
favorable computation, the chances for the true consecration
of any Bishop are as 8000 to 1. “Ifit be admitted,” says he,
“ that regular consecration was the general practice, but only
insinuated that there may have been here and there an ex-
ception through neglect, say, for example, 1 in 500— for argu-
ment’s sake let us grant so much; upon this showing, the
chances for the validity of the consecration of every one of the
three olficiating Bishops in a given case are,: : 500 :1. For
the validity of those of two out of the three,: : 500 x 500 =
(tic) 25,000: 1. For the validity of some one out of the three,
: : 500 x 25,000 = 12,500,000 ;1. If, however, this be not
enough, let us pursue the numerical argument one step far-
ther, and instead of taking the original chances at 1 to 500,
let us reduce them lower than perhaps any adversary would
demand; let us place them at lin 20. On this extravagant
allowance, the chances in favor of the validity of the conse-
cration of a Bishop who receives his commission from three of
the order, are only 20 x 20 x 20 = 8000 : I ,”f Be it so:
this only diminishes the probability that, in any given case,
the suspicion of invalidity is unfounded; —it still leaves the pro-
position untouched, that there is a probability that such inva-
lidity exists and as no one knows where, the panic is not
allayed. What is wanted, is a criterion which shall distin-
guish the genuine Orders from the spurious. Alas! who
knows but he may be the unhappy 8000th? According to Mr.
Gladstone’s theory, limited as his view of the subject is, no
man in the Church of England has a right to say that he is
“ commissioned to preach the gospel,” but only that he has
Ifga. parts of certainty that he is! A felicitous mode of ex-
pression it must be confessed. What would be the fraction
expressing the ratio of probability, on the supposition that
simony, heresy, or infidelity, can invalidate holy orders, is—
considering the history of the middle ages—far beyond our
arithmetic.
But the difficulties of this puzzling doctrine do not end
here. It is asked, how a man who is no true Christian, can
* Art. on Gladstone's “State in its relations with the Church.’'—Edin-
burgh Review, Vof. Ixix. pp. 2G32G3,
t Gladstone on Church principles . Chap. r. pp. 235, 236.


be a true Christian minister? flow he, who is not even a dis-
ciple of Christ, can be a genuine successor of the Apostles?
Whether it be not impious to suppose that God has pledged
himself to impart,by inevitable necessity, the gift of the “Holy
Ghost” to an unholy man—merely on the performance of ex-
ternal rites, and to qualify him for the performance of the
functions of a purely moral institute, though still morally unfit ?
We can understand, it may be said, how, by the overruling
Providence of God, a bad man preaching truth may do
some good, if the hearer (a rare case) has both sense and
honesty to separate truth from him who propounds it. But if
he be iguoraut of the truth, and preach “ pernicious error,”
(as thousands so ordained have done,) we cannot conceive
how his preaching can have the effect of truth, simply be-
cause he is “commissioned.” Yet this, no less an authority
than Mr. Melville asserts, in language as plain as the doc-
trine itself is mystical.*
In like manner, if it be supposed that the sacraments are
only external signs of affecting and momentous truths, and
that the benefit derived from them still depends on the moral
and spiritual dispositions of the recipient, we can understand
that they may be beneficial, even when he who administers
them may be a bad man. in both the above cases, however,
as the effect is a moral one, that effect will be proportionably
diminished by the conviction of the worthlessness of the offi-
ciating priest. This necessarily results from the laws of our
moral nature. It is impossible to get the generality of men
to revere that which their teachers practically despise; to obey
precepts rather than imitate example. As all history shows,
it is impossible long to maintain religion when the priest is
himself irreligious. But that, by a divinely ordained neces-
sity, some preternatural efficacy, itself certified by no evidence
either of sense or consciousness, is conveyed through the
minister merely because he has been cpiscopally ordained,
(however wicked or worthless he may be,) and which is with-
held when that ordination is wanting, (however worthy and
holy he may be) who can really believe ? Nothing but the
most express revelation, or the most undeniable effects, could
attest it. And both the one and the other the advocates of
the dogma are avowedly unable to indicate.
• Mr. Melville expressly affirms, “ If, whensoever the minister is himself
deficient and untaught, so that his sermons exhibit a wrong system of doc-
trine, you will not allow that Christ's Church may be profiled by the ordi-
nance of preaching; you dearly argue that Christ has given op his office, anti
that he can no longer be styled, “ the minister of tire true Tabernacle when
every thing seems against the true followers of Christ, so that, on a carnal
calculation, you would suppose the services of the Church stripped of all
efficacy, then, by acting faith on the head of the ministry, they are in-
structed and nourished, though, is the main, the given lesion be false-
hood, and the proffered sustenance little better than po isos.


At these, and all other arguments, the supporter of the
doctrine only shakes his head in awful warning, proclaims
his horror of “ rationalistic” presumption, and asserts, that by
implicit faith alone can it be received. In this we believe
him.
But is it, can it be true, that Christians will he content to
receive these strange conclusions ? Are they willing to sacri-
fice even charity itself to an absurdity ? Powerful as are the
arguments on all hands against this paradox, none is so power-
ful with us as this. The advocates of the Oxford system, when
they are destitute of arguments, (which may be represented
as their ordinary condition,) are fond of appealing to our moral
feelings; if we do not know, they tell us we may feel the
truth of a certain conclusion. Without being, we trust, in the
same miserable destitution of argument, we would fearlessly
adopt their course on the present occasion. We feel that if
there were nothing else to say, there is no proposition in Ma-
thematics more certain, than that a dogma which consigns the
Lutheran, the Scottish, and indeed the whole reformed Nou-
Episcopal clergy to contempt, however holy; and which ne-
cessarily authenticates the claims of every Episcopal Priest,
however unholy —must be utterly alien from the spirit of the
institute of the New Testament.
2. Equally extravagant are the notions entertained by this
School on the subject of the Sacraments. With them, they
are not simply expressive rites, symbolical of religious doc-
trines, and capable of awakening religious emotion through
the medium of the senses and the imagination;—they are
themselves the media of a “ supernatural grace,”—exclusively
communicated, however, through the Episcopally-ordained
minister. This supernatural influence is supposed to be con-
veyed, in every case, in which secret infidelity or open vice
offers no obstruction on the part of the subject of the rite. It
is supposed to be actually conveyed, therefore, in every case of
infant baptism, (the subject being there incapable of offering
any obstruction,) and to involve that stupendous and myste-
rious change, called in Scripture “regenerationand which
surely ought to imply, if we consider either the meaning of the
term, or the nature of the institute, a moral revolution equiva-
lent to an absolute subjection to the law of Christianity. In
the eucharist it is supposed that infidelity or unworthiness in
the recipient may obstruct the “preternatural grace,’’ which
nevertheless is, as it were, flowing through the priest, and per-
meating the elements. Such a state of mind may operate as
a sort of non-conductor to the ethereal and subtle influence.
Meantime, it is most strange that this “ preternatural grace,”
which is represented as so scrupulous, has no objection to re-
side with the Priest, and act in and by him, even though he


should be, morally, ten thousand times worse than those to
whom the rite is administered!
The doctrine of “ baptismal regeneration,” is indeed held
by many men who are far from approving of the Oxford move-
ment. With the peculiar, yet, we must be permitted to think,
consistent audacity of the new School, its advocates have car-
ried it out to its uttermost extravagance.
It probably will not be doing injustice to the generality of
the disciples of this School, (though they do not conceal that
there are some differences,) if we further state that their senti-
ments on the subject of the Sacraments are pretty generally
represented by those of Dr. Pusey and Mr. Newman. The
former contends that not only is the dread mysterious change
called “ regeneration,” effected in every case of baptism rightly
administered; but that there is no certain hope of the pardon
of sin wilfully committed after it;* and that he who has once
so sinned, must live in perpetual and trembling doubt of his
final safety. If so, one would think, that as Scripture assu-
redly has no express command on the subject, these men
would be disposed to postpone the rite of baptism to a late
period; instead of administering it to those who as yet have
no sins to repent of, and leaving them to sin (as they assu-
redly must) with the knowledge that the only plenary antidote
was improvidently wasted before they were permitted to have
a voice in the matter. One cannot wonder that if this doc-
trine be true, thousands in the much admired Church of the
age of Chrysostom and Ambrose, should have thriftily put off
the performance of this wonder-working rite to the very last
extremity. Only think of the system. A child is baptized
when a few days old; he commits a mortal sin when he is
(say) sixteen years of age; he lives to ninety ; and with the
New Testament and its numberless promises in his hand, he is
to spend nearly eighty years in perplexity and anguish, and
die in doubt at last, though truly penitent, devout, and con-
sistent ; because somebody applied the baptismal water before
he had any voice in the proceeding! But further, as all have
committed sin after baptism, all are in the same predicament,
and can entertain but a trembling hope of heaven! Can
Christian men and women believe this hideous system to be-
long to the Gospel P
The difficulties of this subject have constrained Dr. Pusey
to make the convenint Romish distinction between venial and
A
* “ The Church,” he says, has no second baptism to give, and so she ran'
not pronounce him (who sins after baptism) altogether free from his past sins.
There are but two periods of absolute cleansing, baptism and the day of judg
ment.”—-Letter to Bishop of Oxford, p. 93, 4lh edition.)
If, “ after having been washed once for all in Christ’s blood, we again sin,
there is no more such complete absolution in this life—no restoration to the
same undisturbed security iu which God bad by baptism placed ns.”—(See
also Tract No. 80, p. 46 )


mortal sins; although in the case of those who have committed
“ mortal” sin after baptism, he has not been able to hit upon a
method half so sure and satisfactory as the “ penances,” and
“ indulgences” of Rome. In fact, Dr. Pusey does not see his
way clear to any remedy. The doubt and the anguish are
part of “ the bitterness of the ancient medicine.”*
Again, with their peculiar views of the exclusive preroga-
tives of the episcopally-ordained Priest, they deny the validity
of all baptism but their own; and in defiance of the law of
their own Church, and of decency, charity and common sense,
often refuse to inter an infant who has not passed under their
own patent process of regeneration. The consequence is, that
they throw doubt (and many of them do not scruple to avow
it) on the final state of the myriads of unbaptized infants.f
Whether they are, as some of the Fathers believed, neither
happy nor miserable—consigned to a state of joyless apathy,
or condemned to eternal suffering—we are all, it seems, in the
dark. We may hope the best, but that is all the comfort that
can be given us. To a Christian contemplating this world of
sorrow, it has ever been one of the most delightful sources of
consolation, that the decree which involved even infancy in the
sentence of death, has converted a great part of the primeval
curse into a blessing and has peopled heaven with myriads of
immortals, who, after one brief pang of unremembered sor-
row, have laid down for ever the burdens of humanity. It
has been the dear belief of the Christian mother, that the pro-
visions of the great spiritual economy are extended to the in-
fant whom she brought forth in sorrow, and whom she com-
mitted to the dust with a sorrow still deeper; that he will
assuredly welcome her at the gates of Paradise, arrayed in
celestial beauty, and radiant with a cherub’s smile. But all
these gloriously sustaining hopes must be overcast in order to
keep the mystical power of “regeneration” exclusively in the
hands of the Episcopal Clergy. All charity, all decency, all
• u What the distinction between lesser and greater, venial and mortal
tins? or if mortal sins be “ sins against the Decalogue/' as St. Augustine
says, are they only (he highest degrees of those sins, or are they the lower
also ? This question, as it is a very distressing one, J would gladly answer
if I could or dared. But as with regard to die sin against the Holy Ohost,
so here, also. Scripture is silent. I certainly, much as I have laboured, have
not yet been able to decide any thing. Perhaps it is therefore concealed, lest
man’s anxiety to bold onward to the avoiding of all sin should wax cold. But
now, since the degree of venial iniquity, [what is venial iniquity f] if perse-
vered in, is unknown, the eagerness to make progress by more instant contin-
uance in prater is quickened, and the caiefuliuss*to make holy friends of
the mammon of unrighteousness is not despised.’'—Pusey, cited by M'Hvaine.
See also Letter to Bishop of Oxford, p. 83, 4th edition.
t “ But I will rather suggest the consideration of the vastness of the power
claimed by the Church—a power which places it almost on a level with God
himself— the powerof forgiving sins by wiping them out in baptism— of irons'
/erring souls from Hell to Heaven, without admitting a doubt of it, as when
“ baptized infants /' it is said, “ dying before they commit actual sin, are un-
doubtedly saved.”—Sewell’s Christian Morals, p. 274. .


humanity, as well as common sense, are to be outraged, rather
than the power of conferring some inconceivable “ nonentity”
should be abandoned.
As to the Eucharist; if the doctrine of the Oxford School,
especially according to the latest “ development,” be any tiring
less mysterious or more intelligible than the Romish doctrine
of Transubstanlialion, we confess we cannot perceive it. That
there is some great ineffable change wrought by the formulas
of consecration, we are expressly told, but what, is not ex-
plained.*
On the alleged mysterious efficacy attending the administra-
tion of the Sacraments at the hand of the privileged priesthood,
(what their personal character is, it appears, little matters,)
similar observations may be made as upon the mysterious
“gift” handed down in ordination from hand to hand? What
is it ? Is it any thing which can be distinguished from a non-
entity—seeing that it is not cognizable by sense, consciousness,
or experience? Take baptismal regeneration, for example.
What is imparted—what effected? If any change be pro-
duced, it surely ought to be stupendous, in order to justify the
application of such a term; and it surely ought to be moral ,
for moral excellence is the design of the whole institute. Yet
we look in vain for any such effects, or rather for any effects at
all. Millions of the infants thus annually regenerated, pre-
sent in all respects just the very same qualities—physical and
moral—with those who have not been subjected to the process.
Visibly do they grow up, neither wiser, nor holier, nor better
than the less fortunate infant who has been subjected to the
• See Mr. Newman on Art. XXVIII., Number Ninety.
“Ai regards the Holy Communion,” says even Mr. Gladstone, “our
Church does not feel that the solemn words of the institution of the
Eucharist are adequately, that is, scripturally, represented by any explanation
which resolves them into mere figure j and she fears lest the faithful be thus
defrauded of their consolation, and of their spiritual food.”—Gladstone's
Church Principles, p. 161,
Again—“ There is no one passage in the New Testament which alludes to
the Eucharist at alt, which is otherwise than most naturally consistent (to
say the least) with the idea of its mysterious and miraculous character.”—
British Critic, July 1842, p. 73.
Again—“ What is the meaning of the popular phrase, * the age of miracles!'
It there all the difference, or, indeed, any thing more than the difference be-
tween things seen and unseen, (a difference worth nothing in faith’s esti-
mate) —between healing the sick and converting the soul—raising man’s
natural body and raising him in baptism from the death of sin ! Is the won-
der wrought at the marriage of Cana a miracle, amt the change which the
holy elements undergo, as consecrated by the priest, and received by the
faithful, no miracle simply because the one was perceptible to the natural eye,
while the other is discerned by the spiritual alone I’’— British Critic, vol.
xxvii. pp. ‘259, *260.
This transcends all. We always thought that the very essence of a miracle
consisted in its appealing to the senses of those in whose _ presence it is
wrought. “It is wrought in their presence,” virtually says this writer, “ and
is as wonderful a miracle as raising the dead, only you cannot see it—a dif-
ference worth nothing in faith’s estimate.” For similar doctrine see Tract
85, p. 95.


unavailing baptism of the Presbyterian minister, or to no
baptism at all. Here an amazing spiritual revolution, to
describe which metaphor and hyperbole are exhausted, is sup-
posed to be effected, which yet leaves absolutely no traces
behind it —whether physical or moral. Nothing less than
Omnipotence is introduced to effect that, of which, when
effected, we have not the slightest evidence that it has been
effected!
■ Such mysteries as these, if received at all, must be received
just in the same manner, and for similar reasons, with the doc-
trine of Transubstantiation; and we cannot wonder that those
who have no scruple in receiving the one, should adopt views
indefinitely near the other. In both cases we are called upon
to believe that a stupendous change has, in millions of in-
stances, been effected without any evidence that there has
been any, or rather with all the evidence that our nature is
susceptible of, that there has been none. In Transubstantia-
tion, we are commanded to believe that a great physical change
has been wrought, of which our senses give us no information;
and, in baptismal regeneration, that a great spiritual change
has been wrought, of which both consciousness and experience
give us just as little.
But, as was said of Apostolical succession, so we may say of
the “sacramental doctrine’’ connected with it, that no mere
arguments can be more conclusive against it, than the feeling
that it shocks the whole spirit of the Christian institute.
3. But perhaps this consciousness is more strongly felt in
relation to the views held by this School respecting the Church
than in relation to any other subject. According to these men,
the Church of Christ is visible and one ; and as the Church
can exist only where “ the gospel is truly preached, and its
ordinances are duly administered,” while these are exclusively
and inseparably connected with an episcopally-ordained clergy;
they deny the name and privileges of the Church to every
community, in which such a ministry is not found, and as
freely concede them wherever it is.* Apparently, scarcely any
pravity of doctrine, any flagitiousness of practice, is sufficient
• “ Do not we hover about our ancient home, the home of Cyprian and
Athanasius, without the heart to take up our abode in it, yet afraid to quit
(he sight of it; boasting of our Episcopacy, yet unwilling to condemn sepa-
ratism ; claiming a descent from the Apostles, yet doubting of the gifts at*
tending it; and trying to extend the limit* of the Church for the admission
of Wesleyan* and Presbyterians , while we profess to be exclusively primi-
tive? Alas, is not this to witness against ourselves like coward sinners, who
hope to serve the world without giving up God’s service?” —" Whatever be
our private differences with the Roman Catholics, we may join with them in
condemning Socinians, Baptists, Independents, Quakers, and the like.
But God forbid that we should ally ourselves with the offspring of heresy and
schism, in our contest with any branches of the Holy Church which main-
tain the foundation, whatever may be their incidental corruption* I’*—
(Oxford Tracts, vol. II.; Records of the Church, No. XXV. pp. 3,8, 9.)


to annul ibis title where these channels of preternatural grace
are found —no purity of doctrine, no blamelessness of conduct,
can justify its application to a community in which they are
not found. But as this Church is also one, it might be sup-
posed an insuperable objection to the Romish, Greek, and
English Churches—which are acknowledged to be “ branches”
of the true Church, but which all exist in a state of professed
separation from one another, nay, which have reciprocally
anathematized one another —must be proved to be one. One
would imagine that unitv in any community must imply
unity of government and jurisdiction; intercommunion of
its members, or at the very least, perfectly friendly relations
between its several “branches.” And so Mr. Gladstone seems
at first to admit; but he afterwards discpvers, when it is con-
venient to discover it, that union in the Church by no means
requires as one of its essential conditions, “the conscious-
ness (?) and actual or possible communication of the persons
united.”
It would sadly perplex any ordinary understanding to com-
prehend how communities can be one which are not only hos-
tile, but mutually excommunicate. If unity may still be
preserved in such a case, it would really seem that there might
be devised some reasonable way in which Episcopalians and
Presbyterians might be regarded as one. An unsophisticated
mind would imagine, that if unity is not impossible amongst
those who respectively acknowledge the Thirty-nine Articles
and the Tridentine Decrees, it should be not altogether impos-
sible for those who acknowledge the Thirty-nine Articles and
the Confession of Faith, to find one Church large enough to
hold both. But such a man would only show his ignorance of
theology. The terms of communion must be wide enough to
embrace the whole Churches of Greece and Rome, for they
have the Apostolical succession; but not a single Lutheran
or Presbyterian community, for they have it not
Hence the fraternal yearnings of our Anglicans towards the
Greek and Romish Churches. Hence the language recently-
quoted, “ that it is evident at first sight that there is much
grace and many high gifts” in each of these communions—
hence the declaration, equally arrogant and insulting, cited in
the preceding note from the Oxford Tracts—hence the lamen-
tations over the Reformation as an untoward event, and all
but “ a fearful judgment”*—hence their eagerness to show,
though at the peril of exposing their own Church to the
• British Critic, No. 59, p. I.' H We trust, of coarse, that active and
visible anion with the see of Home is not of the essence of a Church; at the
same time we are deeply conscious that in lacking it, far from asserting a
right, we forego a great privilege. Home has imperishable claims on our
gratitude, and, were it so ordered, on oar deference.... for her sins, and
our own, we are estranged from her in presence, not |n heart.—/6W, p. 3.


charge of having been guiltv of a detestable schism, that the
differences between England' and Rome are far from being so
momentous as those between Ahglicans and other Protestants
—hence it is that we see them stretching themselv es half over
the gulf which separates them from Popery, to the infinite ha-
zard of toppling into it, for the purpose of touching only the
tips of the fingers of their new friends and allies. But it
will not do ; as long as the separation itself is continued, their
arguments will all be futile. Either that separation was justi-
fiable or not; if it was, then are the Churches of Rome and
England two communities, not one—and Rome heretical; if
not, still they are two communities, and not one —and that of
England schismatical. If the latter be the fact, let those who
maintain these views act like men of sense and honor—return
to the bosom of the Romish Church, and not only subscribe,
but carry out, the following declaration of the editors of the
Ecclesiastical Almanac for the present year: “It is by the
constant action of this principle, as upon our theological opi-
nions so upon our ritual and ceremonial, and indeed upon
every branch of our religious life, that we may hope to prepare
ourselves for that union for which we sigh, and which we are
so far privileged as to be permitted to hope for, and even
to begin to look forward to. For this who would not
pray and labour as for an end, before which all other objects
of desire sink into infinite insignificance ? For these poor pages,
at least, the motto has long been chosen, and must be year by
year repeated. God grant it may ever be its sole aim to
HASTEN THAT UNION, AND RENDER OURSELVES WORTHY OF
ENTERING INTO IT.”*
Meantime, is it not wonderful that those who are astute
enough to discover that the Romish, Greek, and English
Churches all form constituent parts of One Visible Church ,
merely in virtue of holding Apostolic succession and kindred
Church principles, should not recoil at the bigotry of un-
churching all the Reformed Churches of the Continent—the
Church of Scotland, and the communities of dissenting Pro-
testants ! But here, again, the Oxford men are but carrying
out their views consistently, however absurdly. The Bishop
of London, indeed, naturally shocked at the uncharitableness
of the above views, has, in his “ Three Sermons on the Church.”
entered his protest against them. We only regret that he has
protested on principles which, whatever respect we may feel
for his charity, leave us little room to congratulate him cither
on his consistency or his logic. It is hopeless to contend against
the Oxford men on the principles which his Lordship has laid
down. He does not escape from one of the real difficulties in
which the hypothesis of Church principles involves him, and
• Ecclesiastical Almanac, 1843, p. 5.


is, in effect equally uncharitable, For how does this Prelate
argue ? He affirms that ordinarily , Episcopacy, and an Epis-
copally-ordained ministry, are essential to the constitution of
a true Church; hut hesitating at the thought of consigning
all the foreign Reformed Churches to “ the uncovenanted mer-
cies of God,” as no part of the true Church of Christ, he frames
for them a special exception, on the ground that their indi-
vidual members have no choice, (there being no Episcopal
Church to which they can join themselves;) while he consigns
the Dissenting communities at home to the said “ uncove-
nanted mercies,” or to no mercies at all, (as the case may be,)
because it is their duty to join the Church of England. How
they can do so, if they conscientiously believe they ought not;
and whether his Lordship, in saying they can and ought, be
not constituting himself a judge of conscience, it may he
wise in him to consider. But let that pass. It is plain, that
on his Lordship’s principles the foreign Reformed Churches are
no true Churches; for though it is true that individual mem-
bers of those Churches may not have had an opportunity of
availing themselves of the inestimable advantages of “aposto-
lical succession;” the churches themselves (of which, and of
which alone, his Lordship is professedly speaking,) considered
as entire communities, have had the opportunity any time
within the last three centuries. They are, therefore, as com-
munities, no true Churches, however charitably his Lordship
may be disposed “ to hope” respecting individual members.
But we will further try his Lordship’s test by an additional
instance, which he has done wisely to keep out of sight,
although it lay at his very door. We ask, Vls the Church
of Scotland a true Church?” If his Lordship answer in
the affirmative, it must be for some reason: it cannot be be-
cause she embraces Episcopacy, for she repudiates it; it can-
not be because she could not have effected re-union with the
Episcopal Church, had she been so pleased;—nay, she has not
only had Episcopacy offered, but thrust upon her, and has,
doubtless, deeply sinned in wilfully rejecting it. It can then
only be on the ground of her being established. But then a
totally different criterion of a true Church is at once admitted;
will his Lordship affirm that every Church established is a true
Church? If, on the other hand, he says that the Scottish
Church is not a true Church, then, for aught we can see, he
may just as well go the whole length of his censured, but more
consistent brethren of Oxford. We will submit another case
to his Lordship, still near home. Let us cross the Irish Chan-
nel. Is the Romish Church there a true Church, and en-
titled to the allegiance of the people ?if not, it appears that
it is possible that the criterion of an Episcopal ministry may
fail; if it be, then it is at least as much entitled to a rightful


obedience as the Anglican Church. If his Lordship says, No,
because it is not established, he again introduces a criterion of
a true Church inconsistent with his theory. Such are the in-
consistencies in which this Prelate is involved. We thank him
for his charity; but we cannot be content to hoodwink our-
selves to palpable absurdities and inconsistencies, even in order
to be charitable ; and can only regret that he did not “ find
out a more excellent way” of rebuking that bigotry at which
he is naturally shocked, and which we once more say, is a
stronger argument against the errors of the Oxford school
than any, or all besides. God forbid that we should deny the
member of any community—Episcopalian, Presbyterian, or
Independent, who holds the essential doctrines of Christianity,
and is manifestly animated by its spirit—to be a member of tile
true Church! We feel that whom we dare not deny to he
a “ Christian,” we dare not deny to be a member of Christ’s
Church. We feel that the saying of Robert Hall commends
itself at once to common sense, to the highest reason, and to
the noblest instincts of our moral nature —“ he who is good
enough for Christ, is good enough for me.”
Views so extraordinary as those on which we have com-
mented—so unsupported by reason, and so destructive of charity
—ought surely to be authenticated by the clearest utterances
of Revelation. Even then, it may perhaps be said that their
reception would present greater difficulties than ever yet
troubled an infidel; but strange to say, it is admitted by their
very advocates, that one of the greatest difficulties connected
with these doctrines is the primd facie evidence of Scripture
against them ; that they are not at all events on the surface
nor explicitly stated, but are to be developed out of mysterious
hints, and ambiguous whispers.* Further, the very texts on
which they exhaust every art of exegetical torture to make
them speak their mind sound, when thus interpreted, so cold,
constrained, and frigid, that they acknowledge, again and
again, that these doctrines cannot be established by Scripture
alone; and they therefore discreetly call in the authoritative
voice of tradition.
4. It is, then, a further dogma of this School, that the Scrip-
tures are not the sole, or a perfect rule of faith ; that they are
to be supplemented by tradition; that they furnish at best but
the germ of an imperfectly developed Christianity—which is
to be found full blown and perfect somewhere, (no one can tell
where,) in the third, or fourth, or fifth, or sixth century, or
some century still later; and that the Fathers have much to
tell us of undoubted apostolical authority, which the Apostles
themselves have lailed'to tell.
Infinite are the disputes which such a theory instantly gives
* No. 85, passim.


rise to. In essence and principle it in nowise differs from that
of Rome, (for it affirms both a written and an unwritten word;)
it differs only in the pleasant and gratuitously perplexing ad-
dition, that it is impossible to assign the period within which
the circle of Catholic verities may be supposed complete—the
period when the slowly developed church-system became ripe,
but had not yet become rotteu. The unity of faith which is
thus sought, is farther off than ever; for the materials of dis-
cord are enlarged a thousand-fold.
1. There is the dispute as to whether there be any such
authoritative rule of faith at all; and this alone promises to
be an endless controversy.
2. Even if we were to admit the possible existence of such
a rule, the uncertainty in its application would preclude the
possibility of its being of any use.
3. Even if men in general are told that they need not en-
quire for themselves, hut just receive what their “ authorised
guides” choose to tell them, private judgment is still pressed
with insuperable difficulties; for alas, we find that the “ au-
thorised guides” themselves, in the exercise of their private
judgment, have arrived at very different conclusions as to
what is Catholic verity, and what is not. It is very easy for
Mr. Newman to talk in magniloquent phrase of that much
abused abstraction, the “ Churchand to represent his sys-
tem of “ Church principles ” as one and complete in every age.
But when we enquire which is that Church, what are the doc-
trines it has delivered as the complete circle of verily, and
who are its infallible interpreters, we find those whom these
authorised guides proclaim -equally authorised, at endless va-
riance;—Romanists, Greeks, and Anglicans, differing in judg-
ment from each other and from themselves. In a word, we
find the “Church” is just Mr. Newman or Dr. Pusey—not
unbecomingly disguised in the habilaments of a somewhat
antiquated lady, and uttering their “ private judgments” as
veritable oracles. 'What can one of these “guides” say to “a
brother guide,” who declares, “ I adopt your principles, and
it appears to me and many others, that on the same grounds
on which you contend for the apostolical succession—that is,
on the authority of the ancient Church—l must contend for
the celibacy of the clergy ? Or to another who declares, “on
our common principles I think there is good reason to admit
the invocation of saints, the worship of images, the doctrine
of the efficacy of holy relics, the monastic institute, to be of
apostolical origin ? Or to another, “it appears to me that
the doctrine of purgatory is but a development of the doctrine
which justifies prayers for the dead? Or to another, “you
will not go beyond such and such a century in determining
your Catholic orthodoxy; I think the limit ought to be fixed
c


a century later, or two centuries, or three ?” What can he
reply ? He may perhaps say, “We can show when your doc-
trines came in.” “ An!” he replies, so it appears to you ;
but it appears to me, that ou the same principles another per-
son may show when your favorite doctrines came in ; for I
do nothing more than adopt your principles of “ expansion ’’
and “ development ” of improving “ hints,” of harmonising
apparent contradictions, and so on; and my doctrines are thus
brought out as clearly as those for which you contend. There
is no greater apparent discrepancy between my favorite doc-
trine and those of the Fathers of the third century, than there
is between those you extract from the Fathers of the third
century and the Scriptures.” “ But we decide otherwise.”
“ But who are we ?” is the instant and scornful reply.
Such is, in fact, the inevitable course which the controversy
is taking; till at last thousands of Anglicans are contending
for the system of the fourth or fifth century, and even there
feel that their footing is insecure.
. This variety of result is inevitable. 1. The very elements
from which this Catholic system of theology is to be collected,
are in a great degree doubtful; —intermixed with forgeries;
disfigured by interpolations, erasures, mutilations; so that it
has transcended all mortal skill to settle the patristic canon.
2 What one man receives as genuine, another rejects as spu-
rious; and endless is the controversy as to which is right. 3.
The works themselves, spurious and genuine, are most formi-
dably voluminous, written in different languages, and each of
them dead. 4. They contain much of universally acknow-
ledged error, and a pleasing assemblage of obscurities and
contradictions. 5. Some are dark with curious subtleties, and
others as much disguised by rhetorical exaggerations. (!.
Owing to these and other circumstances, it is possible for very
different controvertists to prove from them very different con-
clusions, and to wage an interminable war of citations and
counter-citations. The Romanist brings forward a citation:
—“ you are to consider the rhetorical mode of reasoning of
these venerable men,” exclaims the Protestant. The Pro-
testant countercites—“ you are not to forget,” says the Ro-
manist, “ that it was said in the heat of controversy, when it
is so natural to deal in unlimited propositions.” The Ro-
manist is ready with another; “ the writing is not genuine—
most probably a forgery,” shouts the Protestant—all critics
allow it to have been at least grievously interpolated.” To a
fourth it is said, “itis an interpolation of the Greeks.” To a
fifth, “it was foisted in by the Latins.” To a sixth, “the
passage is corrupt; there are five different readings, and twice
as many renderings.” To a seventh, “it is a contradiction
only in appearance ; we can easily harmonize the statement.”


To an eighth, “ though it he only a hint, you are to consider
the “ reserve ” of the early “ Church.” To a ninth, “true, that
passage says so, but here is another from the same author, di-
rectly in the teeth of it;” and so on for ever.* Such is the
unity to which the guidance of tradition has ever led, and
will ever lead us; and of this the present controversies—the
goodly array of hooks which stand at the head of this article
—and the many others which might be added to them, afford
a signal and irrefragable proof. Unity! Babel itself is but a
faint image of this “ confusion of tongues.”
But the advocates of tradition profess to have discovered an
unfailing directrix in all difficulties, in the far-famed rule of
Vincentius Liriuensis —that we are to believe what has been
delivered every where, always, and by all: “ Quod sem-
per, QUOD ÜBIQUE, QUOD AB OMNIBUS TRADITUM EST.” This
rule sounds plausible, but on examination will be found to
involve, for reasons already hinted, most complicated difficul-
ties in its application ; and is about as serviceable as a certain
guide-post, which assured the traveller that when it was under
water, that road was impassable. This, however true, would
not prevent his being drowned before he made the discovery.
When we come to examine the rule, we find that if we take
it without limitations it is a manifest absurdity; and if we
take it with all the limitations it requires, it becomes as mani-
fest a nullity;—not to mention that, at the very least, it leaves
open the question, who is to determine what has been thus
delivered “ always, every where, and by all ?”—a question not
very easy of solution, when we reflect that both Romanists
and Anglicans profess to receive it, and yet reach widely dif-
ferent results.
But to consider the rule itself. We will not here refine, as
some have done, and say that it is ambiguously expressed :
that it may he so interpreted as to imply that we are to receive
all that has ever been delivered for truth; in a word, that we
are to believe error and truth, heresy and orthodoxy, contra-
dictions and paradoxes—such a creed as may well be sup-
posed too much for even a Montanist or a Marcionite. We
will take it for granted that it means, that that only is to he
received for Catholic verity which has been affirmed by all
conjointly, at all times, and every where. But taken even in
this sense, we have, at the very outset, a notable instance of
what is called reasoning in a circle. For when it is asked—
“ls the word 1 all’ to be taken absolutely ?” The answer is
* The Archbishop of Dublin has well illustrated this subject" The mass
of Christians are called on to believe and do what is essential to Christianity,
in implicit reliance on the reports of their respective pastors, as to w hat cer-
tain deep theological antiquarians have reported to them, respecting the r#r>
ports given by certain ancient Fathers, of the reports Current in their times,
concerning Apostolical usages and institution!."
c 3


—“ By no means.” “ Who are the ‘ all,’ then ?” Answer—
“ The Orthodox alone.” “ And who are the Orthodox ?”
“Those who hold what has been delivered by ‘all.’” This is
limitation the first. But now, let us suppose this difliculty
evaded by some subterfuge, and the authorities to which ap-
peal is to be made otherwise determined. We proceed to ask
then—does this rule mean, that whatever isdelivered for truth
must be expressly asserted by all whom the advocates of the
rule itself invest with a vote? Are we, for example, to look
for the whole circle of affirmed Catholic verities iu the
writings of each of the apostolical Fathers? “ Nomust be
the reply, “it is sufficient that they do not contradict them.
Their silence must be supposed to give consent.” To this it
might be replied, that this is at once to abandon the rule, or
rather to take for granted the very thing to be proved; while
we have a sufficient explanation of the silence of these
earliest Fathers in the fact, that it was impossible for them to
anticipate, and therefore to condemn all the absurd innova-
tions and corruptions which after ages would bring in. They
were no prophets; Clement could not anticipate the vagaries
of a Tertulliau, nor Polycarp predict those of an Origen ; any
more than Cranraer could have supposed that such a peculiar
logician as Mr. Newman would, at the distance of three cen-
turies, arise to prove that the Articles might be explained
away. This, then, is limitation the second. It is not neces-
sary that all that we are to believe should be expressly af-
firmed by all who are included in the circle of authorities ;
that is, we are to believe much which non ah omnibus Iradi-
turn est. But if the supposed argument drawn from their
silence be of any avail, then let us consider with what wea-
pons we are to combat the Romanist, who is continually
playing off against us this very stratagem. Why may not he
urge, on behalf of transubstantiation, (which undoubtedly for
many ages could boast the übigue et ab omnibus,) the same
apology for the silence or the ambiguous utterances of earlier
Fathers, as our Anglicans urge for many of those novelties
which are not to be found in the Apostolical Fathers? To
both or neither is the course open —to say that Christianity
was a gradually developed system ; that it does not appear
iu its perfect proportions till some ages after the Apostles had
gone to their rest; and that we are not to wonder that many
Catholic verities are very slightly noticed, or not at all, in the
earliest age. Thus these parties may endlessly refute each
other, but meantime, by that very dispute the boasted rule is
shown to be a nullity. But if we are to believe nothing but what
is affirmed nr all, at all times, everv where, then any one
of those whom they themselves challenge as orthodox, will do as
a standard as well as the rest —Clement of Rome, for example.


If they say, “True, but nevertheless there are many things
which, though he did not assert, he.would have asserted had
he written about them, or thought of it,” —this is again to
abandon the rule, and to substitute conjecture for it If it be
said, we imagine all believed these things, because later
writers generally testify they did, we again reply, this is to
imagine and not to prove, and will do as well for the Roman-
ists as for you; for of course each succeeding age will take
care to authenticate its own corruptions; and, right or wrong,
vouch for its predecessor. Thus, if we may believe the Pa-
pists, Peter was first Bishop of Rome; and if the Oxford
Tractists, prayer for the dead is an Apostolical tradition. But
we come to a third limitation. When we ask—“ But is it
true that the dissent on any point, on the part of any one of
those whom you deem in the main orthodox —as Clement of
Alexandria, for example—is sufficient to invalidate that ar-
ticle ?” The answer is—“ No, certainly;” but then what
becomes of your quod ab omnibus ? for there is hardly an
article, (if we except those great fundamental truths, which
we can at once extract from the Scriptures without any thanks
to these worthies) —there is hardly one of the opinions which
you peculiarly patronize but is denied by some of them. An-
swer —It is not necessary that Catholic verity be asserted by
all absolutely, but only by the ‘•'•greater part .” Limitation
the third; —set down, then, that omnes means the “greater
part” But we have not yet half done with the difficulties
of the rule; we here come to a curious problem of limits. It
is said that it is not necessary that each article of faith should
be admitted by all those who are included in the circle of
authorities, but only by the “ greater part ” Pray, how much
“ greater ”is this “ greater part ” to be ? Will a bare majo-
rity of one, or two, or three, or half a dozen, or half a score,
be sufficient? or if not, of how many? What is to be the
ratio of suffrages which shall determine that to be Catholic
truth, which otherwise would be no truth at all ? And if the
judgments of different men differ as to what this ratio ought
to be, (as they needs must, where there is nothing but caprice
to determine them,) —who is to be the judge as to whose
judgment is to be received ? Even supposing that impossible
point decided—who is to be the judge as to what opinions
have or have not the requisite majority of authoritities to back
them? But yet again, if a bare majority, or anything short
of unanimity, will be sufficient, are you prepared to receive
any of those doctrines or usages which are sustained by an
equal majority, with any one of those you enjoin upon our
belief? If so, this precarious rule will compel you to go
much further than you have hitherto gone—if not, you have
gone much too far. The doctrine of the Millenaries, now
universally abandoned, and explicitly condemned by you;


the administration of the Eucharist to infants; the celibacy
of the clergy; the monastic institute; superstitious reverence
for relics; the worship of the saints; the monkish miracles;
and what would be quite as hard for you to digest, the popu-
lar election of Bishops and their voluntary support, can plead
as large an amount of authority to sustain them, as many of
those tenets which you enjoin upon us. He who wishes to see
this subject fully handled may consult Mr. Isaac Taylor’s able
and elaborate work, entitled Ancient Christianity, on which
we shall presently offer a few remarks. He plies the Oxford
Tractistswith this argument very fairly, and shows, in our judg-
ment conclusively, that they are shut up to one of two courses;
either to develope their system much further, (for which, if we
may judge by recent demonstrations, they are fully prepared,)
or retrace their steps to the principles of the Reformation.
Once more; as it is a part of the rule that what we are to be-
lieve must have been not only universally received, but always,
that body of truth must have been as perfect in the earliest
times as the latest: there is, therefore, no occasion to go lower
than the first age —that is, to the Scriptures themselves, and
honestly to apply the rule to them. That the truth was sub-
sequently received by greater numbers, or was more widely
diffused, is nothing to the purpose, and does not affect its in-
tegrity. The base of a pyramid may be enlarged; but as
every section of the pyramid parallel to it, cuts off a precisely
similar pyramid, so if the body of doctrine we are to receive
has been always the same—it was just the same in the Apos-
tolic age as in the fifth century, or in our own, and we may
as well stop there. Thus a perfectly fair application of this
much-vaunted rule, issues most unexpectedly, but most le-
gitimately, in allowing us to defer to the exclusive authority
of Scripture; and with this fresh limitation we are willing to
abide by it. The Apostles shall be our omnes, their writings
our übique, and their age our semper. “ But,” says the Angli-
can, “ though it is true that the body of truth has always been
the same, and is therefore entire in the Scriptures, it is not on
the surface there—it is five hundred fathoms deep—it must
be developed; they contain but hints which require expansion.”
Jn the first place this is begging the very question; and in the
next place, it is just what the Romanists tell us, who, adopting
the very same rule, and using no greater artifice of expansion,
“ expand” the system of the Scriptures into the system of Trent.
But further still; will these imitators of Rome, in borrow-
ing Rome’s own rule, apply it fairly to alt ayes of the Church ?
Will they take the semper absolutely ? “No, by no means,”
is the reply; “for how should we confute the Romanists, who
truly allege that during many ages doctrines have been pro-
fessed, universally and by all, which we deny?” What then,
we ask, is your semper ? Within what limits is always to be


confined? “That question does not admit of an answer,”
says Mr. Newman; “we had better not perplex ourselves
with it: ‘ the era of purity ’ cannot he determined within less
than 400 years; It was not ‘ much earlier than the Council
of Sardica, a.d. 347!’ nor so late as the second Nicene
Council, a.d. 787.” What a curious solution of a his-
torical problem, which brings us somewhere within 400 years
of the truth, and leaves the rule of Vincentius of uncertain
application, within that very period in which the doctrines
and practices were developed, on which the very gist of the
controversy depends.' However, as limitation the last, let it
be noted that semper means not always, as some foolish people
imagine; but some time between 347 and 787 years.
Thus the rule which Vincentius Lirinensis has delivered
with so much gravity and solemnity, amounts to this—that we
are religiously to receive all doctrines, which some unknown
persons have, in some undetermined places, delivered for
truth at some uncertain periods! But the rule becomes yet
more flagrantly absurd, as less epigrammatically delivered by
himself. It then sinks into the most contemptible of truisms;
for he takes care, as Daille has remarked, to fence his propo-
sition with so many limitations, that if they could but be all
complied with, he must be an infidel indeed who would refuse
assent to it He tells us in his own inimitable style, that “he
speaks not of any authors, but only of such as having piously,
wisely, and constantly lived, preached, and persevered in the
Catholic faith and communion, obtained the favor at length,
either to die faithfully in Christ, or else had the happiness of
being crowned with martyrdom for Christ’s sake;” he further
adds, “that we are to receive as undoubtedly true, certain,
and definitive, whatsoever all the aforesaid authors, or at least
the greater part of them, have clearly, frequently, and con-
stantly affirmed, with an unanimous consent, receiving, re-
taining, and delivering it over to others, as it were jointly,
and making up all of them but one common and unanimous
council of doctors.” Whence it appears, as Daille has fully
shown, and not without a touch of humour unwonted in him,
that “ all that Vincentius here promises us is no more than
this, that we may be sure not to be deceived, provided that we
believe no other doctrines save what are holy and true.
This promise of his is like that which little children are wont
to make, when they tell you that you shall never die if you
but always eat.” So that to the enquiry—“ What is the
Catholic faith V’ it appears that we are at liberty to reply that
it is the doctrine of those who have “ piously, wisely, and
tonstandy lived, preached, and maintained to the death—the
Catholic faith;” or, at all events, of the greater part of such.
A truly cautious conclusion!
Nothing can be more ridiculous than the extravagant claims


which our modern lovers of antiquity prefer on behalf of the
Fathers. It is true that Mr. Newman, by way of obviating
the argument arising from their unspeakable weaknesses and
extravagances, assure us that it is hot their individual autho-
rity, but their concurrent testimony, to any point of doctrine
and ritual, which sanctions it as of Apostolical origin. But
then, as it is difficult to say how far it may be necessary to
draw upon these holy men, or how far their poor credit will
serve to give currency to the preposterous doctrines for which
they are made responsible, it is as well to accredit as much of
their worthless paper as possible. If there be a concurrence of
a majority, their authority is then infallible; if only of a con-
siderable number, the most egregious puerility ceases to be
such ; while the opinion only of one, though it may appear
downwright craziness to common sense, is to be treated with
silent veneration. Throughout the Oxford Tracts, and more
especially in Number Eighty-Nine, (On the Mysticism of the
Fathers) —a besotting aud besotted veneration is constantly
inculcated towards them.* Many of their most extravagant
absurdities are not merely palliated, but lauded:—even their
inimitable vagaries in the way of allegorical interpretation,
are seriously recommended to our devout attention ; and we
are told to enquire whether we have not lost much by re-
nouncing the system which led to them. The tone of rever-
ence, which is every W'bere maintained and enjoyed, is
evidently designed to perplex the understanding of the igno-
rant and timid, (an artifice in common use with this School,)
and to foster the belief that the Fathers are too sacred to be
dealt with as merely human authors. No matter how childish,
how ludicrous the fancies which provoke our laughter, these
writers shake their heads and say, “ Beware how you despise
things that may be sacred.” f
The author of the Tract in question is even so infatuated as
to express his regret that the selections from the Fathers to
• ** A devout mind will probably at once acknowledge on which side, in
the present question, the peril of erring will be greatest. The question is
like that of the general evidences of religion ; a person who would go into
it with advantage, should be imbued beforehand with a kind of natural piety,
which will cause him to remember ail along, that perhaps when he comes ti>
the end of his enquiry, he will find that God whs all the while really there. '*
—(Oxford Tracts, No. 89, p. 5.)
t After vindicating rhe patristic system of allegorical and mystical inter-
pretation as a sjsteni, and fearlessly justifying it in some of the most extra-
vagant instances—as, for example, in those absurd fancies in which the
Fathers persisted in discovering types of the cross and baptism in every
mention of wood and water in the Old Testament—as in the rods which
Jacob stuck in the troughs before Laban’s sheep, or the staff with which he
passed over the river Jordan, or in the ladder which he saw in a dream—(on
which the Tractist actually makes the following inconceivably silly remark,
“ This example is not irrelevant, since a ladder is part, so to speak, of the
furniture of the cross;”)—after all this, pursued at great length and with
most edifying solemnity—the W’riter makes this frank statement, —** Some
examples have been given above: examples purposely selected, many of
them, as the likeliest to startle and scandalize a mere modern reader; and


which the people have been occasionally treated, are such as
to give the reader a too favorable opinion of them; that is,
that the Editors of such selections have exercised some dis-
cretion, and extracted only the better parts of these authors.
“ But the very circumstance,” says he, “of such selections
being made with a view to modern prejudices, shows that
they can do no more than palliate the evil. When a reader
passes from specimens of that kind to the whole body of any
Father’s writings, he is apt to feel as if he had been unfairly
, dealt with, and is inclined rather to be the more intolerant of
the many things which he is sure to meet with, alien to his
former tastes and habits of thought.”* He proceeds, therefore,
to expose more freely the (in popular opinion) more question-
able “ sayings and doings ’’ of the Fathers; in the hope, no
doubt, that the public, on becoming familiarized with, may be
enamoured of them; and this Tract, in which so much that is
whimsical and delirious in the Fathers is not only apologized
for, but cited with applause, may be considered as a sort of
tentative experiment—a test of the patience and stupidity of
the English people.-)-
We, too, snare in the author’s hopes, that the public may no
longer be restricted to the more “ select ’’ portions of the
Fathers. We differ widely from him.in our anticipations of
the effect of throwing open the doors of this storehouse of
learning. We are convinced that the plain good sense of the
English people would immediately resent the attempt to blind
and delude them; and reject with abhorrence that idolatry of
the Fathers, to which they are invited to degrade themselves.
We thank the Oxford divines for having projected and partly-
executed a “ Library of the Fathers,” and heartily bid them
go on. The only thing we fear is, lest they should not give us
something, it is hoped, has been done towards showing, that in those cases,
at least, the holy Fathers well knew what they were about ('0; that they
proceeded in interpreting Scripture on the sorest ground—the warrant of
Scripture itself in analogous cases.”—No. 89, p. 40.)
” Bnt in order to appreciate rightly the Fathers’ reasoning in such places,
we ought, of course, to recollect, that Its force lies in the accumulation of
instances. It is not necessary that each anecdote, taken by itself should be
a complete type of the evangelical truth, at which the sum of the whole
points : e.g. though a person questioned the distinct allusion to anv Christian
mystery, in the account, taken singly, of Jacob using rods to influence the
breed of Laban’s cattle, still it must come in as one among many examples,
to show how constantly the Almighty employed that material, which was to
be the instrument of redemption, as a conveyance of temporal blessings to
his chosen people v !!)”
• No 89, p. 8.
t “ It is a subject,” he says, “ which scholars in general have, perhaps,
been apt to treat over lightly, not to say profanely; so that, in speaking of
it, a person Insensibly falls into the apologetic tone ; but the mote we really
come to know and think of it, the more deeply, perhaps, shall we feel, that
even that tone is inexcusable presumption, compared with what would be-
come us in making mention of those who come nearest the Apostles, and
had, in greatest perfection, the mind of Ghtist.*’—(No. S 9, p. 38.)
c 5


those unique specimens of madness and folly, which the pa-
tristic literature supplies. If they will not, we trust that
others will. It will be easy to furnish a “ Supplement ” to
the “ Library ; ” and we confidently anticipate that we shall
be able to say of this appeal to the Fathers, what Chilling-
worth says of a certain argument of his opponent; “ though
it may seem to do you great service for the present, yet you
will repent the time that ever you urged it against us.” VVe
are convinced that nothing more is needed than the indiscri-
minate exposure of an impartial sample of the works of these
unparalleled writers to the popular gaze, to obliterate that
feeling of traditional reverenca with which they are regarded.
The drunken Helots never taught the Spartans a more whole-
some lesson of temperance than the inimitable antics of these
holy men would teach the present age the folly of deferring
to them as our spiritual guides; and still more of investing
them under any conditions with the authority of Scripture.
It is impossible, however, to help wondering at the infatuation
implied in thus throwing open to public gaze the “ treasures ”
of the Fathers. These writers had better by half adhere to
their wiser maxims of “ reserve in the communication of re-
ligious knowledge.” But, whatever be the motive, we rejoice
at the step they have taken. It will be singular should they
in this way become the iconoclasts of their own idols, and, by
a sort of righteous retribution, the reformers of their own
errors. The task of freely exposing the errors and absurdities
of the Ancient Church, has in a certain degree been performed
by Mr. Taylor in his “ Ancient Christianity,” on which we
must here offer a few remarks. The work has more than the
author’s usual excellences, and fewer of his characteristic de-
fects. There is less of the indistinct haze and magniloquent
common-place, which are too often found in his other writings;
while the earnestness of controversy has certainly improved
his manner —leaving him less leisure for the false glare and
tplmdida villa, which so commonly taint his style. Here, how-
ever, as elsewhere, he is often exceedingly prolix: of simple
energy, of the art of saying much in few words, he seems to
have but a faint idea. But these are small matters; and it is
a duty to notice some others which are not trivial. One is the
almost offensive egotism by which he has stated his claims to
be considered nearly sole champion in this great cause;
another is the perilous concessions which, in his first Number,
he was induced to make, and which he has since, in almost
every page, been compelled virtually to retract. As to the
first; it is amusing to find him cutting off first one body of
religionists, and then another—some parties in the Church and
all out of it—as quite incapable of encountering champions
of such redoubled learning, and all but invincible prowess, as


the new Knights of Oxford ; and then modestly naming
himself as one who may be deemed not insufficiently equipped
for this glorious adventure. He lays great stress not only
upon his familiarity with patristic literature, but upon his
having access to a complete collection of the Fathers! We
have no doubt that there are many men, both in the Church
and out of it, who have a knowledge of this peculiar species
of literature quite sufficient to qualify them to take part in
that good work in which Mr. Taylor is engaged; and we
know that access to the Fathers is not altogether a singular
privilege. Whether he has assumed this tone from an un-
conscious tendency to magnify the importance of cherished
and solitary studies, or whether from a desire to impress his
readers with a'deep conviction of the difficulty of the achieve-
ment which he proposed to himself, we know not; and most
assuredly we should not have alluded to the topic, were it not
that it tends to strengthen the delusion which the tone of the
Oxford Tractists was all along calculated to produce, that they
were monopolists of some peculiar sources of information, and
that none but persons of the profoundest erudition could be
presumed to be in possession even of the data on which to
form an opinion of the soundness or unsoundness of their
views. This we must be permitted to designate sheer delusion.
It is true that patristic literature had been little studied by the
mass of educated persons, but it was from an impression (and
a correct impression, too) of its general worthlessness. Nor
were the data on which that opinion had gradually diffused
itself scanty or insufficient. Though the Oxford Tract writers
insinuated that that impression was the result of ignorance,
and suffered themselves to speak contemptuously of those who
had not merely a knowledge of such writers as Chillingworth
and Daille * but had studied the Fathers quite long enough to
convince them that they were not worth studying longer;—
though they thought it a sufficient answer to a Whately or a
Shuttleworth, to insinuate that they were mere sciolists in pa-
tristic literature, because they had been too wise to waste life
in reading little or nothing else; yet is it quite certain that
every nook of this vast field'had been explored again and
again, and the results fully given to the world, in works which
were written long before Dr. Pusey and Mr. Newman were
born, and which will be read long after they are forgotten.
More, especially is it true, that, in relation to that dogma of
the new School now under consideration, ample materials for
forming a judgment were long since provided in works on the
* Even Daille himself does not escape the same sort of depreciation. It
is (has the writer of the Tract on “ Mysticism” allows himself to speak of
that troly learned man :—“ By his skill in rhetorical arrangement, and by
a certain air of thorough command of his subject, which he has been very
successful in assuming,' he became at once the standard author for all who
look that side of the question.”—(No. 89, p, I.}


was uo school-boy; Srillingfleet and Hall were not to be des-
pised ; —all these and many others had learning quite equal to
that of any of the authors of the Oxord Tracts; and in powers
of reasoning and argument, and, we will add, a lore of truth,
were immeasurably their superiors. Mr. Taylor is indeed
pleased to say, that “ Whatever analogies may seem to con-
nect the doctrines of the Oxford Tracts with Popery, the dif-
ference between the two is such, as that those must certainly
be disappointed who, hastily snatching up the rusty swords
and spears of the Reformers, rush, so accoutred, upon the
Oxford divines.”* But we have no occasion to confute this
statement; for the progress of the controversy, and a more
correct appreciation of its bearings, have compelled him to
confute it himself. “By explicit avowals or implied approba-
tion, or in the mode of delicate allusion, these writers,” says
he, “in their various publications, have at length taken to
themselves every thing in Romanism which is of earlier date
than the close of the fifth century; ”f and he further tells us,
“ Romanism, and nothing else, has become the subject of the
great argument which the Oxford Tract writers have origina-
ted. Candour now scarcely demands that the alleged dis-
tinction between the Anglo-Catholic Church System and the
faith and worship of the Tridentine Council should any longer
be much regarded. This difference, be it what it may, affects
no fundamental principle.’’^;
We wonder that Mr. Taylor did not see this from the first.
Though particular points disputed between the Romanists and
Protestants are different from those in question between the
Anglicans and their opponents, yet the general principles in
controversy are the very same; and the great dogma now
under consideration—the authority of the Fathers, and the
value of Tradition—had often been subjected to the fullest in-
vestigation. The vagueness of the rule of Vincentius Lirinensis,
and the uncertainty of tradition, are as clearly asserted and
demonstrated by Jeremy Taylor, (a writer in some respects
fondly claimed by the Oxford school,) as they could be by
Isaac Taylor. But further; we affirm that the very same
views which Mr. Taylor maintains, had in substance been
given to the world in works which had no special reference to
the Popish controversy. In Mosheim’s History , and still more
in his De Rebus Chrislianorum ante Constantinum, § —a work
of the most extensive and searching erudition, —practically
the same conclusions are drawn respecting the early and wide-
spread corruptions of the Church. Mone will pretend that
♦ Ancient Christianity, No. 1, p 18.
♦ No. 4, p. 5.
| No. 8, vol. ii. 379.
i Of a portion of this work, an excellent translation (a little too wordy,
perhaps) has been given to the woild by Mr. Vidal. The first volume sp •
peared in 1812, the third in 1835. We shall be glad to sec it completed.


Romish controversy. Bailie was no sciolist; Jeremy Taylor
was not, it is presumed, deficient in learning; Chillingworth
Mosheim had not learning, and none but an Oxfordist that he
wanted judgment Precisely the same conclusions are esta-
blished in the writings (though less calm and impartial) of
Jortin, and of Conyers Middleton. But why do we say all
this ? Merely to dissipate the illusion that the Tractist
champions are in possession of some exclusive treasures of
knowledge; an illusion which we think the first Number of
Mr. Taylor’s work would go to confirm. We ridicule the
notion that none are competent to form an opinion on the
present controversy, unless they have given a “ lifetime ”
(which Mr. Newman says it requires) to this species of reading.
Any plain man, with the Bible in one hand, and Chilling-
worth, Bailie, and Mosheim in the other, need not fear to
pronounce on the truth of the principles asserted by the
Anglicans. Is it necessary to read through the Koran and all
its commentators in order to pronounce on the claims of Maho-
met; or to toil through the absurdities of the Talmud before
being qualified to say that the Rabbis are not to be trusted ?
But Mr. Taylor, has also run into a more serious error. He
has been pleased to claim a certain indefinite “ authority ” for
the Fathers; and has suffered himself to speak most strangely
of the celebrated maxim, “ that the Bible and the Bible only
is the religion of Protestants.” What this authority, over
and above that which may be yielded to any other human
beings, may be, he nowhere distinctly informs us. He asserts
that “divine Providence has connected the later with the
earlier Church by a link which can never be severed; and
which connexion implies a general duty of acquainting our-
selves with the records of the early Church, and of yielding
such a specific deference to its testimony and judgment as is
not to be claimed fur the Church of any later period.”f
Again : he says, “ it has been nothing so much as this incon-
siderate ‘ Bible alone ’ outcry, that has given modern Popery
so long a reprieve in the heart of Protestant countries.’’ I He
appears to lay much stress on the old fallacy, that we depend
on the Fathers for ascertaining the canon of Scripture itself;
and hence would seem to inter that we are in fact dependent
on them for a great deal more. Much has been founded on
this argument, yet most illogically. We do certainly admit
the Fathers to be witnesses to the fact, that in their day such
and such books were received as of undoubted apostolical
authorship; just as we admit their successors of any succeed-
ing age to be “ witnesses ” that they also had the same books.
They are witnesses of a “ fact;’’ and, as they had eyes and
ears, we have no reason to distrust them. But we need not
enlarge on this subject; and the less, that whatever mysterious
i Ancient Christianity, No. 1, p. 46,
X Ibid. No.- 1, p. 56.


and inexplicable authority Mr. Taylor may claim for these
men beyond that of any other witnesses, he has taken effect-
ual care to dissipate the illusion in the course of his work. In
truth, the impression that he must leave on every reader’s
mind is, that more unsafe guides it is impossible to follow.
He expressly says, (and there is much more to the same pur-
pose,)—in proving them to have grossly perverted the Gospel,
and to be amongst the worst guides which the Church can
follow, we are driven to the necessity of producing evidence
which no motive less imperative would have led us to bring
forward.”* In this, and the preceding case, we appeal from
Mr. Taylor’s first thoughts to his second.
We should also probably differ from Mr. Taylor in relation
to the date, extent, and rate, of progress of certain corruptions;
and in some instances cannot but think be has damaged his
cause by overstating it. It would also have been as well had
he refrained from citing some authorities of doubtful quality;
though, as an argumentum ad hominem, we do not know what
his opponents could fairly reply. He has been assailed, for
example, for having made use of Athanasius’ “ Life of St.
Antony;” yet Mr. Newman, in his “Church of the Fathers,”
admits its substantial authenticity, and deduces from it some
most edifying conclusions.
In spite of these, and some minor defects, we cannot but
regard Mr. Taylor’s work as a most valuable contribution to
the cause of Scriptural Christianity; and considering the cir-
cumstances under which it was produced, most creditable to
his talents, energy, and learning.
The Fathers will receive, and ought to receive, just the de-
gree of respect that we should pay to any other men, and no
more-; that is, their authority will be in proportion to their
knowledge, good sense, freedom from prejudice, honesty,
and opportunities of forming a judgment. It may be sup-
posed, indeed, that the last circumstance, considering their
proximity to the Apostolic age, would give them a decided
superiority over every other class of writers; but it is very
possible that their disadvantages in other respects may depress
their authority in the greater number of cases below that even
of a third-rate student of Scripture of a later age—just as a
man with bad eyes may not see an object so clearly at fifty
yards, as another with good ones may see it at half a mile.
Now, almost all the Fathers had very bad eyes; and what is
worse, they attempted to remedy the defect by still worse
spectacles. On this point the reader will find some admi-
rable remarks in Dr. Shuttleworth’s treatise on Tradition.
The reason of this phenomenon is not far to seek. Many of
the Fathers, indeed, were men of unquestionable genius, and
of large erudition (such as it was;) and small portions of
• No. 5, p. 26.


many of their writings may be read with profit. But they
were all more or less tainted—most of them deeply—with the
false maxims and pernicious prejudices which characterised
their day; and from the influence of which, without being
more than human, it was impossible that they could be free.
This is no disparagement to their genius or their learning, any
more than it is disrespectful to Descartes or Kepler to affirm,
that having been early imbued with false principles of science,
they constructed theories which we do not feel bound to reve-
rence, because we reverence the men. We can separate Des-
cartes from his ‘‘ vortices,” and Kepler from his fanciful
analogies between the laws of the planetary system and the
“ five regular solids.”, In like manner we may well despise the
interpretations of Origen, without despising Origen himself.
That Christianity should be fearfully corrupted, and that at
no remote period from its origin, was not only natural, but in-
evitable, unless a series of perpetual miracles had been wrought
to prevent it. Brought suddenly into contact with many sys-
tems of false philosophy, and of the most degrading polytheism,
and attracting converts from all nations and all ranks, was it
likely to be received and retained in its perfect purity? Falling
on such a million-sided surface as the humanity of that day,
it was impossible that the heavenly light should not undergo
all sorts of refractions; —let down into such a pit of mephitic
vapours, it was impossible that the lamp of truth should not
burn dim. Christianity did much for its converts, doubtless;
but it could not, and did not pretend to release them from all
their prejudices and ignorance. It was perfectly natural, it
was to be expected, that in a thousand cases the new principle
should rather enter into combination, according to the ordinary
laws of mental affinities, with the old —than that they should
wholly repel them. The philosopher could not absolutely
forego his lifelong speculations, nor the polytheist the habits
of an ingrained idolatry; and thus, at a very early period, we
find attempts to reconcile the doctrines of Christianity with
the speculations of the Oriental and Grecian Schools; and to
complicate and corrupt the ritual of the new religion by luck-
less imitations of that of the old. “ Such,” remarks Mr.
Taylor at the close of an eloquent passage, which we much
regret that our limits do not permit us to give entire—“ such
were the antagonist principles, in contending with each of
which the holy religion of Christ triumphed in each instance,
and in each was trampled upon; conquered, and was con-
quered; diffused light and health, and admitted darkness and
corruption.”*
It is thus and thus only that we can account for the rapid
corruption of the Christian faith; and the extraordinary fa-
cility with which the best of the Fathers admitted the most
• Ancient Christianity, No. 1, p. 129.


monstrous extravagancies and the most silly puerilities. We
can on this ground, indeed, palliate their errors and compas-
sionate their foibles; but to set them up as guides, does appear
to us the most extraordinary fatuity. Guides! A very mode-
rate course of patristic allegories, conceits, visions, legends,
miracles, and superstitions—of Barnabas and Hennas, Origen,
Tertullian, Jerome, and Ambrose—will be quite sufficient to
reclaim any sane mind from such abasement; while, if we
were to judge by any spicilegium of their errors, collected out
of that menstruum of insipidity and commonplace in which they
usually float, we should imagine that we had got into the com-
pany rather of a set of Bedlamites than of Christian sages; and
should be unable to conceive the reason of that reverence with
which they are regarded, except on that principle of the
ancient Greeks, which connected insanity with inspiration ; or
that which dictated the custom of the Mahometans, to wor-
ship and reverence as saints those who are fairly out of their
senses.
And yet these are the men whose authority, when they are
tolerably unanimous, is to be considered as co-ordinate with
that of Scripture—from whose single opinions we are to dissent
with the greatest caution —and to whose keeping Divine Provi-
dence has committed an unwritten revelation. “ And so He
may have done,” it is said; “ for it is not the errors and absurdi-
tiesof the Fathers for which we contend, but the apostolic truths
of which they were the depositaries.” But is there no diffi-
culty in believing that the freight of immortal truth should have
been committed to such leaky and rotten vessels?—that God,
designing to give a Revelation, would purposely and inti-
mately mix it up with a mass of impure metal, leaving man-
kind to smelt it as they might? Truly, if this theory be
correct, it may well be said, that “we have the eternal trea-
sures in earthen vessels!”
This difficulty is still further increased if we consider the
character of that portion of Revelation for which these men
are the vouchers —the nature of the dogmas superadded to
the Bible. The question is whether the Christianity of the
third, fourth, or fifth century is a development or a corruption
of the Scripture system —a natural growth or a cancerous en-
largement? We believe the latter; but assuredly nothing
could warrant us in believing the former; except the most
obvious harmony between the Scriptures themselves and these
supposed additions to it. But it is acknowledged that no
such obvious harmony is to be found; —that the doctrines
contended for are not easily reconciled with the Scriptures—
that apart from the patristic authority no one would have sus-
pected them to be there—that there is very much at the least
which appears to contradict them—that the tone and spirit in
which the relative importance of the several elements of re


ligion are spoken of, appear to be entirely alien. One would
imagine, therefore, that nothing less than a Revelation as
clear, as express, and as miraculously authenticated as the
Scriptures, would be sufficient to justify our reception of these
additions. Can we then believe that they would have been
committed to such men as the Fathers are proved to be, and
mixed up with their acknowledged errors, follies, and super-
stitions 1 Ought not this circumstance alone to make us sus-
pect, that the soi disant additions to Revelation are more
probably corruptions of it?*
The interval between the Scriptures and the very best of
the Fathers is so immense, that not a few have testified that
it forms to them the most convincing proofs of the inspired
origin of the former; it being, in their judgment, absurd to
suppose that any man—much less a number of men —could
have composed such a volume as the Bible, in an age in
which their immediate successors, many of them possessing
undoubted genius and erudition, and having the advantage of
their light to walk by, could fall into puerilities so gross, and
errors so monstrous. We could sooner believe that Jacob
Bohmen could have composed the “Novum Organum,’’or
Thomas Sternhold the “ Paradise Lost.”
But the more intimate this conviction, the deeper ought to
be the indignation that any man should attempt to exalt the
Fathers, either singly or collectively, to the same level with
the Scriptures; or attempt to divide their exclusive and para-
mount authority with that of a set of men on whose pages
are so legibly inscribed the marks of error, absurdity, and
fantastic raving.
Yet this has the Oxford Tract School done. It has done
more. Without, we hope, designing it, it has, by way of
shielding the palpable contradictions and fabulous legends of
the Fathers from contempt, suffered itself to speak of the
Scriptures in language which cannot but tend to diminish
reverence for them, and to give no little advantage to infi-
delity. In one of the most gratuitously offensive of the
Tracts (No. 85,) it is argued that, if the Fathers apparently
contradict one another, so do the Scriptures; if many of their
statements are unintelligible and revolting to reason, there are
many in the Scriptures which are equally so. And then it is
added, that if the Scriptures are nevertheless true, so may the
system dependent on the Fathers be true. - With the accus-
tomed suppressio veri, the writer has carefully concealed two
essential points; the first is, that the reason why we receive
any apparent contradictions or startling prodigies in the Scrip-
ture, is not on account of their antecedent probability ; but on
• On this subject the reader will find some truly philosophical observations
in Mr. Taylor’s Ancient Christianity. Nos. 1 1 and 3. See particularly p,
180—190.


account of the many and convincing proofs, of an inde-
pendent character, that the Scripture is of Divine origin.
Give us the same evidence for the Fathers, and except where
they really contradict one another (which they do very plen-
tifully,) we will receive them too. The second is, that there is
the widest possible difference between the miraculous narra-
tives of Scripture, and the idle legends of the Fathers—not
less in the character of the events themselves, than in the
tone and manner of the writers. These writers have gone yet
further. We have seen it recently asserted, that there is as
much reason for rejecting the most essential doctrines of
Christianity—nay Christianity itself*—as for rejecting their
“Church principles.” That, in short, we have as much rea-
son for being infidels as for rejecting the doctrine of Apos-
tolical succession. What other effect such reasoning can have
than that of compelling men to believe that there is nothing
between infidelity and Popery, and of urging them to make a
selection between the two, we know not. The author of Tract
Number Eighty-Five, calls his argument a “ kill-or-cure re-
medy.” We believe that it will kill in either case. But even
in the sense in which the author uses these words, we are per-
suaded it will “kill” far more than it will “cure.” Not a
few will say, “W e accept your reasoning; you are a learned
man, and we will believe as you say, that you have no more
to say in behalf of the Scriptures than in behalf of your
Church principles; and as we see that what you have to say
for the last is little enough, you will excuse us for rejecting
Christianity altogether.” Indeed, we fully expect that, as a
reaction of the present extravagances —of the revival of obso-
lete superstitions—we shall have erelong to fight over again
the battle with a modified form of infidelity, as now with a
modified form of Popery. Thus, probably, for some time to
come, will the human mind continue 4o oscillate between the
extremes of error; but with a diminished arc at each vibra-
tion ; until the gravitation of eternal truth shall at last pre-
vail, and compel it to repose in the centre.
After all, the greatest enemies of those “ good but greatly
erring men,” the Fathers, are their modern idolaters; w ho,
by exaggerating their claims, compel us to prove them un-
founded. Most certain is it, that they do not invest'either
themselves or the church to which they belonged, with the
authority which their modern admirers would fain attribute
to them; —a point which the reader will find abundantly
proved iu Mr. Goode’s ample citations from them. Daillfi has
a striking passage on this point, from which we extract a
single sentence : “I am firmly of opinion that if these holy
men could now behold from the mansions of blessedness . .
what things are done here below, they would be very much
• Britith Critic, No. 63, Art. 11., p. 75, 76.


oflended by the honors which men confer upon them much
against their wills . . or if from out of their sepulchres,
where the relics of their mortality are now laid up, they could
but mate us hear their sacred voice, they would, I am very
confident, sharply reprove us for this abuse, and would cry
out in the words of Paul, “ Sirs, why do ye these things 1 we
also were men of like passions with yourselves!’ ”
In concluding this part of the subject, we may remark that
it is a suspicious circumstance, that the authority of “ tradi-
tion” did not maintain the unity of the faith and the integ-
rity of doctrine, to secure which their writers would restore il.
No sooner did the ancient Church assume that perfect form to
which the Oxford theologians would assimilate the modem,
than it degenerated into Popery : it no sooner became ripe
according to their notions of ripeness, than it became rotten.
Of course we have no difficulty in accounting for the phe-
nomenon ; there was continuity in the whole process. That
the sun which had long been setting, should go down, and
leave darkness behind it, was natural; but how it came to
plunge at once from the zenith into the ocean, may well sur-
prise us. Two things, however, are clear. One is, that this
marvellous rule of faith is no security at all against corrup-
tion ; secondly, it appears that in the only experiment ever
made of its efficiency, it instantly ended in it. Its advocates
can be consistent only in arguing that Romanism is not a
fearful corruption, but, like the Church of the fifth century,
still a harmonious development. To this it is coming.
5. We had intended offering some observations on the views
propounded by this School on the important subject of “Jus-
tification,” and the related topics. But our space warns us to
forbear, and we must content ourselves with referring to the
able discussions in the volume by the Bishop of Ohio. Suf-
fice it here to say, that the views in question approximate
indefinitely to those of Rome; —at least, if there be any im-
portant difference, it depends on the most subtle refinements
and the most unintelligible distinctions. Mr. Newman’s
“ Lectures ” on the subject form one of the most curious
specimens of cloudy metaphysics ever given to the public.
Most unfairly is reason dealt with by this School. In general,
they dispense with it altogether; when they do appeal to it, it
is only to mock it with incomprehensible subtleties. Of the
two, we decidedly prefer their mysticism to their metaphysics;
we had rather be called upon to exercise faith without logic,
than be insulted by a logic which can be received only by
faith. It at least saves much fruitless effort to understand
what we, after all, discover is not to be understood.
ti. In addition to all this, many individual writers, and
some of the public organs of this School, have put forth a
variety of opinions and statements, the general tendency of


which cannot he mistaken. They together constitute Roman-
ism, almost perfect in its organs and lineaments, but of Lilli-
pution dimensions. We shall give them miscellaneously.
The Tracts on “ Reserve ” openly plead for a method of
exhibiting Christianity, or rather a method of veiling it,
which strongly reminds one of the Romish Church. The
writer contends for the ancient disciplina arcani , by which
the more awful mysteries were “ reserved ” for the initi-
ated ; but amongst these, with a plenitude of extravagance
to which the ancient Church affords no parallel, he in
eludes even the characteristic doctrine of Christianity, and
vehemently denounces the “explicit” and “prominent” exhi-
bition of the atonement.* He casts high scorn on all the
present “utilitarian” methods of doing good—on cheap
churches and cheap Bibles. He disapproves of the attempt
to bring the church to every man’s door; and seems to think
that an empty church, provided it cost enough and the ser-
vices be sufficiently magnificent, will, by a sort of opus ope-
ratum he of “ incalculable efficacy.”f In open defiance of
the command “To preach the gospel to every creature,” and
to proclaim the truth “ whether men will hear or whether they
will forbear;” in equal defiance of the Apostles themselves—
he assures us that it is an awful thing to make known the
gospel to those who are ignorant of it, lest we involve them in
deeper condemnation.} We must not give a Bible, we pre-
sume, unless we are beforehand guaranteed that it will be
rightly used ; a plan very much like that “utilitarian” be-
nevolence which buttons up its pockets, and will not bestow
• No. 80- “ Sect. 5. On the necessity of bringing forward the doctrine
qf ihe Atonement.” —Us “ explicit and prominent” exhibition is “ evidently
quite opposed to what we consider the teaching of Scripture, nor do we find
any sanction for it in the gospels. If the Epistles of St. Paul appear to
favor it, it is only at first sight.” “In all things it would appear that this
doctiine, so far from its being what is supposed, is in fact ihe very secret of
the Lord, which Solomon says “ is with the righteous,” and “the covenant”
not to be lightly spoken of by man, but which He will show to them (hat
fear him.”
t “ For if the erection of churches, which from commodiousness and easi-
ness of access are to invite, and from their little cost partake more of a low
contriving expediency than of a generous love of God, is to do the work of
religion, then is It more easy to win souls than Scripture will warrant us in
supposing;” and he adds ‘‘that we have to fear lest, rather than doing good,
we be breaking that holy law which hath commanded that we give not that
which is holy to the dogs.”—(P. 69.)
u The effect of the Church as a witness, though in a manner silent and out
of sight, is something very great and incalculable, of which* I would adduce
the following instance. Before the Reformation the Church recognised the
seven hours of prayer. However these may have been practically neglected,
or hidden in an unknown tongue, there is no estimating what influence this
may have had on common people's minds secretly ,”—(P. 73.)
J “ Much of what is here said may be applied to an indiscriminate distri-
bution of Bibles and religious publications. We must not expect that the
work which occasioned our Saviour and his disciples so much pains, can be
done by such means. We have rather to look with awe on these new deal-
ings of Providence with mankind.” .... ** That the unprepared can-
not receive the ‘ truth,'ls the appointment of God; but our attempting lo
act contrary to his mode of acting may be productive of evil.”—(P. 70.)


a farthing till quite sure that the “ object is worthy.” The
utilitarian thus reserves his money as the writer of the Tract
would reserve his Bibles. Alas! for St. Paul and his igno-
rant colleagues; we fear they must have incurred much guilt,
and occasioned much, by proclaiming the gospel without suffi-
ciently considering whether it would be rightly received or
not. They seem to have been but poorly provided with the
doctrine of “ reserveor, if they had it, they assuredly “ re-
served” it. It is evidently also the opinion of this writer,
that it is better to leave the heathen in utter darknesss than
attempt their conversion by any “ unauthorised ” methods or
irregular zeal. Men had better, one would suppose, die of
their spiritual maladies than be cured empirically—had bet-
ter not go to heaven at all than go there by any other route
than the Via Media. But to proceed to other facts.
After stating the early or original opinion respecting Pur-
gatory, the writer of the tract professedly against the Romish
doctrine says, “ taken in the mere letter there is little in it
against which we shall be able to sustain formal objections.”
Prayers for the dead are openly justified. The practice,
says Mr. Newman, “is Catholic, and apparently Apostolical.”
While the Tracts on “ reserve ” advocate a very cautious
and measured communication of religious truth, a sort of com-
pensation is to he given in the shape of multiplied symbols,
it is but the exchange of one sort of instruction for another,
and effects a great economy of time, breath, and labour. As
the philosophic exile found
Sermons in stones .and good in every thing,
so the stupid rustic is to study celestial wisdom in a system
of symbols; though, as all history proves, he is more likely
to learn superstition than religion from them. If the “Priests”
are to be in a measure “ dumb n'imporle, for the very
“ stones in the wall ” are to “ cry out,” emblazoned as they
are to be with the characters of a hieroglyphical religion.
A Journal devoted to the sect, has given us its views on
the subject in an article on “ The Church Service.” We
there find the cross called a “sacramental sign”—a holy effi-
cacious symbol.” Yet, with the exquisite prudery of the
new doctrine of “reserve,” the writer does not approve of
the crucifix in churches. “Doubtless,” the reader will
say, “ because it is so easily abused to superstition.” No
such thing. “We are no advocates of the crucifix, at all
events in the open way in which it is commonly exhibited
abroad. Even pictures of the same solemn subject strike
us as irreverent, and should at least be always veiled. And
we would not hazard an unqualified objection even against
the crucifix as an object for very private contemplation,
under certain trying circumstances; say, for instance, a sur


gical operation. The crucifix openly exhibited, produces the
same sort of uncomfortable feeling with certain Protestant ex-
posures, in preaching the mystery it represents.” But will
equal refinement, the writer highly approves of the image ol
the cross, and he hopes the time will come—golden age!—
“ when no English church will want what many possess al-
ready, the image of the cross in some place sufficiently con-
spicuous to assist the devotions of the worshipper. Let us
multiply the same holy and efficacious emblem far and wide.
There is no saying how many sins its awful form might scare,
and how many evils avert.’’* “ With the cross,” proceeds the
writer, “ should be associated other Catholic symbols, still more
than itself forvavra avvtroig. For these painted windows seem
to furnish a suitable place. They should at all events be con-
fined to the most sacred portion of the building. Such are the
lamb with the standard; the descending dove; the anchor;
the triangle; the pelican; the (fish), and others. Per-
haps the two or three last mentioned, as being of the
most recondite meaning, should be adopted later than the
rest.” To these the writer is prepared to add more, when the
right time shall come. For ourselves we doubt whether, in our
present state of deplorable spiritual ignorance, the anchor and
the triangle may not prove too much for us.
In the same spirit, this writer laments the absence of anoint-
ing at Baptism and Confirmation, as the “ loss of a privilege;
and rejoices in the perpetuation of the custom in the coionation
, service, as nothing less than an “ example of providential care
over the Church.” Can superstition go further ? He else-
where tells us that there should be “ more special decorations
of the Church on Festival Days; altar coverings and pulpit
hangings of unusual richness; or the natural flowers of the
season, woven into wreaths, or placed according to primitive
custom on the altar. These should be chosen with especial
reference to the subject of the Festival.” “ White flow-
ers,” proceeds he, with infinite gravity, “ are most proper on
the days consecrated to the Virgin, as emblematic of sinless
purity; purple or crimson upon the several saints’ days, (ex-
cept St. John the Evangelist, and perhaps St. Luke) to signify
the blood of martyrdom; and on All Saints’ days and the
Holy Innocents, white should be intermingled as a memorial of
Virgin innocence.” “We deprecate,” proceeds this exquisite
spiritualist, “forced flowers, which look artificial; but we believe
that, with a little management, natural flowers of the proper
colors may be found throughout the year. It is difficult to con-
ceive a more suitable occupation for the Christian population
than that of cultivating flowers for such a purpose, and after-
wards arranging them.” Thus the practice would be in equal
degree an encouragement to piety and market gardening.
• Hr, Cr. t No. liv, p. 271.


Neither are the chandlers forgotten : “ two lights should be
placed upon the altar.” “ These,” he thinks, “ should be
lighted, else they do not, so well signify the truth, Christus lux
mundi.” Truly we think they but indifferently express this
truth, whether lighted or not; but he does not press this point,
though disposed to think it “ truly Anglican.”
. When we consider not only the number and variety of these
proposed “embellishments,” but the importance attached to
them, and the solemn tone in which they are spoken of, it is
impossible to doubt whither we are tending. If the views of
such writers prevail, they must lead to an entire subordination
of what is spiritual to what is ceremonial —and religion will
degenerate into abject superstition. No wonder that the coun-
try is infested by not a few young “ priests,” raving about their
apostolic succession; founding the most absurd pretensions on
their mere sacerdotal character, though backed neither by ex-
perience nor wisdom; boasting of the thaumaturgic powers
they can exert in the administration of the sacraments; con-
tending not for the faith once delivered to the Saints, but for
wax candles, altar cloths, chaplets, crosses, crucifixes, and
mummery of all kinds; —at the same time, modestly consign-
ing all Protestants out of the Episcopal pale, either to perdi-
tion or the “ uncovenauted mercies;” in a word, exhibiting
zeal indeed, but zeal that is utterly unacquainted with any
other of the Christian graces—zeal that is not even on speaking
terms with knowledge, faith, or charity.
The Bishop of London, we regret to say, in his recent
“ Charge” has done not a little to fan the zeal in behalf of
ceremonial. Though in great part condemning the Oxford
Tractists, and severely reprobating their most dangerous inno-
vations, he yet gives such space and importance to certain
trumpery matters of ritual, that we are not surprised his
“ Charge” should have been claimed on the whole as a triumph
by the Oxford party. If we have been rightly informed, his
Lordship has expressed his displeasure that what he designed
as a condemnation of that party, should have been so miscon-
ceived. He is the only person, we suspect, who will feel any
surprise on the subject. When we see him expressing such
anxiety that the Rubric should be closely adhered to—laying
so much stress on the merest trifles —more severely censuring
those who do not punctiliously keep to the Rubric, even in
points virtually obsolete than those who make unauthorised ad-
ditions to it—discussing with so much gravity matters of pulpit
etiquette and clerical costume —expressing his wish that all
his clergy should preach in white, though it appears he had en-
joined those of Chester to preach in black —affirming that he
sees “ no harm” in the two wax candles, provided, strange rea-
soning! they are not lighted—sagely declaring his approval “ of
the arrangement lately adopted in several churches, by which


the clergyman looks to the south while reading prayers, and to
the west while reading lessons”—it is impossible not to regard
him as too nearly allied in spirit to those whom he condemns.
We sincerely thank him, however, for his unequivocal censure
of tire most comprehensive and poisonsous errors of the Tract-
ists, and shall not ungraciously ask whether it might not have
come sooner.
But to resume. Not less significant is the altered tone in
which these writers speak of those errors of Popery which they
still admit to he such. There is as great a difference between
their tone and that of the Reformers, as between the playful
tap of a coquette’s fan and the vigorous stroke of a boatswain’s
lash. The invocation of saints these writers content them-
selves with calling “ a dangerous practice, as tending to give,
often actually giving, to creatures the honor and reliance due
to the Creator alone ” Of the worship of images, which they
soften into honor paid to images, they say only that “ it is
dangerous in the uneducated, that is, of the great part of
Christians.” Yet they profess to be following Bishop Hall.
The Bishop of Exeter truly remarks, that Bishop Hall calls the
first of these practices “ a foul superstitionand of the se-
cond, says, “not merely that it is dangerous to some, hut sinful in
all.” One of these writers elsew here calls these and other things
“ uncatholic peculiarities.” But other and more recent writers
have gone further, and almost adopted an apologetic tone.
The British Critic, after having described some of the most
childish and absurd superstitions of the middle ages—implying
the grossest idolatry—merely remarks—“ Much there was
which sober piety cannot sanction; but let us not forget what
was holy and religious on account of incidental corruptions.”
As well might a polite physician assure some patient crusted
over with leprosy, that he feared be was labouring under a
slight cutuaneous eruption!
Equally significant are the approximations to Romish
usages and practices in other instances. The Tracts recom-
mend to private Christians the dedication of particular days to
the religious commemoration of deceased Saints; and have
furnished a model service in honor of Bishop Ken, after the
pattern of an office in the breviary of a Roman saint. The
Journalist just quoted goes further, and is evidently inclined
to think that the Saints know of our prayers, and sensibly feel
the compliment of commemorations. “ Days and places,”
says the writer, “ specially dedicated to the Saints, are means
to ns of communion with them. They not only remind us of
them, and lead us to contemplate their lives, but they give us
a special interest in the prayers which those blessed spirits offer
.up day and night before the throne.’'*
Many of this school are in ecstacies with the riches of the
• Oct. 1842.


Romish and Parisian Breviaries. They have also for several
years past furnished their followers with an “ Ecclesiastical
Almanac,” in which the minute rules of the Romish Church
are quoted as a guide to individuals. Some of them openly
plead for the restoration of Monasticism ; and others have not
obscurely expressed their predilections for the celibacy of the
clergy. The Reformation, as already mentioned, is spoken of
as all but a fearful judgment: we are told that the “ unpro-
testanlizing of the National Church” is an object well worth
all the hazard and bitterness which may attend the attempt;
that “ we must recede more and more from the principles, if
any such there be, of the English Reformation.”* Mr. Fronde’s
too famous exclamation is adopted by not a few—“ Really, I
hate the Reformers and the Reformation more and more!” Jn
perfect accordance with all this, the Revolution of 16S8
is called “rebellion;” While, as we have recently seen,
some have put the copcstone on the whole system, by expressly
denying the Bight of Private Judgment, and vindicating the
maxims and practices of persecution.
. We must now notice some of the general characteristics and
tendencies of this school.
I. It is a very suspicious circumstance, that the whole sys-
tem tends to the increase of the power and glory of the Epis-
copal Clergy. This is the case with the principal doctrines
themselves, —apostolical succession, the thaumaturgic efficacy
of the sacraments as exclusively administered by them, the
restriction of the name and privileges of the “ Church” to the
communities in which they exercise their functions. The same
result may be calculated upon, in proportion as Christianity is
transmuted into a religion of rites and symbols. As such rites
and symbols become the objects of awful veneration and su-
perstitious dependence, (as they are sure to do, conjoined with
the convenient system of “ reserve,” and the inculcation of an
“implicit faith,”) the people will look to the hierophants who
perform, or exhibit them, as the very aibiters of their eternal
destiny.
Such a tendency is further fostered by the blind, unques-
tioning acquiescence in the priests’ dicta which these writers
so strongly enjoin. Their deluded victims will do well to re-
member the old and quaint saying, that “ though they may
believe by proxy, they must be damned in person.”
The same general tendency is observable, if we consider how
earnestly—almost exclusively—these doctrines are insisted
upon by the writers of this School. Marvellous, indeed, is the
difference in this respect between the Apostles and these
successors of the Apostles. The former are intent,—almost
exclusively intent—on those great themes which render the
• Sr. Cr. No. lix.*p. 45,
D


gospel “glad tidings;” llie latter almost as exclusively, in mag-
nifying their office: —the former absolutely forget themselves
in their flocks; the latter wellnigh forget their flocks in them-
selves:—the former, if they touch on the clerical office at all,
are principally intent on its spiritual qualifications andduties;
the latter on its prerogatives and powers.* To hear these men
talk, one would imagine that hy a similar vaetpov wpirtpov
with that of the simple-minded monk, who “ devoutly
thanked God that in his wisdom he had always placed large
rivers near large towns,” they supposed the Church of Christ
to he created for the sole use of the clergy; and the doctrine of
“ apostolical succession” to be the final cause of Christianity.
The tendency in question is most suspicious; but we are far
from charging the chief founders of this School with the sor-
did aims of priestcraft; although we cannot help thinking,
that with many of their followers an unconscious bias in this
direction affords the true solution of their conduct. Some of
them, wc fear, are not altogether unconscious of the bias.
2. The next characteristic of the system is, that it tends to
rob Christianity of its chief glory as a spiritual and moral in-
stitute, and to render it a system of mere formalism—to sub-
stitute for the worship founded on intelligent faith, a devotion
which is a species of mechanism, and rites which operate as by
magic. The doctrine of apostolical succession itself is neither
more nor less respectable than that of the hereditary sanctity
of the Brahminical caste; while the prayer-mills of the Tartars
afford a fair illustration of the doctrine of sacramental efficacy.
The stress laid on rites and symbols, and outward observances,
and the attempt indefinitely to multiply them, tend the same
way. It is true, that as religion appeals to every part of man’s
complex nature, rites and symbols have their use, and are not
to he neglected. Still, whether they be beneficial or not, will
entirely depend on the place they hold in the system. The
Divine Founder of Christianity, as if in wise jealousy of a ten-
dency which may be so easily abused, has confined the cere-
monial of his religion within the straitest limits: while no
element of our nature which can be subordinated to religious
use is wholly neglected, each is appealed to only in the pre-
cise degree in which it can be rendered tributary to the great
object. Would that all who have taught this religion had
taken this significant intimation of superhuman wisdom as
their guide! As the history of all corrupt religion shows,
nothing is more difficult than to prevent the material from cor-
rupting the spiritual—the senses and the imagination from
assuming an undue influence. Let the balance be destroyed,
and the ritual and symbolical is immeditely substituted for
• The first volume of the Oxford Tracts contains no less than eight distinct
papers on “ apostolical succession'' alone.


religious sentiment and emotion. Let rites and symbols be
multiplied—perpetually insisted upon—made unduly promi-
nent —and spiritual truth will be forgotten; they produce an
effect on the great doctrines which .they are professedly em-
ployed to illustrate, analogous with that which a minute sys-
tem of casuistry produces on our views of morality. Let but
the great principles of a noble and ennobling system of ethics
be sincerely received, and human nature may be safely left to
determine the modes in which they are to be applied in par-
ticular cases; it will choose to take council of what is great,
generous, and magnanimous, rather than ask just how much
is scrupulously lawful. But let the casuist come with his scale
and weights, or his foot-rule, and determine within how many
grains an action is of being strictly unlawful, or how far, to an
inch, we may proceed in a certain direction without commit-
ting crime; —under what circumstances a man may consider
himself not absolutely compelled to do what his noblest
instincts tell him he ought to do, and in what way he may
obey the letter of a law and violate its spirit; and the essence
of morality is gone—it is well if even the form be retained.
It is much the same with religion and its ritual. Let but
the great doctrines be fully and adequately received, and
little need be said on the ritual; it will adjust itself. But
if a man be taught (especially after acquiescing in the
doctrine of “ reserve,” and being told that an implicit faith
will answer the purpose very well) to gaze in stupid won-
der on an exhibition of rites and symbols, whether it be
ou the gorgeous and solid magnificence of the Romish
Church, or the mimic gilt and tinsel of our Puseyites—
let him be taught to make much of wax-candles burnt at
noon-day—the cross or the crucifix —painted windows—gar-
lands of flowers, triangles, and fishes—vestments, black and
white—pulpit-hangings and altar-cloths —postures and atti-
tudes—and his religion stands a chance of being about as
much worth as that of him who was thus praised by Dr.
Johnson: “He never passes a church without pulling off his
hat —this shows he has good principles.” Let his attention be
principally or much directed to these things, and the process
of degeneracy is inevitable. It was so with the ancient
church, which we are now so earnestly exhorted to take as our
model. No one can read the writings of the Fathers without
feeling that they gradually became more intent on the circum-
stantials of religion than on the essence of it; more solicitous
about the modes in which religious duties should be performed,
than about the spirit of them. It is all over with religion
when this is the case. The process of corruption is soon
complete. The next thing is to count our prayers —to measure
the value of devotions solely by their frequency, their length
by the dial, or their number by the beads—to consider that if


a man is holy who says a hundred prayers a-day, he is twice
as holy who says two hundred; and that if he who fasts four-
and-twenty hours has some merit, he who fasts efght-and-forty
has twice as much
3. Another signal characteristic of this School is its dispo-
sition to vilify and traduce reason. They do well to hate it;
for, as Hobbes well said, “ when reason is against a man, a
man will be against reason.” Reason, they feel, is their im-
placable foe, and blinded indeed it must be before it will
admit their pretensions. “My Lord Understanding’s house.”
says John Bunyan, “ was too light for the Prince of Darkness,
and he therefore built a high wall to darken all the windows.”
In inviting us to lay down our reason, they remind us of
the wolf who counselled the sheep to get rid of their watch-
dogs. Their constant plan is to inveigh against the sin of
“ rationalism,” as they call it, in relation to the “ mysteries,”
of religion—by which they mean any tendency to question
their dogmas. They thus avail themselves both of the preju-
dice against the first term, and of the awe inspired by the
second. That there are “ mysteries ” both in philosophy and
religion about which it is irrational to speculate, is true;
but we receive them, though not on intrinsic, yet on sufficient
evidence; and reason is still the judge as to whether that
evidence be sufficient to justify their reception, though it be
not able to speculate on the mysteries themselves. The exist-
ence of God is a great mystery; but if we do not admit it,
we must admit manifold contradictions and absurdities:—the
permission of evil is a great mystery; but it would do us no
good to deny its existence as a matter of fact:—Christianity is
itself full of mystery; but we receive it on proofs so manifold
and various, that we feel it impossible to resist them. Give
us similar reasons for believing “ apostolical succession,” and
we faithfully promise that it is not its being a mystery that
shall startle us. But to hoodwink our reason, and receive any
absurdity without examination, because some piece of solemn
inanity shakes his head, and assures us it is too awful to reason
about, is not to be tolerated. Yet this is the continual artifice
employed to protect “ Church principles,” and imposes, we
have no doubt, upon thousands. We have already adduced
some remarkable specimens of this species of logical artifice.
“ Beware how you rationalize on these great truths,” is the,
constant cry—“ how much better is it to obey than to speculate
—to believe than to reason!” A plain understanding would
say—“ Both very well in their place, reverend sir; what God
hath joined together let no man put asunder: I think it better
to believe than to reason, when I have reason to believe that
God has spoken: 1 think it better to reason than to believe,
when I have reason to believe that it is only Dr. Pusey or Mr.
Newman.” In fact this artifice is itself the highest insult to


reason, since it involves a quiet assumption of the whole
question in dispute—namely, whether the mysteries of the
Oxford Tract School are supported by the evidence which
proves that they are worthy of being believed in spite of their
transcendental character. Of course the Papist uses the same
plea for his transubstantiation. Doubtless even the Egyptian
priest of ancient times often used the same plea, when he had
to defend the divinity of “cats and onions” against the ra-
tionalists of those days, at whom he would unquestionably
shake his head, and tell them how superior after all was faith
to logic! About as reasonable is the defence which the Oxford
writers employ, and about as reasonable the dogmas for which
it is resorted to. “ The first principle, or universal axiom,”
says Mr. Taylor, “of the modem revivers of Church principles,
is the abjuration of that integrity of reason to which the in-
spired writers always appeal, and of which they enjoin the
exercise and culture. * * * To doubt is a sin. To
adduce evidence, given in relation to common facts of history,
and to judge of it according to the common rules of historical
enquiry, is to be a “ rationalist.” To distrust the pretensions of
St. Dunstan, or the genuineness of the “True Cross,” is an
offence as grievous as to reject the Trinity; both are dis-
obedience"*
4. Amongst other characteristics which belong to these
writers in common with the Romish Church, we must reluc-
tantly include a tendency to the use of “ pious frauds.” Let
not the reader be startled. We do not charge them with such
wholesale forgeries, such magnificent crimes, as those which
were perpetrated and justified by some of their venerated
Fathers. As their whole system is Romanism in miniature, so
is it in this respect also. They do not, as the ancients did,
write books, and inscribe them at once with some venerable
name to make them pass current. They do not draw a bill of
doctrines, and indorse it with the name of Cranmer, Ridley, or
Hooker. Neither do we charge them with actual interpola-
tions of ancient works. Such things cannot well be managed
in these days of “ unreserved communication of knowledge.”
There is as much difference in point of audacity between the
“ pious frauds ” of ancient days and the humble imitations of
Oxford, as between open burglary aud petty larceny—between
forgery on a large scale and passing a bad sixpence. But
with tlie little arts of fraudulent mirsepresentation, they do in
our judgment stand chargeable. They are well skilled, as Mr.
Taylor expresses it, “ in packing their “ evidence,” and “in
schooling their witnesses.” They can leave out, if they do not
put in—insulate a plausible sentence or two from a qualifying
or refractory context, and manage commas and colons to ad-
miration. Some ingenious examples of this literary joinery
• Ancient Chrutianity, No. 6, p. 225.


may be found in M‘llvaine’s work, (p. 232.) For instance,
they cite a passage from the homilies, which appears not un-
friendly to a doctrine they affirm ; hut on reference to the
original, it is found that they have taken only the beginning
and end of the paragraph, the intermediate part which they
have omitted, being altogether against it; but no breaks—
asterisks —dots—or other indications—are employed, to sug-
gest that there, has been any solution “of continuity ” in the
citation; on the contrary, the disjecta membra are represented
as so immediately connected, that they are separated only by a
semicolon ! Similar traces of unfairness are most conspicious
in their construction of those curious things they call the
Catena Palrum, by which they attempted to prove something
like a Catholic consent of “ testimony, on the part of the
writers in the later English Church,” to their peculiar doctrines.
Some of these citations are absolutely nothing to the purpose;
others most vague and indistinct ; others, rent from their
context, are made to convey a meaning never designed by
their authors; others may be confronted by citations from the
very same writers equally or more explicit the other way;
while the many divines of opposing sentiments are passed by
altogether. Such is the argument from consent. On the same
principles it would be the easiest thing in the world to con-
struct a Catena on the other side—and in fact we have seen
more than one equally conclusive. But we need say no more
on this point, Mr. Goode having so effectually exposed the
attempt that even his reviewer now abandons it. “In what-
ever way,” says Mr. Goode, “ we may be enabled to account
for it, certain it is that truth has been sacrificed, and the au-
thority of great names pleaded in behalf of a system in no
respect entitled to such protection.”
Of the unscrupulous use by these writers of the vulgarcst
arts of sophistry, we need say nothing. Enormous examples
of petitio principii, suppressio veri, and almost every other
species of logical delinquency, have been given in preceding
articles, or in the present. But examples of all will be found
in Number Ninety itself; that singular monument—not are
perennius certainly, for it is “ brass ’’ itself—of logical petti-
fogging-
We question, however, whether these writers have not de-
rived still more service from that obscure, imposing, and truly
Delphic style, of which, as Archbishop Whately says, the
“ effect is to convey at first to ordinary readers a striking im-
pression, with an appearance of being perfectly intelligible at
the first glance, but to become more obscure and doubtful at
the second glance, and more and more so, the more attentively
it is studied by a reader of clear understanding; so as to leave
him utterly in doubt, at the last, which of several meanings it
is meant to convey, or whether any at all,” * * * This


is especially the case with the tracts on “ Reserve ” and
“ Mysticism,” of which it may be truly said that they seem to
have been written after preferring, and obtaining, a plenary
answer to that prayer—
Of darkness visible so much be lent.
As half to show-half veil the deep intent.
The one writer is most “ reserved on reserve,” and the other
most “ mystical on mysticism.” Seldom is any thing said
plainly and absolutely, but with a perpetually tortuous and
guarded expression. Scarcely two sentences are found to-
gether without a “ so to speak,” or “as it were,” or “if so be,”
or “it nmy be after a certain secret manner,” &c. Thus, en-
deavouring to prove our Lord’s systematic concealment of his
miracles, the writer on “ reserve ” says of the feeding of the
live thousand, “ even here it would appear as if there was
somehow a sort of secret character about the miracle.” Another
specimen. “ Notwithstanding that a spirit of true charity has
a natural desire to communicate itself, and is of all things the
most expansive and extending, yet in all such cases [of good
men] we may still perceive the indwelling of Christ in them,
still seeking, as it were , to hide himself; for I think they are
all marked by an inclination, as far as it is possible, of retiring
and shrinking from public view.” “ The Fathers,” he tells us,
“ suppose that our blessed Lord is, as it were, throughout the
inspired writings, hiding and concealing himself, and going
about (if I may so speak reverently) seeking to whom he may
disclose himself.” There are numberless passages of this
kind, which may mean any thing the interpreter is pleased to
imagine; although in reality they contain nothing but very
pious-sounding nonsense, which would have been quite in cha-
racter in Jacob Bohmen or Emanuel Swedenborg.
Thus, “so to speak,” and “as it were,” the author often
seems to say something, when in reality, and without any “ so
to speak” or “as it were.” he says nothing. His style per-
petually reminds us of Bardolph’s explanation of the word
accomodated. “ Accommodated; that is, when a man is, a*
they say, accommodated; or, when a man is—being—whereby
—he may be thought to be accommodated ; which is an ex-
cellent thing.”
Should any be disposed to charge us with treating grave
subjects over lightly, we have to reply, first, that we sincerely
believe that this is just one of those cases in which the maxim
of H orace applies,
Ridicnlnm acri
Fortius et melius magnas plerumque secal res;
secondly, that we recommend the objectors to a careful
perusal of the Eleventh of Pascal’s Lettres Provinciates, in
which he shows, Qu'on pent refulcr par des railleries les
erreurs ridicules; thirdly, that amongst the Christian privi


leges of which our opponents would’deprive us, we trust they
do not intend to include what Ben jonson calls our “Christian
liberty of laughing” at what is laughable; fourthly, that if’
they would have us repress our mirth, it must be by exhibiting
a system of doctrines less irresistibly comic; and lastly, that
we are perfectly aware that the artifice of inculcating “ an
awful and reverential manner ” of treating absurdities such as
those on which we have animadverted, is the approved receipt,
as the history of all superstition shows, of sanctifying, in the
estimation of the timid and the credulous, the most enormous
deviations from truth and common sense. Nor is it amongst
the least causes of the disgust we have felt in perusing the
writings of this School, that their authors, even while pro-
pounding doctrines which are equally insulting to the Bible
and to human reason, and defending them by methods which
are disgraceful to morality, have yet been able to maintain
that sanctimonious air, that, pious gravity, which distinguish
certain writers of the school of Loyola.
We must not conclude without pointing out to the reader
the works which, in our .judgment, furnish the best confutation
of the tenets of the Oxford School. These are, Archbishop
Whately’s Essays on the Kingdom of Christ, (a truly ad-
mirable work ; Goode’s Rule of Faith, which is learned and
full; MTlvaine’s Rome and Oxford, and Taylor’s Ancient
Christianity —of both of which we have already spoken; and
Mr. Lindsay Alexander’s learned and able work, just pub-
lished, entitled Anglo-Catholicism not Apostolical.
Meantime we await the progress and issue of the great
contest without apprehension. Terrible as are these hurri-
canes of controversy, pernicious as may be their immediate
effects on the faith of some aud the temper of many—they
serve from time to time to purify the atmosphere and render
it salubrious. Let us but be true to ourselves, and we have no
fear lest we should he “ re-iuvolved,” to use the strong lan-
guage of Milton, “ in that pitchy cloud of infernal darkness,
in which we shall never more see the sun of Divine Truth
again, never hope for the cheerful dawn, never more hear the
bird of morning sing,”
Let us never forget that Christianity was planted, and has
grown up, in storms. Discussion is always favourable to it,
and has ever been so. Let the wintry bias’ come. It will
but scatter the sere leaves, and snap off the withered branches;
the giant tree will only strike its roots deeper into the soil,
and in the coming spring-time put forth a richer foliage and
extend a more grateful shade.
THE END.
