

wgyg -




.
8pussin|?
BOOTS IMP
ONCE upon a time there was a miller who had
three sons. When he died he left each of them
something. To his eldest son he left his mill;
to the second his ass; and to the youngest his cat.
The poor youngest son was very sad when he found
that he had nothing left to him but a cat; but to his
great surprise Puss jumped on-the table, and said in a
friendly manner:
■A
“Do not be sad, my Only buy me a pair
of boots and a bag, and I will provide for you.”
So the miller’s son, who had a shilling or two in his
pocket, bought a smart little pair of boots and a bag, and


| ■ K, V
>w
[ v
" a
Close by a warren green, where rabbits played.


;t^*_ c \ i ~«/ {/A* I
/V, frcPIUS
12.9^
“The ogre who lives on the hill.”


gave them to Puss, who put some bran and sow-thistles
into his bag, opened the mouth of it, and laid it near a
rabbit warren while he lay hidden near by. A foolish
young rabbit jumped into the bag; Puss drew the string,
and soon killed the rabbit.
He went immediately to the King’s palace with it, where
he found the King and Queen sitting on their thrones;
bowing low, he laid the rabbit at the King’s feet, saying—
“Please, your Majesty, my master, the Marquis de
Carrabas, has sent you a rabbit from his warren as a
mark of respect.”
“I am much obliged to the Marquis,” said the King, and
he ordered the rabbit to be taken to the cook, and a piece
of money given to the cat.
Puss, much pleased, took a rabbit daily to the King,
as a gift from his master, till his Majesty was well
acquainted with the name of the Marquis de Carrabas and
with his wonderful cat.


There was a very rich and cruel ogre living in that
country. One day Puss went to call on him, and the ogre
was quite amazed at hearing a cat talk; it was the first
time, too, he had seen a Puss in Boots.
“Is it true, most wonderful ogre,” said Puss, “that you
can change yourself into any creature you please?”
Quite true, as you shall see,” said the ogre, and he
changed himself into a lion, and roared so terribly that
the cat climbed up the wall out of his way.


afl| B *j1&m
Then the ogre resumed his own ugly shape, and laughed
at Puss’s fear.
“It was very surprising, said the cat; “you are of such
a great size that I do not wonder you could become a lion,
but could you change yourself into some very small
animal?”


\ /
He came to a field with reapers at work.


“You shall see,” said the stupid, vain ogre, and he
turned himself into a mouse.
Directly Puss saw him in that shape, he darted at him
and ate him up. The ogre deserved it, for he had eaten
many men himself.
Then Puss made haste back to his master, and said:
“Come and bathe in the river, and when the King passes
by do exactly as I tell you, for I see his carriage coming
this way.”
The miller’s son obeyed his friend the cat; he undressed
and jumped into the water, and cunning Puss ran away
with his clothes and hid them under a large stone.
By-and-by the King drove by with his daughter. Puss
began to cry loudly:
“Help, help! Or my lord the Marquis de Carrabas will
be drowned.”
The King stopped the coach directly, and asked what
was the matter. Puss answered that while his master was


bathing some thieves had stolen his clothes, and that there-
fore the Marquis could not come out of the water.
The King luckily had a dress suit with him, so he sent
it by a servant to the Marquis, and desired him to accept a
seat in the royal coach so that he might drive him home.
The miller’s son looked very well in his fine clothes,
and the King was pleased with his appearance.
Puss directed the coachman to drive to the late ogre’s
castle, and then he ran on before. Coming to a large field
in which reapers were at work, he said:
“If the King asks to whom these fields belong, you must
say, ‘to the Marquis de Carrabas’; or you shall all be
chopped as small as mincemeat.’’
The men were so astonished at hearing a cat talk that
they dared not refuse; so when the King came by and
asked, “Whose fields are these?’’ they said, “They belong
to the Marquis de Carrabas.’’ Next Puss came to some
meadows with shepherds and flocks of sheep, and said the
same to them. So when the King asked them, “Whose


i \ \ via
L=^ | 17
He growled to the porters guarding the gate.


j I I f
I ~ ri' f• / n,fr ■ j b v / r V:> I *y
yy f I V D
And without more fuss their troth was plighted.


flocks are these? they answered, Those of tdie Marquis
de Carrabas.”
Puss ran on over the dead ogre s land and said the
same words to all the labourers on it, till he reached the
castle. There he stood at the door to receive the King and
Princess when they drove up to it.
“Will your Majesty honour my Lord by taking some
refreshment?” he said; and the King, who had not so
fine a castle as this one, alighted from his carriage and
entered.
Now the ogre was just going to his dinner when Puss
had called and killed him, so there was a very fine feast
upon the table and the miller’s son was able to entertain
the King and the Princess to a grand banquet. The King
took such a fancy to the rich Marquis de Carrabas that
he gave him the Princess for his wife. They lived in the
ogre’s fine castle, which Puss presented to his master,
and the happiest of their servants was “Puss in Boots.


Printed by Boylan & Co. Pty. Ltd.. 31 Cunningham Street. Sydne>


,^B(3HEErs^9SMHB^F'
3 1508 00765630 4
