

QUARANTINE.
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN MARITIME QUARANTINE AND THE
EVOLUTION OF INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS
CONCERNING QUARANTINE.
1913.
By Authority
ALBERT J. MULLETT, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
C. 11388.




AUSTRALIAN MARITIME QUARANTINE AND THE
EVOLUTION OF INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS
CONCERNING QUARANTINE.
From the earliest times attempts have been made by various countries
to protect themselves against the introduction of disease from other
countries. Roughly speaking, however, such measures were applied by
any country against only such countries as were at the time of applica-
tion of these measures invaded by an unusual outbreak of a disease
which did not happen at the time to be prevalent in the country moved
to so protect itself. Certainly these measures were also applied to any
vessel arriving in port with cases of disease on board. The one crude
measure universally applied was the application of quarantine —that is,
detention of the ship and all on board under absolute isolation for a
longer or shorter period.
Soon the absurdity of detaining a vessel which was itself absolutely
free from disease, merely because it had come from a country where
disease was prevalent, became apparent, and the more enlightened of the
officials concerned in the administration of these measures began to take
steps towards an international discussion of the position. Another
aspect of the same question also appealed strongly to some of the Euro-
pean authorities. The journeys between various European ports were so
short that practically Europe was, so far as quarantine was concerned,
merely one country.
It may be readily appreciated, therefore, that this matter of quaran-
tine was essentially one calling for international agreement. Many
attempts were made to secure an International Conference upon the
subject, but without any result until the very severe outbreak of cholera
in Europe from 1848 to 1850 brought the necessity of co-operation
between nations for the purpose of defence against disease prominently
before the world.
Paris, 1851.* —The first Conference was convened by the French
Government. Twelve states only were reprtsented, and the
outcome of the Conference was a Convention of thirteen articles
and 136 regulations. This Convention was based largely on the
French practice, and a too direct adhesion to the French ideas
was the principal objection to its adoption. It was ratified
by only France, Portugal, and Sardinia, and these withdrew
from the agreement in 1865. The other countries had a
system of administration too divergent from that of the
French to permit of their adopting the details prescribed in
the regulations, whereas they might more easily have agreed to
adopt the thirteen articles of the Convention had these alone
been put forward. Still, notwithstanding this failure, this
Conference of 1851 opened the door to international discussion.
Paris, 1859. — The second Conference was also convened by the
French Government, and resulted in a Convention on very
broad lines. No regulations were adopted, and in the actual
application of the principles the greatest liberty was allowed to
each State. This second attempt failed mainly by reason of
political events, especially the war with Italy.
C. 11388.
* The information concerning- the European Conferences is taken largely from “ Prophylaxie
Internationale et Nationale,” by Faivre.


Constantinople, 1866. —The French Government again took the
initiative, the epidemic of cholera imported into Egypt and
thence into Europe by Mecca pilgrims, provoking the
summoning of this Conference. The special study of this
Conference was the epidemiology and prophylaxis of cholera.
It carried out its work for eight months —the French delegate,
Dr. Flauvel, being specially present.
Two important principles were, for the first time, ratified —
1. Restrictive measures recognised beforehand and satisfac-
torily carried out are much less prejudicial to com-
merce and to international relationships than the dis-
turbance to industry and to commercial transactions
which follow an outbreak of cholera.
2. The nearer quarantine and other preventive measures
are applied to the original source of the epidemic, the
less burdensome are they and the more can their
efficacy be relied upon.
The Conference also occupied itself with the measures to be
taken in the original foci of endemic cholera, more especially
in India, because of the importance of that country in relation-
ship to the Mecca pilgrimage.
This Conference of Constantinople was really the first occa-
sion upon which a real attempt at international regulation
of sanitary matters was made. The actual set of regulations
was not the most noteworthy result of this Conference, for
the long-continued deliberations, the conscientious study of the
subjects under consideration, brought the representatives of
the countries into closer touch, and bore fruit in an unmis-
takable influence on the sanitary policy of the countries
concerned. England and Turkey in particular gave tangible
proof of this ratification of the conclusions adopted, by putting
them into practical operation—the former in India, and the
latter in the Mediterranean and the Red Sea.
Vienna, 1874. — This Conference, convened by the Austrian
Government at the instance of Russia, had two main objects—
the revision of the work of the previous Conference with regard
to the epidemiology and prophylaxis of cholera, and the estab-
lishment of a Permanent International Sanitary Commissibn.
The principal aim, however, of the two countries which were
mainly instrumental in convening the Conference, was the
suppression of the maritime quarantine which was hindering
commerce in the Black Sea and on the River Danube.
The resolutions of the Constantinople Conference on the
subject of the aetiology of cholera were entirely confirmed;
but upon the question of quarantine, the delegates were divided.
The representatives of the northern countries maintained that all
quarantine had become useless; those of the southern countries,
on the other hand, while admitting that measures of quaran-
tine had, when Europe was already invaded by an epidemic,
lost much of their efficacy, took the stand that, under certain
circumstances, such measures of quarantine were still of great
value. The discussion on this vital point ended in an agree-
ment that each country should protect itself in the way best
adapted to its own interests. To make provision for probable
variations in the practical translation of this permissive diver-
gence, the Conference agreed to recognise two systems—that of


“ medical inspection/’ and that of ‘ quarantine. A§ for the
institution of a Permanent International Sanitary Commis-
sion which should be intrusted with the study of epidemic
diseases and their prevention, this was dealt with in a separate
draft International Convention distinct from the other resolu-
tions adopted by the Conference. This draft Convention was,
however, not followed up, and accordingly the project of a
permanent Commission was allowed to lapse.
This Conference of Vienna is noteworthy, by reason of the fact that
two features of International Sanitary Defence prominent to-day were
then introduced for general discussion for the first time. These two fea-
tures were the abolition of quarantine and the establishment of an Inter-
national Sanitary Commission. Prior to this Conference, “ quarantine
was understood to mean the detention, not only of an actually infected
vessel, but also of any vessel coming from a port declared by the country
of destination to be an infected port. Measures of disinfection were
understood as being part of the restrictive measures; but the vital part
of “quarantine” was the actual detention of the vessel for an arbi-
trary period fixed by the authorities, until all possibility of infection of
those on shore was presumed to have been eliminated. During tis
period of quarantine, all communication between the vessel and the
shore was absolutely forbidden. These measures constituted an enormous
hindrance to commerce, and it was natural that strong pressure should
be brought to bear on the authorities with the object of substituting
some less burdensome measure. The adoption of . the principle o
“medical inspection” was the direct outcome of this movement; and
successive Conferences have progressively enlarged the application of
this modification of the severity of “ quarantine ” measures. The prin-
ciple of “medical inspection” may be briefly stated as follows:
In place of the irrational method of enforcing “ quarantine detention
on all vessels arriving from an infected country, irrespective of whether
the vessels themselves had actually become infected or not, it was agreed
that it would be quite safe if each vessel, on arrival at any port, were
boarded and examined by a medical ofiicial from the shore, and
“ quarantine ” measures applied only to those vessels found infocted,
all those free from infection being allowed to continue without further
restrictions. In the latter event, the vessel was awarded pratique.
Washington, 1881. —This Conference was convoked by the United
States Government, but the delegates were mostly the accredited
Ministers or Consuls at Washington of the various countries,
and there were very few medical experts. . ,
The primary objects of the Conference were the discussion of
the prophylaxis of yellow fever, and. the introduction o a
properly organized system of international notification ofthe
occurrence of infectious disease. The system of dual notifica-
tion (i.e., notification upon bills of health issued to every
vessel of the condition of the port of departure at the moment
the vessel leaves that port, and also an independent periodical
notification by each country to the others of the sanitary con-
dition of the country and its various towns) thus received fo
the first time the consideration due to its importance.
The Conference of Washington differed from those which had pre-
ceded it by reason of the fact that, for the first time, the principal
disease studied was yellow fever. Hitherto, the Conferencesi had limited
themselves to the study of cholera. This variation is notable, as tt
brings into prominence a fundamental principle which underlies all


existing International Sanitary Conventions, namely, that these Con-
ventions have been framed with reference largely to those diseases,
invasions of which the majority of the countries represented at the
Conferences have to fear. The first four Conferences dealt almost
solely with cholera—a disease which, from 1830 to 1850, had caused
great ravages all over Europe. At these Conferences, the United States
Republic not having yet been attacked by cholera—was not repre-
sented. But the terrible outbreaks of yellow fever in America between
1850-1880 had brought forcibly under the notice of the United States
Government the necessity of concerted measures in relation to this
disease, and more particularly the necessity of regular notification by
other nations (in this case, the notification of yellow fever by the Central
and South American Republics) of the occurrence of epidemic diseases
within their borders.
Rome, 1885.—This Conference was convened by the Italian Govern-
ment, and had as its object the creation of uniformity in the
sanitary measures in force in the different countries, and the
making of these more effective, and at the same time less
prejudicial to commerce. At this Conference, resolutions
were drawn up by a special committee; but the Conference
terminated without adopting these resolutions.
The resolutions prescribed a code of international sanitary
control having reference to cholera and, to a minor degree,
to yellow fever.
The evolution of the present system of maritime sanitary regulation
wa.s at this time at its most critical stage, and the confusion attending
this evolution is described by Dr. Proust* in a passage which is worth
reproducing here:
“ The distinctive characteristic of the Conference at Rome
is that it has adopted the principle of isolation for a period
consistent with the duration of the incubation of cholera; it
has endeavoured to abolish the use of the terms “ quarantine ”
and lazaret,” fearing to recall recollections of another age;
but it has decided that the passengers and crew of ships
actually infected, or even of ships coming from an infected
port, may, under certain circumstances, undergo sufficient
isolation with the object of avoiding any danger of transmis-
sion of infection in the event of one or more of the passengers
being infected with cholera in the incubation stage.
It is not likely that the Conference of Rome will have any
practical result. It at first appeared to be impossible that
a Conference so numerous, composed of elements so diverse,
having interests so opposed, could be productive of any agree-
ment. How is it possible, in fact, to reconcile the demands
of England who does not desire any measure, however slight,
with Spain, Turkey, Brazil, and Mexico, who require long
periods of “ quarantine,” and, in some cases, actually prohibit
the entrance of a vessel into their port. However, we have
established a kind of international sanitary code composed of
rational, moderate, and uniform provisions, which may serve
as the groundwork for an ultimate complete understanding.”
Venice, 1892.—This Conference marks the commencement of the
series of formal Conventions adopted as binding by the
signatory nations. The discussion was confined almost entirely
to the measures to be taken with vessels passing through the
June 1885 ° r * ac^resBe< * Minister of Commerce of France Vy M. Proust, 25th


Suez Canal. The importance of this highway between Asia
and Europe as a channel of infection is obvious, and much
of the time at this and subsequent Conferences was devoted
to the adoption of regulations for the sanitary control of this
traffic. This Conference instituted on its present basis the
present International Council which controls the maritime traffic
in the Suez Canal from the sanitary aspect; and it also intro-
duced another important innovation, viz., the classification of
vessels according to their own sanitary condition on arrival,
with complete abolition of any detention based solely on the
condition of the ports from which the vessel had come.
Thus was established the fundamental change in quarantine adminis-
tration, which embodied the evolution from the old irrational system
to the present method. Under the old system, a vessel was detained
and kept isolated if it came from an infected port; under this new
modification, the vessel was treated entirely on the result of the medical
inspection—a vessel was " clean ”if it had had no cases of cholera on
board during its voyage; "suspected” if it had had cases during the
voyage, but no case within the seven days preceding its arrival; and
“ infected ” if there were cases on board on arrival, or within the seven
days preceding its arrival. This classification is still, with slight modi-
fications, maintained.
Dresden, 1893. —This Conference continued the consideration of
the epidemiology of cholera, paying special attention to. the
notification by each country of the first cases of cholera within
its borders, and to the part played by cargo, merchandise, and
inanimate objects generally (fomites) in the spread of cholera
infection. #
This Conference dealt with the question of merchandise
much more completely than previous Conferences. It laid down
that certain articles, mails, for example, should not be submitted
to any restriction nor disinfection; that certain other articles
might be prohibited, and either refused entry altogether, or
permitted entry only after disinfection.
Further modifications in the classification of vessels according to
their sanitary state on arrival were introduced by the recognition of
the danger inherent in emigrant ships, or vessels exhibiting insanitary
conditions. It was recognised that such vessels, though actually free
from cholera, might be regarded with suspicion and subjected to
restrictive measures. _
Another important principle was adopted at this time, viz., that
observation of a person from a “ suspected ” ship might, under certain
circumstances, be permitted at the person’s residence instead of requiring
the detention of the person at a quarantine station.
Thus was instituted the existing system of “ surveillance.
Paris, 1894.—This Conference dealt only with the question of the
sanitary regulation of the Mecca pilgrimage, and of the mari-
time trade of the Persian Gulf.
Venice, 1897. —The appearance in Bombay, in September, 1896,
of a disease which had not shown itself for many years, viz.,
plague, caused much uneasiness amongst European authorities,
and accordingly, this Conference was summoned with the object
of arranging the measures to be taken to prevent the introduction
and dissemination of plague, and the sanitary control necessary
for this purpose in the Red Sea and in the Persian Gulf, lhe


Convention which was the outcome of this Conference is prac-
tically a consolidation of the previous Conferences at Venice
(1892), Dresden (1893), Paris (1894).
Paris, 1903.—The necessity of obtaining a practicable Convention
had become increasingly urgent, and it was decided to convoke
a new Conference, with the object of codifying the previous
Conventions, and producing one uniform set of resolutions
and articles of agreement. At the same time, the knowledge
that had been gained since the Venice Convention of 1897,
on the role played by rats in the dissemination of plague,
and of mosquitos in the dissemination of yellow fever, rendered
necessary a revision of the articles dealing with those diseases.
At this Conference, the proposal for the establishment of a
permanent International Bureau of Health, first suggested at
the Conference of Vienna in 1874, was finally adopted, and
this office has been in full working order since 1909.
The classification of ships (detailed above) into “ clean,”
“ suspected,” and “ infected,” has been maintained until the
present day.
For “ clean ” ships, notwithstanding that they may have
come from an infected port, the only measures permitted are the
original medical inspection, evacuation of drinking water and
bilge water, and any necessary measures of disinfection (in-
cluding measures for the destruction of rats). It is not con-
sidered permissible to detain either passengers or crew on such
vessel.
For “ suspected ” ships, in addition to the above, it is
recommended that measures of surveillance be employed—that
is, that passengers and crew be kept under observation for
certain specified periods, while in the case of “ infected ” ships
it is recommended that the passengers and crew be detained
under observation.
The gradual evolution of the scope of these Conferences under the
influence of the various epidemics which appeared from time to time, is
one of their most striking features. Dealing at first only with cholera,
the outbreak of yellow fever in America brought that disease within the
range of discussion,. while the great epidemic of plague subsequent to
1895 brought this disease forward into a prominent place in the discus-
sions at Venice (1896) and Paris (1903-12). As yellow fever was not
considered a menace to the European countries, it has never been
assigned more than a minor place in the discussions at these Conferences,
but it is so serious and widespread a disease in America that it has
been found necessary for the American nations to hold frequent con-
ferences and draw up international treaties, imposing restrictions on
raffic and commerce, solely with the object of preventing the spread of
the bearing it has upon the differences between the policy laid down by
the. International Conventions and that adopted in Australia. The
United States and other American nations have registered their adhesion
o the Pans Convention, but have, nevertheless, found it necessary to
impose restrictions beyond those specified in the Convention, with the
object of preventing the spread of yellow fever. Not only so, but in
view of the necessity of protecting their country against small-pox, the
United States have found it necessary to impose restrictions with regard
°f ls^ lsease a^so — a disease which has not even been discussed at anv
ol the European Conferences. It is necessary to emphasize this, as the


criticisms which have been directed against the Australian system of
quarantine have almost entirely been concerned with the measures
intended to prevent the introduction of small-pox.
The fundamental principle underlying the existing International
Conferences is that these Conferences have been convened with the object
of devising some system of mutual protection against those diseases
which most seriously threaten the countries concerned, and have always
been convened at a time when an invasion by the disease has been
actually very imminent.
In adopting the same principle with regard to yellow fever and small-
pox, the American nations were only following the same course, and
their departure from the principles laid down in the International Con-
ventions has, therefore, been regarded as perfectly legitimate, even
though these same nations had registered their adhesion to these
Conventions.
That the same principle has actuated the present Australian system
can be fully demonstrated.
SANITARY CONFERENCES IN AUSTRALIA.
After Australia had been free from any extensive epidemic of small-
pox for a period of thirteen years a serious outbreak occurred m Sydney
in 1881. Following this there were scattered cases, and in 1884 the
disease became extensively prevalent, affecting New South Wales, Vic-
toria and South Australia. Prior to this there had been several definite
outbreaks in Australia —Melbourne, 1857 and 1868; Sydney, 1877 and
the danger of small-pox to the community was very definitely before the
minds of those in authority. In addition to this, as each of the Aus-
tralian States had its own law and practice, and these differed materially
as between the States, considerable confusion and irritating obstruction
to commerce, especially by sea, was found to result.
As a direct result of these two factors the New South Wales Govern-
ment invited the Governments of the other States to send representatives
to confer and report as to the best means of establishing a uniform and
effective system of quarantine for Australia. The two words here used—
“ uniform ” and “ effective ”—constitute the keynote of the objects of
this and all subsequent Australian Sanitary Conferences. The striving
after uniformity has had its direct outcome in the present Common-
wealth system of quarantine—a system uniform for all Australia and
under one central direction. The determination to secure efficiency led
naturally to the discussion of those diseases which were most seriously
to be feared in Australia. The Australian Conferences, therefore, were
moved by exactly the same impulses and toward exactly the same ends
as all other Conferences; but just as the European Conferences discussed
the disease which most threatened European countries—cholera, and
later, plague; and just as American Conferences devoted themselves
almost entirely to the disease peculiarly dangerous to America—yellow
fever, and later, plague—so Australian Conferences, inspired by
identical apprehensions, have devoted themselves primarily to small-
pox, and later, to plague.
Australia has never known cholera or yellow fever except on vessels
arriving off the coast; but it has known very serious epidemics of small-
pox, and has learned how great a loss of human life and how serious a
hindrance to traffic and commerce, and how great a burden of cost to
the community, is produced by this disease.


First Conference, Sydney, 1881.—The greater part of the delibera-
tions of this Conference were directed towards the production of a
uniform Federal system of quarantine, and many of the resolu-
tions deal with the details of this system. At that time, and
indeed until 1908, there was no system introduced under any
Commonwealth Act, and accordingly the system proposed by
their delegates was based upon the assumption that all the States
would act in unison and co-operate in detail. Provision was
made for the introduction into each of the State Parliaments of
a uniform Quarantine Bill, so that although there was no com-
bined action in any other political sphere, uniform administration
in quarantine would be insured by the passage of these several
Acts to be known in each State as the Federal Quarantine Act,
It was agreed by the Conference that Part VI. of the Public
Health Statute 1865 of Victoria, should be the basis of this
Federal Quarantine Act, and, although the Act has in its
evolution changed considerably, yet this original basis can still
be traced in the form of the existing Commonwealth Quaran-
tine Act. Provision was made for the establishment of Federal
quarantine stations at Albany and at Thursday Island, the
ports first reached by vessels making Australia from the west-
ward and northward respectively, these stations to be under the
joint control of all the States.
The procedure to be adopted on the arrival of vessels was
also laid down.
In the case of clean ships, from whatever port they may have
come, no obstruction to the landing of passengers was per-
mitted. Certain measures of disinfection were allowed at the
discretion of the Health Officer.
case vessels infected with cholera it was prescribed
that “ all hands except such as are actually necessary to cleanse
the ship expeditiously and thoroughly, shall be landed at the
quarantine ground at the terminal port, where they shall be
detained for a period of not less than ten days.’’
In the case of vessels infected with yellow fever it was pre-
scribed that if no cases of yellow fever have occurred on
board during the voyage, being more than ten days from the
date of leaving the infected port, the passengers may be admit-
ted to pratique, but that if any case have occurred on board,
the passengers and crew shall be detained for ten clear days on
shore at the quarantine ground, and their effects, as long as
may be necessary to disinfect them to the satisfaction of the
Health Officer.”
Plague was not referred to. Considerable attention was
paid to small-pox, and the following rules were agreed upon:
Every passenger ship bound for Australia was to carry
enough lymph to vaccinate all on board. If small-
pox broke out the surgeon was to vaccinate all on
board.
Persons able to satisfy the Health Officer that they have
been successfully re-vaccinated at a date being not
more than six months previous to their arrival in an
infected ship may, at the discretion of the Health
Officer, be released after such time as is necessary to
cleanse and disinfect their clothing on shore.”


It may be seen from these provisions that except for the attention
paid to small-pox the scope of the measures agreed upon as practicable
did not differ from those agreed upon at the contemporary European
Conferences. That the Australian Sanitarians were fully alive to the
position taken up by their European colleagues is indicated by the
following initial resolution :
“ That by quarantine this Conference understands such measures
taken in regard to vessels coming to the various Australian
ports as will effectually protect the Australian Colonies from
the invasion of contagious or infectious disease consistent with
the least possible interference with the liberty of individuals
and with the least possible restriction to commerce.”
This Conference was not productive of any immediate result, nor
were any of its resolutions put into practice by the Governments con-
cerned. That it was, however, of great value in preparing the minds
of those most concerned for the ultimate unification, and in establishing
an understanding between the Health officials of the various States, is
clearly shown by subsequent events.
Second Australian Conference, 1896.—This Conference was held
primarily, if not entirely, for the purpose of arriving at some
uniformity of practice in regard to quarantine administration.
Confusion and annoyance had been produced in the case of
certain vessels infected with small-pox by reason of the varying
procedure adopted in the different States. The discussions
dealt with this question of uniformity of procedure in detail,
but entirely with reference to small-pox, and the resolutions
carried did not differ in any essentials from those carried at
the First Conference. In order that the reality of the fear of
small-pox in Australia might be appreciated it is only necessary
to mention that in the interval between the first and second
Conferences two disastrous epidemics of small-pox had occurred,
namely, in Launceston (Tasmania), 1887; and Perth (Western
Australia), 1893, and the necessity for placing this decision in
the most important position amongst the subjects discussed, at
Australian Sanitary Conferences is indicated by the closing
words of the President (Dr. D. A. Gresswell) at the conclusion
of this Conference :
“ The resolutions, if carried out, would secure a much
greater degree of protection to the Colonies than they
had previously enjoyed. Convinced though all might
be that small-pox must one day become endemic in
Australia, the duty which had been confided to them
of keeping it out as long as possible, and by such
means as were fair and reasonable, would at all times
receive their most careful and anxious consideration.”
Third Conference, 1900. —This was known as the Intercolonial
Plague Conference, and the only subject discussed was plague.
The world-wide spread of plague, and the appearance of the
disease in two of the Australian States, had rendered a
conference imperative. The Venice Convention of 1897 .was
taken as the basis of discussion. Certain important alterations
were made, and the resolutions finally agreed upon differed from
the Venice Convention primarily in two directions.


The principle of surveillance was not adopted, but, as was the
practice adopted by the French Government, taking advantage
of the discretion allowed by the Venice Convention, observation
was substituted for surveillance.
The precautions taken against rats and the measures for destruction
of rats on board were much in advance of the provisions of the
Venice Convention.
Fourth Conference, 1904.—The previous Conferences, which had
had as their object the creation of uniformity in the measures
adopted by the different States, had resulted in a much better
understanding between the various health officials and also in
considerable progress toward uniformity in the application of
quarantine measures, but no common legislation and no binding
agreement had been concluded between the States. With the
Federation of the Australian States into a Commonwealth in
1901, a new legislative condition had been created, and amongst
the matters upon which the Commonwealth Parliament was, by
the Constitution, authorized to legislate for, was quarantine.
Accordingly in 1904 the Prime Minister of Australia summoned
a Conference of the principal health officials in the various
States, The principal object of this Conference was expressed
in the Prime Minister’s letter as follows:
“ The Conference will be asked to submit for consideration
suggestions as to the provisions to be introduced into
a Bill dealing with the question, and also as to the
taking over of the administration of the quarantine
laws from the several States.”
This Conference drew up a number of recommendations, most of
which were subsequently embodied in the Quarantine Act 1908
now in operation. The Quarantine Act for the Common-
wealth of Australia was assented to on March 30, 1908, and
came into force on July 1, 1909, and by this Act the aims of
Australian Sanitarians, begun in 1884, were achieved. It
was found necessary, however, before the transfer of admini-
stration from the State Governments to the Commonwealth
Government was actually made, that the officials of the various
Governments concerned should meet to discuss certain
important details.
Fifth Conference, 1909.—The Fifth Conference, 1909, was accord-
ingly held and the draft regulations were discussed, various
details of practical administration being laid down.
Throughout the Fourth and Fifth Conferences, and naturally also
in the Commonwealth Quarantine Act and regulations,
measures directed against small-pox take a prominent place,
though the proximity of the Asiatic endemic centres of plague
and cholera, and the danger threatening Australia from these
sources, is also fully recognised.
COMPARISON BETWEEN AUSTRALIAN QUARANTINE
CODE AND OTHER CONVENTIONS.
" It is necessary in the first place to understand what is meant by
quarantine,” as the word is used in Australia. The term was defined by
the First Conference (1884) as follows:
“ By Quarantine, this Conference understands such measures
taken in regard to vessels coming to the various Australian
ports as will effectually protect the Australian Colonies from


the invasion of contagious or infectious disease, consistent with
the least possible interference with the liberty of individuals,
and with the least possible restriction to commerce.
The definition, as given by the Quarantine Act at present m
force, is:
“ in this Act, quarantine has relation to measures for the
inspection, exclusion, detention, observation, segregation, isola-
tion, protection, sanitary regulation, and disinfection of vessels,
persons, goods, things, and having as their object the prevention
of the introduction or spread of diseases affecting man.
It is obvious that the term “ Quarantine ” in Australia does not bear
a significance in any way divergent from the aims and objects of t
various European Sanitary Conventions.
The advisability of continuing to use the word ‘ ‘ Quarantine ’
recalling as Dr. Proust says, “ recollections of another age may
perhaps^be open to question; but the policy which is labelled with this
name in Australia does not, so far as its declared objects go, differ from
the policy in force in Europe.
The desideratum in both geographical spheres is efficieimy of prophy-
laxis, with a minimum of restriction to commerce and traffic.
Furthermore, the practical interpretation of these ideals does not
differ in essentials any more than does the policy.
There are provisions for the notification of disease, for the application
of certain prescribed measures of disinfection and of destruction of rats
and for the prevention of the migration of ™^ et w e en *hip
and shore, and for the production by arriving vessels of a Bill of Health
from the ports called at.
The sphere of quarantine administration in which the Australian
svstem principally differs in detail from the European systein is m the
measures prescribed upon the arrival of vessels; but, as will be pointed
out, the only essential difference is the inclusion of small-pox.
Upon the arrival from oversea of any vessel in any port in Australia
the master must produce a health report m a prescribed form This is
perused by the quarantine officer (always a medical man) who boards
the vessel/and then all passengers and crew are mustered. If aH pers
are found to be free from any quarantmable disease, the ship is, as
a general rule, admitted at once to pratique. Measures of disinfection
and deratisation may, however, be prescribed, and the only departure
from the general rule which would be enforced is that, m the event of
anv unusual occurrence of disease m any of the ports from which
vessel has come, the passengers might be released only on the conditi
that they report themselves at specified times and places.
In practical application, the classification of other vessels recognised
by the P European Conferences, viz., ‘ suspected and infected is
not rigidly adopted in Australia—every vessel upon which a case of
quarantine disease has occurred during the voyage bemg an
infected ship The remoteness or imminence of the probability ol
infective persons or material being still on the vessel on arrival m
Australian waters is, however, considered, and each case is. dealt Wi
according to the facts revealed by inquiry on arrival. Passengers or
• Th, q ua,antinable dlsaaa.a « .mall-pox, cholera, plagoe, yeU.w lever, «,phu,, and l.pro.y, a»d
power is given to add to these by proclamation.


crew may be released under surveillance, or may be detained under
o servation at a Quarantine Station. The minimum periods of deten-
tion at a station, or for surveillance, are prescribed as:
Small-pox ... ... 18 d
Typhus Fever U d
Yellow Fever ... ... 7 days .
ST® - - - 7
Cholera ... ... 7 da y g
Release under surveillance is, in the case of small-pox. only permitted
for persons primarily vaccinated or re-vaccinated more than fourteen
days and less than seven years. luurreen
In actual practice, the application of the principle of surveillance
is applied wherever possible, consistent with the reservation just
mentioned, and is freely applied in the case of plague infection. J
1 f The a^° Ve ? tat , em . ent mak f s it clear that there is no essential difference
between the Australian and the European systems as systems The
one fundamental point of difference is the inclusion of small-pox in the
diseases against which measures of protection are taken.
In this respect, as has already been pointed out, the authorities
other Entries. prGClSely the Same motives as the authorities of
The Australian population is, from the point of view of the hygienist
an unvaccinated population, the only State having any effectivJ system
of vaccination being Victoria. Small-pox, moreover" is not endemic
in Australia, and has become epidemic just often enough and severely
enough to produce a wholesome dread of the disease il the mTnds of
the responsible authorities. The last epidemic was in 1903.*
WpfJ^ nder theS ! cumstances > the application of the system of frontier
defence against disease, known in Australia as quarantine, is entirely
m accord with the principles upon which all such measures of sanitary
maritime defence are based, and in their details the measures prescribed
in respect of small-pox are entirely in harmony with the Measures
StadfrL. reC ° gmSed aIS ° b 7 EUropean for
J. H. L. CUMPSTON, M.D., D.P.H.,
Ist September, 1913.
ad u'ndeT'control™ ° CCUrred - TWS ° Utbreak
Pr,nte d PubHshed for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia
Dy ALBERT J. Mullett, Government Printer for the State of Victoria.




