

QUICKSILVER MINES,
KILKIVAN, QUEENSLAND,




ROUGH PLAN
Showing the approximate positions of Outcrop of Ore on the
QUEENSLAND CINNABAR SELECTION
OF 80 ACRES (No. 2688),
KILKITAN 3RXJ3ST, Gi'OTEEIISrBL.A.ISrZD,
NOTB.—See Leading Article in the “Brisbane Courierlolh November; “Queenslander,"
Hth November; and “Sydney Morning Herald." 22nd December, 1877.




A) %bss/r 103,
16-S-77
PEEPWP pipg,
KILKIVAN, QUEENSLAND.
At the present time, when the mineral wealth of Aus-
tralia is so admirably brought before the eyes of the
many representatives of other countries, attracted here
by our International Exhibition, it appears opportune
to call the attention both of Australians, and visitors who
may have come in search of new fields of enterprise, to
an industry which, so far, has not met with the support
it most certainly merits.
In the grounds of our “ Garden Palace” and inside
that building, on a substratum of that most useful of
minerals, coal, gold rears its glittering head and shares
the attention it merits in conjunction with the more
humble yet equally useful trophies of tin and other
metals, which represent the great mineral wealth and
wonderful resources of these colonies. Quicksilver —
the most useful agent in the extraction of the precious
metals from the ores (of which we see such magnificent
specimens in the Nave and Transept)—is to be found in
the Queensland Court, where a splendid collection of
Cinnabar ore and its product, “ quicksilver,” indicates
that in that colony there exists a district exceptionally


ricli in Cinnabar lodes, offering peculiar facilitiees for
lucrative operations and greater extension ini this
remunerative branch of the miner’s work.
Our readers will doubtless pronounce this a “ John-
sonian pufflet them patiently peruse the fadts we
have to place before them —assertions easy of disjproval
if not perfectly true —and then say if this is not siimply
a ‘ ‘description” entirely distinct from anything approach-
ing the nature of a “ puff.”
About five years since Mr. Samuel L. Heslter (a
miner of considerable experience among the quicksilver
mines of California), knowing the Kilkivan district to be
rich in minerals, determined, in conjunction with his
brothers, to thoroughly prospect the country for cinna-
bar. After discovering and sinking upon several lodes,
they were fortunate enough to find a cluster of eight
within a ring fence of 80 acres; and made arrange-
ments with the present owner of the property to secure
the freehold of the “ Queensland cinnabar selection.”
We should state that Mr. Hester prospected continuously
some three years, and opened up nearly 100 places, find-
ing several cinnabar-bearing lodes before finally arriving
at the conclusion that the above-named selection was by
far the richest.
But finding a mine and procuring the wherewithal
to work it are two very different things ; the reaction
which set in against mining operations of all kinds after
the tin and copper mania, told upon our successful pro-
spectors, and speculators declined to assist them : they
therefore, determined upon working the lodes in a primi-
tive fashion themselves, procured and erected a retort


(if a species of baker’s oven can be so dignified) and
with that and other inefficient appliances succeeding in
obtaining two tons of quicksilver from about fifty tons
of cinnabar, and sold the mercury to various gold mining
companies in the neighbourhood. The quicksilver com-
manded the highest price in Gympie, and was preferred
for its purity to the imported article ; the process, how-
ever, with such limited means at their disposal, was so
very dilatory that the proprietor deemed it advisable to
close the mines until arrangements could be made for
working upon a more extensive and scientific scale.
The country around abounds in fuel, iron-bark
being plentiful; nor is there ever any want of water
supply, whilst lime for flux is procurable in any quan-
tity on the ground.
Some figures in connection with the foregoing may
be added. Working as the Messrs. Hester did, they
could not afford to retort ore yielding less than per
cent. With capital to conduct the business properly,
experience at the foreign mines proves that ore yielding
1 per cent, of quicksilver gives a very handsome return.
One per cent on 2,240 lbs. at 3s. 3d. per lb. being equal
to £3 12s. Bd., not far short of the equivalent of 1 oz. of
gold per ton, of quartz, the cost of producing the respec-
tive results admitting of no comparison.
The proprietor, therefore, decided upon closing the
mines until satisfactory arrangements could be made to
work them in a scientific and profitable manner; for
this purpose he invites the co-operation of capitalists; and
those inclined to join him in the enterprise will learn all
the information they may require at Messrs. Eldred and
Co.’s office, 62 Margaret Street, Sydney.


The railway between the Port of Maryborough and
Gympie will be completed as far as the township of
Gootchey, 30 miles from Maryborough, about the middle
of 1880 ; the distance between Gootchey and Kilkivan
is about 10 miles, with a very good level road through a
fine pastoral country, and as steamers are frequently
plying between Maryborough and Sydney the quicksilver
can he brought to market at a very moderate cost for
carriage.
Experience tells us that as a rule it is not pioneers
and discoverers who reap the harvest they deserve, enter-
prise and capital step in for the larger share ; hut in the
present instance we trust that all concerned may profit
by adding another industry to the many which lend so
much lustre to these colonies.
In November, 1877, the rumours of the richness of
these mines induced the enterprising proprietor of the
Brisbane Courier to send a special mining reporter to
inspect the property, and his extensive and reliable
report appeared in that paper on the 10th of November,
1877, also in the Queenslander on the 21th of that month.
It is not our object to dilate further upon the advantages
thus presented to those who are in search of an invest-
ment ; we confine ourselves, therefore, to reiterating our
opinion that the enterprise offers unexceptionable pro-
spects of success, and to drawing attention to the follow-
ing brief report by Mr. Samuel Hester, and to the plan
of the property annexed :


SAMUEL L. HESTER’S REPORT.
Kilkivan,
Queensland.
Dear Sir,
I have much pleasure in handing you the following report of
the Queensland Cinnabar selection in the Wide Bay district of Queensland.
This selection consists of (80) eighty acres, and is well situated for
economic mining, surrounded with a useful forest of timber, lime, and water,
good site for works, and of easy access to the port of Maryborough, some
(70) seventy miles distant.
The selection is named the “ Queensland ” and from the now established
character of the property, I have no hesitation in stating this to be the
most promising area in the district.
The results of the work done some time past were satisfactory, but the
recent development has exceeded my expectation, I can therefore invite
inspection with every confidence of a favourable issue.
From one of the lodes, some (4) four tons of ore were reduced (when
the first working occurred), from which an average yield of (4) four per cent,
of quicksilver was obtained, or (320) three hundred and twenty pounds.
This quicksilver has since been sold to a quartz crushing company in the
locality, and pronounced by the buyer to be superior to the imported
article.
Our recent operations have been on the same lode (but not reducing
the ore raised), which has been sunk to a depth of (25) twenty-five feet, at
which level a drive was opened and continued for a distance of about (25)
twenty-five feet in lode matter.
The lode is over (7) seven feet in width, showing splendid ore
disseminated through the matrix, the full width of lode has not been
reached, but it is sufficiently exposed to stamp this deposit as the most
permanent and richest in the district.
From this operation 1 send you about (16) fifteen hundredweight of
high grade ore, and have stacked at shaft some (12) twelve tons undressed,
this will dress down to about (4) four tons of payable ore; and, judging from
previous results, it should give from (4) four to (5) five per cent, quicksilver.
The rock is of an average hardness and no indication in the neighbour-
hood of really hard or difficult rock to work.
The shaft sunk is six feet by three feet ; average width of drive, three
feet by seven feet; the workings are entirely on lode matter, and all rock
sent up is more or less charged with ore.
With such a face of lode matter to work with, no trouble would be
experienced in keeping a reasonable sized reduction works going continually
from what we term the Gully Lode, which forms the most important one at
present stage of development.


“ Hill Side Lode ” is the next in importance, and is situated close to
the “ Gully Lode,” but crossing at an acute angle. This lode has been
sunk upon, to a depth of (30) thirty feet, the outcrop being traceable for
some distance. The width of lode on the surface about (2) two feet,
showing ore completely through the huge blocks on the surface ; at depth
mentioned, the lode decreased in size to about (1) one foot, still carrying the
ore. Rock from this lode is payable if treated in a large way, that is, pre-
suming it remains without change for the better, which is not fair to the
lode, as it evidently belongs to the great source from whence the other, at
present, more favoured lodes received their wealth, and may eventually
prove equal to the Gully Lode, which it resembles in character of rock and
other features.
A trench has been carried from the shaft for some eight feet following
the outcrop, at which distance, another lode was met with at right angles,
about one foot in width. This lode shows cinnabar sparingly ; no work
having been done, little can be said of its value beyond its presence.
From the “ Hill Side Lode ” I send you about (3) three hundredweight
of rock, shewing its character as to quality ; the contents of case marked
] —[ is part of a huge block, several tons of such is strewed about the top of
the shaft
The “ Hill Side Lode ” is well defined, having average clean walls,
calcareous clay seams follow the lode, and show fine ore intermixed ; this is a
favourable indication of better results ; from a depth (the “ Gully L@de ”
shows the same way, but not so much now as at the surface), from site of
present shaft, this lode could be worked by tunnel with advantage.
The “Frank” vein occupies the next place of importance in this
property ; this vein on the surface outcrop, was about (3) three inches wide,
but at a depth of some (15) fifteen feet, it gradually increased to nine inches.
When first opened, about one and a half ton was reduced, and yielded
at the rate of (5) five per cent, quicksilver which was sold with the other
already alluded to. This vein differs from all the other lodes and veins, in
character of matrix, also country in which it exists. Quartz in this vein
forms the matrix, and is backed with a strong vein of calcspar, the ore
strictly adheres to the quartz : the calcspar seems to be the strongest, as it has
pinched the ore bearing portion of the vein ; the rock at the depth reached
increased in hardness, requiring blasting.
The site of shaft is on top of hill, but the better plan would be to test
this promising vein by tunnelling, as natural advantages exist for such an
operation. From this vein, I send you a small lot of ore-bearing rock, this
sample is not so rich as the parcel we reduced.
These three points form the leading attractions in the “ Queensland ”
eighty acre area, and having been sufficiently tested to warrant an inspection,
I shall merely allude to the other undeveloped lodes as a key to the map
showing the several outcrops and the courses of each lode, and it must be


borne in mind, that the undeveloped lodes possess no worse appearance on
the surface than those that have received our attention.
Hill Side Lodes are distinguished by the
Numbers 1 and 2
Gully Lode ... ... ... 3
Frank Vein ... ... ... 7
Undeveloped Lodes are Nos. ... 4, 5 and 6
Excepting the “Gully Lode,” the general course of the lodes are
northerly and southerly, with a westerly underlay.
The rock formation, limestone with large outcrops of calcspar in the
locality.
I am, dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
(Signed) SAML. L. HESTER.
Gibbs, Shallard, and Co., Printers, 70 (late 108) Pitt Street, Sydney.


