

fern
<s■ I
QUEENSLAND.
EMIGRATION
TO THE
NEW COLONY OF AUSTRALIA, THE FUTURE
COTTON FIELD OF ENGLAND,
IffcS @*ograpi)i), .Climate, Sgitcultural Capabilities,
anti Hanß EaluS,
(with: :m:.a.:p-)
HENRY JORDAN, Esq.,
Late Member of the Legislative Assembly for the City of Brisbane'
EIGHTIETH THOUSAND,
LONDON;
REES & COLLIN, “LOMBARD STEAM PRESS,”
38, GRACECHURCH STREET, CITY.






138 140 142 144 14S 148 150 162 154
Rees &, Collin, Lombard Steam Rtess, London.


QUEENSLAND.
Queensland is a new British colony, comprising the whole north-
eastern portion of Australia. Until December, 1859, it formed the
northern district of the Colony of New South Wales. It extends
from the present southern boundary, commencing at Point Danger,
in south latitude 28° 8' to Cape York, the northern extremity of
Australia, and from the sea coast, washed by the Pacific, to the 138th
meridian of east longitude. In other words, Queensland covers an
area of six hundred and seventy-eight thousand square miles, equi-
valent to nearly four times the area of France, and to nearly twice
that of Canada. As yet colonization has extended over an area
about equivalent to that of Great Britain and Ireland.
The coast line is picturesque, presenting more variety, and features
of greater interest and beauty than most other portions of the Austra-
lian sea board. The country is always green, presenting a succession
of fiats and ridges, well grassed, and finely timbered, or spreading out
into extensive plains, waving with nutritious grass, or covered with
flowering herbage. Ranges of mountains run parallel with the coast
line, at a distance of sixty or seventy miles, with their spurs running
out upon the more level lands towards the sea, diversifying the scenery,
and giving rise to a multitude of streams and rivers; of these many
are broad and navigable for many miles inland; their banks, formed
generally of the best alluvial soil, are finely grassed and wooded.
Most of the rivers have a bar entrance, but the obstructions are such
as may be easily removed by dredging. A dredge is now at work
in the river Brisbane, and it is expected it will soon put twenty feet
of water upon the bar. When the obstructions are removed, the
river will become a magnificent harbour for vessels of any tonnage,
with many miles of natural wharfage. The removal of the bar is
proceeding successfully," and it is expected will be completed in
about six months.
The sea board of Queensland is formed for extensive maritime com-
merce, having many noble bays, containing a vast area of land-locked
waters. Moreton Bay is about sixty miles long by twenty miles wide,
the shores are rich in soil and admirably adapted for agriculture.
The bay is dotted with islands, which add much to its beauty, and
some of them are also capable of profitable cultivation. Five navi-
gable rivers pour their waters into this beautiful bay, the Arrowsmith,
the Logan, the Brisbane, the Pine, and the Caboolture.


Besides Moreton Bay, there are several other estuaries of equal or
superior beauty, such as Keppel Bay, Wide Bay, Port Curtis, Port
Bowen, Port Denison, and others. These ports afford easy access to the
interior, and thus diminish the cost of carriage and shipment. Beyond
the range of mountains, the water-shed of the eastern coast land, the
country and climate assume a different character, the higher elevation
renders the temperature much cooler than in the low lands in the same
latitude. These table lands spread over an immense extent of country,
commencing about the twenty-eighth parallel, and extending for
several hundreds of miles in a succession of magnificent downs, covered
with nutritious herbage, and well supplied with water. First come
the Darling Downs, then succeed the Waterloo Plains, Calvert Plains,
Fitzroy Downs, Mantuan Downs, the rich pastoral country of the
Dawson, the Peak Downs, and the fine grassy plains of theßurdekin,
extending away northward and eastward towards the Plains of
Promise, which stretch along the shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria.
The Darling Downs, so named in honour of General Darling, a
former Governor of New South Wales, were discovered by that
enterprising and scientific traveller, the late Allan Cunningham, in
1827. These table lands are about 120 miles in length and about
50 miles wide. They are thus described by the discoverer : “ These
extensive tracts of clear pastoral country commence about the parallel
of 28° south latitude. Deep ponds, supported by streams, from the
high lands immediately to the westward, extend along their central
lower flats. The lower grounds, thus permanently watered, present
flats which furnish an almost inexhaustible range of cattle pasture at
all seasons of the year, the grass and herbage generally exhibiting in
the depth of winter an extreme luxuriance of growth. From these
central grounds rise downs of a rich black and dry soil, and very
ample surface, and as they furnish abundance of grass, and are
conveniently watered, yet perfectly beyond the reach of those floods
which take place on the flats in a season of rain, they , constitute a
valuable and sound sheep pasture, with a most beautifully diversified
landscape, made up of hill and dale, woodland and plain.” This
sketch may be taken generally as a correct description of much of
the rich pastoral land occupying the high lands of the colony.
CLIMATE.
The climate of Queensland is the finest in Australia, and cannot be
surpassed in any part of the world.
Although the latitude is high, the mean temperature is low as
compared with many places more distant from the Equator, as will be
seen by the annexed table


Places.
Latitude.
Mean
annual
tempera-
ture.
Average
rain fall
in inches.
Average
number
of days
on which
rain fell.
Brisbane (Queensland)...
28° S.
68.7
43
108
Funchal (Madeira)
32° 37'N.
68.5
29
70
Cape Town
34° S.
67
29
76
Malta
35° 53' N.
67
28
75
Algiers
36° N.
70
36
75
20° 9' S.
77
39
148
London
51° 30'N.
60.4
23
148
The climate closely resembles that of Madeira. The temperature
is more constant than in many other regions within the same isother-
mal lines. This equalisation is due partly to the sea breeze tempering
the heat of summer, and partly to the copious rains which fall during
the hottest months of the year. The peculiar coolness and dryness
of the atmosphere, as compared with the latitude, has been explained
by the intense and active evaporation which takes place in this part
of Australia. The absence of the hot winds that frequently afflict
the other Australian colonies further accounts for the comparative
coolness of the climate in Queensland. During a large proportion of
the year the weather is fine, the sky cloudless, the atmosphere dry,
elastic, and exhilarating. The summer months (December, January,
and February) are hot, but not sultry or oppressive. The winter
season, when dry (as it almost invariably is), is exceedingly beautiful
and agreeable. The mornings and evenings are cool, during the day
the air is warm and balmy, the sky brilliantly blue, and, the
atmosphere singularly transparent.
Such a climate is necessarily healthy. It is free from all endemic
diseases, and epidemics are of rare occurrence. The diseases
incidental to youth are usually very mild in their character, and
short in their duration. -In the incipient stage of consumption, this
climate usually affords great relief. “Many persons afflicted with
this fatal malady, have derived great benefit from a short residence
in Queensland; and several individuals, who have arrived in what
appeared to be a dying state, have lived here for many years in
comparative health and comfort.”* “Persons, particularly, who
have arrived at or passed the middle stage in the more inhospitable
climate of Britain, often have their health and vigour surprisingly
renewed in this genial climate. Instances of persons attaining a
great age are common, —persons nearly, or quite one hundred years
* Letter from Dr. Hobbs, the Health Officer at Brisbane.


old, being not unfrequently met with, and these generally retaining
an amount of strength and activity to the last.” *
AGRICULTURAL CAPABILITIES.
The soil and climate of Queensland are suited for the production
of a great variety of articles of general commercial value. Cotton,
sugar cane, barley, oats, sorghum-saccharatum, arrowroot, tobacco,
indigo, coffee, rice, may all be successfully cultivated on the rich
flats and ridges of the low lands. Maize (Indian com) and the
English potato also thrive admirably together, and yield an abundant
crop. One crop of maize and two crops of potatoes may be taken off
the same land in a single season. The average yield of maize is forty
bushels to the acre, and the average price is 4s. 6d. a bushel. The
average yield of English potatoes is three tons to the acre, and the
average price realized by the farmer, £6 per ton. On new land the
produce of maize is sometimes eighty bushels to the acre, for two or
three successive crops. Potatoes will sometimes yield eight tons to
the acre. Arrowroot of the finest quality is cultivated successfully,
yielding an average of one ton of farina to the acre. It has hitherto
sold in Sydney at Is. per pound in bulk, and the quality is said to be
equal to the best Bermuda. Prizes were awarded to Queensland
arrowroot at the Paris Exhibition.
The sugar-cane promises to prove one of the principal sources of
prosperity in Queensland. It thrives most luxuriantly, and competent
judges have pronounced it to be of excellent quality, and likely to
yield richly, and make a very profitable return to the planter. The
pine-apple thrives remarkably well in these localities, growing to a
large size, and preserving its peculiar and delicious flavour. It yields
a very profitable return to the growers, who cultivate it in large
quantities. One plantation will cover several acres, and during the
season, thousands of pines are exported weekly to the Sydney
market. Arrangements are now made also for shipping them
regularly to Melbourne, where they will find an almost exhaustless
demand. The banana is cultivated largely, requiring little care,
and growing with great luxuriance; the yield is very large,
averaging at least 300 bunches to the acre, containing four
dozen bananas on each bunch at 9d. per dozen, the ordinary
price; this will realize £45 to the acre. The vine, in some
of its varieties, flourishes well, and will amply repay the
labour of its cultivation. Oranges may also be grown in abundance
with careful cultivation. The peach grows fast, and bears early,
and in great profusion; several varieties of it have not succeeded, the
fruit being imperfectly formed or spoilt by a grub; but other kinds,
* Lecture on Climate, delivered by Dr. Barton Surgeon to the Brisbane
Hospital, at the School of Arts at Brisbane^


such as the China peach, are perfectly developed, of a delicious flavour,
and load the tree in great abundance. The loquat, quince, mulberry,
guava, mango, Papaw-apple, tamarind, star-apple, Bengal-quince,
date, datd-plum, grandilla, custard-apple, rose-apple, citron, lime,
pomegranate, lemon, alligator-pear, &c., &c., all grow well on the
low' lands, unprotected in the open air.
In the uplands, beyond the mountain range, wheat is most success-
fully cultivated; it is of the finest quality, the grain is full and clean,
weighing 60 to 631bs. per bushel; it is perfectly free from smut,
rust, and blight, the rind is thin, and the yield of flour large, and the
quality of the flour very fine. The yield of wheat in this locality
averages about thirty bushels to the acre, and the average price of
flour in the same district has hitherto been about £3O a ton.*
This district, “ The Darling Downs,” before described, may very
properly be termed the Garden of Australia; and although the greater
portion of it may be by nature designed for pastoral purposes, yet a
vast number of acres must soon be covered over with com, and beau-
tified with luxuriant orchards and gardens. A long strip of country,
from fourteen to fifteen miles in width, is, as it is termed, within the
influence of the range; is visited by regular rains; intersected by
numerous watercourses; lightly timbered, and capable of producing not
only -wheat and other cereals, but almost all the choicest English
fruits in great perfection and abundance. Of all agricultural pursuits,
however, cotton-growing promises to prove the most profitable, and
it will probably become the staple produce of the colony. The climate
and soil of Queensland, east of the Main Range, have been proved to
be peculiarly suited to the production of the finest kinds of this
valuable textile. Several bales of Moreton Bay cotton have already
been sent to England, and have been valued by the best judges at
very high prices. The Sea Island ’cotton, worth from Is. 3d. to
2s. 6d. per lb., will probably be grown most profitably.
Owing to the absence of severe frosts, the Cotton Plant, an annual
in America, is perennial in Queensland. The average yield will cer-
tainly amount to four hundred pounds to the acre. Mr. Bazley, M.P.
for Manchester, has estimated the average value of Moreton Bay
Cotton at Is. 4d. per pound. Estimating the value at Is. 3d. per
pound, and the yield at four hundred pounds to the acre, the value
of the produce from that amount of land would be twenty-five
pounds sterling, annually.f
* By a recent mail we learn that as much as 50 bushels to the acre of wheat
has been realised in the district of the Darling Downs. —H. J.
t On the authority of the largest shippers in England, it may be stated that
one penny per lb. will always cover the cost of freight. The average cost of
freight from America is five-eighths of a penny per lb. It is probable that
two or three thousand bales of cotton may be exported from the colony this


A bonus is offered by the Queensland Government of ten acres of
land for every bale of this description of cotton, weighing 300 lbs.—
which will amount in value to Bd. per lb., making each pound of clean
cotton worth Is. lid. to the producer, and as an acre will produce one
bale and a third, there are £l3 6s. Bd. sterling value to be added
to the produce, which will thus be worth nearly £4O per acre.*
The labour of picking the cotton constitutes no real difficulty in the
cultivation of this valuable article of commerce. It is known from
American experience, that one man, assisted by his wife, and one
child, could very easily gather the cotton from ten acres of plants
during the picking season, which lasts three months. In Queens-
land these would be May, June, and July, when the climate is
eminently serene and salubrious.
An immense quantity of land is suited to cotton cultivation, in-
cluding almost the whole extent of the sea board of Queensland, at
least, from Point Danger to Keppel Bay, with the alluvial lands on
the banks of the navigable rivers, embracing many millions of acres,
where a very large population of British yeomen and their families
might be employed in cultivating their own land, enjoying comfort
and independence, and, in many instances, realizing opulence.
CLEARING LAND.
The average cost of cutting down and burning off the trees, leaving
the stumps of those over two feet in diameter, is £4 per acre in the
low lands, where the timber is thicker than on the uplands. Trees of
smaller growth are usually “ grubbed ” out by digging around the
roots till they can be easily overturned by the weight of the branches,
and thus the roots are drawn out of the ground. The roots of the
larger trees are left two or three seasons, and then got rid of by an
easy and simple process called “steaming.” In the Hunter District,
Hew South Wales, where this plan is adopted, two men will contract
to do this work at £4 per acre ; but after the first expense of clearing,
this further process may be well omitted for several years.
In many localities, especially on the lands best suited for wheat,
there is little timber, and the expense of clearing is very much less.
Generally, there is enough timber of the best description for fencing,
having the double advantages of being very durable and being easily
split.
AGRICULTURAL RESERVES.
As this new colony offers, perhaps, the most attractive field for
year. Several Companies are now in most successful operation in the colony,
and the results so far have proved highly satisfactory. The operations have
been carried on with European labour. —H. J.
* The bonus, as here estimated, will continue only till the end of 1863, but
will continue at half the amount for the two succeeding years, till the end
of 1865.


emigration of all the British colonies, the Queensland Parliament have
passed laws calculated to encourage emigrants of such a class as will
he most likely to he themselves benefited, and to lay the foundation of
the permanent wealth and prosperity of the colony. The “ Alienation
of Crown Lands Act ” provides for the rapid survey of large tracts of
the best lands for agriculture, in localities suitable for water carriage
or other means of transit. These agricultural reserves are to be
marked out in connection with all the principal townships, and on
the shores of the bays and rivers. The amount of land thus reserved
for farming will be almost unlimited, the law providing for a con-
tinuous supply, and that the quantity of land in each agricultural
reserve shall be always kept five thousand acres ahead of the
demand.
The terms of occupancy are easy, and must prove very attractive
to the intending emigrant farmer. Although not nominally reduced
to the low price which obtains in the United States and in Canada,
the land is in reality cheaper on the Queensland reserves. A man
purchasing forty acres at the price of £1 an acre, for £4O, may claim,
in addition, one hundred and twenty acres, which he may hold for
five years, at the nominal rent of 6d. an acre, with a right of pre-
emption over the whole or part: That is, during any period of the
five years the occupant may purchase any part of the whole one
hundred and twenty acres, at the upset price of £1; which is, in
effect, giving him that quantity of land, on credit, for five years; and
after that period he pays only the ordinary Australian upset price of
£1 per acre, after he has been realizing the returns from his crops
during that lengthened time, the profit of which will be more than
sufficient to pay for the fee simple of the soil. The only conditions
imposed are actual residence on the land, and that a substantial
fence be put round it in eighteen months.'*' As long as the fence is
substantial, it may be of a rude description, requiring comparatively
little labour beyond what is necessary for the clearing; while the
materials are close at hand, in the smaller timber grubbed out of the
land, and in the trunks'of the larger trees which have been felled.
These may be piled up, in the colonial style of fencing, with as little
labour as would be required to burn the timber off the ground where
it lies. No land tax, or any charges whatever, beyond the 6d. an
acre rent, are imposed.
The farmer in Queensland having raised his crop, is liable to meet
with no new difficulty in getting his produce to market. A very large
proportion of the land on the agricultural reserves will be on the
* The buyer of land, on the reserves must fence in his purchased piece, unless
he leases the further portions, in which case, he must fence the leased land, and
may leave the bought land unenclosed.—H. J.


shores of the bays, or on the banks of the fine navigable rivers, with
which the colony abounds; while the splendid wheat-growing country
over the Main Eange will be reached in a few hours from the head of
the navigation of the Brisbane and Bremer rivers, by a line of tram-
ways now in process of construction.
Alive to the importance of opening up the country, stimulating
industry, and bringing every product of the farm within easy reach of
the market, the government has acted very liberally in this most
important undertaking, by giving a grant of land of one acre to every
pound sterling expended by a private company in constructing the
line. This undertaking has been commenced with spirit.*
EMIGRANT LAND ORDERS.
To immigrants from Europe, further inducements are offered.
These, if they have paid their own passage out, as cabin or in-
termediate passengers,f are entitled to free grants of good land, to
be selected by them in any district of the colony, to the amount
of £3O sterling for each adult, and for each two children be-
tween the ages of four and fourteen years; children under four
years not counting, those above fourteen counting as adults. This
regulation entitles persons arriving in the colony at their own
expense, to land on the following scale, viz.:—
Man and wife ... £6O w r orth of land.
(Say) 4 children over 14 years ... £l2O „ „
„ 4 „ between 4 and 14 ... £6O „ „
That is a total amount of land orders to the value of two hundred
and forty pounds will be granted to a man with his wife and a family
of eight children. Land orders will not be transferable except by
the permission of the Government in special cases.
The land orders which are available for the purchase of any farm
or country lands offered by the Government, without restriction as
to quality or locality, are granted in the proportion of £lB im-
mediately on arrival, and £l2 more at the end of two years
continuous residence in the colony—the latter instalment being
given only to cabin and intermediate passengers. No [particular
portion being allotted to the emigrant, whose selection is unfettered,
he will be saved from the disappointment which has been experi-
enced elsewhere upon finding the allotted portion to be in some
cases almost entirely useless.
The Government grants of land are available also for persons
sending home from the colony for their friends, or for any one sending
*' This tramway is now being constructed under the immediate direction of
the Government
t Steerage passengers will receive an £lB land order. —H. J.


out their own servants under the Queensland emigration regulations,
at their own cost. *
The regulations formerly made by the authority of the Queen, for
the remission of certain portions of the purchase money for land to
officers of the British army or navy are still in force in Queensland,
though these privileges have been abolished in most of the other
Australian colonies.
WEALTH OP COLOHY.
The wealth of Queensland at the present moment may be said to
consist in its immense herds of cattle, and flocks of sheep, estimated
four years ago at 3,500,000 sheep, 450,000 horned cattle, and 20,000
horses;+ the staple exports from these were then valued at more than
half-a-million of pounds sterling a-year, and these exports are
augmented annually. The laws for the occupation of portions of
the country for grazing purposes, are such as sufficiently protect the
pastoral interest, while the principle is affirmed, that the primitive
occupation of grazing sheep and cattle on the uncultivated lands,
must give place to the advancing strides of colonization, and to the
cultivation of the soil.
PASTORAL LEASES.
A measure entitled “The Unoccupied Crown Lands’ Occupation
Act,” became law during the first session of the Queensland Parlia-
ment. The principle of security of tenure was therein established by
granting fourteen years’ leases, —thus securing the lessee of Crown
lands used for grazing, against any other person wanting it for the
same purposes; while twelve months may, at any time, dispossess
the sheep farmer of his run, should it be required for public use, or
to be sold for agricultural purposes, subject to these conditions, the
squattages are let on fourteen years’ leases, but are to be re-valued at
short periods. The rent for the first four years is merely nominal,
with a view to encourage enterprise, in taking up new country, and
is increased according to circumstances, during the two succeeding
periods, each of five years. The quantity of country held in one
block is limited to a hundred square miles, and must be stocked with
sheep or cattle to one-fourth of its estimated capabilities during the
first year. Grass lands are estimated to carry and to fatten one
hundred sheep, or twenty head of cattle per square mile. The rent
for the first four years, is ten shillings a square mile ; during the first
* By arrangements made to check all speculation in land-orders injurious to
the colony, and calculated to frustrate the intentions of this liberal immigration
scheme, it is necessary that persons for whom land-orders are claimed, unless
members of their own families, should be the servants of the parlies paying
their passages, engaged at “ current rates ” of wages in the colony, and by the
use of the regular form to be obtained at the Queensland Emigration Office.
London. —H. J,
t These numbers are now greatly increased.— H. J.


of the two succeeding periods, not less than £25, nor more than £5O
the “ block,” containing twenty-five square miles, and during the
second period of five years, not less than £3O, nor more than £7O
for a block.
The pre-emptive right of purchase, having in many instances
resulted in the depreciation of Crown lands by the alienation of water-
xrontages, and other more valuable portions of the country, has been
abolished; and the principle substituted of compensation to the
lessee for improvements, to be paid at the termination of the lease.
GOLD, MINERALS, AND TIMBER.
The natural products of Queensland are rich, varied, and abundant.
Gold has been found in several localities, of the finest quality; and
though no systematic search has been made for it, there can be little
doubt, from the appearance of the country in many districts, that it
will be found in quantities that would be richly remunerative to a
mining population.
Copper and tin are also found in a very pure state, and want only
labour to turn them into gold.
To encourage the development of these sources of wealth, provision
has been made for securing to any persons or company, 640 acres of
land for mining purposes, at the upset price without competition, and
in any locality where the ore maybe likely to exist in paying quantities,
Coal of excellent quality is abundant; and, as in other countries,
where there is much coal, iron is also plentiful.
The many beautiful and valuable woods of the country, are es-
pecially worthy of being noticed. Perhaps no part of the British
possessions is richer in this respect, and the timber of Queensland
will probably become a very large and valuable export.
The success which has attended the attempts to grow cotton as a
remunerative occupation, especially to the proprietary farmer, pro-
mises to make this invaluable textile the greatest source of wealth
to the colony.
FORM OP GOVERNMENT.
The form of Government in the Colony of Queensland resembles
that existing in England, but with a much more extended franchise.
There is a Governor, who is the representative of the Queen. There
are two Houses of Parliament; the Upper House, or Legislative
Council is nominated by the Governor, in the name of the Crown;
while the Lower House, or Legislative Assembly, is elected by the
people. All money-bills must originate in the Assembly, and the
responsible ministers of the Governor, forming the Executive
Council, must be persons possessing the confidence of the Legislature,
in accordance with the practice of the British Constitution.


It will be seen from the above that full political freedom has been
granted to the colony, and that it has been entrusted with the entire
management of its own affairs, while, at the same time, as a colony of
the British Crown, it enjoys the powerful protection of the mother
country. The highest offices in the Civil Service, as well as the seats
in the Legislature, are open to all whp possess the public confidence.
No distinction is made between foreigners who have been naturalized
and British-born subjects. Aliens can be naturalized by an inex-
pensive form, and then obtain the franchise.
EDUCATION.
This subject engaged the early attention of the Colonial Legisla-
ture, and a system has already been established of the most efficient
and liberal character. In the Primary Schools, a thoroughly good
English Education is brought within reach of the very poorest classes,
while in the Grammar Schools facilities are provided for obtaining, at
a very moderate cost, a good classical and general education, such as
will fit the pupil for the English Universities. Boys distinguishing
themselves in the Primary Schools are eligible for scholarships at the
Grammar Schools; and again, the best scholars at these higher
seminaries will be eligible for Exhibitions of a certain annual value,
at any British or Australian University. These Exhibitions are
open to all indiscriminately, and are to be obtained by public
competitive examination.
PUBLIC WORSHIP.
Public worship is well supported, the number of places of worship
in the principal towns being very large in proportion to the present
number of inhabitants. Brisbane, the seat of Government, with a
population • of about 7,000, contained, during the first year of the
existence of the colony, no fewer than fourteen churches and chapels
of various denominations.* There is a Bishop of the Church of
England, and also of the Roman Catholic Church, besides ministers
of all the principal Christian communions.
DEMAND FOR LABOUR & RATE OF WAGES.
There is a steady demand for certain descriptions of labour, and in
the pastoral districts especially, it far exceeds the supply. Shepherds
are always required, and obtain good wages, those offered in the
northern districts at the present moment being much higher than
the subjoined average rates. Ploughmen and farm labourers are also
much in request, and are well paid. Domestic servants, and especially
* The population of Brisbane has grown with that of the colony generally,
and the accommodation for purposes of religious worship keeps pace with the
other advancing interests of the colony.


female servants of good character, can always obtain immediate em-
ployment and high wages. Mechanics will earn high wages; masons,
carpenters, wheelwrights, blacksmiths, &c. are always needed. For
some other descriptions of skilled labour, mentioned below, there
cannot, at present, be a large demand, although a few more individuals
might still earn the wages named, such as upholsterers, tinsmiths,
printers, painters, coopers, millinfers, and dressmakers. Shopmen and
clerks are not much needed. There is a class of persons who cannot
prosper in this colony, viz., persons who, though with a good education
and good manners, have no trade or profession, and are without capital.
Sheep-farming is, however, a very profitable pursuit for energetic
men, with even but small capital. As explained at page 10, pasture
lands can be obtained in the new districts at an almost nominal rent
The settlers most urgently required in Queensland, are men desirous
to engage in agricultural pursuits. Persons with the bare means of
existence at home, but who can manage to pay their own passage out,
will find themselves in the possession of a farm immediately on their
arrival in this colony, and may enter forthwith upon the cultivation of
the soil, with the fairest prospects of success. Others, who may not
be possessed of any capital on their arrival in the colony, may be
certain of immediate employment at good wages, with board and
lodging, and the amount they can save out of their earnings in two
years will be quite sufficient to enable them to enter upon their own
land, to the whole amount of which they will then be entitled in the
proportion of thirty pounds’ worth for each adult, and half that
amount for children between the ages of four and fourteen years—
if they have paid their own passage out—or to twelve pounds’
worth for each adult, and half the amount for children if they have
been conveyed to the colony free of expense to themselves by their
employers.*
WAGES IN BRISBANE, f
Stonemasons, 10s. to 11s. pr. day.
Bricklayers, 10s. to 11s,
Carpenters and Joiners, 9s. to 10s.
Plasterers, 9s. to 10s.
Painters, 9s. to 10s.
Blacksmiths, 10s. to 11s.
Masons’ and Bricklayers’ la-
bourers, ss. 6d. to 6s.
Quarrymen, per day of 10 hours,
Bs. to 9s.
Labourers, ss. fid. to 6s. Bd.
Tinsmiths, £2 to £3 per week.
Upholsterers per day, 9s.
Female cooks, £3O to £lO a-
year.
Tailors, 6s. 6d. to 7s. fid. per day.
Milliners, £4O to £BO per ann.
Dressmakers, £3O to £6O
Needlewomen, £3O to £4O.
Shoemakers, a-week, £2 to £3.
* Half land-orders are not given for any single or odd child, but two children
in one family between four and fourteen claim one full land-order. —H. J.
t Persons who are disposed to hire as shepherds, or general servants, in the
interior, especially in the Kennedy and other Northern districts, may obtain
much higher wages than those above mentioned,—H. J.


Coopers, per day, 15s.
Printers (Compositors) Is. 3d.
per 1000.
Printers (Pressmen).
Shepherds a-year with rations,
£3O to £35.
Grooms do. do. £4O to £45.
Farm servants do. do. £35 to £4O.
Married couples with services of
wife, double rations, £45 to £55.
Servant maids a-year, with board
and lodging, £lB to £25.
REVENUE AND POPULATION.
The year 1860 was the first of the political existence of Queensland,
and yet the revenue, raised principally by a few indirect taxes, and
from the proceeds of the rents and sale of the Crown lands, did not
fall far short of two hundred thousand pounds (£200,000), so that
Queensland at once took the twelfth place among the forty-eight
colonies of the empire. The population, of British origin, was then
estimated at about twenty-eight thousand souls.
The population now exceeds 41,000. The revenue is estimated
at nearly £300,000.
Detailed information of all kinds—the banks in the colony, the im-
ports and exports, &c., will be found in the Statistical Eegister of
Queensland for the last year.
AVERAGE PRICE OP AGRICULTURAL
PRODUCE AND
FARMING STOCK.
Wheat per bushel, 9s.
Maize ditto, 4s. 6d.
Potatoes per ton, £6.
Hay ditto, £B.
Bananas per dozen, Bd. to Is.
Grapes per lb., Is.
Pines per dozen, from 2s to £l.
Arrowroot in bulk per lb., Is.
Cotton per lb., lOd. to 2s. 9d.
A good cart horse, about £3O.
A serviceable riding horse, £2O.
Yoke of oxen, £lB.
A good milch cow, £6.
Farmer’s cart, £2O.
American plough, £5 to £7 10s.
PRICES OF
PROVISIONS
AND CLOTHING.
Fresh beef per lb., 4d.; best
Fresh mutton per lb., 4d.
Salt beef per lb., 3d.
Tea per lb., 2s. to 3s.
Bacon per lb., Is. 2d. to 2s. 6d.
Salt butter (best) per lb., Is. 4d.
to 2s.
Cheese (Colonial) per lb., Is.
Eggs per doz., Is. 6d. to 2s.
Bread (best wheaten 21b. loaf), 6d.
Flour (best) cwt., 235.
Flour (2nd.) cwt., 19s.
Candles (composition) per lb.,
Is. Bd.
Candles (tallow) per lb., 9d.
Soap (Colonial) per lb., sd.
Starch per lb., 9d.
Fresh ditto, 2s. to 2s. 6d.
Milk (new) per quart, 6d.
Cheese (English) per lb., Is. 6d.
The price of clothing is about one-fourth more than in England.
* Pines in summer are sold by the fanner at from 2s. to 6s. per do«en ; in
winter from 14s. to £1 per dozen.—H. J.


GENERAL ADVANTAGES OF QUEENSLAND AS
A FIELD FOR EMIGRATION.
These may be thus briefly summarised.
The salubrity and charm of the climate, and its suitability to the
European constitution, the existence of the English constitution, and
of English Jaws and habits of life, the lightness of the taxation, the
htness of the soil for agricultural purposes, especially for the cultiva-
tion of semi-tropical productions, and above all for the growth of
cotton. The facilities now afforded for procuring land on the Anricul-
tural Reserves on the easiest terms, the readiness with which farm
produce may be conveyed to market by water carriage or tramway,
the free and liberal grants of land to be made to persons arriving from
Europe, without expense to the colony, the safety of the voyage, and
the ease with which parties will be immediately settled on the land
with very little further expense of travelling on their arrival.
The Government of Queensland have sent to England a special
Emigration Agent, who will give every necessary information to
intending emigrants, who are invited to apply by letter to Henry
Jordan, Esq., Queensland Emigration Office, 17, Gracechurch Street
London.
Vessels will be despatched frequently from London, Liverpool,
Glasgow, and Plymouth. The fullest information can be obtained
by application to Henry Jordan, Esq.; at the above address.
Queensland Emigration Office.


APPENDIX.
Restrictions as to Age. —Persons claiming Land Orders under these
Regulations must have arrived in Queensland by a ship coming direct
Jrom Europe, and either at their own expense, or otherwise without
any cost to the Government; they must not have been previously
resident in the Colony; and must be, if men, under forty; if women,
under thirty-five years of age. This restriction as to the age will be
dispensed with in the case of parents accompanied by not less than
five children.
Proof of Eligibility to receive Land Orders. —Upon their arrival in
the Colony of Queensland, persons claiming Land Orders must pre-
sent themselves forthwith to the Immigration Agent at the port of
disembarkation, with the Land Order Warrants, which must be
obtained before embarkation from the Queensland Emigration Office.
When persons have paid their full passage money they will receive
a certificate from Messrs. T. M. Mackay & Co., the Shippers, and this
must be forwarded, together with the required proof of age,* and
the names and ages of each member of the family, addressed, Henry
Jordan, Esq., 17, Gracechurch Street, London; Land Order Warrants
will then be issued, enabling persons to obtain the Land Orders in
the Colony.
Outfit of Clothing
For Males.
Six shirts
Six pairs of stockings
Two warm flannel or Guernsey
shirts
Two pairs of new shoes
Two complete suits of strong
exterior clothing
For Females.
Six shifts
Two warm and strong flannel
petticoats
Six pairs of stockings
Two pairs of strong shoes
Two strong gowns, one of which
must be warm.
But for each child nine shirts or shifts, four warm flannel waistcoats,
and one warm cloak or outside coat, six pairs of stockings, two pairs
of strong shoes, and two complete suits of exterior clothing, are re-
quired. There must be also, at least, three sheets for each berth, and
four towels, and two pounds of marine soap, for each person. The
necessary brushes and combs and clothes brushes, for cleanliness, must
be provided by the Passengers. Persons must not have less than
the above outfit; but the larger the stock of clothing, the better for
health and comfort during the voyage, which usually lasts about four
* In any eases where the extract from the register of birth cannot be procured,
a declaration of the age, signed in the presence of a magistrate, and bearing also
his signature, must be produced. Forms may be obtained at the Queensland
Emigration Office, 17, Gracechurch Street, London.


months; and as the Voyagers have always to pass through very hot
and very cold weather, they should be prepared for both. Two or
three coloured serge shirts for men, and an extra supply of flannel for
women and children, are strongly recommended.
PASSAGES.
Arrangements have been made with Messrs. Baines & Co., of Liver-
pool, and T. M. Mackay & Co., 1, Leadenhall Street, London. E.C.,
for the despatch of First-class well equipped Passenger Vessels direct
for Queensland. + For persons paying their own Passage, the Fares
will be as follows: First Cabin, £45; Second Cabin, £25 : Inter-
mediate, £2O; Steerage, £l7; Children under twelve years of age
half-price. Special arrangements made for Families. Wines and
Malt Liquors obtainable on Board at moderate prices for Cabin
Passengers.
Second Cabin Passengers will have to provide themselves with Bed,
Bedding, and Towels, and all Cabin requisites, viz.;— 2 knives, and
forks, 2 table and 2 tea spoons, a metal plate, a hook pot, 2 drinking
mugs, 2 cups and saucers, and plates, a water can or bottle, and a few
pounds marine soap. Steward’s attendance found by the ship.
Intermediate and Steerage Passengers will have to provide them-
selves with Bed, Bedding, and Towels; knife, fork, table and tea
spoon, tin plate, drinking can, tin quart and pint pot, and a keg or a
can for holding water.
Chief Cabin is supplied with plate and table linen.
OUTFITS.
These can be obtained at the large Outfitting Warehouses in
London, Liverpool, Glasgow, Dublin, or Cork.
BAGGAGE.
Cabin Passengers will be allowed to take 40 cubic feet of luggage;
Second Cabin 30 feet; Intermediate and Steerage 20 feet; any ad-
ditional will be charged at the rate of 2s. 6d. per foot. All Packages
of Baggage should be marked in paint, with the name of the Passen-
ger, and the words “ Wanted on the Voyage,” or “ Not wanted on the
Voyage," with the class of cabin to which it belongs. Portmanteaus
and Trunks of the ordinary sizes are generally adapted for First
Cabin Passengers, but for all other classes, the Packages wanted for
use on the Voyage must not exceed the following dimensions—viz.,
2 feet 6 inches in length, 1 foot 6 inches in breadth, 1 foot 4 inches
in depth, in order that as many as possible may be placed below the
berths. Packages not wanted on the Voyage are not limited to any
particular size, but should be as small as possible, for easy removal.
t Many ships have already been despatched under this arrangement, and a
ship is now leaving London every month, besides other vessels belonging to
the same line leaving Liverpool or Glasgow. The Liverpool ships call at
Queenstown, Cork, or take in passengers.


Passengers must superintend the shipment of their own baggage,
and take charge of it when on board, as the ship will not be respon-
sible for its loss, damage, or detention under any circumstances.
Extra Luggage must be paid for before it is taken on board.
PRINCIPLE AND OPERATION OP THE
QUEENSLAND EMIGRATION SCHEME.
The principle of the Queerfsland Emigration Scheme is to give the
land-orders, in the proportion of £3O to each adult or two children be-
tween four and fourteen, to those persons who pay their own passage to
the colony, being Cabin or Intermediate Passengers. Steerage Pas-
sengers will receive an £lB Land Order. The intention is to encour-
age the emigration especially of a class of small farmers or persons
who may have limited means at their disposal, not sufficient to enable
them to make more than the barest living in England, and altogether
inadequate to their making any provision for themselves or their
families for the future. Such persons, having a number of children,
if trained in habits of industry, who are disposed to cultivate the
land, have thus the opportunity of at once obtaining a freehold estate
of good land nearthe market,besides the privilege of leasing three times
as much as they buy at an annual rent of sixpence an acre for five
years, and then the right of purchase at the lowest price. The
extreme productiveness of the soil, and the high prices obtained for
farm produce, together with the healthiness of the climate, and
other advantages, unite to make this colony now most attractive to
the class of persons to whom the scheme is especially suited.
Class of Persons to whom the scheme is especially ad-
dressed. —There are doubtless thousands of respectable farmers
with limited means and large families, who cannot possibly do more
than barely pay their rent, and meet the necessary expenses of their
families. Many of these see their sons and daughters growing up
around them, and are saddened by the thought that their children
must necessarily sink to a lower social position than that which they
themselves occupy. They cannot hope to get farms for their boys,
and these must become mere farmers’ labourers, and their daughters
must in most cases occupy a similar position.
Land Orders —Agricultural Reserves—Price. —lt must be
understood that the land-orders are like so much money, and are
available for the purchase, of land on the Agricultural Reserves near
all the large towns. The price of these farm lands is equal to five
shillings paid down, and fifteen shillings more at the end of the five
years, i.e., forty acres purchased at twenty shillings an acre, will
secure 120 acres adjoining, on lease for five years at a mere nominal
rent of fid. an acre a year, with the right of buying the leased
portion, a part or the whole of it any time within five years, at
tw'enty shillings an acre.
No one can purchase less than forty acres on the Reserves, and no
one can hold more than 320 acres on the Reserves, including the
part which he leases.
The Operation of the Queensland Emigration Scheme is plainly
shown as follows:—A man with a wife and ten children determines


to cultivate his own farm in Queensland. Suppose six children
between 4 and 14 years and 4 over 14—that is, with the parents, six
adults and six children; these count as 9 adults, and would cost 9
times 17, or £153, to convey them to Queensland. On arrival, the
family is entitled immediately to £162 of land-orders. Forty
pounds’ worth of these land-orders are used in purchasing a forty-
acre farm, on the agricultural reserves near the towns; the farmer is
then entitled to lease 120 acres more at 6d. an acre per annum for
5 years. He has also £122 worth of land-orders left, more than
enough to secure the fee simple of the whole at the end of five years,
or at any period in the interim. If he has paid for Cabin or Inter-
mediate passages, costing as much as £2O per adult, he is entitled
after two year to 9 times 12 or £IOB worth more of land-orders.
Thus a man, with a wife and ten children, who can manage to
command £162, finds himself immediately on landing in Queensland
in possession of a farm containing 160 acres of good land, one-fourth
of it paid for, money enough in his pocket to pay for the rest in five
years, which he can meanwhile use as capital, and in two years he
receives a further amount of £IOB worth of land-orders, which he
can use in the same way for his sons. The only restriction is that
persons who have less than five children with them must be under
a certain age, men under 40, and women under 35. When there are
as many as five children there is no restriction as to age.
Money need not.be Reserved eor Expenses in the Colony.—
Persons of limited means need not fear to spend all they possess
in taking their families to Queensland, if they are disposed at first
to take employment for a short time. The money which pays their
passage to the colony also buys their farm. In many cases it
is recommended that even persons who may take some capital
with them, if they intend to cultivate the land, should hire
with farmers in the colony on first arriving, in order to obtain
experience, to learn how to split timber for fencing, the readiest way
of clearing the land, and many other things peculiar to farming in
Australia.
There is no degradation in this in the colonies, where there are few
conventionalities, and labour is always honourable. A man will com-
mand immediate wages, as much as £4O a year, with a hut to live
in, and weekly rations, consisting of 101 b. of beef, 101 b. of flour,
31b. of sugar, and a tea. If his wife will hire, too, they will com-
mand £7O a year, and double rations.
It is natural that persons intending to emigrate should think it
necessary, generally, to take out a little capital with them, but in
this case, in consequence of the facts here stated, it will be evident
that persons who do not possess more than barely enough to cover the
cost of their passage, need not be afraid of landing there without
money. If they choose to hire there need not be any delay; and in a
year or two they can save enough out of their wages to enter on their
own land. The number of children constitutes no difficulty; on the
contrary all over twelve may be immediately hired with their parents
at good wages.


ASSISTED PASSAGES.
Assisted Passages are given to female domestic servants of good
character. Such persons are placed on board the vessel under the
protection of a respectable matron. Upon their arrival they will
be immediately engaged at high wages at from £lB to £25 a-year.
A great number of respectable young women have gone out to this
A ] lstralia within the last few years, but they are so soon settled
that the demand for female domestics is still very large.
Provision is also made for granting a limited number of assisted pas-
sages. The class of persons who may obtain this assistance are plough-
men, road-makers, quarry-men, professed gardeners, and a few miners
to work the copper mines at Gladstone, and coal mines at Brisbane • also
carpenters, masons, bricklayers,blacksmiths, wheelwrights shipwrights
and female domestic servants of good character. It must here be borne
in mind that it will be useless for any one to apply for assisted
passages, unless they belong to one or other of the classes above-
named, and can furnish written proofs of their being honest, in-
dustrious, and sober ; they must also be in sound health, and be good
hands at their trade or calling. The number of children in a family
is no bar to an assisted passage to Queensland, If there are as
many as five childien in the family, there is no bar as to the ages of
the parents: but if there are less than five children the father must
be under 40, the mother under 35 years of age. Should either of
them be more than this, they cannot obtain assisted passages unless
they have as many as five children with them. To accommodate a
class of passengers whose circumstances enable them to assist towards
their passage, but who cannot afford to pay the full price a plan
has been adopted of helping them, as follows ; ’ 1
Persons eligible as above described, and passed at the Queensland
Emigration Office, will receive a passage at less than half its cost on
the payment of £8 per adult. Two children of twelve months, and
under twelve years of age, are counted as one adult. Children under
twelve months are taken entirely free. Single men can obtain a
passage for £8 each. Single women, being respectable female domestic
servants, may receive a passage for £4 each. In Families there will
be a reduction of £4 for each unmarried female over fourteen in
excess of single males over fourteen in such families. In families
where there are single females over fourteen, and no single males
over that age, a reduction is also made; half the number of such
females will then be taken at £4 each, instead of £B. When the
number of these is an odd number, the reduction is on half of the
next lower even number, thus : the number of these being five two
would be taken at £4 instead of £8 each. No assistance can be
given to families where individual members are proposing to nav
their full passages. 1 *
Land-orders will not be granted in the case of persons receiving
these assisted passages, either on arrival or afterwards, but will still
be granted to persons paying their full passages to the colony, being
Cabin or Intermediate passengers, in the proportion of what will be
equal to thirty acres of land, that is, thirty pounds’ worth of Land-
orders to each adult, eligible by the Emigration Regulations, and


obtaining a Land-order Warrant now issued at the Queensland
Emigration Office. Steerage passengers will receive an £lB Land-
order. Land-orders in future will not be transferable except by
permission of the Government in special cases.
Any persons belonging to any of the above-named classes, and
under the age named, or having the requisite number of children,
who will pay the amount required, are in these respects eligible, and
may apply for a form, stating in their letter what is their occupation,
also the number of their family, and the age of each person.
Application for forms for assisted passages cannot he granted in any
case unless accompanied hy a certificate from some late employer, or
other satisfactory proof of efficiency in their professed calling, and of
the good character of the person making the application. Certificates
from employers must he in all cases countersigned hy a Magistrate or
Minister of Religion residing in the same parish with the applicant.
Assisted passengers are to remit, in addition to their passage
money, sufficient to cover the cost of the articles as supplied to
them when they join the ship, in accordance with either of the lists
which will be found in the form. A ticket will then be sent to
them, being an order for getting these necessaries on board. The
cost of these articles will be either 10s. 6d. or 20s. for each adult,
according to their own choice*
Persons taking their own servants to the colony under an agree-
ment to serve them at “current rates,” will be entitled to an £lB
Land-order for every adult thus introduced, two children over twelve
months old counting as one adult. The servants should be hired
under the regular Form, to be obtained at the Queensland
Emigration Office;
Persons desirous of obtaining assisted passages to the colony,
being of the class above-named, must apply for printed Forms
to H. Jordan, Esq., Queensland Emigration Office, 17, Gracechurch
Street, London.
N.B.—All persons applying for assisted passages, in 'accord-
ance with the above directions, must enclose a certificate from some
late employer, showing that they belong to one of the above-named
classes, are of good moral character, and good hands at their trade
or calling. All applications for information should be accompanied
with postage stamp for reply. Persons communicating with the
Office by letter are particularly requested to write their name and
address very plainly.
HENRY JORDAN,
Queensland Emigration Office,
17, Gracechurch Street, London, E.C.
* In estimating the number of adults in the family, for the purpose of provid-
ing these necessaries, children under four years need not be counted. Each
person of twelve years must be counted as one adult, and every two children
between twelve and four years, must also be counted as one adult.—H, J.


1508
01559174


Flying Cloud
.... 2,000
Golden City
2,500
Light Brigade
2,000
Young Australia
Young England
2.000
Montnlprentry
Wansfell
1,500
1,500
Prince Consort
2,500
Chatsworth
2,000
Whirlwind
2,000
Ocean Chief
2,500
Sultana
2,000
"Queensland
Golden Dream
2,500
Under special arrangements with Her Majesty's Government
for the Colony of Queensland.
“BLACK BALL”
Jitu tti gMijrpn
LAND ORDERS, VALUE £3O,
SUBJECT TO THE GOVERNMENT REGULATIONS,
Are given to persons paying their own passages by this Line.
The only direct REGULAR Line of Queensland Packets.
The Ships forming the “ Black B
reputation ; famous for their size, qi
elegant accommodation, and the f(
already sent, and to be dispatched
from LONDON and
LIVERPOOL,
Ball” Fleet are of world-known
quick and regular passages, and
following form a part of those
id to this colony, sailing monthly
Maryborough 2,000
Princess Royal 2,000
The above Line also dispatch their magnificent Clippers, whose
accommodation for all classes of Passengers is unsurpassed, to
MELBOURNE and GEELONG, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, HOBART
TOWN, and LAUNCESTON, from London and Liverpool, every
fortnight.
For further particulars regarding Queensland, apply to HENRY
JORDAN, Esq., Queensland Emigration Commissioner, 17, Grace-
church Street, E.C.; and for freight or passage to all Agents for the
° Black Ball ” Line, and to
JAMES BAINES & CO., Liverpool; or
T. M. MACKAY & CO.,
1, LenelenhaJl Street, LONDON. E.C.
