





I m /** ~nrt r - m* * &
4ycWC /7 ,-lto.
t/*~-yf -«--t^






QUEEN POMAIvE.


QUEEN POMARE
Jmir Jr# Cflmrfrg*
By the Rev. GEORGE PRITCHARD,
Formerly Missionary and British Consul at Tahiti ,
WITH AN INTRODUCTION
the Rev. Dr. ALLON.
THE LIGHT-HOUSE, POINT VENUS.
LONDON:
ELLIOT STOCK, 62, PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C-


* 10 DOT ISC4 *
%T>


6923
INTRODUCTION.
Mr. Pritchard has told the story of Pomare as
no one else could have told it. His long residence
in Tahiti as a Missionary of the London Missionary
Society, and as British Consul, and his personal
acquaintance with Pomare during the greater
part of her life, gave him knowledge that no
other European possesses. His presence in the
Island, and his violent imprisonment at the time
of the French seizure of Tahiti—the latter leading
almost to war between England and Franee —may
be thought unfavourable to an impartial narrative;
and Mr. Pritchard has undoubtedly warm sympa-
thies with Pomare —as I suppose almost every
man in Europe acquainted with her wrongs has —
but no one will read this little book, without


being struck with the restraint which the writer
has put upon himself, and with his manifest
determination to permit no exaggeration in his
statements.
The portraiture of the Queen is a striking
attestation of the deep religious hold upon the
Tahitians which Christianity has taken. Few
European sovereigns inheriting centuries of Chris-
tian traditions, could have borne such wrongs with
so much religious patience, or have exhibited
through the long years of her deposition such a
noble Christian deportment. It is always in-
teresting to see the first contacts with a people, of
a new religious faith; and it is more than an
answer to some of the strongest sceptical objec-
tions to Christianity to see how speedily, radically,
and firmly it takes hold of the heart of a heathen
people thus receiving it. The character of Pomare,
and the fidelity of the Tahitians to the spiritual
characteristics of Protestant Christianity—all the
blandishments of the sensuous ritual of the


Church of Rome, and all the influences of French
political power, notwithstanding—are equally sur-
prising and assuring. The sufficient vindication
of Christianity, now as heretofore, is its practical,
moral, and religious power.
One could have wished that more detail of the
Queen’s private life and character had been
furnished, and that somewhat more of background
for the story told, could have been put in; but
Mr. Pritchard has done the best with the materials
at his disposal, and his simple narrative will be
read with absorbing interest, and will in some
degree revive sympathies that, when the events
which are narrated occurred, excited the English
people to passion.
Few nations are wholly free from the crime
of violence and injustice in conquest, but the
dastardly outrage on Pomare, in arbitrarily
deposing her from her throne and taking pos-
session of her country, without even the pretence
of constructive wrong on her part, will be an


abiding reproach. Some crimes, although not
intrinsically worse than others, have yet character-
istics of meanness, selfishness, and brutality,
which give them a bad, and sometimes a historic
pre-eminence. For a nation pluming itself on
its gallantry and chivalry, to have seized the
little territory of a helpless and unoffending
woman —an Island in the Pacific Ocean for which
it had no need even —merely to gratify a senti-
ment and resentment of European politics, is a
crime of gratuitous heartlessness, which offends
both the moral sense and the chivalrous sentiment
of men, and will be remembered to the reproach
of the French nation, even when some of the far
greater crimes of Napoleon I. are forgotten.
HENRY ALLON.


QUEEN POMARE
AND HER COUNTRY.
It is probable that no royal personage in the
whole of Polynesia has been more extensively
known or more highly respected than Pomare, the
late Queen of Tahiti. Many captains and officers,
both of ships of war and of merchant vessels of
various nationalities, have visited the lovely
Island of Tahiti, during the last 50 years • and the
almost universal testimony which these gentlemen
have borne to the character of the late Queen has
been of a favourable nature. True, there have
been exceptions among them who have felt the
simplicity and purity of her example and precept
B


in both life and law to be a constant reproof to
the contrast which their conduct presented, and
a check upon the irregularities which they prac-
tised at other places, but the general testimony
has been greatly in favour of her Majesty, both as
regards her public and private character. Friends
of Missions have long been familiar with the name
of Pomare, and have deeply sympathized with her
in the numerous and heavy trials she has been
called to endure, and perhaps among these no one
has evinced a truer sympathy, or expressed more
sincere sorrow than our own beloved Sovereign,
Queen Victoria.
At the suggestion and in compliance with the
wishes of several of these friends, the writer has
consented to draw up the following brief memoir.
Having lived on the Island of Tahiti himself in
the capacity of Missionary and British Consul for
a period of 20 years in daily familiar intercourse
with the Queen from her childhood, and after her
marriage, with her consort and children likewise,
he, during that time and also during many subse-
quent years, spent on neighbouring Islands, has
had opportunities for gathering up many facts and


obtaining much information which cannot fail to
be acceptable to those who feel an interest in
Tahiti and her Queen'” while to those who
know little or nothing of her, it may serve as an
introduction to one who has maintained her cha-
racter for steadfastness to the truth amidst much
prevailing opposition, has been faithful unto death
and has now (we believe) received the crown of
life.
Pomare was born on the 23rd February, 1813.
Her mother was the daughter of the King of
Raiatea. About the time of her birth her father,
Pomare 11, embraced Christianity, and hence the
heathen customs, usual on the birth of a royal
infant, were not observed. In former times no
fires were allowed to be lighted for many days,
except at a great distance from the dwelling of
the child. No boat was allowed to leave the
shore, and no persons were permitted to approach
the royal babe, saving sacred persons, and these
must be dressed in sacred clothes. Pomare told
the Missionaries he wished his baby to be brought
up like an English child. The young princess
was called Aimata. During her early years she
B 2


was much with the Missionaries, who, in accord-
ance with the King’s wish, endeavoured to make
her acquainted with the manners and customs of
the English, but not only so, they also instructed
her in the Christian religion. When Aimata was
old enough she went to school and improved
rapidly. In the month of June, 1820, an import-
ant event occurred in the royal family, the then
Queen became the mother of a little boy. The
King was much pleased with his little son, and
expressed his wish that no person but Mrs. Crook
(the wife of one of the Missionaries) should touch
the infant. She took it and dressed it according
to English custom, but as she could not always
attend to it, the sister of the Queen became
the baby’s nurse, though it was generally at the
house of Mrs. Crook, who was called its mother,
because she had the principal charge of it. Little
Mary Crook employed herself in making clothes
for the young prince. When Aimata was eight
years of age, her father, Pomare 11., was removed
by death. He died on December 7th, 1821. The
government was carried on for a little more than
two years by Aimata’s mother and aunt. In


December, 1822, Aimata
ited in marriage
to a descendant of an ancient race of kings, who
formerly reigned in the Island of Tahaa. He
was an orphan, and had been committed to the
care of the pious King, who then reigned over
Tahaa. It was hoped that as he had received a
Christian education, and appeared to be well dis-
posed that he would prove a worthy husband for
the young princess. It was arranged that the
young man should meet his betrothed bride in the
Island of Huahine, which belonged to Aimata’s
aunt. The young man arrived first, attended by
many chiefs and the King of Tahaa. Aimata
came in a ship belonging to her little brother,
accompanied by her mother and aunt, and was
received on the beach by the Regent and other
important persons. She was conducted by them
to the house where the intended husband was
waiting to receive her, dressed in native style.
He neither rose nor spoke when Aimata entered;
Abe sat down by her mother and aunt, and
remained quite silent. This first meeting lasted
20 minutes, during which time not a word was
spoken by either of them. They were to be


married by mutual consent, but there was reason
to fear the marriage would not prove a happy
one, for they were both very young, and strangers
to each other, and were in several points of oppo-
site characters; the youth being as grave and
reserved as the young princess was gay and open.
The marriage ceremony took place a few days
after their first meeting, and was performed in
the chapel at noon, Mr. Ellis and Mr. Barff, the
Missionaries at Huahine, took their station behind
the communion table before the pulpit. The
youthful pair stood opposite, and the friends of
each were ranged on either side, Aimata was
dressed in an English white gown and a pink
scarf with a bonnet made of white bark, trimmed
with white ribbons. The ladies who attended her
were dressed in the English fashion, but the chiefs
wore their native clothing. A tear was observed
in Aimata’s eye during the service. This tear
was the evidence of a feeling which, had she been
a heathen,would have had no existence, for, having
been instructed in the Mission Schools, she had
been made aware of the holy nature of a promise.
After the vows had been made and the blessing


pronounced, the marriage was recorded in a book.
The day was concluded by a feast, in which the
name of God was not forgotten, and no rioting or
excess was permitted. How different was
this Christian marriage from those of the
natives in former times. The heathen used to
make vows of fidelity in their temples, but they
never kept them, although the skulls of their fore-
fathers were often brought out and ranged before
the young couple, and though their mothers
wounded themselves with shark’s teeth and stained
a cloth with their blood mingled together, —
modes of confirming a vow, practised in the days
of heathenism. Christianity has banished these
abominable customs from many of the lovely
Islands in the Pacific, and has conferred unnum-
bered blessings on many thousands of the natives
who have embraced it. The youthful pair after-
wards removed to Tahiti, where they lived in a
house of their own at Papaoa, near the dwellings
of the rest of the royal family, and near the
Royal Mission Chapel; but the union, as might be
expected, did not prove a happy one, being simply
the fulfilment of an early betrothal and not the


result of a sincere affection on the part of either
of them; the consequence was, the young man
soon returned to his own friends at Borabora.
The chiefs, anxious to secure an hereditary and
undisputed claim to the crown, urged upon
Aimata the desirability of a second marriage.
In 1824 the young Prince, Aimata’s brother,
though very young, was crowned King Pomare
111., and governed by a Regency. The day ap-
pointed for the coronation was April 21st, 1824.
At the close of the service pardon was proclaimed
to all who were under punishment from the law;
the banished were permitted to return, and the
prisoners were set free. The father of this young
Prince had been proclaimed king according to the
heathen custom, not by being crowned, but by
being wrapped in a girdle covered with red
feathers; and this ceremony had been attended by
the slaughter of men, and had been followed by
the worshipping of the king as a god, as he sat in
the Marae (temple) in company with Oro, the
god of war, and Hiro, the god of thieves. How
happy was this little Prince, whose coronation,
instead of being stained with blood, was attended


by the opening of the prison doors, and with
prayer and praise to the living God. A school
having been established for the children of the
o
Missionaries, the ’ young King became a scholar.
He made great progress in his learning, and
showed such good dispositions that the mission,
aries fondly hoped he would become a blessing to
his kingdom, but they were disappointed in their
expectations. When six years and a half old, he
was attacked by a complaint that prevailed in the
Islands at that time and became dangerously ill.
He lingered only three weeks. He died in the
arms of Mr. Osmond, his affectionate teacher.
Thus God cut off with a stroke the desire of many
hearts, and the hope of a nation. His remains
were deposited in the family vault in the Royal
Mausoleum at Papaoa. In January, 1827, shortly
after the death of her brother, Aimata was pro-
claimed Queen, and assumed the name of Queen
Pomare IV. Her Majesty was only 14 years of
age when she commenced her reign. She con-
tinued to live at Papaoa in a neat plastered house,
situated beneath the shade of a lovely grove. It
was not called a palace, but’ the Royal residence.


The Rev. Henry Nott continued to be her teacher.
She could read and write well and was considered
very clever, but in her youth was not so serious
or steady as to set a good example to her subjects.
In December, 1832, Queen Pomare married a
second time, and in the early part of 1833 there
was a rebellion instigated by some of the chiefs
and people who were not pleased with this mar-
riage. The rebels were soon conquered by the
loyal party, and when peace was established the
places of worship and the schools were attended
as formerly. For a short time this civil war had
thrown many of the congregations into great dis-
order, thereby causing the Missionaries much
grief. About this time many ships called at
Tahiti with abundance of spirits to sell, or to
barter with the natives for the produce of the
Island, consequently drunkenness became very
prevalent. The Missionaries, at their respective
stations, recommended the establishment of Tem-
perance Societies, in the hope of inducing the
people to leave off the use of spirits. In August,
1833, Mr. Nott took a sheet of paper and wrote
his own name, and very soon obtained a hundred
others in his district as abstainers.


At that time the Queen was at Fimeo, the
neighbouring Island. Mr. Nott sent a messenger
with a letter entreating her Majesty to set an
example of temperance to her subjects .by per-
mitting her name to appear on the paper. She
sent a message in reply to the effect that she
would consider the subject. . Feeling persuaded
that the Queen’s example would be followed by
very many, the Missionaries were very desirous of
obtaining her name.
One evening, when Mr. Nott and some of his
people were assembled for worship, a messenger
entered the chapel, his countenance beaming with
joy. He surprised the people by exclaiming,—
“ Brethren and sisters, rejoice with me.” All eyes
were fixed upon him. He then added, “ I say rejoice
with me, because the Queen has given me orders
to tell ‘ Notte ’ (Rev. Mr.Nott), to add her name to
those who belong to the Temperance Society.”
This news was received with great delight by all.
Much good resulted from the establishment of
these Societies. In the same year, 1833, a British
ship of war arrived at Tahiti, having on board all
the inhabitants of Pitcairn’s Island, 87 in num-


ber. They were the descendants of the mutineers
who landed on that Island in 1790 from H.M.S.
Bounty, commanded by Captain Bligh. They
were the children of English fathers and Tahitian
mothers. The Bounty had been sent by the
British Government to Tahiti to obtain plants of
the bread-fruit tree and convey them to the West
Indies. On leaving Tahiti the crew took away
six men and twelve women (native) who went
with them to Pitcairn, where they remained for
several years without being heard of. As their
numbers increased they found the resources of
the Island to be inadequate for their support, and
made application to the British Government to
remove them. In compliance with this request
they were removed to Tahiti. Queen Pomare
gave them a very kind reception, cheerfully
giving up a large house of her own for their use,
which proving insufficient for their accommodation,
several of the Chiefs made room for them in their
dwellings. A large tract of rich land was also
marked out as a desirable territory for their
future residence. At a meeting of the Chiefs of
the district, the Queen formally announced that


she had assigned that portion of land to her
guests from Pitcairn, and at the same time gave
directions to her people immediately to commence
the construction of houses for her newly arrived
friends. Her Majesty’s kind disposition led her
to feel much pleasure in shewing hospitality to
strangers. The Pitcairn Islanders, however, did
not remain long under Queen Pomare’s fostering
care. Their health suffered in the new climate.
Sickness became prevalent among them, and in a
short time twelve of their number died. Owing
to this, and their love for their own country, they
became very anxious to return to their old home,
and after residing in Tahiti for six or seven months
they went back to their loved little Isle.
In the end of the summer of 1835 there was a
considerable religious awakening, and many were
converted in various parts of the Island, more
especially by the preaching of Mr. Nott atPapaoa.
Among those who were at that time awakened
were some of the Eoyal family. The Queen, her
husband and her mother, all desired to be admitted
to the church. The Queen and her husband
wrote to Mr. Nott, stating the reasons why they


wished to become communicants. They were all
three soon afterwards permitted to assemble round
the table of the Lord to commemorate the Saviour’s
-dying love.
The Queen now manifested a great desire that
her people should be instructed and converted.
She herself engaged in teaching poor little girls to
read, and thus set an example to others of her
subjects. In February, 1836, Mr. Nott sailed
for England for the purpose of carrying the whole
of the Tahitian Bible through the press. The
Papaoa Station, where the Royal family resided,
was now without a Missionary, consequently they
removed to my Station, Papeete, the principal
Port, a large and beautiful harbour with safe
anchorage for vessels of any size.
Ships of war visiting Tahiti anchored there.
The British Government had sent a ship of war to
this port annually (until the occupation of Tahiti
by the French), with presents for Pomare and
other members of the Royal family. It was the
custom of the commanders of those vessels to
invite the Queen and a few of the principal Chiefs
to dine on board, when most of the officers had




the honour of joining the party. On one of these
occasions, when all were seated at a large tempo,
rary table on the quarter deck, the Captain at the
head of the table, the Doctor at the opposite end,
with the Queen at the Captain’s right hand,
and, as he could not speak Tahitian, nor Pomare
English, I, as her Majesty’s Chaplin and interpre-
ter, sat at the Captain’s left hand. After the
Captain had served the Queen and several members
of the Royal family, he perceived that not one
had commenced eating; he then turned to me and
said, “ I am afraid we have made a great mistake
in providing for this company. I thought as this
Island was noted for pork, they would like a suck-
ing pig, but not one of them appears disposed te
touch it.” I replied, “You could not have got
anything they would like better; the reason why
none have commenced eating is this, —the natives
are accustomed to ask a blessing before each
meal.” The Captain then said to me, “Mr.
Pritchard, do say grace,” and no sooner had I
“ said grace,” than the Queen and the other
natives gave good proof that they liked what had
been provided for them. The Captain then looked


to the other end of the table and said “ Doctor,
we have got-it to-day,” then, turning to me, said,
“ Now, Mr. Pritchard, you see what a graceless
set we are.” May we not hope that the conduct
of the natives at the dinner table that day taught
the Captain and his officers a lesson, reminding
7 O
them of a home custom they ought not to have
forgotten.
Prior to the French taking forcible possession
of Tahiti, Queen Pomare and the principal Chiefs,
with the most intelligent of the inhabitants, used
to meet annually to hold a friendly conference ;
the object of the meeting was to consider what
plans could be adopted for the benefit of the
Islands, both in a temporal and spiritual point of
view. On one of these occasions her Majesty sent
lor a Bible, and had it placed on the table before
the chairman. Just as they were about to com-
mence, her secretary stood up, and addressing the
assembly, said, “ Queen Pomare has requested me
to fetch the word of God, and put it where you
can all see it. It is her wish that whatever
comes before you to-day for consideration, you
should first ask, ‘ Is it in accordance with that


Book ? ’ If it be, adopt it, but if not in accord-
ance with that Book, discard it.” From the time
the Queen became a member of the Mission Church,
in 1835, she was very regular in her attendance
on the means of grace. She was seldom absent
from the Bible-class, the prayer-meetings, or the
preaching of the Gospel. She was fond of sacred
music, and was herself a good singer. Two of her
maids in waiting were also good singers, and these
three formed a part of my choir in the mission
Church at Papeete. None appeared to take
greater interest in the service of j)raise than these
three, the Queen herself occasionally setting the
tune in the absence of the leader. Up to this
time the places of worship were well attended,
the schools were full, and everything in connec-
tion with the Protestant Mission was in a condi-
tion of prosperity, when an event occurred which
not only put the sincerity of her Christian profes-
sion to the test, but threatened to disturb the
peace and check the prosperity of herself, her
family, and her dominions at large. On the 21st
of November, 1836, a small vessel arrived at
Tahiti, bringing from Gambier’s Island two


Frenchmen (Roman Catholic Priests). One of
the Port regulations prohibited any master of a
vessel landing a passenger, with a view of remain-
ing on the Island, without the permission of the
Queen and the Governors. These priests, to
evade the prohibition, and to avoid the native
police, landed on the opposite side of the Island,
from whence they walked to Papeete, the Port
and seat of Government. At all the villages
through which they passed they told the natives
they had come out of compassion to them, because
the English Missionaries were deceiving them,
and they had come to teach them the truth; that
the Church of Rome is the only true Church, and
by joining that they were sure to be saved. As
soon as they arrived at Papeete, they immediately
put themselves under the protection of the Ameri.
can Consul, who, being favourable to Roman
Catholicism, promised to protect them. The
Queen, Governors, and principal Chiefs assembled
to consult together, and consider what could be
done in this unpleasant business consistently with
the laws of nations. They maintained that as
Queen Pomare was an independent sovereign, and
C 2


was acknowledged as such by all civilized nations,
the Tahitian Government had a right to enact
laws and to establish port regulations the same as
more powerful Governments. The two Roman
Catholic Priests and the Consul were requested to
attend the meeting. Messengers were sent to
them two or three times before they would con-
descend to attend. When at last they appeared
they were informed by the speaker for the Queen
and Chiefs that the two priests would not be
allowed to remain on the Island. They were
requested to return in the vessel which had
brought them, as it was then about to return.
The priests replied, “ We will not go away, we
will wait until a ship of war comes to establish
us.” The American Consul declared that the
Tahitian Government had no right to enforce port
regulations on strangers until those regulations
had been sent to the various Governments of the
civilized world andhad received their sanction. The
French are now in possession of Tahiti, and their
port regulations are most rigidly enforced. Not
a single person from a ship is allowed to sleep one
night on shore without a permit, for which the


sum of two francs is demanded. The Queen,
Governors and Chiefs, believing that if these priests
remained much evil would arise, resolved to act
in accordance with the laws which had long been
in existence, and eventually they were put. on
board by force, but without the slightest injury
either to their persons or property. On the 27th
January, 1837, another vessel arrived from the
same Island, with priests on board. Immediately
after she had anchored, the Government sent on
board a copy of the port regulations, begging the
attention of the Captain to the fourth article,
which referred especially to passengers. The
Captain then wrote to the Queen, asking to be
permitted to land his passengers. By this act he
acknowledged the authority of the Tahitian
Government. The permission was not granted,
consequently they went on in the vessel to Val-
paraiso. One of the officers on board told me that
there were two priests who wished to remain at
Tahiti, but if they were not allowed to do so they
were to proceed to Valparaiso.
Exaggerated statements of this transaction were
at once forwarded to the French Government by


the priests and by their friend the American
Consul. On the 29th August, 1838, the French
frigate Yenus came to an anchor in Papeete
Harbour, commanded by Commodore A Du Petit
Thooars. At ten o’clock the next morning the
Commodore addressed an official letter to
Queen Pomare, informing her Majesty that he was
sent by the King of the French and his Govern-
ment to reclaim and enforce, if necessary,
immediate reparation due to a great power and a
valiant nation. The Commodore demanded three
things,—lst. That Queen Pomare should write a
letter of apology to the King of the French. 2nd.
That a sum of two thousand dollars should be paid
to the cashier of the frigate as an indemnification
for the two priests (Messrs. Lavel and Garret).
3rd. The French flag should be hoisted and saluted
by the Tahitian Government with 21 guns. The
Commodore declared that if these three demands
were not fulfilled within 24 hours he would
declare war and commence hostilities imme-
diately throughout her Majesty’s dominions,
and this would be carried on by all the French
vessels of war which would visit Tahiti, until the


French had obtained satisfaction. At that time
the Queen was residing on the small Island in the
Harbour, about half a mile from the main land.
She had scarcely recovered from her accouche-
ment, having given birth to a child about three
weeks previously. The baby being unwell, the
Kev. Mr. Barff and myself were in attendance,
administering medicine, &c,, when there came
into the house, in a most unceremonious manner,
a French officer in full uniform. He stood before
the Queen with a paper in one hand and throwing
the other about violently, was endeavouring to
impress upon her, in broken English, that France
was one great nation , and that France had 60
frigates, all like that, pointing to the “Venus ”
lying at anchor. Mr. Barff and I interpreted to
the Queen the document she had just received.
Her Majesty immediately resolved to go to the
main land and consult with her Chiefs. In a short
time she and her husband, with their little infant,
followed us on shore, where they took refuge in
my house. Her Majesty was thrown into a state
of trembling anxiety; she knew not what to do.
The large frigate had got her guns loaded and


run out, and all the men under arms ready for
action, if the requisitions were not promptly ful-
filled. The first thing the Queen did was to write
to the Commodore, begging that he would allow
an investigation to be made; stating that she had
understood that it was the custom of civilized
nations always first to try the case, and then, if
the person accused be found guilty, to inflict a
punishment, or impose a penalty according to the
enormity of the crime. I was intrusted with the
letter in company with a member of the royal
family to deliver it to the Commodore. We went
on board the frigate, but the Commodore would
not receive the letter, nor hear from me any
explanation, but said if the requisitions were not
fulfilled by ten o’clock the next morning, he
should fire upon the settlement and carry devas-
tation and death through the whole of her
Majesty’s dominions, and that each French ship
that came would do the same until they had
obtained sufficient reparation. He stamped his
foot on the deck with anger, because the Queen
had left the little Island, He had sent a guard
to prevent her departure, but to his great morti-


tication found that she had gone. He also placed
■a guard round the Queen’s little schooner, and
laid an embargo on the shipping, that no vessel
might go out till the business was settled. Thus
this French Commodore thought it consistent with
his duty and position to make the Queen a prisoner
before the Time had expired for the fulfilment of
the requisitions.
The Commodore sent me a letter, offering his
' O
ship as an asylum for myself and family, stating
that when he had commenced firing upon the
Settlement the smoke would prevent their seeing
my house, and perhaps they might not be able to
fire clear of it. I told the officer who brought
me the letter to give my compliments to the Com-
modore and say that I expected that flag (pointing
to the English colours waiving over my Consulate)
to protect me. As we knew that it was impossible
for the natives to pay 2,000 dollars, a few friends
(English and Americans) united with me in raising
the money for the Queen, which was duly paid on
board the “ Venus.” For this payment I now hold
the receipt. The Queen wrote a few lines to the
King of the French, which the Commodore under-


took to deliver to him. There was one requisi-
tion jet to be fulfilled ; this was to hoist the French
flag on the Tahitian flag-staff and salute it
with 21 guns; but how was it to be done, as the
natives had only powder enough for five guns. I
stated to the Commodore that if he insisted upon
21 guns being fired he must find the powder, for
none could be obtained elsewhere. He replied,
“ That does put me in one difficult ‘position. If
I give them powder it will perhaps be seen in one
paper in France that I did give the Tahitians
powder to salute my own flag.” After hesitating
a short time he said, “ I will tell you what I can
do, I will give some powder to you as British
Consul, and you can do what you like with it.”
Thus did we have French powder with which to-
salute the French flag. Was it honoured by such
an act ? Let the Commodore answer. But there
was yet another difficulty. There were several
large guns on the little Island in the harbour, but
o O
only one of them fit for use. The “ Yenus ” had
to lend several instruments with which to prepare
the guns for firing. While the natives, with a
few Englishmen to help them, were hard at


work at the guns, an Officer was sent from the
O '
frigate to my house requesting me to say to the
Queen that the Commodore was much surprised
that the French flag had not yet been saluted,
and that if they did not commence the salute by
10 o’clock he should fire upon the town. The
men succeeded in getting the guns ready only a
few minutes before 10. Twenty-one guns were
then fired. Thus were fulfilled the three requi-
sitions made on these poor islanders in the name
of One great and valiant nation. After this the
Commodore summoned the Queen and all the
principal Chiefs to a meeting, when he appointed
M, Moerenhout as French Consul. The Queen
objected to this appointment. She had had
trouble enough with that gentleman already
while he had been acting as American Consul.
The Commodore became exceedingly angry, and
said he should appoint him, and if her Majesty
would not receive him as such he should consider
it as a declaration of war. Queen Pomare said
she did not object to there being a French Consul
at Tahiti, but she objected to the person nomi-
nated. It was of little consequence what objec-


tions she or her Chiefs had against the appoint-
ment, the Commodore was determined to overrule
them, perceiving he was just the man for the
position, and that no one could be found so likely
to forward the plans intended to be executed by
arbitrary power in subverting the government of
a, helpless Queen. The next thing was to request
the Queen to sign a Treaty which these gentlemen
had prepared. Making some hesitation, they
became pressing, when the Queen intimated that
she would much rather not enter into any Treaty
with the French. The Commodore was much dis-
pleased and said that they had power, therefore
they should act upon it, whether her Majesty
signed it or not. The purport of the Treaty was as
follows:—“ That there shall be perpetual peace and
friendship between the French and the inhabitants
of Tahiti. That the French, whatsoever may be
their profession, shall come and go freely, es-
tablishing themselves and trade among all the
islands which compose the government of Tahiti.”
The Queen objected to the expression “ The
French whatsoever may be their profession shall
establish themselves .”


Pomare said she had no objection to French,
men coming as they had long been accustomed to
do and establishing themselves as mechanics and
merchants; but as they had Protestant Mission-
aries who had been there many years, and all her
people where receiving instruction, she did not
wish Roman Catholic priests to come and establish
themselves in her dominions. The Commodore
then, with an oath, declared that he did not care
about their religion, that he should protect them
not as priests, but as Frenchmen. As there
appeared to be no alternative, the Queen at last,
with great reluctance, signed the Treaty, The
Commodore, with the assistance of his friend M.
Moerenhout, whom he had appointed French Con-
sul, having thus frightened Queen Pomare into a
compliance with all his requisitions, sent on shore
a barrel organ as a present to her Majesty, when a
rather remarkable incident took place. Just as
the men were carrying this grand present into
the Queen’s house, a strange loud cracking noise
startled them all. The Queen and the peojde
sittinsr around the door listened with astonishment,
o 7
and upon examination found that two or three of


the posts in the framework of the house had split
open almost from the top to the bottom. The
natives*considered this as ominous. One said to
Pomare, “ Ua riro to tatou hau” —Our kingdom
is gone. Another said, “Da afaa te hau.” The
kingdom is divided. All began to prophesy, and
circumstances have since proved, that some of
them conjectured correctly. Professedly to es.
tablish a good feeling Queen Pomare was invited
to dine on board the “ Yenus.” Her Majesty had
no disposition to accept this invitation, she had
had quite enough of the “ Venus ” and all con-
nected with her. The Commodore and his friend
having endeavoured in vain to coax the Queen
into a compliance with their wishes, as their last
resource came to me to beg that I would use my
influence with her Majesty to go on board, and if
she would consent they would salute her with 21
guns. I told these gentlemen that under existing
circumstances they could scarcely expect the
Queen to go on board. The Commodore replied,
“ She had better not be sulky and haughty, or it
will be much worse for her, for we have power
and shall let her know it.” Only a short time


elapsed before the Queen knew by painful ex-
perience that the power of that one great and
valiant nation was employed in subverting her
throne and robbing her of her kingdom The
Commodore having succeeded in the principal
object of his visit allowed her refusal to pass
without further notice, and soon after took his
departure. On his arrival in France he was im-
mediately promoted for his important services in
the South Seas. He was made Rear-Admiral,
commanding the French fleet in the Great Pacific.
In a few weeks after the “ Venus” had left Tahiti
the Queen and her principal Chiefs, under the
conviction that they were still in danger through
exposure to French intrigue and oppression, and
remembering their long and friendly alliance with
Great Britain, wrote to Queen Victoria, begging
her Majesty would be graciously pleased to take
the Islands under the special protection of the
British Government. This letter was signed by
Queen Pomare and four of her principal Chiefs.
Queen Victoria, though deeply touched by this
appeal, and manifesting her sympathy, was unable
to render any assistance without assuming a right


of interference which might have proved dan-
gerous to the interests of her own kingdom. Very
soon after this letter had been sent to England,,
another French frigate arrived, 11 The Artimise,”
commanded by Capt. La Place. While sailing
down the north-east side of the Island, standing
too close in shore, she struck upon a sunken rock,
and was injured to such a degree that had it not
been for the prompt exertions of Capt. Ebrill (son-
in-law to one of the Missionaries) and a large
number of natives the vessel must have been lost.
They succeeded in getting her into port, and the
natives were employed pumping day and night to
keep her from sinking, while every thing was
taken ashore that they might heave her down and
repair her. In a little more than two months
the work was completed, during which time the
captain, officers and crew had lived on shore, pro-
fessedly on the most friendly terms with the
natives. As soon as the vessel was again ready
for sea the Captain called a meeting of the Chiefs,
and insisted upon the Queen also being present.
At this meeting Capt. La Place produced a docu-
ment in which he demanded that a piece of ground


should be given at Papeete, the principal sea-
port, on which to build a Roman Catholic Chapel,
and that a similar building should be erected in
every station where there was a Protestant place
of worship, and also demanding the free exercise
of the Roman Catholic religion at Tahiti and in all
the possessions of Queen Pomare. If the Queen
would not sign that document he threatened to
commence hostilities immediately. Rather than
expose her lands and people to devastation and
death, her Majesty was induced to give her signa-
ture. Shortly after this Queen Pomare and her
family (having been repeatedly invited to visit
the neighbouring Islands, Huahine, Raiatea,
Tahaa and Borabora) left Tahiti for that purpose
in the latter end of 1840, having appointed one
of the Chiefs to act as Regent during her absence.
Owing to my long residence in a tropical climate
my health had become such as to make it neces-
sary to visit my native country. Having obtained
leave of absence for a short time, I sailed from
Tahiti on the 2nd of February, 1841. The Royal
family having gone to the leeward Islands, and I
on my way to England, the French Consul, who


had long been jealous of my influence with the
natives, thought it was now a favourable time to
carry out his desire of annexing Tahiti to France.
He had long ere this declared to me that if the
French did not take possession of Tahiti it should
not be his fault. He began by working upon the
feelings of the Regent, and two or three of the
principal Chiefs, having them frequently at his
house, and supplying them with as much brandy
as they liked to drink, telling them that he saw
plainly that foreigners did not regard the Tahitian
Government nor the laws of the port, and inti-
mated that if they would write a few lines to the
King of France, his Majesty would send persons
to manage for them in such a way as in the future
they would have only to govern their own people.
He prevailed upon four of the principal Chiefs
to sign a document, prepared hy himself , profes-
sing to be a letter from the Chiefs of Tahiti to
the King of France, asking for French protection.
This letter was forwarded to Paris by the first op-
portunity. When Queen Pomare, on her return
to Tahiti, heard what had transpired, she imme-
diately wrote three letters, one to Louis Philippe,


one to Queen Victoria, and one to the President
of the United States, disavowing all knowledge
of the said document and begging that it might
at once be rendered null and void. To these
letters her Majesty received no reply. In the
beginning of September, 1842, Admiral Du Petit
Thouars arrived at Tahiti in the “ Heine Blanche.”
Several days elapsed without any intimation of
hostile intentions. The Admiral and French
Consul were together most of the time. Having
arranged their plans, the Consul requested the
Regent to write to Utami and Tati, two of the
principal Chiefs, to say that the Admiral wished
to see them, and that it was only for a friendly
visit. They went immediately to the house of the
Consul at Papeete, where the vessel was at anchor.
Here they met two other Chiefs, who had been
sent for. M. Moerenhout took them on board the
“Reine Blanche,” where the Admiral received
them in the after cabin. They had not been long on
board when they were told through M. Moerenhout,
as interpreter, that he had come to demand redress
for the ill-treatment of Frenchmen. Several charges
were brought forward, all of which were accounted


by the Chiefs to be untrue and not one of which
could, under any circumstances, be construed into
ill-treatment. The native Chiefs were anxious to
have a public investigation into these charges;
but the Admiral would not agree to anything of
the kind. He maintained that the allegations
were all true, and he demanded 10,000 dollars, or
the cession of Tahiti; or if neither of these, an
agreement, which he had prepared, must be mado
between Pomare on the one part, and Louis
Philippe on the other, and if the agreement were
not made, he would fire upon the land. The
agreement, drawn up in French, and translated
into Tahitian, was a document, professedly coming
from the Queen and Chiefs requesting French pro-
tection. The natives solemnly declared that they
knew nothing of such a document until it was pre-
sented to them for their signature. The Admiral
could not prevail upon the Chiefs to sign it, but
M. Moerenhout took them on shore to his house
(the French Consulate) where he at length
obtained their signatures, positively declaring that
if they did not sign, the Admiral would commence
hostilities on the morrow, but if they would con-


sent to sign the paper, he would give to each of
them one thousand dollars. As yet they had not
obtained the Queen’s signature. Her Majesty was
at Moorea, the next Island. A boat was immedi-
ately despatched, the distance of 28 miles, to con-
vey the fatal document, with positive instructions,
from the Admiral, to return with the Queen’s
signature by 2 o’clock the next day, or he would
seize the Island and depose her Majesty. Words
fail to describe the feelings which the presentation
of this paper to Pomare produced in the minds of
the Royal Family, especially when the messenger
stated that he was commanded, by M. Moerenhout,
to state that her Majesty must sign that, or pay
10,000 dollars, otherwise the Admiral would on
the next day, at 2 o’clock, fire upon the town and
take possession of Tahiti. It was late in the even-
ing when the messenger arrived at Moorea, and
he must leave very early in the morning in order
to reach Tahiti in time to avert the threatened
attack, thus leaving Pomare but a few hours in
which to decide. It was not till the last moment
(about 4 a.m.) that she could bring her mind to
.sign her name. That night was literally a night


of weeping. As soon as the Queen had signed her
name to the document she took up into her arms
her eldest son, and kissing him affectionately,
said, “ My dear child, I have signed away your
birthright.” The messenger returned to Tahiti,
only just in time to prevent the firing, the vessel
being ready for action. The Admiral would not
receive the document on shore, but insisted upon
two of the principal Chiefs taking it on board the
vessel, and delivering it to him in his own cabin.
His design in pursuing this course, probably was,
that he might inform his government, and also
publish to the world at large, that while at Tahiti
two of the influential Chiefs brought on board his
vessel, and delivered to him a document, signed
by Queen Pomare and four of the head Chiefs,
begging that Tahiti might be put under French
OO O
protection.
This done, the Admiral did not wait for instruc-
tions from his government, but at once established
a French Protectorate, consisting of three gentle-
men. M. Moerenhout, the French Consul, he
nominated “Commissioner of the King;” M.
Heine, Military Governor; and M. de Campegna,


Captain of the Port. Queen Pomare was imme-
diately deprived of the exterior Sovereignty of
Tahiti and Moorea, the revenue arising from
foreign residents, and from ships visiting the Port-
was claimed by the —so called —Provisional
Government, which had been thus forced upon
the rightful Sovereign and her people. This was
the first important step towards the ulterior
object which they had in view, viz., the full pos-
session of Pomare’s dominions. The Admiral
wrote to the Queen, telling her Majesty how glad
he was that all things were now amicably settled,
and he hoped she would dine with him on board
the “ Heine Blanche ” before he left. Her Majesty,
however, as on a former occasion, respectfully, but
firmly, declined, the settlement being, in her esti-
mation, anything but amicable. The Admiral
having left Tahiti, the French officials composing
the Provisional Government were very annoying
to Queen Pomare and to the natives generally, in
consequence of which she was advised to remove
with her family to Bunauia, a town about 12
miles from Papeete. While there, H.B.M.
Frigate “ Vindictive ” arrived at Tahiti, com-


manded by Commodore Nicholas. This vessel
had come direct from Sydney, where I was staying
a few days, on my return from England. I cheer-
fully accepted the Commodore’s kind offer to give
me a passage on board the Frigate under his
command. We made Tahiti on February, 24th,
1843, but as there was no prospect of getting to
the proper Port that day, I went on shore in one
of the ship’s boats, and landed near the place
where Sir Thomas Thompson, commanding H.B.M.
ship “Talbot,” had recommended the Queen and
her family to reside till the arrival of another
British ship-of-war ; consequently I had the plea-
sure of seeing her Majesty in a few minutes after
landing. The information I had to communicate
relative to the large vessel in the offing, the
character of her gallant officer (the Commodore),
his anxiety to render all that assistance and pro-
tection which circumstances would allow, and the
various presents for the royal family intrusted to
my care by the British Government, as renewed
assurances of those friendly relations which had so
long existed, drew from them numerous expres-
sions of gratitude and joy. On the following day


the “ Vindictive ” anchored in Papeete Harbour;
I having again joined her out at sea. No sooner
had we entered the Port, than a letter from Queen
Pomare, addressed to the Commodore and to my-
self, in my official capacity as British Consul, was
sent on board, giving us a hearty welcome to
Tahiti, and in a most earnest and touching manner,
entreating us to do all in our power to protect her
from the French, and to restore her to her former
position. Her Majesty at very considerable length
described her numerous and heavy trials, arising
from the arbitrary and oppressive conduct of the
French. In reply to the Queen’s letter we
expressed our deep sympathy and promised we
would do all we could for her benefit. As soon as
the vessel had anchored, I accompanied the Com-
modore and most of his officers on shore to pay
their respects to her Majesty, who had come with
her family from the other station (Bunauia) to
Papeete to receive them. The Queen, finding her-
self again surrounded by her friends, spoke freely
of the painful circumstances which had transpired,
the relation of which aroused the indignation and
sympathy of all present. The next morning the


proper Tahitian flag was hoisted at the Queen’s-
residence and saluted by the “ Vindictive ” with
21 guns. From day to day we endeavoured to
console her Majesty in her troubles, and assured
her of our willingness to render every assistance
in our power; but as the particulars had been
forwarded both to the English and French
Governments, we advised her to wait patiently
till despatches arrived from Europe on the subject.-
Soon after I had the honour of presenting to
Pomare, from Queen Victoria, a carriage, and a
handsome drawing-room suite, also from His
Excellency, Sir George Gipps, Governor of New
South Wales, in the name of her Britannic Majesty,
articles of furniture and handsome dresses for the
husband of Pomare and for her four children.
I was instructed by my Government to present
the various articles in the name of her Majesty
Queen Victoria, and to accompany them with such
expressions as might be suitable to the occasion,
showing to the authorities in the Islands that the
British Government continued to take that in-
terest in their prosperity which had heretofore
been expressed. There was also a variety of


valuable articles from Lady Trowbridge and other
persons of distinction in Great Britain, all of
which were very gratefully received as tokens of
sympathy and affectionate regard. As there was
no distinctive mark in the Queen’s flag by which
the natives and others might know where her
Majesty was in person, and as difficulties had
already arisen from the want of some mark of
distinction, Pomare ordered a crown to be put
into the white part of her flag, which being done
the following notice was sent to the officers of the
Provisional Government: —“ Her Majesty Queen
Pomare, considering that in accordance with the
usages of all Monarchical States, the particular
and personal flag of the Sovereign should bear a
mark of distinction to show the difference be-
tween it and the national flag of the country,
whereby to know when the sovereign is present,
the Queen hereby signifies to the Provisional
Government that henceforward wherever her
Majesty may be in person, either on shore or
afloat, that her flag will bear a crown similar to
that on the seal of her arms, which will signify
that the Queen is then and there present. (Signed)


Pomare,” As the French still maintained that
both the Sovereign and her subjects were anxious
for French protection Queen Pomare thought it
advisable to call a meeting of the principal people
on Tahiti and Moorea that she might ascertain
their candid opinion and give them an oppor-
tunity of stating their wishes. When the French
authorities heard that there was about to be a
great gathering they were in a state of consterna-
tion, fearing that the object was to attack them.
They therefore applied officially to Commodore
Nicholas, begging him to interfere to prevent it.
I enquired of the Chiefs and people as to the
probability of such a result. They all assured
me that no such thing was contemplated, that the
people were coming from the various parts of the
Islands and from Moorea to hold a public meeting,
but they would not be allowed to come armed.
They assembled in great numbers very peaceably,
and her Majesty, addressing her Chiefs and people
through her Speaker, said, “ Do you accede to my
wish? This is my desire, let me and all my
family be with the old alliance, that Victoria may
truly be my friend. Let us twist a threefold


cord and get a brass chain that it may not be des-
troyed by rust; let us make a vessel of Tahiti
and let Britain be a rock, and let us take the
threefold cord and the brass chain to that rock,
even Britain, and fasten to it, so that we may not
be moved, and that all nations may know that it is
my desire still to be one with Britain. If it be
agreeable to you, my people, that we should still
be with Britain, hold up your hands.” The people
immediately held up their hands, the Queen’s
Speaker saying with a loud voice, “ Let us all be
with Britain ; let us all be with Britain.” Biaba,
one of the Chiefs, in addressing the Queen, said,
“ This is our desire, that the Commodore fully
inform us of the nature of the protection to be
given us.”
Nautere, the Queen’s Speaker, replied, “ You
enquire concerning this protection. There is our
Protector (Victoria) the Queen of Britain, and
here is her servant, the British Commodore. This
is his word : * I have had great happiness in
coming to Tahiti to assist Queen Pomare. I will,
if possible, wait for another ship of war to arrive
before I leave. Whilst lam here I will protect


Queen Pomare from insult and oppression as long
as my ship will swim.’ ” A Chief then said,
“ We are very much pleased with the words ol
the Commodore which you have made known to
us. Now we know that here is our man-of-war to
protect us, we feel a pleasure in returning to our
lands.” Mare, one of the Judges, said, “ Friends,
this is a good word j behold we fully know the
words of our Protector. This word is as water
from the rock dropping upon the crown of our
heads. We are refreshed. Let us rejoice at this
good word with pleasure and admiration and with
cheerfulness of heart; let us acquiesce in this
o-ood word with Amen.” Then all the people
stood up and shouted “ Amen” three times. The
impression immediately produced was very great.
Many foreigners were present, most of whom were
highly gratified with the meeting.
By the kind assistance of Commodore Nicolas
the Tahitian code of Laws was considerably en-
larged and greatly improved. The French
authorities protested against this procedure and
would not allow any new laws to be enforced.
They would permit no addition to those which


VC
untry.
and her Cc
were in existence when the French Protectorate
was established. The 24th of May being the
anniversary of Queen Victoria’s birthday, Pomare
and all the royal family were invited to dine on
board H.B.M. ship “Vindictive.” The French
Consul, mortified by the refusal of the Queen to
dine on board any of the French ships of war,
waited upon her Majesty and endeavoured to pre-
vail upon her not to go on board the “ Vindictive.”
Pomare was determined to go, and being anxious
fo do justice to the occasion, spared no expense in
making preparation. The day was fine, and the
“Vindictive,” at all times beautiful, was now
very tastefully dressed with the colours of all
nations, the Royal Standard of England flying at
the maintop-gallant masthead. At the appointed
hour boats were sent on shore to take the Royal
family on board. Queen Pomare and her husband
went in her Majesty’s own carriage to the British
Consul’s pier, where the Commodore’s barge was
waiting their arrival, A Royal salute was fired,
the yards were manned, the marines presented
arms, and the band played Queen Pomare’s
March. Her Majesty appeared in crimson silk,


trimmed with white lace, and a beautiful head-
dress of artificial flowers. Her husband wore a
uniform similar to that of a Post-Captain of the
English navy. The little Princes had plaid
velvet tunics, trimmed with gold lace, crimson
velvet caps with gold hands, and white satin jean
trousers. It was the opinion of several of the
gentlemen present that her Majesty’s appearance
would not have disgraced any Court in Europe.
The first toast was “ Her Britanic Majesty Queen
Victoria.” The next was “ Queen Pomare,” with
an excellent speech by Commodore Toup Nicolas,
to which Data, the Queen’s foster father, made an
appropriate reply. Several other toasts were
given, after which there was a display of fire-
works. The yards being again manned, and blue
lights burning, the Koyal family returned to the
shore, very much gratified by their visit. In the
month of July the Commodore received from the
British Admiral orders to leave Tahiti and pro-
ceed to Valparaiso. It was with the deepest con-
cern and regret that the British residents heard
that the “ Vindictive” was about to leave. Queen
Pomare was much distressed at the thought of the


Commodore’s departure. Her Majesty’s letter
will show how anxious she was for him to remain
till the unpleasant business was finished, how
grateful she was for the assistance and protection
he had afforded, and her earnest desire that on
his arrival in England he would plead her cause
with the British Government.
“ Papeete, August 2nd, 1843.
“ 0 Commodore, health and peace be to you.
Great was my surprise when I heard that you were
about to leave. This is the desire of my heart,
that you still remain at Tahiti till the day when
the work you have been doing shall be finished.
I am pleased with the great works done by you in
assisting me at Tahiti. Do you fully receive my
thanks for the good assistance you have given me.
Though your ship go away, yet you will not be
forgotten by us, we shall think of you with affec-
tion and gratitude. Our thoughts will follow
you even to Britain. When you arrive there and
meet with the persons conducting the Government,
then think of me in my distress, and assist me.


Make me known in my affection to your wife and
all your family. Health and peace to you.
The servant of my dear friend, Victoria.
Pomare, Queen of Tahiti, &c., &c., &c.”
The Commodore would willingly have complied
with the wishes of the Queen to remain at Tahiti,
but his orders were peremptory. On the 6th of
August, 1843, he left the harbour for the Spanish
Coast. Commodore Nicolas will long be remem.
bered by the Tahitians for his indefatigable
labours to promote their welfare. On the 30th of
September, Captain Tucker arrived in H.B.M.
Ship “ Dublin,” sent by the British Admiral for
the protection of the British residents. On the
Ist of November the French Admiral, Du Petit
Thouars, arrived in the “ Heine Blanche imme-
diately after the vessel had come to an anchor,
Queen Pomare addressed a letter to the Admiral,
expressing her hope that he had now come with
orders from the two Governments (French and
English) to restore her Sovereign power. This
letter the Admiral did not condescend to notice,
but in a few hours afterwards sent on shore a very
long communication addressed to the Queen and


Chiefs, informing them that his Majesty Lonis
Philippe, first King of the French, had ratified the
treaty, and therefore from that day it was irre-
vocable. The introduction of a crown into her
personal flag by Queen Pomare, gave great offence
to the French authorities. They maintained that
the act of taking a personal flag was vicious in
its origin, without any right and an offence to
France.
The Admiral ordered the National Flag of
France—(not that of the Protectorate) to be
hoisted on the Tahitian flagstaff and to be saluted.
Queen Pomare protested against this procedure,
but it was altogether useless, as the Admiral per-
sisted in the course he had adopted. The Queen
became now more than ever convinced that the
proposal to establish the Protectorate was only
a pretext, and that they were determined to get
possession of Tahiti for a French colony. The
sequel has proved that her Majesty’s anticipations
were correct. At 8 o’clock the next morning the
French flag was saluted with 21 guns. The
French ships-of-war in the harbour were gaily
dressed with their colours. Soon after midday


two other very large frigates arrived, bringing
Admiral Bruat, the intended Governor, and a
large number of troops. These were soon deco-
rated with their various colours, and the French
flag was then honoured with another salute, and
again at sunset. The two last-named vessels
brought materials with which to build barracks
and a fort, and great guns to mount thereupon.
Had they intended only to establish a Protecto-
rate these things would not have been necessary,
neither would a Governor have been needful.
In the forenoon of that day a letter was taken
to the Queen by the Captain of the Port, who took
great pains to inform her Majesty that if she did
not comply with the Admiral’s wishes, she would
lose her Government altogether, and that her
children would not be allowed to govern any of
the other Islands. The purport of the Admiral’s
letter was to inform the Queen that he could not
recognize a flag which had been adopted after the
signature of the Treaty with the King of the
French, but if she would take out the crown, and,
as a substitute, put in some stars, he would then
pay her the honours of royalty. In preparing


this crown great care had been taken to make it
unlike all other crowns, not only in England but
in Europe. Small cocoa-nut leaves were intro-
duced in the upper part of it, that it might be
emblematic of the country to which it belonged.
Her Majesty was informed, verbally, that she
would be allowed till 12 o’clock the next day to
consider the Admiral’s proposition, when if the
present flag continued to fly, troops would be sent
on shore to haul down the flag and take possession
of the Island. Her Majesty addressed a petition
to the King of the French. The following is a
translation of an extract from it.
“ Papeete, Tahiti. Nov. 4th, 1843.
The Petition of Queen Pomare, the Sovereign of
Tahiti, &c., to Louis Philippe, the King of the
French.
“ Your well-known benevolence will not allow
you to object to the Petition of a powerless Sove-
reign, and her weakness will induce you to com-
passionate her. This is my Petition, that the
treaty of the 9th of September, 1842, may be
thoroughly undone, because it was through fear
that I wrote my name in the said treaty. This


is the reason why that treaty should be thoroughly
undone, because the paper of charges out of which
grew the treaty was not written to me. Certain
vague reports were circulated. The money which
your Admiral demanded I could not obtain. If I
had had the money it would have been given, as
on a former occasion. This is another reason why
I make this known to you, 0 King ; M. Moeren-
hout, whom you put in office, coaxed and intimi-
dated certain Chiefs who were not well affected
towards me, that they might write their names in
the said treaty. On account of my indisposition,
and being near my confinement, great was my
trouble. On account of this plain statement to
you, 0 King of the French, I trust to your benevo-
lence, that you may thoroughly undo the said
treaty, that you may leave me independent on
Tahiti.
“ (Signed) POMAEE, Queen of Tahiti, &c.
About 10 o’clock on the sth of November the
Admiral wrote to Queen Pomare as follows :
“ Madame, —I declare to you, if at the expira-
tion of two hours after this letter this flag is not


struck, and if, before sunset, you have not written
me a letter of apology for your inconceivable
conduct, and made a formal declaration that you
will renew, in good faith, your treaty with France,
I will no longer recognize you as Queen and Sove-
reign of the lands and dependencies of the Society
Islands, and I shall take definitive possession, in
the name of the King of France.
“ (Signed) A. Du Petit Thouars
Shortly after this another letter was sent,
informing her Majesty that the Admiral would
not take possession till 12 o’clock the next day.
The Queen was in deep distress, and spent that
evening at the British Consulate. The next morn-
ing the natives generally, especially those in the
town, were greatly excited, anxious to see if these
threats would be carried into execution. With a
view of preventing the people from creating any-
thing like a disturbance, her Majesty issued the
following proclamation: —
“Ye Governors, Chiefs, and all men in my
dominions. This is my word to you, —keep per-
fectly quiet. Should you even be ill-treated still


keep quiet and bear it patiently. Rely upon the
justice and the clemency of the King of the French
and the other Sovereigns of Europe.
“Pomaee, Queen of Tahiti, &c.
“ Nov. 6th, 1843.”
At 12 o’clock the French began to land the
troops. About 500 having come on shore, they
were marched, with the band playing at their
head, up to the Queen’s house, where they found
a few of the Chiefs in charge of the house and flag-
staff. The troops were exercised for a few minutes,
after which a French officer harangued his fellow
countrymen, stating that in the name of his Majesty
Louis Philippe, King of the French, they now took
possession of Queen Pomare’s dominions. The
flag: was then hauled down and the French colours
<3 a
hoisted in its place. They then gave three cheers
and swore to defend it with their lives. A Royal
salute was then fired with the field pieces which
they had taken on shore, and by all the French
ships in the harbour. The officers then demanded
the keys of Pomare’s house, and immediately
took possession, not only of that house but of
several others belonging to the Royal family.


Thus was Queen Pomare at once deprived of all
she possessed, not an inch of land remaining nor
a house in which to shelter herself and family.
Her Majesty took up her abode with us at the
British Consulate. As soon as her personal
flag was hauled down many of her people came
to compassionate her. It was truly affecting to
see their deep sympathy with their Queen in her
heavy trials, especially to see some with hoary
hairs, who would have shed their blood for her
without a tear, weeping bitterly. Several of the
British residents also came to express their deep
concern for her Majesty, and assured her that
although the French had cruelly deprived her of
house and home she should not want so long as it
was in their power to render any assistance which
she might require. Pomare herself bore up
under it all far better than could possibly have
been expected. Finding it perfectly useless to
hold any further correspondence with the Admiral,
her Majesty addressed another petition to King
Philippe. The following is a literal translation .
“ Petition of Pomare to Louise Philippe (King of
the French).


“ Tahiti, Nov. 7th, 1843.
“ 0 King,—This day have I been deprived of
my Government. My Sovereign power has been
violated, and my lands have been seized by your
Admiral with an armed force because I have been
accused of not regarding the Treaty which was
written on the 9th of September, 1842, In re-
regard to that Treaty was the letter which I wrote
to you on the 4th November, 1843. It never was
my intention to put a crown into my flag for the
purpose of breaking the Treaty and insulting you,
O King. I think that the circumstance of keep-
ing a crown in my personal flag will not be con-
sidered by you as a crime on my part, because it
was but a very little thing which your Admiral
demanded should be altered. If I had complied
my Sovereign power would have been despised by
my high Chiefs. Besides, Ido not know any part
of that Treaty which makes known the character
of my personal flag. I strenuously protest against
the harsh conduct of your Admiral, but I trust to
you with confidence in your compassion, your
justice and your kindness towards me, a power,
less Sovereign, that you will deliver me from my


troubles. This is ray prayer, that the Almighty
may soften your heart, that you may perceive the
justice of what I ask of you, that you may restore
to me the Sovereign power and the Government
of my forefathers. That God may bless you, O
King, and that your reign may be long and
flourishing is the prayer of
“ POMARE.’
To this petition the Queen received no reply.
Governor Bruat having landed in great style r
took up his residence in the large house which
had belonged to Pomare, giving it the name of the
“ Government Palace.” On the following Sabbath
forenoon His Excellency held a levee, to receive
the foreign residents, and in the afternoon of that
sacred day, the band was ordered on shore for the
benefit of those who chose to amuse themselves by
dancing. While Pomare and her family jvere
living with us, it was reported that the French
authorities were coming to the British Consulate
to insist upon Pomare going to see the Governor,
and perceiving some of the Gens d’armes coming
round the bay towards the house, she took refuge
for a few hours on board H.B.M. ship “ Dublin.”


On the Bth January, 1844, H.B.M. Ketch
“ Basilisk ” arrived with orders for the “ Dublin ”
to leave. That Pomare might not be altogether
without protection, Captain Tucker ordered the
“ Basilisk ” to remain at Tahiti till another British
ship-of-war arrived. The French authorities
having seized and imprisoned some of the princi-
pal Chiefs, simply because they were friendly to
Pomare, I felt convinced that it was not safe for
the royal family to remain longer in my house, I
therefore obtained permission from Captain Hunt
to take them on board the “ Basilisk ” for protec-
tion. About half-an-hour after they had gone on
board, nine or ten French soldiers, armed, came
nnd stood for a short time opposite my door, and
then returned, evidently disappointed. As soon as
■Governor Bruat became aware that the Queen
and Jier family had taken refuge on board the
“ Basilisk,” M. D. Carpegna was sent with the
following letter:—
“ Papeete, 1844.
“ French Establishments of the Ocean.
“The Governor of the French Possessions of
Oceania to Pomare.


“ In the name of the King of the French.
“We, Governor of the French Possessions
of Oceania, give you notice that by this act
of defiance to our protection that you have just
committed, you have renounced, by this came act,
our support. That it is prohibited to you to land
on the Society Islands without having previously
obtained our permission.
(“Signed Bruat.”)
The “Basilisk” fceing at anchor just opposite
the British Consulate, two sentinels were placed
day and night, close to my own gate, to watch all
our movements, and to seize the Queen or her
children should they attempt to land.
A child belonging to the royal family having
died, Queen Pomare was anxious to attend the
funeral. This could only be managed by convey-
ing the corpse by water instead of by land, con-
sequently the coffin and bearers, and some others,
were taken in the cutter belonging to the
“Basilisk,” and the Commander took the Queen
and Mrs, Pritchard in his own boat. When we
arrived near the place where the corpse was to be


deposited, the French police were waiting on the
beach, ready to seize any of the royal family if
they should set foot on the shore. The death of
the child, and the peculiar position in which she
was placed, produced the deepest distress and
agony in the mind of the persecuted Queen, who
wept most bitterly.
On the 19th of February, Pomare and all her
friends (native and foreign) were greatly delighted
by the opportune arrival of Captain Gordon, in
H.B.M. Steam.vessel “ Cormorant,” by whose very
great kindness the anguish of Pomare’s mind was
very much alleviated. From the time Queen
Pomare was deposed until she had to take refuge
on board the British vessel, I had accommodated
her and her family, but not having sufficient room
for all her domestics, a house a few yards distant
had been fitted up for their convenience by the
men under the command of Captain Tucker, of
H.B.M.S. “Dublin.” On Sabbath, 25th of Feb-
ruary, the head policeman, with a number of
soldiers, went into this house and violently drove
out its occupants, because they were the servants
of the Queen, and the house was immediately
turned into a French prison.




The Isthmus is by far the most lovely spot on
the whole of Tahiti. It belonged to the royal
family. The largest house on the Island was
there, and was built by the Chiefs and people for
Pomare, their rightful Sovereign, and there she
occasionally resided.
The French took possession of that also, and
turned it into a barracks. They then tried to
capture several of the Chiefs, but without success.
Perceiving that the natives generally were thereby
greatly exasperated, the Governor was under the
impression that they were meditating an attack
upon the French. The natives had no such inten-
tion, on the contrary, many of them had retired
to their fortresses on the mountains in order to
avoid coming in contact with the French, but on
the bare suspicion, Papeete was immediately put
under Martial Law, and the town declared to be
in a state of siege.
A number of regulations were issued forthwith
and most rigidly enforced. I was particularly
careful to act in accordance with these new regu-
lations, but my determination to avoid giving
offence was useless; what I had already done,


viz., afforded protection to the Queen and her
family, was sufficient in the estimation of the
authorities to render me the marked man for their
first victim. The new regulations were issued
on the 2nd of March, and were to come into force
on the following day: accordingly, in the after-
noon (3rd) I, although H.B.M.’s recognized
Consul, was seized by the police, and, without
any reason being assigned, was taken to a block-
house, consisting of a dungeon and a guard-room
over it, entered by a ladder from the outside. I
was ordered to mount that ladder, and then was
put down through a trap-door into the dungeon,
which had an earthen floor and no windows.
Light and air were admitted by loopholes, made
for the purpose of firing muskets. Here I was
furnished with a mattrass, a bolster, and a
blanket.
I begged the head policeman to allow me to
send a note to Mrs. Pritchard, to let her know
where I was, but this was denied me. I was told
that I must remain there, and the trap door was
then shut, and I was left to my own musings trying
to imagine what I could have done that I should


be treated like a felon. After being confined 15
or 16 hours, I was furnished with the following
document: —
“ French Establishment in Oceania.
“ A French sentinel was attacked on the night
of 2nd March. In reprisal I have caused to be
seized ‘ one Pritchard,’ the only daily mover and
instigator of the disturbance of the natives. His
property shall be answerable for all damages oc-
casioned to our Establishments by the insurgents,
and if French blood is spilt, every drop shall fall
back on his head.
“ Papeete, 3rd March, 1844.
“ The Commandant Particular
of the Society Islands.
(Signed) D’Aubigny.
I knew no more about a French sentinel being
attacked than if I had been on the opposite side
of the globe. I was firmly persuaded no French
blood would be spilt, if they would let the natives
alone. I was also conscious of having from the
first exhorted the people to bear patiently all
their trials and by no means to ill-treat any of
the French.


I enjoyed much consolation from the know-
ledge that my life was in the hands of God, and
that if it was his will that I should suffer it
would be for some wise purpose, and he would
give me all that support which my peculiar
circumstances would require. On the third day
I became very ill, suffering from a severe attack
of dysentery. Owing to the dampness of the
dungeon and the intense excitement and anxiety
of mind, it was very soon necessary to remove
me. I was then placed on board one of their large
ships in the harbour, where I was still kept in
solitary confinement. I was allowed food twice a
day, at eight in the morning and at four in the
afternoon. After being ten days thus imprisoned
I was put on board an English ship out at sea,
and forcibly sent away from the Islands without
a trial or investigation of any kind. Seven months
elapsed without seeing or hearing of my wife and
family. They were obliged to remain on Tahiti
about three months waiting for a vessel, during
which time they were greatly annoyed by the
French sailors and soldiers, who helped them-
selves to such of our live-stock and property as


they desired. On my arrival in England our
government demanded from the French govern-
ment an explanation. M. Guizot replied that the
French authorities at Tahiti perceived that I had
so much influence with Queen Pomare, with the
Chiefs and people generally, that so long as I
remained they could make no progress. They
approved of my removal, but condemned the
means by which it was effected. Thus, we see,
my enemies, being Judges, that my unpardonable
offence was my great influence. I am quite
ready to admit the fact, but can truly say that I
ever endeavoured to use my influence for the
universal good, French as well as natives, and to
promote peace. Up to the time of my expulsion
not a blow had been struck, but no sooner was I
away than they were at war, and many were
killed on both sides. The Kev. Mr. McKean
was shot as he was walking quietly along the
verandah of the Mission House. Shortly after
my expulsion the Governor laid such restrictions
upon the labours of the other Missionaries that
they refused to remain under those humiliating
conditions, consequently they put the Protestant


churches under the care of native pastors and re-
turned to England. Prior to their departure,
Pomare addressed to them a very kind and affec-
tionate letter, of which the following is a correct
translation.
“ Yaiaau, August 30th, 1844.
To the Revds. Messrs. How, Jesson, Joseph
and Moore.
“ Peace be to you.
“ This is my speech to you all: may you be
saved by the Lord in your journeyings; great is
my affection for you. I have no desire to give
you up, but in consequence of fear on your
account I do so, because the land is evil, and I
am in trouble. I agree to let you go, but if I
had remained quiet you would on no account
have been given up by me. But this is my speech
to you: do you remember me in my great afflic-
tion. Behold, you are going to Great Britain,
make fully known my affliction to the Queen,
and to those who govern the kingdom under her,
and to the Ministers and the Directors of the
great society that they may seek the way in which


I and my country may again enjoy good. This is
what I wish you to make known to them: Let
there be no French flag set up in my kingdom,
neither a Protectorate flag. Neither let there be
a French Governor, nor any one connected with
him in my dominions. I have not the least
desire for these flags. The true flag of my
country is what I desire. Give the Queen of
Great Britain no rest until these flags are entirely
removed that I may enjoy good, and that I may
again be free in my own country.
“ May Peace be with you,
“ Pomare, Queen of Tahiti.
As an instance of the mode of treatment adopted
by the French authorities towards the natives, I
may state the following, of which I was informed
by several eye-witnesses.
Some relatives of Pomare returning from
Moorea, (the neighbouring Island) were swamped
by a very heavy sea, just as they were entering
Papeete Harbour. Certain persons on the shore,
seeing what had happened, sent Pomare’s own
boat as quickly as possible to their assistance. As


life was at stake they pulled immediately to the
spot to rescue them, if possible, from a watery
crave. No sooner did the French perceive that
<D
the boat had gone without first obtaining their pei -
mission, than they sent out their boats and
captured the whole party. The principal person
in the boat which was swamped, was a cousin of
Queen Pomare. She had with her her youngest
child, a babe, three or four months old. The
general opinion was that the child was not dead
Vhen taken out of the water, and that if they had
been allowed to go direct to the shore and use
proper restoratives, they might have been success,
ful in saving its life; instead of this, all were
taken on board the French frigate “Frame” as
prisoners, and kept there about two hours. Dr.
Meyrick, a British resident, was imprisoned four
days for having advanced the above opinion on the
death of the child. The boat which had been
swamped was, after some time, given up, but
Pomare’s boat was retained by the French autho-
rities.
Such was the conduct of the French towards the
small vessel (the “Basilisk”,) on board of which


the Queen and her family had taken refuge, that
they considered they were no longer safe, although
under the British flag; consequently they applied
to Captain Gordon for permission to go on board
H.B.M. steam vessel under his command for
greater security. The royal family had scarcely
got on board the “ Cormorant ” than the Governor
made arrangements for that British Ship-of-War
to leave the Port; consequently they all had to
return on board the “ Basilisk,”
From the deck of that little vessel she could se»
the lofty mountains, the verdant valleys, and the
luxuriant vegetation of her fatherland; but was
not allowed (nor any of her family) to set foot on
shore. She could recognize many of her subjects
passing to and fro along the beach, but could hold
no converse with them, the restrictions likewise
preventing them from going on board to see her.
The health of the royal family beginning to fail,
through long confinement and anxiety, and their
lives being constantly embittered by petty annoy,
auces, the Queen became very desirous to go to
some other Island, where she might live quietly
and enjoy personal liberty; consequently the next


British ship-of-war that arrived at Tahiti took her
and her family to the Island of Raiatea, where
they received a hearty welcome from the King,
Chiefs, and people; but even there the French
ships went to annoy them.
NATIVE CHAPEL, KAIATEA.
Notwithstanding all this persecution, Pomare s
faith in God remained unshaken. A Missionary
who went to see her in her banishment, was
speaking of the protection of the French, when
she replied, “ I want no other protection


than that of God and his truth,” Many of the-
Tahitians left their native soil and went to
other Islands rather than remain under French
rule, and a very large proportion of those who re-
mained took up arms and went to their native
fortress. There they held out against the French
for nearly three years. At length they were be-
trayed, through the treachery of a native, from
another Island, who knew the way into the fortj
and who, for a sum of money, led the French
soldiers to the camp. The Tahitians seeing that
it would be useless to resist, laid down their arms
and submitted to the conquerors. The Queen,
hearing of the triumph of the French, began to
question whether she should remain at Eaiatea or
return to Tahiti. After much serious thought and
earnest prayer for divine direction, she resolved to
return and submit to her enemies.
In February, 1847, the Queen, with her family,
left Eaiatea to return to Tahiti, and on their way
they called at Moorea and visited the Missionaries.
She told them that when her baby, Victoria, was
a little older, she should place it under their
but soon after the dear little girl died.




When they arrived at Tahiti, Pomare presented
herself before the French Admiral Bruat. Hav-
ingshaken hands with the Queen and her attendants
the Governor said to'the Queen, “ I have several
important things I wish to tell your Majesty pri-
vately. Where can we go ? ” “To the Chapel,”
was the reply. The important communications
were, —That the Queen should be restored to her
kingdom on certain conditions, and that a sum of
money should be given to her every year. Pomare
consented, because she knew there was no alter-
native. She then went into the large school-
house, which was filled with people. Tapoa, the
King of Borabora, engaged in prayer, after which
Governor Bruat stood up, and taking the Queen
by the right hand, said, “ Queen Pomare and I
understand each other perfectly, and I hereby
return to her all her rights as Queen of these two
Islands, Tahiti and Moorea.” Immediately the
French band began to play, and 21 guns were
fired in honour of Pomare’s restoration. This
was done with a view of pleasing the natives, and
that it might be published to the world, that the
French had restored the sovereignty of Tahiti to


Pomare, retaining only the Protectorate, that is,
the external Government of the Islands; but they
have as full possession of them now as they have
of New Caledonia, their penal settlements This
act of restoration was a mere form, and to the day
of her death, Pomare was only nominally Queen,
no rights of sovereignty having been returned to
her. The French Government from that time
allowed her a pension, on which to live in retire-
ment. The trials of Queen Pomare were not
only numerous and heavy, but also of long con-
tinuance. When all the circumstances are con-
sidered, her j^atient'forbearance and Christian
fortitude appear truly marvellous, and furnish a
manifestation of those graces, such as we should
only expect to meet in the most matured Christian
characters. She evinced no desire to render evil
for evil, but at all times exhibited much of the
temper and spirit of her Saviour, who when He
was reviled, reviled not again, and when He suf-
fered threatened not. Her exemplary piety was
clearly evinced by the tone and spirit of her letters
to the King of the French, for while they prove
that she was by no means indifferent to the


infringement on her rights which she had suffered,
yet they always breathed kind wishes for his
welfare, and for the prosperity of his kingdom.
After Pomare was deprived of her sovereignty
she laboured zealously for the spiritual benefit of
the people.
A NATIVE MINISTER’S HOUSE.
The English Missionaries being obliged to leave,
the Protestant Churches were put under the sole


■care of native pastors, —men who had been trained
for the work. These have carried on the work
of the schools for the adults as well as for the
juveniles, the prayer meetings and the Sabbath
services, just as the English Missionaries had been
accustomed to do. Queen Pomare always main-
tained a uniform kindness of behaviour towards
these native pastors, and did everything she could
to encourage them in their work.
A few years ago she invited them to accompany
her to certain villages to hold special services of a
religious character. She wished them to conduct
the devotional parts of the services, and she would
address the people. They went in company from
village to village, and in a loving and truly
Christian spirit she exhorted the people to be more
diligent in their attention to Divine things, to
cling to their Protestant faith, to walk worthy of
their Christian profession, and try to do good to
those around them. When she had visited all the
villages she intended, she held a meeting with the
pastors alone, entreating them to be zealous and
faithful, and expressing her earnest desire that
their labours might be attended with great success.


She called them her children, and concluded her
address by saying,—“ I have no greater joy than
to hear that my children are walking in the truth.”
Some time after it was found that in some of the vil-
lages that had been visited a considerable revival had
been the result. Strangers visiting Tahiti have
looked with more than ordinary interest upon the
chapels and school-houses on the various districts,
expressing their pleasure at finding them in such
good condition. The Protestant natives on Tahiti
during the years 1875-6 spent 35,000 dollars on
their churches. Many of their places of worship
would do credit to villages in our own country.
The native pastors are men of God rightly di-
viding the word of truth. Their discourses, too,
are not devoid of figurative language. The fol-
lowing may serve as a specimen ; —A native,
speaking to his countrymen on the love of Christ,
said, with considerable warmth, “ The love of
Christ! to what shall I compare it ? To what
CAN I compare it? Compared with it, that
ocean is shallow, that sky is low; the east and the
west are close together.” The old, old story of
Jesus and His love is the favourite subject on


which they delight to dwell. They preach the
gospel of Christ in its purity, with simplicity and
fidelity. It has been with the most intense in-
terest I have heard some of the native Ministers
address a large congregation on the Sabbath. I
have sometimes been at a loss which to admire
the more, the earnestness and simplicity of the
preacher, or the serious and devout attention of
his hearers. The Master whom they serve has
not permitted them to labour in vain. They have
been instrumental in the conversion of sinners,
and in building up believers in the faith and hope
of the Gospel. For more than thirty years the
French Roman Catholic Bishop, with many
Priests and Sisters of Charity, backed by their
Government, have been zealously endeavouring
to make Proselytes, but with very little success,
though, if report is to be believed, they have not
been at all scrupulous about the means used to
increase the number of their adherents. On one
occasion a Priest coaxed a number of little chil-
dren into his house by giving them sweetmeats;
then, taking them into an inner room, he
sprinkled some holy water updn them. It was


then reported that several juveniles had joined
their community. Some time ago a few of the
women of Tahiti were induced to join the Romish
communion by the promise of a new satin mantle
each. These hopeful converts were admitted to
“ the bosom of the true Church,” and duly re-
received the promised reward. Great was their
dismay when they afterwards found that they
were held responsible for payment, and pay they
did, though it was with great reluctance. Latterly,
Popish Chapels have sprung up in districts where
they never had been seen before. The Priests
induce two or three persons to petition the
Governor to build a Church in a certain locality.
The petition is graciously acceded to, and the
building is forthwith reared at the expense, not
of the French Government, but of the Protestant
2iopulation, who are heavily taxed for the sup-
port of Popery. A heavy tax is demanded
of all who set up schools for the foreigners,
which is intended to force the children of
Europeans into the schools of the Jesuits, Not-
withstanding these continued efforts to crush the
Protestant cause; it has greatly prospered. By the


latest reports from the Islands, we learn that out
of 8,000 inhabitants on Tahiti and Moorea there
are only about 300 Roman Catholics. The
number of members connected with the Protestant
Churches is 2,485. These are under the Pastoral
oare of thirteen native preachers. The Bible is
greatly loved and very highly prized by the
natives generally, and of many of them it may
truly be said that they “ search the Scriptures
daily.’ ’ Some gentlemen visiting Tahiti went into
the Roman Catholic Cathedral and expressed their
surprise at seeing in the pulpit a Tahitian Bible
(translated by the Protestant Missionaries.) A
native in reply said, “ They must have the Bible,
or the Tahitians would never listen to them. Prior
to the time of the French aggressions on Tahiti,
the native churches did a great work in propagat-
ing the Gospel in the dark lands as they called
those Islands where the joyful sound had not been
heard, and the inhabitants were enveloped in
heathen darkness. Many of the best members of
the Church, men eminent for piety, talent, and
intelligence, went forth as pioneers with the glad
tidings of salvation ; but when troubles so multi-


plied at home, their efforts and energies seemed
crippled, and for several years they put forth no
new attempts in that direction; it is however
cheering to know that now they are awaking to
a renewed sense of their duty to send the Gospel
to those Islands which are destitute of it. They
UUEEN POMARE’s PALACE, TAHITI.
are just now sending, as a messenger of the
Tahitian Churches, a devoted young man to
Papua, which is a part of New Guinea, At
Papeete they have collected a large quantity of
articles, useful for the native Missionaries at


Papua. Pomare took the deepest interest in this
work, and gave very liberally to help it on, thereby
evincing her undiminished zeal and love for the
cause of Christ.
In the early part of the month of September,
1877, the Queen became somewhat indisposed,
but no serious results were anticipated. The
following is an extract from the “ Messager de
Tahiti,” a newspaper published on the spot: —
“ Her Majesty Queen Pomare IV. expired on the
17th of September, 1877, at 7 a.m., at her house
in Papeete, in the 65th year of her age, after
having reigned a little more than 50 years over
the Society Islands and dependencies.*
Born on the 23rd of February, 1813, her
* Queen Pomare never reigned over the Society Islands,
viz., —Huahine, Maiaoiti, Raiatea, Tahaa, Borabora, and
Maupiti. Her Majesty had the sovereignty only of Tahiti
and Moorea (the Georgian Islands). When Captain Cook
visited those Islands, in the reign of George 111., he had on
board a gentleman (a naturalist), member of the Royal
Geographical Society. Tahiti and Moorea he called the
Georgian Islands— after King George ; and out of compli-
ment to the aforesaid Society he named the rest of that
group the Society Islands , each of which has a separate
Government.


Majesty Queen Pomare, succeeded her brother,
Pomare 111., in January, 1827. During so long
a reign the Queen has experienced many vicissi-
tudes and many trials; but notwithstanding all,
she was still very vigorous, and there was nothing
to indicate that her end was so near. This event
will resound throughout the world. Oceania was,
in a sense, represented by Queen Pomare. The
multitude of Officers of all ranks, the numerous
Captains of Commerce, who, during so many
years, have visited these parts, have taken to all
quarters of the Globe a souvenir of her person, of
her hearty welcome, and of her hospitality. She
has friends, therefore, everywhere—friends to
deplore her death, and to partake of the regret of
her family.”
The following brief report of the ceremonies
connected with the funeral of the late Queen
Pomare IV., which took place on Saturday the
22nd of September, has been forwarded to the
London Missionary Society, by the Eev. J. L*
Green, Chaplain to the foreign residents on Tahiti.
“ A public service was held at the Palace on
Friday evening at five o’clock, conducted by M.


Vernier and myself, each of us in turn addressing
the thousands of natives from the districts of
Tahiti, Moorea (Eimeo), and other Islands,
assembled in the grounds surrounding the Palace,
The family, the French Admiral, all the French
Officials from on shore, and from the ships-of-war
in port, together with many other Europeans,
occupied the halls and balconies of the Palace, M.
Vernier and I took up our positions at the angle
of the balconies, where we commanded the whole
of that vast assembly. My colleague addressed
the people from the words of St. Peter, Ist epistle,
Ist chap. 24th verse. “ For all flesh is as grass,
and all the glory of man as the flower of grass.”
I followed him, after the singing of a hymn, by an
address from cxvi. Psalm, 15th verse. “ Precious
in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints.”
Among the hymns sung at this service, was a
translation of the English, “ I have a Father in
the promised land.” The whole service was very
impressive. The setting sun, with the peculiar
stillness of all nature around us, and all that
immense assembly dressed in deep mourning,
tended to add to the solemnity of the occasion. On


the following morning (Saturday), the cortege
moved off from the front of the Palace towards
Papaoa, a distance of four miles, precisely in the
following order :
Mounted native Police with Banners.
French Gens d’Armes.
A company of Artillery.
Marines from the Admiral’s frigate.
Band of Music from the frigate.
Local Band.
European Ministers.
Native Pastors. ej $
o
The Hearse bearing the Corpse, drawn by <5?
30 Natives, relieved at three intervals, P p
p
the Hearse being arranged from %
to
o .5
m ©
PI «
<d m
% a
O*
- £
CO C 3
CD rj
'S O
O M
-U3
OT
O
c 3
Ph
native affairs.
Late Queen’s Privy Council.
Members of the Family.
the Queen’s own carriage, sr
with a canopy over it.
Ariiaue, heir to the Throne, and Admiral. B' Bi
5 7 a> a>
Aides de Camp, and Director of
Foreign Consuls.
French Naval, Military, and Civil Officers.


Native Judges of Supreme Court.
Native Chiefs,
Natives of Tahiti, Moorea,
And other Islands.
Tho procession extended over a mile, with an
average of eight abreast, a single file of natives
was stationed on either side of the road for the first
mile and-a-half of the distance from Papeete, and
as the cortege advanced these fell into the ranks.
On arriving at the Royal Mausoleum at Papaoa,
the natives surrounded the building. The Soldiers,
Gens d’Armes, and Marines were drawn up rank
and file, and as M, Yernier ascended the pulpit,
which had been brought from the Church, and
placed in a suitable position, the Marines fired a
volley of musketry. After the hymn announced
by M. Yernier, M. Vienot read a part of 15th
chapter of Ist Epistle to the Corinthians. Mr.
Brun, of Moorea, then offered prayer and
addressed the assembly ; and after the singing of
another hymn, the coffin was removed from the
hearse and deposited in the vault.
M. Yernier accompanied the act with a few


appropriate words, after which I offered prayer
and pronounced the benediction. The people all
dispersed, leaving only the family behind to weep
over their loss. The following day being the
Sabbath, funeral sermons were preached to very
large and attentive congregations. Much could be
written on the character, and the peculiar trials and
difficulties of the late Queen, and of all the vicissi-
tudes through which she has passed, but we only re-
mark, in viewing them, that her uniform conduct
has been such as to prove that she esteemed the
reproach of Christ greater riches than all the
pomp and position of royalty. She has for many
years past felt herself much more at home in
religious meetings than in the discharge of poli-
tical duties, in fact, she has frequently absented
herself from Papeete for weeks together, with her
domestic chaplain, (one of my former students at
Taaha), visiting several districts of the Island, or
at Moorea, employing herself with the female
members of the Churches, in holding meetings for
mutual edification; and at these meetings she
usually decided the character of the meeting, by
previously prepared notes, and it was the notes


prepared for these meetings which had accumu-
lated so as to excite the Admiral’s astonishment to
which I shall presently refer, and there is no
doubt but these meetings have done much to keep
the people in such firm adherence to the Gospel
of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; at the same
time we know that God is not dependent on any
one particular means whereby to accomplish His
purposes, and we do not despair of His maintaining
His cause amongst us. The day after the Queen s
death, I called with my colleague, M. Vernier, to
pay my respects to the Admiral as “ Commandant
Commissaire de la Republique (he having assumed
that position two days previously, in consequence
of the illness and incapacity of the commandant
newly arrived in the Colony.)
The Admiral naturally referred to the Queen’s
sudden and unexpected death, and when speaking
of the loss we all sustained in her departure from
our midst, he said, “ It has been a part of my duty
to look over the Queen’s private papers to ascer-
tain, if possible, what her wishes were with regard
to the succession, and I have been astonished to
see the many proofs of her goodness. The many.


very many, notes on Scripture, which she has left
behind her, shew her to have been eminently
pious, and she was as generous and benevolent as
she was pious. She has left behind her proofs of
her generosity, benevolence, and self-denial, which
nhew that she had given away all her income, on
some occasions, leaving only a few francs per
month to support herself and her household.”
This remark speaks for itself and tells its own
tale. Personally we felt an intense interest in
Pomare and her well-being; she looked
upon us as a part of her own family, and would
frequently drop in without ceremony, and the first
intimation of her arrival would be her familiar
voice calling out to Mrs. Green or myself, and
felling us not to be disturbed. She is gone, how-
ever, and I have no doubt she has gone to be at
rest, and to enjoy the eternal reward of her earnest
though imperfect labours among her people.”
(Signed) James L. Geeen.
Chaplain to the Foreign Residents.”
The unqualified testimony given by the French
Admiral to the sterling Christian character, the


uniformly consistent conduct and boundless bene-
volence of Queen Pomare speaks volumes in her
praise. The natives generally have sustained a
great loss in her death, for although for more than
30 years her sovereignty has been merely nominal,
yet by the consistency of her Christian deportment,
and her untiring zeal for the spiritual welfare of
the people generally, she has proved a great bless-
ing to the Islands, and will long be remembered,
with much affection, both by natives and foreigners.
Strangers unacquainted with what the French
have done and are doing at Tahiti, on reading the
account of the funeral, will be disposed to think
that they have paid great honour to the memory
of the Queen, but a further acquaintance with
their proceedings, for more than 30 years, would
lead such persons to a very different conclusion.
Ariiaue, the Queen’s eldest son, has been crowned
under the title of Pomare V. Like his mother, he
will have an annual allowance, and an honorary
title.












1508 02129518


