

ti. '
(Slueen IDictona.


<3ob Save tbe (Slueen!
“ The august Sovereign who wields the sceptre of the
British Empire, whose wisdom all acknowledge, whose
love for her people has found expression on innumerable
occasions during a reign unequalled in duration, and who
is enthroned in the hearts of hundreds of millions of
subjects of almost every race in every quarter of the
globe.
“ The awful curse of Shakspeare’s tyrant is transmuted
into a blessing for the Queen; for every creature loves
her.
“Tried by affliction herself, she has known how to soothe
the afflicted, and to win the reward of the promise to
them who humble themselves before God.
“From the isles and from the continents the multi-
tudinous seas waft blessings to her at the close of three
score years devoted to the welfare of her people; and if,
through wise counsels of the European Powers, Her
Majesty’s subjects be permitted to gather together in time
of peace in London in June, 1»97, a sight surpassing the
pomp of Roman triumphs will bo presented to the world.
“ Those triumphs were the price of conquest and of
blood; and following the beasts intended for sacrifice
were the patriot captives, destined also for slaughter after
contributing to the public show.
“ No such blot will disfigure the pageant in London.
India will send her men of mark only to join in the
chorus of good-will. The Ave Regina ! Avc Imperatrix !
which they will utter will be prompted by the general
accord with which the subjects of the Queen will hail and
revere her as Victoria the Good.”*
History of Australia, 1S!)7, 2nd Edition, Vol. 111., p. r>2l.
By G. W. Rusden.


H 170671
(Bob ©less tbc (Siuecn!
Why weep ye for the Queen ? Rather with joy
Hail the completeness of her glorious life !
Pattern of duty done! e’en grief’s alloy
Proving her worth as Queen, as friend, as wife.
Greatest on great occasions, her pledged word
Soothed Indian Princes’ fears, and kept them true ;
And, in the twilight of her reign, their sword
Was swiftly drawn when danger was in view.
Is it not fitting that her mighty sway
Should, without failure on her part, be crowned
By briefest illness ere she passed away,
Acclaimed, revered, and blest, the world around,
Borne on the breath of universal love
To share eternal joy in realms above ?
G. W. RUSDEN.
2:2 nd January, 1901.


. ■ ■ • ’ . •
■ se«.f
A Q~ 3 \
• ' <S -*£- <
SHE
>
.
T- 1
fi
, i • >
• . • > ■
