

EMIGRATION PAPERS FOE THE WORKING
CLASSES
Being a description of the Climate, Boil 7 Products r Population f
Wages, and General Inducements Offered to Different Glasses of
Emigrants hy the various Fields Open to Colonization.
QUEENSLAND
AUSTRALIA,
CHARLES HAYNES BARLEB, ESQ.,
Of Clavering, Kedron Brook, Brisbane.
EDITED BY ELLEN BARLEB,
Author of “ Our Homeless Poor “ Individual Exertion “ Friendless
and Helpless, sc.
iPIESICIS ZFOTJIRIPiEIsrCIEL
PUBLISHED BY
GORDON & GOTCH,
S. W. PARTEIDGB & Co.,
9, PATERNOSTER ROW,. E.G.
Australian and American News'
Agents, 121, Holborn Hill.




EMIGRATION PAPERS FOR THE WORKING-
CLASSES
Being a description of the Climate, Soil, Products, Population,
Wages, and General Inducements Offered to Different Classes of
Emigrants hy the various Fields Open to Colonization.
QUEENSLAND
AUSTRALIA,
CHARLES HAYNES BAILEE, ESQ,.,
Of Giavering, Kedron Brook, Brisbane.
EDITED BY ELLEN BAELEE,
Author of “ Our Homeless Poor," “Individual Exertion “ Friendless
and Helpless, sc.
PEICB IPOTJiR-IPIBISrOE.
PUBLISHED BY
GORDON & GOTCH,
S. W. PARTRIDGE & Co.,
9, PATERNOSTER ROW, E.O.
Australian and American News-
Agents, 121, Holboen Hill.


PRINTED BY JAMES WAKEHAM,
4, BEDFORD TERBACE, CHURCH STREET,
KEMSINGTON,


PREFACE.
Emigration has become one of the leading features of the day, having
been forced on the attention of all classes alike, from the necessity to
provide some outlet for the thousands of unemployed artizans and
Laborers who cannot secure work at Home. A large class, however,
among our Working Classes, have very mistaken ideas of Colonial Life,
they look on Emigration as little short of Transportation, and only accept
a passage across the water, provided by the charity of the public, as a last
resource against starvation. Others, again, remain at Home, wearing out
existence in a hopeless effort to secure their daily bread, seeing no prospect
of advancement for themselves or their children, and no asylum for their
old age, save the Workhouse,
This state of things arises simply from ignorance, and non-appreciation
of the value of their own Labour and acquirements, which, if carried to a
Colonial market, would ensure, not only independence, but such collateral
advantages as in this overcrowded country can never be obtained.
Knowledge is Power, and, doubtless, had the body of our Working Classes
a knowledge of the resources, supplies, and wants of our Colonial
dependencies, each alike demanding labour as the staple source of its
advancement, many intelligent craftsmen who now swell the ranks of
pauperism, would ere this have crossed the water at their own expense
and become already independent members of Society.
It is desirable, if possible, that Emigration should become more
of an independent movement than at present, and that the element of
“ Charity ” should gradually no longer be needed. Many a man, when
work fails, instead of at once resolving to seek it abroad, will live for a
time on the sale of his effects, till all being gone, he is reduced to pauper-
ism, while had he “realised ” at first, he might have transported himself
and family to Canada or elsewhere, and still been in possession of a few
pounds on his arrival, thus taking a far higher position than the pauper
emigrant, who lauds often without a shilling.


Others, when in work, might, without event feeling the loss, put by a
small sum weekly, to enable one or more of their children to enter
on Colonial life, training them, during their youth, to a knowledge of its
requirements, thus founding a home for cithers to follow. Again the
allowances often paid by Trades Unions to their members when on strike,
or out of work, would pay their passages to other lands at a permanent
benefit to the recipients.
In furtherance of this step, “ Knowledge” again “is Power, and I
therefore propose to edit, for circulation, a few Pamphlets, written by
persons well acquainted with the various places of enterprise open to
Emigrants, and containing such information as may enable those who
cannot find employment in England, to adapt their talents and means
to the varied resources which other countries offer towards inde-
pendence, pointing out how they should set out on their travels, and to
whom to apply to for further advice, if required.
In Emigration, as in every other path to prosperity, it will however, be
well to remember that there is no royal road to success, and that happiness
can alone be ensured in that well tried path, the hear of God,
which engenders obedience to His Commandments. Hitherto the Colonies
have had sorely to complain of the many idle, incapable hands, which are
yearly landed on their shores. Helpless at home, these men are ten
times more so in a new country, where every man must be able to
shift for himself, and where industry and perseverance are the essential
elements of independence. Such a class had far better remain where they
are. It is those that feel within themselves the power and strength to
follow God’s Command, “ Go forth, Eeplenish the Earth, and subdue it,”
to whom Emigration recommends itself, but even they must recognize in
such an enterprise, that the hill has to be climbed ere the summit
is reached, and they must bring, not only energy and sobriety, but
patience to their toil. Then, indeed, their work will not fail of its
reward. One word more. In every land alike the Creator s blessing or
condemnation follows man’s steps, according as he wastes or improves the
opportunities set before him. Let every emigrant, then, as a pioneer of
Civilization, be also that of a true Christian Faith, ever remembering the
promise : “ Them that honour Me, I will honour, and they that despise Me
shall be lightly esteemed.’’
ELLEN BALLEE,
Author of “ Homeless Poor,”
Helpless,” 66 Individual Exertion,” &c>


EMIGRATION.
QUEENSLAND.
The great demand for intelligence of this Colony, rather than
any faith in the merits of this pamphlet, has induced me to
lay it before the public, since I hold it to be the duty of every
one, who has it in his power, to contribute his quota of in-
formation on a subject possessing such general interest.
I may, however, claim the merit of having honestly and
truthfully recorded my observations and impressions, which
are the result of a residence in this Colony, since the inaugu-
ration of a responsible government, aided by a general know-
ledge of Colonial life derived from a previous residence of 20
years in the neighbouring Colonies of New South Wales,
Victoria, Adelaide, &c., &c.
Queensland is the north-eastern settlement of the Australian
Continent, and was a portion of New South Wales until the
year 1859, when it was erected into a separate Colony and
called after our Most Gracious Majesty.
Upon reference to a map of Australia, it will be seen that
the boundaries of this Colony comprise an immense area, an
area in fact of 678,000 square miles, with a seaboard of 2,250
miles—or nearly twelve times as large as England and Wales,
and about four times the size of France. Stations extend from
700 to 800 miles west of Brisbane, and 800 miles north of Rock-
hampton, and to the Gulf of Carpentaria. The inducements to
enterprise held out by the judicious and liberal enactments of
the Queensland Parliament are fast attracting population, and
the hardy squatters, the pioneers of civilization, are penetrating
with their flocks and herds further and further into the interior,
reclaiming the wilderness and opening the way for a gradual
development of the resources of the country.
The Colony of Queensland, or rather that part of it which


has been taken up by the white settlers, is divided into dis-
tricts similar to our counties, except that they are of much
larger dimensions. These are twelve in number, as follows ;
Moreton, the south-eastern district, which at present con-
tains the largest share of the population, as it includes in its
limits the two principal towns, Brisbane and Ipswich, the last
named township being situated on the Bremer, a branch or
tributary of the Brisbane.
A large trade is carried on in Ipswich with the interior of
the Colony in the supplies required for stations and the shipment
of Colonial produce. The most noteworthy institution in
Ipswich is the North Australian Club, one of the best clubs in
the Colonies, and the resort of the wealthy squatters, when
business necessitates a trip to the township.
The Darling Downs, to the west of Moreton, is, as its name
implies, a pastoral district. Here may be seen some of the
most magnificent open pasture land that can be conceived.
It includes the Cecil Plains, the Victoria Downs, and
other large tracts of park-like, country, over which thousands
of cattle and sheep depasture. The Great Dividing Range
separates this district from Moreton, which is about 80 miles
from Brisbane. The Condamine river intersects the Darling
Downs towards the north, and the Weir river to the west.
In the eastern portion of the district lie the two rival town-
ships of Drayton and Toowoomba, both of which are municipal
towns, and together form one electorate. To the south is the
town, of Warwick, a rising township which already returns one
Member to the Legislative Assembly, and to the north is the
town of Dalby. The Darling Downs is famous throughout for
its rich grassy land.
Leichhardt, which lies above or to the north of Darling
Downs, is also a large squatting district, and possesses more
varied natural features, including a large proportion of moun-
tainous country. In this district are the Peak Downs Copper
Mines, which have proved highly productive. They are situated,
about 270 miles from Rockhampton.
The Maranoa, Mitchell, and Warrego districts bound the
Darling Downs on the west, and reach, to the extreme western
boundary of the Colony. These are purely pastoral districts,
in which large quantities of land have been taken up and
stocked. They also comprise large areas of scrub, the resort of
wild tribes of aborigines, and abound in a great variety of game.


The Burnett district is skirted by the sea coast for its
eastern boundary. Maryborough, a maritime township, situated
at the mouth of the river Mary, is the most important place in
this district, and is already doing a large trade. Maryborough
is the nearest shipping port to the Burnett Gold Fields, recently
discovered on the Mary River, and which have attracted a large
population, especially at Nashville, or Gympie.
Port Curtis, of which Gladstone is the seaport, is the next
district, and is also bounded by the coast for the whole of its
eastern boundary. The rivers Dawson, Fitzroy, and Macken-
zie, with their numerous tributaries, water this district, which
is in every way highly favoured by nature. It has already
afforded proof that it contains great mineral treasures. Some
important gold fields, especially the Morinish and Rosewood
diggings, have been discovered. Valuable marble quarries are
being worked, equal, it is said, to European marble, in the
neighbourhood of Gladstone. About 45 miles up the Fitzroy is
situated the important town of Rockhampton, which on account
of its central situation and conveniences for supplying the sta-
tions in the interior, has prospered more in a short time than any
other town in the Colony. The great gold rush of 1858 which
at the time bade fair to depopulate Sydney and Melbourne, took
this direction, Canoona, the scene of the diggings, being close
to Rockhampton. The terminus of the Great Northern Rail-
way is at Rockhampton. This line is only completed to West-
wood, a distance of 33 miles.
Keppel Bay, which is situate in the tropic of Capricorn, and
Broad Sound, are two fine harbours on the coast.
The Kennedy, Gregory, Burke, and Cook districts bound
the occupied territory to the north. These districts contain a
large extent of valuable pastoral country, watered by the
Burdekin, Flinders, and Sutton rivers. In the Burnett district
is a rich gold field on the Cape River. Bowen is the principal
town in this district, situated on the shores of Edgecumb Bay.
The other townships in this district are Mackay, Townsville,
and Cardwell, in Rockingham Bay. A township has been
formed near the mouth of the Albert River, flowing into the
Gulf of Carpentaria, and named Burketown.


Form of Government.
The form of Government in Queensland resembles that in
existence in New South Wales. The Governor, Her Majesty’s
representative in the Colony, is appointed by the Crown. The
Executive Council consists of four gentlemen nominated by his
Excellency from among the members of the Legislature, viz :
The Colonial Secretary (Premier) • Colonial Treasurer, Attorney
General and Minister of Lands and Works. The department
of Lands and Works is a new creation called for by the addi-
tional duties arising from the increased sale of land and expen-
diture upon Government works in the interior.
The Legislative Assembly or House of Commons comprises
26 members who are elected by the people. The Legislative
Council,the Peers of Queensland, are nominated by the Governor;
they are 16 in number. The qualifications for an elector are
as follows : —l. Every man twenty-one years of age, who is either
a natural born or naturalized subject of Her Majesty, and who
is either owner of a freehold worth 100 Z. above all charges and
encumbrances, and which has been held in possession six months
previous to the last registration (this proviso has also reference
to the, qualification arising from householders, salary, board and
lodging). 2. Occupier of a house or tenement of the annual
value of 10Z. 3. Leaseholder to the annual value of 10Z. whose
lease has not less than three years to run at the time of regis-
tration. 4. Leaseholder to the amount aforesaid, three years
of whose lease had expired previous to registration. 5. Holder
of a pastoral license from the Crown. 6. Receiving a salary
of 100 Z. a year. 7. Paying 40Z. a year for board and lodging,
or 10Z. a year for lodging only.
Criminals and defaulters in respect of taxes, rents, tolls, &c.,
are debarred from voting. The change of residence from one
district to another also involves fresh registration. The
franchise is thus clearly within the reach of every industrious
man in the Colony.
The important question of Education has always been a
difficult one to grapple with in the Colonial communities on
account of the different sects of religion which exist, the many
prejudices which have to be encountered, and the variety of
opinions which prevail in connection with the mode of adminis-
tering it. The principle which the Queensland Primary Edu-
cation Act proposes to carry out is to provide a good secular


education as rar as practicable to all classes in the form of a
national system, and a vote of the Legislature provides a sum
of money for the erection of Primary Schools.
The schools which receive Government aid must be vested
in the Board of General Education. This consists of six
persons appointed by the Government including a member of
the Executive who is chairman ex officio. The Board are
empowered to make laws and bye-laws which must, however,
be submitted to the Legislature for approval. No schools can
obtain assistance which are not vested in the Board and con-
ducted under their inspection. In any district in which there
is no vested school, and in which 30 children can be mustered,
the inhabitants may apply for the establishment of a school in
connexion with the Board of Education. In such a case a sub-
scription equal to one-third of the sum necessary for the erection
of a suitable building must be raised locally; the Government then
agree to defray the remaining two-thirds. The inhabitants of
the place may recommend a teacher but the appointment rests
with the Board.
A Parliamentary grant is devoted to the foundation of Gram-
mar Schools. The Act provides that a subsidy of 2,000 1, may-
be given towards the building of a school in any district in which
I,oook shall have been already subscribed for the purpose, and
also a further assistance in the shape of an endowment of land to
the value of 2,000 k to each school. When the fees in any
school amount to 250 k annually the Government are empowered
to double that sum each year to support the school. These
schools are invested in a Board of seven trustees, four of whom
are appointed by the Executive ah& three by the subscribers.
The State affords no support to religion in Queensland and
there is consequently no dominant church. Each sect has to
depend upon its own resources, or, in other words, upon the
liberality of its adherents, and enjoys an equal amount of
toleration and respect. The Church of England comprises the
largest share of the population, and the Roman Catholic next;
the other sects may be classed in the following order: Presby-
terians, Baptists, Wesleyan and Primitive Methodists, Indepen-
dents and Congregationalists.


Brisbane.
Brisbane, the Capital, is situated on a bend of the River
Brisbane and is divided into four portions, North and South
Brisbane, Kangaroo Point and Fortitude Valley. Brisbane is
becoming a place of no little importance, and already exhibits
most of the features of large English towns. It possesses
besides the Houses of Parliament, and Government House,
several handsome State buildings of a solid and sub-
stantial structure, Churches, Banks, Hotels, Clubs, National
Schools, an Observatory, School of Arts, Botanical Gardens,
Theatres, &c. A debating society meets twice a week, affording
the youths of Brisbane an opportunity of qualifying them-
selves for future legislatorial honor. The library, though
not yet very extensive, has received during the last few
years several valuable additions purchased in England with
funds subscribed by members. Classes in different branches
of education are also held at regular periods for the benefit
of the rising generation, and the place is further supported by
the laudable efforts of the better informed of the inhabitants,
who give from time to time entertaining lectures on various
subjects.
There is now telegraph communication to the extreme frontier
of Queensland, and thence to Sydney, Melbourne, and Adelaide.
One hundred and sixty miles of railroad have been constructed,
and sixty-two miles are in course of construction.
Sandgate and Cleveland are the two seaside places for the
inhabitants of Brisbane; the former is about 13 miles from
Brisbane, and therefore easy*of access.
The different modes by which emigration to Queensland is
aided by the Colonial Government may be summed up in the
following order.
1. By the Remittance System , which permits a person residing in
the Colony to go to the Emigration Office and nominate certain
persons whom he wishes to bring out. For these persons he
has to pay down 4b per head for each male emigrant under
12; over 12 and under 45, 6b ; above 45, 81.; and for females
under 35, 4b ; over 35 and under 45, 6b ; and over 45, 8b
In return for this he is furnished with certificates to be
forwarded to the parties nominated, which must be produced
by them to the Emigration Agent in England within Twelve
Months. These emigrants are then brought out by the Govern-


ment, and upon their arrival are provided with lodging at
the Immigration barracks for 10 days, after which time if they
remain there, from not being suited with employment, or from
any other cause, they are charged Is. per day.
2. By Assisted and Free Passages. —“ Assisted passages ”,
are from time to time given by the Queensland Government
to certain classes of European emigrants. These persons to be
eligible must be labourers accustomed to field work, and
mechanics, such as carpenters, blacksmiths, &c. Intending
emigrants of this class, can, if approved by the Emigration
agent, upon payment of 81. for each adult or every two
children between 12 months and 12 years, obtain a passage
to Queensland in one of the vessels chartered by the Govern-
ment for the purpose. Respectable female domestics can be
sent out upon payment of 11. each. Children under 12 months
are not charged for. Forms of application can be had at
the Emigration office, 2, Old Broad Street. Free passages
are also granted to married farm laborers, having not more
than one child, and under 12 years of age. No land orders are
given to persons receiving Government aid.
3. By the Land Order System. —The Land Order System
is the great inducement to emigration, as it comprises a liberal
gift of good land with the principle of free selection among the
unsold lands throughout the settled districts of the Colony.
Every emigrant paying his own passage as cabin, interme-
diate, or steerage passenger is entitled to a SOL land order
immediately upon arrival. The land orders are available as
cash for the purchase of suburban or country lands.
The climate of Queensland is, in spite of all that has been
said about it, undoubtedly a healthy one. The solar heat during
the months of November, December, January, and February is
unquestionably great, but I have rarely met with a person who
has resided in the country for any length of time who has com-
plained that his health has been in any way affected, or that he
has suffered any real inconvenience by it. Many on the other
hand date the restoration of their health from the period of
their arrival in Brisbane, more especially those who have been
suffering from pulmonary complaints, or who have the least
tendency to consumption. Such persons will, perhaps, thrive
better in Queensland than any other place in the world. Those
who are affected with complaints of the liver would, perhaps,
do better in a colder climate. The atmosphere is peculiarly


clear and transparent, and the cold nights which succeed the
hottest days are very conducive to health as the system becomes
braced and enabled to withstand the relaxing effects of the heat.
The greater portion of the rain falls during the summer months,
in a succession of thunder storms which purify the air; and the
hot winds and hrickfielders which are so common in Sydney
are here unknown. Nor does the soil partake of the sandy
nature which is characteristic of a large portion of New South
Wales. The country too, generally speaking, is better grassed
and watered. .From these and other combining causes the climate
is very salubrious, and it is an incontestable fact derived from
statistics that the average mortality is a very low one. Endemic
diseases are quite unknown in Queensland, and the epidemics
are only those which are common to all countries, such as
influenza,-neuralgia, &c.
As the result of my experience I can safely state that no one
need be deterred by the heat from pursuing his ordinary avoca-
tions. I have travelled through the bush at all seasons of the
year and at all times of the day with the most perfect impunity.
The climate of Brisbane assimilates more nearly to that of
Funchal (Madeira) than any other place, as will be seen by the
following table taken from a statement by Dr. Barton, Meteoro-
logical Observer to the Queensland Government.
Average
number of
days on
which rain
falls.
Mean
annual tem
perature.
Average
rain fall in
inches.
Latitude
Brisbane
Funchal
Queensland
Madeira
28° ' S
82 37 N
34 S
Cape Town
Malta
35 53 N
Algiers
Mauritius
London
36 N
20 9 S
51 30 N
The mean
maximum heat of
is estimated
at 87-2,
summer
but of course the thermometer takes a higher range during the
few hours in the midsummer days to allow of this average.
The mean maximum heat of the year is 80'6.
It will thus he seen that the climate of Queensland is quite
endurable even in the extreme summer months. Indeed I have-
alway s dreaded the return of summer more from fear of the


mosquitoes than the heat. These pests are not very
posed of, though they are far more troublesome in the townsthan
in the open country, and are only savage during the two hottest
months. During the other two they are simply troublesome.
The emigrant will do well to provide himself with curtains for
his bed, though he will not have occasion to use them at all in
the winter. In reference to the winter season in Queensland,
I can only say that the climate is as nearly perfect as it is pos-
sible to be.
Advice to Emigrants—Current Rates of Wages—-Sale of Land —>
Opportunities for Investment.
The class of emigrants who are the most likely to prosper
in a new Colony are those who possess some distinctive
calling, to which they can apply themselves as soon as
they land, and in which they are certain to find an opening, if
not in Brisbane, in one or the other of the towns in the inte-
rior. There is at present comparatively little competition in
any of the trades or professions throughout Queensland, and
this must for some time be the case, for as long as the present
influx of population continues the demand for skilled labour
will become greater in the hitherto but partially settled dis-
tricts. The emigrant who wishes to become independent must
make up his mind at the outset to forego many of the
comforts to which he has been accustomed, and to study
economy in the same way as he would have done at home.
Thrift, industry, sobriety, and perseverance are the qualities
which will advance him in his career in Queensland as else-
where, and these are more than ever needed there in view of
the temptations to laxifcy of conduct which every new country
offers to the emigrant. In proportion to his steadiness and
ability will be his success. It must not, however, be con-
sidered that fortunes are so very easily made in Queensland,
but independence is within every man’s reach who chooses to
work for it. The liberality of the land-laws affords to every
one a right to a certain portion of the soil on which he can
erect his homestead, and it rests with him to turn his expe-
rience to account in making use of it. Those who belong to
no particular calling at home, and who are without means, must
be content when they arrive in the Colony to go up the


country in search of work, in which case they will have no
difficulty in obtaining a situation either as shepherds, hut-
keepers, or bullock-drivers at some of the stations, or as
labourers on the farms in the interior. They will have good
pay and the possession of their land orders should induce them
to save their wages with a view to the future formation of a
home of their own.
I would recommend every emigrant to take out with him a
tent, or if he be sufficiently skilful, the materials for making
it on board ship. The great advantage in this addition to his.
outfit will be found when he lands. Instead of being com-
pelled, during his stay at Brisbane or elsewhere while in
search of employment, to lodge in town at a considerable
weekly expense, he can put up his tent on some piece of
Government ground in the vicinity of the town the very day
of his arrival, and live comfortably enough at no further cost
than the articles of food which he requires to consume. If he
has a family, it is particularly desirable that he should spare
his funds, and this is a very ready way of doing so. The
tents generally made use of are made of unbleached calico. A
framework formed of saplings cut in the bush, is first con-
structed to the size required, and upon this the calico is
stretched and nailed. An outer covering of the same material
upon a second ridge pole, supported by a couple of forks rising
about seven feet from the ground, and about six inches higher
than the inner tent, secures the occupant from all danger of
wet, and renders the habitation cool and comfortable. The tent
may be divided into rooms by partitions of calico, and a turf
chimney completes the arrangement. A trench should be dug
to receive the water which falls from the roof, as the tropical
showers are very violent while they last. They are indeed in
every way as desirable for the temporary occupation of a
family as the small wooden cottages, in the outskirts of the
town, the rent of which would be within the means of
emigrants, the majority of whom are not overburdened with
cash; while they comprise the double advantage of wood and
water supplies, which are a serious item to the householder.
TV ater is sold at one shilling a cask in town, and wood ss. to
6s. per load.


The following
represents the Average Bate
Queensland.
of Wages in
Queensland Statistical Register , 1867,
Average
wages
Average
wages
j Average i Average
I wages | wages
: per diem, per aim.
: without with
per diem,
without
board
per am.
I with
i board
Description- or Labor
Description or Labor
board board
and
lodging.
and and
lodging,
lodging, lodging,
ARTISAN LABOR.
£ s. d,
SERYANTS, MALES
AND
married couples
Masons
0 9 0
Plasterers
£ s. d
£ £
0 7 0
Bricklayers
Carpenters
0 9 0
Married Couples')
without family J
Married Couples )
with family j
Men Cooks for Hotels
Grooms
0 8 0
35 to 49'
Blacksmiths
0 8 0
Wheelwrights
35 to 40
49 to 70
40 to 50
0 8 0
AGRICULTURAL
LABOR.
£ £
25 to 30
25 to 30
25 to 30
25 to 30
25 to 30
Gardeners
0 6 0
Farm Laborers
Ploughmen ....
Reapers
Mowers
0 6 0
0 6 0
FEMALES.
0 6 0
25 to 40
26 to 30
28 to 30
20 to 25
13 to 20
20 to 30
25 to 30
0 6 0
Laundresses
General Servants ...
■Housemaids
Nursemaids
Threshers
0 6 0
PASTORAL LABOR,
Shepherds
Stock Keepers
Hut Keepers
Farm house servants
Dairy Women
25 to 40
40 to 50
MISCELLANEOUS
LABOR.
Generally useful men
on Stations
49 to 50
ss. to 7s.
per diem
Sheep Washers
Quarrymen
General Laborers
0 9 0
0 5 0
Shearers, per 1001
Sheep Sheared J
Seamen |
4to 6
17/6to 25/
per ninth
I observed on one
considerable number
occasion, a
of newly
in search
arrived emigrants p
of work. Many of
bitterly of their 1c
misled —that they w
no way of bettering
patrolling the
s streets, apparently
did not scruple to s
l these people
lot and to ci
speak very
had been
complain that they 1
to obtain employment
iition. Upon entering
were unable
and saw
their condition
into con-
versation with several of them I found, however, in each case
eitner that work had been offered them, or that they knew
where it was to be had. How then was it that they were still
idle, and were to be seen every day lounging' about the streets
and hanging at the doors of the different registry offices in the
town F Simply because they were averse to leave Brisbane
for the bush, and were waiting for an opportunity of being
engaged in town. How, it is not to be supposed that the
metropolis of the Colony, which barely comprises a population


of 10,000, should by any possibility find occupation for every
new comer. Yet that would seem to be the expectation
entertained by a large proportion of the Government emigrants.
It is in the country districts that the demand for labour
chiefly exists, and it is there that the new arrivals should
betake themselves as speedily as possible. The rate of pay is
higher the further the distance from the towns. As a general
rule good men are appreciated by their employers, and better
treated in the bush than in town where they can be more easily
replaced. But a good many get it into their wise heads that
the country is unsafe, that the blacks are not to be depended
upon, that snakes abound, and that it will frequently be “ ban-
yan day” with them if they once allow themselves to be exiled
from civilization and ensconced in the bush. These ideas
are complete fallacies. It is only in the unsettled districts
on the extreme frontier, and some hundreds of miles from
Brisbane, that any danger is to be apprehended from the
natives, and even there the settlers are under the protection of
a well-organized native police force, and the blacks are fast
becoming amenable to our laws. Labour in the interior,
especially in the lambing and shearing seasons, is frequently so
scarce that wages reach a most unreasonable height. That the
demand really exists there can be no question.
I now proceed to give some general account of the laws
which at present regulate the alienation of the Crown lands of
the Colony:
The auction system prevails in Queensland for the sale
of land, a large proportion of the revenue being as yet
derivable from this source. Sales are held monthly in Brisbane
and Ipswich, and quarterly in the other towns, except in cases
where the demand is greater than usual when additional
opportunities are afforded. A list of the portions to be offered
for competition is published for a month previous to the day
of sale in the Government Gazette, as well as in the local
paper of the district in which the land is situate. The land
is divided into three classes —town, suburban, and country.
The town lands are divided into allotments of from one rod to
an acre. The suburban allotments, which are those lying
within one mile of the township, are from one to eight acres;
and the country lands under the Bew Land Act of 1868, are
divided into agricultural, and first and second class pastoral
land.


The prices are as follows (except in reference to the town
lots, in the principal towns, snch as Brisbane and Ipswich,
&c., the greater portion of which have, however, already been
alienated from the Crown). Town, BZ. per acre; suburban,
1/,; country, 155., 10s., ss. per acre.
Sales are held in the Court House or Police Office in each
township, the Clerk of Petty Sessions usually officiating as
auctioneer. Maps of the district are on view, and all inform-
ation required by the purchaser can always be had on applica-
tion. The land is knocked down to the highest bidder, who
pays a deposit of ten per cent, on the spot, and the remainder
in one month.
It rarely happens that all the land thus put up for compe-
tition is disposed of at once, and it is competent for any per-
son who may have been unable to attend the sale, and who is
desirous of purchasing a portion of land included in the list to
call at the local office at any subsequent period and to buy at
the upset price any portion or portions of land which are
unsold. In this case the whole amount must be paid at the
time of purchase. A list of the lands thus open for selection
is, as I have before stated, kept in the survey office for public
inspection.
Pastoral Peases.
Leases of the unoccupied crown lands are issued by the
Government for a period of 14 years, for pastoral purposes.
The system in force is as follows: —Bach district is provided
with a Commissioner of Crown Lands to whom applications
for new runs must be made. Forms for these applications
can be obtained at the Commissioner’s office. They must
comprise a description of the locality with its principal
geographical features and. its natural or artificial boundaries.
Where there are no particular land marks it is usual to notch
certain trees, generally by carving on the wood the initial of
the applicant in order to define the position of the block. The
Commissioner then enters the application in a book which he
keeps for. that purpose, and as soon as possible inspects the
country, and if necessary connects the description. Supposing
the land to be unoccupied, and that there is no prior claimant,
a license is then granted for one year.
The area of a run for pastoral purposes is from 25 to 200
square miles. The form of application provides that the des-


cription is to define the area as comprising so many acres
“ available for pastoral purposes,” so many “ unavailable
for ditto,” and also the number of sheep the applicant con-
siders it capable of depasturing, the Government estimate
being 100 sheep or 20 cattle to the square mile. When
the license has been obtained, the successful applicant is
called upon to pay in three months’ time a sum equal to 10s..
per square mile for the first year, and is compelled to stock
the run before the expiration of nine months to an extent equal
to one fourth the number of sheep or cattle. These conditions
having been complied with the license is exchanged for a
lease which is granted for 14 years, the Government reserving
the power to cancel any portion of it, upon giving compensation,
in the event of its being required for the site of a township or
for any other public purpose.
It is but right to state, that, in consequence of the great
demand of new country for grazing* purposes, no runs are
now to be had except by penetrating to the far interior,
The roads too are in a very primitive state and are frequently
impassable from floods. Creeks have to be crossed which as
yet, have never been visited by the Colonial Architect, and there
are many difficulties to contend with which require both
patience and courage to surmount. The squatter leads to a
certain extent a lonely life, as he is necessarily from the nature
of his occupation cut off from society. He is the pioneer of
civilization, and to be successful must be of a hardy and
adventurous character.
By the new Land Act of 1868, the whole of the squatters
in the settled districts are required to give up one half of their
runs, which will be thrown open for public selection for
pastoral and agricultural purposes. But the outside squatters
are likely to obtain an undisturbed tenure of the lands they
occupy for many years to come. And though the value of wool
and stock have been much depreciated during the late hard
times, this depreciation will probably be only of temporary
duration, while a better system of working stations is carried
out.
Under the new Land Act of February 1868, the follow-
ing liberal provisions for acquiring land were passed : —•
The land is now divided into agricultural land, and first and
second class pastoral lands. Purchases of these lands can now
be made as follows;—Of agricultural land from 40 to 640


acres can be purchased at 15s. per acre, payable in ten annual
instalments of Is. 6d. per acre; within three years from the
date of selection the lessee, on proof that he or his bailiff has
resided not less than two years on his land, and expended not
less than 10s, per acre on the land, or that he has fenced the
whole with a good and substantial fence, or if during the
currency of the lease he can prove that he has cultivated one
tenth, on payment of the balance of the ten years’ lease, is
entitled to a deed of grant in fee simple.
Purchases of first and second class pastoral lands can be
made at 10s. and ss. per acre, payable in ten annual instalments
of Is. per acre, and 6d. per acre. Of first class pastoral land
from 80 to 2,560 acres, and of second-class pastoral land from
80 to 7,680 acres can be purchased; within three years from
the date of selection of any pastoral land the lessee, on proof
that he or his bailiff has resided on the land for two years, and
that 10s. per acre for 'first-class land, and 6s. per acre for
second-class land, has been expended in substantial improve-
ments, or that he has fenced the whole with a good and
substantial fence, on payment of the balance of the ten years’
rent, is entitled to a deed of grant in fee simple.
Blocks of land for sugar and coffee plantations, of from 320
to 1,280 acres, can be selected within ten miles of the coast
or any navigable river, and if within three years one-tenth
part of the land selected is under cnltivation, in either sugar or
coffee, on payment of the balance of the ten years’ lease the
lessee is entitled to a deed of grant.
HOMESTEADS. —Any person who is the head of a family
or who has arrived at the age of 21 years, except a married
woman, or a person wdio is not a natural born subject of her
Majesty, unless naturalized, can make selection of a Homestead
of 80 acres of agricultural land, subject to a quit rent of 9d.
per acre for five years, or of 160 acres of first or second-class
pastoral lands, subject to a quit rent of 6d. per acre; provided
that he or she has not on any former occasion exercised such
right of homestead selection; and the lessee, on proof of five
years’ residence and cultivation of one tenth of the land, or that
he has fenced it in with a good and substantial fence, can
obtain a deed of grant at the end of five years; or, if the lessee
chooses to pay the upset price of his land after two years, on
proof of residence and cultivation, he can then obtain the deed
of grant.


Soil and Products —Mode of Clearing Land—Natural History
of Queensland.
Queensland, in common with all the Australian Colonies,
comprises in its limits a large quantity of useless and barren
land. There are however extensive tracts of valuable country
eminently adapted for agricultural purposes, while here and
there, in the more mountainous portion, are to be found
valleys of rich alluvial soil, which yield prodigious returns to
the farmer. On the banks of the many fine rivers which
water the different districts, are large belts of scrub of most
luxurious growth, and very densely timbered. These belts are
covered with a dense underwood, so thick that the sun is
entirely excluded, and a degree of moisture prevails which
assists in the decay of vegetable matter, and renders the soil
exceedingly rich. Scrub land, in spite of the immense labor
required to clear it, is, in consequence of its superior character,
preferred to any other, and the lots usually fetch a high
price at auction. The process of clearing is as follows ; —•
the trees are first cut down with axe and cross-cut-saw at a
distance of tw r o or three feet from the ground, and left to lie
with all the underwood and vines clinging to them, until the
foliage then exposed to the rays of the sun fades and becomes
sufficiently combustible, when the whole pile, which is so close
that it resembles one large faggot, is set fire to, and owing to
the quantity of resinous matter contained in the leaves, a great
portion of it is thus consumed. The axe and cross-cut are now
at work to convert the remainder into a series of large bonfires
by a process of stocking, which again diminishes the quantity
to be cleared, and this process has to be repeated until the
whole is consumed, except the stumps, which offer employment
to the settler for many a weary month, and, where the trees
are green and sound, have to be grubbed up at intervals.
The charge usually made per acre for clearing, without
stumping, in thickly timbered forest land, is from Ml. to 51.,
but in scrub land such as I have described the expense is
necessarily greater. In the meantime the settler takes advan-
tage of the opening already made, and crops his land in
patches between the stumps, without waiting the completion
of his work. These scrub lots are frequently bought up by


capitalists, wlio lease them to hard-working men on clearing
leases. They charge no rent for seven years, .but stipulate
that a certain portion of the ground must be cleared and
cropped. At the expiration of the lease, the howling wilder-
ness reverts to its proprietor in the form of a valuable farm,
worth at least ten times its cost. The tenant, meanwhile,
if he has been industrious, has cleared by the produce of the
ground, enough to start with on his own account, tne soil
being as prolific as a well manured market garden, and the
town always within easy access by water. Whatever his
profits they are richly deserved, and the independence he
makes is literally hewn out of the forest. The crops which
are most profitable, and for which there is the readiest market,
are maize, English and sweet potatoes, vegetables; barley,
cut green, or lucerne, for which there is a constant demand
for horse fodder during the hotter months; melons, cucumbers,
pumpkins, pine apples, Cape gooseberries, oranges and lemons,
loquats, passion fruit, guavas, citrons, grapes, figs, mulberries,
peaches, and bananas, all grow luxuriantly in Queensland,
out of doors, and require very little assistance from art.
The fruit crop is thus an important portion of the pool man s
revenue. Pineapples, melons, and bananas are especially so
hardy that they have only to be planted ano. left alone. Tne
English potato, as a general rule, does not thrive so well there
as the sweet potato ; the latter reaches an enormous size, and
is very generally used for the table. Cabbages grow well,
but only in the low lying lands, as the soil is generally too dry
for them, but then cucumbers and vegetable marrows grow
like weeds and supply their place, so do peas and beans, and
the generality of English vegetables. The vine especially
flourishes in Queensland, and some very palatable light wines
are made. Arrowroot is grown on a large scale by seve-
ral of the more enterprising farmers, and now forms a
valuable article of export. Experiments have been made from
time to time in the growth of coffee, tobacco, ginger, and
other plants, which have been of a most satisfactory character.
Cotton and sugar are likely to become the chief staple
agricultural productions of the country. The of
cotton sent to the Exhibition of 1862 attracted much attention,
and gave a stimulus to the cultivation which has extended from
year to year. The cotton crop of 1868 was estimated at .60,000 Z.
The present bonus of 51. per bale of 300 lbs. of cotton, will cease


at the end o£ this year, 1869; but, in all probability, a bonus
of 21. 10s. per bale will be continued for some time to come.
The quality of the Queensland cotton and its marketable value
has been so fully tested that I need not further remark upon it.
The cultivation of the sugar cane appears likely to outstrip all
other agricultural productions, over 60,000 acres have been
leased from the crown especially for sugar and coffee growing,
but principally sugar growing, of which one-tenth, or 6,000
acres, must be under cultivation within three years from the
date of the lease, or the land will revert to the crown. At the
end of 1868, over 8,400 acres of sugar cane were planted.
The value of sugar and rum produced in the colony in 1868
was about 35,000 Z. ; much of the sugar produced has realized
from 38s. to 38s. 6d. per cwt. The average yield is nearly two
tons of raw sugar, that is sugar and molasses, per acre.
Queensland possesses the same description of timber as may
be found throughout Australia, and perhaps a little more of it.
The trees most commonly met with are tHe blue and red gum,
iron bark, stringy bark, wattle, and box trees. The former
are a useless description of timber, gnarled and knotted, as
hard as adamant, and usually rotten in the centre. The iron
bark and stringy bark are straighter in the grain, and come
in for fencing and building, though by no means a first class
wood, it splits readily, and forms the shingle. The stringy
bark is however a very useful wood; with which most colonial
houses are roofed. The wattle and box trees are of little
value, except for the gum which exudes from the bark,
and fetches a high value in England. There are, how-
ever, more choice descriptions of timber in the Colony,
among which are the Moreton Bay pine, the red cedar, the
Moreton Bay fig tree, and the bunya bunya, (also a species of
pine,) which are very plentiful in certain localities, and are
gradually coming into use for manufacturing purposes.
Besides these, the immense scrubs in the northern portion of
Queensland contain a great variety of smaller trees, the wood
of which is very beautiful.
There are no wild beasts in Queensland, the only carnivorous
animal of any size being the native dog, which has every chance
of becoming extinct before long in the settled districts. They
are very destructive to sheep where they are numerous, and
every effort is made to destroy them on the sheep stations in
the interior. Kangaroos abound in all parts of the colony where


the country is well grassed. There are several different species
of them, of various sizes and colours, and I have known a large
buck, or “ oldman,” weigh 208 lbs. ; the height of this animal
was seven feet, and the tail weighed exactly 17 lbs.; he was
caught by the dogs, one of which he killed on the spot. It is
rarely, however, that they inflict such deadly injury, although
the hoof of the hind foot, which terminates in a sharp point, is
a very formidable weapon. When at bay, they stand erect on
their hind legs and face the dogs, whom they attack by jumping
upon them. The kangaroo, like the deer, is gregarious; it is
no uncommon thing to see fourteen or fifteen of them in a herd,
and I have seen double that number.. The forest kangaroo
resembles the deer in its habits, and lives entirely upon grass.
Emus,"opossums, flying foxes, and flying squirrels, are found, in
great 'abundance. There are several varieties of the flying
squirrel, the smallest being the size of a mouse. The skins
of these animals are very valuable, on account of the exceed-
ingly fine quality of the fur. They should be taken in the
winter, as they are of comparatively little value in the summer,
when, from the habit which the animals have of carrying their
young ones on their backs, the fur becomes very short and
bare. Besides these animals there are, the womang, an animal
resembling a badger, which burrows to a great depth, and
comes out only at night; the porcupine, hedgehog, and the
native bear. The latter is a very harmless animal, not much
like a bear, except in having no tail ; it lives entirely upon
roots and vegetable substances.
The feathered tribe in Queensland are a singular lot, and about
as unlike the birds we have been used to see and hear in
England as can well be imagined. There are but few .song-
sters among them, though there are a few whose notes are not
to be despised. Amongst the most musical is the common black
and white magpie, called the “ settlers’ clock,” from the regu-
larity with which it announces with its melodious voice the
return of day. But if the birds do not sing, they talk, chatter,
and laugh to a degree. Everyone has heard of the laughing
jackass, but the loud, shrill, unearthly laugh of the bird must
suddenly startle the passer by to enable him fully to appreciate
it. The notes are clear and distinct, and always in the following
order—ha, ha, ha, he, he, he, ho, ho, ho, kek, kek, kek, and are
taken up by one and another of these merry fellows until the
woods ring with the noise. The wattle-bird is another noisy


fellow, but the noise he makes is of a different order. To hear
a couple of wattle-hirds chattering, you would fancy you were
listening to two persons quarrelling in some foreign language,
or holding a very animated conversation, so much does their
gibberish resemble the human voice. Then we have cockatoos
black and white, and a great variety of parrots and paroquets
of bright and gorgeous plumage, wild turkeys, and pigeons.
Aquatic birds are also numerous in Queensland, and afford good
sport to the fowler.
There are of course snakes and reptiles in Queensland, as in
every other hot country, but they are neither so numerous nor
so deadly as they are thought to be, and I have been quite
surprised to hear intending emigrants speak of them as the
principal objection to the country. A very short stay in the
colony will disabuse them of these opinions ; indeed any colonist
would smile at the idea of entertaining serious alarm on this
head.. The carpet snake which is the most common is not
deadly, but the bite of the black copper bellied snake, I
believe, is fatal.
Insect life swarms throughout the colony ; almost everything
you touch has life in it. .During the summer evenings besides
the mosquitoes, of which the less I say the better, moths of
every size and hue, beetles, grasshoppers of all sorts abound. An
entomologist would be in raptures at the number of specimens
within his reach. The butterflies especially are of large size
and great beauty.
The harbors on the coast,' as w r ell as the many rivers which
water the country, abound in fish. The most common species
are the bream, flathead, guard fish, mullet and jew fish. They
are very easily caught and the towns are in consequence well
supplied. The natives subsist upon fish during the season.
The most exciting sport to a stranger is mullet fishing by
night. During one or two months in the summer .these fish
>come up with the salt water tide from the bay into the Bris-
bane river in shoals, leaping out of the water in rapid succession,
as this kind of fish will do. You then take a boat, at the bow
of which you place a lantern to attract the fish, and let yourself
gently down with the stream in the direction of the shoal.
The fish rise to the light and with a short hand net you can, if
you are moderately skilful, transfer them to the bottom of the
boat one after the other. I have known a take of this sort
to comprise upwards of fifty fine mullets. Prawns q£ large


size and delicate flavor are plentiful in tlie Brisbane river, and.
are easily caught in the ordinary shrimp nets.
Such is a brief sketch of the natural history of Queensland
as far as my own observations have led me. In the interior of
the country there may be, as no doubt there are, numerous
other specimens commonly met with, which are sufficiently
remarkable to claim special notice. An Acclimatization
Society has been organized in Brisbane. The object of the
Society is mainly to study the natural history of the colony,,
and to collect native birds and animals for the purpose of
exchanging them for those of other countries which may be
likely to 'thrive in the colony. Several exportations have
been made to England in exchange for red deer, hares and
rabbits.
Gold Diggings and Mineral Wealth.
The mineral resources of Queensland are now attracting an
attention which was denied to her during the last few years,
and few can doubt but that a profitable field, both for the in-
dividual labor of the miner, and also for the capitalist, is now
opening. The recent discoveries of gold at Gympie Creek, the
Cape River, and in the vicinity of Rockhampton, are assuming
a permanent character ; and, judging from what has been done
up to the present date, and of the reasonable expectations that
the development of the gold-mining interest promises for the
future, the colony will yet be numbered amongst those whose
career has been stimulated in an unexampled manner by the
realisation of their mineral wealth. In addition to gold, there
are also the strongest evidences of the existence of other metals.
Silver, lead, and copper have been found at considerable
distances apart, which is a reasonable presumption of their
wide-spread existence. The latter mineral has been discovered
in one or two places under such favorable circumstances, that
mining operations have been undertaken with successful,
results. During the past year,_ a valuable copper lode was
discovered on the Cloncurry, a tributary of the Flinders River
flowing into the gulf of Carpentaria, which exhibited solid
masses of the pure metal, on a scale of magnitude not usua y
met with out of America, whilst its suitableness for working was
not diminished by its own richness. The coal measures are also
observed in portions of Queensland, especially in the southern
districts; but this may be mainly attributable to the closer.


observation which that part of the colony has been exposed to.
The coal is worked in several places, and is found suitable for
furnace and domestic uses. The steamers from the ports of
Brisbane and Maryborough invaribly obtain their supplies of
fuel from the mines in the vicinity of these towns.
A great variety of colonial woods and building stone can be
procured in the colony; the former is eminently suitable for
every purpose, whether for strength or ornamentation, and
furniture is now made from it that will bear a favorable com-
parison with the best samples of European manufacture.
Good building stone exists everywhere, and is very plentiful
in the immediate neighbourhood of Brisbane. The new
Government House, the gaol, and other public buildings are all
constructed of stone obtained from quarries on the bank of the
river close to the town.
Native P opi I itu n—their Habits and Customs.
During my stay in the Colony I have had many opportu-
nities of becoming acquainted, with the habits and customs
of Queensland aborigines. These embrace many points of
interest to the emigrant who is frequently brought in contact
with black fellows of various tribes, and and is very apt to
form a mistaken estimate of their character. The natives of
Queensland are shrewd and intelligent, and when dealt with
fairly and honorably, capable of strong attachment. But they
are by nature crafty and savage, and but too ready in their
wild state to meet unkindness with treachery and violence.
The skin of the black fellow is dark, like that of the
negro, his hair is jet black, long and coarse, mouth broad, with
large full lips, black eyes, sharp and bright, and a broad and
good-humored countenance. In height they are about on a
par with Europeans, though hardly so stout, their arms and
legs especially being little else but skin, bones, and sinew. The
most unprepossessing feature in the Queensland black is the
nose, which they have a custom of flattening in infancy. This
does not, as may be supposed, improve the expression of the
face. The habit does not, however, prevail throughout the
Colony, each tribe having some peculiar distinguishing trait of
their nature. The teeth of the natives are white and regular,


the natural consequence of their simple and healthy diet. Their
skulls are as thick as the skull of an African, and not to be
injured by the blow of an ordinary stick in the hands of a
European. They are not, however, thickheaded in the other
sense of the term, and have by nature a remarkably quick
perception and the most retentive memory. A native never
forgets an injury, nor a benefit; he is as ready to return the
one as the other. I have met occasionally and conversed with
one of them for a few minutes, and have gone away and thought
no more about the matter. Months afterwards I have encoun-
tered the same native who has accosted me by name and called
to mind our first meeting, every minute detail of, which he has
brought to my recollection.
But the most remarkable characteristic of the Australian
native, and in this they are all alike, is the superiority of their
senses. No European can compete with them in this respect.
I question even whether the North American Indian excels the
Australian savage in following the trail of man or beast. Over
the stoniest ranges, across ground covered with leaves and
dead timber, through grass and scrub, wherever the game may
flee to, the native follows with unerring instinct. Nothing
escapes his vigilance. Accustomed to depend for his daily
sustenance entirely on his hunting excursions his powers of
sight, hearing*, and smell are quickened to a marvellous degree.
He can discern objects at an immense distance which would be
quite imperceptible to the dull eye of a European. By placing
bis ear to the ground he can detect the approach of the game
at an incredible distance, and the acuteness of his olfactory
organs apprises him at once of the vicinity of game. When
seeking to discover a dead body, whether of a white man lost
in the bush, or the carcase of an animal, he mounts a tree to
observe the indication afforded by the crows, hawks, and other
birds of carrion. Guided by these die seldom fails in dis-
covering the object of his search.
Snakes, squands, lizards, and many of the larger sort of
insects form part of their support when more substantial food
is unattainable. These are spied out in a moment, when their
presence would never be discovered by the white man, and
quickly appropriated. The staple article of diet is opossum.
The fall dress of the Queensland native is a cocked hat and
spurs, or to speak seriously no clothing at all. They are,
however, unquestionably partial to good blankets to sleep in,


and they are getting more common among them in consequence
of the humane practice which prevails of distributing annually
a certain number in each district. The distribution takes place
on the Queen’s birthday, and is the occasion of a grand gather-
ing' of the tribes in each of the settled districts. On a recent
anniversary the blankets presented to them were of a very
inferior quality, and the recipients were not slow to perceive
the difference. It was, in fact, a great national grievance.
The chief weapons used by the natives are the spear, the
wamerah used to propel the spear, the waddy, a species of
club, the nulla nulla, which resembles a wooden hatchet, and
the boomerang. With these they are very dexterous, and the
force with which they wield them is surprising. The boom-
erang is a singular weapon. A black fellow will throw it from
him a distance of 50 or 60 yards and cause it to describe a
complete circle in the air and return to his hand. Armed with
these implements the native patrols the woods ready for any
game that comes within his reach. In pursuit of the kangaroo
they display great caution and patience. With uplifted spear
the wary savage follows noiselessly on its track, crouching
behind a bush, or standing erect and motionless as a statue
when the crackling of a stick or the least noise from any ocher
cause has startled the game, until at last he approaches
near enough to hurl the weapon, which rarely misses its
destination.
The Queensland natives are without houses or any fixed
habitation, but wander about within the limits of their several
districts as the game shifts at different seasons of the year.
Each tribe has its boundaries defined, and beyond these they
dare not go. Selecting a sheltered spot, where there is a sup-
ply of fresh water, they strip the surrounding trees of their
bark, and erect a number of small “ gunyahs” or semicircular
huts formed by placing the sheets of bark in a slanting position
and supporting them by saplings. These primitive erections,
which are all they possess, and just sufficient to protect them
from the wind and rain, are abandoned after two or three
weeks’ occupation, when the tribe generally shift their camps
to some fresh locality. Their mode of cooking is very simple,
and consists in placing the food upon hot embers and broiling
it. Instead, for instance, of being at the trouble of plucking
a duck they content themselves with throwing it on the fire,
when the feathers quickly disappear and the cooking is soon


finished. There are a number of edible plants and roots,
known only to the natives, npon which they subsist during a
portion of the year when game is scarce. Anything that has
life is food for the blackfellows. I have seen a native woman
take up in a piece of bark a quantity of large black ants, and
after shaking the bark in a peculiar way, to separate the
insects from the dirt, put the former into her mouth by whole-
sale. They abjure this kind of food when more substantial
fare is procurable.
The native language has a very guttural sound, or rather it
appears so to us. Several words have a similarity to the Latin
tongue in their terminations. I have seen somewhere a num-
ber of hexameters composed of native names of places which
had a very droll sound. But my knowledge of their dialect
is not sufficient to express an authoritative opinion on this
subject. Each tribe has its own peculiar vocabulary. I could
never arrive at any serious conclusion as to their ideas of re-
ligion, except that they believe in a future state : that is unques-
tionable ; and they seem to have some dim notion of punishment
and reward. But their ideas on this head are very vague and
unsatisfactory. Some of them assert, that when they “ jump
up” again they will become white men, but that is of course
a comparatively modern idea; others, that they will live in
a rich country, where all the delicacies they have longed, for
here will be at their disposal. They are very superstitious,
and are devout believers in all sorts of evil agencies. It is by
acting upon these fears that the cunning old men and women
of the tribe urge the young men to deeds of daring and
plunder. Battles are frequent among them, but the spear is
not a very deadly weapon, and the loss of life on the occasion
of a pitched battle is not very considerable. In fighting they
use shields made of gum bark, and painted in bright colors.
With these they ward off with great dexterity the missiles
aimed at them, A battle is always commenced by the women
on either side who advance to the front ranks and commence
to abuse each other and to use what may safely be called strong
language, in order to excite the ire of the combatants. The
men becoming exasperated at the epithets applied to them
now prepare for action, when the ladies make themselves
scarce and the conflict rages. As soon as the spears are all
expended, a hand to hand contest takes place in which the
nulla nulla and waddy are brought into play. This is warm


work and does not last long. The victorious tribe conclude
the day with a grand feast, at which they magnify their ex-
ploits and recount their deeds of daring. They have curious
regulations which guide their conduct at different periods of
life.- When a young man reaches the age of puberty he is
condemned to lose one of his front teeth, and to go through
certain ceremonies which last for the space of three days.
After this he is allowed to marry and steals a wife, wherever
he can find one, at the first convenient opportunity. As
he gets older he is allowed to have more, but the number
rarely exceeds two, the two sexes being nearly in equal pro-
portions. It is said that cannibalism prevails in some parts of
the interior, but I cannot say whether it is the case or not.
I am inclined to think that such a practice is at least very
rare. The blacks appear to be fond of their children and to
be capable of a much higher degree of civilization than they
have attained to. The art of tattooing is carried on to great
perfection among them. The process gives them little or no
pain, as the cuts heal almost immediately.
The natives of Queensland have different modes of disposing
of their dead. In some places the corpses are interred in a
hole dug in the ground, and then covered with stones. In
others they place the body in the fork of a tree, and wrap it
up with nets, rags, and pieces of bark. This is generally done
in districts infested with wild dogs who would exhume the
corpse if it were buried. They have but few articles, besides
their weapons of war, of native manufacture. These are their
canoes, made of bark, and their fishing nets which are formed
of various fibrous vegetable substances found in the bush, and
which are also used as food. The mourning' garb consists of
a wreath of birds’ feathers entwined in the hair.
Such are the aborigines of Queensland—an intelligent
but indolent race, and after a short intercourse with the
whites generally harmless enough. There are occasional dis-
turbances with the more savage tribes on the frontier, but the
presence of an armed native police force in each district has
pretty well tamed them of their savage propensities even there.
It is sad to think that with the influx of a European popula-
tion the native race, once lords of the soil, are now diminishing
in numbers, and must at no very distant date disappear
altogether. Although, as I have stated, they are already in a
great measure tamed, but few of the many efforts made to


educate and Christianize them, or induce them [permanently
to adopt our mode of living 1 , have been rewarded with success.
Life in the Bush.
I. must now give some account of life in the bush. Nothing
can be done in the bush without a horse, riding being not only
a luxury but a necessity. Horses are consequently plentiful
and not very expensive to keep, on account of the large
extent of commonage to be had in all parts of the Colony
for horses and cattle. Many men who make an excellent living
by dairy produce depend entirely upon the waste lands in the
vicinity of the towns for the support of their stock. During
the summer the feed gets somewhat scarce, and occasionally
during the very dry seasons the water holes dry up and a good
many cattle die. But in ordinary seasons the animals keep
themselves in good condition the year round. The kangaroo
grass is more nutritious than most English grasses on account
of the seed it bears, which resembles oats ; it grows in tufts
about five or six inches apart.
Bush houses are generally built of slabs split from the neigh-
bouring forest, and are of a very simple order of architecture.
Straight logs are laid on the ground horizontally for a founda-
tion. In these grooves are cut to receive the ends of the slabs,
which are placed perpendicularly, and kept so by a similar
groove in the wall plate. The roof is invariably made of
shingles split from the stringy bark and iron-bark tree, and
about afoot or more in length. All the houses are furnished with
verandahs from six to eight feet wide to protect them from the
sun, and in the summer a canvas curtain is usually hung from
the outside posts, which thus encloses a large additional space, and
converts the verandah into a dining or sitting room. Rows of
bananas are planted on the sunny side of the house, giving it a
cool and shady look.
Bush cooking is very simple. The camp oven is one of the
principal utensils, and the most characteristic of bush life. It
answers for baking bread or for cooking a joint. Where the
family is very large the bread is cooked in the ashes in the form
of a damper. An enormous wood fire is made, and as soon as
the wood is reduced to ashes, the damper, a large circular loaf,
about three inches thick and sometimes 18 in diameter, is placed
in the red hot embers, and covered over quickly with a spade


until the air is entirely excluded. In about twenty minutes the
ashes are scraped away, and the spade is again in requisition to
lift the damper out. It is then nicely done, and only requires
to he beaten with a cloth or brushed—no sweeter bread can be
made than a damper properly cooked.
The game in the woods, the fish in the river, and the variety
of vegetables which the climate permits him to cultivate, afford
plenty of variety to the farmer. Unsparing hospitality is the
rule in the bush, and especially in the interior of the country.
There, where the stations are at some distance from each other,
the visit of a stranger is very acceptable. He has news to tell
as well as information to receive, and his presence breaks the
monotony of the settler’s life. He is therefore well treated, his
horse is cared for, and every attention shewn him, and in the
morning he and his host part with feelings of mutual satisfac-
tion, if, indeed, he has not been persuaded to stay a day or two
to enjoy a little good hunting and shooting or other country
amusements. Such is my experience of the settler’s hospitality.
Occasionally the traveller is unable from some cause or other
to make the station he expects by nightfall, or determines to camp
out where the feed for his horses happens to be particularly
abundant. His preparations are soon made. He first waters
and then hobbles the animals, and marks the way they bear.
Then choosing a sheltered spot to camp in he collects a quantity
of dead wood, sufficient to last him until the morning, lights his
fire, and gets his supper ready. A regular bushman always carries
a pair of blankets or an opossum rug before his saddle, a pair
of hobbles, and a quart pot to make tea in, which is the
principal beverage in the bush. If he carries a gun, and is hard
up for provisions, he can shoot a pigeon for his supper. Wrap-
ping himself in his blanket the traveller lies down before the
fire with his saddle inverted for a pillow, and sleeps soundly until
aroused at grey dawn by the laughing jackass or wattle bird,
without experiencing any ill effects from the exposure. Should
the weather prove wet he has to exercise his ingenuity in the
formation of a bark hut, which is easily done if he sets about it.
The landmarks in Australia are usually bold and sufficiently
prominent to render it an easy task to journey from one place
to the other where there is no regular road. But this is not
always the case ; in the low lands, in scrub, and among the
small ranges and broken country, the scenery is very monotonous,
and the traveller is frequently bewildered. Every large gum-


tree appears the exact counterpart o£ the other, and the new
comer is at a loss for a cine by which to recover his line of
march. To find yourself lost in the bush, with stations on one
.side of you only, and those some miles distant, and a complete
wilderness on the other, with but a thin chance of meeting any
one to direct you, without provisions and, perhaps, without
water, is not by any means a pleasant thing. In such cases
people are too apt to lose their presence of mind, and to neglect
the only means likely to be of avail. It has generally been
found that men who have been lost in the bush have got so con-
fused that they have described, during the whole period of their
wandering, a series of complete circles, when, perhaps, two op
three miles in any one direction would have brought them out
of their difficulties. By carefully observing the bearing of the
place he is bound for, the bushman is generally enabled to steer
by the sun; but the sun, although nine days out of ten a ser-
viceable guide, may be obscured, and, without some knowledge
of the locality, it is always prudent in a strange country to
travel with a pocket compass. "When a stranger is actually
lost in the bush, the best method of proceeding is to follow
the inclination of the ground. The smallest watercourse will
lead to a gully, the small gully to a larger one, the large gully
to a creek, and down the creek in most cases to a station.
Amusements in the bush are principally connected with riding,
hunting, and shooting. At the cattle stations the stockmen
are continually in the saddle, and the life they led is a roving
and adventurous one. They are mostly well mounted, but their
horses are much disfigured by large unsightly brands made by
a hot iron, and placed on some conspicuous part of the animal.
These marks are found to be necessary for the recovery of stolen
or strayed cattle. Good stock horses soon become accustomed
to their work and require little or no guiding in rounding up
or driving a mob of cattle. They are mostly sure-footed, hardy
beasts, are rarely groomed, and are accustomed after a hard
day’s work to be hobbled and turned into the bush to find their
own suppers. They leap well, the immense quantities of fallen
timber strewed over the ground affording them constant prac-
tice. Galloping through the bush where there is much timber
calls for good horsemanship and a well trained horse. Town
horses will frequently run their riders against a tree, and have
not the knack of getting over the creeks and bad places which
.the others have acquired.


The climate of Queensland is particularly favorable to the
breeding of horses, and it is an incontestable fact that they will
do as much work there upon bush grass as corn-fed horses will
in England. It has been stated that if a cart horse were taken
from the Lincolnshire fens and turned out in Australia, he
would in the course of time entirely lose the shaggy fetlocks,
long hair, and other marks of his plebeian origin. For draught
purposes, bullocks are much used in the colony, and especially
in carting wool from the stations. They are more hardy and
patient than horses, better adapted to a mountainous country,
and can endure greater privations.
Opossum hunting is another favorite amusement in the bush..
For this sport any dog that will hunt may be taken, generally
the greatest curs are the best ’possum dogs. A moonlight night
is selected, and the sportsman turns his steps in the direction
of the largest timber, which is generally on the small flats
between the range. In such spots he is sure to have excellent
sport.
With these and other amusements to vary the monotony of
the daily avocations, life in the bush is not a very tedious affair.
The healthy nature of the pursuits in which people who reside
in the country are engaged induces cheerfulness and contentment,
while there is more society in the bush than would be imagined.
For a ride of ten or fifteen miles to make a call is thought
nothing of, and the friendly feeling exhibited on all sides
encourages frequent exchange of visits. There is a charm too
in a country life in the freedom from care, and the absence of all
strife and turmoil, and the daily enjoyment of the beauties of
nature which must be experienced to be fully appreciated.
Every one smokes in the bush. It is a habit, however, which
may be carried to excess in a hot country.
The rations allowed to each man in the bush are lOlbs. meat,
lOlbs. flour, 21bs. sugar, jib. tea, and |lb. tobacco.
The Ermgrarit on Landing—Prices of Provisions—Parting
Advice.
The emigrant upon landing at Brisbane will find no difficulty
in obtaining his land order. The production of his land order
warrant is all that will be required of him at the Immigration,


Office, to which he will at once proceed. He will then (if he does
not engage in some temporary employment to acquire colonial
experience), as soon as he has settled himself in his habitation,,
whether he put up a tent, as I have advised him to do, or rent
a cottage in the town, be naturally desirous of making some
enquiries as to the land open for selection, where it is situated,
when the next land sale is to take place, &c., &c.
The form and mode of taking up land is in this way: —•
The applicant attends at a land agent’s office, and having
ascertained that the land which he wishes to select is available-
—if he has not previously determined this—lodges an applica-
tion (form F in regulations in the new Land Act) in triplicate,
accompanied with the amount of the first year’s rent and survey
fee. This application sufficiently explains itself. It contains
a declaration that the applicant is above the age of 21 years,
and that he applies for the land in his own behalf and use, and
not as agent or trustee for any other person whatever. He
further declares that he intends to use the same, and that he
has not entered into any agreement to sell, demise, or mort-
gage it. These specific declarations are required in accordance
with the provisions of the Act, being portions of the conditions
under which the land is held. The application should also con-
tain a clear description of the boundaries, with reference-to
some known feature or previous survey. The area, and the
particulars of the first year’s rent, being one tenth of the whole
purchase money, whether in cash or land orders, are also to be
furnished.
The farming implements he will have occasion to purchase
are readily obtainable in Brisbane. The price of such articles
may be somewhat dearer than he expects, but competition is
rapidly lowering it, and these sort of things being heavy and
awkward to transport are far better purchased on the spot.
Clothing is getting very cheap in Brisbane, and the emigrant
need not encumber himself with a large outfit, though he will
do well to provide himself with a few good articles for bush
wear. The boots and shoes sent out are generally second rate,
and colonial made shoes are decidedly dear, though of excellent
make and well suited for the bush roads.
There are many boarding-houses in the colony ; single men
can obtain board and lodging at from 1 1, to 21. 2s. per week.


List of the present retail prices of Provisions.
BREAD.
Wheatcn flour,) lgg tQ 21g I Wheaten loaf, 4 lbs. weight... 9d.
per 100 lbs. i ' . |
butchers’ meat.
s. d. s. d.
Beef, per lb. .. 2d. to 0 2i Lamb, per quarter ... 5 0
Mutton „ 2Jd. to 03i Pork, per lb. ... ... 0 6
Veal „ 0 4
GROCERIES,
s. d.
Tea, per lb. 2 6
Oatmeal, per lb. ... ... 0 5
Soap „ ... ••• 0 3
Sugar „ ... ... 3d. to 0
Coffee „ ... ... ... 1 6
Oilmen’s stores, &c., at a small
Chocolate and cocoa ... 2 3
Eice, per lb. ... ... 0 4
advance on English prices.
WINES AND
SPIRITS, ETC.
s. d.
s. d.
Brandy, per gall. ... 28 0
Sherry „ ... 20 0
Port „ ... 20 0
Ale and Porter,.Eng-) g to u Q
hsh bottled, per dz. r
DAIRY
PRODUCE,
s. d.
Bacon, colonial, per lb. 0 9
„ English „ 16
Cheese, English, per lb. 1 6
Lard „ 0 9
Eggs, per dozen ... 10
Ham, colonial „ 10
„ English ~ 16
Milk, per quart ... 0 6
Fowls, per pair 3s. 6d. to 4 0
Butter, fresh „ 16
„ salt „ 13
Ducks „ ... 4s. to 5 0
Geese, each ... ... 8 0
Cheese, colonial „ 10
VEGETABLES.
Beans, French, per peck 1 6 Marrows, each ... 0_ 2
Cabbages, each 2d. to 0 6 Onions, per lb. . ... 0 6
Cauliflowers,, 3d. to 0 6 Parsley, per bunch ... 0 1
Cauliflowers „ 3d. to 0 6
Celery, per head
0 6 Peas, per peck ... 2 0
Capsicums, per quart 0 4
Potatoes, common, per cwt. 9 0
„ sweet „ 8 0
Chilies „ ... 0 4 ~ sweet „ 8 0
Cucumbers, each ... 0 3 Pumpkins, per lb. ... 0 2
Carrots, per bunch ... 0 3 Radishes, per bunch... 0 2
Carrots, per bunch ... 0 3
Tomatoes, per quart... 0 4
Eschalots „ ... 0 3 Tomatoes, per quart... U 4
Lettuce,each ... 0 2 Turnips, per bunch ... 0 3
BRUIT.
s.d: s - d.
0 8 Apricots, per dozen ... 10
Bananas, per dozen ... 0 8 Apricots, per dozen ... 1 0
Pine-apples, each ... Id.toO 6 Mulberries, per quart... 0 6
Passion fruit, per dozen 0 4 Loquats „ ... 0 6
Grapes, per lb. ... 0 6 Oranges, per dozen ... Bd. to 2 0
Figs, per dozen ... 0 3 Lemons „ ... 16
Is. to 3 0
Gooseberries, per quart 0 6 Apples „ ... Is. to 3 0
Guavas, per dozen ... 1 0 Melons, each ... Id. to 2 0
Peaches „ ... 2d. to 1 0


My brief sketch of the colony of Queensland is now conclu-
ded. I have not attempted in the limits of this little work to
enter into the details of sheep and cattle farming, or into any
calculations of profit or loss connected with the culture of cotton,
sugar, &c., but have contented myself with giving the results
of my own personal observation and experiences of colonial life.
The reader will acquit me of the charge of drawing a highly-
colored or fanciful picture of the country. I have stated the
pros and cons, in order that those whose attention may be
turned towards Queensland may be able to judge fairly for
themselves, whether the colony is a desirable place or not.
I believe that a great many of those who are struggling
with limited means at home, if they could make up their
minds to quit friends and relations, and seek a home in the new
colony, would unquestionably better their condition. The
steady, hard working man, who is content to do a fair day’s
work for a fair day’s pay, will not remain long without
employment.
The mechanic will readily find a demand for his services, if
not in Brisbane, in one of the many towns now springing up in
the interior; and the farmer who avails himself of the induce-
ments held out to him, will have advantages which he could
obtain in no other country ; while every person, no matter what
his pursuit, after two years’ residence in the colony, will find
himself the owner of thirty acres of freehold, where he can look
abroad into the varied field of nature.
I may be permitted to add a word of caution, more par-
ticularly addressed to the class of emigrants who are now
coming to the colony. Avoid intoxicating liquors, which
have been the ruin of many a poor fellow who has landed in
the colony wdth the fairest prospects of success. Seduced by
evil example, they have fallen victims to intemperance, and
sunk step by step to the lowest depths of misery and distress.
Strong drink is quite unnecessary, and especially injurious to the
constitution, in a hot climate. One of the first questions asked
by an employer is this, Is he steady ? does he drink ? Nowhere
are good character and steadiness of conduct more appreciated
and of more value to the possessor than in Australia. Above
all things, let him not, in his eager struggle for independence,
forget that there is an Eye which sees, and a Hand which
directs everything. In Queexisland where, as I have elsewhere
remarked, there is no state aid to religion, everyone who pro-


fesses to be a Christian is expected to contribute his direct
support to the Church to which he belongs; and lam happy
to say that, in the towns, the different places o£ worship are
well attended, and every opportunity is afforded for religious
improvement. The emigrant’s lot may, however, be cast in the
far bush, where
“ The sound of the church going bell
The valleys and rocks never heard
and, except from an occasional visit from a clergyman, he may
never hear the blessed truths of the Gospel preached. But the
Sacred Volume is always within his reach, and the prayer to
Almighty God will reach the throne of grace as readily from
the shepherd’s hut as the lordly palace. The emigrant who
desires to tread the path of usefulness, happiness, and honor,
will place his reliance, in every stage of his career, npon that
all-wise and watchful Providence which overrules everything,
and seek support in his trials from the source from which only
it can be obtained. Then only will he prosper.


HINTS FOR EMIGRANTS.
Sea Sickness. —1. Make every preparation at least twenty-
four hours before starting. —2. Eat a hearty meal before going
on board.—3. Go to bed before the ship starts, having con-
veniently arranged such articles as may be needed for ti day oi
two (this rule is important.) —4. Eat regularly and heartily, but
without raising the head for at least two 5. Take some
mild aperient the first night out. 6. IST ever rise without first
eating something.—7. If the sea becomes rough go to bed beroie
being sick. , ,
Tents. —Emigrants, especially those likely to take up land,
will save much expense by providing themselves with tents, as
by this precaution they save rent till they can erect a homestead.
The simplest and least expensive tents are made thus : Eaise on
any piece of Government land, or on that purchased, a frame-
work of saplings to the size required, strain and nail over these
a covering of unbleached calico ; then erect upon a second ridge
pole supported by two forks, and rising about seven feet from
the ground and four inches higher than the inner tent, an outer
covering of the same material; will secure the inmates
from wet and render tbe habitation cool and comfortable. A
trench should be dug round the tent to receive the rain from
the roof, whilst the interior may be divided into rooms by means
of partitions of calico.
Mosquito Curtains.— These will be found, especially in hot
climates and in the country almost indispensable to comfort, and
emigrants will do well to provide themselves with materials to
make them, fine muslin or tarlatan is best. Ladies cast off
dresses of this description may be bought for a few pence of
second-hand wardrobe sellers, and serve the purpose well.
Mothers will save much anxiety and trouble by thus protecting
their children’s cots from the black flies and mosquitos.
Beds.— Excellent beds may be made from the leaves of the
beech tree ; these should be gathered in autumn and well dried.
They do not harbour vermin and are very springy.
' Cooling Drink. —As an emigrant’s success depends much on
his abstinence from whiskey and strong drink, the following
recipe for lemonade may be useful. One pound of brown sugar to
five pints of boiling water, and one ounce of tartaric acid, add
when cold sixpenny-worth of essence of lemon. A wineglass-
ful of this mixture in a tumbler of water will be found the right
Sun'Bonnets.— Female emigrants are advised to provide them-
selves with these articles, which are simply made in the form of
a large cap with a full border and a long curtain falling behind.
A yard of print makes one. . , .
Cure oe Bites oe Insects. —Tincture of arnica diluted in
twelve times its own quantity of water.
For Destroying Elies.— lnfusion of quassia one pint, brown
sugar four ounces, pepper two ounces, mix together and place
in a shallow dish.


1
■
.
■




