

QUEENSLAND'S PROGRESS
BY THE
HON, SIR HORACE TOZER, K.C.M.G
(AGENT GENERAL FOR THE COLONY)
A PAPER READ BEFORE THE ROYAL COLONIA INSTITUE
JANUARY 17. 1899
[Reprinted by permisston from the 'Proceedings' of the Institute]
GENERAL SIR HENRY W. NORMAN
G.C.B. G.C.M.G. C.I.E
IN THE CHAIR




QUEENSLAND’S PEOGRESS.
1. INTRODCTION.
In response-to the request of the Council ol the Boyal Colonial
Institute that I should read a paper on the progress of the Colony'
of Queensland, I will endeavour to comply and confine my observa-
tions to the period which has elapsed since previous papers were
discussed.
Though my memory would carry me back to the first year
of the Colony’s history, yet for all practical purposes a review of
the work of the last ten years will suffice, especially as during that
period my official position as a member of the Executive Council
,gavo me the opportunity to derive more information than through
the ordinary channels.
I have no desire to make this a sketch-book of the Colony, nor
in face of the instructive papers which have been read before this and ■
•other Societies should there now exist any necessity to ifemind you
of its early history, its physical features, or geological formation.
Notwithstanding that two papers have been read on the . Mineral
Besources of the Colony, in view ol the great importance I j attach
to this industry, I should have devoted more space , to that
particular subject, and have referred in detail to its expansion
since 1884, but this can he better described by a gentleman
■of the highest scientific attainments, Mr. E. L. Jack, Government
Geologist of Queensland, whose name was appropriately mentioned
and whose work was worthily complimented here fifteen years ago,
when reference was made to him " as a scientist who had done as
much for Queensland as perhaps anyone who had ever gone there,”
and whose., researches—always trustworthy—you can now obtain
from himself, ■ He is on his way to England to superintend the
.comprehensive Mining Exhibit which : Queensland ■ intends to
show at the Greater Britain Exhibition at Earl’s Court in May
A


next. I shall consequently content myself with a general reference
to mining in its appropriate place.
2. “THE PRODIGAL PERIOD."
At the commencement of 1885, when the Colohy had Just com-
pleted twenty-five years of a separate existence, the population had
increased from 25,000 to about 800,000, and the public loan in-
debtedness had approximated twenty millions. The distribution
of such a considerable sum had created an artificial prosperity
which abnormally inflated values, particularly of land. Doubtless
a portion of the money then spent might with more patience and
experience have been used to better • advantage, but the policy of
progress was so popular that legislation in the direction of attract-
ing labourers to settle permanently on the lands and become pro-
ducers did not keep pace with the expenditure, but there undoubt-
edly remained a considerable settlement, as is evidenced by the'
increase of population,. The fact that Queensland is traversed by
3,760 miles of railroad in good condition, with ample working plant,
returning even presently nearly three per cent, on the ■' capital cost
of eighteen mil Hons, and bettering 110 millions of acres of unsold
crown lands, is some a>ssurance that the money borrowed has on
the whole been well invested. In 1884, a new Land Law was passed
which, whilst securing to the pioneers of the pastoral industry a
continued reasonable extension of their holdings, substituted the
tenure of leasing, and offered attraction to the smaller capitalists
in grazing selections at a low rental. This policy had also for its
object the .establishment of; an annual fund for the purpose of
substantially assisting the Treasury to pay the Increasing demand
for interest consequent on the expenditure of loans in works whose
productiveness was largely in the future, and depended on increased
population, but this was not at once attained, and special
sales of land became a temporary expedient; meanwhile, there did
hot exist much activity in the selection of grazing farms ; it was,
howevef, generally recognised as the policy of the Colony, and one
most likely to conduce to the permanent benefit of the then in-
creasing population, and to still further attract desirable colonists,
that as soon as the exigencies of the Treasury would permit, and
certainly on the termination of the old leases, this country should
not be again let in large areas, but as grazing farms and home-
steads; this , has since been carried out so that no less than
14,000,000 acres have been rented under this system; aiid in
addition to providing for much closer settlement, gives- hopes that


the financial results which have been by circumstances deferred, for 1
almost fifteen years may now have some prospect of realisation..
3. ARTESIAN WATER.
The portion of Queensland best adapted for sheep farming
is situated to the west of the main, or coast range; that
portion of it which is wholly within the tropical belt is made
up largely of undulating lands and extensive plains and is
abundantly watered, the grasses also are luxuriant and nutritious.
The remainder includes the famous Darling Downs, and extends
to the extreme western boundary, where rolling downs cover a basin
of artesian water, probably the most extensive in the world. Prior
to the discovery of this water, the irregular and scanty rainfall gave
no hopes of successful pastoral operations save in extensive areas,
but within the last ten years the transformation has been - rapid.
Though much ol this country contains the nutritious Mitchell and
blue grasses, stock suffered greatly and perished in numbers, but
now that the artesian, water has been tapped almost everywhere
in 876 different bores, yielding 216 million gallons daily,
vegetation not only flourishes luxuriantly, hut thirsty stock no
longer largely perish from want of the much needed beverage. In
many parts of the west, and particularly the south-west, these end-
less plains are covered with several varieties of succulent shrubs
and forests of mulga, which, -with the valuable salt bush, provide
provender for the stock when the natural grasses are parched and
withered from want of rain. This country, though some thousands
of feet above the sea, is almost level, and it is no uncommon sight
to see teams, loaded with over 100 bales of wool each, toiling across
and often through these plains drawn by unshod horses or by
bullocks, whose only sustenance is the mulga tree, fallen in. clumps
by the drivers. As a sample of what can be done with these lands,
I recently visited a grazing selection within five miles of the railway
station at Ounnamulla, containing about 10,000 acres, the rental of
which was under Ijd. per acre. The owner had been a carrier on
the roads, and had accumulated by that meails a sum of about
,i 2500. The piece of land he selected was waterless. Satisfied that
artesian water could he found, he bargained with an enterprising
firm to sink the bore, the water in which was struck at about
1,500 feet and averaged over a million gallons a day. This not only
sufficed for Ms own purposes, but ample remained to supply his
neighbours, and also to provide water for market gardens. Being


thrifty, and having acquired his experience in the school ol necessity,
his home and administration buildings, though comfortable,-were
not extravagant. By purchasing well-bred oast-off ewes which the
pastoralists were willing to sell for a few shillings each, he had
managed to obtain a flock of lambs, and had succeeded in not only
having the land and buildings, but the bore, free from debt, and
hoped shortly his sheep -would have increased to one to the acre,
which he reckoned as the carrying capacity of hia land. As the warm
water from the bore enabled him to scour his wool, and the surplus
supply had assumed a good rental value, he calculated that in
future his income would he equal to what some leading professional
gentlemen in this metropolis set down as their earnings. I will
not pretend to promise that this is or will be the case even with the
average grazing farmer, hut I do say that there is now, and will be
for years to come, equally good land available to all who desire to
select it at even a lower, rental, and in favoured localities, and that
with patience, perseverance, and thrift the case referred to will be
that of hundreds, and I hope thousands of others who now waste
their opportunities from want of knowledge. Nature forces this
water to the surface, from which it is diverted in shallow channels
dug out by an appliance somewhat like a snow plough, which,
drawn by bullocks, makes an indentation in the surface to be sub-
sequently fashioned to the required shallow depth by the hydraulic
action of the stream, whilst in other places it is oast into the natural
channels and there creates constant running water. And not only
is this stream used for pastoral and irrigation purposes, but in
places it is sufficient by its own pressure to supply large towns, as
is the case at Oharleville, where the bore, opened in 1890, which
has been supplying three million gallons a day, now reticulates the
town and supplies water, not only for domestic purposes, but for
the extinguishment of fires and general cleansing of the town.
The pressure and temperature vary. In Thargomindah, a town
almost on the southern and western border, there exists one bore
2,680 feet deep, the pressure on its 6-ineh pipe being 245 lbs.,
and ’ the temperature 166°. These bores turn a number of
turbines, some, of which, in a locality once considered to be
a desert and distant 750 miles from the metropolis, assist to supply
the town with electric light, whilst others keep in motion the
welcome. punkahs ; and one used by the editor of • the local news-
paper turned an opal-cutting machine, which operates upon the
finest opals—almost the only mineral so far discovered-in • this
fertile pastoral region. The-depths at which artesian water is


struck vary from 200 to 5,000 feet, the latter depth being probably
the deepest artesian bore extant. There are, however, -some
reasons for anxiety in regard to the permanence of this water
supply, which will probably call for measures for its"oonservation
at an early date, I have given this subject prominence because
this discovery of a supply of artesian water was the commencement
of a new era in Queensland’s progress and Nature’s compensation
through the art and ingenuity of man —for many of the
difficulties and obstacles inseparable from the development of new
territory under untried conditions.
4. RETRENCHMENT.
Financial institutions and individuals, satisfied that the progress
was permanent, had also borrowed largely from abroad _ at high
rates of interest upon values then considered real; and had invested
capital to a large amount, so that when the monetary crisis
extended to Queensland, the interest Bill heoame a subject of
anxiety, not only to the Government but to individuals. It then
became apparent that the credit which had become impaired by a
chain of circumstances not wholly associated with Queensland or
even Australasia could only be restored by proof that the natural
resources of the Colony, properly stimulated by social|aotion and
by legislation on sound economic principles, wore sufficient to pay
the general interest Bill and to establish an equilibrium between
revenue and expenditure in the public finances. These colonists,
trained in a school of adversity, when it became apparent to them that
self-denial and pluck were the harbour lights to guide them : to a
return to prosperity, sat to work with a will to retrench their expendi-
ture and put forth all their energies in the direction of increased
production. Those who knew Queensland longest and best never
despaired of the result, and with the example of the Government in
the operations of the State, commenced their up-hill work. Save
in a few oases of particular note all classes of the community
assisted, and whilst determined to faithfully conserve the bulk of the
public lands as a further security for the money borrowed and for
the benefit of posterity, patiently submitted to retrenchment. The
system of keeping the public accounts shows the actual transactions
of each year in the most reliable form. It shows the cash receipts
and disbursements not only in the year, but for the year as well, as
far as it is possible in a Colony with such an extent of territory;
and in addition, an ordinary mercantile balance sheet is now


prepared slowing the net returns under each head. Thus assured
of the reliability of the Treasurer’s public accounts the four
consecutive surpluses of revenue over expenditure since the
financial crisis referred to must be satisfactory. This result
has not been arrived at by any increased taxation, nor by the
sacrifice of any capital assets, for whereas in 1890 the taxation per
head was £8 17 s. Id., last year it was reduced to £8 ss. 2d., and
whilst in the same period the land sales revenue was £l7s.2d.
lasi year it was only £1 3s. s d. per head. In case anyone desires
to be farther assured, aud will refer to the account X have referred
to which forms a part of the Treasury budget, he will find that last
year the net cost of the Government of the Colony was .*£1,900,000,
found to the amount of £1,500,000 from Customs, Excise, Stamp’
Dividend Duty, and Licences; £ 75,000 from Land Eevenue, and
the balance, £825,000, from purely pastoral occupation. Though
there are local 'rates averaging about Id. in the £ on the capital
value of land without improvements, there is no land or income
tax, whilst of the indirect taxation through the Customs about one-
half of the total is raised from fermented and spirituous liquors,
tobacco, and opium. Some criticisms have appeared on the
soundness of the Colony’s securities, because on a population basis
it appears as the heaviest borrower of all the Austr alias; but
though population may be one factor in determining this question,
the use that has been made of the money is the most important.
Judged by Jhis test Queensland has nothing to fear. By prudent
legislation the whole of the Colony is under local. Government,
whose loans are provided by the Treasury. If we exclude these and
the unexpended loan .balances, the public debt approximates thirty
millions. This money has been expended in railways, water bores,
and tanks, electric telegraphs, roads and bridges, and national
defence works, whilst almost all the land connected with these
assets, now bettered in value, has been supplied by the State. These
remain as security for the amount of the loan liability ; and if, as
against any deficiency, the unsold land of the crown-—412 millions of
aores^-is ; reckoned at even the lowest selling price, and to this is
added the private wealth of the people, about £150,000,000, there is
ample security. I may observe that whilst the gross interest
Bill amounts to £1,825,000, the net annual Interest payable is
even presently only £885,000, showing that the loan investments are
reproductive in part, and as population increases will surely
become so in the whole.
■ ®* o principal products contributing to the progress: of the Colony


are derived, from three primary sources: pastoral, mineral, and
agricultural, which I propose to deal with in this order because it is
their relative direct value.
6. PASTORAL PRODUCTION
The pastoral tenants or, as they are locally termed, Squatters ”
were in occupation of large tracts in Queensland prior to its separa-
tion from New South Wales, and were left undisturbed till 1868,
when longer leases were allowed in the unsettled districts; and
inducements were offered to existing Crown tenants to surrender
part of their runs in consideration of a renewed lease lor the
remainder. Most, of these leases in the settled districts have now
expired, and the land is being rapidly taken up, under various,
tenures, in smaller areas. The term unsettled no longer applies to
that territory, which was, In fact, largely so when the term was first
used, for, by the advent of railways, the discovery of artesian water,
and the necessity to stock, it has become almost entirely occupied.
It is quite true the occupation is not of that character which is most
beneficial to the State. After the nser, almost since separation by,
those pioneers of this industry who devoted many of the best years
of their life and contributed so largely to the success of the Colony,
their holdings have largely passed into the hands of financial
institutions whose directors and shareholders are for the most part
.absentees, and an overseer remains in charge with only such hands
as are absolutely necessary to run the concern to the ‘heat payable
advantage, which, from overcapitalisation, in many oases is not
always realised. The runs now held under pastoral lease are 2,871,
with a gross area of 882 thousand square miles, having a rent roll
of {€850,000, whilst practically the settled districts are all open to
the public under the various liberal tenures of the new land law.
Recently pastoralists have been offered a further extension for a
period of twenty-one years, and .special concessions at an almost
nominal minimum rent are proposed in regard to runs near the South
Australian border, so that the, impression which prevails, that the
State, as landlord, is illiberal, or, as some contend, unjust to the
pioneers of this industry, has mo foundation. ■ Parliament has
always been sympathetic with any reasonable case made out by the
nastoralists, and has ever charged reasonable rents, low railway
charges, , and granted concessions of further terms of years whenever
special circumstances have warranted them. There exists mo reason
for alarm on the subject, it is the best interest of the State to keep


their railways fully employed, and by reasonable rents to keep
permanent tenants for all the pastoral territory. If, after' the
extended term is over, the State can accomplish both these objects-,,
most likely the preference will be to existing tenants, but the Act of
last year- is a clear and distinct notice that in all probability by that
period these areas will be required for closer settlement by a rapidly
increasing population, and if the change brings with it personal
occupation by smaller men, the gain to the Colony will be con-
siderable, and those who have used these lands for almost half a-
century will then have to make way for others. Up to the present,
grazing farms give an average rent of £3 14s. B cl. per square mile,
whilst on first-class runs the average rent lor second periods is only
£2 7s. 6d., and over the whole area £T6s. Bd. At any rate the new
system will, long before that time, have had such a trial that it will
then be known whether it will best pay the State to renew the leases
or not. Good land can be acquired at almost nominal rates, under
tenures suitable to all requirements ; agricultural farms at a mini-
mum of B d. an acre; scrub selections for a term of thirty years
without any rental at all for twenty years, whilst grazing selections-
and homesteads, not exceeding 20,000 acres, can be secured at a
minimum rental of an acre for a maximum period of tweuty-one
years, upon condition that the occupant fence in his area within three
years; and bo largely have these liberal provisions been availed of,
and especially by experienced farmers from all places, that last-
year’s selection was a record—-no less than I,s74’farms, containing-
-3,629,651 acres, have been selected at an annual rental to the State
of £24,025.
Main Trunk Eailways have been extended from Brisbane to
Ounnamulla, 818 miles; from .Rockhampton to Longreacb, 427
miles; and from Townsville to Winton, 318 miles—so that the
principal disability to the successful carrying on of pastoral opera-
tions, distance, has been minimised. In the last return before me,
that for the year 1808, the total value of exports from Queensland
was £10,079,000, being an excess of £1,853,000 as compared with the
previous year, and when we find considerably over one-half of this
is contributed by this pastoral industry, it proves not only its present
importance but the probabilities of expansion under new conditions.
The State has put forth its full powers to remove any undue
obstacles to its successful development, postal and telegraphic
facilities have been everywhere provided, experimental bores have
been sunk in numerous places, subsidies have been paid to local
authorities to keep local roads in repair and keep down pests of all


kinds, and protection of life and property lias always been eon- ■
sidered the paramount duty of the Government. Then, when
co-operation seemed advisable and could not be secured by
voluntary effort, various Acts have been passed enforcing the system,
and almost- in all oases vesting the management in those who
provided the funds; thus we have a variety of separate funds,
specially provided by the industry such as The Brands, Sheep,
Meat and Dairy, Marsupial, and Diseases in Stock Fund. These
contributions, though no doubt a heavy drain on the industry, are
essential to its success. The principal harbours have been so
dredged that suitable steamers can now come to the wharves, thus
avoiding the heavy costs of lighterage, and at the present moment
there is no obstacle to steamers drawing twenty-five feet of water
navigating the Brisbane river up to the wharves of the metropolis.
Stimulated and largely assisted by the Meat and Dairy Encourage-
ment Act, mealworks for freezing, tinning, extract, and boiling
down have been provided in suitable localities, which last year
operated on a million sheep and 800,000 head of cattle. So much
has been written about meat freezing that it is not necessary to
even recapitulate results. I am, however, in a position to state that
no disease-tainted meat is ever allowed to leave Queensland’s shores
for other countries, and that the inspection by the officials of the
State is and has always been of the most searching nature. Unfor-
tunately, inferior meat has now and then been sent away on owners’
account, hut this has recently been remedied by legislation adopting
classification, and grading of all products, so that in future the
veterinary certificate will not only be an absolute guarantee as to
freedom from all disease, but the grading certificates will insure
that nothing but the very best produce is in future allowed to leave
the Colony. That the prices given by the consumers here would
give a margin of profit to the Queensland producer is admitted, as
is also the fact that the prejudice against the product is steadily
flimim'shing, but notwithstanding many and often unselfish efforts
to reduce the expenses of distribution, the return to the producers
is discouraging. This result arises, not so much from antagonistic
influences on this side of the world, as it does from the fact that
there exists no system of regular collection and shipment of the
best products by fewer channels in Australia, the consequence
being that Australasia, by its sections, competes against itself to the
manifest advantage, of its nearer and more favoured rivals, America
and the Argentine, and thereby keeps prices down to a limit which
often yields no margin of profit to the producer. The first reform
A 3


should originate from the place of production, and should Federal
action bring the various sections together, and lead inter alia to
some concerted scheme for the more regular shipment of only the
best meat and other produce, Great Britain’s fear for her food
supply will be lessened, and this industry will develop hy leaps and
bounds.
The most recent item of progress is the establishment of wool
sales in Brisbane, for which there is a prospect of a permanent
successful result. As my desire is to present to you a full
and faithful picture, I must not leave you to imagine these results
have been arrived at without difficulties, disappointments, hardships,
and losses. Some of these I may enumerate. In spite of the
border fence erected by the State to prevent their incursion, rabbits
have undoubtedly secured a footing. The fence, 700 miles long,
has certainly dispersed the wave o rabbits as it approached
from New South Wales and South Australia. By doing so it not
only gave additional time to private holders to fence their own
holdings, but it enabled tjae State to organise Boards to further
meet this pest, with the result that save on a few runs no appre-
ciable diminution of the stock-carrying capacity of the pastoral
districts has yet been demonstrated. It is true the danger is there,
but it is being met at every point, and having being taken in time,
and the greatest efforts having being put forth to erect rabbit-proof
fences almost everywhere in advance and to keep on destroying all
rabbits as they appear, it is hoped the heavy initial outlay will bear
good result. Bacilli of chicken cholera in pollard pellets have been
used with success though the contagion theory of Pasteur's Institute
has not been clearly made out. (I need hardly remark that these
rabbits are not used for any commercial purposes whatever.) At
present only a small portion of the Colony is affected, but the
knowledge that that pest originally spread from small beginnings in
the southern colonies keeps alive the feeling of alarm whilst the
present injury is not so serious. The number of miles of rabbit-
proof fencing erected with the assistance of the State (4,421 miles,
and about 3,000 miles hy lessees) proves that the pastoralists have
put forth their best efforts. The outlay thus incurred must con-
tribute to the more beneficial management of their holdings in other
respects.
After all 1 have said about closer settlement and fencing one
would imagine, that the innocent looking marsupial, whose skins
are so- valuable, would be diminishing'; I, however, notice the
number of scalps destroyed last year, which the State contributed


to obtain, was the rec0rd—1,522,885. It is estimated that oyer 12
million scalps have been paid for since the first Act came into opera-
tion, and it is a weMnown fact that many hundreds are destroyed
annually, the scalps of which are not presented for payment.
No less than 26,000 dingoes were hilled last year under the same
System.
The most recent pest is, however, the tick {lxodes bovis), which
fortunately only affects horned cattle. This insect has an extra-
ordinary life history. In the first stage, that of the ovum, it may
remain four months, from which it emerges into visible life in the
larval form, and is so small that it appears to the eye like a grain
of sand. In this stage it has existed for quite nine months, and never
increases in size till attached to a congenial host, invariably horned
cattle, though it has been known to fecundate on a horse. After a
period of fifteen days in this minute form it begins to expand, till in a
few days it reaches the size of an ordinary pea of dull grey colour,
when it drops off, and within a’ short time deposits no less than
2,500 eggs, which in their turn perform similar prolific functions. I
have seen, a portion of the flank of a beast so covered with ticks
that a point of a penknife could hardly be inserted without removing
a female tick, or the tiny male insect, which in every case is found
nestled under the comparatively huge frame of Ms larger, though
not better half. It made its first appearance in Queensland in
the end of 1894 in the Gulf Country. The Stock Depart-
ment was not prepared for its arrival, and then knew very little
of its life history. They were lulled into a sense of security by
official information from Natal that “ red-water ” was not caused
by ticks; and treating it as a local disease of a malarial nature,
restrictions against travelling were withdrawn, in consequence of
which the disease very rapidly spread to the Eastern seaboard as far
south as the Tropic of Capricorn. It has, however, never made a
footing on the Western plains, for the sun is its greatest enemy,
so that even after four years it is still confined to the more humid
districts on the Eastern seaboard. Whether it will eventually spread
over the southern Colonies depends more on natural conditions.
In America none are found north of a particular range of mountains;
the chances are that the tick will in time expand over the Southern
coastal districts, by which time immunity from ill effects will have
been secured by inoculation. The Department has now two gentle-
men, eminent in their profession—Dr. Hunt, a pathologist, and
Mr. Bound, a bacteriologist—and though their conclusions are by no
A 4


means final, nor their investigations completed, yet it is tolerably
certain —
1. That the tick is identical in all respects with that existing in
the Southern States of North America, Argentina, the West Indies,
Buenos Ayres, South Africa, India, Ceylon, Java, South Australia,
and West Australia.
2, That dipping is not of much permanent practical utility.
8. That the disease, of which the most marked symptoms are
feyex and red-water, can only be contracted by the operation of the
tick or inoculation with the blood of a recovered animal.
4. That it leaves no injurious effect whatever when the animal
has quite recovered.
5. That cattle, the progeny of tick-recovered animals, are
immune.
6. That ticks are carried by so many agencies that quarantine by
proclamation or by fencing is only a postponement of the danger.
7. That it will never extend into the principal pastoral country,
as it-cannot exist there for any time.
8. That, comparatively with drought, the losses, though serious
in some coast districts, have been small.
9. That the fever is caused by a micro-organism associated with
the tick, but the present unsettled complication is when or where
this micro-organism becomes so associated. This difficulty has
arisen recently from the discovery of a number of healthy cattle
covered with these ticks, which, when removed to another tick-
infested locality where more ticks of the same species abound,
at once contracted the fever. The harmless ticks were the direct
progeny of others which had been on cattle infected with the fever,
and caused many deaths.
It is, however, satisfactory to note that inoculation with the blood
of a recovered animal practically ensures immunity from the disease,
and it is hoped it will be eventually considered as of no moment,
as it is in the other places I have referred to, where no special
precautions are used or required.
6. MINERAL PRODUCTION.
The progress in this industry has been most gratifying. A
benign influence has always seemed to be showered upon it at the
critical moment. In the very worst times of depression the flicker-
ing mining candle has burst forth into a fall blaze of light and
prosperity. It was so when Gympie was discovered in 1866, and it


has since continued, Nature being most prolific when the necessity
was the greatest. Charters Towers, Mount Morgan, Gympie,
Croydon, Clermont and other smaller fields have been discovered for
years, and though no new goldfields have been discovered, so many
new finds on old fields bays appeared simultaneously that the
aggregate yield during the last five years has largely assisted to the
general progress. This yield has been augmented by improved
methods, and tailings and residues, heretofore considered valueless,
are now being profitably treated. The value of the gold won in the
last year, 1897, was £% 558,141, and the prospects for 1899 are even
better. I have preferred to give you the results in £ s. d. as the
estimate in ounces (which is so freely used for reference purposes)
must he largely misleading. It would be very advisable if some
mining authority would start a reform in the direction of insisting
that all returns of ounces should be on the basis of fine gold only;
to call much of the bullion recovered by cyanide treatment gold is
misleading. I feel sure Queensland would gladly welcome a reform
of this nature. During last session a new mining law has been
introduced, under which there must be a further impetus to pro-
duction. Though the western districts contain only coal and opals,
the whole of the eastern part of the Colony from north to south
abounds in metals and minerals. Mount Morgan, in the centre,
still remains as the auriferous wonder of the world. Its discovery
was as surprising as its development has been satisfactory. The
gold was found to exist in a formation not previously deemed auri-
ferous, and was doubtless due to a geyser or hot spring which burst
out in Tertiary times after the Valley of tbe Dee had been carved
out of the desert sandstone which once covered the site of the
mountain. Its existence has not only furnished employment to
many thousands of people, but it supports a town containing over
6,000 inhabitants, and whose importance justified the extension of
a railway, the first in Australia to adopt the Abt Bail system. The
dividends already exceed and present prospects point to
a long and prosperous future. Last year it turned out 173,200
ounces of almost fine gold, an increase of 11 per cent., and the
advance may be even expected to be greater, owing to the en-
largement of their plant for the treatment of low grade ores. A
reaction has also taken place on the Hodgkinson goldfield, and
the important copper, silver and lead producing district of Ohil-
lagoe promises to give new life in this locality. Tbe railway to
Mount Morgan has been opened, and powers have been given to
construct a private railway from Mareeba to OMllagde. There is


ample scope for successful investment in mines in Queensland,
though the Company system of this metropolis is not likely to
ensure the best results. Speculation in shares seems to be
the main object rather than an investment in judiciously selected
mines. Queensland offers better prospects in the latter class, and
if, instead of partly worked out mines purchased at exorbitant
prices, watered by large profits and expensively directed, individuals
or associations would employ experienced men at reasonable wages
to select and work promising ventures, relying more on the dividends
from the ground than from the operations of the Stock Exchange,
there would not long continue a reluctance to invest capital in
developing the payable mineral resources of the Colony. The new
law increases the area of leases, dispenses with profitless labour,
and provides a more secure tenure.
7. AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION.
The impression of the early settlers was that Queensland was
not an agricultural Colony, and few have turned their attention to
it till stern necessity forced them to seek their living by production.
Parliament has now made ample provision for the education of the
people in the agricultural resources of the Colony, has secured the
services of several experts in the various branches of the industry,
established an Agricultural College and experimental farms, and
generally obtained the most intelligent methods for the application
of advanced knowledge. The result is apparent: instead of con-
tinually growing food principally for horses, last year 60,000 acres
were under wheat alone, which averaged ■l7 bushels to the acre.
The, land which produces this is part of the Darling Downs, and
there exists of the same character sufficient to stock the granaries of
Great Britain without relying on foreign nations if only the right
class of farmers can be induced to acquire it. Whenever the de-
mand arises, the State purchases back these lands, intersected by
railways and situated in a temperate climate. They are for the most
part cleared and free from floods, and are resold to farmers as they
require them, on long terms at cost price. Recognising the advan-
tages of a larger population Queensland is now able to offer free
passages to farm labourers and domestic servants, and sub-
stantial assistance by way of passages to all farmers and their
families desirous of taking part in this industry. These lands SO'
suitable: for agriculture and dairying combined, and also for grazing
homesteads and selections, give the prospect of a comfortable home,


particularly to young men desirous of relying on their own exertions
rather than remaining a perpetual burden on their relatives or
friends. To such, the State offers land at low rentals, it affords
facilities to teach them their work and make them experienced, and
then, if assisted by a moderate expenditure to fence and stock, suc-
cess will follow on thrift. That this is becoming apparent to the
local community is evidenced by the large number of selections last
year. The total area now open for similar settlement approximates
10,000,000 of acres, of which 1,600,000 is in the pick of the pastoral
districts. Fruits, tobacco, malting barley, and coffee are being pro-
fitably grown, but I can only further refer in detail to sugar. When
originally started the work was mostly performed under the gang
system, large plantations being worked by alien labour. This was
not profitable and the industry languished; then, when necessity
demanded it, the State altered its policy of prohibiting the employ-
ment of labour from the South Seas, and offered to assist groups of
small co-operative farmers to erect the milling power necessary to
crush the cane. Private owners cut up their lands and sold or
leased portions to small farmers, who, seeing that Polynesian
labour was suitable to them for rough work, no longer refused to
avail themselves of it so long as it was strictly limited to field
operations not usually profitably undertaken by whites. Twelve
mills of the newest design have been erected under the pro-
visions of the Sugar Works Guarantee Act, and the area now under
cane has reached 100,000 acres. It is expected that 140,000 tons
will be next season’s output, and as bountiful rains have recently
fallen, there is little doubt the next season’s crop of sugar will
exceed in value a million Stirling. The principal districts are
Bundaberg, Childers, Maokay, Ayr, Ingham, Cairns, and Geraldton.
Most of the labour is obtained from the Solomons, and as a
resident Commissioner has been appointed there since 1897, to
whom all Queensland labour vessels have to report themselves, and
as the regulations no longer admit of any of those “scandals”
which once were associated with this labour, the opposition to
it as a temporary convenience has abated. The labourers are
not only now regularly obtained and returned, but the State
insists upon the most parental care of them during their term of
employment; and-as from last returns 2,G77 have voluntarily
placed to their credit in the General Savings Bank .§21,280,
it shows they are .beginning to learn the value of money. There
are not more than 8,224 in the Colony, all of whom are engaged in
field operations connected with the growth of sugar. This number


is not sufficient to cut and harvest the increasing crop, so the
planters are again anxious as to the future supply of labour for
this purpose. The price to which sugar has fallen, owing to the
system of foreign bounties (£8), has induced a request to the parent
country for countervailing duties. Queensland would gratefully
appreciate, any assistance by the Mother Country which would give
the British sugar producer the opportunity of fair competition, and
I fear if such is not forthcoming there is little prospect of the con-
tinuance of this industry, and certainly none of its further develop-
ment.
It is contended in some quarters that the assistance given by
the State to this industry is equivalent to a bounty. The facts will
show that this is nntenable. The cost of the introduction and
regulation of Pacific Island labour is borne by a special fund pro-
vided by the planters. It is true that the State has, in accordance
with its general policy of advances to local bodies, provided the
funds for the purchase and erection of twelve central mills out of
the sixty-five mills at work in the Colony, and to the extent of half
a million sterling; but the repayment of principal and interest is
secured, not only by a mortgage over the mill, hut over the freeholds
of the many co-operators who own and supply the mills with cane.
Under this credit mobiliser system, all moneys advanced are repaid
to the State as to a - private mortgagee. If bounties are abolished
or countervailing duties established, these private companies could
goon redeem and leave no excuse for- the impression that this State
help to a few co-operative farmers is equivalent to a bounty on all
sugar produced in the Colony.
As is the ease with the pastoral industry, so also has agriculture
its pests. These, however, cannot be considered exceptional, and
every effort is being made to exterminate them which science and
experience can bring to hear.
Strenuous efforts are being put forth to improve the growth
of grapes, tobacco plant, coffee and cotton, with a view to the
increased production of such articles for which the climate and soils
are specially suitable. Through the Dairy Board an impetus is being
given to the production of butter, cheese, and hams, of which large
quantities are now exported; and so rapid has been the progress of
agriculture that the treasurer in his last Budget-speech specially
congratulated the Colony on its progress as gauged by the success-
ful operations of its agricultural industries.
. Prom these principal sources, pastoral, mineral, and agricultural,


the bulk of the raw products are obtained, but other valuable exports
are derived from the pearl shell, beche de mer, and oyster fisheries.
In the secondary industries the progress,has been consider-
able, and when it was found there were over 12,000 persons
assisting in the work of production, though not of raw material, it
was deemed advisable to regulate their employment and to make
provision for their health and comfort by a Factories Law based
principally on the experience obtained in Great Britain.
8. MATERIAL PROGRESS.
Queensland is fortunate as regards distribution of population,
there being no less than ten large towns or cities, in each of which,
with the suburbs, the population exceeds 10,000. These are for the
most part seaports, though Charters Towers and Gympie, the
mining capitals, are inland, as are also Toowoomba and Warwick,
the centres of agriculture. The rapidity of the growth of these
towns is marvellous. Brisbane, the metropolis, has a population of
about 120,000, and is well situated on the river of that name, about
fifteen miles from its mouth. The Government buildings are perma-
nent handsome structures —in fact, all the more recent edifices are
substantial. The new double bridge connecting North and South
Brisbane has just been completed—in fact, restoration-has been
made everywhere of the bridges carried away in various places by the
floods of 1898, It has been estimated that the public buildings, in-
cluding schools and those required for railways, have cost almost
two millions of money. All the large towns are lighted by gas,
gome use the electric light; in fact, one, whose position Is almost
in the centre of the continent (Thargomindah), has so turned to
use the forces of Nature that the bore water is the motive power
for its electric lighting plant, and has sufficient power to drive
from 150 to 200 16-candle lamps, the theoretical maximum potential
being 27 horse-power. Recently the metropolis has been provided
with an overhead electric tramway of a comfortable design, which
in a warm climate is largely availed of.
Special efforts have been made to secure and store a constant
supply of pure water for each centre, and so well is this now pro-
vided, that the death rate of the white population is reduced to
10-88 in the-1,000, -
Harbour trusts have been created at the principal ports, and such
additions are contemplated to their already excellent dredging
plant as will ensure sufficient depth of water in every port for all


oversea steamers. In every scientific department men of the
highest attainments have been secured to impart knowledge with
the object of using the natural resources to the best advantage and
stimulating production.
The Weather Bureau, under the direction of Mr. Clement Wragge,
formerly of Ben Nevis, has reached that stats of usefulness that
it is not only a valuable aid to every industry in the Colony, but it
has become an Australasian institution, in fact, of proved service to
the entire continent. If to these ordinary evidences of material
progress we find the population and the Government revenues ex-
panding, the equilibrium between revenue and expenditure main-
tained, the railway profits improving, exports increasing and largely
exceeding the imports, property moving steadily but not booming,
trade and commerce sound and brisk, the unemployed finding
work, labour required and invited, free immigration revived, saving,
bank deposits increasing, more land being hand fide selected: than
in any previous year, and everyone hopeful, then we may safely
assert that Queensland is steadily progressing. It is now five years
since the crisis; it was then alleged that the Colony only paid her
interest by borrowing money. Although several millions of capital
were then suddenly withdrawn and fresh influx ceased, in the face
of a succession of droughts and pests, she stood the drain on her
resources, and. in 1897, on the basis of a total indebtedness to her
outside creditors of J 50,000,000, paid away no less than £5 3 s, 9d.
per cent, upon the entire principal, proving that if relatively she is
the moat heavily indebted of the group, she is also able to make
much the largest return on that indebtedness. The figures, for
1898 have been recently cabled, which show even a larger return.
9. OBSTACLES.
Public credit had a rude shock by reason of the stoppage in 1893
of a banking institution (which of late years conducted the Govern-
ment, business), owing to its mismanagement by those directors and
officials in whom the public trusted and placed confidence, in con-
sequence of which numbers of local residents were greatly incon-
venienced by the enforced conversion of moneys at current account
into long deferred loans, whilst serious losses otherwise resulted alike
to residents within the Colony as well as to many out of it. The
most searching investigations have been held with a view to
ascertain the causes of these losses, and recently it was left; to a
competent judicial tribunal to determine the question of responsi


bility, 'with the result that the survivors who contributed to the
mismanagement have been exonerated from any conspiracy to
deceive or defraud, aa it was shown that they were themselves
heavy pecuniary losers. In referring to this lamentable business,
which almost brought Queensland, to the verge of ruin, I am not
concerned in the silting of reputations. But I must add that
the public men of the present day cannot be held responsible for
these failures, and the people of Queensland took the same action
to discover wrong-doing as would have been insisted on in this
land. The shares of this bank were for the most part hold by
residents beyond the Colony, who must accept their share of the
responsibility in having failed to take such business precautions as
would have secured a closer inspection of the company’s advances,
The success of the Institution and its ability to redeem its deferred
liabilities largely depend on a restoration of confidence; possibly
the Colony’s progress may assist in this direction. One result of
the banking crisis was the establishment by the. State of its own
note issue, which baa not only proved a convenience to the several
private hanks, in that it saves them the necessity of keeping gold in
their many and distant branches, but it is a security to the public,
and, as such, is much appreciated.
10. LITERATURE, SCIENCE, AND ART.
With the necessity to work and without any leisured class these
do not present equally tangible results. Technical education has
been stimulated by the State, and is not only on. the increase, but
much appreciated. Music has been assisted by examinations
regularly conducted by British societies, and several most promis-
ing vocalists are now studying and expect shortly to join their
Australian sisters in their successes on this side of the water.
Painting has received recognition by the official establishment of a
National Art (Mlery, to which the State subscribes £l,OOO a year.
This originated in a bequest by one of Queensland’s pastoral
pioneers, the Hon. J. De Xj. Murray-Prior; since which several
valuable paintings have been donated, the last being the much
appreciated painting “ The Charge of the Heavy Brigade.” Litera-
ture has been encouraged by the creation of a National Public
Library, and although at present only in its infancy, the trustees
are in possession of a library of 15,000 volumes. Newspapers
abound everywhere, and almost every important town has its
“ Labour ” journal. Education, primary and secondary, is provided


by, the State. The primary schools impart a good useful education
without foes, and though secular, there is now an agitation and an
ever increasing hope that provision will soon be made for the further
formation of character by imparting through the regular teachers
the fundamental truths of morality and religion. A large number
of the ablest and most promising pupils of both sexes are by a
system of scholarships drafted off to the Grammar Schools, which
are part and parcel of the State system, and each year three scholars
from the Grammar Schools are provided withExhibitiong worth £l5O
a year to enable them to complete their studies at some University,
and arrangements have almost been completed for the establish-
ment of such a seat of learning in Brisbane.
11. SOCIAL PROGRESS.
Glass distinction is gradually disappearing. Nothing is more pro-
nounced than the gradual levelling of the community. Many who
made large fortunes by lucky or judicious speculation live in other
lands, and derive large incomes from the Colony; others, again,
parted with their properties for remunerative prices to combinations
of capitalists, for the most part non-residents, and who are also to be
found elsewhere ; and though the savings deposited in the savings
and other banks are equally large in the aggregate, the distribution
is over a greater number ; the people who remain have to live on
incomes reduced by the necessary public and private retrenchment,
their purchasing power is lessened, and they are gradually becoming
more democratic.
Queensland has now settled down into a working man’s country,
using that term In its broadest sense ; there are few drones in the
hiye, : and workers are now in the great and preponderating
majority; and with State education and other similar institutions
the'dividing, line between the classes which was more pronounced
in the early days is ever disappearing, and almost every person who
is not sick is labouring in some form. There is a strong tendency,
especially in the case of girls after leaving school, to choose a town
life in a factory or shop rather than take any share in the primary
industries. Men and women also cheerfully recognise that Society
has its duties, and landibly erect and manage hospitals, asylums of
various kinds, and numerous social institutions to which the State
contributes ill to £% and, as a general rule, with successful results,
leaving .the .management to the subscribers. Members of local


authorities devote much valuable time without remuneration to
the work of Local Government all over the Colony,
12. ABORIGINAL POPULATION.
No census can in the nature of things be presently taken of the
native aboriginal population, but guessing from the number who
receive from the State the annual gift of blankets, and recently
food, there are about 20,000 left. Legislation of a paternal
character was passed last year, under which protectors have been
appointed to see that justice and kindness are meted out to this
rapidly dwindling race, who, following the rule, and helped
by drink, opium, and other vices of civilisation, are gradually-
disappearing. All that reasonably can he done is being attempted,
and to the credit of the whole community he it recorded with
almost universal approval. The Asiatic alien population numbers
about 10,000, and gives rise to much controversy; There is a strong
feeling against the Chinese, though many families would miss
the civil and industrious gardener, who in all seasons and almost in
every locality provides at reasonable charges vegetables and fruits for
the needs of almost the entire white population. Ample precautions
have been taken against too great an influx of Asiatic aliens, hut-
difficulties still exist in connection with the new Eastern power
Japan, which it is the province of statesmen to remove or lessen.
18. POLITICAL PROGRESS.
The Legislative Council at present numbers 88 nominated for
life by the Crown. Attempts have been made to substitute the
system of election as is the case in Victoria, hut the proposal has
been put off “ till a more convenient time.” The Assembly numbers
72 members, who are elected for three years, and each is paid £BOO
a year. The electoral qualification is residential six months, hut the
plural vote remains. Queensland is the headquarters of the Aus-
tralian Labour Federation, under whose auspices a convention
called “Labour in Politics ” meets from time to time, arranges a
platform, and makes provision for the local choice of Parliamentary
candidates. In the Parliament now prorogued they had 21 members,
and for the first time accepted the ordinary responsibilities of Oppo-
sition, appointing one of their number as leader. The present party
in power, though under different leaders, has existed since 1880.
Some of the planks of the Labour platform are■’
One adult, one vote. State enrolment of voters. Abolition of


tb.6 Nominee Chamber. R eferendum. Conciliation unci Aibiti ation
(Compulsory). Statutory 8 hours day whore practicable. Mini**
mum wage on all Government contracts, lady closing with
weekly half holiday. Wages Protection Act, Government work to
be performed by day labour where practicable. State settlement at
which persons out of employment can obtain work as a" right.
Public organisation of employed labour for public purposes of a
minimum, wage. Progressive Land Tax with exemption up to N3OO.
Progressive Income Tax with exemption up to MOO. Absentee
Tax. National markets and storehouses. State Bank. State
Loans to settlers. State sugar refineries, quartz crushing and flour
mills, slaughter and chilling works. State manufacture of all railway
rolling stock. State fire and life insurance. State coastal marine
service with provision for carriage of passengers and goods.
Justices of the Peace to be elected. Old Age pensions. Repeal
of conspiracy laws relating to industrial disputes.
These are not particularised' with a view to any criticism upon
their wisdom, lam asked to place on record information con-
nected with the prospects and progress of a distant Colony, there-
fore the actions and policy of the political party which has now
for the first time accepted the responsibilities of Opposition, assume
an importance widely different from the time when, they were a
mere faction. Probably such an advanced programme may be
considered Utopian; however, as expectation is the perpetual attitude
of Social Democracy, and as their experimental legislation is often
used as guides for others, the publication of the aims and aspira-
tions of this political party as they are now being submitted to
the electors of Queensland for acceptance at the present general
election, may be of general interest.
14. SEPARATION.
, There has always existed some desire for separation, In admin-
istering Local Government one meets it often. It is inseparable
from large tracts of territory. Little has been heard lately in the
Northern section where it started, but in the Central section it exists
and has its bass at Rockhampton. It is argued by some that separation
would not advance the cause of Federation; the Central people,
however, fear that if Federation came as provided by the Constitu-
tion passed at the last Convention, there would be no chance what-
ever of ihoir wishes being complied with.. Others there are, who
endorse Mias -'Shaw’s opinion recorded in that any
further division should have greater-regard to climate natural


conditions: than exists at present in the accidental paper lines
which constitute the several boundaries of the various sections.
IS. AUSTRALIAN FEDERATION.
Queensland's attitude towards the realisation of this general
sentiment has been often misrepresented, and certainly the impres-
sion which prevails that the sugar planters are opposedto it, because
they see in it the doom of coloured labour, is erroneous. They
would prefer an Australian market, protected against the unfair
competition of bounty-fed beet sugar, even though such carried with
it the probability of the abolition of all coloured labour. The facts
are, that after a long delay in New South Wales the Queensland
Assembly, when they returned from the general election in 1896, in
their desire to select delegates, attempted a “ short cut ” which
brought them unexpectedly into conflict with the other Chamber,
and on their next attempt to pass the Bill on the lines of the other
Enabling Acts, the different circumstances of Queensland raised
sectional issues which obscured the main object, and again put off
the selection of delegates. Should, however, another Convention he
decided upon, it is almost certain Queensland will send delegates;
but whether this will lead to Federation at any early date must
remain doubtful, especially hi view of the present demands of New
South Wales. Statesmen in Queensland have always been essen-
tially practical, and are not likely to ho altogether influenced by
the sentiment of Australian unity, and to settle the ’ conditions
of a partnership so hard and fast as to allow no opportunity to the
people of the future to determine for themselves many problems at
present complicated; possibly the abstention of Queensland (which
has not delayed the movement so far) may have been productive of
good if it only now induces the framers of the new Constitution,
many of whom are strangers to Queensland, to visit these localities
and obtain some experience of the different conditions of tropical
Australia. A recent cable announces a Conference of Premiers on
this subject during the present month, when I hope that a spirit of
compromise will prevail, and such concerted action be decided upon
as will result in the removal of all obstacles to the early settlement
of some form..of union which Australia generally desires,and which
has always had my heat support.
The energy and unselfishness of this young and enterprising Colony
has shown itself in many ways: in its active participation at all
times in the Federal Council; in its accepting one-third of the
pecuniary risk attaching to Australia of the management and


Government of New Guinea ; in its more than proportionate share
of the cost and management of the defences at Thursday Island
and Albany; in its participation and share of every Federal compact
and contribution; in its defence of law and order; in its bringing
into existence a direct mail service from England via Torres Straits,
and a coastal subsidiary service not anywhere surpassed; and in its
provision along 1,800 miles of its coast for such ocean lights as have
often gladdened the heart of many an anxious oversea mariner.
These and other circumstances convince me that no selfish or
parochial policy is likely to influence Queensland’s action, and
with a -proper regard for the rights of her own people, she will
have a genuine sympathy with Australian federation. To her
credit must also be added that by the Defence Act of 1884 was
provided the first regular military organisation on the Continent,
the provisions of which have become the foundation for similar
enactments. Under this there is a land force established of 8,600
men, whose strength at present as 2,844, with 1,794 trained reserves
liable to be called out for active military service; and judging
from indents lately executed, and the commissioning of the gunboat
‘ Gayundah,’ it is not unmindful of its present responsibilities.
Critics have complained that the Colonies do not accept their fair
share of the responsibilities of the defence of the Empire. Queens-
land is ready to place in the field for defence purposes at least 4 per
cent, of its adult male white population, fully armed and equipped,
fairly trained as soldiers, and whose discipline could be relied upon.
Is not this a fair quota towards its defence of the Empire ? It may
be that the outlay to accomplish this is not proportionately as large
as in the Mother Country, but if the standard of the soldiers so pro-
vided is sufficiently high for safety, then, though the system may
be easier for Queensland's finances, it cannot be used to support
the oft-repeated assertion that the Colonies do not satisfy any
reasonable demand upon them in regard to national defence. She
does her heat, and the cost this year will approximate £120,000.
Loaded with a debt of £50,000,000, largely to Great Britain, the
task of producing sufficient to pay the interest requires all its ener-
gies in the days of its infancy. The beneficial advantages of trade
enure also to the Mother Country, to which it is bound by a common
race, religion, and interest, and with which it is always prepared to
fight under that flag whose traditions it loves and cherishes as its
own. From the development of that sentiment will surely flow the
hast results, and eventually Australia united will be found prepared
to accept more responsibility, and to present an unbroken front to
the enemies of the Empire.


16. NEW GUINEA
In its connection with Queensland, has been lately so prominent
that some information from me may not be out of place. The
management of this Possession was provided for by a scheme
under which Queensland became surety for Australia’s contribution
provided by the three Eastern Colonies in equal shares. An Ad-
ministrator, assisted by his Council, was primarily responsible for
legislation and administration subject to the veto of the Governor
of Queensland with the advice of his Government, and in extra-
ordinary matters the Queensland Government consulted, the
Governments of New South Wales and Victoria. This was tried
but did not work satisfactorily, owing to the unavoidable delays
which militated against the effective management of the Possession,
therefore in 1890 a practice was settled under which the Governor
of Queensland, after consulting with his Prime Minister, acted as
he considered best, and the scheme of reference to other Colonies
became, in effect, a dead letter. The arrangement has now
terminated by effluxion of time, and it is much to be desired that
some new system will be speedily provided, by which Australasia
will assume more responsibility and control, not only of New
Guinea, but. of the other British Isles in its vicinity whose
situation is so important to the Continent of Australia, or failing
that, they should be placed under the sole charge of Queensland,
and be managed from there, in the same way as Thursday Island is
at present. Sir William MacGregor’s term of office is over, but his
work and distinguished services remain; by a policy of kindness
with firmness he has laid the foundation of the pacification of the
■aboriginal inhabitants, and has left the island ready and suitable
for further development. When the unostentatious but real work
performed by Mm (especially of exploration) comes to be better
known, his share in the expansion of the Empire will be more
gratefully appreciated.
17. GOOD EXAMPLE.
I have endeavoured to give you some idea of Queensland’s
progress, but one factor I have left to the last in deference to
the presence of your Chairman on this occasion. The people
■of Queensland would consider me wholly, ungrateful if I did not now
recognise the obligations they are under to your Chairman for pre-
siding on this occasion, and give expression to their feeling that
as their Governor in the time of their difficulties General Sir


Henry Norman not only faithfully represented Imperial interests,
but was the ever-welcome friend and adviser of all classes of the
community. He made himself acquainted with its extensive terri-
tory and scattered inhabitants, sympathised with their efforts, and
by his large experience and prudent forethought rendered valuable
assistance to the permanent advantage of the community. Lord
Lamington, the present Governor, is successfully continuing the
same policy. The Colonial Office is therefore entitled to its meed
of praise for its judicious selection of Governors, whose unselfish
efforts and noble examples have so largely contributed to the
progress of a land to which the Queen so graciously gave her own
Eoyal Name.
PWSTEI) BT
gjkrOTWOOpK AND CO., NBIV’SIMSi'
LONDON
