

September 21, 1901.
Glasgow International Exhibition. 1901.
QUEENSLAND : ITS FOOD PRODUCTS.
“ There is room, and there is freedom—there is virgin soil to
till
There to gain an independence—all that’s wanted is the
will.” —“The Emigrant,” by G. Randall.
The State of Queensland, which occupies the north-
eastern portion of the Australian Continent, has a
total length of 1400 miles. It is 1000 miles broad,
and embraces an
area of 427 million
acres, over 5J
times that of
Great Britain.
Its resources of
production are
unlimited, the
climate is healthy,
and there is hardly
anything known
to man which can-
not be grown and
brought to perfec-
tion within the
limits of the State
—from wheat and
malting barley on
Darling Downs in
the south, to sugar
and coffee on the
coastal lands in
the north; whilst
the familiar apple,
pear, and black-
berry of this
country grow to
perfection at Stan-
thorpe; the pine-
apple, banana, and
orange flourish at
Brisbane; yet, for
the want of more
cultivators, food
products to the
value of £750,000
were imported last
year. Queens-
land’s great need
is more people;
its enormous terr^ or y contains a large proportion of
rich agricultural and
grazing land, while its wealth
of every known mineral—including gold, coal, iron,
and precious stones is almost boundless. The
Queensland Co ur t under the charge of Mr. George
Randall a po r t r ait and brief biographical sketch of
whom we hav e pleasure in presenting. As lecturer
and emigration agent in Great Britain for the colony
of Queensland Mr. Randall is very widely known.
We have tak en the liberty to preface our article with
a distich fro m one of his poems, “ The Emigrant,”
and we have a i so to acknowledge our indebtedness to
him for much 0 f the information which follows, In
the course of a conversation with him last week, our
representative gleaned some very interesting particu-
lars regarding the country he loves so well, and in
whose advancement he takes an indefatigable interest.
“In regard to bread-stuffs,” remarked Mr. Ran-
dall, “it was only during the last few years that we
had gone in for wheat and barley growing. But
rapid strides have
■ ■uni. .nil bcdl made both
in regard to the
high yield and
excellentqualities.
Not more than
half our supply is
at present being
grown, but the
area under culti-
vation is increas-
ing year by year,
and we have come
to the conclusion
that, in the course
of a very short
time, Queensland
will begin to ex-
port wheat.”
Meat.
Queensland meat
has always been
a favourite in this
country by those
I who have used
it. During the
last few years
several new com-
panies have
started, and the
output is rapidly
increasing. The
extra demand for
preserved meats
in South Africa
' during the last
two years has also
; Randall. given it an impe-
tus, and difficulty
has been making the supply equal to the
demand. All who have tried Australian meat speak
of it in the highest possible terms. It is superior to
American, The principal exhibitors are The
Queensland Meat Export and Agency Company, Ltd.,
whose Glasgow agents are Messrs. Stevenson & Pae,
Cochrane Street; and the Central Queensland Meat
Export Company, Lakes Creek, Rockhampton. Both
of these firms show corned beef in 14-lb. tins and also
in 2-lb. tins, as well as tins of ox tongues. We
may also mention the exhibit of Skinner’s cele-
brated turtle, Beehe de Mer soup, real turtle jelly,
and other delicacies shown by B. Skinner, Brisbane,
Mr. George Randall.
Scottish Trader.


the London agents being Adams & Co., Leadenhall
House.
Sugar.
“ An interesting fact in connection with the de-
velopment of the sugar industry in Queensland is
that, until a few years ago, nearly all the confec-
tionery was imported from this country; now, not a
ton, not a cwt. in 12 months is imported ; we make
all our own. The same thing might be said of jams
and preserves, and even pickles. For some years past
Queensland has produced more sugar than needed for
her own use, the balance being exported to the other
Australian colonies. The quantities sent to this
country up to the present have been very small.”
giant strides in connection with the making of butter.
A large quantity of it has found its way into the
London market. There is every reason to expect that
a wonderful expansion will take place in dairying, be-
cause we not only go in for dairying on the most
modern and approved principles, but the industry
promises to become an important adjunct to farming
in our sugar-growing districts, as well as in combina-
tion with ordinary farming. Last year the colony
exported 500 tons of butter valued at £50,000, and for
the past three years Queensland butter and cheese have
been exhibited at your great trade shows at Isling-
ton, where both articles have won the highest com-
mendations from your trade experts and best judges.”
View oe Queensland Court from the Main Avenue.
Previously a duty of £4 per ton was levied by New
South Wales on all sugar sent from Queensland, but
the Federation of the Australian colonies will, of
course, have the effect of doing away with this pro-
tective tariff and so help the further development of
the sugar industry. Nothing but cane sugar is grown
in the colony. Several samples of raw and refined
are shown in the Court, also large and small crystals,
granulated, &c.
Butter, Cheese, &c.
“ Queensland, during the past few years, has made
Tobacco,
“We have grown tobacco for many years. The
Government keep an expert to instruct growers as to
the best methods of cultivation.” Some very tine
samples of the fragrant weed are shown in a case.
There is brown twist, black twist, plug, and golden
bar, also Turkish tobacco, tobacco leaf, cigars, &c.
Pice, arrowroot, and chicory are also extensively
grown.
Coffee.
Many acres of the colony are now devoted to the
12
September 21, 1901.
Scottish Trader.


cultivation of the coffee berry. The official instructor
in coffee culture makes the following remarks :
“ There would appear to be some 200 growers,
aggregating 700 acres or more. I have not included
in this the areas that have been allowed to lapse
during the past year, and which amount to over 100
acres alone. The value of the industry cannot be
gauged by the mere acreage, coffee being considerably
more valuable than most farm staples. The area
under coffee in the colony at present is capable of
giving easily—with ordinary cultivation and no
manuring—an average of 10 cwts. to the acre, and a
crop worth ,£20,000, and possibly giving a crop worth
at the same valuation £25,000 to £30,000 annually.
to show an increased and increasing consumption of
the commodity. Local manufacturers are finding, as
was to be expected, that they have to purchase from
smaller growers to supply the demand—a healthy
state of affairs that will, it is to be hoped, continue,
enabling small estate-owners to dispose at once and
for cash of the raw article. The prospects of the
industry are decidedly good. That the sample, when
properly treated, is of high grade quality has been
amply demonstrated this season, and, in spite of
labour competition in other countries, it has also been
demonstrated that the colony’s natural advantages can
compete with them, by the fact of a high-grade coffee
being put on the retail market at the same or a lower
View of Queensland Court, showing
“ The improved methods of work started last year
are showing good results, the samples of coffee at the
various shows improving vastly both in size, shape,
and colour, and showing better and more satisfactory
returns both to the grower and buyer. At present,
practically all the Queensland-grown coffee is bought
up and manufactured in the colony, the prices re-
maining fairly steady at from £56 in the parchment
to £ll2 per ton clean, according to sample.
“ Coffee is being put on the local market in tins,
well got up and of very good quality, at from Is 6d
to Is 9d per lb., and the local sales of such would tend
Fountain, near the Gray Street Entrance.
figure, with a fair margin of profit to both grower
and manufacturer. The removal of inter-colonial
tariffs will also open up the Australasian markets to
this staple of Queensland, and in the home markets
the prices are slowly but surely rising.
“ From the grower’s point of view, it is one of the
most paying of products, giving a return of 10 cwts.,
and possibly a 15 to 20-cwt. crop, which, at even 6d
per lb. in the parchment or £56 per ton, would mean
£2B gross, or a net return of from £l5 to £2O at
least per acre. In the present state of the industry
it seems to be inadvisable to open up large areas for
Mercury
13
Scottish Trader.
September 21, 1901.


The Mercury Fountain.
various reasons, and smaller gardens are more readily
managed.”
Queensland Court General.
Under the auspices of the Hon, Sir Horace Tozer,
K.0.M.G., the’Agent-General for the Colony, one of
the most artistic and charming Courts in the Glasgow
Exhibition has been presented to the public. Our
illustrations are proof of this. The arrangement
14
September 21, 1901.
Scottish Trader.


September 21, 1901.
Scottish Trader.
of the various ores and minerals has been in the
hands of Mr. G. W. Cornish, the assistant manager.
J’he principal, if not the primary, object of the
Queensland authorities in being represented at our
Exhibition, is to bring before the people of this
country the great resources and possibilities of the
Colony. That they have succeeded in doing so few
of those who have visited their magnificent display in
the Industrial Hall can deny. The court is situated
immediately to the left of the Gray Street entrance
and occupying some 5000 feet of space, the main
portion of this forming as nearly as possible a square
block, having avenues on all sides. It is one of the
largest, and forms perhaps the most striking and
attractive feature in the eastern portion of the
Industrial Hall. Square massive gold columns, with,
at intervals, rounded pillars, support a series of arches
which the entire court. Bows of coloured
shields are emblazoned the names of every
mineral field in the Colony, and stcjugs of bunting
of all nationalities and colours are stretched from
girder to girder high in the roof. The square gold
columns at each corner are relieved by plaster casts
of the State’s coat of arms. With the exception of
wool (fine clothing and combing, in two large cases),
some canned meats and turtle preparations, samples
of sugar, and some specimens of timber, the entire
court is devoted to a representation of the mineral
resources of the State. Gold being the principal
mineral is represented by an imposing
obelisk in the tfmtre of the court. This is 6 feet
wide at the base, and gradually tapering reaches a
height of 24 feet, its capacity measuring 864 cubic
feet, and represents 14,837,049 ounces of gold, valued
at £50,101,486, thus indicating at a glance the
quantity of the precious metal in bulk (over 550 tons)
obtained in Queensland from the time of its first
discovery in 1858 up to the returns of last year.
In line with the obelisk at the east-end of the court
is one of the most striking and novel exhibits to be
found in the whole Exhibition—a veritable fountain
of quicksilver. To obtain a continuous flow of this
lively mineral, no less than 3 tons, or 6700 lbs. of
mercury, are required. On the centre line with the
obelisk and fountain, at the opposite end of the
court, another striking and conspicuoixs feature is a
beautifully designed trophy composed of pearl shells
most artistically arranged. These valuable shells,
and their sometimes more valuable contents, are
found in abundance in North Queensland waters,
more paiticularly in the region of Torres Straits, and
are exported in large quantities to London. To
farmers, miners, capitalists, tradesmen, artisans,
and mechanics—to everybody, in fact, possessed of
the requisite energy and ability—Queensland opens
its gates invitingly. Its present population is esti-
mated at slightly over half a million, but it is ex-
pected that the census will show a large increase. It
was proclaimed a separate Colony in 1859, when its
population numbered only 25,000. The rapid in-
crease of population in a territory naturally rich in
agricultural, mining, and pastoral possibilities, aided
in its development by liberal land and mining laws,
has had the effect of forcing its growth in all that
pertains to prosperity and social advancement, until
it claims rank as third in importance among the six
sister States now forming the Commonwealth of
Australia. At the end of the century it had become
intersected by 3000 miles of railway, 10,000 miles of
telegraph, and had increased the value of its exports
and imports from <£1,260,500 to over £18,500,000.
Two millions had been spent in the lighting,
buoying, and improvement of harbours and rivers,
and a like amount on public buildings. The
climate is healthy and enjoyable. A recent com-
parison of death rates in Australian cities with
leading cities of this country gave the following
figures : —Brisbane (Queensland), 10 39 per thousand ;
Sydney, 12-74; Melbourne, 15-39; London, 18-3;
Liverpool, 19'7 ; Glasgow, 22-0; and Edinburgh,
21-0. Brisbane, the capital of the State, has a popu-
lation of over 100,000, arnl is intersected by a perfect
system of electric tramwstys. Wool, gold, frozen and
preserved meats, sugar, coal, tin, and copper are
among its principal exportlft^
We have pleasure in a portrait of Mr.
George Randall, the general manager of the Queens-
land Court, who has in the past been instrumental,
perhaps more than any other man, in directing the
tide of British emigration to Australia. It is posi-
tively delightful to hear Mr. Randall speaking of the
hopes, the prospects, and possibilities of the “Queenly
Colony; ” he has all the colonial perfervid love of
country, and, judging by the magnificent display
made by Queensland in the Industrial Hall, we have
no doubt that Mr. Randall’s most optimistic predic-
tions regarding the colony will be amply fulfilled.
Many of us are precluded from taking advantage of
the facilities and privileges offered by the Queensland
Government because of our not being artisans or
agriculturalists, &c., but there are many farmers,
farm labourers, and tradesmen, who are eking out an
existence in our restricted agricultural areas or in
the crowded metropolitan centres, to whom Queens-
land offers an opportunity for acquiring a competency
for themselves and their families that only one man
in a thousand possesses here.
Asked as to whether he had been getting many
emigration enquiries, Mr. Randall said that these had
decidedly been on the increase during the past few
weeks, and were made by all classes. “It is the one
thing over and above all others our country needs—
more people. Yes, we want capital, I know, but not
that alone ; we want the men as well. We want the
investor with us on the spot, with his brains, his
labour, his intelligence, his interest, to start, establish,
and carry out enterprises, industries, and business,
whether in trade or commerce, mining or farming.
At this moment there are excellent openings for
enterprising men with capital to start wine-making at
Roma, a woollen factory at Rockhampton, more flour
mills on Darlington Downs, a pine-apple canning fac-
tory at Brisbane, drying bananas for the British
market at Cairns, to say nothing of a score of minor
industries awaiting the advent of pushing and
determined men.”
We further learned in conversation that a large
proportion of Queensland Colonists are Scotchmen,
many having taken leading positions in the public life
of the state. They are invariably successful, and are
always ready to give a hearty and cordial welcome to
new-comers from the old country.
