

(Queensland llatinnal ißank, iLimiti'k.
MEETINGS IN LONDON OF CREDITORS AND
SHAREHOLDERS,
July and Bth August, 1893.




QUEENSLAND NATIONAL BANK, LIMITED.
MEETING- OF CREDITORS held at the City Terminus Hotel, Cannon
Street, E.C., July 24-th, ISOS.
EDWYN SANDYS DAWES, Esq., in the Chair.
The Manager (Mr. J. W. Dickinson) having read the notice convening the meeting,
The Chairman said : Ladies and gentlemen, until recently I believed that Mr. Stewart, the Official
Receiver, would preside over this meeting, as he has done at most of the meetings of the other
Australian Banks similarly situated, and for my own sake, and still more for yours, I am sorry
this is not the case, because he would have been able to explain matters to you with that clearness and
precision which are only gained by experience, whilst I have had no such experience. Most of you are
doubtless aware that the Queensland National Bank is a Colonial Institution, and was established in
Brisbane just 21 years ago. It commenced in a small way, and it has grown with the commercial
progress of the Colony. It now has Branches in all the most important trade centres in the Colony,
and has a subscribed capital of £1, 600,000. Besides being the bankers for the Government, it has by
far the largest and best portion of the banking business of Queensland. It is with the object of
conserving this valuable business that you have been invited here to-day to consider the Scheme of
Reconstruction and if possible, and 1 certainly hope it will be possible, to accept it unanimously. I have
before me a copy of the last Balance Sheet issued to the Shareholders, that for the six months ending '3lst
December of last year, and it might be useful if I
figures as at loth May, the date of the suspension of
LIABILITIES.
31st Dee., 1892. 15th May, 1893.
Capital £BOO,OOO 0 0 £BOO,OOO 0 0
Reserve Fund 485,000 0 0 485,000 0 0
Notes in Circulation .... 284,644 10 0 214,080 0 0
Bills in Circulation .... 467,737 10 3 145,097 2 8
Deposits & other Liabilities 8,526,962 3 7 7,801,797 11 9
Brolit and Loss 58,626 4 8
£10,622,970 8 6 £9,445,974 14 5
were to read the balances together with the approximate
the Bank
ASSETS.
31st Dec., 1892. loth May, 1893.
Coin and Bullion £1,063,395 14 9 £437,948 1 1
Cash Balances 671,129 5 6 120,639 11 3
Money in London at Call
and at Short Notice .. 199,000 0 0 335,000 0 0
Government Securities
and other Debentures . 42,814 18 7 40,000 0 0
Bills Remitted and in
transitu 210,531 8 6 255,261 11 8
Bills Receivable and all
other Debts due to the
Bank 8,133,387 1 8 7,888,567 18 0
Bank Premises, Furni-
ture, &c 302,711 19 6 305,082 10 6
Adjustments between
Head Office & London 63,475 2 0
£10,622,970 8 6 £9,445,974 14 5
The item of Bank Premises, I may remark, struck me as being a very large one, but we must bear in
mind that, in addition to the head offices in Brisbane, we have 62 branches in different parts of the Colony.
I should explain that these approximate balances on 15th May were telegraphed from the Colony
to the Official Receiver, and with his kind permission I am able to make use of them to-day,
but as they were telegraphed I thought it better to speak of them as approximate balances, although you
may take it that they are substantially accurate.
There has been a long interval between the suspension of the Bank, the announcement of which
we received on 15th May, and this meeting to-day to consider the reconstruction, but that is explained by
the peculiar position which the Bank bears towards the Government. You are aware that we are the
bankers to the Queensland Government, and that unfortunately at the present time the Queensland


Government is a creditor to a very large amount. Before any Scheme of Re-arrangement could be
accepted, Parliament had to be called together in Queensland to approve of it, and that, as you know,
takes some considerable time. The Scheme has, however, now been accepted on the other side, and we
are able to submit it to you for your consideration. There is one satisfactory feature in connection with
this, which is that the Bank books have been under the inspection of the Colonial Treasurer, and he
was able to report to the Queensland Parliament, as the result, of this close inspection, that the Bank was
quite solvent—(Cheers). No doubt the fact of his stating this authoritatively, induced the Queensland
Parliament to agree to the Scheme of Reconstruction, under which the Queensland Government
conditionally consents to forego its priority of claim on the assets and to stand in with other creditors
in the Scheme now before us—(Cheers). During the interval referred to, the London Directors have
been in close communication with representatives of the Creditors at home, and I take this opportunity
of expressing the gratitude which my colleagues and I feel at the very kind and helpful consideration
they have given us—(Hear, hear) in connection with this Scheme. At great inconvenience they came
through from Glasgow, Edinburgh, and elsewhere, on different occasions to confer with us, and the
suggested amendments were all telegraphed to the other side, and in nearly all cases have been accepted.
At a very early stage we pointed out to the Head Office by telegraph, that the attempt in other cases
to force Perpetual Debenture Stock or Preference Shares upon the Creditors, had given great offence.
The objection was favorably considered, and such proposals do not appear in our Scheme. We also
conveyed their further request that a representative of the Creditors should be placed upon the Boards of
the Bank in Brisbane and in London. As regards London this was conceded, but in regard to Brisbane,
inasmuch as under the Queensland Agreement Act the Government has power to inspect the Accounts,
and as the Government will remain a Creditor pari passu with all the other Creditors, that inspection
may be regarded as equivalent to the appointment of a Director to the Board in the Colony—(Cheers).
You see that the Scheme has not been hastily propounded. It has been under consideration now
since the 15th May, not only here but on the other side also, and I believe, as now amended, it compares
favorably for the Creditors with any Scheme proposed by the other reconstructed banks. The main
points are these :
Ist. The calling up of £3 per Share out of the £5 uncalled.
2nd. The reduction of the Share Capital by writing off £‘2. per Share to meet depreciation
in value of securities.
3rd. The Agreement with the Government to accept payment of the greater part of their
debt in the same way as ordinary creditors.
4th. The payment of the bulk of the present liabilities by instalments spread over six to
twelve years.
sth. The granting of a discretionary power to the Directors to make advances to Creditors on
current accounts against deposit receipts ; to pay to Creditors on current account a
sum not exceeding £5O, and to pay the Bank’s drafts or acceptances in full.
The last of these is with the object of paying off numerous small accounts which will not
materially affect the result. The amendments to the Scheme of Reconstruction are printed in red ink on
the document, a copy of which you all have, and I shall be pleased to reply to any questions that may he
asked concerning them.
I should like now to make a few general remarks. You know that many hard things have been
said about Australian Banking. It is no part of my duty to appear here either as an advocate or
apologist for the Australian Banks, but I think it would be an omission if, after all that we have read
in the Press and in the financial reviews about Australian banking affairs, I did not on an occasion
of this sort make a few comments. Until recently, as you are aware, the Australian Colonial
stocks and deposits in Australian banks were regarded quite in the light of gilt-edged securities, and if
we consider the number of years that the Australian Colonies have been paying comparatively high rates
of interested can hardly be said that Australian investments have been altogether unsatisfactory to
British investors. There is, however, one conclusion we must all come to, and this is that British
investors have been too free to lend, and the Australian Colonies, in their anxiety to develop their vast,
and I might even say, rich territories, have been too willing to receive the money that British investors
could not place with the same advantage elsewhere. A few years ago I paid a visit to the Australian
Colonies, remaining there for six months, and I was much impressed with the excellence of


“ Wool
£4,245,989
‘ ‘ Gold
2,069,418
“Sugar
' 589,763
the public services and with the industry and the energy of our countrymen in all those colonies in
improving and developing the resources laying at their hands. At times I could not help feeling that
there was considerable danger in the practice of borrowing such large sums of money in this country
upon short dated deposits and terminable debentures, and I more than once remarked that if distrust set
in the consequences might be disastrous. I was generally met, however, with the reply that nowhere
could the British investor place his money to greater advantage, and that my fears were unfounded,
but I never realised that such wholesale disaster could have overtaken the Colonies as has recently been
the case.
I desire, however, to-day to restrict my remarks more particularly to the affairs of the Queensland
National Bank and to Queensland generally. I would remark first of all that, unlike most of the other
banks, our troubles have arisen almost entirely from the withdrawals of British deposits. At a
comparatively recent time the 3|- per cent. Stocks of the Queensland Government stood at 108 per cent.,
whilst the Shares of this Bank were selling at 150 per cent, premium. The first check to this came
when the Queensland Government, in its anxiety to push forward its Railway Construction, came upon
the London market too frequently for loans, and a loan that was endeavoured to he placed at a
time when the Argentine troubles had given a rude shock to public credit, resulted in failure and
had to be privately syndicated. There was a great deal of criticism at that time about the indebted-
ness of the Queensland Government, and the Bank began to experience a slow, but steady,
withdrawal of deposits, still not enough to occasion anxiety. The trade of the Colony was good ;
the exports were largely in excess of the imports, and the Government having awakened to the necessity
of largely curtailing expenditure, we hoped that things would soon right themselves. To a certain
extent they did, and were going very well up to last January when the stoppage of the Federal Bank was
announced. That was the first of the great failures of the Australian banks, and then, as you may
imagine, a greatly increased distrust set in. After that, in the month of February, we had, as you know,
very disastrous floods in Brisbane and property was destroyed to a very great extent, again tending
to make Depositors call in their money more rapidly. The London Board telegraphed to the
Head Office telling them what was going on, but received most reassuring replies that there was
no need for anxiety, that the credit of the Bank in the Colony was unimpeached, and the business
prospering. Notwithstanding this (and now I come to a matter which I speak of with great
hesitation) the Bank became, by name, the object of persistent attacks in certain papers, attacks which
were most unfair and misleading. Well, you know what the effect of press criticism upon a banking
institution means. Every single deposit as it became due was lifted ; not one was renewed, and after
very anxious deliberation the London Directors conceived it their duty to telegraph to Queensland that,
in their opinion, we must be prepared to pay off nearly the whole of our deposits falling due during 1898,
and that unless the Directors on the other side saw their way to do this and at the same time to carry on the
business of the Bank, it would be wiser to follow the course adopted by the banks of the Southern
Colonies and suspend payment.
Touching the general trade of Queensland, if you will permit me, I will read a paragraph
which recently appeared in one of the London papers, as follows :
“ Despite the financial crisis, Queenslanders have no reason to despair of their Colony.
“ With exports of £2O 7s. Bd. per head of the population, against imports of £lO Os. sd.
“ less than 50 per cent., she must very soon right herself. Official returns have just been
“ issued, shewing that the total exports from the Colony last year amounted to £8,578,071,
“ exclusive of live stock overland. The principal items were :
“ The imports for the same period amounted to £4,222,497.”
To this I may add that advices received by my own firm report a large increase in the production of sugar
during the present season, the figures being 81,500 tons as compared with 60,050 during last year. The
trade in frozen meat has also very largely developed. Most of you are aware probably of the great extent
of Queensland. It is six times the size of Great Britain, and scattered over this vast area the Queensland
National Bank has 62 branches, where the money of the Bank and the deposits from this country have
been utilized, but are certainly not realizable at short notice. At the present time, as in the past,
we believe that our money is giving a good return, but any attempt to get it back at once would be
most disastrous. Bear in mind one point that is very much in our favour, namely, that unlike the
Argentine and many other parts of the world where British Capital has been so largely invested, there
is no question of a depreciated currency-—(Cheers.) Queensland produces from her mines sufficient gold
for her own purposes and for her own mintage, besides exporting upwards of £2,000,000 sterling per
annum.


It might be useful to consider what is the total amount of Queensland’s indebtedness to Great
Britain ; we know that the government debt is about £30,000,000 sterling, and assuming the private
debts to amount to another £30,000,000, making a total of £60,000,000, the interest at 4-|-per cent, would
be £2,700,000 per annum, whilst as already shown, the excess of exports over the imports amounts to
£4,350,000. Ido not mean to say for one moment that this is a complete argument, but it is interesting
as showing what, in its balance of trade, the colony is doing in the way of remittances to this
country to pay interest. The Queensland National Bank is very largely interested in all this valuable
business throughout the colony, and it would be a grave calamity for the Bank and its creditors if measures
were not taken to conserve it, but this is a contingency Ido not at all anticipate. We have been
met with such kindness and consideration all round that I have the fullest confidence the meeting to-day
will unanimously support this proposal of reconstruction—(Cheers.) On the other hand, if you do not do
so, you must realize what the position is. The Government claims priority over private creditors and
the liquid assets would of course pass, first of all, into its hands. Then there would come upon the
liquidators of the Bank the necessity of throwing its properties of great value on to the market
for sale, with results that you could all fully imagine. They would not under such conditions realize 60 el-
even 25 per cent, of their value, and in proportion as they sold badly so also would be the
smallness of the dividend in the final settlement. Ido not think we need trouble ourselves much about
this aspect of the case because having had such warm approval of the scheme, we confidently believe
that the Creditors will be completely on the side of the Directors and will carry this scheme of reconstruc-
tion unanimously. With these few remarks I conclude, leaving it to a Creditor to propose the following
resolution :
“ That this meeting having considered the scheme of arrangement proposed between the said Bank and
“ its Creditors referred to in the order of the Supreme Court of Queensland, dated 80th June, 1893,
“ a copy of which scheme is hereto annexed, hereby agrees to the said scheme, subject to the
“ amendments shown in red ink on the annexed copy.”
Mr. Dunlop (Edinburgh) ; Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, I have much pleasure in proposing the
resolution mentioned by the Chairman. After the very long and exhaustive speech which we have had,
Ido not think it necessary that I should deal with the Scheme in any detail. lam a Member of the
Committee which was formed in Edinburgh for the purpose of attending to the interests of Depositors in
the banks that have suspended payment. The Queensland National Bank is a very favored Bank in
Edinburgh, and I may say that out of a total amount of British Deposits amounting to something rather
less than £3,000,000, £1,500,000 was deposited through the Edinburgh Agency. That shows the position
of the Bank there. In making that remark I must not forget to mention the zeal and ability shown by
the Agent in Edinburgh and his personal popularity, which I have no doubt helped to attract Deposits.
The Committee have had various meetings with the Directors and Officials of the Bank, and while they
have expressed their views very strongly, the Directors have met them very favorably and openly. We
cannot forget the duties which the London Board have towards their colleagues in the Colony, and I think
the London Board have felt their position very keenly. There was only one point on which I think at
any time there was a difficulty, and that was the restriction of dividends. On that point we were very
strong,and somewhat determined perhaps. We requested the Depositors not to return the proxies to the
Bank until this point had been settled. It has now been settled, and the dividend has been restricted to
5 per cent, as the Chairman has told you. The proxies I received in regard to this matter amounted to
£210,000. Ido not think there are any other points which I need touch upon, and I will only express the
hope that the Creditors here present will pass the Scheme unanimously, and enable the Bank, which has
been carried on so successfully in the past, to re-open its doors. I beg to propose the resolution which has
been read.
General Sir Henry Green : I shall be happy to second the resolution.
Mr. Ewing : I have much pleasure in supporting the resolution.
Mr. Olcott ; I think the Scheme is good in every way with the exception that the deposits are
to run for six years before we get any return. I think that is very unfair to Depositors. (Hear, hear).
If it were made four or five years and then divided into tenths instead of twelfths, it would be
fairer to the Depositors. With the exception of that I consider the Scheme is good in every way.


Mr. Eabbidge : I should like to say a word with regard to the trustees. This Scheme I believe
has been before the Creditors in three different shapes. In the last Scheme that I saw it was provided
that the Directors should have power to pay off’ the claim of any Creditor who could show that he held
it as a trustee. Of course it must be plain to everybody that trustees are placed in a very awkward
position, more awkward than those who are dealing with their own funds, and it is only right that this
provision should be made. I find, however, that it has been crossed out altogether in the present Scheme
and that trustees have to wait for six years. I think it is desirable that some reason should be given
why that was struck out. I would also like to ask another question. Provision has been made in the
Scheme that the dividends are not to exceed 5 per cent, until the Creditors are paid, and that the surplus
profits shall in the meantime be carried to the Eeserve Fund. 1 would like to know whether that is a
proper thing. Of course the usual custom for a private individual is to pay his debts before he spends
his profits. T can quite understand that 5 per cent, is a proper dividend, but during these six years
profits will accumulate to a considerable sum. Why should not those profits be available for the payment
of the Creditors ? (Hear, hear.)
Mr. Hewett : There is one question I should like to ask, and I may say that if it is answered
satisfactorily I shall support the Scheme. I would like to know what are the limits to the discretionary
power of the Directors to make advances against Deposits which have been received. I think that power
should be defined. With regard to the remark that has been made that preference should be given to
Trustees, I think we should all be in the same boat. It has been asked whether we would not show a
tender feeling towards Trustees. I venture to say that Trustees only represent persons, human beings
like ourselves. I fail to see why people who have benefited under the Trustees’ action, should not now
stand with us—(Cheers). We have come to this meeting to support the Bank in their Scheme, and we
must have no invidious distinctions. I maintain that no Depositor ought to be able to get advances
against a Deposit Eeceipt in Brisbane, any more than in London. No one can tell how far this would
be abused. With the exception of that Clause, I shall be pleased to support the Scheme.
Mr. Turner : 1 should like to know whether a winding up order has not been made in England,
and that therefore a meeting of the English Court will have to take place. Fnder these circumstances,
would it not be better to postpone this meeting until that meeting has been held.
The Chairman : There is no liquidation of the Bank. The reason why the Official Receiver did
not preside to-day is that the Bank is not going into liquidation. It is being re-constructed, and will be
continued without liquidation.
Mr. Turner : But 1 understand that an Order has been made to wind up this Bank by the English
Court.
The Chairman : An Order has been made but nothing has been done under it. If this Scheme is
approved by the Queensland Court it will be submitted to the English Court. This is simply a meeting
called by the Queensland Court, at which the Creditors must express their opinion for the benefit of that
Court.
Mr. Turner ; If the Scheme is approved it will have to be submitted to another meeting of the
English Creditors.
The Chairman : That is so. It will depend on the Judge, but I think that would be so.
Mr. Turner ; Having regard to that answer, sir, I think it would bo fair to the meeting to know
what are the assets of the Bank in England as compared with those in the Australian Colonies, so that
they can better consider their position.
A Creditor : 1 should like to ask, what is the Queensland law with regard to the re-construction
of companies without a winding-up? In England such a resolution as you ask us to pass would not be
binding on the dissentient minority or on the absent members unless there was a liquidation. Is there a
different law in Queensland, which would make such a resolution as we are asked to pass binding on the
absentees and dissentients in the absence of liquidation ?
Mr. Stirling (Solicitor to the Bank) ; Yes, we are informed that there is a law in Queensland,
similar to the law in Victoria and New South Wales and other parts, whereby a Scheme can be passed
without a winding up order.
A Creditor ; I would ask the meeting to accept the resolution in its entirety. Ido not say
all these details are exactly as we might desire, but the Scheme ought to be accepted. Every day
between the stopping of business and recommencing on a firm basis must be injurious to the


Bank—(Cheers). We must get the best security we cantor our money, and I take it we shall be
considerably benefited if the Bank is able to continue at once, and not lose its credit, as it would in the
case of delay. In most of these Re-construction Schemes the Depositors have been asked to give
everything and take very little. In this instance we have the advantage that the Queensland Government
is giving something substantial, which .is a quid pro quo for what we are asked to give.
Mr. Mickle : I should like to put forward the same view as the previous speaker with regard to the
time when the deposit receipts are to be repaid. I think it is very late, being repaid at intervals from 6to
111 years, and if, as you stated in the course of your speech, and which is supported by the statement of
the Colonial Treasurer, the Bank is solvent, surely it might begin to pay part of these receipts before the
expiration of six years. It was also stated by the Chairman that this scheme was more favourable than
that of the other re-constructed banks, but 1 think at least on one point it is not so favorable. One of them
begins repayment in four years and finishes in 8-J-. Another begins in five and finishes in seven, and
another one begins even earlier than this. Therefore, with regard to three or four banks at least, the
dates of repayment are more favourable than the time mentioned in this scheme. It is rather late to
begin repayment at the end of six years.
The Chairman : As no one else wishes to ask a question I will now reply. It has been stated by
Mr. Mickle that the date of repayment was too long, but I can only assume that in framing the Scheme on
the other side they desired to make the time as long as they could for realising the assets. There will be
large sums to come back to 1 lepositors as soon as the six years have expired. We know how commonly
it is the practice when properties are put on the market and there are possible buyers, they say, “We
will hold off until such and such an event takes place.” It is better, I think, that the time should be
too long than too short—(cheers). Then Mr. Rabhidge’s point was raised with regard to Trustees.
Originally in the Scheme Trustees were not put on the same footing as the other Creditors, but that
was strongly objected to by the representatives of the Creditors’ Committee, and you see that it has been
expunged and are all now on the same footing—(Cheers). It has also been asked to what extent are the
advances to Depositors to be left to the discretion of the Directors. That discretion is unlimited.
Directors must of necessity have a very large power in dealing with the funds of the Bank, and it is
the duty of those who put their money in Banks to see that they elect to that responsible position men in
whom they have confidence. Now, under this Scheme, the Creditors have the power, as far as London
is concerned, to elect a Director, and on the other side there will be a Government Inspection, but at any
rate the employment of the funds must rest entirely with the Directors, and I do not see how you are
going to limit it. In reply to the question as to what were the Assets of the Bank in London, these I
may state are £54,000, and I suppose when the Bank re-opens its doors this money will be available
to pay interest on Deposits. 1 will now put the resolution.
The resolution was then put to the meeting and carried unanimously.


QUEENSLAND NATIONAL BAM, Limited.
MEETING OF SHAREHOLDERS
HELD AT THE
CITY TERMINUS HOTEL, CANNON STREET, E.C.,
JJ'LY 24th, 1893 ,
EDWYN SANAA'S DAWES, Esq., in the Chair.
The CHAIRMAN : Ladies and Gentlemen, this Meeting of Shareholders, 1 am given to under-
stand, is purely a formal one, not required by any of the Rules that appertain to the Courts in Queensland
dealing with the Banks in suspension. But there is a meeting of shareholders to-day held at Brisbane,
and we were advised that it would be as well that a similar meeting should be called in London
of the shareholders to confirm the resolutions which were passed at the meeting of creditors
held in this room at twelve o’clock to-day. There was a very large attendance, and I am happy
to say that the scheme of re-construction was unanimously accepted. (Hear, hear.) At that meeting
1 set out at some length the general position of affairs, and it is hardly needful for me to go over the
same ground again at this meeting. No doubt there will be a full publication of all that trans-
pired at that meeting, and for my own part I shall be glad to see this one got through as quickly as
possible. But, at the same time lam quite willing, if you wish it, to run over what took place here this
morning. (Hear, hear.)
1 first of all dealt with the arrangements that have been made from the time of the Bank s suspen-
sion up till now. We received the intimation from Brisbane of the closing of the. Banks doors on the
15th May, and almost immediately put ourselves into communication with the principal creditors. Com-
mittees were formed at Edinburgh and Glasgow, where the bulk of the debts were held, and representa-
tives of those committees came up to London to confer with the Directors, and whilst, of course, they did
their very best on behalf of the creditors the Directors must admit that they were most kind and con-
siderate," and even helpful to us in considering the form of re-construction. As you are aware,
several other Australian banks which preceded us in suspending payment, and the Creditors’
representatives, were able to point out many rocks ahead that we ought to avoid. Particularly, they
objected to any attempt to force upon the creditors Preference Shares or Perpetual Deposit Stock in
part payment of their debts. These objections being telegraphed to Brisbane were immediately conceded,
and so cleared away a good deal of difficulty. They made some other suggestions, such, for instance, as
having a Director appointed to the two Boards, in Brisbane and in London, which was conceded as
regards London, but in Brisbane, inasmuch as under the Agreement Act the Government has the right
of inspection of the Bank’s books, the creditors are willing to accept that in place of the appointment
of a Director. The main points of the scheme are these: —
Ist. The calling up of £8 per share out of the £5 uncalled.
2nd. The reduction of the share capital by writing off £2 per share to meet depreciation
in value of securities.
3rd. The agreement with the Government to accept payment of the greater part of their
debt in the same way as ordinary creditors.
4th. The payment of the bulk of the present liabilities by instalments spread over six to
twelve years.
sth. The granting of a discretionary power to the Directors to make advances to creditors on
current accounts against deposit receipts; to pay to creditors on current account a sum not
exceeding £5O, and to pay the Bank’s drafts or acceptances in full.


“ Wool
£4,245,939
“ Gold
2,069,418
‘ ‘ Sugar
589,758
There are certain amendments which appear on the printed scheme in red ink. The most
important of these are the restriction of the dividend to 5 per cent, until the deposit receipts are paid in
full, and the extinguishing of any preference given to trustees. Between the creditors committee and
ourselves, the two most important difficulties that we had to contend with were their claims, first that the
shareholders should he held responsible if they transferred their shares until the creditors were all paid in
full; second, that the dividend should he restricted to 5 per cent. Now we should have been very glad,
being shareholders ourselves, if we could have got over these points entirely. We thought that by
restricting the dividend to 5 per cent, it would to a certain extent discredit the Bank, and we used every
influence we could to get the creditors not to press that point, but without avail. With the exception
of one reconstructed Bank, I believe all have agreed to the restriction of dividends, and upon these
points we came finally to a compromise—we gave in upon the question of the restriction of the
dividend conditionally upon their not insisting upon the liability of the shares until the entire debts were
paid off, which would take under the scheme a period of twelve years, that is, six years before we begin
to pay off at all, and then a portion every six months until it is all liquidated in twelve years. After
that I made a few remarks upon Australian finance generally, but these I need not trouble you with,
and I afterwards dwelt more particularly with the position of affairs in Queensland. I think I might
read to you a paragraph which I noticed in one of the London papers a few days ago, which
must be encouraging to the creditors and also the shareholders of this Bank. It ran as follows .
“ Despite the financial crisis, Queenslanders have no reason to despair of their Colony.
“ With exports of £2O 7s. Bd. per head of the population, against imports of £lO Os. 5d.,
“ less than 50 per cent., she must soon right herself. Official returns have just been
“ issued, showing that the total exports from the Colony last year amounted to £8,578,071,
“ exclusive of live stock overland. The principal items were :
“ The imports for the same period amounted to £4,222,497
I then added from information that had come to my own firm that there was a very large
increase in the production of sugar during the present season, the figures being 81,500 tons as compared
with 60,650 tons last year, and that the trade in frozen meat had also greatly developed. There was
another point that occurred to me as rather important, that is, the very different position which Queens-
land holds in comparison with the Argentine and many other parts of the globe where British capital has
been largely invested, namely, that we have got no depreciated currency to deal with. Queensland
has its own gold currency, and besides raising sufficient gold from her mines for her internal purposes
she exports over £2,000,000 to this country. All this is very encouraging for us of course. The
cause of our present difficulties is the distrust which overtook investors here, and their withdrawal
of deposits which had been so freely given in the past. The Queensland National Bank has paid away
within the last 15 or 18 months £l*loo,ooo of deposits, and owing to a variety of causes, one of which I
ventured to touch upon this morning—very delicately, but still it was necessary to touch upon it is that
following troubles such as the disastrous floods in Brisbane, and the failure of the Banks in
the southern colonies, a certain number of London papers made grossly unfair attacks upon this Bank
by name. Borne of their statements we could not answer in London, but we telegraphed fully to
Brisbane to know how far they were correct, and we were told that they were absolutely unfounded. But
still, it is very difficult to allay distrust after so public an attack had been made, and we found that
every single deposit as it became due was lifted without any exception. Under these circustances the
London Board came to the conclusion that the Bank must be prepared to pay off the whole of
the deposits falling due during the year 1893. We thought that it would be wiser to follow the example
of the Banks in the south rather than go on bleeding to death, where some of the creditors,
those who were most in the rear, would be left at a disadvantage. We accordingly telegraphed to the
head office recommending that, unless they saw their way to pay off all the deposits falling due this year
and yet have the means of carrying on business in a creditable manner, that the Bank should follow
the example of the South and suspend at once. Accordingly this was done. It was a very painful step
to take, and one which we, as shareholders, looking to our dividends from the Bank, and also having
considerable pride in an institution that had done good work for many years and was held in the very
highest credit, were very loth to take. It was painful to us to have to face a measure which would for
some time to come put us in a very secondary position, but I think, gentlemen, you will agree that
under all the circumstances we took the wisest course. Now, although we have not got all that we


could wish from this scheme of reconstruction, we have an arrangement both fair and reasonable-
We have had it accepted to-day unanimously by the creditors, and I hope that this meeting will come
to the conclusion that the Bank officials have acted wisely under very difficult and painful circum-
stances, and, by your unanimous vote, show your confidence in what has been done. (Cheers.)
With your permission, gentlemen, I beg to move the resolution, which is precisely the same as was
passed unanimously at the creditors’ meeting this morning:—
“ That this meeting, having considered the scheme of arrangement proposed between the said
“ Bank and its creditors referred to in the order of the Supreme Court of Queensland,
“ dated 30th June, 1898, a copy of which scheme is hereto annexed, hereby agrees to the
“ said scheme subject to the amendments shown in red ink on the annexed copy.”
Me. VICAEY GIBBS, M.P. ; — Ladies and Gentlemen, 1 have much pleasure in seconding the
resolution which your Chairman has put before you. it is not necessary for me to go at length into the
matter as it has been so fully dealt with by him, but I can most confidently recommend the adoption of
this resolution, for I feel sure that we have been very fairly treated by our creditors in this matter, and
that it is to the interest of everyone of us to set the Bank going again at once, and to put it in a position
to start on what 1 hope will be a prosperous career.
Of course, as you all know, no Bank can continue after its credit is destroyed. Our credit was
destroyed through extraneous causes, for which 1 do not feel that the directors on the other side were
responsible, and therefore 1 see no reason now why in the future it should not again have a very
prosperous career.
I beg to second the resolution.
Me. SCHMITZ : —Before you put the motion, Mr. Chairman, 1. should like to know whether
you have any remarks to offer with regard to paragraph 4. I do not rise in a hostile spirit at all, but I
think the shareholders ought to know what the intentions of the Board are with regard to that paragraph.
You secure hereby the power to issue 175,000 new shares at such times and to such persons, and on
such terms as the directors of the Bank may deem advisable. Ido not think this is a time when bank
shares can be issued, or if they are issued at all they can only be issued at a very heavy discount. There-
fore before the meeting is over I hope the Chairman will give us an explanation with regard to that.
Sie SAUL SAMUEL: According to this scheme it is within the power of the Bank to create
new shares, but 1 think we ought to know on what terms those shares are to be issued. It may be that
they may be created preferential shares, and the holders of the existing shares may be left somewhat
in the background. (Hear, hear.) In fact we may be superseded altogether, and these shares may have
a dividend granted to them which the old shares have not, if I understand this scheme correctly. Ido
not find fault with it, except upon the point which I have just stated. On the contrary, I quite admit
the difficulty which the directors have had to contend with. I cordially endorse their scheme, excepting
that I think we should know how we stand with regard to the creation of these new shares. Now, if 1
understand it correctly, we are not to have more than 5 per cent, dividend until the whole of the existing
creditors are paid off. (Hear, hear.) (A voice : “ Twelve years.”) Ido not object to that, because the
shareholders have the right to protect their creditors as far as they possibly can. (Hear, hear.) But I
do think we ought to know upon what terms these new shares are to be issued, because if they were
to be issued in such a way as will take from us our share of the profits of the Bank after we have started
it again, then I think we ought to be cautious. Knowing the difficulties that the directors have to
contend with, I am sure we are all prepared to meet them in every possible way we can. I believe in
Queensland myself most thoroughly ; I believe the country must advance, as I believe all the Australian
colonies will do as soon as they have got over their present difficulties, which will not be long, but I do
think that, as creditors and as men of business, we ought to know upon what basis these new shares are
to be issued.
Eev. W. BENTLEY : I think it is premature to ask the question now, because by-and-by it may be
possible to issue these shares at a premium, and the existing shareholders will then have an opportunity
of taking them or not. I think it is quite premature to ask such a question. (“ No.”)
Mb. GOWEE: As the Queensland board have conceded the right to the depositors of the election
of a member on the London Board, I think it is only a reasonable and modest request on
the part of the shareholders that they also should be permitted to appoint a director to look after their
interests. (Hear, hear.) I have been a shareholder now for a great many years and this is the first


time within my recollection, and I believe within the history of the bank, that the shareholders on the
London Register have been called together. (Hear, hear.) As a matter of fact we have simply accepted
the report as it came from Brisbane, not having it in our power in any way whatever to make our voices
heard, whatever we might have to say on the subject. I think it is only a matter of justice,to the body
of ladies and gentlemen who hold one-third of the capital of the bank that they should have a v oice in
the conducting of its affairs. If lam in order, Mr. Chairman, if it is permitted to move an amendment
to the present resolution, I should propose it to the meeting that in addition to the scheme as at present
presented to the shareholders one director of the London Board shall be elected by the shareholders on
the London Register. (Hear, hear). 1 beg to repeat my statement that Ido not'think it is an unreason-
able request to make, and I think it will meet, at least I hope it will meet, with the cordial support of
the shareholders present. I have not the least doubt that other gentlemen present will deal with the
other points of the resolution more fully than I am prepared to do, but I think that this amendment
should be proposed. I should like to ask a question upon another point, no information of which is
conveyed in the resolution. We have all been led to believe by the reports which have been issued from
time to time by the Brisbane board that a sum amounting to nearly £500,000 has been placed to reserve.
(Hear, hear.) I should like to know for the information of myself and my brother shareholders in what
way this reserve fund has been invested, whether it has simply been used as floating capital of the bank
or whether it has been invested in securities such as could be readily realised if necessary. Taking into
consideration the fact that the £500,000 is practically the property of the shareholders, having been duly
earned from the bank and deducted from the earnings, thereby lessening the dividends paid, I think the
shareholders are justified in asking in what manner this money has been invested, whether, as I said
before, in liquid securities or whether it has been used in the general business of the bank and invested
in securities that are at present not realisable, and if it has followed the fate of all other investments
and been depreciated.
Me. DAVID BAIN ; I beg to second that.
A SHAREHOLDER : I cannot exactly understand in paragraph I. how the shareholders will stand
as regards the paid-up amount on each share. 1 see you propose making a call of £3 on each share,
making altogether £8 out of a possible £lO. According to paragraph 11., I see £2 of the £lO is to be
cancelled, bringing it back to the nominal value of £8 per share. W ill you please say how much the old
shareholders are to be credited with as paid up on that £8 share.
Me. HARRIS : I should like to know whether it is the intention of the Board that the new shares
shall be preference shares or ordinary shares, because it would be a very bad thing for the ordinary
shareholders, the present shareholders, if you issue 6 per cent, preference shares. There would then be
very little chance for the ordinary shareholders to get a dividend at all. So it is well that we should
know whether if at any future time you issue new shares, they are to be preference shares or not.
A SHAREHOLDER : I think the most serious part of this scheme to shareholders, and it requires a
little more attention on our part before we decide to advocate it, is the reduction of £2 per share.
I should imagine that that means £2 off £5, so that we should then be credited with £3, and we shall
then have to pay up £3 more, making it £6 per share. I should like to know whether this depreciation
is perfectly hopeless —you seem to think it is—whether the money is actually lost. As there are 200,000
shares 1 suppose there is a loss of £400,000. In the accounts that we have had submitted to us from time
to time there has been a reserve fund referred to of nearly £500,000 —£480,000 1 think. \\ ould not it
have been better to have taken off this sum from the reserve fund —(Hear, hear) —leaving shares just as
they were before. Will you please, sir, in your reply tell us whether that reserve fund is altogether lost,
and if so, whether that would amount to a loss of £BOO,OOO, which, I suppose, is due not to extraneous
circumstances, as the seconder of this motion said, but to the mismanagement of the general manager in
Queensland. That gentleman has had connection with another bank, and he has caused an immense
loss to that company, and I am afraid he has caused an immense loss to this Company, too.
I do not know him personally, but I am afraid that there is much truth in what I say,
and that as long as he remains our general manager we shall always incur great risk of
losin<>- money With regard to this limitation of the dividend to 5 per cent., i imagine that the meeting
is mostly in favour of it. (Hear, hear.) But I should like to point this out, that the first intimation I
have had of this is since I came into this room. I think it is sprung upon us rather I should
also like to ask you, sir, with regard to the amount you are going to call up, whether there is any pro-
vision made for the paying off of the whole amount in one sum. These instalments are spread over a


number of months, and many shareholders whose holding is not large may prefer to pay off the whole in
one amount. If a shareholder did pay off the whole in one amount, would he receive the same dividend
upon it as if he had paid it by instalments ?
Sib SAUL SAMUEL : I think the difficulty which I have mentioned may be got rid of if no new
shares are issued until the consent of the shareholders has been obtained. At present the
directors have the power to issue 175,000 new shares on any terms or conditions which they
may decide. Of course, as I pointed out before, they may decide to make the issue on
terms injurious to the present shareholders. If the present shareholders are invited to attend
a meeting in the usual way and they consent to the arrangement there will be no objection. But
I think it is too much power to give to the directors that they should issue these new shares without the
consent of the present shareholders. If the words “ with the consent of the existing shareholders ” were
put in I think it would meet my objection. I do not desire to put any difficulty in the way of the
directors, on the contrary I should like this resolution to be passed unanimously.
The CHAIEMAN : I will deal first with this enquiry of Sir Saul Samuel’s, namely, the issue of
preference shares.
Sib SAUL SAMUEL : Did I understand you to say preference shares ?
The CHAIEMAN : New shares.
A SHAEEHOLDEE : You said preference shares.
The CHAIEMAN : The first part of your remarks I understood referred to preference shares.
The discussion arose here and I thought you followed it up. Whether the new shares are to
be preference or ordinary I will come to later. I was going to say that the creditors’ representatives for
a long time contended that new capital should be, provided before the Bank opened its doors again and
we were stuck at that point for some time. We contended, and we got the same information from the
other side, that to attempt to issue new capital at the present time would result in failure, that
now is not the time to attempt to issue new shares whether ordinary or preference. This clause
it is true as it stands here gives to the scheme the power to issue preference shares on any terms
that the directors may think fit, but I am advised by Mr. Stirling that a legal point conies in here,
that all this is governed by the Articles of Association, and that no new capital either ordinary or
preference can be issued without the sanction of the shareholders in general meeting. (Cheers). But
in any case that you may be perfectly certain that those who have the control of the affairs of this Bank
are not going to create new capital on terms disadvantageous to the existing shareholders if it can
possibly be avoided. Under this reconstruction scheme we are striving to avoid disaster, and I may
add that we cannot alter it by resolution, you may reject it if you like but we cannot accept any
amendments to it.
A SHAEEHOLDEE : Nor additions ?
The CHAIEMAN : We can propose them.
[One of the shareholders here left the meeting.]
I am afraid my clumsiness has given offence and have explained myself very badly. What I
wanted to say was this, that 1 understand no amendments to the scheme can be put forward without
going a long way towards wrecking the Bank. There will be no attempt to issue preference shares at
a disadvantage to the present shareholders, and when the time comes for their issue all shareholders
will be duly communicated with, and will be able to express an opinion upon it.
A SHAEEHOLDEE : A meeting of the shareholders will be called ?
The CHAIEMAN : The Articles of Association show it must be done.
The SHAEEHOLDEE ; Will those Articles of Association stand for the new Bank ?
Mr. STEELING (Solicitor to the Bank): Yes ; they are only altered to the extent that is specified
in the first resolution.
The SHAEEHOLDEE : But I take it the shareholders in the new Bank have a perfect right
to discuss those articles.


Mr. STIRLING : There is no new Bank.
The SHAREHOLDER : Under the reconstruction scheme we are called upon to pay £8 a share
more. It is a new Bank.
Me. STIRLING : It is the same Bank.
The SHAREHOLDER : You may call it by any legal term you like, but it is a new Bank.
[A voice : “ No, it is not.”]
Another SHAREHOLDER : It is a resuscitation.
The CHAIRMAN : There is no new Bank. This is a reconstruction, the old Bank going on,
and we are going by the same Articles of Association as we have done in the past. “ The directors may
“ at any time after the said 50,000 shares shall have been all issued (reads down to) capital of the
“ Company.”
Sir SAUL SAMUEL : Might 1 suggest the addition of these words in clause 4, which I think will
meet my objection : “ But the creation of 175,000 new shares shall not be issued without the consent
“of the shareholders.” The Bank is about to be reconstructed under the Colonial Act, I take it, and
our old regulations, the regulations of the old Bank, do not apply. 1 nder that clause the directors can
issue 175,000 new shares upon such terms as they like, and that may be to the injury of the present
shareholders. (Hear, hear.) In order to guard against that I suggest that the consent of the share-
holders should be obtained. (Hear, hear.) I think that is an amendment which can be put without
difficulty, and without interfering in any way with the conditions under which it is proposed to re-
construct the Bank.
The CHAIRMAN : This is a legal question, and I would prefer that Mr. Stirling should
reply to it.
Me. STIRLING : I may explain that under the scheme the Bank will continue the same Bank.
There will not be a new Bank, as in the case of many of the other re-constructed Banks, to take over the
assets and liabilities of the existing Bank, but the Queensland National Bank will continue as it is without
the formation of a new Bank.
Sir SAUL SAMUEL; I take it, under different conditions?
Me. STIRLING : The only different conditions are those specified in the first clause of the scheme
of re-arrangement, namely, those five sub-sections which appear there relating to the issue of new shares.
New shares must still be issued, as at present, under the existing constitution of the Bank, which states
that no new shares shall be issued without the consent and by the authority of an Extraordinary General
Meeting of the Bank. (Cheers.)
Sir SAUL SAMUEL : May I ask if you are quite clear that those old conditions will apply under
the new state of things ?
Mr. STIRLING : Quite clear.
Sir SAUL SAMUEL : Has not a winding-up order been issued ?
Mr. STIRLING : No winding-up order has been made in Queensland, but one has been made in
London.
Sir SAUL SAMUEL ; I confess I am speaking without book—l have not considered the
matter very much. May I ask whether the new Bank—you say there is to be no new Bank, it is to be
simply a re-arrangement ?
Mr. STIRLING : Simply a re-arrangement.
Sir SAUL SAMUEL: Without any registration under the Companies’ Act which exists in
Queensland, may I ask whether the Bank will be able to carry on business under the old Articles of
Association ?
Mr. STIRLING : So we are advised.
Sir SAUL SAMUEL : Can you speak with certainty ?


Mr. STIRLING : I am not personally acquainted with Queensland.
Sib SAUL SAMUEL : It is a very important point.
Me. STIRLING: The Bank has acted under the best legal advice in Queensland, and that 'is
their advice.
Sir SAUL SAMUEL : I know the difficulty the Directors are in, and I do not wish in any way
to increase that difficulty, but I have to consider my own interests as a large shareholder, and I ask to
have the assurance of the Local Board here, so far as they are able to give it us, that no increase of
capital will take place without the consent of the existing shareholders. (Cheers.)
Me. YICARY GIBBS : You will readily understand that we cannot speak of our own knowledge
in this matter. All we can do is to place ourselves in the best legal hands to protect our interests and
yours. You have already been informed by our solicitor on this side that the legal advice on the other
side assures us that the answer which Sir Saul Samuel requires can be given in a satisfactory way to
him. We can do no more. It will be no use your chairman or myself saying that we think it is so,
because it would add no weight whatever to what you have been told. As to the issue of new shares,
you must all remember that no new shares can be issued or shall be issued by any board of directors
except it be in the interests of the Bank that those shares should be issued, and that is, in the interests
of yourselves as shareholders. We cannot wish to issue new shares for any purpose except for that of
benefiting and developing the property of the Bank. It has already been explained that no new shares
can be issued except with the consent of the shareholders at a general meeting. (Cheers.)
Sir SAUL SAMUEL: That quite satisfies me.
Me. GOOD : I quite accept the assurance that no new shares can be issued without the consent
of the shareholders, but that extraordinary meeting may he held in Brisbane, and therefore we should
have no voice whatever at that meeting. That is the objection we have. We want you to give us an
assurance that our consent will be necessary as well as that of the shareholders on the other side.
Mb. VICARY GIBBS : That is one of the difficulties of investing your capital in another country.
Unless you can send out powers of attorney, and have yourselves represented in Brisbane, of course you
cannot assent yourselves as shareholders, but you must remember that there would be no priority or
advantage given to Queensland shareholders over London shareholders, and that the interests of Queens-
land shareholders and of London shareholders would be identical. Therefore it is to be presumed that
anything which would be satisfactory to them in the way of an issue of new capital would be satisfactory
to you.
[Cries of “ Vote ! Vote ! ”]
Mr. GOWER : May I repeat my question, relative to the appointment of a director on the London
Board, and as to what has become of the Reserve Fund ?
The CHAIRMAN : I understand you wish your views to be sent to the Head Office, and that 1
will undertake shall be done..
Mr. GOWER: Can that be done now. Can the views of the present meeting be taken on the
subject by special resolution ? This is not a resolution antagonistic to the scheme in any way: it is an
addition : and 1 think from what I have heard that it is the general feeling of tire shareholders that they
should have a representative on the London Board, not that they doubt the ability of the present Board,
but they have no voice whatever in the election of those gentlemen—they are not allowed to. Let their
opinion be known upon this question. I think it is only a modest and a reasonable request that a body
of shareholders holding one-third of the capital of this Bank should be permitted to have their voices
heard so far as the London Board is concerned, and I therefore, with all due submission to what you
said just now that no resolution antagonistic to this scheme can be passed, beg to say that this is not in
antagonism, but it is rather an addition to the scheme, and a very modest addition, and I beg the
present body of shareholders to support me in my proposal. I think it is a question which greatly
affects the present shareholders, because a representation going from the Board upon which these share-
holders on the London register are represented would have great weight with the Board in any scheme
that they might bring up with regard to the issue of new shares or anything else. After the dissolution
of this meeting the shareholders go East, West, North, and South, and possibly we shall never meet one
another again without a special meeting is called. I therefore move, before this meeting dissolves, that
an addition to the present scheme may lie carried by the shareholders on the London register, namely,
that a representative of that body should be elected on the London Board. (Cheers.)


Mr. VICAEY GIBBS : Perhaps, ladies and gentlemen, you will allow me to say a few words in
reply to the gentleman who has just spoken. Of course we quite understand from what he has been
good enough to say that his desire to have another director representing the shareholders on the London
board is not made in any spirit of want of confidence in ourselves (hear, hear), or in any spirit of hostility,
and it certainly does seem at first sight, I quite agree, a most reasonable and proper proposition. But I
should like to point out what is to be said on the other side, not at all as opposing the proposal of the
last speaker but merely so that you may see the whole matter. In the first place, of course, the whole
board have given their abilities and industry entirely to the consideration of the interests of the share-
holders. That I can answer for. None of us are interested in our creditors except in doing what we
believe to be honourable and right by them, so far as our position would enable us to do so. In that of
course we felt we should only be doing what you would wish in endeavouring to meet them in every
possible way. But in every other respect, all along we have acted for the shareholders, and I want you
before you make up your minds on this question to understand exactly what the duties of the London
board of the Bank were, because it is important that you should not exaggerate their power or exaggerate
anything which the London board may do for you, however willing they may be. You must understand
that they can have no control over the business of the Bank, as it is undertaken at all. Their business
is the taking in of money and investing it on the Stock Exchange from time to time, or in lending it out
to discount houses and so on, manipulating the money which is placed in the Bank in London for short
periods. That is the bulk of their duties, and I want you to understand that they cannot manage the
Bank, and therefore if you put any shareholder on the Bank, although he might be a much more capable
man than we are, he could not do anything different for you than we have done. And I want you also
to understand that it is most important in the interests of the Bank that there should be absolute
harmony between the local and subordinate and advisory board in London and the main board which
manage the Bank in Brisbane. That is the reason why the Brisbane board has appointed the London
board. You must also remember that the bulk of the shareholders, three-quarters of the shareholders,
are in Queensland, and the success or failure of this Bank must depend, unless there is gross neglect or
incompetence on the London board, provided they do their duty in the ordinary way, upon the manage-
ment in Queensland, and not on the management in London. If anybody in the London Bank interfered
with the management of the head office in Queensland, that would render banking impossible. I have
put these matters before you, but at the same time I am sure there is not a single member of the board
who would not be most happy to make way for any gentleman who had the confidence of the share-
holders in a higher degree than those who at present, I hope I may say, enjoy it. I think I have put the
matter perfectly clearly before you, and it is for you, as a body, to ask us to convey any message which
you like, or anything which you think fit to say, to the head office, and we shall be most happy to put it
before them for their consideration.
Sir SAUL SAMUEL : 1 am sorry to have to intrude again upon the meeting, but I do not think
any good is to be obtained by putting a director upon the London Board. But I would like to say this,
that I think for a long time past the Queensland Board, the head office, has consisted of too few directors.
If I recollect aright, a resolution was passed some few years ago, by which the directors were to number
five, but I do not think that they have ever got to that number. That is a point well deserving the
attention of the shareholders. We ought to insist upon the full number of the Board being appointed.
1 think it is a great mistake to have so limited a number on the Queensland Board as we have hitherto
had, and I think perhaps that we should have been benefited if we had had another member on that
Board. But with regard to the appointment of another member, or an outside member, to the Board in
London, which is only a branch of the head office, having no control whatever of the management of the
affairs of the Bank, I think it would do no good, and I am not certain whether it would not be a great
mistake. I think it would be. We had better leave the Board in London ; it is a very good Board, and
I hope we shall have the same Board continuing to manage the affairs of the Bank as well as they can.
But it is to the head office we have to look, and therefore we want additional strength. The shareholders
at one time were quite alive to that, but somehow or other it has not been followed up. We don’t want
to interfere with the very happy family which exists there, but we want an addition to it.
Mb. GO WEE: It is in no hostile spirit to the Board that I make my suggestion, nor do I suppose that
if another gentleman is elected the business of the Bank will be conducted on other lines than it has been
hitherto, but I do think that if the shareholders on the London register are called together once a year,
in order to elect a gentleman to the London Board, it will enable the London shareholders to express an
opinion as to the way in which the Bank has been managed. I think that such an expression of opinion
going through the London Board would have great weight with the directors in the colony—it must


necessarily have, unless the London Board is treated as of no significance whatever. 1 therefore, with
all due submission to Sir Saul Samuel, think that the election of a gentleman to the London Board to
represent the London shareholders specially, would be advantageous, and I must therefore press the
question. (Renewed cries of “ Vote !”)
The CHAIRMAN : These points are extremely interesting, but they do not meet the question we
have before us, namely, the reconstruction scheme. Sir Saul Samuel says, and I quite agree with him,
that if the shareholders wish to take measures to protect their interests, they should move in the direction
of having a stronger Board at Brisbane. (Hear, hear.) We really can do nothing. It is quite open to
the shareholders to appoint somebody to represent their views on this matter in Brisbane. If
you do not do that, we can but take note of your views, and convey them by letter to Brisbane
if you wish it. One gentleman said that a matter had been sprung upon him, viz., that of the
restriction of the dividend to 5 per cent.—that he had not known it till ho came to this room. Well, I
must say that we here did not know it until we came to town this morning. It was one of
the conditions, as I endeavoured to explain at an earlier stage, that the creditors’ committee
had urged upon us ; their recommendations had been telegraphed to Brisbane, and it was only to-day that
we had official knowledge that they had agreed, on the other side, to that restriction. So you see we
could not possibly have given you the information any earlier. On the receipt of that information the
creditors’ committee were prepared to support this reconstruction scheme, whereas if it had not been
yielded they would have opposed it, and we might have had very great difficulty in carrying it, even
if we had not broken down altogether in our efforts. I think I have said all that I can say on the
subject.
You know the shares at present are £lO, and £5 are paid. £2 out of the £5 is to be written off,
reducing the shares to £B. There is to be a call of £3, and then there will be £6 paid up. After the
£8 is paid there will be no further liability.
A SHAREHOLDER : £3 is to be called up ?
The CHAIRMAN ; Yes, leaving a liability of £2. £2 is to be written off, and the reserve fund
will go to meet the anticipated depreciation of securities or assets. The reserve fund thus disappears.
A SHAREHOLDER : May I ask the nature of the investment of the reserve fund at present ?
The CHAIRMAN : There are no special investments set aside for the reserve fund, it is with the
other funds of the Bank.
The SHAREHOLDER : Am I to understand that the whole of that £500,000 has disappeared ?
The CHAIRMAN : None of it has disappeared at present.
The SHAREHOLDER : Then there still remains a reserve fund of £500,000 ?
The CHAIRMAN : £2 per share will be written off'.
The SHAREHOLDER : Then that is lost ?
The CHAIRMAN : £2 will be written off, and the reserve fund will be written off to meet
anticipated reductions in assets when they can be realised.
A SHAREHOLDER: I understand that this Bank is going to be reconstructed without
changing its name, and you tell us that it is anticipated that this £2 per share and the reserve fund is
going to be lost, and only 6 per cent, dividend is to be paid until 12 years have expired. Now, supposing
the Australian resources get better, and all these large loans that are now out on lands in Australia do
eventually bring in a certain amount of money, what will become of the surplus after 5 per cent, has
been paid to the shareholders. Will it, at the end of the 12 years, be divided among the existing share-
holders who are now losing it, or what will become of it ?
Me. LINDSAY : I take it that there is no necessity to call in the money lent on lands as there
are six years in which to pay off the existing liabilities, and the question arises to my mind whether the
property will not be worth as much as was lent upon it.
The CHAIRMAN : A gentleman asked what would happen if the properties upon which the


Bank has advanced money and the various assets of the Bank yielded 20/- in the £. The re-construction
scheme says:
“ That no dividend in excess of 5 per cent, shall be paid on the ordinary shares until all
the instalments of the substituted deposit receipts shall have been paid with interest, and until
such payment any divisible surplus profits after payment of the dividend on any preference
shares for the time being issued, and a 5 per cent, dividend on the ordinary shares shall be
carried to the reserve fund. Until such payment the reserve fund shall not be applicable to
payment of dividends on ordinary shares, but after such payment the amount of such surplus
profits which may in the meantime have been carried to the reserve fund as aforesaid or any
part thereof, may, if the directors see fit be distributed rateably among the holders for the time
being of the ordinary shares, or otherwise dealt with according to the regulations of the Bank
for the time being in force.”
I am sure we shall all be delighted if the anticipations of these gentlemen are correct, I have had a
private note from the general manager on this question. He said “I am afraid the shareholders will be
very angry about this reduction in the shares and the appropriation of the reserve fund. The other re-con-
structed banks have all announced that their assets are good, I have no reason to believe that our assets
are not equally good, but there is sure to be a very large depreciation on the realisation which is going
on, not only with this Bank but with all the other banks.” You must consider the millions of money
that are now locked up in these banks which have suspended payment, and which will have to be repaid
four, five or six years hence. Pressure must be put on the owners of property to pay back their advances
and in many cases they will not be able to do so without selling their properties. This morning one of
our creditors objected to so long a period as six years, and said four should be plenty. My impression
is that six years will be little enough. During the next six years the many properties which the Australian
Banks have advanced upon will have to be realised, and the directors on the other side have acted wisely in
my opinion in making provision for losses in anticipation. Recognising the fact that the properties will have
to be sold to repay advances, if we have not got ample provision in advance for the depreciation that
will inevitably take place, the losses year by year will have to go to the debit of profit and loss account.
It is far better to make provision for probable losses than have to deal with them in that manner, not
being able possibly to pay a 5 per cent, dividend. The Bank would become discredited, we should get
no further deposits, and in a few years it might become a poor attenuated concern. I say that the
Directors on the other side who have initiated this measure have acted boldly and wisely in your interests,
and if happily things are not so bad in tire future as is anticipated, the money so set aside will come
to credit after the depositors have been paid in full.
A SHAREHOLDER : Can the call be paid in full now instead of by instalments ?
The CHAIRMAN ; The articles provide that any shareholder may in anticipation pay up calls on
such terms as the Directors may approve. In most banks the practice is to give the same interest as is
paid upon deposits ; under this scheme we are to pay 44- per cent. 1 have no doubt that any shareholder
who wishes to relieve himself of Iris liability will be allowed to pay up the £8 in advance, and even the
£2 that is not called.
Mr. GOWER : Will you give us the assurance that the wishes of this meeting will be conveyed to
tire Brisbane Board to the effect that, in their opinion, an annual meeting of the London shareholders
should be called, and at that meeting a Director representing them should be appointed to the London
Board. Will you give us the assurance that that desire will be sent to the Brisbane Board ?
The CHAIRMAN : I give you the assurance that a letter shall be written conveying your wishes.
The Resolution was then put and carried unanimously.


In tf)c Jffigi) (Uourt of Dustier.
COMPANIES WINDING UP.
Mr. Justice Vaughan Williams.
In the Matter of the COMPANIES ACTS, 1H62 to 1890 :
In the Matter of the JOINT STOCK COMPANIES ARRANGEMENT ACT, 1870 :
In the Matter of the QUEENSLAND NATIONAL BANK, LIM1IEI)
PROCEEDINGS at (I Meeting called by Order of the Court, of the Creditors of the
above-named Company (other than the Government and holders, if any, of Bank
Notes of the Company, and other Creditors, if any, entitled in respect of rates,
taxes, wages or other claims, if any, payable in, fall or In priority in the
winding up of the Company) for the purpose of considering and, if thought fit,
approving, with or without modification, a Scheme of Arrangement proposed
between the Company and, its Creditors, held at the C.IJi A OA SIREEI HOIEL,
London, E.C., on Tuesday, Bth August, 189,1.
C. J. STEWART, Esq., (the Official Receiver and Provisional Liquidator) presiding.
The Official Receiver : Ladies and gentlemen, this meeting has been called under the provisions
of the Joint Stock Companies’ Arrangement Act in England, in order to bind the creditors in England
to the same scheme to which you assented at the last meeting held here. That meeting was held on the
24th of July, and the creditors then present unanimously adopted the scheme. On the 27th of July, a
meeting was held in Brisbane, at which the scheme was unanimously assented to also, and the Court
in Brisbane sanctioned the scheme on the 31st of July. On the same day the High Court of Justice
under an order of Mr. Justice Vaughan Williams, ordered this meeting to be held, and the Bank actually
reopened in Brisbane on the 2nd of August. A print has been received this morning of the Act, under
which this agreement between the Creditors of the Queensland National Bank and the Bank has been
agreed to, as in Queensland there has been no liquidation, and it is not proposed that there should be any
liquidation, the compromise being come to under an Act which was passed and assented to on the 29th
of June, 1898, an Act which is similar to an Act which has been in operation for some time in the other
Australian Colonies. The object of that Act was to permit the Government of the Colony to defer
enforcing the claims which, as you are aware, amounted to something like £2,700,000 when the winding
up order was made here. Since that date some £860,000 has been paid out of the London assets under
an order of the Court to the Government, thus leaving the Government Creditors for £2,360,000 in round
figures. Ido not propose, gentlemen to go into the scheme or the position of the Bank at this meeting,
that, as I understand, has been fully explained to you at the last meeting which was held, by the
Chairman of the Bank, Mr. Dawes. 1 would simply point out to you that this is a scheme which appears
to be one which is very beneficial from the Creditor’s form of view, as by the arrangement which was
come to the ordinary Creditors are practically put on the same footing as the Government in respect to
their claims, the Government being under their powers preferential creditors for the whole amount. Ihe
Government, however, does not finally withdraw its claims, but it is permitted to take in respect ot these
claims certain promises for repayment by twelve half-yearly instalments, exactly on the same terms as
the creditors. But in the last clause of the Act it says —“ Nothing in this Act or in any agreement
entered into under the authority of this Act shall prejudice or affect the right of the Government to
enforce payment of any debt due by the Bank to the Government in priority to all other creditors of the
Bank in the event of the Bank making default in carrying out any agreement made under the provisions
of this Act or of the Bank being wound up.” The Bank was never registered under the Joint Stock
Companies’ Act in England, and as you now see has a London Register of Shareholders, comprising 971


shareholders, bolding 42,776 shares, with aßrishane Board, and a London office with a Board of Directors
also. It is right that I should read you one cable message which was received by the Official Receiver from
the General Manager in. Brisbane on the 29th of June : “ The Colonial Treasury after careful investigation
reported to Parliament Queensland National Bank perfectly solvent.’’ In the statement of assets and liabili-
ties submitted from the balance sheet, made up to the 15th of May —no formal statement of affairs has been
submitted —there appears to be, after providing for capital, a surplus of £367,000. That would be the
provision in the Bank’s books for the large amount of advances amounting to £7,468,000. You will
notice under the scheme that there is £2 a share written off the capital, so that there will be a surplus
on paper, assuming all the assets to be good, of something like £687,000, as against book debts amounting
to £7,468,000. Ido not know that there is any other matter that I need bring to your notice to-day.
If there is any question that any creditor desires information on, I shall be pleased to give it him if it is
in my power.
Mr. C. E. Barnett: Ladies and Gentlemen, you have heard the statement of the Official Receiver,
and you further heard, some days ago a statement made to you by the Chairman of the Bank on which
certain resolutions were passed unanimously. I will not therefore detain you at this time, but will
merely move the formal resolution which has been put into my hands. It is—“ That this meeting
“ having considered the Scheme of Arrangement proposed between the Queensland National Bank and its
“ Creditors, set forth in the Schedule to the Order of the Court of the 31st of July, 1898, hereby approves
“ of the said Scheme, subject to the amendment of Clause 7, by inserting the letter (A) between the
“words ‘clause’ and ‘ negotiable,’ and the letter (B) between the words ‘or’ and ‘inscribed’ in that
“ Clause.” I beg to move that resolution.
The Official Receiver : Will any Gentleman second the resolution
Mr. Robert E. Whatmoee : 1 will second that resolution.
The Official Receiver : Before putting the resolution, Gentlemen, I may say that the amend-
ments appear to be only of a formal character. They seem merely to emphasize the discretion which the
Creditors have, so that in lieu of taking Deposit Receipts they may take Negotiable Deposit Receipts, or
Inscribed Deposit Stock. I understand the London Directors will issue a Circular to the Creditors
giving them the opportunity of exercising discretion as to which class they wish to take—Negotiable
Deposit Receipts, Inscribed Deposit Stock, or Deposit Receipts. The following is the resolution I have
to submit to the meeting :
“ That this meeting having considered the Scheme of Arrangement proposed between the Queensland
“ National Bank and its Creditors set forth in the Schedule to the Order of the Court of the 31st of
“ July, 1898, hereby approves of the said Scheme subject to the amendment of Clause 7 by inscri-
bing the letter (A) between the words ‘clause’ and ‘ negotiable,’ and the letter (B) between the
“ words ‘ or ’ and ‘ inscribed ’ in that Clause.”
Those Creditors who are in favor of the resolution will please signify the same by holding up their
hands. Those who are opposed to it. (To a Creditor) :Do you wish to dissent from the Scheme, sir?
Mr. W. J. Vincent : Yes.
The Official Receiver ; I conclude you do not wish for a vote to be taken. Will it be sufficient
for your purpose if you signify your dissent in writing ?
Mr. Vincent : In the first Scheme there was some provision made for Trustees. That has been
scratched out, or erased in some way or another.
The Official Receiver : I will only point out to you the fact of the Scheme having been
sanctioned.
Mr. Vincent : lamin a somewhat peculiar position myself. I had trust money, and 1 paid the
trust money over four months ago.
The Official Receiver : What is your difficulty ? There is no further liability imposed than
you are under at the present time.
Mr. Vincent : No, I suppose not,
The Resolution was then put and carried, with one dissentient.
The Proceedings then terminated.


PROCEEDINGS
At a Meeting of CONTRIBUTORIES of the QUEENSLAND NATIONAL
BANK, LIMITED, held at the Cannon Street Hotel, London,
on Tuesday, the Bth of August, 1893.
C. J. STEWART, Esq., (the Official Receiver and Provisional Liquidator) presiding.
The Official Receiver : Ladies and Gentlemen, Ido not propose to detain you long. You have
already had the Scheme of Arrangement before you, 1 think on one occasion, on the 24th of July, when
you unanimously approved the proposal. Since that date the Court at Brisbane, on the 31st of July,
sanctioned the scheme, the Bank reopened in Brisbane, I am informed on August the 2nd, and this
morning a copy of the Act under which this arrangement is come to, has reached me. The Bill was
assented to on the 29th of June of this year, and gives power to the Government to enter into the
arrangement now set out in the scheme. The only point I think in which the shareholders are affected,
is the reduction of capital, namely, by £ 320,000, and the limitation of dividend to 5 per cent, until the
payment off of the creditors’ claims is made. Under Clause 1, sub-section 5, there is a provision that
any surplus profits after the 5 per cent, should be carried to a reserve fund, and after the payment off
of the deposit receipts the Directors may, in their discretion, distribute that fund rateably amongst the holders
of the ordinary shares, or otherwise deal with it according to the regulations of the Bank. The one other
point is the issuing of preference shares, and that, I understand, was explained to you on the last occasion
by Mr. Stirling, the explanation being that the Bank at the present time with the consent of the share-
holders, has the power to issue preference shares. In all these schemes it must necessarily mean
something to be given up, and in many schemes, or at all events two to my knowledge, shareholders have
had to increase their liability to a considerable amount. In this case there is no increase of liability, and
the calls are, at all events, as far as one can see, for the present limited to £3 per share and in fact the
whole of the call will be spread over nearly three years, whereas with a forced liquidation the call could
be made, of course, at much shorter intervals.
Mr. 0. E. Barnett : Gentlemen, you heard at the last meeting the whole details of the Scheme,
which were discussed at considerable length. I think, therefore, it is not the least necessary for me to
detain you to-day in giving you any of those points which were so fully talked over. I will therefore
formally propose the resolution put into my hands, to this effect:
“ That this meeting having considered the Scheme of Arrangement proposed between the
“ Queensland National Bank and its Creditors set forth in the Schedule to the Order of the Court of
“ the 31st of July, 1893, hereby, approves of the said Scheme subject to the amendment of Clause 7,
“by inserting the letter (A) between the words ‘ clause ’ and ‘ negotiable,’ and the letter (B)
“ between the words ‘ or ’ and ‘ inscribed ’ in that clause.”
This, as was explained this morning, is really an alteration of no value in the wording of the Scheme;
it simply rather accentuates the paragraph No. 7.
Mr. Amherst : Mr. Chairman, may I ask one question with reference to the liability ? Will the
bank under this scheme have power to continue to issue notes for which the shareholders will be liable ?
The Official Receiver : That appears to be so.
Mr. Amherst : Then the liability is indefinite ?
The Official Receiver : I take it that is the same position as the Bank was in before. The posi-
tion is not changed as regards that. Will any gentleman second this resolution ?
Mr. Hall : I have much pleasure in seconding the scheme.
The Official Receiver : These appear to be simply formal amendments.
Mr. Gower : Before you put that to the meeting, might I ask a question ? I was under the
impression that at the meeting held on the 24th, in answer to several questions by Sir Saul Samuel to


the then Chairman, the Bank could not issue preference shares without calling the shareholders
together. (Hear, hear.) That statement was confirmed by the Solicitor, who sat on the Chairman’s
left, namely, that no further issue of preference shares could be made until the Shareholders had been
called together. It appears, however, that there is some misapprehension on the subject, for I under-
stood you to say that the Bank had that power, that is the power to issue preference shares to the
detriment of the present shareholders.
Mr. Stirling : What I said at the last meeting was that the issue of preference shares must
be authorised by a meeting of shareholders, but no doubt it is part of the scheme.
Mr. Gower : May I take it that no issue of preference shares will take place until the share-
holders have been again called together, and their vote taken on this subject?
Mr, Stirling : I consider that is necessary.
Mr. Gower : The English shareholders ?
Mr. Stirling : A meeting of the shareholders must be held.
Mr. Gower : That is the Colonial shareholders ?
Mr. Stirling : The Colonial and English shareholders ; but whether the shareholders in England
would have notice in time, I cannot answer. Ido not know what the practice is.
Mr. Gower : There is another question which arose at the last meeting, to which the gentleman
then presiding promised his attention, that notice should be sent to the Brisbane Board, asking their
consent to a suggestion which was thrown out and almost unanimously adopted by the shareholders
present, namely, that the shareholders on the London register should be called together annually, so as
to be able to express their opinions as to the manner in which the bank was managed. The shareholders
on the London register have an interest of nearly one-fourth of the capital of the Bank, and up to the
present time they have practically had no voice whatever in the management of its affairs. I would beg
to draw your attention, sir, to that fact.
Mr. Barnett ; I understand from Mr. Stirling that the point has been sent out to the Board at
Brisbane, and will no doubt receive their attention. We can give no undertaking on their part here.
Mr. Gower : Another point was raised at the same meeting, namely, as to the representation of
the Shareholders on the London Register upon the London Board. Speaking with every possible respect
to the Gentlemen who now form the London Board, and who doubtless give every possible attention and
care to your business, still they are simply nominees of the Brisbane Board. Ido not know in what way
they are elected, and it was thought it would be desirable if the Shareholders on the London Register
were called together annually, that they might have a voice in the election of the retiring members of the
London Board. That also was a point which was promised by the Chairman should receive the attention
of the Brisbane Board.
Mr. Barnett : That also has been referred to them.
The Oefioial Receiver : That has been communicated to the Brisbane Board.
Mr. Gower : Would there be any means by which the result of the communication could be
conveyed to the Shareholders on the London Register, so that in the event of its being in the negative,
they might take measures to convene a meeting themselves, and urge further on the London Directors
and the Colonial Board the desirability of such a proceeding ? Would the result of such communication
be communicated ?
Mr. Barnett : It can be either ascertained by applying to the office here, or if it is the wish of the
Shareholders, there could be no objection to sending a circular round to inform them.
Mr. Gower : Perhaps the shareholders might express their wish on the subject that a circular
should be sent round, announcing the result of the communication, or we may be entirely left in the dark.
Mr. Barnett ; Personally, I see no objection, but I am rather standing up by myself without
having had the opportunity of consulting my colleagues, as you can understand. As far as I can see,
however, there could be no objection on their part.
Mr. Gower : Would an expression from this meeting of shareholders have any effect?


Mr. Barnett : I think it would receive every attention here, naturally.
Mr. Gower : I take it that the body of shareholders present desire the result of the communication
to be communicated to them—(Hear, Hear.) That appears to be the general feeling.
The Official Receiver : Do you wish to move that as a resolution ?
Mr. Gower ; I would move that as a resolution.
The Official Receiver : Then perhaps it will come in afterwards.
A Shareholder : Might I ask how many shares are held on the London Register ?
The Official Receiver ; There are 971 shareholders -who hold 42,776 shares out of 160,000.
Mr. Gower : About one-fourth.
The Official Receiver : About one-fourth. I have read the resolution which has been duly
proposed and seconded, and I will now put it to the vote.
>Mr. Gower : If I am in order, I would beg to move that the result of the suggestion relative to
the convening of an annual meeting of the Shareholders on the London Register, and for the purpose of
electing, if necessary, the retiring Directors, or in whatever way you may wish to put it, should be
communicated to the body of Shareholders by circular from the office in Princes’ Street.
A Shareholder : I take it that under the present arrangement the London Directors do not retire ?
Mr. Barnett ; No, that has not been the practice.
A Shareholder : They are permanent.
Mr. Gower ; May I ask the manner of their election ?
Mr. Barnett : They are appointed by the Brisbane Board.
A Shareholder : I don’t see that we can do anything in electing Directors, but we might have a
meeting of the Shareholders for general discussion of the business of the Bank.
A Shareholder : A suggestion has been made to the Brisbane Board that the London shareholders
should have the option of electing their directors on the London Board, and we are awaiting their reply.
Mr. Gower : A meeting could be convened by circular if this reply is unfavourable.
The Official Receiver : Will any gentleman second the resolution ? As regards the point of
election of directors, it might lead to some difficulty, because the election is now carried on under the
Articles of Association by the Brisbane Board.
Mr. Gower : It was my object in rising to know if the suggestion thrown out of an annual
meeting of the shareholders on the London Register be accepted by the Brisbane Board or not.
The Official Receiver : You limit your proposition to that ?
Mr. Gower : Yes.
Mr. Barnett : May I ask if the two of us here give their assurance that we will send that circular,
is it necessary that you should have a resolution on that point ? We will do it without.
Mr. Gower ; We wish to know whether you will send it.
Mr. Barnett ; Certainly, I would not stand up to say that if I did not mean to do it.
Mr. Gower : To be sent to every individual shareholder ?
Mr. Barnett : Yes ; I suppose we have them on the register.
Mr. Gower ; That is all I wish.
The Official Receiver : Then that will conclude the business of the meeting.
The proceedings then terminated.




31508023314706


