

QUEENSLAND:
AN INTRODUCTORY ESSAY.
BY
A. J. BOYD.
Colonial and Indian Exhibition
1886.
LONDON:
WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, Limited,
printers anO to tfje &opl Commission,
13, CHARING CROSS, S.W., and at THE EXHIBITION.
1886.






CONTENTS:
PAGE.
DISCOVERT OE THE COLONY, AND FIRST SETTLE-
MENT 3
PHYSICAL FEATURES, POPULATION, AND CENTRES
OF POPULATION ..... 4
PASTORAL AND AGRICULTURAL ... 6
GOVERNMENT—LEGISLATIVE, MUNICIPAL, AND
JUDICIAL - - ... 8
IMMIGRATION ------ 9
RAILWAYS ------- 10
WATERWORKS - - - - - - 11
TELEGRAPHS ------ 12
STEAM NAVIGATION ...» - 12
EDUCATION 13
LITERATURE ....... 15
SOCIAL FEATURES 15
RELIGION ------- 1°
DEFENCE ------- 17
SOCIAL CONDITION OF THE MASSES - - 19


DISCOVERY AND SETTLEMENT.
Sixit-twO years ago Lieutenant Oxley, Surveyor-General of New
South ’Wales, gazed first upon the primeval solitudes through which
flowed the magnificent river to which the explorer gave the name of
Brisbane. No longer was the silent shore to be abandoned to the
aboriginal and to the denizens of moor, marsh, and forest. Thus the
foundation of Queensland’s greatness was laid when Oxley planted
his foot on the sand of Moreton Bay.
“ Mulfa quoque passus dum urbs conderetur.”
It will serve no purpose to rake up in this paper the old stories
of suffering, crime, and stern retribution which characterised the
early settlement of the colony. Suffice it to say, that, in 1825, a penal
settlement was founded at the mouth of the river, and the convict
gloom hung over these fair shores, tainting the atmosphere, repelling
and retarding settlement until 1839, when the last batch of convicts
was landed here. Ten years later the first free immigrants arrived
and settled down in what was then the bush —now a crowded suburb
of Brisbane —and to which they gave a name which perpetuates the
memory of the good ship which brought them, with their lares and
penates, to seek a new home in the new Land of Promise. All Queens-
landers have heard of Fortitude Yalley —the chosen settlement of the
free pioneers of civilization in the colony.
It was not until 1859, however, that the Colony of Queensland
was proclaimed by Imperial command, although the first Governor,
Sir George Ferguson Bowen, had arrived in 1857. Prom this point
may be dated its true progress.
Although Queensland has an area of 678,600 square miles, with
a sea-board of about 2,500 miles, the traveller would observe with
surprise the extraordinary evidences of the energy of what may be
comparatively termed this handful of people. On all sides—north,
west, south, and east—civilization and vitality are found. The coasts
swarm with vessels, from the majestic mail steamer to the humble
fishing-boat. Inland, railways hurry rich freights to the coastal towns.
Par away in the silent bush, towns have arisen—the country is
QUEENSLAND:
AN
INTRODUCTORY ESSAY.
By A. J. BOYD.


parcelled out and fenced off; the boom of the miners’ blasting opera-
tions ; the crash of the quartz-crushing mills; the shrill whirr of the
saw; the bleating of millions of sheep; the lowing of hundreds of
thousands of cattle; the crack of the teamsters’ whips, are heard in
all directions. The G-reat Silent Land is silent no longer. Distance
is bridged over —space annihilated. There is no place so distant from
the metropolis whence a telegram may not be sent; the post-office is
everywhere—the mailman übiquitous. The face of the land is entirely
under the dominion of the Australian. Day by day sees the railways
pushed further and further, and in a very short space of time
Brisbane will be connected by rail with those great centres of popula-
tion of the southern colonies—Melbourne and Sydney.
PHYSICAL FEATURES, POPULATION, AND CENTRES
OF POPULATION.
Taking a glance at the country in which sucli rapid strides in
civilization, culture, and luxury have been made, it will be seen that
Queensland owes its advance in a large measure to its mineral and
pastoral resources. The colony appears to be naturally divided into
three grand divisions, each eminently adapted to its peculiar industry.
Parallel with the eastern coast runs a high range of mountains, distant
from 20 to 100 miles from the sea —a continuation, in fact, of the Great
Australian Alps and of the. Blue Mountains of New South Wales.
Between this range and the ocean we find a wide belt of alluvial soil,
through which meander many fine rivers and their tributary streams.
Beyond the coast range is a vast table-land, with its level or gently-
undulating plains stretching away like the vast prairies of America to
the illimitable horizon. These three well-defined divisions are each
devoted to different industries. The alluvial coast lands are given over
entirely to agriculture and to timber-getting. The banks of the rivers
were, before the timber-getter and the farmer made their appearance,
clothed with a luxuriant growth of timber. For centuries the decay
offleaves, of trees, and of succulent plants had been forming layer upon
layer of the richest mould. The frequent recurrence of heavy floods
assisted the formation by leaving, on their retreat, deep deposits of rich
sediment. Within the shadows of these scrubs no grass grew ; only
stray rays of sun found their way through the tropical luxuriance of
the trees, lianas, orchids, &c., which everywhere abounded. But
wealth was soon to bo drawn from them. The stately Moreton Bay
pine-tree, the noble red cedar, and the imperishable beech grew to
enormous size on the borders of the rivers. These were soon dis-
covered, and saw-mills sprang up in all directions. The expiring sigh
of the last tree as it fell to the lumberer’s axe was the signal for the
farmer to step in. With axe and brand the jungle was quickly
removed, and maize, tobacco, and cotton fields soon added another
charm to the already beauteous rivers. Boats and steamers began to
ply on the hitherto unploughed waters, and agriculture grew and
flourished.


Across the range, which towers to a height of over 3,000 feet
a different sight meets the eye. The basaltic plains of the table-land'
are covered with a luxurious growth of nutritious grasses. Men
famous in the older colonies amongst sheep and cattle, took possession
of the solitary wilds, and behold ! the face of the land is to-day dotted
with flocks and herds.
In 1858 a new era was heralded in by the discovery of gold in the
coast range. At this magic word the third great division resounded
with the busy hum of men. Another impetus was given to the colony.
Thousands of southern miners, business men, and speculators poured
into the colony, and from that day to this the ranges have been the
home of a numerous and wealthy mining community.
_ This brief outline of the early history of the colony is all that the
limits of space will permit. That history has gone on repeating itself,
and, with a few checks, has been one of continual progress—a pro-
gress which, taking into consideration the gloomy circumstances
under which the colony was started—its great distance from Europe,
and the want of information concerning it—a want felt even at the
present day—may be said to have no parallel in the history of British
colonization.
Queensland having been thus built up of three great industries,
we may now consider what has been the outcome of these. The
population, which in 1846 numbered only 2,500 souls, had now reached
25,000, and the tide of immigration has rolled in continuously since
that date, until in 1883 the census showed a population of 287 475
persons. Taking the annual increase at 15 per cent., the next census
will probably give an estimated population of 400,000. The large
centres of population are situated on the banks of navigable rivers. °
Brisbane, with a population of about 40,000, is beautifully
situated on both banks of the river of the same name, at a distance
of about 12 miles from its mouth. It stands in lat. 27° 28' 3" S.
long. 153° 6' 15" E. On the north side are the principal places of
business, the Supreme Court buildings, Government offices, head
offices of the banks, the newspaper offices, &c.
The new building of the Queensland National Bank is a most
imposing structure of freestone. It has just been completed at a
cost of about £40,000, and can scarcely be surpassed, if equalled, in
massive elegance by any banking establishment in the old country.
Government House is situated in a lovely domain adjoining the
Botanical Gardens ; but the building is now far too small for the pur-
poses of public ceremonies, balls, levees, &c., and it is therefore pro-
posed to erect a spacious building on the commanding site, part of
which is now occupied by a splendid Grammar school.
Extensive saw-mills, factories, iron shipbuilding yards and foun-
dries line the banks of the river on either side. At the numerous
wharves may be seen vessels of many countries, taking in and dis-
charging cargo, whilst here and there may be seen a British, German,
or French warship moored in the stream. The Brisbane River is one
of the most “sea-going ” rivers in the Australian colonies. The


largest mail steamers, many of them of 4,000 tons burthen, find no
difficulty in coming up with their full cargoes. A commodious dry
dock affords ample facilities for effecting repairs to all but the very
longest vessels. The dock is to be lengthened, and when this work is
completed it will accommodate vessels of all types.
Other large coast towns are —Rockhampton, on the Pitzroy River,
with 10,000 inhabitants; Maryborough, on the Mary River, 12,000 ;
Townsville on the Ross and on Cleveland Bay, 10,000 j Mackay, on
the Pioneer River, with 2,500. This town is the great centre of the
sugar industry. About thirty large sugar-mills are here in operation,
and the output of sugar reaches 18,000 tons annually. Bowen, Cairns,
and Cooktown, on the Northern coast, are towns which have a grand
future before them. The two latter are being connected with mining
centres inland by rail. Bundaberg and Gladstone are amongst southern
coast towns of importance. The former is connected by rail with the
copper district of Mount Perry—-the latter is a cattle-shipping port.
The numerous inland townships are all rapidly rising in importance.
Charters Towers, 100 miles west of Townsville, is marvellously rich in
gold quartz reefs, and large sums are invested in the mines and in
mining machinery. The great Mount Morgan mine, lately discovered
near Rockhampton, is a perfect Aladdin’s cave. Near Charters
Towers is the silver district of Ravenswood, which is still a wealthy
gold-mining town. Gympie, on the Mary River, is the centre of a rich
auriferous district; the town is large and populous. Stanthorpe, on the
borders of New South Wales and Queensland, is the centre of a tin-
mining district; as is Mount Perry of the copper interests. Ipswich, a
populous and one of the oldest towns of Queensland, is situated on the
Bremer River, 25 miles from Brisbane. The Government Railway
workshops are established here. At the present day the town owes its
importance to its coalfields, and its manufactures, such as tweeds,
woollens, &c. To enumerate all the towns of Queensland would not
come within the scope of this pamphlet. Some idea may he gathered
of them -when it is stated that Government Savings Banks are
established in 102 towns; that the Bank of New South Wales has
branches in 39 of them; the Queensland National Bank in 41; the
Australian Joint Stock Bank in 16 ; and other hanks have also their
branches established in various towns.
PASTORAL AND AGRICULTURAL
Allusion has been made to the boundless and fertile plains of the
Western transmontane district. These plains early became famous
for their grazing capabilities, and explorers were soon followed by
pastoral settlers. Sheep and cattle rapidly covered the face of the
land. In 1851 the first wool ship sailed direct from Brisbane to
London. The latest statistics show the export of wool to have reached
2,277,858 lbs.; 11,000,000 sheep are now pastured in the colony;
4,000,000 horned cattle; besides a quarter of a million horses. The
stock is pastured on large areas of land rented from the Government
at the rate of from 15*. to £3 per square mile, and many of these


runs ” as tliey are termed, consisting of 100 square miles each,
are consolidated, so that one squatter may hold as much as live
thousand square miles. This sounds large, but when it is considered
that except in cases where the squatters have purchased their runs, the
cattle wander about in unfenced freedom, looked after by a few stock-
men who see that the sufficient herds of cattle keep to their own
portion of the run, it will he seen that large areas of land are
absolutely necessary, as the cattle depend entirely on the natural
grasses, which sometimes fail them in very long droughts. Squatting
has, however, of late years been reduced to a science. Cultivation of
artificial grasses and irrigation are being largely resorted to, whilst
large sums are expended on the importation of pedigree stock. The
Australian squatter thinks nothing of paying from £I,OOO to £2,000
for a pedigree bull, or from £2OO to £6OO for a stud sheep. Thus it
will be seen that the pastoral industry is one of great magnitude and
importance.
Agriculture is carried on very much in the same style as it is in
the older colonies or in the old country, with, of course, this difference—
that Queensland has more tropical and semi-tropical products than the
former.
In new “scrubs” or jungle the beginning of a farm is a very
primitive matter. A man and his family settle down generally in a
tent, sometimes in a hark hut. He then sets to work with his axo
and fells a couple of acres of jungle. Owing to the dry heat of the
climate, it is not many weeks before this is ready to be burnt off. A
match applied on a windy day will generally make a clean sweep of all
but the largest logs. Then all the family take hoes and march across
the land, dropping maize seeds in small holes made with the hoe in the
rich vegetable mould. No further cultivation is needed. The fire has
destroyed the seed of noxious weeds —the rich warm humus generates
the seed and stimulates the rapid growth of the plant. Whilst this
first crop is growing and hastening towards maturity, the farmer
occupies himself with clearing additional land, fencing, &c., and in due
course, with fairly showery weather, he reaps a rich harvest of grain.
He has a great advantage over the farmer in colder regions—he can
take two or even three crops of various kinds from the same ground in
one year. And in spite of the constant cropping, the scrub soils of
the Brisbane river, which have never had a day’s rest, and to which not
an ounce of manure has ever been applied, have borne heavy crops of
maize, cotton, arrowroot, potatoes, and sugar, not to mention oats and
barley, together with a host of vegetables —such as peas, turnips,
carrots, cabbages—for over fifteen years, with very little sign of
deterioration.
STJOAE.
In 1846 it had been shown by a small experiment that the sugar-
cane could be successfully grown in Queensland. Nothing was, how-
ever, done on any remunerative scale till the year 1865, when the
Government offered special facilities to the colonists to foster the
cultivation of sugar.


Without going into the history of the trials, of the failures, and
of the now historical sugar which was produced by the late Mr. John
Buhot, a sugar-planter of great experience, by crushing the cane in a
copying press, and boiling the sugar in a frying-pan, it will be of
interest to note how enormously the sugar-producing interest took
hold of the country. In 1867 six mills produced 168 tons of sugar.
In 1872 over 6,000 tons were made, and everything looked bright and
prosperous for the growing industry, when a terrible disaster befell the
planters in 1873.
A disease akin to blight attacked the soft cane, then universally
planted under the name of Bourbon cane. In an incredibly short
space of time the cane-fields all over the colony were attacked, and the
industry appeared to be about to utterly collapse, when it was dis-
covered that certain hard varieties of cane were not susceptible to the
disease. These new canes soon replaced the Bourbon, and all went on
merrily again. Vast sums have been invested in machinery, lands, and
labour, when again trouble has threatened the planter in two forms ;
one, in the depreciation in the price of the commodity, the other in the
labour question. Both these difficulties will, doubtless, be overcome
in time, for it is not possible that an industry returning about
£1,000,000 per annum will be allowed to lapse when obstacles may be
overcome by judicious legislation.
GRAPES A^ T D OTHER SEMI-TROPICAL PRODUCTS.
The grape seems to have found a congenial home in Queensland,
and several large vineyards turn out annually considerable quantities
of very fair wine. The manufacture of champagne has also been
commenced with every prospect of success. Tobacco and arrowroot-
are largely grown, the climate favouring both these products. The
Western plains are principally devoted to the culture of cereals ; and
the wheat farmers are generally in comfortable circumstances.
GOVERNMENT —LEGISLATIVE, MUNICIPAL, AND
JUDICIAL.
The Government of Queensland is modelled upon the plan
of the British Constitution, and consists of a Governor appointed
bv the home authorities, a Legislative Council and a Legislative
Assembly. Six responsible Ministers are at the head of the
various Government departments. The franchise is almost universal,
so that every male of sound mind, who is of the age of twenty-
one and possesses an income which any labourer can easily
command, has a voice in returning the members to the House of
Assembly. The enormous extent of the colony naturally caused
discontent to be felt at what was looked upon as “Centralization.”
Revenue derived from the North was to a great extent expended in
the South. To obviate this, the country districts were placed under
what is called “ The Divisional Boards Act." By this Act no political
influence could he brought to hear upon the question of votes for
roads, bridges, &c. It divided the colony into seventy-four divisions.


each governed by a locally elected board consisting of from three to
nine members. The duties of these boards were to levy rates, and
maintain and control all public highways, roads, bridges, ferries,
wharves, wells, reservoirs, and other public works. An endow r ment is
paid by the Government to each board, equal to twice the amount
raised by rates during the first five years of the operation of the Act,
and a sum equal to the rates collected during every subsequent year.
The Act had a magical effect upon the country. It worked smoothly
almost from the outset. Eoads were formed, bridges built; and where
formerly the weary farmer or timber-getter flogged his jaded cattle
as they floundered through miry tracks or plunged through flooded
■streams, ho now travels gaily along well-metalled and gravelled
roads and across substantial bridges or punctual ferries. The
divisional boards are in effect a kind of rural municipal council.
The goldfield laws are administered by wardens, who are also
police magistrates. The large towns are all erected into municipal
councils, and some into shire councils, a distinction without much
difference —all tend to the same end and all work successfully.
The administration of the law is in the hands of a chief justice
and six other judges, besides whom there are in every large town, and
in every district, a police magistrate and a very large number of justices
of the peace. It cannot be said that crime is more prevalent in Queens-
land than in any other part of the world —in fact, we have no great
criminals. Occasionally a few' burglars disturb the peace of mind of
honest citizens—a wilful murder sometimes crops up; but, considering
the vast extent of the colony and the utter independence of its inhabi-
tants, crime may be said to be at a minimum. In 1880, when thousands
had swarmed to the new goldfields, it was found that out of 53,000
pec pie, comprising the population at that time of our five largest
towns, the number of convictions w'as only forty-four, and in the
Northern circuit, out of 17,000 persons the convictions were six. Of
these fi%, only five were murder cases, and two of these were not pro-
ceeded with.
There are several penal establishments in Queensland, the most
noted being a beautiful island in Moreton Bay named St. Helena.
Here the long-sentence prisoners devote their enforced leisure to the
cultivation of sugar, the manufacture of harness, t«. white smithery
and tailoring, to the extent of a gross return for the island products
of about £B,OOO per aunum. Juvenile offenders are sent to reforma-
tory institutions for various periods, and numbers of the lads who
have been permitted to take service with responsible persons have
turned out very good members of society—thanks to the excellent
system adopted for the reclamation of the incipient criminals.
IMMIGRATION.
In the early times of the colony inducements were held out to
intending emigrants from the old country to turn their faces toward
Queensland, by offering them grants of land amounting to 40 acres
for each adult. Every person arriving in the colony received a “laud-


order ” entitling him to tahe 18 acres of land, on presentation of the
order for that amount. After two years’ residence he obtained the
balance of the order (£l2), and could then take up 12 acres more.
As the colony became more populous these orders were abolished,
and free immigration was instituted, and continues to the present day.
The result has been that from 15,000 to 20,000 arrive annually
in the colonies.
There is now plenty of splendid agricultural and grazing land to
be obtained at reasonable prices and by payments extending over ten
years.
RAILWAYS.
, Unlike America, Queensland cannot boast of vast rivers inter-
secting, together with their broad tributaries extended over areas
of fertile country. The rivers of Australia generally are broad,
certainly, but the aqueous portion of them bears no comparison to their
beds. In wet seasons huge volumes of water come roaring down from
the mountains, sweeping before them trunks of trees and everything
which lies in the way of the resistless power. At these times the
rivers are generally impassable, some of them having a width of over a
mile, whilst the adjacent country is frequently inundated to shallow
depths for several miles. It will be obvious, from what has been said,
that our rivers can only serve to a limited extent for navigation pur-
poses. Fifty to sixty miles inland from the coast is the limit of
navigation for sea-going vessels. To tap the interior, railways were
required, and this want has been duly recognised by the various Gov-
ernments who have held the reins of power in Queensland since the
year 1864. In that year a commencement was made with the
Southern and Western Railway, which connects Brisbane with the
western cities of the plains, and with those on the southern border of the
colony adjoining —New South Wales. It was decided, at the outset,
that our railways should be built on the narrow-gauge (3 feet 6 inch)
system, and this gauge has been adopted in the construction of all
our lines. The greatest obstacle to railway communication with the
interior in this colony, as well as in the sister colony, was the pre-
cipitous Main Coast Range. But engineering skill surmounted the
difficulty, and the first line, which connected the capital with Toowoomba,
a large and thriving city situated just above the range at the edge of
the table-land, was successfully carried over a height of 2,600 feet.
The scenery, as the range is mounted, is magnificent. The line vies
with the Union Pacific Railroad in the United States in tall spider-
like bridges spanning fearful looking gorges, and in tracks passing
round the precipitous spurs of the mountains. Cuttings and tunneling
are met with from the moment the ascent commences. The steepest
gradient in this line is 1 in 50. Notwithstanding the apparent
danger attending a journey on this portion of the line no
accident involving loss of life or serious injury to rolling-stock has
occurred here during the twenty years which have elapsed since the
first engine ran on it. To the excellent system of management and the
careful supervision exercised over every portion of the line must be


attributed the immunity from accident which has characterised the
working of all our railway lines. Every year sees the existing lines
extended. In 18G5 there were 21 miles of rail open for
traffic. By the year 1871 there were 218 miles open. Nine years
later the mileage reached 635, and the returns for 1883 show a total
of 1,080 miles, with an additional 410 miles in progress. The amount
expended on these lines, which return a net revenue of £2 10s. lid.
per cent., has been nearly £10,000,000. Most of the rolling-stock re-
quiredisnow manufactured in the colony. Locomotives only are imported,
and this, not because they could not be well made in the colony, but
owing to the high price of material and labour. A great many lines
have yet to be constructed, and some of these are now being surveyed;
for others tenders have been already called, notably for a line to con-
nect Brisbane with the Gympie Gold Eield. The route passes through
splendid agricultural districts and tops a range of mountains abound-
ing in valuable timbers, such as red cedar, pine, beech, hardwood, &c.
It is fully anticipated that this line will pay, when completed, a high
per centage on the cost of construction. Indeed, the passenger and
goods traffic on our railways is increasing so rapidly that the Depart-
ment of Public Works can barely keep pace with the requirements.
Whilst British capitalists are turning their attention to the colonies
as a field for investment, Queensland appears to offer special induce-
ments for the employment of that capital in railway construction.
WATERWORKS,
Most of our towns arc so situated that the construction of water
reservoirs has offered no serious engineering difficulties. The Brisbane
waterworks were commenced in 1865, and were completed at a cost of
£66,000. A chain of hills some seven miles from town offered an
excellent site for a reservoir. The natural features of the ground
were largely availed of, and out of a watershed of 2,590 acres, 186
acres were laid under water, thus giving an available supply of
1,000,000,000 gallons, and this as yet has been found sufficient to
supply the ordinary wants of the city in a fair season; but under
abnormal conditions of weather it was feared that a scarcity might
result, and a second reservoir has just been completed, connected with
the first, and both are finally to be fed from the heads of the Brisbane
River. The supply will then be large enough to meet any emergency
in the shape of drought, or rapid increase of the population of the
city. The extension alone will supply 40 gallons per head to a popu-
lation of 100,000.
All our large towns have been supplied by artificial means, and
no expense has been spared to render these means efficient.
The continued dry weather of the year 1885 has caused most
pastoral tenants to look about them for a continuous water supply;
and in most instances shallow sinking or boring has brought to the
surface large stores of excellent water, whose existence was not even
suspected. The water supply for the interior is now being taken in
hand by the Department of Public Works, and under its auspices


boring appliances have been sent out to the far west. Thus it will
probably not be long before the Western country will be comparatively
independent of the surface water, artesian wells having been found to
answer all requirements.
TELEGRAPHS.
Simultaneously with railway construction telegraphic communi-
cation was initiated. For many years the only means of conveying
information from the seaboard to the interior were the coach and the
horse mail. Matters of vital importance therefore had to await
transmission by these comparatively slow appliances. Neither rapidity
nor certainty were ensured. Hence the necessity for electric commu-
nication was early recognized, and the work once initiated was pushed
on with such celerity that in 1881 there were 6,270| miles of line in
operation, carrying 9,222 miles of wire. There are now nearly 11,000
miles of wire open for public business, whilst about 300 miles of wire
are employed for telephonic purposes. The telephone has been adopted
very largely in all our towns; and every business place of any impor-
tance is connected with a central telephone exchange. Queensland
is connected with all the other colonies by telegraph, and, by means of
the South Australian Overland Telegraph line, with the whole civilized
world. Messages of ten words, exclusive of the sender’s name and of
the address of the recipient, which are not charged for, can be sent to
any part of the colony for Is.
STEAM NAVIGATION.
The increase of population, and the extension of business relations
with the northern portions of our own colony, and with the outside
world, has had a remarkable effect upon the development of both ocean
and coastal steam communication. For many years the Australasian
Steam Navigation Company of Sydney enjoyed a monopoly of the
coasting trade. Of late years, however, the trade has been gradually
wrested from the erstwhile powerful association. After several
attempts by individuals, Messrs. Howard Smith and Company began
to run steamers on the coast. These gentlemen, trading under the
style of the Melbourne Steamship Company, ran their boats as far
north as Rockhampton in Queensland, whilst the Australian Steam
Navigation Company abandoned the Tasmanian and New Zealand
trade, but extended their operations to Cooktown in the far north of
the colony and also to San Francisco via Honolulu. Since that time,
the British India Company, under contract with the Queensland
Government, which binds the latter to the payment of a subsidy of
£60,000 per annum, have carried out a monthly mail service between
England and Queensland with the greatest regularity. This company
also runs fortnightly boats, and all bring a large number of immigrants
to our shores. The Queensland Steam Shipping Company have lately
placed some magnificent coasting steamers on the line running from
Sydney as far north as Cooktown, and Thursday Island in Torres
Straits. The China steamers also make regular calls at our ports, as do


those of the Eastern ana Australian, and of the Dutch East India.
Companies. The ports nearer Brisbane are served by a host of
smaller steamers belonging to private firms. The tonnage inwards
amounted last year to 1,437,824 tons, whilst the outward tonnage
reached 1,247,479 tons. It will be seen from the above statement
that by means of our coastal navigation appliances, the greatest
facilities are afforded to those whose business or inclination takes
them to the different parts of the colonies.
The trade of the colony is so fully dealt with in another article
that it need not be referred to here.
EDUCATION.
The colonists having succeeded in obtaining separation from New
South Wales, determined to inaugurate a system of National Educa-
tion, rightly judging that by spreading the light of knowledge, crime
would be lessened, and thus the colony would reap a direct advantage
from the money devoted to educational purposes. A Board of six
gentlemen was accordingly appointed to supervise and direct the
establishment and carrying out of the scheme. Under their direction
national or primary schools soon began to multiply in the land. A
largo central school, entitled the Normal School, was built in Brisbane,
where teachers were subsequently trained for their work. In the
other towns and country districts schools were built, on a requisition
of the residents, accompanied by an amount equal to about one-fifth
of the estimated cost of the building. Wherever twenty children of
school age — i.e., above five years—could be got together, there a school
was established, a teacher was supplied and paid by the Board.
Inspectors were appointed who, at short intervals, visited and reported
upon the various schools in their respective districts. The result of
this legislation was that in a short time no district, howmver in-
significant, was without its w r ell-appointed school.
The tone of the Queensland primary schools is very high, since
they are —unlike the national schools of the old country—attended by
the children of all classes of the community. The sons of barristers,
hankers, judges, merchants, sit on the same form with the children of
the farmer, mechanic, and labourer. To this fact we owe much of the
excellence of our national schools, and of the favour with 'which the
colonists regard them.
During the first few years of the colony’s separate existence,
small fees were demanded of each scholar, according to the class he
attended at school. This tax was abolished in 1864, through the
efforts of Mr. (now Sir Charles) Lilley, the present Chief Justice of
the colony. The teachers, on the abolition of the fees, received a
compensating addition to their salaries.
The Board of Education was abolished in 1876, and the Govern-
ment undertook the entire management of, and control of, the educa-
tional establishments of the colony. Mr. Samuel Walker Griffith,
the present Premier, who was in that year Attorney-General, was
appointed Minister for Education, with Mr. Graham for Under


Secretary. Under the charge of these gentlemen the Department of
State Education was conducted in a manner which gave complete
satisfaction to the general public, and no appeal was ever made in vain
to the Minister from the smallest district, provided that reasonable
grounds could be shown for granting the application. The schools,
since the day that the Government undertook their control, have
multiplied at a remarkable rate; but the demand for them still goes
on. In 180 l there were 43,303 children on the rolls of 350 schools,
which employed 1,000 teachers —male and female. To-day there are
46,262 children on the rolls, the average attendance being nearly 60
per cent, of those enrolled. Thus it will be seen that about one-
seventh of the population of the colony is under school instruction.
Besides the primary, there are several denominational schools in
healthy operation, five grammar schools endowed by the State, and
several well-attended private schools. But we have yet progressed a
step or two further towards the higher education of our youth.
Scholarships entitling the winners to free education at the grammar
schools are granted yearly to girls and boys of primary schools, who,
between the ages of 12 and 14, can pass a certain examination. These
scholarships are open to any boy or girl from any primary school in
the colony. About 25 per cent, of the candidates pass every year, and
it is a fact worth recording that those youths who have distinguished
themselves both at the grammar schools and at the various universities
of Australia and of the United Kingdom will be found as a rule to
have been scholarship boys who commenced their educational career in
the primary schools, '/he attainment of a grammar school scholarship,
however, does not limit the range of our ambitious youth. The State
provides for exhibitions to universities, tenable for three years; and
without exception the winners of these exhibitions have triumphantly
carried the banner of their Queensland schools through the ordeal of
the legal, medical, theological, and scientific examinations at the
universities of Oxford, Cambridge, Edinburgh, Sydney, and Mel-
bourne. Enough has been said on our system of State education to
show that a Queensland youth has only to develop ability to be
helped to the highest standard of education, and, as a necessary
corollary, to the highest honours which the various learned professions
can offer.
The religious education of the juvenile population is diligently
attended to by the various denominations, mainly through the instru-
mentality of the Sunday schools. The Brisbane Sunday School Union,
a union of all denominations except the Church of England and the
Eoman Catholic, exerts a powerful influence on the young. Every
year a gathering of the various Sunday schools takes place in the
Botanical Gardens. Over 6,000 children, attended by their teachers,
marched in procession to the gardens in May last, where they were
addressed by His Excellency the Governor, who takes great interest
in the movement.
Schools of Arts exist in all our towns, and these, especially in
Brisbane, are what their name implies—institutions in which those


who cannot attend day-classes may obtain instruction, technical or
otherwise, in the evening. Drawing, painting, science, mechanics,
and carpentering, are here taught by well-qualified instructors.
Under the head of educational establishments may be classed
museums. The Brisbane Museum is a spacious stone and brick
edifice, occupying a fine site overlooking the river. The student of
natural history, botany, geology, mineralogy, or archaeology, may here
find a rich field for investigation. A country such as Queensland,
possessing fauna, flora, and minerals of such varied forms, contains
within itself all the elements for the formation of a vast museum,
which not only affords instruction to the colonists, but is of great
utility to scientific men of other lands. The Brisbane Museum is
thrown open to the public on Sunday afternoons, and numbers of
persons avail themselves of this boon. •
LITERATURE.
The Englishman all over the world appreciates his daily paper.
Queensland Englishmen are no exception to the rule; hence it follows
that the literature of the colony as represented by the Press is large
and varied. Every town possesses its newspaper; some, three or four-
daily, weekly, and bi-weekly. Many of these journals are of a very
high class, and nearly all of moderate tone, which causes them to
present a very vivid contrast to the highly-spiced sensational journals
of our cousins oyer the Pacific. Queensland can boast of writers in
other walks of literature, whose productions have been very favourably
received in the old country ; and the services of these gentlemen are
accordingly in constant request by the leading journals.
SOCIAL FEATURES.
Queenslanders are essentially a clubable, meeting-holding, society-
forming people. It would take up too much space to enumerate the
numberless societies which are in operation in the colony for social
ends. Two excellent clubs in Brisbane are devoted to the usual pur-
poses of such institutions, and both are in a flourishing condition.
Ihe Johnsonian Club is, as its name implies, a literary stronghold,
composed of votaries of art, science, literature, law, and music. °lt is’
conducted on the lines of the Savage Club in London, and numbers
some 200 members. Once a month the members meet, and after a
bpartan supper, substituting fish for black broth, the evening is spent
in music, recitation, and congenial conversation. The club has lately
been affiliated to other literary clubs in Australia, and to the Savage
Club. The Good Templars, Eechabites, Salvationists, and Oddfellows
are numerously represented, and all have their lodges, barracks, and
meeting-houses. The Freemasons are a powerful body, working under
the three constitutions, England, Scotland, and Ireland. The founda-
tion of a new Freemasons’ Hall was laid the other day with great
pomp and ceremony, in the presence of a large concourse of people.
Theatres are well patronised, as are also concerts, especially those


of the Musical Union, where high-class music is excellently rendered.
Of junketings, tea-meetings, picnics, and steamer excursions there
is no end.
The chief State holidays, of which there are fivein the year, are times
of great merrymaking. On these occasions the railways, steamers,
and other means of conveyance are crowded by thousands of eager
holiday-makers. But the great event of the year is the Exhibition of
the National Agricultural and Industrial Association of Queensland.
This society is a thoroughly national institution. Its ramifications
extend throughout the whale colony. Inaugurated by a few far-seeing
colonists in 1876, it soon assumed large proportions. The colonists
as a body combined to render it a useful and successful institution.
The work done by it has been of immense value. Through its instru-
mentality both pastoral and agricultural properties have greatly im-
proved in many respects, and our varied resources have become more
widely known, and have been developed to a greater degree than they
were prior to the formation of the society. The an aual exhibition is
now eagerly looked forward to by the people. In August of each year
the three days’ carnival takes place. The show is opened with great
ceremony by the Governor in person. On the opening day, it is gene-
rally impossible to obtain ever a glimpse of the varied exhibits which
fill the Exhibition building. Thousands of visitors pour in from
town ai?d country. For three days business is almost entirely sus-
pended, the whole population giving itself up to the enjoyment of its
grand fete. The society is consequently in a most flourishing condi-
tion, and is in a position to carry out new ideas and improvements
every year.
Like all English-speaking people the colonists are fond of horse-
racing and, athletic sports. Every township in the colony has its
racecourse and cricket-ground. The youth of the colony are ardent
footballers, cricketers, and bicyclists. Regattas are held annually, and
on these occasions our boating men give good evidence that the pluck
and skill of the fatherland has been carried to the “ Greater Britain.”
Athletic sports are frequently held, when jumping, foot and bicycle
racing, cricket-ball throwing, &c., &c., are indulged in with great
animation.
RELIGION
Nearly all the religious denominations of the old country are here
to be found in full and successful operation. The church has no con-
nection with the State. Each congregation supports its own minister,
and the spiritual wants of the community are thus fairly supplied.
Allied closely to the churches are various charitable institutions,
such as the Benevolent Asylum at Dunwich, a place of refuge for old
and destitute persons, where the inmates are well cared for, and pass
away life in a comfort which under other circumstances would be
utterly beyond their reach. Of Orphanages there are six in operation,
which undertake the care of nearly 1,000 children, who either through
misfortune or the dissolute habits of their parents would have become
homeless vagrants but for the care of the State. Lunatics are


provided for in six asylums and reception-houses. There are hospitals
in every town of any size in the colony, supported partly by Govern-
ment endowment, partly by private subscription. The Brisbane
Hospital is a noble institution, as is the Hospital for Sick Childron ; both
are well-supported by the public. Other charitable institutions are
Relief Boards, Female Refuges, Lying-in Hospitals ; and the Brisbane
Benevolent Society, which does good work in enquiring into and
relieving cases of distress.
DEFENCE.
The colony has up to a very late period depended almost exclu-
sively upon the mother-country to defend her in case of hostile attack
from without. Considerable numbers of men had been enrolled in
various volunteer corps, and in 1882 the total strength of the force
was 1,872, of whom probably not one-half were efficient. Of ships of
war there were none, whilst the only" appliances for land defences were
a few field guns, and a battery of six or eight old-fashioned smooth-
bore 24-pounders, dating from somewhere about the year 1791. If
we except the single item of pluck (which all Englishmen inherit,
whether they are born in the Arctic regions or in the Tropics), the
colony was deficient in everything which could aid to defend it from
an enemy’s attack.
In 1884, however, a move was made in the direction of defence.
Two gunboats and a torpedo-boat were ordered from England, and
they have since arrived here. One of the former is stationed at
Brisbane, the destination of the other is not yet determined. Further-
more, an Act was passed by both Houses providing for the defence of
the colony", which repealed the old Volunteer Act of 1878, and of
which the following are the provisions in brief: —All the male
inhabitants of the colony between the ages of eighteen and sixty years
are liable to serve in a Defence Force for a period of three years from
date of enrolment. The male population liable to serve is divided
into four classes, according to age and conjugal condition. The
Defence Force is distinguished as Active and Reserve —Land and
Marine —the Reserve Force consisting of all the men who are not
serving in the Active Force for the time being. These forces are
divided into batteries of artillery, companies of mounted infantry,
engineers, submarine miners, garrison artillery, battalions, regiments,
and companies of infantry ; and the Marine For 00 includes seamen,
marines, and torpedo corps. The arms and accoutrements for all non-
commissioned officers and men are provided by the Government, subject
to certain restrictions. Commissions in the force are granted by the
Governor, and all officers must undergo examination and obtain a
certificate of fitness from a board of officers. The examination varies
in degree for each rank, and consists partly of a written examination
and partly of practical work in the field.
In time of war or threatened invasion, should the various corps
not he brought up to their strength by voluntary enlistment, the
necessary number of men may be drawn by r ballot in each military


district. Tlie drill and training of tlic Force is also provided for.
Everyman, to become efficient, must undergo ninety-six hours’ drill in
the year, including eight days in camp. These drills are paid for at
the rate of Is. per hour for the privates. Officers and non-commis-
sioned officers are paid in proportion. In addition to these paid drills,
all ranks are expected to perform at least seventy-four hours’ unpaid
drills annually. During their period of active service, the whole
Force is subject to army discipline, as set forth in the “ Queen’s
Regulations.”
Besides the citizen Force, a permanent Force has been established,
to consist of a maximum strength of 150 men. This corps, known as
“ A Battery,” serves the purposes of instruction to the remainder.
The men are provided with lodging in the Victoria Barracks, and are
treated in precisely the same manner as the regular forces at home,
with the exception of pay, which is much higher here. Gunners,
drivers, and trumpeters receive 2s. 3d. per diem; bombardiers, 3s. j
corporals, 3s. 6d.; sergeants, 4s; quartermaster-sergeants, ss. 6d.,
with free kit and uniform, free quarters, fuel, light, and rations.
The available Force of all arms amounts now to a strength of
2,585 men, to which must be added a fine body of 600 police, all
well-drilled and trained men.
The war material for the defence of our coasts is not at present
very extensive. The entrance to the Brisbane Biver at Lytton is
defended by a fort mounting two 64-pounder guns and one 6-inch
gun. Earthworks are also thrown up on a hill overlooking the sea,
about a mile from the fort. All appliances for “ booming ” the river
and for laying torpedoes are at hand. The Lytton defences are sup-
plemented by the gunboat “ Gayundah,” the torpedo boat “Mosquito,”
and during the “ war scare ” three or four small steamers were pur-
chased and armed by the Government. Townsville is protected by
two 64-pounder guns mounted in commanding positions, and these
will be assisted in case of need by the gunboat “ Palumah.” Many of
our coast towns are, however, fairly defended from attack by the
nature of their surroundings. Rockhampton, for instance, is situated
34 miles from the estuary of the Fitzroy River, which is unnavigable
for vessels of deep draught, and those of lighter build would require
pilots having an intimate acquaintance with the banks and shallows
with which portions of the river abound, to enable them to reach the
city. With a few well-served torpedo stations at intervals on the
banks, Rockhampton would be practically impregnable. The same
may be said of Maryborough, which must be approached by a tortuous
river,
Townsville, Bowen, Cooktown, and Gladstone are by position the
most defenceless, but steps are being taken to utilize the natural
advantages of the sea-front for defensive purposes.
The whole of our Defence Force is under the supreme command
of His Excellency the Governor, as Commander-in-Chief. Colonel
French, C.M.G., R.A., has been appointed Colonel-Commandant, with
Major Grieve, R.A., in command of the various artillery corps,


including “ A Battery.” The infantry are supervised by Captain
C. H. Des Voeux, 8.5. C., Captain J. Sanderson-Lyster, Brigade-
Major.
At Easter all the corps are called out for eight days’ training in
camp, and the results of such training have become very apparent in
the increased smartness of the men. Lately, when war with Russia
appeared inevitable, the utmost enthusiasm prevailed amongst tho
colonists. Hundreds of men enrolled themselves either in the Defence
Eorce or the Volunteers. The Police volunteered in a body for active
service. Gentlemen belonging to all professions hastened to offer
their services to defend their adopted country, and there is not the
smallest doubt that, had hostilities actually broken out, the whole
male population to a man would have voluntarily come forward to
take part in the struggle. Like his American congener, the Queens-
lander is a peaceable business man when let alone, but once roused by
outside aggression he is prepared to submit to any sacrifice to main-
tain his rights, and in such a case the hereditary dogged obstinacy of
his race comes out conspicuously.
SOCIAL CONDITION OF THE MASSES.
As yet there is no leisurely class amongst the colonists. Queens-
land is a large hive, in which all the bees are hard at work and tolerate no
drones. There is so much to be done to keep the colony in pace with
other countries that even those whose private means might entitle
them to rest do not do so. They work as hard as, if not harder,
than those whose necessities compel exertion. But the inducements
to work are here very great. Wages are high, and workers not over
numerous. As a consequence, the Queenslander, especially the
working man, is in a thoroughly independent position. If he works
hard he is well paid, and can afford to enjoy, to the top of his bent,
tho numerous holidays afforded him. In the old country a Bank holi-
day means a serious loss to many ill-paid labourers. Here, holidays
are eagerly looked forward to by all classes. On these occasions an
excellent opportunity is afforded to observe the evident comfortable
circumstances of the working man. He and his family are well-
dressed, they have plenty of spare cash, and can afford to enjoy
themselves.
The thrifty amongst them invariably have an account at the
Government Savings Bank, and very few of these latter have failed to
become possessors of an allotment or two of land, on which they
have erected small but comfortable residences. They have thus no
rent to pay, and whatever additions or improvements they make, servo
to enrich themselves instead of the landlord. Most of the friendly
societies are officered by the respectable steady mechanic, who also fills
in many cases more responsible positions. The farming class are
equally independent. Notwithstanding occasional dry seasons and
consequent loss of crops, they fight their way through with eminent
success, thanks to energy, a splendid climate, and rich soil. In fact,
the farmers may be looked upon as the most thoroughly independent


class in the country. They rule their own districts by means of the
Divisional Boards ; they all have a voice in the election of members of
the Legislative Assembly, and often have been returned as members
themselves. It may be said that, taking one industry with another,
the general mass of the people of Queensland are better paid, better
fed, better clothed, and more happy and independent than those of any
other country outside of Australia.
Everywhere the cry is for more hands; on all sides our manu-
factures are increasing. Good wages await any man or woman willing
to earn them. Thousands of acres of land are ready for the shepherd
and the farmer. Our trades have openings for an unlimited number
of the right class of immigrants. Female domestic servants are
wanted in all parts of the colony, and the highest rates of wages can
be obtained. Many of the good folk at home have an idea that
Queensland consists mainly of bush and blackfellows. If they could
be suddenly transplanted to Brisbane on a Saturday evening they
would be surprised to find how much it resembles London. The
afreets are crowded with tram-cars, omnibuses, and cabs ; the splendid
shops are brilliantly illuminated ; the railway station is lighted by the
electric light; the river is alive with shipping; whilst the crowded
streets render walking or shopping as much a matter of difficulty here
as in the metropolis of the world. They would find the people no whit
different from those they had left behind, except in the matter of
independence and well-lined pockets. The Anglo-Australian race is
merely a transplanted Anglo-Saxon race.
Last, but not least, the Australian is loyal in thought, word, and
deed. He looks upon England as “ home.” Middle-aged men, born in
the colonies, invariably speak of the old land as “home;” and the
grand old National Anthem, as soon as heard, brings every Australian,
bare-headed, to his feet as he re-echoes the words “ God Save the
Queen.”


