



COPY,
"Kincora",
Moray Street,
Not Private, New Farm,
BRISBANE.
18 Augus t, 1935.
Angus & Robertson Ltd,
Dear* Sirs,
I thank you for your offer of certain copies of my last Political
History of Queensland — “Our Seventh Political Decade.’' In my old
age, and since my retirement I have ceased to interest myself in
Politics or Politicians. I served the latter, I regret to say, for
54 years. In my own time I wrote for their use, and without any
expectation of reward, two large Political Histories and three other
valuable reference books, and after over half a century of service I


*
left them with no more recognition than a junior messenger, dismissed
for stealing postage stamp* would get. If you think Members of the
federal, ; .o. -ales or Victorian Parliaments would like these books
FREE (all members of Parliament like things free) you are at liberty
to distribute them. Possibly you have a Bush Book Club. They may
like SOme for distribution. If these suggestions are not acceptable,
you could make a weekly and systematic contribution to Ihe Garbage tin.
rfith kind regards and appreciation of your offer,
Yours very truly,
C.A. Bemays.




QUEENSLAND—
OUR SEVENTH POLITICAL DECADE, 1920-1930






CHARLES ARROWSMITH BERNAYS, 1.5.0.
The Clerk of The Parliament and Parliamentary Historian


QUEENSLAND-
OUR SEVENTH POLITICAL
DECADE, 1920-1930
By
CHARLES ARROWSMITH BERNAYS, 1.5.0.
AUSTRALIA:
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LIMITED
89 CASTLEREAGH STREET, SYDNEY
031


WHOLLY SET UP AND PRINTED
IN AUSTRALIA BY
HALSTEAD PRINTING COMPANY
LTD., ALLEN STREET, WATERLOO
1931
REGISTERED AT THE GENERAL
POST OFFICE, SYDNEY, FOR TRANS-
MISSION THROUGH THE POST AS
A BOOK


TO
MY FOUR LITTLE GRANDCHILDREN




ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author is indebted to so many good friends for kindly
suggestions, made as the compilation of this volume pro-
ceeded, that he finds it impossible to name them all. He cannot
readily forget the friendly interest in his work of His Excel-
lency The Governor of Queensland, Sir John Goodwin —his
wise counsel and example of industry which have ever been
such sources of inspiration to him. To the Heads of the
various Departments of State and to his colleagues of the
Parliamentary staff he is deeply grateful for all the assistance
they have so ungrudgingly given, and which has gone far
towards materially lightening a heavy task and securing
greater accuracy. All this assistance, however, would have
been futile without the generous encouragement given to him
by the Premier, the Honourable A. E. Moore, and the Minis-
ters of his Government who brought within the range of
possibility the ultimate publication of the history of our last
political decade. For this, and for having been instrumental
in crowning his life’s work with a great and coveted honour,
he has no language in which to fittingly express his gratitude.




CONTENTS
Page
INTRODUCTION xiii
SESSIONAL RECORDS --------- 1-69
CRISIS OF 1922 ----------- 17
BRENNAN BRIBERY CASE AND SEQUEL 18-21
PROXY VOTE 22
CHILLAGOE SMELTERS AND MUNGANA MINES - - - 43-50
CRISIS OF 1927 - 46
SIZER’S BOMB - 52
LABOUR’S SUCCESS --------- 53
SLOGANS - _____ 56
THE NEW GOVERNMENT 59
OPPOSITION ATTITUDE - - - - 66
ABOLITION OF LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL - 72
REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 87
STATE ENTERPRISE TABLOIDS 95
COMPLETE HISTORY OF THE BASIC WAGE - 130
THE 44-HOUR WEEK --------- 135
BORROWED MONEY AND OTHER THINGS ----- 144
GOVERNMENT LOANS, REDEMPTION AND CONVERSION - 149
VOTES ON ACCOUNT FOR THE ENSUING YEAR - 155
COMMONWEALTH AND STATES FINANCIAL AGREEMENT - 157
THE UPS AND DOWNS OP LEGISLATORS - 163
MINISTERS OP THE CROWN AND THEIR SALARIES - - 172
OUR LAND LAWS SINCE 1918 ------- 177
MAIN ROADS COMMISSION 194
PRIMARY PRODUCER AND WHAT WAS DONE FOR HIM - 197
THE AGRICULTURAL BANK ------- 213
IRRIGATION 223
THE PEOPLE’S HOMES - - 226


THE LOCAL AUTHORITY FRANCHISE 231
QUEENSLAND STATE GOVERNMENT INSURANCE OFFICE - 234
THE PUBLIC CURATOR - - 239
SAVINGS BANKS ---------- 243
AN ELECTION DISAGREEMENT 248
EDUCATION TESTS - 250
THE VIRTUE OP SILENCE -------- 252
THE SPEAKERSHIP --------- 254
VANISHING PETITIONS - 256
THE COUNTRY-NATIONAL PARTY ------ 258
PARLIAMENT HOUSE AS A DANCING SALOON - 259
EARLY POLITICIANS AND THE MEAT TRADE - 260
M:UNGANA-CHILLAGOB INQUIRY ------- 261
REFERENCES TO INTERESTING PACTS ----- 266
SOME POLITICIANS AS I HAVE SEEN THEM - 277
THE GOVERNORS OF QUEENSLAND ------ 345
X
CONTENTS


ILLUSTRATIONS
THE AUTHOR - -- -- -- -- Frontispiece
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, BRISBANE, QUEENSLAND - - xii
HON. ARTHUR EDWARD MOORE, PREMIER AND CHIEF
SECRETARY - xiii
MR W. FORGAN SMITH, LEADER OP THE OPPOSITION - xiii
GOVERNORS OF QUEENSLAND ------ 344






THE HONOURABLE ARTHUR EDWARD MOORE
Premier and Chief Secretary
MR W. FORGAN SMITH
Leader of the Opposition


INTRODUCTION
“A Prophet is not without honour, save in his own Country and in his own
house.” — Matt, xiii 57.
When the author of this book originally conceived the idea
of writing the first sixty years of the Political History of
Queensland, he had no doubt whatever of the ultimate utility
of the work. At one time or another most men and women
have occasion to seek for knowledge, and the search is made
less laborious if one can find condensed knowledge in the
form of printed books. One is given a variety of starting
points, as it were, and the person who is thirsty for informa-
tion on a particular subject, obtains hints from his reference
books which lead him ever forward until he arrives at a
glorious finale of surfeit. Like the busy honey bee, he has
sipped the best from all the literature at his command, and
having filled his brain box to overflowing, he is liable to preen
himself upon his cleverness, and exclaim with pride, “Alone I
did nr
The author of original literary matter, if he is a sensible
author, has no objection to being quoted ad infinitum. It is a
graceful compliment which any author may well be proud of;
but one is bound to confess that it is gall and wormwood to
be pirated and plagiarized by lazy individuals who desire to
pose as authorities, and, who devote their energies to appro-
priating without acknowledgment the work of others.
Shortly after Queensland Politics During Sixty Years ap-
peared in print, the author was amazed at finding that large
slabs of the anecdotal portion of the book were being pub-
lished by an Australian weekly, without acknowledgment,
and as original matter. To the credit of the newspaper in
question be it said that the editor was entirely unconscious
that he was being taken down by a thief, and that when the
thief was discovered he reaped the reward he deserved. Other
persons who ought, it may be presumed, to have known better,
repeated the process, but they were found out and were well
advertised for their dishonesty.
The author desires to thank the members of the Queensland


Parliament for their generous recognition of the merits of
his former history. There were various reasons for the
acknowledgment being tardy in the first instance, and for
the contents of the book being better known and more appre-
ciated outside of Queensland. Every politician had not been
made a hero. In all walks of life heroes are few and far
between, and the book has not yet been written, in which
there are seventy-two leading characters all possessing merits
of equal value. Hence it became necessary to cull the wheat
from the chaff, and the politician who found himself in the
chaff category, was indignant that he had not been converted
into a grain of wheat.
To-day the position is exactly similar. There is no inten-
tion whatever of magnifying the importance of people who
have not yet magnified their own. The decision in these
matters must necessarily be arbitrary, but there is no law
which forbids a politician writing a book devoted exclusively
to the advertising of his own importance, and handing his
name down to posterity as the greatest leader and thinker of
his day. It is said on Biblical authority that “It is easier for
a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man
to enter into the Kingdom of God.” Well may it be said that
it is easier for a politician to wander aimlessly in the cool
shades of insignificance and to vanish into obscurity “unwept,
unhonoured, and unsung” than to accomplish even one little
act during his career, however long, which would place his
name on the roll of the immortals.
When Queensland Politics During Sixty Years was pro-
duced in the year 1919, one could be forgiven for thinking
that he had done his share, and that the work would then
be carried on by an energetic younger man who had not
been worn out in the service of the Queensland Parliament.
Twelve years have elapsed since the publication of that
book, and no one has yet come forward to carry on the work.
Members of Parliament have actually begun to ask for more.
A month has seldom gone by, in which the author has not
been asked when he is going to bring his Political History
up to date. One naturally appreciates the compliment very
much indeed, and recently the urge from numerous quarters
has become so insistent that the author has felt the call of
duty, notwithstanding his age, and the fact that his career
as a Parliamentary servant is fast drawing to a close.
It may be necessary in this book, more than in the former
one, to express a few opinions which may not be altogether
palatable. Yet the writer having been an onlooker, and it is


hoped an impartial one, for so long a period would not feel
justified in merely compiling a list of facts and dates, and
calling it a history. Whether, the conclusions one arrives at
are right or wrong they at all events form valuable texts on
which to found argument. Care has been taken to verify what
is written by reference to official documents. If one draws
conclusions from these —well after all, they are only the
opinions of one man and need not be taken to heart too ser-
iously; nor should the author be condemned as a partizan. In
this, his last book, the author has claimed as a right, free-
dom of speech. He has ignored the fact that he is a Parlia-
mentary official. While certain of his conclusions may not be
endorsed, he asks for a generous recognition of the fact that
his wide knowledge of politics and politicians has necessarily
made him a better judge than a party politician governed
largely by bias in favour of a particular programme or party.
No one knows better than the politician himself, that he
is not the best judge of his merits or his motives. Poli-
ticians are in a class by themselves. It is not their fault that,
all the world over, the Parliamentary Institution is dominated
by selfishness and governed by self-interest. One may
be in private life a kindly, genial, self-effacing soul, untinged
with guile —uninfluenced by self-interest. The day comes
when one is chosen to stand for Parliament. From that
time forward his one-time disinterestedness, his altruism, his
lofty purposes, vanish into thin air, and he becomes suddenly
cold, worldly, self-centred, with an eye always wide open
to the main chance. No one has ever attempted to explain
the metamorphosis. It would almost seem as if he had
come into contact for the first time in his life with an
unfamiliar natural law which he proceeds to obey. It is said
that “dog does not eat dog.” Don’t believe a word of it. In the
political world the dog will eat his children or his grandfather
indifferently. Nothing must stand in the light of one’s personal
advancement. “En Avant” is the motto of them all. They
trample down the weak: they intrigue against the strong:
they make “honourable arrangements” amongst themselves to
scratch the backs of one another: their war cry is “Every
man for himself and the devil take the hindmost.” From Ses-
sion to Session, from Parliament to Parliament they learn
and put into practice every shade and grade of intrigue, one
against the other, until the day arrives when they meet their
respective Waterloos by either losing their nominations, or
being only halfway up the poll. Then kindly nature takes
them in hand once more, and re-teaches them all those beauti-


ful domestic virtues with which they were endowed before
entering the arena where fame is uncertain and failure rather
frequent.
In the following pages the practice adopted in Queensland
Politics During Sixty Years has been repeated. The record of
each Parliament is treated separately and concisely; the names
of any new members who may have entered the political arena
are given, together with a brief account of the legislation
passed in each session; any minor incidents, worthy of record,
are mentioned in their proper sequence. This is followed by
extended articles on the more important subjects, such as the
Land Legislation from 1919 to 1929; “The story of State
Enterprises/' etc. Following these again, are numerous char-
acter sketches of present and late members; the whole being
concluded by biographical notices of the Governors of Queens-
land since 10th December 1859.
A strong effort is made to produce a readable and informa-
tive volume which will serve as a reference to numerous
matters of political interest. Unfortunately it is impossible
to please everybody. Even modest expressions of opinion
here and there, may excite more or less hostility. Neverthe-
less it is fervently hoped that the intentions of the author will
not be misinterpreted in his endeavour to serve a useful
historical purpose. There is no personal gain to be made
out of writing political history. Remembering that fact,
readers may be willing to give a more kindly interpretation
than they otherwise would, to the method adopted by the
author.


THE TWENTY-FIRST PARLIAMENT
SECOND SESSION
We take up the thread then where we dropped it at the
termination of the session of 1918. It will be useful for
record purposes to show what was done, or attempted to be
done in the session of 1919-20, and what it lead up to in
the third session of the Twenty-first Parliament, beginning’
on August 18th 1920, and terminating with the abruptness
of an exploded aerolite. The Public Bills originating in
the Legislative Assembly during the session of 1919-20
numbered 4 2, of which there were passed and assented to, 35;
two were stopped by prorogation, and six were not returned
from the Council. Here is the detailed record. Five Appro-
'C' * 1 . . .
course do not count; Brisbane
Exhibition Lands Leases Bill (not contentious); Brisbane
Tramway Fares Bill, not returned from the Legislative
Council for the very good reason that the Government, being
about to take over the tramways, did not wish to depreciate
their value. Nevertheless, the measure came home to roost
after the lapse of quite a few months, for the Brisbane Tram-
way Fares Bill was one of the scorpions used wherewith to
sting Theodore when he reached England in 1920. The
Brisbane Tramway Purchase Bill passed both Houses.
Theoretically it was quite a presentable measure, but the
accusation of alleged repudiation hung like a pall over this
and other measures of the period. The Constitution Act
Amendment Bill was not returned from the Council. It was
designed to abolish that body, and had met a hard fate on
former occasions. On this occasion, as in former times, a long,
argumentative amendment, moved by Hawthorn, was carried’
on 4th November, 1919. Consequently the Bill was incon-
tinently bumped out. The Constitution Act Amendment Act,
No. 2 was a kindly friend designed to make the people’s
representatives more comfortable by supplementing their
earnings by £2OO a year. In the previous year—l9lB—there
appeared upon the Supplementary Estimates for the year
B


then current a sum of £13,000 as “an additional allowance of
£2OO to certain members of the present Legislative Assembly
for the year 1918-1919,” and a further sum of £12,000 for the
expenses of a second referendum on the question of the
abolition of the Legislative Council. It was explained that
the additional allowance of £2OO would enable members to
conduct the campaign without cost to themselves, and that to
impose a burden upon them in this respect would be a terrible
hardship. The referendum campaign was opened by Theodore
at an out-of-door meeting at Ipswich, and then the scheme
was abandoned —the excuse being the pneumonic influenza
outbreak. It would hardly be reasonable to expect the return
of the £2OO allowance, and it was doubtless spent upon many
worthy objects as for instance the payment of deposits upon
neat suburban cottages. Next year —1919-20 —the Govern-
ment came down with a straight-out proposal to increase
members’ salaries from £3OO to £5OO a year, and the Legislative
Council, then still in possession of the nationalists, passed
the measure. The Co-operative Agricultural Production and
Advances to Farmers Act Amendment Bill, the Dairy Pro-
duce Bill, the Daraji Railway Bridge Bill and the Discharged
Soldiers’ Settlement Act Amendment Bill became law. The
Elections Act Amendment Bill was incontinently pitched out
by the Council on the motion to read it a second time.
Amongst other things it conferred the electoral franchise upon
children of eighteen. One of the arguments used in favour
of this somewhat utopian proposal was that if lads were good
enough to fight at eighteen, they were good enough to vote
at that age. Parents of boys are not unfamiliar with their
offspring fighting at the age of five or six. Our pugnacity
develops very shortly after we have given up the feeding
bottle, but it is doubtful whether any useful purpose would
be served by conferring the franchise on children in short
frocks. There should be no relation whatever, between the
age at which a man can fight for his country and the age at
which he should exercise civic rights. There is a material
connection between the above-mentioned proposal and the
following story. A labour politician (a conscientious, kindly,
good soul) had a son at the front. Did this fact convert him
into a conscriptionist? Never! He might have lost his seat
had he obeyed the dictates of conscience. In conversation
with him and others during the first conscription campaign,
the writer unhesitatingly announced himself a conscriptionist.
“Brother,” said the politician, with tears in his eyes, “don’t
make up your mind hurriedly. Let me put it to you in this
2
QUEENSLAND—


way. Suppose, by a miracle, you could be transported to some
place overlooking the trenches, and you saw a man receive his
mortal wound, and as he lay dying he looked up in your face
and with his last breath whispered, ‘Brother, you sent me
here/ what could you reply to him?” “There is only one reply,”
said the writer (the father of brave soldiers himself), “and that
reply is ‘Brother, it was up to you to come without being
sent/ ” A harmless Factories and Shops Acts Amendment
Bill became law. The Fair Rents Bill was passed, with the
aid of the February nominees to the Council, and the same
remark applies to the Income Tax Bill, the Industrial Provi-
dent Societies Bill, Land Act Amendment Bill, Land Tax Act
Amendment Bill, Main Roads Bill, Mining Acts Amendment
Bill, etc. Theodore was a proud man when he saw sheaves of
Bills coming from “The House of Lords” without amendment,
and he treated with very little concern the prognostications
concerning the result of passing the Land Act Amendment
Bill, commonly known as the “Repudiation” Bill. Of this
measure more anon. Its passage led to grave difficulties with
very powerful people at the other end of the world, but it
ultimately led to better understanding with people on whom
we are largely dependent for our supplies of Loan Funds.
Before Mr Lennon’s February nominees reached the Council,
that Chamber had dealt trenchantly wdth a proposal to alter
the Officials in Parliament Act by creating another paid
minister, and the Unemployed Workers’ Bill. The Succession
and Probate Duties Acts Amendment Bill was another
measure passed, which w 7 as taken exception to by the sensitive
London Money Market. A very rich man died, having com-
plied in all respects with the law of the land. He, however,
had found a loophole in the Succession and Probate Duties
Act, and his estate escaped duty to a large extent through
his change of domicile. The Government, without considering
the consequence, extracted £75,000 from his estate by means
of retrospective legislation, and when Theodore reached Lon-
don, this transaction had to be explained. In this session
also, there was an amendment of the Liquor Act providing
for a poll to be taken in October, 1920, on “Prohibition,”
“State Control” or “Continuance,” but the suggestion of six
o’clock closing was held in abeyance. The Governor’s Salary
Act Amendment Bill was not returned from the Council. It
was a strong measure, and the accusation was made at the
time that it was designed to prevent Sir Pope Cooper, the
Lieutenant-Governor, from drawing half the Governor’s salary
when acting as Lieutenant-Governor after the retirement on


27th January, 1920, of Sir Hamilton J. Goold Adams. Other
measures passed, and which were harmless, dealt with Port
Dues, Harbour Boards, Stock Foods, Jimbour Selections, Sea-
forth Repurchased Estate, Queensland Government Savings
Bank, and Queensland National Bank Agreement, but no
further mention was made of the Popular Initiative and
Referendum Bill. Such then is the record for the session of
1919-20.
THE RECESS OF 1920
The session of 1919-20 had no sooner terminated than
Premier Theodore went off post-haste to London. He had a
double-barrelled mission, his first objective being to raise an
extensive loan, and his second to urge upon the Dominions
Office that Queensland was not in pressing need of an imported
Governor, and could do quite well with the local product.
Others had different views, and they worked up a delegation
to England to follow on Theodore's tracks —partially for the
purpose of urging the Imperial Government to appoint a
Governor, and partially to prevent, if possible, the Land
Act of the previous session from becoming Statute Law. The
delegation consisted of Sir Robert Philp, Sir Alfred Cowley,
and Walsh, of Fitzgerald and Walsh, solicitors. In one
respect they were very successful. They secured the appoint-
ment of Sir Matthew Nathan as Governor but the Dominions
Office is not in the habit of interfering with Legislation of
purely local concern.
A big man was Theodore in Queensland, but when con-
fronted with irate financiers who thought they had had their
securities depreciated through local land legislation, his pro-
portions were not so large as in Queensland. At a London
banquet at which Lieutenant-Colonel Amery, Secretary of
State for the Dominions, was present, he was acclaimed as the
youngest Dominion Premier extant, but in a subtle, humorous
manner he had his alleged sins rubbed into him when the
Lieutenant-Colonel told him that age improved both youth
and wine, and that when he was older he would know more.
Theodore responded, and in his introductory remarks was
quite affable, but later on, so the cables said, he partially lost
control of himself, and uttered words which in calmer mood
he would be the first to admit were unwise. Furthermore,
his mission was not assisted by the allegation that Philp,
Cowley, and Walsh had gone to England to ruin the credit
of the State, and that they were disloyalists and traitors.
The persons who made such statements did not believe them
4
QUEENSLAND—


then, and do not believe them now. Every interest that those
men and their friends had in the world was centred in Queens-
land. If they ruined Queensland they ruined themselves as
individuals, and unless men suddenly lose control of their
reason, they do not wilfully and of malice aforethought ruin
themselves. But some political capital had to be made out
of the Delegation, and for the time being the wholesale abuse
of it was clever political propaganda.
THE SESSION OF 1920
The 1920 session commenced so late in the year as August
18th, with Theodore still not returned from his vain hunt for
a loan. Obviously things had been happening, and one noticed
an atmosphere of doubt and indecision, as if members were
on the tiptoe of expectation, and were waiting for cablegrams.
William Lennon opened the session as Lieutenant-Governor,
and began inauspiciously by tripping on the dais, and nearly
breaking his vice-regal neck. It was really a very memorable
session introduced by a truly—
COMIC OPERA SITUATION
First let it be said that just at a convenient period when it
had been announced that Sir Matthew Nathan had been
appointed Governor, and the Government were looking about
for a means of providing for Mr Lennon, William Hamilton,
the President of the Council, died. He was a good sort of
whom more will be written later on. But here is a little
story out of which that master of satire, W. S. Gilbert, could
have made a fortune had he been alive. The Government
decided, through the Lieutenant-Governor, of course, to call
William Lennon to the Legislative Council, and appoint him
President. It would not look very decent if William Lennon,
Lieutenant-Governor, called William Lennon to the Council
and appointed himself President. Even a political neophyte
would recognize that that would be a truly opera situa-
tion. A solution was sought, and they sent William Lennon,
Lieutenant-Governor, away for a holiday to the Tweed,
nursing <f a sore knee.” Thereupon the Dormant Commission
came into operation and Pope A. Cooper, Chief Justice, had
to act as Administrator. Pope A. Cooper knew quite well
that the number of members of the Legislative Council was
30 per cent higher than it ever should have been allowed
to become, and when the Executive Council put before him a


proposition that William Lennon should be '“called” to the
Legislative Council, he point blank refused to sign the Execu-
tive Minute. The Minute appointing William Lennon to the
Council was duly signed by William Lennon after all, when
he and his sore knee had come back from the Tweed, and then
W illiam Lennon, Lieutenant-Governor, issued a Commission
to William Lennon, the private person, which ran as
follows:
“To our Trusty and W r ell-beloved the Honourable William
Lennon of Brisbane, in our State of Queensland in the Com-
monwealth of Australia, Esquire,
Greeting—
We, confiding in your loyalty, wisdom, and in-
tegrity, have constituted and appointed you the said William
Lennon to be President of the Legislative Council of the State
of Queensland, etc.”
William Lennon.
THE BOMB OF 1920
> all} expected something sensational from a
Lieutenant-Governor who opened Parliament by trying to
break his neck when ascending the dais, and there was no
disappointment in this respect.
William Lennon had had put into his hands a quite re-
markable speech in which Fihellian diction could be plainly
traced. It was alleged—“ That the financiers abroad, at the
behest of three unofficial delegates, informed the Government
that loan money would be supplied if the Government would
agree to repeal several important legislative enactments which
had been endorsed at two elections by the people. ... My
advisers have declined the infamous proposal. They scorn the
bribe and they will not bow to the threat. . . . Under the cir-
cumstances they think their decision should have the approval
of the electors before a further loan is launched on the London
market. With the object of putting the Question to the test,
my advisers have decided to postpone all legislation, with the
exception of a short amending Liquor Bill. . . . My advisers
v ill then adjourn Parliament until the Premier’s return, and,
after affording him an opportunity of personally presenting
the to the people, will refer to the constituencies the
issue which the enemies of our Self-Government rights have
raised.”
As a matter of fact, another small measure was passed on
6
QUEENSLAND—


19th August—an Appropriation Bill for £3,300,000 wherewith
to finance the country over the general elections. Then
Parliament adjourned until Friday, 10th September. Shortly
after rising, Government supporters began to make tracks
for the far-distant constituencies; it was then realized that it
never had been intended to meet again, and that the Parlia-
ment would be dissolved before Theodore’s return on 10th
September.
THE RETURN OF THEODORE
Edward Granville Theodore returned from his futile financial
mission on the night of 10th September, 1920. Early
in the morning of that day William Lennon, the Lieutenant-
Governor, had issued a proclamation dissolving the Parlia-
ment. The ruling party at that time had a two to one
majority in the Assembly and could easily have carried on
until the Parliament expired by affluxion of time, but it was
considered good tactics to strike while the iron was hot, and
while there was a good slogan to go to the country with.
Parliament had adjourned until the 10th September, and up
to daybreak on that day the Acting Premier, Fihelly, assured
the press that he would scorn to deceive Parliament, and that
it would meet on the appointed day. Needless to say, The
Twenty-first Parliament never met again.
THE SHY BIRD
From a party political point of view the anger of the ruling
party was entirely justifiable. They were a strong party, and
right in the middle of their triumphant progress they had
been foiled. No matter what was the cause, the pride of any
party would be hurt under such circumstances. Perhaps with
lack of vision they had failed to realize what a shy, elusive,
and sensitive bird the capitalist is, all the world over. In
our own little tinpot concerns are we not all sensitive when
we imagine, rightly or wrongly, that someone is trying to
deprive us of what we are pleased to call a “right?” It is an
inherent trait of human nature to be suspicious, and it was the
suspicion of “moneybags limited” which caused all the bother.
One recalls that at this stage Theodore threatened that the
Government would “put their hands into the local capitalist’s
pocket, and, if necessary, exert a little forceand one won-
ders whether even a statement of that nature, uttered under
a sense of irritation, was either cautious or wise.


THE ELECTION OF 1920
Members went to the country on 9th October, 1920, and
the Twenty-second Parliament met hurriedly on 13th Novem-
ber of the same year.
The attitude of the people during the 1920 election was
entirely novel. They either did not attend political meetings,
or were so strangely apathetic when they did attend, that they
appeared to be drugged or overfed. There was ample vigour
amongst the leaders, but the people did not respond.
Theodore in his election address, declared that he would be
the most disappointed man in Queensland, if he did not win
52 seats out of 72. He was the most disappointed man in
Queensland, for he only secured 38 seats against the combined
opposition's 34.
Before describing what happened on 15th November, 1920,
when Parliament met, just a word regarding the altered
position of parties. At the election of 1918, caucus secured
two to one in the Legislative Assembly, while anti-caucus
secured 156,212 votes. At the election of 1920 caucus secured
only 163,472 votes, and anti-caucus, which embraced the
Nationalist and Farmers' parties, secured 184,005 votes.
Nevertheless caucus came back to the Twenty-second Parlia-
ment with a voting majority of four—3B caucusites, and 34
combined opposition. The Government majority of votes at
the 1918 election was 24,479. The Government minority of
votes at the 1920 election was 21,013.
WISE OLD CONFUCIUS
A disciple of Confucius once asked the sage in what lay
the art of Government. The master replied that the three
first requisites were, a sufficiency of food, a sufficiency of
troops, and the confidence of the people. The disciple then
asked which of these three could be dispensed with in case
of urgent necessity? Confucius replied—'‘Dispense first with
the troops, and next with the food supply."
TWO INTERESTING PRECEDENTS
Just prior to the meeting on 15th November, 1920, the press
announced that a “precedent" was to be established—that
a Speaker w r as to be elected and business proceeded with
without presenting him to the Crown’s representative for
approval, and that there was to be no Opening Speech and
8
QUEENSLAND—


no Address in Reply. It is elementary that the very basis
of our Parliamentary system is the constitutional supremacy
of the Crown, and a means had to be found by which that
should be preserved. The author was asked to devise a means
by which the Address in Reply could be dispensed with while
preserving at the same time the rights of the Sovereign’s
representative, and this was done by a perfectly legitimate
expedient. It was suggested, and the suggestion was adopted,
that the Commissioners for the Opening of Parliament should
be made to say, that it was His Excellency’s desire, notwith-
standing that the accustomed Speech would not be delivered,
# that you proceed, forthwith to the consideration of very
important and urgent legislation which is awaiting your
attention.”
That was done, but the action was challenged by Peter
Macgregor, Member for Merthyr, on a Question of Privilege.
He claimed that “the causes for the Summoning of Parliament
had not been announced.” The Speaker ruled that the con-
stitutional supremacy of the Crown had been upheld, because
the Lieutenant-Governor had expressed his desire, through
the Commissioners, that Parliament should immediately pro-
ceed to the consideration of urgent and important legislation.
On the day following the opening, William Bertram, the
Speaker elect, presented himself to William Lennon, the
Lieutenant-Governor, for “His Majesty’s Royal Approbation”
(vide Standing Order No. 7), but William Lennon, ignoring
the Standing Orders, smilingly announced that he intended
to pursue a new system by acknowledging the Speaker’s cour-
tesy in presenting himself, and congratulating him on his
election. He intimated that that was the course followed in
the Commonwealth Parliament. True, it is, but only because
the Commonwealth Standing Orders differed from our own at
that period. Since that time we have in the matter of the
presentation of Mr Speaker to the Governor, brought our
Standing Orders into line with those of the Commonwealth.
THE CASUALTIES OF THE 1920 ELECTION
The state of parties at the 1918 election was Ministerialists
(Labour) 48; Opposition 24. When the final returns for the
1920 election were posted, the state of parties was Minis-
terialists (Labour) 38; Opposition 34. There had indeed been
somewhat of a landslide, and the following indicates the
casualties and other changes:—
H. A. Cattermull (Musgrave), defeated T. G. Armfield;


G. A. Logan (Lockyer), defeated R. J. C. Butler; W. A.
Brand (Burrum), defeated A. E. V. Whitford; J. W. Fletcher
(Port Curtis), defeated G. Carter; E. H. C. Clayton (Wide
Bay), defeated A. Thompson; W. H. Green (Townsville),
defeated D. Ryan; J. S. Kerr (Enoggera), defeated W. F.
Lloyd; P. B. Macgregor (Merthyr), defeated P. A. Mc-
Lachlan; J. Jones (Kennedy), defeated J. O’Sullivan; R. M.
King (Logan), defeated A. A. James; C. W. Conroy (Mar-
anoa), defeated T. A. Spencer; E. Costello (Carnarvon),
replaced D. Gunn (Gunn did not contest seat); W. A.
Deacon (Cunningham), replaced F. Grayson (Grayson did
not contest seat), returned unopposed; J. Dash (Munding-
burra), replaced T. Foley (Foley died after dissolution of
House). J. F. Maxwell (Toowong), replaced E. H.
Macartney (Macartney did not contest seat) ; F. L. Nott
(Stanley), defeated H. P. Somerset; J. B. Edwards (Nan-
ango), defeated R. S. Hodge; J. H. C. Roberts (Pittsworth),
defeated P. M. Bayley; M. A. Ferricks (South Brisbane),
replaced E. N. Free (Efree did not contest Seat); J. A.
Fihelly (Paddington), resigned ;th February, 1922 (A. J.
Jones elected 18th March, 1922); F. M. Forde (Rock-
hampton), resigned sth October, 1922, and went to Federal
Parliament (G. P. Farrell elected 17th February, 1923. Parlia-
ment dissolved before seat taken).
In 1919, J. McE. Hunter resigned and became Agent-
General. At the by-election for Maranoa, T. A. Spencer a
former member, was returned, but at the general election
of 1920 he was defeated by C. Conroy.
When one remembers the confidence with_ which Theodore
went to the Country, and when his forecast is borne in mind,
it is difficult indeed to account for the slide backwards of the
Labour Party. Everything seemed to be in their favour. They
had an excellent political slogan, and they had only been in
office for five years. The only thing wanting was the votes
of the people which they did not get, and a party is up against
a dead end when it meets with apathy and indifference on the
part of the electors.


THE TWENTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT
FIRST SESSION
BEING THE SECOND SESSION OF 1920
And so we got down to the business of the session of 1920,
on 15th November, with every indication that what had to be
done was to be rushed through before Christmas. It was a
poisonous, venomous little session made more remarkable by
the fact that the strong Opposition of 34, of whom so much
was expected, did not quite act up to its opportunities. Un-
fortunately, it was divided into two parties, each somewhat
jealous of the other, but the tragedy of the situation was that
they did not attend with even moderate regularity, with the
result that a Government with a majority of four more often
found itself with a majority of eight, on account of the de-
pleted Opposition ranks.
Three days after Parliament met the Government intro-
duced the Queensland Government Loans Subscription Bill.
It provided, inter alia, that if a loan was not fully subscribed
in Queensland, compulsion might be resorted to by the
Government. It was proposed to raise locally £2,000,000, and
Theodore said definitely “We are now asking Parliament for
authority to collect, under compulsion, subscriptions from
those who can afford to pay them, if they will not subscribe
voluntarily.” Persons with incomes up to £IOOO were not to
be compelled to subscribe. It is a happy circumstance for
Queensland that the Bill was never taken beyond its second
reading. A local £2,000,000 loan was raised in January and
February of 1921, with the aid of the Commonwealth Bank,
but at a very high rate of interest.
The Income Tax Act was amended by cutting out the pro-
vision for taxing Commonwealth War Loan interest. The
High Court had ruled such a law beyond the power of the
local Government, and hence it was compelled to retreat.
Next, they amended the Local Government Act by applying
the Parliamentary Franchise to Local Government elections.


We shall see what happened to that legislation as we advance
further with our story.
A Wheat Pool Bill was enacted, and probably it was about
the most useful legislation the session produced.
Parliament ratified the Agreement with the Commonwealth
for taking over the Savings Bank; there was an amendment
of the Officials in Parliament Act to provide for an eighth
Minister in the Assembly, and there were other small measures
such as a Mining Act Amendment Bill; Chillagoe and Ethe-
ridge Railway Act Amendment Bill; Commonwealth
Powers (Air Navigation) Bill; a Government Inscribed Stock
Bill, and two Appropriation Bills. The session concluded
on 23rd December, 1920.
-"V
RECESS OF 1920-1921
During the recess an effort was made to come to terms
with Mr J. S. Badger in reference to the purchase price of
the Brisbane Tramways. Nothing eventuated. The Govern-
ment had power to take over the Tramways, but with little
money and not too much credit, it ran into a dead end. A
Valuation Board had been appointed, but it did not see eye
to eye with Badger, and hence the cul-de-sac. The Government
prevented the company from raising its fares by issuing a
proclamation under the Profiteering Prevention Act. In some
respects this Act, by the way, was of doubtful public utility.
We had a Prices Commissioner at iiooo a year, who fixed the
value of barbed wire and sulphate of ammonia and bone dust,
but the general public, who don’t eat or wear bone dust and
barbed wire and sulphate of ammonia, looked in vain for relief
from shameless profiteering in food-stuffs and clothing. Other
things of interest happened during the recess. The Mount
Morgan Copper and Gold Mining Company —one of the
largest industrial concerns in the State —intimated that at the
current price of copper they could not carry on, and offered
continuous employment if the employees would accept 20 per
cent reduction in wages. Every conceivable inquiry was
made by the Arbitration Court into the truth of the Company’s
allegations, and they were found to be substantially true. A
ballot was held among the men to determine whether they
would accept the Company’s terms or not. They turned the
proposal down by about seventy votes, thus throwing on to
the unemployed market not less than 1500 persons. Finally, a
hurried Cabinet meeting was held and the following proposal
was made, viz., that in order to keep up wages and maintain
12
QUEENSLAND—


employment at Mount Morgan, the Government should remit
railway freights chargeable to the Company to the extent
of iiooo per week. It was, after all, only a stopgap proposal.
It lasted for a while, and doubtless served a useful purpose,
but whether authorities on political economy could justify
such a proposition is a horse of an entirely different colour.
' DEATH OF SIR HAMILTON J. GOOLD-ADAMS
Before closing the account of the first session of the Twenty-
second Parliament, it would be well to record the fact
that Major Hamilton John Goold-Adams, the Governor of
Queensland during the war period, died at Capetown on 13th
April, 1920, during his six months’ leave prior to retirement.
APPOINTMENT OF SIR MATTHEW NATHAN
Towards the close of 1920 the Imperial Government sent us
The Right Honourable Lieutenant-Colonel Sir Matthew
Nathan, P.C.—an eminently intelligent and cultivated Jew
who took his job as Governor of Queensland very seriously
indeed, and was a most industrious representative of the
King. In this respect he acted up to the reputation he
brought with him to the State.
THE SESSION OF 1921
SECOND SESSION OF THE TWENTY-SECOND
PARLIAMENT
Perhaps in all our political history, extending over sixty-
nine years (up to 1929), there has been no more remarkable
session than that of 1921, or one more fraught with possible
danger to our whole system of Parliamentary Government as
we have known it over a period of seven decades. In order
that matters may be viewed in their true perspective, let it
not be forgotten that at the beginning of the session the
Assembly was dominated by a party with an insignificant
majority—a party which held office, though in a minority of
27,000 votes after the general election of October, 1920. It
is not asserted that there is anything morally wrong that a
party representing a minority of votes should hold office.
That is one of the results of our system of Parliamentary
Government, and should the opposing party gain office under
similar circumstances, it is assumed that they would not blush
like the desert rose if asked to assume power, but that they


would cheerfully and with much celerity undertake the salva-
tion of the State. From a Government holding office under
such conditions, perhaps a cautious attitude of marking time
might have been expected, in view of the doubtful nature of
the Government's majority.
A DEFECTION
Early in the session rumours were rife concerning defections
from the party. Two men were named as possible additions
to the opposition party —J. C. Peterson and William
Cooper. As a matter of fact, Peterson, a courageous and able
member of the Labour Party, did desert, much to the anger
and chagrin of his party, who thus had their majority re-
duced to something entirely negligible. Another member,
went nearly half-way over, and like the lost dog in the football
field returned to that side of the ring from which the loudest
whistle came.
THE WORK ACCOMPLISHED
The entire session of 1921 lasted only from 9th August to
27th October, and in that period they passed no less than 32
measures —an accomplishment largely due to the disunion
of the two Opposition parties, whose members frequently
absented themselves from the House on many important
occasions.
A SUGGESTION
In this connection it might well be suggested for the con-
sideration of some courageous future leader that the member
who draws his salary at the end of the month, and refuses to
work for it, should be debarred for life from a seat in Parlia-
ment, or deprived of a portion of his income. The principle
is entirely sound. In no other walk of life are employees
(and these are employees of the State) allowed to come
and go as they please, giving as much or as little service for
their salaries as seems to them fit. The audacity of the pro-
posal will doubtless be resented. Its soundness and justice are
irrefutable.
The majority of the measures passed in this session were
innocuous. Among the harmless innocents were measures
dealing with Animals and Birds; Anzac Day; Banana Industry
Preservation; Cheese Pool; Infant Life Protection; Main-
tenance Bill; Police Acts; Regulation of Sugar Cane Prices;
Second-hand Wares Bill; Water Authorities Bill; Wheat Ad-
14
QUEENSLAND—


vances Agreement Bill; Workers’ Accommodation Act
Amendment Bill, and a few other domestic measures and
Appropriation Bills. To accomplish even this much Parlia-
ment was called upon to sit unusual hours —towards the end
of the session beginning at 10.30 in the morning, and finishing
late at night. The fact that believers in an eight-hour day
worked their officers seventeen hours a day was a mere cir-
cumstance in the rush. The navvy in the railway cutting who
works half an hour over eight hours is paid time and a half,
but educated men can be worked to a standstill, and never
receive even the shadow of acknowledgment.
THE BIG MEASURES OF THE SESSION
Let us deal now with the four really important measures
of the session. Barely a month had elapsed after the opening,
before the Government introduced a trio of Bills relating to
the Law Courts, far-reaching in their effect, revolutionary in
their character and, as was contended by their opponents,
repudiatory in their incidence. The Supreme Court Act itself
swept away as with a stroke of the pen, the great system built
up with infinite care and labour by such eminent jurists as
Griffith, Lilley, Pring, Harding, Real, Cooper, Chubb, Shand
and Lukin. It turned the poor old Court inside out, and
revised it from alpha to omega, and made the legal profes-
sion gasp with amazement. Nevertheless it embodied many
useful reforms, and was not the very worst legislation that
was ever passed.
The Magistrates’ Court Act extended the powers of stipen-
diaries, and permitted them to adjudicate in cases up to £2OO.
The most revolutionary Act of all, however, was un-
doubtedly the Judges’ Retirement Bill providing for the com-
pulsory retirement of three Supreme Court Judges—Cooper,
Real and Chubb, all of whom were considerably over 70 years
of age. The familiar cry of repudiation was again raised here.
That phase of the subject does not concern this record. It is
not proposed to justify the retention for an indefinite period
of even eminent judges of the Supreme Court Bench. Even
judges come to the end of their usefulness, but it is true that
the bargain made with these men was a life bargain, and in
any cancellation of the bargain it might have looked better
if mutual arrangement had been made between the Execu-
tive and members of the Bench. These men were, it is known,
prepared to listen to a reasonable proposition.


A PATHETIC INCIDENT
A pathetic incident connected with the Judges’ Retirement
Bill was an address at the Bar of the House by Mr Justice
Real. It was touching indeed to see this enormous framed
old man pleading before the High Court of Parliament for
bare justice, and the fulfilment of a bond. But all of no avail.
Shaking like an aspen leaf, his voice trembling with emotion,
he pointed to his life’s work in the service of his country,
and he claimed the fulfilment of the bond. His years, his
dignity, his fine presence, his emotional appeal were of no
avail, and just as he uttered the last words of his address,
Myles Ferricks shouted aloud, “I move that the Bill be now
read a second time.”
THE CHEF-D’OEUVRE
Very late in the session the Government produced its chef-
d'oeuvre. There had been, just about 22nd October, 1921, an
exceptionally animated meeting of caucus following a Labour
Convention held in Brisbane, and with dramatic suddenness
suggestive that the convention had issued an ultimatum re-
garding the abolition of the Legislative Council, the Govern-
ment came down to Parliament on 24th October, or three days
before the close of the session, and put the coping-stone on
their session’s work by abolishing the Legislative Council.
Indeed, they pushed the measure through Parliament in less
than an hour and a half by means of the Closure.
The entire story of the abolition of the Legislative Council
will be treated at length in a separate article. It is of para-
mount historical importance, for in no other British Dominion
has an event of such political significance ever taken place. It
will be treated, in the first instance, from a purely historical
point of view, but in consideration of the fact that it has
claimed the interest of authorities of world-wide renown, the
ethical view of this famous political move will not be lost
sight of.
THE SESSION OF 1922
THIRD SESSION OF THE TWENTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT
During the session of 1922 (the first one-House Parliament
session), which extended from 4th July to 4th October, 37
Bills were passed and assented to. It was a session prolific
of incidents as well as of Bills, but before relating the incidents
it is as well to give a list of the measures passed. Apart from
16
QUEENSLAND—


the two Appropriation Bills, there were the following:—Agri-
cultural Education Bill; 2 Auctioneers and Commission
Agents’ Bill; 3 Brisbane Tramway Trust Bill; 4 Cairns
Hydro-Electric Power Investigation Board Bill; 5 City Elec-
tric Light Co., Ltd., Brisbane, Foreshore Bill; 6 Criminal
Code Amendment Ball; 7 Electoral Districts Bill; 8 Factories
and Shops Acts Amendment Bill; 9 Fruit Cases Acts Amend-
ment Bill; 10 Harbour Boards Acts Amendment Bill; 11
Hawkers’ Licenses Act Amendment Bill; 12 Health Acts
Amendment Bill; 13 Income Tax Act Amendment Bill; 14
Irrigation Bill; 15 Land Acts Amendment Bill; 16 Land Tax
Act Amendment Bill; 17 Legislative Assembly Act Amend-
ment Bill; 18 Legislative Assembly Act Amendment Act of
1921 Repeal Bill; 19 Local Authorities Acts Amendment Bill;
20 Main Roads Act Amendment Bill; 21 Maternity Bill; 22
Matrimonial Causes Acts Amendment Bill; 23 Officials in
Parliament Act Amendment Bill; 24 Primary Producers’
Organization Bill; 25 Primary Products Pools Bill; 26 Public
Service Bill; 27 Regulation of Sugar Cane Prices Acts
Amendment Bill; 28 Salaries Bill; 29 Sugar Works Bill; 30
Trade Unions (Property) Bill; 31 Unemployed Workers’ In-
surance Bill; 32 University of Queensland Act Amendment
Bill; 33 University Site Bill; 34 Water Power Bill; 35
Workers’ Homes Act Amendment Bill.
THE CRISIS OF TUESDAY, ist AUGUST, 1922
The Agricultural Education Bill being under consideration
in Committee on Tuesday, ist August, 1922, the political
atmosphere being calm, and the tempers of honourable mem-
bers placid, an unexampled tornado burst upon the one House
of Parliament of Queensland and struck it with the celerity
of a streak of lightning. It was known on all hands that the
Government were uncomfortable with their working majority
of one, with the Speaker or Chairman of Committees to fall
back upon in case of emergency, but the situation had become
critical, consequent upon an epidemic of influenza which
had laid low members belonging to all parties. The Govern-
ment side had been hardest hit. The Home Secretary, McCor-
mack, was in hospital; Gledson, member for Ipswich (being
more economical), had commandeered a bedroom in Parlia-
ment House, and thus the Government Majority had vanished
as a dream. The only hope was in known illness in the Oppo-
sition ranks. The two Opposition parties, however, had been
putting their heads together. They absolutely declined to give
c


“pairs” and had arranged that two semi—convalescent sup-
porters should at a given signal swoop down upon the House,
and put the Government to confusion. The coup was cleverly
stage managed, but it was precipitated by Theodore (the
Premier) unwisely enforcing the gag, and thus irritating his
opponents. He reckoned on a majority of one. He found
himself, on the first amendment moved, in a minority of one.
The Opposition parties carried a poor little amendment
against the Government, and Theodore thereupon swore by all
his Gods to restore the status quo ante , even if he had to kill
a supporter in so doing. Thereupon he sent his two heaviest
weights downstairs and ordered them to bring up the sick
Gledson —dead or alive. He would vote him breathing or
breathless, for there was nothing in the Constitution Act to
prevent a dead member voting so long as he had not been
actually buried and his seat declared vacant. It was a very
sick and emaciated man who was carried in, swathed in
blankets and removed from side to side of the House according
as necessity arose for him voting “Aye” or “No”. And to
make matters more spectacular, a member of the Government
party constructed a large red cross and hung it over the head
of the sick member. The “majority” then consisted of the
Speaker or Chairman of Committees, whichever happened to
be in the Chair, and these two officials valiantly gave their
casting votes as required, and rehabilitated the Government.
Ultimately, Theodore, being alarmed at the situation, and
fearing to kill Gledson, adjourned the House for ten days.
The scene as a whole could not be described as creditable.
The disorder was supreme, and once there was imminent
danger of physical violence.
THE BRENNAN BRIBERY CASE
THE SENSATION OF 14th AUGUST, 1922
In all our long political history of 71 years no more sensa-
tional development has taken place than that which was
announced in the morning papers of Monday, 14th August,
1922.
On the previous Thursday the Government, who were
having an anxious time in consequence of ill-health having
wiped out their majority, had, after practical defeat (although
only temporary) challenged the Opposition to a test of
strength. On Friday the challenge was taken up, and W.


J. Vowles, then leader of the Opposition, gave notice of a
motion of Want of Confidence. Between Friday and the
following Tuesday developments were taking place. It is
extremely difficult to discover who were the chief conspirators.
The bare fact remains that transactions of a very discreditable
character, and gravely reflecting upon our public life, actually
did take place, and the Monday morning papers contained a
sensational account of the arrest of two pressmen for attempt-
ing to bribe one Frank Tenison Brennan, member for
Toowoomba, by offering him £3500 as a reward for deserting
the Labour Party and voting with the Opposition. The story
of the trapping of these misguided persons, who after all were
the mere tools of wealthy men, is the story of two crude
simpletons who went about their subborning process in the
manner of two little schoolboys. Not only did they go to
Brennan’s house, which had been rigged up as a complete
cinema stage, with hidden detectives, and hidden stenog-
raphers, all as witnesses, but they made and kept an
appointment with Brennan at Lennon’s hotel, where there
were more detectives waiting, and were arrested with money
and Government Bonds on them with which they were about to
attempt to corrupt the member for Toowoomba. Mind you, it
was known that Brennan had been to some extent swinging
the axe over the head of the unhappy Government Party, every
one of whom was the working majority of one. He had for
long made himself conspicuous in the caucus room, and had
repeatedly kicked over the traces. Hence we can well under-
stand how the outside wire-pullers saw what they thought was
an opportunity to turn out a Government which had engen-
dered an unusual amount of enmity and bitter desire for re-
venge. Brennan, of course, was the hero of the hour, but it
was alleged at the time that Theodore, the Premier, got in
first and dished the whole little scheme. He had been waited
upon by an indiscreet organizer of the Country Party, who
had told Theodore that he could look forward to going out
of office through the desertion of Brennan. Moreover, it is
said that Vowles, Leader of the Country Party, boasted to a
Government supporter on the racecourse that Brennan was
in the bag.
On the Tuesday following, the Want of Confidence motion,
instead of being allowed to lapse after the publication of this
scandal, was ostentatiously moved by Vowles, and was replied
to by Theodore, who gave a detailed report of “confidential”


interviews he had had with a northern Nationalist Party
leader, and the aforesaid Country Party organizer, both of
whom, it was alleged, had approached him to sap his allegiance
to the Labour Party. The details of each interview were in
type, and fell as a bomb-shell among the Opposition parties.
It was quite evident that Theodore had scored by secreting
behind a screen certain stenographers, who had recorded both
interviews.
An alleged second attempt, at the same period, to bribe
another Government supporter is also on record, but the plan
to catch the intending subborners, which included the secre-
tion of a large detective in a ladies’ small box ottoman in
Parliament House, failed disastrously. It did, however, nearly
bring about a tragedy for the “tec,” who was on the verge
of being smothered.
Having now outlined the famous case, let us say a few words
as to the use made of it in subsequent years. It would be
asking too much of human nature (especially politica l human
nature) to abstain from making the very fullest use, both in
and out of Parliament, of this discreditable incident in our
public life. With wearisome reiteration the Opposition parties
were accused of deliberately setting out to bribe a member of
Parliament. The author verily believes that there is not one
atom of truth in such an assertion. It is unthinkable that
men of the type of A. E. Moore or W. H. Barnes would even
indirectly associate themselves with such a transaction. They
are too scrupulously honourable for it to be really believed
by the most violent political partizan. That the attempt was
made to bribe a member of Parliament js unfortunately too
true. The Law Courts proved it, and the two offenders, or
rather the two cat’s-paws, suffered three months’ imprison-
ment and a fine of £SOO each. Where then did the plan
originate, and where did the money come from? It was not
party money; it was not a party move; but it is confidently
and definitely stated here that it was the irresponsible and
impulsive act of two, if not three, enthusiastic but entirely
unscrupulous persons actively associated with politics quite
outside the Parliamentary arena. It was not a party transac-
tion. It was a personal transaction. The offenders, in their
dislike, nay, hatred of Labour rule, went the length of finding
the money among themselves. They never consulted the
executive management of the Opposition parties.


A SEQUEL TO THE BRIBERY CASE
On 4th October, 1922, Mullan, the Attorney-General, intro-
duced into Parliament a Bill to amend the Criminal Code,
having the object of forfeiting property used in connection
with the bribery of Members of Parliament. It provided as
follows: —
“Where a person has been convicted (whether before or
after the first day of July one thousand nine hundred and
twenty-two) of an offence under this Section, all property
which has been tendered or produced in evidence at the trial
of the offender, as being the property or part of the property
which the offender in the course of the commission of such
offence, gave, conferred, or procured, or promised or offered
to give or confer, or to procure, or attempt to procure, to,
upon, or for a member of the Legislative Assembly of Queens-
land, or to, upon, or for any other person, shall become and
be deemed to have become forthwith upon such conviction,
and or without any further judgment, or order the absolute
property of His Majesty, whether such is the property of the
offender or of any other person/'
The object of this amendment was to secure the absolute
forfeiture of the money (£3OOO or more), found upon the
convicted persons, who had already been fined £s°°
and three months' imprisonment, with a further term of im-
prisonment if the fine was not paid. It was argued at the
time that this was imposing a further penalty on the accused,
beyond that imposed by the Court. Looking at this mattei
from an entirely disinterested point of view, one comes to the
conclusion that it was not an extra punishment inflicted upon
the accused, but that it was a justifiable penalty imposed upon
the undiscovered principals. If they suffered in pocket only,
they escaped lightly, and by fining them £3OOO they were
given a wholesome moral lesson, which likely enough will
act as a deterrent in possible future cases of bribery and
corruption.
It was alleged at the time that Brennan, being the informer,
was entitled to a proportion of the fine of £SOO each, inflicted
upon the accused persons. There is no evidence that such a
payment was ever made to him.
BRENNAN, J.
It seems fitting to interpolate here that at a later period
13th March, 1925, to be accurate —Frank Tenison Brennan


was elected to a seat on the Supreme Court Bench. What
connection, if any, this executive act had with the famous
Bribery Case it is not desirable to say, even if there was
authentic information on the subject. Certain, however, it is
that there was much animation in Caucus on the day the
proposal was made. It does not by any means follow that
because certain misguided persons approach a {Prominent
politician with a bribe, the act per se should disqualify him
from going on to the Supreme Court Bench if otherwise
qualified. That would, indeed, be a very cruel denouement to
a disreputable incident. Consequently, Frank Tenison Bren-
nan remains on the Supreme Court Bench until the age of
70 years, or until nature otherwise ordains.
THE PROXY VOTE
A FREAK AND UNIQUE CIRCUMSTANCES
When on ist August, 1922, the Government had carried
against them in Committee an amendment in a modest little
measure entitled the Agricultural Education Bill, there were
indications of much anger and considerable chagrin. The
House that night broke up in manifest confusion. The Govern-
ment were in a dilemma, and having temporarily re-estab-
lished the status quo ante by the aid of the Speaker’s casting
vote, they by the same means obtained a ten days’ adjourn-
ment in order to study the new situation and devise means of
putting an end to an impasse.
Shortly after meeting again on 10th August, notice was
given of a Bill to amend the Legislative Assembly Act by
making provision in certain cases for the voting by proxy
of Members of the Legislative Assembly absent through ill-
health. The preliminary introductory stage of this measure
was taken on Wednesday, 16th August. It was bitterly
fought for hour after hour, thirteen divisions being recorded,
and in most instances the Government carried the day on the
casting vote of the Chairman of Committees. Similar pro-
ceedings took place on the following day, when the second-
reading and committee stages were taken, and it was not
until midnight, when gag after gag had been applied, that
this revolutionary, reactionary, and hopelessly discreditable
measure was finally passed on to the third-reading stage.
22
QUEENSLAND—


In no period of our political history is it possible to find
another example of legislation of even minor importance, to
say nothing of measures embodying discarded and discredited
principles, being forced upon the legislative body by the
casting vote of either Mr Speaker or the Chairman.
Necessity in this case was truly the mother of invention.
The situation was desperate and it seemed to be assumed that
any remedy, no matter how revolutionary, was justifiable. It
is said, though there is no proof of the statement, that James
Larcombe, Secretary for Railways and member for Keppel,
originated this unique legislation. If he did, his name should
certainly be enrolled among the immortals.
The total number of divisions on this three-clause Bill num-
bered 28; on eleven of those occasions the Speaker gave a
casting vote, and nine times the Chairman followed his lead.
But it remained for Michael Joseph Kirwan, Chairman of
Committees, to Out-Herod Herod. During the Committee
proceedings a resolution was moved to disagree with the
Chairman’s ruling, and when the time came to record the
division, he had no hesitation in ostentatiously giving his
casting vote in favour of his own ruling, and declaring him-
s_elf at one fell swoop the most unconsciously humorous per-
son in an assembly of 72 members.
It is thus, then, that the big, strong Labour Government
of 1915 saved itself in 1922.
In due course the Legislative Assembly Act Amendment
Bill, otherwise the Proxy Voting Bill, was presented to
Governor Nathan for the Royal Assent. The Nationalist-
Country Party Opposition had sent a strong protest to the
Governor, and had asked for the reservation of the Bill. Evi-
dently His Excellency was impressed with their arguments,
for he remonstrated strongly with Theodore against his de-
mand that the Bill should be assented to forthwith.
The writer is in a position to know this to be true. He
alone had the job of presenting the Bill to His Excellency
for assent, and he well remembers how perturbed His Ex-
cellency was on the morning of the 21st August and how
bitterly he spoke on the subject.
The Message of Assent was received on Tuesday, 22nd
August, 1922, and immediately thereafter Mr Speaker Bertram
produced no less than three medical certificates and notifica-


tions concerning two Ministers (McCormack and Gillies),
and J. T. Gilday. These Mr Speaker should have personally
read, but refrained from doing so. Instead he asked The Clerk
to read the documents, and contented himself with a short
written declaration that he believed the contents to be true.
On the following day, Wednesday, there was another medical
certificate concerning Coyne, the Secretary for Lands, who
had an inflamed ear. That night the gag was applied to the
Financial Statement debate. Previously a Standing Order
had been passed, limiting debate on the Address in Reply to
four days, and this was agreed to on the pledge by Theodore
that full liberty of discussion would be given on the Financial
Statement.
The proxies were even brought into requisition when the
gag was applied to the Financial Statement debate, and next
night the Nationalist-Country Party section of the Opposition
hired a public hall in which to deliver undelivered speeches
on the Financial Statement. It was a sight for the Gods to
see the cynical Theodore sitting in division during the gag
motion, and saying with a sardonic grin, “Mr Chairman, I
vote as a proxy for Mr McCormack, Mr Coyne, Mr Gillies,
and Mr Gilday.”
This innovation in Parliamentary Government is trenchantly
dealt with in the most recent edition of Professor Arthur
Berriedale Keith’s Responsible Government in the Dominions ,
where he says on page 388: —“The measure was justly
denounced by the Leader of the Opposition, but must
remain a serious blot on Mr Theodore’s sense of justice and
legislative propriety, giving forc/e to the contention that
Labour will stick at nothing to achieve its momentary ends.”
At page 765 he further adds: —“Such an arrangement was
really straining decency rather far even for Queensland.”
With Professor Berriedale Keith’s opinion the author
entirely agrees. The institution of the Proxy Vote was in
no sense Parliamentary Government as we in Queensland
have known it since 1859. One remembers well the sensitive-
ness of Robert Philp, who declined to carry on the Govern-
ment of Queensland with a certain majority of two, and one
contrasts this more refined ethical view of Parliamentary
Government with the crude yet audacious expedient of polling
the votes of men who at the very moment of taking a division
may be either dead or dying.
24
QUEENSLAND—


MR JOHN ARTHUR FIHELLY
There was one special feature about the session of 1922
which calls for particular remark. The House did not contain
the stormy petrel of the Labour Party, Mr John Arthur
Fihelly. That unusual politician had been otherwise provided
for after the session of 1921. He had become somewhat
embarrassing’ for quite a variety of reasons during the session
of 1921, and the party was not averse to sending him to
England as Agent-General.


THE TWENTY-THIRD PARLIAMENT
FIRST SESSION
The Twenty-second Parliament having been duly dissolved,
the elections were held on 23rd May, 1923, and the Twenty-
third Parliament met on the 10th July of the same year.
A TURN OVER
When we find the Labour Government returned at the 1920
election with a majority of four only; when we view their
struggle for power during the whole of the Twenty-second
Parliament and witness their majority dwindling to one, it is
indeed amazing that we find them in the Twenty-third Parlia-
ment revivified and with their numbers approaching those of
the election of 1915. Theodore led the Party to victory in
1923, and the following changes were brought about as the
result of the election.
GENERAL ELECTION 1923
Electoral districts abolished:—Drayton, W. Bebbington;
Musgrave, H. Cattermull; Pittsworth, J. H. C. Roberts.
Kennedy, H. A. Bruce defeated J. Jones; Port Curtis, G.
Carter defeated J. W. Fletcher; Townsville, M. P. Hynes
defeated W. H. Green; Merthyr, P. A. McLachlan defeated
P. B. Macgregor; W. Kelso was returned for Nundah; W.
F. Lloyd for Kelvin Grove; A. H. Wright for Bulimba.
Other changes which took place during the currency of
this Parliament were :
J. H. Coyne (Warrego), resigned 31st July, 1923; R. Bed-
ford elected, by-election 13th October, 1923; J> Huxham
(Buranda), resigned 31st July, 1924; E. J. Hanson elected,
by-election 16th August, 1924; F. T. Brennan (Toowoomba),
resigned 26th February, 1925; E. J. Llewelyn elected, by-
election 4th April, 1925; E. G. Theodore (Chillagoe), resigned
19th September, 1925; J. O’Keefe elected, by-election 16th
January, 1926; W.N. Gillies (Eacham), resigned 24th


October, 1925; C. J. Ryan elected, by-election 16th January,
1926; Coyne took refuge in the cool shades of the Land Court;
Huxham succeeded Fihelly as Agent-General.
THE CAUSE
Let us look for a moment at the cause of this remarkable
turn over. When we remember that at the 1920 election
Labour secured 38 seats and the Opposition 34, and that at the
1923 election Labour secured 43 seats and the Opposition
29, it is appropriate to look for a reason and to set down
what appear to be the facts of the case.
Under the Electoral Districts Act of 1910, three Commis-
sioners, Messrs Ferry, Carter and Dunlop, had been appointed
in 1921 to redistribute the electorates. It was a difficult task
as it always is, and as on former occasions it was humanly
impossible to please everybody. Numerous alterations were
made in the boundaries of existing electorates, but it is not
nroposed to discuss the altered boundaries beyond saying that
the scrupulously just manner of dealing with such questions
is to eliminate the political element entirely and delimit the
boundaries with a sole regard to the cold hard facts of the
altered distribution of the population, and with a desire to
give to each section of the State the representation to which
it is justly entitled, having regard to the interests of all
sections of the community. One could not justify an abnormal
city representation for the sole reason that city populations
had grown abnormally: nor could country districts expect
undue consideration at the expense of the city. The happy
medium must be found, and therein lies the difficulty. It is
not suggested that the delimitation of the boundaries was
purposely, and of malice aforethought, unfair, but there were
nevertheless some strange anomalies perpetrated by adding
on to certain electorates certain blocks of voters with whom
they had no common interest. The difficulty is admitted of
arriving at the correct quota of electors with common interests
in all cases, but the margin allowed under the Act is suffi-
ciently wide to enable this to be done without creating
manifest injustice. Under this redistribution three country
seats were entirely abolished —Drayton, Pittsworth and Mus-
grave—and that no doubt was one of the material factors
which led to the turn over of seats during the election of
1923.
Another cause was doubtless the want of unity among the
Opposition parties. During the critical period, 1920-1923, there


was little or no evidence of cohesion, and a party which
attempts in these days to fight an election with no objective,
and to contest against a well-organized section prepared to
make definite bids for public support, has small hope of
achieving success. In every walk of life strength lies in unity.
The individual as well as the party must have a definite pur-
pose —a goal to be attained by fixed determination or united
purpose. No man gets anywhere, simply by craving to be there,
or hoping for a miracle which will put him there. An objective
in any walk of life is only attained by work, nay, more often
than not by desperate effort, and what applies to the individual
is of equal application to a political party.
It was mainly the disunion and want of cohesion of the
Opposition parties in the Twenty-second Parliament, which
led to their confusion at the election of 1923.
So it came about that the Twenty-third Parliament met on
10th July, 1923, with Theodore still head of the Government
and of a strong party numbering 43 against the Opposition’s
29.
A PLACID SESSION
Throughout the whole session, extending from 10th July to
2nd November, 1923, a perfectly wonderful placidity marked
the proceedings. There was not even one real fight put up
on any proposal made by the Government, though there were
opportunities and to spare, for contesting legislation of, in
some cases, a novel character. A big session’s work was
accomplished in a comparatively short time, largely due to the
lack of Opposition enthusiasm and the laissez faire attitude
of that body. On important occasions they absented them-
selves in numbers, and took no personal interest in the work
for which they were paid. Indeed, one’s mind went back with
longing to the day when Griffith paid members according to
their attendance, and deducted two guineas for every day they
were absent. A re-enactment of some such drastic law might
have a wholesome effect.
The system of the Labour Party is after all straightforward
and intelligible. If a Labour supporter is not on the spot
when wanted, he is carpeted by caucus, and if he is persis-
tently lax, he stands no chance whatever at the next selection.
Parliamentary duty with the Labour Party is a business, and
Labour members who desire to supplement their incomes must
perforce put restraint upon themselves, and curb their im-
patience until the prorogation sets them more or less free.


THE WORK OF THE SESSION OF 1923
Of 48 Bills introduced during the session, no less than 45
became law.
The chief offender amongst the legislative law leviathans
was Gillies of the Department of Agriculture. Verily he
proved himself in 1923 a great and beneficent law-giver, for
he introduced and passed no less than twelve new measures.
Here is the record of Mr Gillies: —1 Agricultural Bank
Bill; 2 Cotton Industry Bill (he prohibited the growing of
ratoon cotton and created a riot and a strike among the
growers of the Dawson Valley during March, 1924) ; 3 Dingo
and Marsupial Destruction Act Amendment Bill; 4 Diseases
in Poultry Bill; 5 Fruit Marketing Organization Bill (which
created another riot among the orchardists. Gillies seemed to
be a specialist in the manufacture of disturbances) ; 6 Meat
Industry Encouragement Bill; 7 Pest Destroyers Bill;
8 Primary Producers Co-operative Associations Bill; 9
Primary Producers Organization Act Amendment Bill; 10
Primary Products Pools Act Amendment Bill; 11 Stallions
Registration Bill; 12 Sugar Experiment Stations Act Amend-
ment Bill. And when on the last day of the session he com-
pleted the last of these, he almost collapsed with physical
fatigue and mental inertia. It was too much for Gillies. He
had not got the keen intellect which would permit him to bear
such a load.
McCormack came next with the following nine Bills: —1
Closer Settlement Acts Amendment Bill; 2 Japanese Earth-
quake Relief Funds Bill; 3 Land Acts (Review of Cattle
Holding Rents) Bill; 4 Main Roads Act Amendment Bill;
5 Nerang River Bridge and Southport Burleigh Road Bill;
6 Palmerston Land Settlement Bill (not passed) ; 7 Prickly-
Pear Bill; 8 Sugar Workers’ Perpetual Lease Selections Bill;
9 Upper Burnett and Callide Land Settlement Bill.
Theodore contributed seven measures as follows: —1 Appro-
priation Bill, No. 1; 2 Appropriation Bill, No. 2; 3 Govern-
ment Loans Redemption and Conversion Bill; 4 Income Tax
Act Amendment Bill; 5 Land Tax Act Amendment Bill; 6
Local Bodies Loans Guarantee Bill; and, 7 Private Savings
Banks Bill.
Then came Brennan, with six:—l City of Brisbane Bill (not
passed) ; 2 Dental, Opticians and Pharmacy Acts Amendment
Bill (not passed). This was a cheerful measure to give certain
persons, who had neither the industry nor brains to pass
examinations, the right to prey upon the public without quali-


fication. 3 Fire Brigades Act Amendment Bill; 4 Local Auth-
orities Acts Amendment Bill; 5 Rockhampton, Toowoomba,
Warwick and Gatton Public Land Mortgage Bill; and 6
Salaries Act Amendment Bill.
The Attorney-General, Mullan, came next with five: —1
Insurance Bill; 2 Jury Act Amendment Bill (this allowed
among other things women to sit as jurors) ; 3 Racecourses
Bill; 4 Trust Accounts Bill; and 5 Workers’ Compensation
Acts Amendment Bill.
Then came W. Forgan Smith (a possible Premier if there
were a shuffle, and one of the most intellectual members of
the party). He introduced and passed four Bills: —1 Elec-
trical Workers’ Bill; 2 Industrial Arbitration Act Amendment
Bill; 3 Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Acts
Amendment Bill; and 4 Weights and Measures Acts Amend-
ment Bill.
The Home Secretary, Stopford, introduced two: —1 Hos-
pitals Bill; and 2 Liquor Acts Amendment Bill.
A. J. Jones, the Secretary for Mines, passed:—l The Mil-
som Petroleum Agreement Ratification Bill; and 2 The
Petroleum Bill.
And Larcombe came in at the tail end, with a diminutive
Railway Act Amendment Bill.
THE CHICKEN THAT CAME HOME TO ROOST
During the session, at various opportune periods, reference
was made by the Treasurer, Theodore, and leading members
of the Opposition, to a certain little Bill which had to be met
by the State in the shape of expiring loans. On these occasions
a certain amount of nervous trepidation was apparent. Theo-
dore and others were somewhat apologetic, and not nearly so
emphatic as aforetime, when mentioning the effect of “The
Repudiation Act” upon the prospect of borrowing redemption
money in London. The Opposition failed to rub in to any
extent the old stuff re broken contracts with ruined pas-
toralists, and adopted the kindly and friendly attitude of the
gentleman who sidles up to one in the street, and asks for
the loan of half a crown. It was marvellous how unanimous
everybody was in his desire that Queensland should be suc-
cessful, and Theodore, who announced his intention of going
to London on this business, assured the House, that he in-
tended to approach the London financiers in the most con-
ciliatory spirit, and that he could be depended upon to act
with the greatest circumspection.


The critical position in which the State was placed may be
gathered from the following. Queensland had to pay back
between the years 1924 and 1926 £85,691,228, but the most
pressing and immediate need was a small sum of £13,296,196,
due in 1924, and £12,143,562 due in 1925. When a Treasurer
has to go looking for millions of money, it will be admitted
that the position is acute and the task an anxious one. Never-
theless, early in the recess he went looking. He could have
left this minor transaction to the versatile Agent-General,
Fihelly, but Theodore was not trusting our representative in
the home of “Cant, hypocrisy and humbug,” and went himself.
Thereupon Fihelly went off post-haste to meet him half-way,
in New York, with his resignation in his pocket—the victim
of disappointed ambitions.
On 2nd April, 1924, a cable had come through announcing
that after much negotiation Theodore had agreed that the
pastoral rents as at 30th May, 1924, should be “The maximum
rents and that no further demand should be made upon the
pastoralists.
THE DISAPPOINTED AGENT-GENERAL
And what of Fihelly? Interviewed in London by the Aus-
tralian Press Association, and asked for his reasons for re-
turning to Queensland, he gave one of his characteristic replies
—namely, that Moses had ten commandments; President
Wilson fourteen points, and he had three children. When
this speech was originally made, it was funny, but as it hap-
pened to be pirated from the utterance of an English public
man, it can only be assumed that Fihelly thinks that nobody
in Queensland reads the English papers.
LEADERSHIPS
the session just closed, Charles Taylor, Member for
Windsor, had succeeded Vowles as Leader of the Opposi-
tion; i.e., the National section, with Elphinstone as Deputy
Leader, and Arthur Edward Moore, of whom more will be
heard later, was elected Leader of the Country Party. These
announcements were made on nth July, 1923.
THE SESSION OF 1924
SECOND SESSION OF THE TWENTY-THIRD PARLIAMENT
The second session of the Twenty-third Parliament was
opened on 29th July, amid drab surroundings and a dull
political outlook.


A COMBINED OPPOSITION
On the opening of the session, 29th July, A. E. Moore
announced a “working arrangement” between the two Opposi-
tion Parties. He said that each party would retain its
identity, but that they had enough in common, in the interests
of the State to work together in Opposition on the floor of
the House. This statement was made after a joint meeting
of the two Opposition Parties, held on the 9th April, 1924,
Mr Taylor having announced that he was not a candidate for
Leadership. As a matter of fact the two parties went to the
Country later on, in 1926, as one cohesive party and have been
commendably united ever since.
The session was short and sharp, lasting only from 29th
July, until 22nd October, and on the Government benches
there was an apparent sense of impending change of weather.
Theodore had come back from England after “compromising”
over the Land Act repudiation measure. He had bitterly
offended his extreme wing, and in addition he had announced
his intention of leaving the local arena, and standing as labour
candidate for the Federal Herbert seat. Palpably he had lost
caste with some of the rank and file, and his speeches on im-
portant occasions were received in cold silence and with mani-
fest impatience. Immediately on his announcement of his
Federal ambitions the strings began to be pulled and play
made for the future Leadership. This was decided in
February, 1925, and Gillies won by a narrow margin.
THE HERBERT PLEBISCITE
As a matter of history Theodore won the Herbert plebiscite
in October, 1924, by a two to one majority over his very
bitter opponent, Ferricks, M.L.A. for South Brisbane. Fer-
ricks was confident that given a fair go, he could win hands
down, but he overestimated his strength.
DAYLIGHT SITTINGS
It is an ironical situation, and an illustration of the psycho-
logy of the human being, that at intervals a brilliant conception
emanates from the least expected source. The session of
1923 had sorely tried W. N. Gillies, the Acting Premier. He
had had charge of a large number of Bills—some long, and
some short; some simple and some complicated. It was not


an overburden for an average intelligent man, but it got
Gillies down. Suddenly there flashed into his mind the idea
that night work was barbarous, and as he was Acting Premier
at the end of that session, and all the while Theodore was
m England, he had the power to set wheels in motion for
the purpose of experimenting in Daylight Sittings. It was a
troublesome job which fell upon the writer, but as he, too,
was anxious to try the experiment, an elaborate Sessional
Order was drafted, submitted to Caucus, and approved by a
narrow majority. Consequently we started the 1924 session
under entirely new auspices. The House met at 10 a.m.
and adjourned automatically at p.m. A few members
engaged in business in the city cordially disapproved of the
innovation, but the new practice so grew upon members that
when 5.30 p.m. approached they were like a lot of eager
schoolboys anxious to be let loose. Generally speaking, the
new system was a pronounced success. At first it led to'thin
houses, and later on to a good deal of “pairing,” but there is
no doubt that it is the civilized method of doing the business
of the country.
A NEW PREMIER FOR SEVEN AND A HALF MINUTES
The House had no sooner met than an urgent caucus meet-
ing was summoned, primarily to deal with a proposed
statutory 44-hour week, the repeal of the Salaries Act which
deducted 5% from the salary of everybody in the Public
Service, including members of Parliament, and the removal
of the embargo preventing Public Servants who received more
than £3OO per annum from going to the Arbitration Court.
The atmosphere was very electric. Theodore was in partial
disgrace. It was alleged that he had given away in England
the self-governing rights of the State, and to make matters
worse for himself, he is said to have opposed all three of the
before-mentioned proposals. Feeling in caucus ran very high.
The language used was lurid, and the strong Premier swing-
ing the axe over the heads of his supporters, threatened that
if he did not get his own way he would resign. Then came a
roar from the advanced wing, and they told him they were
tired of his threats. Whereupon he left the caucus room
followed by the members of his Ministry. It is a thousand
pities that just at this moment that inimitable satirist, W. S.
Gilbert, could not have put his head inside the door, so that
he might lampoon the subsequent proceedings. The Caucus
D


was without a Leader: the Premier and Government had half
resigned. What was to be done? With the solemnity of a
Quaker’s meeting, Caucus proceeded to elect a Leader in the
person of “Charles Collins,” the member for Bowen, and as
Deputy Leader John Payne, member for Mitchell. And then
a terrible thing happened. A hinge creaked, and the startled
multitude on looking up beheld the old, old Government, just
as it knew it before the recent fray, trooping back into the
room. They had held a little caucus upstairs, and had found
a 'Modus vivendi. And so you see that the hatchet was tem-
porarily buried, and the kindly member for Bowen passed out
of the ephemeral limelight, back again into outer darkness
unlit by the fires of the Bowen Steel Works.
ESTIMATES 1924-1925
Another innovation was introduced during this session.
After passing the Address in Reply, and one or two small
measures, the House settled down to discuss the Financial
Statement, followed by seventeen weary days on end, of
Estimates. Day followed day with nothing to relieve the
intolerable monotony of Little Peddlington criticism on De-
partmental votes. But the end came, and then the final
Appropriation Bill of the year. Usually this signifies the
end of all things parliamentary, but in this case it was only the
beginning. Finance out of the way, Parliament drove head
first into a mild avalanche of bills. It authorized a ten mil-
lion loan, amended the Diseases in Plants Act, and put on
the Statute Book useful measures relating to Apprenticeship
and Weights and Measures. The Curator Act,
Auctioneers and Commission Agents Act, Justices Act, Oaths
Act and Police Act came in for amendment. The Oaths Act
Amendment Bill abolished kissing the Bible as a compulsory
service. Henceforth prostitutes and ladies, plutocrats and
burglars only had to hold the disease-laden tome in their
hands, and swear to tell the truth. It was a wonderful re-
form. Instead of kissing the same page as Mary Ann
O’Sullivan, the lady of doubtful morals, all one had to do was
to absorb her filth by grasping firmly the same page that she
had pawed. The Police Act Amendment Bill abolished the
poor policeman at sixty years of age and conferred some
minor privileges on him during the few years he was em-
ployed. The Animals and Birds Act Amendment Bill imposed
a royalty on skins, and proclaimed them all Crown property.


Queensland is a great country for taxation indeed. The
south Bnsbane-Kyogle-Grafton Railway Agreement Bill gave
Queensland a very cheap railway into New South Wales and
as some say, bestowed a “new Province” on us. The Blind
Deaf and Dumb Children Bill made it compulsory on parents
to educate these little unfortunates. The Babinda Sugar
Works Bill handed over, on terms, the Central Mill of that
name to a co-operation of farmers. The Commonwealth and
State Income Tax Agreement Bill confirmed the collection of
the two taxes by the State authority. The City of South
Brisbane Improvement Bill made provision for resuming pro-
perty for City Improvement. The City of Brisbane Bill
provided for a greater Brisbane reaching out to Sandgate in
one direction, and Wynnum in the other. The Public Service
Act Amendment Bill removed the shameful and dishonest
embargo upon Public Servants drawing ,£3OO a year and
going- to the Arbitration Court. The Cotton Industry Act
Amendment Bill was a crawl down by farmer Gillies and a
concession to the growers of ratoon cotton. The Land Tax
Act Amendment Bill re-enacted the super tax. There were
minor amendments of the Local Authorities Act, and the
Trustees and Executors’ Act. All Saints Church was given
power to mortgage its land, and the same thing was done for
Emu Park, Innisfail, Maleny, Morningside and Townsville
School of Arts. A Bill was passed to make legal certain
regulations regarding the Tully River Sugar Lands. The
Brisbane Gas Company was given power to increase its capital
to a million. An amendment to the Navigation Act to regu-
late motor boats was dropped, and so was the Stamp Act
Amendment Bill which proposed increasing our taxation by
100% on bank cheques. The Land Acts, Metropolitan Water
Supply and Sewerage Act, Real Property Act, Friendly
Societies’ Act and Tramway Trust Act were amended in
minor particulars. The Income Tax Act was consolidated,
and the Industrial Arbitration Act was amended to provide
for a 44-hour week. What a pity to stop half-way! Why
work at all? That was the lot —about 35 of them —and pro-
bably 30 too many. One remembers the cynical D. H.
Dalrymple and his estimate of Parliament. “Shut the damned
place up for five years.” That was his panacea, and he was
more or less right.
The session was over. That was the end.


THE RECESS OF 1925
It does not necessarily follow that the history of a Parlia-
ment is wholly made within the four walls of the Legislative
Chamber, though the main incidents of history take place
within those sacred, dignified and august precincts. Many
things indeed happen outside which have a very distinct
bearing upon the matters occurring inside, and the year 1925
affords us two remarkable examples of the fact. For instance,
no political act could well be of more importance than the
change of Leadership in a Party, and it was early in 1925
(February 26th, to be exact) that a change of this nature
took place. E. G. Theodore had been Premier of Queens-
land since 22nd October, 1919. He had, as admitted on all
hands, done good work for his party. His outstanding ability
had come to be recognized by all classes. He knew what he
wanted, and generally speaking, he accomplished his pur-
poses, often in the face of very strenuous opposition from his
party. He was, however, a strong man who knew when his
followers had gone far enough, and hence he frequently came
into conflict with his party inside and outside the House,
and on numerous occasions gave them some home truths
when they attempted to force down his throat economically
rotten propositions. Kidston shammed strength: Theodore
possessed it. He saw that the parting of the way was inevit-
able, but he hung on in the hope that he might yet bring to
reason the unreasoning members of his party. Hence, by a
very gradual process he became more and more unpopular,
and when on his last trip to England he not only dined at
Buckingham Palace, but wore spats and a top hat, and in
addition made the now famous compromise with the London
financiers over what is known as the “Repudiation Act,” he
returned to Queensland discredited among the extremists,
who, to use the marvellous mixed metaphor of a Federal
Senator—“ Crawled about on their hands and knees like a
snake in the grass, with revolvers in one hand and knives hi
the other, ready to stab him in the back.” He saw that the
situation was growing impossible, and as a Federal election
was looming towards the end of 1925, he determined to get
out, and woo the electors of the Federal Herbert seat. Elis
resignation from the Queensland Parliament is dated 19th
September, 1925. He first signed the Roll on 2nd November,


1909. Members of Parliament might well be pardoned tor
acquiring the vice of vanity if they were all as successful "is
Edward Granville Theodore.
THE HERBERT SHOCK
The Herbert Federal Election was contested with much
spirit and vigour by Dr Lewis Nott, Theodore’s opponent.
At first he was held very cheap indeed. The ex-Premier
anticipated at the outset a ridiculously easy victory of over
3000. Later on he revised his estimate, when he noticed the
effect of his opponent’s campaigning. Then came the end of
the contest and when the final count was announced, Edward
Granville Theodore was a defeated candidate.
WHO SHOULD SUCCEED THEODORE
The question arose who was to succeed Theodore. The
somewhat weak though amiable Gillies had been Acting
Premier, and two other competitors were both strong men
McCormack and Forgan Smith. In due course the party
met after intriguing for many weeks outside. Every aspirant
had his scouts and his touts. Heads were counted repeatedly
by the various candidates, and it became evident that there
was to be a close run for the Leadership between Gillies and
McCormack. McCormack was cocksure, and said he had it in
his pocket, but herein he reckoned without his host. At
this time there happened to be a vacancy on the Supreme
Court Bench, and Frank T. Brennan, honorary minister, was a
candidate. McCormack openly opposed him for the Judgeship,
and hence Brennan, both surreptitiously and openly, opposed
McCormack for the Leadership. McCormack, it transpired,
had made a bad miscalculation. One or two who promised
him votes turned dog on him, and thus Brennan in the caucus
had the casting vote, just as Brennan in the Cabinet had had.
He eagerly cast it against McCormack, and Gillies secured
the Premiership by one little vote. It was a pity in one sense.
McCormack was the abler of the two. Gillies, on the other
hand was well-meaning no doubt, but slow and pulled hither
and thither by the latest influence. However, there was the
result—Gillies as Premier, and we dawdle on through the
balance of the recess until we come to
37
OUR SEVENTH POLITICAL DECADE, 1920-1930


THE SESSION OF 1925
THE THIRD SESSION OF THE TWENTY-THIRD
PARLIAMENT
And what an epoch-making session it was to be sure. The
House met on 28th July, and forthwith decided to continue
the daylight sittings which had been established in 1924,
though during the session the Federal Government announced
suddenly its intention of appealing to the people, and this
so alarmed labour that it was determined to hurry up and get
outside as quickly as possible. Thus for a fortnight Parlia-
ment sat day and night to 10 p.m., and divided one whole
sitting into two “Supply” days, thus wiping out the sixteen
days allotted to Supply in eight days.
GILLIES AS LEADER
It is no reflection whatever upon William Neal Gillies to
say that as a leader of politicians he was not a profound
success. He really became leader by reason of the fact that
he was a very kindly disposed man, both privately and
politically, and among his party it is safe to say that Bill
Gillies had no enemy. Unfortunately for himself he was over-
shadowed by two men of greater ability—McCormack and
W. Forgan Smith, either of whom could lose him with facility
when it came to a question of general knowledge. Gillies,
recognizing his limitations, was vacillating and timid, and
though he conscientiously did his very best, and was an up-
right and honourable man, his best friend could not credit
him with the qualifications for leadership.
TROUBLE FOR THE GILLIES GOVERNMENT
It was not long after the House met that the Gillies Gov-
ernment met trouble. The Railway servants defied the Govern-
ment, defied the Arbitration Court, struck work throughout the
State and brought on incredible confusion and loss. Twice Par-
liament adjourned to give opportunity for negotiation, and
finally negotiation ended in the abject surrender of Constitu-
tional Government. The strikers triumphed; the Government
wilted, and Rymer a Railway leader ostentatiously declared
that he had but to make a “gesture” for them to obey. No
matter from what angle one looks at this unfortunate occur-
rence, however much one would like to find an excuse for
what was allowed to happen, there is only one conclusion that


one can come to, if there is any desire whatever to tell the
truth, and that is that it was a deplorable example of weak
Government. Later on we shall see how the same Govern-
ment, under different leadership, dealt with an almost exactly
similar situation, more emphatically, more straightforwardly,
and with very much credit to themselves.
A WANT OF CONFIDENCE MOTION REFUSED
On the 15th October, 1925, the Leader of the Opposition
(Moore) gave notice of Motion “That the Government does
not possess the confidence of this House.”
Authorities on Parliamentary Government will hardly
believe that at the direction of Premier Gillies this Motion
was set down among “General Business —Notices of Motion.”
No opportunity for its discussion was ever afforded, and
thus a well-recognized constitutional practice was ignored.
At page 262 of May's Parliamentary Practice it is definitely
laid down that —
“In the case of Motions amounting to a distinct vote of
Want of Confidence, proposed or sanctioned by the Leader
of the Opposition, it is the practice of the Government to
concede an opportunity of discussion.”
Again on 17th November, 1926, the Leader of the Opposi-
tion was treated once more in this cavalier manner, when
desiring to challenge the Government by Motion of Want of
Confidence.
It is hoped that these precedents have been created
thoughtlessly, and without knowledge of the offence that
was being committed against an established usage of Con-
stitutional Government.
THE LEGISLATION OF 1925
Let us examine now the legislation of the session. The
chef d’oeuvre was to have been child endowment , but when
Rymer and his truculent followers practically commandeered
hundreds of thousands of pounds without reference to the
Arbitration Court, the Government abandoned that part of
their programme.
First and foremost they fixed the Basic Wage by Act of
Parliament, and made it impossible for the Court to decide
upon evidence what it should be. They said every man
should have £4 ss. per week for a certainty, but they allowed
the Court to give as much more as it saw fit. They abolished


the Court of Arbitration as then constituted, and created
a Board of Trade and Arbitration constituted of a
judge and two laymen. One layman was Gillies, who stepped
down from the Premiership, and the other a union secretary
named Dunstan. To each of these was given £2OOO a year for
seven years. The arrangement had this advantage that it
made room for McCormack, as Premier, quite late in the
session, and allowed one other ralnker to get ministerial
emolument.
The other measures passed were mostly of minor import-
ance. The Legislation totalled something like 31 Bills and
included the Townsville Bridges Act, Income Tax Regulations
Ratification Act, Primary Products Pools Act Amendment
Act, Inspection of Machinery Act Amendment Act, Primary
Producers Organization Act Amendment Act, Trust Accounts
Act Amendment Act, Mining Act Amendment Act, Worked
Homes Act Amendment Act, Main Roads Act Amendment
Act, Salaries Acts Repeal Act, Cairns, Ipswich and Too-
woomba Public Lands Mortgages Act, Bank of New South
Wales Act, Workers’ Compensation Acts Amendment Act,
Heavy Vehicles Act, Water Act, Animals Protection Act,
Wheat Pool Act Amendment Act, City of Townsville Public
Hall Improvement Act, State Securities Registration Act,
Elections Act Amendment Act, Medical Act, Coalmining Act,
Fruit Marketing Organization Act Amendment Act, Lands
Act Amendment Act, Local Authorities Acts Amendment
Act, Duchess to Mt. Isa Railway Act and two Appropriation
Acts. Such a crop of amending measures never was. Verily
one began to wonder whether after all the unicameral system
was such a treasure after all.
We went into recess in a hurry, for it was urgent that
members should take part in the forthcoming federal elec-
tion.
Parliament adjourned on 23rd October, 1925, and that was
the end of the Twenty-third Parliament.


THE TWENTY-FOURTH PARLIAMENT
The Twenty-fourth Parliament of Queensland was elected
on Bth May, 1926 and met on 27th July of the same year.
The following was the state of Parties—
Ministerialists (Labour) 43, Opposition 29.
Thus it will be seen that the balance of power remained
exactly the same as in the Twenty-third Parliament.
The following are the changes in personnel consequent on
the election—
E. M. Hanlon (Ithaca) replaced J. T. Gilday; A. L. Petrie
(Toombul), did not contest seat, H. M. Russell elected; W.
J. Vowles (Dalby), defeated by W. A. Russell.
During the progress of the Parliament the following changes
took place —
E. M. Land (Balonne), died 2nd May, 1927, S. J. Brassing-
ton elected, by-election 6th August, 1927; F. L. Nott (Stan-
ley), died sth December, 1927, E. L. Grimstone elected, by-
election 25th February, 1928; J. Payne (Mitchell), died 14th
January, 1928, R. R. Bow elected, by-election 26th May, 1928;
B. H. Corser (Burnett), resigned 16th August, 1928, R. L.
Boyd elected, by-election 13th October, 1928. Session ended
before Date of Return of Writ; Hon. J. G. Appel (Albert),
died 19th March, 1929, no by-election held. House dissolved
nth April, 1929.
FIRST SESSION
The first session of the Twenty-fourth Parliament opened
on 27th July under the leadership of W. McCormack amidst
the usual surroundings. McCormack had had only one week
of leadership in the previous session, after Gillies had retired
into the cool shades of the Arbitration Court in October,
1925, on £2OOO a year. It remained, therefore, for William
McCormack to endeavour to make good.
Certain it is that he had been shocked beyond measure at
the selection, as Premier, of Gillies in preference to himself.
In some respects he was justified in his attitude, for whatever


may be said of the kindly personal characteristics of Gillies,
the most superficial observer could see which of the two was
the more capable and well-informed man.
DEPARTURE OF GOVERNOR NATHAN
Governor Nathan had left the State, and hence the cere-
mony was shorn of some of its spectacular efifect, the frock
coat of the Lieutenant-Governor being drab and uninterest-
ing compared with the gorgeous apparel of a real Governor.
McCORMACK AS LEADER
It would be true to say that McCormack as Leader was an
improvement upon Gillies. Certainly he had the advantage
of possessing keener brains and being a quick thinker, but he
gave one the daily impression of regarding the proceedings
as a joke and Parliament as a House of entertainment. He
was a moderately good speaker, and having a keen sense of
humour the party took kindly to him.
A MEASURE OF ECONOMY
The times were not promising when McCormack took office.
The Railways were going from bad to worse, and the financial
outlook generally was gloomy, yet one of the first acts of the
session was a measure to amend the Constitution Act by
creating another Minister, and by raising salaries all round.
A majority of the party had made up its mind to increase
members’, ministers’ and Speaker’s salaries by £250 a year,
and they did it. To the credit of McCormack, be it said,
that in caucus he opposed the proposal with considerable
vigour.
Another £s°° a year was added to the public burdens by
amending the Audit Act, and increasing the Auditor-General’s
salary to £ISOO per annum. Mure Robertson retired from
that office and was succeeded by G. L. Beal, Under-Secretary
to the Treasurer.
The Cotton Industry Act was amended. Stamp Duties were
increased materially, and a Gift Duty Act was passed in the
desperate hope that everybody would be giving everybody
else gifts, all of which would be taxable.


The Income Tax Act was further amended to find more
revenue, but as a disastrous drought had brought the chief
Income Tax contributors to their knees, it could hardly be
anticipated that this desperate grabbing at a very weak straw
would have much effect.
An amendment was made in the Liquor Act which bore
the impress of the publican’s fat fingers, and made his posi-
tion a little more secure.
Other measures dealt with (nearly all by way of amend-
ment) were the Crown Lands Act, the Local Government
Act, a measure dealing with War Service Settlers and their
Dependents, Land Tax Act renewing the super-tax iniquity,
a Loan Act to add £9,000,000 to our future burdens, Primary
Producers’ Co-operative Associations Act Amendment, a
Railways Act Amendment which made a gesture of severity
towards recalcitrant railway servants, a Federal Aid Roads
Agreement Act, a Sugar Workers Act Amendment Bill,
Public Curator Act Amendment Bill, a Water Act which
raised strong resentment amongst settlers, and two or three
tinpot, minor, semi-private measures. As usual, the desire
seemed to be to struggle into recess.
CHILLAGOE STATE SMELTERS AND MUNGANA MINES
Undoubtedly the sensation of the session was the disclosure
made by the Leader of the Opposition, A. E. Moore,
regarding the Chillagoe State Smelters and the Mungana
Mines, together with the relations existing between those
disastrous enterprises and three persons named Reid (a min-
ing speculator), Goddard (the Manager), and Dunlop (the
Police Magistrate at Chillagoe).
This question is altogether too delicate a one to be en-
larged upon in a political history. It involves amongst other
things, the personal relations between members of the Queens-
land Labour Government and certain officials and others
associated with the Chillagoe State Smelters and the Mungana
Mine. No good purpose can be served by going into detail
at this stage. Those who are interested can read for them-
selves the story as disclosed in the pages of Hansard for
1926. Twice during the session of 1926 was the matter
trenchantly dealt with by the Leader of the Opposition and
his followers. On another occasion Speaker Bertram on 3rd


November, 1926, refused to give an opportunity for discussion
under cover of a Motion for the adjournment of the House.
A demand by Moore for the appointment of a Royal Com-
mission to inquire into the whole matter was treated in a
cavalier manner by McCormack who declared that there was
“nothing to inquire about.” Yet by the official figures of the
Auditor-General himself, it was shown that grave irregul-
arities had been taking place. It is not the purpose or the
business of the writer to say who was responsible for the
astounding circumstances disclosed by official figures, and
particularly is it not his business to even hint at the possible
beneficiaries, but it may be said with some considerable degree
of truth in the assertion, that the Chillagoe Smelters and
Mungana Mine State Enterprise had terribly disastrous con-
sequences to the State and are probably the most shocking
example extant of the failure of the Government to make
good in the field of Governmental control of a trading concern.
A NEW GOVERNOR
Lieutenant-General Sir Thomas Herbert John Chapman
Goodwin K.C.8., C.M.G., D. 5.0., F.R.C.S. arrived on 13th
June, 1927, and was sworn in in the old Legislative Council
Chamber. He opened the second session of the Twenty-
fourth Parliament on 24th August, 1927.
THE SESSION OF 1927
SECOND SESSION OF THE TWENTY-FOURTH
PARLIAMENT
The session of 1927, the second of the Twenty-fourth Parlia-
ment, opened on 24th August, 1927, and terminated on
15th December. Following the precedent of the last three
years, the daylight sittings were continued, but there was a
growing feeling, even among the most enthusiastic supporters
of daylight work, that the sting had been taken out of Parlia-
ment. When we say “sting” let us be honest. The real
feeling was that limelight had disappeared, and without an
audience in the galleries Parliament had become a drab affair.
Many a man who would speak his full forty minutes with a
bevy of smiling and admiring electors gazing at him and
drinking in his pellucid eloquence, contents himself with a


quarter of an hour, when he knows there is no one in the
gallery waiting to be thrilled by his Homeric efforts. Before
leaving the subject, let it be said that the Opposition, as
any Opposition would, took advantage of the time for auto-
matic adjournment to talk matters out until 5.30 p.m. This
raised the ire of McCormack very frequently, and on more
than one occasion he came up to the Table and remarked
“Who drew up this adjectival Sessional Order: it is no
adjectival good to me” forgetful the while that he as Leader
of the House approved of it, and should have anticipated the
use that would be made of it by his opponents. Let it go at
that. The future may hold for us a reversion to the former
system.
There is much to be written of the session of 1927 and
perhaps it is well to clear the air, and first state roughly what
was accomplished in the shape of legislation. This will be
followed by more interesting and readable matter, some of it
per force not too palatable to a class of parliamentarian who
cares little either for personal repute or public condemnation.
THE MEASURES PASSED IN 1927
In all, twenty-eight measures were passed into Law, of which
five or six may be considered important. The Land Act Amend-
ment Bill was founded on the report of the Land Advisory
Committee, but Caucus would not swallow an extension of
leases as recommended, and confined it largely to relief 01
selectors. The Commonwealth and States Financial Agree-
ment Bill ratified a fine statesmanlike proposal by the Bruce-
Page Government to abolish the per capita payments; to
take over a large part of the public debts of the states, and
generally to lay the foundation for sound financial relations
between the States and the Commonwealth. It was a fine
statesmanlike measure, showing much vision, and bids fair
to place on a sound footing the financial affairs of the Com-
monwealth. The Petroleum Act was a useful measure, though
it gave very wide Governmental powers in the matter of
granting leases.
The Public Service Superannuation Act Amendment
liberalized that measure. The fund, strangely enough, is
solvent. It is a State Enterprise under strictly business
management. The Rural Fires Bill was a necessary precau-
tionary measure. There were bills to deal with the protection
of aboriginals, Agricultural Township Portions, Apprentice-


ship, Electrical Workers, Evidence and Discovery Act
Amendment, Brisbane River Tidal Lands Improvement, Fruit
and Vegetables, Infant Life Protection, two small Mining
Bills, Wire Netting Advances, Unemployed Workers In-
surance, a measure to hand over certain Sugar Mills to Co-
operative Associations, a Law Society Bill, Reciprocal
Enforcement of Judgments Bill, Local Authorities Act
Amendment, a measure to continue the Land Tax, a semi-
private Bill dealing with the mortgage of certain lands granted
for public purposes, and three Appropriation Bills. In these
days bills introduced mean bills passed. A Government with
a majority of fourteen, and no Legislative Council to hinder
them, puts a bill in at one end of the machine, the minister
concerned turns a handle, and out it comes at the other end,
only requiring the signature of the Governor to make it law.
It is a simple process.
THE CRISIS OF SEPTEMBER, 1927
On Tuesday 30th August, 1927, the House met under what
may fairly be described as electrical conditions. Under
ordinary circumstances Parliament would have proceeded
with the debate on the Address in Reply, but parliamentarians
propose and other people dispose. There had been for two or
more months an industrial dispute at the South Johnstone
Sugar Mill. Feeling had run high. The farmers, who own
the mill, had defied the unions and were working the mill
themselves. The district had been plastered with police.
There had been more or less violence, with one fatal shooting
incident in which a picket was killed. The A.W.U. had
taken charge of the trouble. Members of the Board of Trade
and the Industrial Magistrate had intervened, and negotia-
tions without end had taken place. Finally a proposal was
made by the Board of Trade which in the words of Riordan,
the A.W.U. secretary, would have given the strikers “a 100%
victory.” Nevertheless they unanimously turned it down.
The sugar from the mill ordinarily goes to Mourilyan Har-
bour, to be shipped south, and wisely or unwisely it was now
determined to send consignments south by rail. This
excited the hostility of local railway men, although they
were advised to keep out of the dispute by Riordan and the
A.W.U. In spite of this, certain southern mischief-makers
urged the railway men to resist. Thus in ones and twos
they began to defy the authority of the Commissioner. As
each one refused duty he was dismissed, until approximately
46
QUEENSLAND—


about 150 were put off. The trouble grew more acute.
The Government stiffened its back, and resolved to test the
question of who was to govern. They therefore made a
dramatic move, and decided to dismiss all members of the
Australian Railway Union on Saturday, 3rd September, with
the right of reinstatement if they signed a pledge to obey the
Commissioner. This was a tactical blunder, for it picked out
one particular railway union among several, and it looked
as if McCormack wanted to smash two prominent railway
leaders, as indeed he did. Subsequently the ukase was
amended and all railway men were to be given notice of the
termination of their engagements on the following Monday,
subject, however, to their signing an undertaking to obey
lawful commands. Many signed; many did not. The com-
bined railway unions became more defiant, and interpreted
the Government’s action as a direct attack by a labour admin-
istration on unionism in general. The fat then was properly
in the fire. Some recanted and withdrew their pledge; some
remained loyal to the Government, but the net result was
that on Monday, sth September the railways stopped running
from Cape York to Point Danger. It was a critical situation
—the second of its kind within two years. On the last
occasion in 1925, Gillies had given in to a demand for increased
wages, and had enacted a basic wage to satisfy the malcon-
tents. On this occasion the dispute had an entirely different
aspect. It was not a question of wages, but of alleged prin-
ciple. According to the leaders of the revolt, the whole
foundation of the trades union movement had been made to
rock by renegade cabinet ministers, who had been recreant to
their sacred trust. McCormack particularly must be pushed
out. His recent visit to England had converted him into an
autocratic plutocrat. He had hob-nobbed with high financiers;
he had sat at the same table with the great masters of indus-
try ; he had shaken hands and conversed with the King.
Well, to cut a long story short, the Government on 30th
August secured an adjournment for a week, and the Govern-
ment party trooped down to the caucus room to scratch their
heads, and find a path through the maze. It was not a happy
gathering. Fifteen extremists, so it is said, definitely opposed
the Government, and swore to have their blood or scalps,
or something else which would serve as triumphant trophies.
The meeting ended late that evening, and the Government
sat down with grim determination to enforce constitutional
authority. In the meantime the Premier, the unions leaders


and the Arbitration Court were busy trying to find a way out.
Conference after conference took place; sparring without end
was the order of the day, but the parties seemed to be in a
kind of cul-de-sac and could find no means of egress. The
week slipped by, and Parliament met again on Tuesday 6th
September. It was a tense situation. The Premier asked
for another adjournment, which was supported by the leader
of the Opposition with an offer of his party to throw in their
lot in the cause of constitutional government. The House
met at 10.30 a.m. and sat until 9.45 p.m. that night. The
insurgents on the Government side had grown in numbers.
Instead of fifteen malcontents there were twenty, and one
after another they testified to the glories of unionism, the
wickedness of enforcing discipline in the railway service,
and the recreant character of the Government’s action. Never
before in the history of the Queensland Parliament had one
seen so many bucking bronchos kicking over the traces.
Bronchos, eh? They were real brumbies. Let it be said,
though the truth is at times unpalatable, that certain members
had visions of coming plebiscites and that £ls a week was
not to be lightly thrown away. It was a pitiable spectacle,
and if the gods ever weep they must have been unusually
lachrymose that night. Here was a case of insolent defiance
of constituted authority by a body of men wonderfully and
astonishingly well treated, and yet there were those who for
the sake of votes were prepared to drive, not a nail, but a
marlinspike into the coffin of Queensland.
After an exceptionally able, logical and unbiased statement
of the case by McCormack, and much mouthing and frothing
by a section of his supporters, the adjournment was carried
until 15th September, being strongly supported by the opposi-
tion, and Parliament again went into recess for nine whole
days. On Wednesday, 7th September, the Arbitration Court
was busy again over the South Johnstone dispute, it being
felt that if that trouble could be settled it would automatically
settle the impudent defiance of authority by the railway
employees. Representatives of all parties appeared before
the Court, and ultimately a final solution was agreed to, sub-
ject to its endorsement by the disputes committee and men
at South Johnstone. The Court declared that it was sur-
prisingly liberal to the men, and even Reardon, the A.W.U
secretary, had no reason to go back on his statement that it
was “a 100% victory.” It was telegraphed to South Johnstone,
and being submitted to the strikers, everyone in Brisbane con-
48
QUEENSLAND—


nected with the dispute was chagrined to hear that it had
been unanimously turned down. Thus September 7th went
by, and the sun went down on a mournful Brisbane with
no railways running, with trade at an extraordinarily low
ebb consequent on drought and other causes, and with the
prospect of hundreds of employees in the retail trades receiv-
ing almost immediate notices of dismissal. Already the Meat
Works in various parts of the State had closed; 500 coal
miners had been thrown out of work in the Ipswich district,
and the prospect all round was hopelessly gloomy and without
a ray of light. Furthermore the unfortunate country people
had begun to suffer unusual hardship through want of trans-
port and absence of mails, and an instance was quoted in
which 500 sheep must die failing the carriage of fodder to
their drought-stricken district. The Bth September dawned
with no better hope than the day before. On the morrow,
the 9th, Caucus meet again. Would that we could say of
that gathering that we looked to it with the same hope that
we would look to a medical man when our dearest relative
is sick unto death.
Friday, 9th September, duly arrived, and the matter was
promptly dealt with by Caucus. There was naturally an
animated debate on the situation. As a matter of fact there
was a volte-face by the party, but not in the form expected.
McCormack in cold, unimpassioned and deliberate language
put before the insurgents of the party the choice between
constitutional Government and anarchy. He never minced
his words, he suppressed nothing, and he exaggerated nothing.
Practically a vote of WAnt of Confidence in the Government
was moved by the “extremists.” When they had heard their
leader, an effort was made to withdraw the motion. But the
astute William would have no such move. He wanted to
separate the sheep from the goats. All but four of the in-
surgents backed down, and the Government carried what was
really a vote of confidence by 38 to 4. Then came Saturday
morning, the 10th September. The dispute committee in
force met McCormack. The A.W.U. withdrew its support
from the defiant South Johnstone strikers; the railway men,
after endeavouring to bargain, at length capitulated with
ignominy, and 4QG on Saturday night broadcasted the wel-
come intelligence that the strike was over, and that trains
would run on Monday, 12th September. No one can gainsay
that McCormack and his Government did well. They were calm
and firm throughout, and on this occasion showed the public


that labour could govern. The only fly in the ointment was
that no penalties were inflicted upon the ultra truculent and
defiant members of the Q.R.U. who had refused to obey
orders and had been suspended. They went back with the
rest, but a salutary lesson had been taught to this branch of
the public service, and it is confidently believed that it will
be many years before they again venture to flout public
opinion, disorganize an important public utility, and lay the
foundation for soviet rule. For this we can chiefly thank
William McCormack.
CHILLAGOE AGAIN
The smellful Chillagoe smelters and Mungana transaction
again came in for an overhaul. The Auditor-General had
made a special scathing report on the matter, and this
was tabled on 30th August, 1927. In Committee of Supply on
Ist November this transaction was once more brought before
the House on the initiative of Moore, the Leader of the
Opposition. As a protest against the continued determina-
tion of the Government not to clean up by means of a Royal
Commission the undoubtedly suspicious phases in connection
with the Chillagoe and Mungana matters, a move was made
to reduce a proposed vote on account for the public services.
The amendment to reduce the vote was rejected ultimately
by 34 votes to 20.
We came to the end of the session on 15th December,
1927, and after an uninspiring recess we arrive at
THE SESSION OF 1928
THE LAST OF THE TWENTY-FOURTH PARLIAMENT
In the days of long ago the coming expiry of a Parliament
was the signal for unusual activity on the part of His
Majesty's Opposition. The electors had to be stirred up, and
impressed with the sins of the Government, and if there were
no brickbats handy, there was urgent haste to manufacture
a few and throw them with great violence at the head of His
Majesty’s Ministers. But the continuous characteristic of
the Government of 1915 seems to have brought about a change
in Opposition tactics. The position of the Opposition has
certainly appeared somewhat hopeless and the continuous
success of Labour at election after election was liable to
make any party lose heart. It was openly said by a promin-
ent labour Minister that his Government was very vulnerable
50
QUEENSLAND—


and he was overcome with surprise that the Opposition did
not make better use of the ammunition which was given to
them.
There does not appear to be much room in modern politics
for scrupulousness and it is doubtful whether the ideal leader
is to be found in a highly sensitive and honourable man who
hates to think ill of his fellow man, and who under no cir-
cumstances would take a mean advantage of his political
opponent. Politics, after all, is an “all in 5 ’ game, and as in
love and war, all is fair in politics. The electors as a body
accept a political party at its own estimate of itself, just as
we see the fool world outside accept the valuation placed by
a noodle upon himself if he is sufficiently persistent with his
self-advertising. The keen observer of men has in mind per-
sons who have never done a useful act in their lives, and yet
who by persistent and tireless chatter about themselves, per-
suade the universe that they are very clever and indispensable
persons.
Later on, we shall see how when labour fell, it collapsed
with a resounding thud, and it may be useful then to lightly
touch both on the causes of its long success and the sudden-
ness of its downfall.
The session of 1928, the last of the Twenty-fourth Parlia-
ment, was not responsible for any abnormal thrills in the
shape of legislation. It was responsible for the passage of 25
public and two private Bills. There were two Appropriation
Bills: Aboriginals Protection Act Amendment; Architects
Bill; Commonwealth and States Income Taxes Agreement Act
Extension Bill; Coal Mining Act Amendment Bill; Farm Pro-
duce Agents Act Amendment Bill; Loan Bill; Guardianship
and Custody of Infants and Marriage of Minors Act Amend-
ment Bill; Harbour Boards Act Amendment Bill; Hospitals
Act Amendment Bill; A Bill giving powers of Mortgage to Cer-
tain Schools of Arts; Income Tax Act Amendment Bill; Land
Tax Act Amendment Bill; Main Roads Acts Amendment Bill;
Police Acts Amendment Bill; Nurses and Masseurs Registra-
tion Bill; Police Acts Amendment Bill; Stamp Acts Amend-
ment Bill; State Children Acts Amendment Bill; Stock Foods
Act Amendment Bill; Supreme Court Acts Amendment Bill
and Traffic Acts Amendment Bill. The private Bills were Bris-
bane Roman Catholic Land Sales Bill and The Colonial Gas
Association Ltd. Bill. Observe that out of 25 Acts, 15 were
amending measures. What relation, if any, this fact has to
the abolition of the Legislative Council who can say?


Certain it is, that since the revising chamber was put out of
action, there has been an abnormal crop of amending measures.
LABOUR PLEBISCITES
SIZER’S BOMB
The session having been one of great placidity, the attack
of H. E. Sizer on the Maree Labour plebiscite stands out
somewhat as a contrast, and had the effect on the opposite
camp of a quite unexpected bomb. In anticipation of the
forthcoming general election, there had been much activity
in labour circles in the conduct of plebiscites and there appeal
to have been circumstances surrounding the conduct of one
which caught the eagle eye of the member for Sandgate.
The attack was made in Committee of Supply on Speaker Bert-
ram’s plebiscite and it was made with a vigour and thorough-
ness which at times characterize the onslaughts of Sandgate s
member. It was alleged that Mr Speaker Bertram was op-
posed in Maree by H. P. Talty, the Police Union Secretary,
that there had been corrupt and improper impersonation of
voters. It was stated in a Statutory Declaration by Talty that
“a gang of political assassins were hired for the purpose of
doing him an injury,” and he thereupon named the
was further alleged that forgery, amongst other cnmma«
offences, had been resorted to, and generally, the charges were
sufficiently dirty, if Mr Talty’s Statutory Declaration was
to be relied upon. Sizer concluded by calling for an inquiry,
and the prosecution of those found guilty of forgery. Un-
doubtedly the case was very well presented by Sizer, but it
was made more or less light of by McCormack, in reply, who
claimed that it had nothing whatever to do with Parliament,
and that if criminal offences had been committed they could
be dealt with by the Police.
The irony of the situation was apparent in the sequel, for
William Bertram, the Speaker, lost the seat by over 800 votes
in spite of winning the plebiscite, a position which Mr Talty
would also have occupied in spite of the nefarious practices
which it is alleged that labour organizations adopted.
THE CLOSE OF THE SESSION
The session of 1928 closed on 25th October with the usual
valedictory speeches and the customary stereotyped humour.
The vain hope was expressed by Premier McCormack that
all would be returned, and that each would find his accus-
52
QUEENSLAND—


tomed place waiting for him after the general election. It
is well that we are not permitted to take a peep into the
future and see what is in front of us. If on the 25th October,
1928, the Leader of the Government could have told his sup-
porters in caucus what was in front of them, there would
have been many sad hearts at the festive Christmas season.
Politics is a game of surprises, and it is a woeful mistake to
think that popularity and success can last for ever. Electors
are fickle people. They may love their members dearly for
ten years, and then in the eleventh, without any outward or
visible apparent cause, they may cast them into outer dark-
ness and sentence them to obscurity for the rest of their lives.
LABOUR’S SUCCESS
What were the dominating causes of labour’s success between
the years 1915 an d 1928? It is quite fair to say that though
labour politicians knew a good deal about Parliamentary
Government when the axe suddenly fell in May, 1929,
yet when they took office in 1915 under T. J. Ryan, they were
charmingly ignorant of the elementary principles of Govern-
ment. They had their theories of course. We all have, and
perhaps it is fortunate for most of us that we have no oppor-
tunities to put them into practice.
There is little doubt that in the first instance success came
to labour largely through the weariness of the people over
the old regime. The old regime was a regime which practised
if we may say so without undue offence, excessive caution and
excessive economy. A State can have too much of both,
though a moderate amount of either during labour’s reign
would not have been an unmixed evil. For over three years
labour was in office during the critical period of the Great
World War, and it was during that period that a psychological
change came over the people. In the first year of the War,
Denham’s Government being in office the people suffered
much mental disturbance and much unbalancing of their
excheauers through abnormal rises in prices. Then the
1915 Election came and they eagerly grabbed at the oppor-
tunity, thinking a change of Government would do no harm
if it did not do any good, and would provide them, as
promised, with cheap food. But it did do good. It gave them
more than they had been accustomed to. At a time of cruel
trial men got into office who made promises, many of which
they kept. It did not matter that they were unable strictlv
to act up to the slogan “Finance is the test of Government.”


The first thing for a party to centre upon is to secure the reins
of Government. There is time enough afterwards to devise
means of holding them. Then came the great splash. Prices
soared Heavens high, and the people were given the means
of countering prices and having a little to the good. They
were given a generous Arbitration Court, which they had but
to ask for favours and they received. Wages soared; prices
increased; they soared again with the same old echo from
prices, but with a little margin to spare each time. The
people were better off; their living conditions were better;
they had more money to spend on food, clothing, and amuse-
ment. This captivated the trader. What cared he so that
there was money to spend on silk stockings, and gloves, and
picture-shows and racecourses? “What’s the matter with a
Labour Government?” Nothing at all, and they all became
recruits of Labour. The seasons were fairly good; money
could be borrowed with comparative facility. Those outside
the charmed circle were envious of those inside. They
struggled to get inside. Many thousands of them did. They
became Government employees in the Railways and the
dozens of State Enterprises and Government offices. The
public servants clamoured for the right to go to the Court with
their grievances. They got there, and Parliament became
merely a place of registration of Arbitration Court decisions.
Nevertheless, each man who secured a position or an award,
was a vote, and each man had a wife and a sister or some sons
and daughters, and as their material comfort was catered for,
so they became labour voters. It was a snowball, a roly-poly
on the western plains. There was nothing at all the matter
with the Government. Even the writer had no fault to find
with them. They improved his position as no other Govern-
ment ever had done before. That man or Government is our
friend who gives us the most in material comfort, and in hope
which is only deferred for twelve months, and then comes
good. It never occurred to anybody, so long as we paid our
way, that we were living beyond our means, that we were
growing effeminate with luxury, that we were demanding,
as it were, food without the necessity of working for it. We
just ate and drank and were merry. We forgot that to-
morrow we die. We forgot that wonderful economic fact of
which McCormack was the discoverer —that there are only
20 cwt. of potatoes in a ton. We did not know anything
and cared less, about economic laws. We just lived and
lived well, forgetful of the elementary fact that you can only
54
QUEENSLAND—


spend what yon can produce. And so we continued to live in
a fool’s paradise; and so the people became the friends of the
Government, election after election, and all was well at the
cross roads. Then came the pinch. Gradually, stealthily, it
grew upon our governors. Promises were made which
could not be fulfilled; money grew short: our obligations did
not stand still, but production did: one-time enthusiastic sup-
porters began to shake their heads: Trades Hall officials
started expressing doubts: claims of Government employees
in the Court were opposed: economies involving lost jobs
had to be practised: truculent railway officials had to be dis-
ciplined. The trend was towards a loss of friends: lukewarm
friends became enemies. Enthusiastic friends began to openly
express doubts: they gave advice which was not accepted:
impossible promises were impossible of fulfilment: the end
was approaching: we were eating 30 cwt. of potatoes
and producing 20 cwt. McCormack’s economics were proved
sound though elementary. After thirteen years of luxury
and easy living, the people grew sullen and defiant because
“the people’s Government” could not do the impossible.
They knew nothing and cared not a damn about McCormack’s
potatoes, and the thing he called “Economics.” They wanted
something more for nothing, and they could not get it, so
they just put in the boot on nth May, 1929.
THE RECESS OF 1928-1929
Parliament had no sooner gone into recess on 25th October,
1928, than members became extremely busy, and unduly at-
tentive to their electors. Numerous labour and other plebis-
cites took place, and general preparations were made for
the impending election campaign. There was manifest
amongst members a distinct air of restlessness. Furtively
they endeavoured to discover the pulse of the people; there
was an indefinite kind of feeling that changes were impending.
Nevertheless neither side seemed too confident. Country
Nationalist members of the more cautious breed, forecast a
gain of four or five seats, and a reversion to the conditions
existing at the 1920 election. Others, more hopeful, and who
moved about more, interpreted the quiet reserve of the people
as forecasting a landslide. Many Government members were
extremely doubtful of the result. Large sections of the indus-
trial population, notably the railway workers, were incensed
with their own Government. They had been treated with
such phenomenal liberality that they imagined that Moses


McCormack had only to strike the rock and that moulten gold,
instead of water, would gush forth. It was idle to tell them
that the days of miracles had departed, and that the State had
come up against a dead end; they were cynically amused
concerning McCormack’s potato story and they were much
inclined to believe that he had learned his avoirdupois table
upside down. McCormack himself, before going into the
country, professed little or no concern as to the result. They
would come back, he said, “about the same.” He made a few
short runs about, and coming back to Brisbane was encount-
ered by Wright, late member for Bulimba, who remarked “I
say Mac, you and I seem to be the only two people who
are not worrying.” “By ” said McCormack, “make no
mistake: I am worrying, if you are not.”
It is hardly to be supposed that in those early election
days Wright had even had a bad dream about a little, quiet,
reserved lady who was going to wipe the floor with him in the
big electorate of Bulimba.
In due course came McCormack’s Policy Speech at Too-
woomba. We cannot all go to Toowoomba to listen to Policy
Speeches, but nevertheless we can all listen per medium of
wireless, and many thousands of us did. It is no use beating
about the bush. It was not an attractive speech. It did not
seem to breathe McCormack at all. There was no vim in it
—no fire, no electricity. It largely consisted of a relation of
things accomplished, but there was little or no promise for
the future —no definite and emphatic statement of what he
would do if returned —nothing at all to fire the imagination
of the electors.
SLOGANS
The Opposition organization, on this occasion, was dis-
tinctly good, and the Leader’s statement of intentions was
sufficiently definite to leave no room for doubt. The cam-
paign was strongly reminiscent of that of 1915. Somebody
had discovered a genius who had a knowledge of the value of
clever slogans.
GIVE JIMMY A VOTE
One remembers the first campaign of James W. Blair in
Ipswich, when he caused the city to be smothered with tiny
dodgers bearing the unique legend “Give Jimmy a Vote,” and
did not even forget to introduce them into the public
lavatories.
The Opposition parties had an equally brilliant conception.
56
QUEENSLAND—


Piorii Cape York to Point Danger they invited the people to
Change the Government ,” and to “Give the Boy a chance.”
How it called to mind, to be sure, poor old Mark Twain’s
Verse which he once read in a newspaper and how, having
committed it to memory, it nearly drove him insane—
Conductor, when you receive a fare,
Punch in the presence of the passengare.
A blue trip slip tor an eight-cent fare,
A butt trip slip for a six-cent fare,
A pink trip slip for a three-cent fare,
Punch in the presence of the passengare.
Punch, brothers, punch: punch with care:
Punch in the presence of the passengare.
And so it was with “Change the Government,” and “Give
Jpif °y a c^lanc c. 1 he phrases took possession of the people.
ey repeated them. i hey hummed them. The religious
members of the community attached them to the end of their
evening prayer. The musicians set them to music. The
footballer with raucous voice yelled “Give the Boy a chance,”
as he rushed for the goal. One went into a draper’s shop
and was asked by a captivating damsel “What can I do for
you, Sir,” and you replied instinctively “Change the Govern-
ment. And so, right throughout the wide expanse of the
State, these two simple phases caught the imagination of the
people and they did what they were told.
1 hose associated with the campaign were struck with the
silent reserve of the people, wnich they regarded as an
ominous sign, but until Polling Day no one was able to give
an interpretation of it. Apparently ‘ Change the Government”
was slowly but surely getting on their minds and obsessing
them, and when nth May, 1929, arrived, they acted on the
direction or advice, and brought to a termination labour’s
long rule, which had lasted from 22nd May, 1915, to nth May
1929— or practically fourteen years. The following was the
result of the fight:—
Ministerialists (Country National Party) 44, Opposition
(Labour) 27, Independent 1.
And Arthur Edward Moore became Premier of Queens-
land.
The General Election of 11th May, 1929, produced the
following changes in the personnel of the Legislative As-
sembly :
G. Tedman (Maree), defeated W. Bertram; F. W. Butler
(Port Curtis), defeated G. Carter; E. B. Maher (Rosewood),


defeated W. Cooper; V. H. Tozer (Gympie), defeated T.
Dunstan; T. Nimmo (Oxley), defeated A. C. Elphinstone;
T. A. Dunlop (Rockhampton), defeated G. P. Farrell; N. F.
Macgroarty (South Brisbane), defeated M. A. Ferricks; J.
E. Walker (Ipswich), defeated D. A. Gledson; W. E. Carter
(Fitzroy), defeated H. L. Hartley; O. Daniel (Keppel),
defeated J. Larcombe; J. D. Annand (Toowoomba), defeated
E. J. Llewelyn; R. Hill (Kelvin Grove), defeated W. F. Lloyd;
C. H. Jamieson (Lockyer), defeated G. A. Logan; Dr P. J.
Kerwin (Merthyr), defeated P. A. McLachlan; E. A. Ather-
ton (Chillagoe), defeated J. O’Keefe; G. A. Duffy (Eacham),
defeated C. J. Ryan; J. A. C. Kenny (Cook), defeated H. J.
Ryan; Mrs I. Longman (Bulimba), defeated A. H. Wright.
The following changes have taken place since the General
Election held on nth May, 1929: —
D. Riordan (Burke) resigned 16th September, 1929, Arthur
Jones elected, by-election 2nd November, 1929; D. Weir
(Maryborough) died 22nd September, 1929, J- Blackley
elected, by-election 26th October, 1929; W. McCormack
(Cairns) resigned 21st February, 1930, J. O’Keefe elected,
by-election 10th May, 1930; E. T. Bell (Fassifern) died 2nd
May, 1930, A. Wienholt elected, by-election 28th June, 1930.
The Speaker and three ministers were amongst the defeated
candidates. It was a landslide of the same proportions as that
of 22nd May, 1915, and gave proof that no Government, even
if it were composed of archangels, can last for ever.
AN APOLOGY
This appears to be an appropriate place to express regret
at a quite accidental omission from Queensland Politics
During Sixty Years. Augustus Cecil Elphinstone made his
first bow to the Queensland Parliament on 28th May, 1918.
As he received his conge at the election of nth May, 1929,
he passes off the political stage for the present. Very un-
fortunately his name was completely omitted from the former
political history of Queensland as one who came upon the
scene in 1918. This~is the more to be regretted because he
was recognized on both sides of the House as an exceptionally
able speaker who had the capacity for Leadership. Possibly
it was to some extent his own fault that he did not appear to
gain the confidence of his own party. Under other circum-
stances there were possibilities in front of him which come
to few public men.
5 8
QUEENSLAND—


THE NEW GOVERNMENT
A change of Government after the lapse of fourteen years
is so unusual a happening that the actual formation of the
Ministry naturally presents numerous difficulties. Men who
had been in Opposition year after year, and who had been
burdened with the onerous duty of almost eternal criticism,
naturally expected their reward when the electors gave the
word to “Change the Government.” And the law says there
shall be only ten Ministers and only ten there could be in a
party numbering 44. Under the caucus system of the
Labour Party, with the principle of the exhaustive ballot well
established, the same difficulties do not present themselves.
First the Premier is elected and then each member of the
party is a starter for office. It has its merits and its demerits,
one of the latter being that often the most popular, but not
the most capable men attain distinction.
It was so long since a Country-Nationalist Party had been
in office that there was some speculation as to whether the
elective system would or would not be adopted. But after
all, the Ministry bears the name of its Leader, and the prin-
ciple of the politicians, of whom the Country-Nationalists
were the lineal descendants, had always been that the Premier
selected his colleagues and was supreme in his own domain.
The history of the past is not without instances of some very
arbitrary Premiers who threatened to, and sometimes did,
pass out a colleague who was not giving satisfaction. It is a
simple and effective process. He is gazetted out of office.
These, naturally, are extreme cases, but desperate diseases at
times require desperate remedies. One has in mind at least
one instance under labour rule, in which it would have been
a healthy disciplinary action to have passed out of office an
unsuitable Minister.
It is no use pretending that there were no heartburnings
in the formation of the Moore Cabinet. There were, but
sensible men forgot their momentary disappointments, and
right through the first session of office the Country-National-
ists were a loyal and enthusiastic body of men. The
following is the Ministry as formed by Mr Moore.
Premier and Chief Secretary, Arthur Edward Moore;
Secretary for Public Instruction and Public Works and
Deputy Premier, Reginald MacDonald King; Treasurer,
Walter Henry Barnes; Home Secretary, James Christian
Peterson; Attorney-General, Neil Francis Macgroarty; Secre-
tary for Public Lands, William Arthur Deacon; Secretary for


Agriculture and Stock, Harry Fredrick Walker; Secretary for
Railways, Godfrey Morgan; Secretary for Labour and Indus-
try, Hubert Ebenezer Sizer; Secretary for Mines, Ernest
Albert Atherton.
A strange feature associated with the Ministry was that
two men, newly elected to the Assembly, and without previous
political experience, were included among the ten —namely
Messrs Macgroarty and Atherton. Never before had the
Queensland Parliament established such a precedent.
The Premier claimed the right to nominate the Speaker,
and he chose Mr Charles Taylor, member for Windsor.
Thomas Robert Roberts, member for East Toowoomba, was
chosen as Chairman of Committees, and the Temporary Chair-
men chosen were J. F. Maxwell, J. P. Fry and E. L. Grim-
stone from the Government side, and Messrs F. A. Cooper
and D. Riordan from the Opposition. On Mr Riordan v s
resignation to contest a Federal seat, his place was taken by
Mr E. J. Hanson.
LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION
William McCormack having retired from the Leadership of
the Labour Party after the elections, there was only one
possible successor to the office —William Forgan Smith who
had proved himself a strong, capable, and unusually indus-
trious Minister in the late Labour Government.
POLICY SPEECH
COUNTRY-NATIONALISTS 1929, AND PERFORMANCES
When the Policy Speech of the Country-Nationalist Party
was delivered by the then Leader of the Opposition (Moore),
there were several emphatic and definite statements made,
which left no doubt as to what course they would follow if
they reached office after the election of nth May, 1929. The
Opposition Leader being also Leader of the Country Party,
would naturally turn his attention at a very early date after
the election to what was known as
THE RURAL AWARD
Section 5 of the Industrial Arbitration Act of 1916, passed
by the Labour Government, provided in Sub-section 1 that
“nothing in this Act applies or to persons employed in
work such as is usually carried on in farming operations on
dairy farms, fruit farms or agricultural farms.”
60
QUEENSLAND—


That provision had been repealed by Section 3 of the
Industrial Arbitration Act Amendment Act of 1923, and a
Rural Award had been made by the Court. But there was a
second Sub-section to Section 5 of the Act of 1916, which gave
the Governor in Council power from time to time, by order in
Council, to declare that any person or classes of persons
should be exempted from the operation of the Act. It had
been promised that if the Opposition were returned to power
they would instantly suspend the Rural Award, and pursuant
to that promise, they had not been in office 48 hours before
the award was peremptorily suspended.
INCREASE OF MEMBERS’ SALARIES
It was further undertaken that the Act of the McCormack
Government known euphemistically as “The Salary Grab,”
whereby members’ salaries were increased from £5OO to £750,
and Ministers’ and Speaker’s from £lOOO to £1250 would be
repealed. This was done early in the session.
INDUSTRIAL CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION
A measure was promised to encourage Conciliation through
round table conferences, and a most elaborate measure was
passed during the session, having that object in view.
RESTORATION OF FREEHOLD TENURE
A measure to restore freehold tenure (with optional per-
petual lease) was in the forefront of the programme. This
was given effect to in an elaborate Lands Acts Amendment
Bill.
STATE ASSISTANCE TO THE COTTON INDUSTRY
This was given effect to by means of executive action shortly
after the Government took office.
RE-OPENING OF ONE SMELTER AT CHILLAGOE
This promise was redeemed early in the Government’s
career but it is too early yet to say what effect it is going
to have on the Northern Mining Industry or whether it pro-
mises to be a commercial success.
NATIONALIZATION OF MAIN ROADS
A step has been taken in this direction, the Local Authorities
bearing only one-half the cost of maintenance.


DAY LABOUR VERSUS CONTRACT
A promise was given to eliminate “the wasteful system of
day labour” and substitute contract labour where it could
be effectively done. To a very great extent this promise was
redeemed, and as time progresses it is possible that an almost
complete return to contract labour will be brought about.
THE ABOLITION OF GOVERNMENT TRADING
At a later stage it is proposed to deal quite extensively with
Government trading and its result. It is sufficient to say
here that so far as was humanly possible, without making
undue sacrifices, the new Government gave effect to their
policy, and within a very few months reduced Government
trading to a minimum.
REDUCTION OF LAND TAX
A promise was made to reduce Land Taxation with a view
to its ultimate abolition. This was not found practicable
during the Government’s first session, but the Treasurer in-
dicated that after 1929-30 we should have seen the last of the
Super Tax.
REDISTRIBUTION OF SEATS
The restoration of democracy by an equitable redistribution
of seats was promised. This is a matter which is never dealt
with in the first session of a new Parliament. It is almost
invariably left to the last session. Time will indicate whether
the promise will be fulfilled.
UPPER HOUSE REFERENDUM
This also was on the programme of the new Government.
The taking of a referendum being a somewhat expensive pro-
ceeding, it is assumed that it will be taken, if at all, in con-
junction with a general election.
AVERAGING OF INCOMES
It was promised that for the purpose of taxation incomes
would be averaged over a period of five years. At time of
writing (end of 1929 session) it had not been found practicable
to give effect to this.
SUPERANNUATION FOR RAILWAY EMPLOYEES
Preliminary steps were taken to redeem this promise by
the appointment of an Inquiry Board, with certain extensive
powers. A Superannuation Act was subsequently passed
in the session of 1930.
62
QUEENSLAND—


THE RIGHT TO WORK. NO JOB MONOPOLIES
The new Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Act certainly
makes a strenuous effort to accomplish the above two pur-
poses. In the administration of the Act much will depend
upon the wise and generous co-operation of the Unions. They
have indeed much to gain by co-operation and much to lose
by unreasoning hostility.
WORKERS’ COMPENSATION
It was promised that Workers’ Compensation would be
brought up to the basic wage standard,, and this was done.
It is a generous and far-sighted measure and doubtless will
be much appreciated.
BEEF CATTLE INDUSTRY COMMISSION
A promise was made to accept the recommendations of the
Beef Cattle Industry Commission and to a great extent this
was done.
HOSPITAL TAXATION
A promise was made to more equitably distribute hospital
taxation, but this was not accomplished in the sessions of
1929 and 1930.
WORK FOR BOYS AND GIRLS
It was undertaken that greater opportunities would be given
to boys and girls to learn trades. With this end in view
the Apprentices and Minors Bill was introduced and passed.
BUREAU OF ECONOMICS
Preliminary steps were taken to give effect to this promise,
and a Professor of Economics was brought from another State
to report on the establishment of a Bureau. The Bureau was
established in 1930.
REMOVAL OF RESTRICTIONS ON LAND SELECTORS
One of the objects of the Land Acts Amendment Act of
1929 was to effect improvement in the above direction but
only experience of the operation of the Act will show how
far the alterations made will prove effective.
LOANS FOR WORKERS’ DWELLINGS
It had been proposed to take advantage of the State
Advances Act (Application of Commonwealth Housing Act
1 9 2 7- I 9 giving opportunities to persons in receipt of up
63
OUR SEVENTH POLITICAL DECADE, 1920-1930


to £l2 a week to borrow 90% of advances up to iiSoo, but
as the Commonwealth Government were temporarily not
finding any more money for that purpose, the scheme fell
through.
MOUNT MORGAN
A strong endeavour was to be made to secure the reopen-
ing of Mount Morgan. Efforts were made in that direction,
but it is an extremely difficult problem and no Government
can force the issue. It is a question primarily of “will it
pay ?” A reconstructed Company was formed and has been
working in a small scale.
PROMOTION BY MERIT—NO RIGID AGE LIMITATION
Already instances are at hand in which promotion by suita-
bility has been brought into operation. To a large extent
that implies promotion by merit. It is a system which can
be extended with much benefit to the Public Service. Length
of service has no relation whatever to ability, and promotion
on that ground alone is a ruinous doctrine. The automatic
scrapping of a man at sixty-five, is a practice which cannot be
justified. Men develop their mentality at different ages, and a
man at sixty-five may be and often is infinitely more alert and
useful than a placid and dreamy young man of thirty. For
that and other reasons, the change of policy was sound and
removed hardship in many cases. No one wants to stay at his
post until he is imbecile, but there is no more reason and
sometimes very much less reason for scrapping a public ser-
vant at the age of sixty-five, than there would be for scrapping
a politician.
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE BILL
This measure was not actually promised, but an attempt
was made to give effect to an undertaking to give stimulus
to secondary industries. It is a useful attempt at experi-
mentation. It may work out well, and even if it assists in
the establishment of but one or two new secondary industries,
its passage will have been more than justified.
We thus come to the end of what it is hoped will be consid-
ered a reasonably accurate account of promises made and
fulfilment realized, and it remains now to give a complete list
of the work of the first session of the Twenty-fifth Parliament.
The following are the Bills introduced, all of which, with one
exception (The Application of Commonwealth Housing Bill)
were passed.
64
QUEENSLAND—


Agricultural Bank Act Amendment Bill.
Apprentices and Minor Bill.
Appropriation Bill, No. I, 1929-1930.
Appropriation Bill, No. 2, 1929-1930.
Babinda State Hotel Sale Bill.
Banana Industry Protection Bill.
Brisbane Cricket Ground Bill.
Constitution Act Amendment Bill.
Constitution Act Amendment Bill, No. 2.
Diseases in Plants Bill.
Duchess to Mount Isa Railway Act Amendment Bill.
Heavy Vehicles Act Amendment Bill.
Hospitals Acts Amendment Bill.
Income Tax Acts Amendment Bill.
Industrial and Provident Societies Act Amendment Bill.
Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Bill.
Industries Assistance Bill.
Jury Bill.
Justices Acts Amendment Bill.
Land Acts Amendment Bill.
Land Tax Act Amendment Bill.
Local Authorities Acts Amendment Bill.
Main Roads Acts Amendment Bill.
Mining Acts Amendment Bill.
Mining Trust Limited Agreement Ratification Bill.
Officials Inquiries Evidence Act Amendment Bill.
Patriotic Funds Administration Acts Amendment Bill.
Petroleum Acts Amendment Bill.
Pittsworth Soldiers Memorial (Application of Funds) Vali-
dation Bill.
Professional Engineers Bill.
Railway Acts Amendment Bill.
Railway Superannuation Investigation Board Bill.
Real Property (Commonwealth Defence Notification) Bill.
Royal National Agricultural and Industrial Association of
Queensland Bill.
Soil Survey Bill.
Stamp Acts Amendment Bill.
State Advances Act Amendment (Application of Common-
wealth Housing Act 1927-1928) Bill.
Workers' Compensation Acts Amendment Bill. .


THE OPPOSITION ATTITUDE
A few words might be said here with much advantage re-
garding the new Opposition which at the meeting of Parlia-
ment on 20th August, 1929, sat opposite the new Government.
After the defeat of his party on nth May, McCormack had
resigned the Leadership, partly because he wished to go for
an extended tour abroad, and partly because, as he himself
expressed it, he had no desire to ‘dag superfluous on the stage.”
The latter was a very bad reason indeed, for if we look back
to the period when our Parliament contained such able
Leaders as Sir Samuel Griffith, and Sir Thomas Mcllwraith,
we do not find them regarding themselves as “superfluous”
when, by force of circumstances they were compelled to
retire from the Leadership of the Government and assume the
Leadership of the Opposition. The latter, while not so dis-
tinguished as that of the Premiership, is a very honourable
and very onerous position which any man might well be
proud to occupy, holding as it does reversion to the Premier-
ship when the electors give the word of command.
It is a strange circumstance that amongst the twenty-seven
members who formed the Opposition, comparatively few —
about five —had had previous experience in opposition.
The election of nth May, 1929, it must be confessed, had
somewhat frayed the nerves of members of the defeated
party. They were not quite able to realize that after fourteen
years of power they had been turned down by the electors,
and it took them some little time, prior to the meeting of
Parliament, to adjust themselves to their new surroundings.
In the House, when it once got to work, they proved them-
selves quite a capable and industrious opposition. W. Forgan
Smith had been elected Leader, vice McCormack, resigned,
and Percy Pease, Deputy Leader. From the very outset they
were active and alert, and from a critical point of view all
that could be desired, though their second and third session
in opposition doubtless will afford them more scope.
Two minor errors they made which were quite capable of
future correction. They held the new Government too cheap,
not realizing that there were some very able men in it, and
although they had been many years in office, they were some-
what deficient in knowledge of tactics and procedure. This in
itself was remarkable, considering the opportunities they had
had. Nevertheless, they made a good opposition, having
assumed that position under very adverse circumstances.
Few men are at their best, if called upon suddenly to sacrifice
66
QUEENSLAND—


unlimited power, and occupy positions which are shorn of
that influence which surrounds a Minister of the Crown.
MOUNT ISA
Probably the most animated debate that took place during
the session, was that which was initiated under cover of the
second reading of the Mining Trust Ltd. Agreement Rati-
fication Bill. This Bill had relation to the development of
a tract of mineral-bearing country in the Lawn Hills District,
Although it had no direct relation to the Bill itself, oppor-
tunity was taken to refer to certain transactions in connection
with Mt Isa, and the morality was questioned of members
and Ministers of the Crown who were largely interested in
the development of Mt Isa being responsible for the intro-
duction and passage in October, 1925, of the Duchess to Mt
Isa Railway Bill. The debate was extremely bitter and
centred largely round the transactions of the member for
Warrego (Mr Bedford) in Mt Isa Mines Ltd. Shares, and
also the holdings in the same concern of Messrs E. G. Theo-
dore, Wm McCormack, Alfred J. Jones and others, and the
method by which they became possessed of the shares. Later
on Mr Bedford invited inquiry into the whole matter, and it
was more or less understood that when at a later date the
inquiry into the Mungana transactions was opened, the
story in relation to Mt Isa share transactions, and the
building of a railway to that mineral field, would not be
overlooked.
THE NEW SPEAKER
After having for so many years iseen the same familiar
figure in the Presiding Officer’s Chair it was at first strange
to see a new face and hear a new stentorian office coming
from the Speaker’s accustomed place. The new Government
Party unanimously elected Mr Charles Taylor, Member for
Windsor, as Speaker. He was the 16th occupant of the Chair
since 22nd May, iB6O. Under even normal circumstances
there would have been difficulties to overcome, but Mr
Speaker was faced with unusual intricacies owing to the some-
what more vigorous methods of the new opposition. We
had been accustomed under Speaker Bertram to a mono-
tonous placidity, and even if the activity of the opposition led
to an increase of work it also had the effect of keeping the
House alive, and Mr Speaker and his officials up to the
collar.


RESIGNATION OF THE HONOURABLE WILLIAM LENNON
Just as the year 1929 was coming to a close, the Honour-
able William Lennon, Lieutenant-Governor tendered his
resignation. He had reached the fine old age of eighty years
and had been a typically useful colonist, and now, weighed
down with years he left his high office vacant to be filled by
a younger and more active man. More will be said about Mr
Lennon at a later stage, his political life being included among
the Character Sketches in this book.
A NEW KING'S REPRESENTATIVE
Mr Lennon’s resignation was followed by the automatic
assumption of office by the Chief Justice, Hon. James 'William
Blair, by virtue of the Dormant Commission appointing the
holder of that office Deputy-Governor in view of a contin-
gency such as had arisen. As Sir John Goodwin was about
to take a month’s holiday, the Chief Justice immediately got
ji'ito harness. Those who have taken an interest in the rise
and fall of public men will have observed with pride the rise
to fame of this native of Queensland. Verily the career of
James William Blair shows what may lie before a young man
in this great Continent. Certainly he had luck by coming
into Parliament just when an Attorney-General was wanted,
and in not having to serve an apprenticeship before being
exalted to high rank. He also had ill luck, when William
Kidston, reconstructing his Ministry, promised him a
Southern Supreme Court Judgeship and failed to keep his pro-
mise. Then there was a period of comparative quiescence,
and a somewhat adventurous struggle at the Bar again, then
came an offer, for the second time, of a Northern Supreme
Court Judgeship which was accepted; not a great while after,
came the Chief Justiceship after Judge McCawley’s death;
then the position of Deputy-Governor and then a Knighthood
—Sir James William Blair Kt. Verily is it not enough to make
William Kidston, late of Falkirk, turn in his grave?
Just as one writes these few lines, the words of John
Fletcher upon an Honest Man’s Fortune, come back into one’s
mind: —
Man is his own Star, and the soul that can
Render an honest and perfect man
Commands all light, all influence, all fate,
Nothing to him falls early, or too late.
68
QUEENSLAND—


SECOND SESSION
TWENTY-FIFTH PARLIAMENT
The second session of the Twenty-fifth Parliament was
opened on the 15th July, 1930, and ended on the nth De-
cember of the same year.
While it does not constitute a record, either in length or
in the matter of the number of Bills introduced and passed,
nevertheless, it very nearly approaches the record, and may
be said to have been one of the most strenuous sessions that
Parliament has ever known.
After so long a reign of one party, it took a whole session
for the new Government to realize that it was a new Govern-
ment, and for the new Opposition to become accustomed to
the surroundings of an Opposition and the essentially difficult
work it had to perform. When, however, the second session
of the Parliament arrived, members on both sides knew
exactly where they stood —the one party as originators of a
policy and the legislation to give effect to it, and the other
party as an active Opposition prepared to assert on each and
every occasion that no good could come out of Nazareth.
Nevertheless, all difficult situations come to an end, and after
the passage of no less than fifty-three Bills, Parliament went
into recess with the consciousness that a spell had been well
earned.
The following is a list of the Legislation passed during the
session:—
Income (Unemployment Relief) Tax Bill.
Water Act Amendment Bill.
Coroners Bill.
Art Union Regulation Bill.
Inspection of Machinery and other Acts Amendment Bill.
Bureau of Economics and Statistics Bill.
Home Hill State Farm, Helidon State Quarries, and South
Brisbane State Workshops Sale Bill.
Crown Remedies Act Amendment Bill.
Defamation Law of Queensland Amendment Bill.
Workers’ Homes Acts Amendment Bill.
Appropriation Bill of 1930-1931, No. 1.
Sea Carriage of Goods (State) Bill.
Navigation Acts Amendment Bill.
Land Tax Act Amendment Bill.
Primary Producers’ Organization and Marketing, Fruit Mar-
keting Organization, Wheat Pool, and Diseases in Plants
Acts Amendment Bill.


Federal Aid Roads Agreement Approval Act (Variation ot
Agreement) Approval Bill.
Abattoirs Agreement Ratification and Meat Industry Bill.
Railway Superannuation Bill.
Salaries Bill.
Holidays Act Amendment Bill.
Queensland Border to South Brisbane Railway Management
Bill.
Anzac Day Act Amendment Bill.
Children’s Courts Act Amendment Bill.
Babinda Township Bill.
Racing Regulation Amendment Bill.
Tully Sugar Works Bill.
Prickly-pear Land Acts Amendment Bill.
Diseases in Stock Act Amendment Bill.
Finance Bill.
State Housing Relief Bill.
Supreme Court (Commonwealth Payment to Judges) Vali-
dation Bill.
Native Plants Protection Bill.
Purchasers of Homes Relief Bill.
Appropriation Bill of 1930-1931, No. 2.
Tully Sugar Works Area Land Regulations Amendment Bill.
Mining Acts Amendment Bill.
Palmer Development Coy. Limited Agreement Ratification
Bill.
Appropriation Bill of 1930-1931, No. 3.
City of Brisbane Act Amendment Bill.
Land Acts Amendment Bill.
Income Tax Acts Amendment Bill.
Grazing Districts Improvement Bill.
Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Act Amendment Bill.
Queensland Law Society Act Amendment Bill.
Commonwealth Mines Preliminary Syndicate Limited Agree-
ment Ratification Bill.
Alexander Macdonald Mining Agreement Ratification Bill.
Stamp Acts Amendment Bill.
Elections Acts Amendment Bill.
Unemployed Workers Insurance and Income (Unemployment
Relief) Tax Acts Amendment Bill.
Salvation Army (Queensland) Property Trust Bill.
Queensland Trustees Limited Bill.
Union Trustee Company of Australia Limited Acts Amend-
ment Bill.
70
QUEENSLAND—


Brisbane Roman Catholic Cathedral Lands (Mortgage and
Lease) Authorization Bill.
Where legislation concerns articles embodied in this book,
it will be mentioned in detail, but it is not practicable, nor
would it serve a very useful purpose to give a summary of
each separate Bill. Two measures, however, stand out in
prominence for entirely different causes. One was the In-
come (Unemployment Relief) Tax Bill, under which an effort
was made to provide funds to meet the ever-increasing un-
employment difficulty. It was founded on the principle of
equality of sacrifice, and imposed a universal tax of 3d. in the
£ upon earnings of all descriptions. Naturally enough, it
may be regarded as a misfortune when the necessity arises for
legislation of such type. A happier condition of things would
be that every man and every women in the community desir-
ing employment should be able to find it. In no part of the
world, however, has such an ideal condition been reached at
any time. Probably there will always be unemployment as
certainly there will always be unemployable. Our difficulties
of to-day are largely attributable to the world-shrinkage in
values, and the mechanization of so many of our modern pro-
cesses, so that every new invention means a readjustment of
labour to new mechanical invention. It is fervently to be
hoped that as time progresses, new outlets for labour will be
found, and new demands for the product of labour discovered.
The other measure to which it is justifiable to refer as
having an important bearing upon the social conditions of
the people, was a Bill which effected extremely severe re*
trenchment upon the servants of the State, while at the same
time they bore their share of the other taxation necessary to
adjust the public finances. While one does not hesitate
for a moment to admit that drastic diseases require drastic
remedies, yet it must not be lost sight of, that no matter in
what direction curtailment of expenditure takes place, it has
as its inevitable result the creation of further unemployment.
The public servants of the State have loyally fallen into line
with the policy of the Government; they recognize that a
reduced salary is infinitely better than no salary at all, but
those of us who think so, must not lose sight of the fact that
if you reduce the spending capacity of a huge body of people
like the public servants of the State —if you withdraw from
circulation a sum nearly approaching a million of money,
more than half of which is spent in the city of Brisbane —it is
inevitable that it reacts upon the trader, and casts out upon


the unemployed market a larger proportion of the people. It
is a difficult problem, it is a trying problem for any Govern-
ment to face, and it is to be hoped that the time is not very far
distant when the status quo ante will be restored.
ABOLITION OF THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL
UNICAMERAL V. BICAMERAL SYSTEM
In all our long - experience of Parliamentary Government,
extending over 71 years, in all the much longer experience of
other Dominion Governments, no case can be found which
excites more interest amongst constitutional students than
the war waged for years against the Legislative Council of
Queensland, culminating in its dramatic abolition during the
session of 1921.
It is quite inevitable that from time to time differences
must arise between Upper and Lower Houses of Parliament.
Those who care to read Queensland’s experience in this res-
pect will find a complete record of the disputes which oc-
curred between the Council and Assembly recorded in pp.
2 3S to 282 of Queensland Politics During Sixty Years. Great
Britain itself has encountered innumerable difficulties in
this respect, and every Dominion of the Empire has had a
like experience. Governments in many States have no doubt
at times been irritated beyond the point of endurance, by
what they were pleased to term the “obduracy” of the Council,
but even in the most acute dispute a via media has ultimately
been found and the two branches of the Parliamentary
establishment, each making some reasonable concession, have
had to admit in the end that the dispute served a useful pur-
pose and had enabled the points of view of the opposing
parties to be better appreciated. To grow mad because one
cannot have all one’s own way is a fool’s game. Which of us
can say, as he has gone through life, that he has been able
to bullock his way through the world regardless of the rights
and opinions of others, and that never once has he been com-
pelled to make a concession, or admit the justice of the con-
tentions of others.
These few words are written as a prelude to the detailed
history of the abolition of the Legislative Council of Queens-
land by the Theodore Labour Government in the year 1921.
It is an interesting history for the student but the wisdom or
justice of following such a precedent may lead to a diversity
of opinion when the whole facts are reviewed in an impartial
72
QUEENSLAND—


manner after the lapse of eight years. Here, then, are the
historical facts of the case which the author has already re-
corded in print in a little book entitled The Roll of the
Queensland Parliament. Because of their paramount im-
portance they are repeated here, so that there may be in one
volume the outstanding political events during the past ten
years.—
THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL
From the colony of New South Wales we inherited at the
date of separation, 10th December, 1859? the bicameral system
of government with a nominee Upper House. The inherit-
ance, good or bad, was a gift from the motherland, and was
at all events a marked advance upon being a mere neglected
appendage of the colony of New South Wales.
By ‘ the Order in Council of date 6th June, 1859, empower-
ing the Governor of Queensland to make laws and to provide
for the administration of justice in the said Colony 1 ' the
Governor of New South Wales was authorized to summon
not fewer than five persons for the purpose of composing
the Legislative Council of Queensland, and the Governor of
Queensland was authorized in like manner after the first
meeting of the Council and Assembly to summon from time
to time to the said Legislative Council such other person or
persons as he should think fit, four-fifths of whom were to be
persons not holding any office of emolument under the Crown.
The members of the first Legislative Council summoned by
the Governor of New South Wales were to hold their seats
for five years, but all future members summoned by the
Governor of Queensland were to hold their seats, subject to
certain provisions, for the term of their natural lives. There
appear to have been eleven members summoned at the outset
for five years by the Governor of New South Wales, the
remaining appointments being made by the Governor of
Queensland from time to time. The proportion of members
of the Council to members of the Assembly was never at any
period of our history established by law, but a usage appears
to have grown up confining the membership of the Legislative
Council to two-thirds that of the Legislative Assembly. Sir
George Bowen, writing on 21st May, iB6O, to the Duke of
Newcastle, expressed the opinion that fifteen members would
ba a fair proportion as compared with the twenty-six in die
Legislative Assembly, which practically means a proportion
of one to two. Nevertheless, the two-thirds proportion seems
to have found most favour over a series of years.


After existing for a period of fifty-five years, under varying
conditions of popularity and unpopularity, a definite move-
ment was made to entirely abolish the Legislative Council.
The first measure having this object in view was introduced
by the Honourable T. J. Ryan, Premier, in a speech on the
second reading of the Constitution Act Amendment Bill, on
17th November, 1915. The Bill was simplicity itself. It
abolished the Legislative Council: abolished all offices con-
stituted or created in or in connection with the Council, and
declared that the Legislature and Parliament of Queensland
should be constituted by the Legislative Assembly of Queens-
land in Parliament assembled. The second reading was
carried by 38 votes to 17. In the Legislative Council an
amendment was moved on the motion to read the Bill a second
time, which substituted a lengthy and argumentative mem-
orial to the Governor, covering ten constitutional, political,
and general reasons why the Bill should not be passed, and
concluded with the request that the memorial be transmitted
to His Majesty’s Secretary of State for the Colonies. This
was carried by 26 votes to 3 and consequently the Bill was
shelved.
A Bill with exactly similar provisions was introduced in
the session of 1916 by the Honourable T. J. Ryan, Premier,
and the second reading was carried in the Legislative As-
sembly by 35 votes to 15. In the Legislative Council an
almost identical amendment, in the form of a memorial to the
Governor, was carried on division by 19 votes to 3, and the
Bill was once again shelved.
The rejection for the second time of the Constitution Act
Amendment Bill paved the way for the Government, if they
so wished, to submit the question of the abolition of the
Council to the people by way of Referendum, under the pro-
visions of the Parliamentary Bills Referendum Act passed
by the Honourable W. Kidston in 1908. This was accord-
ingly done on sth May, 1917, the result of the polling being
—For Abolition, 116,196 votes; Against Abolition, 179,105
votes. Informal votes, 2968.
On 10th October, 1917, nine new members were called to
the Council, and two days later four more, but this was
towards the close of the session, and no efTort was made to
abolish the Council that year.
In the session of 1918 a further attempt was made to
abolish the Upper Chamber, but the Bill introduced by Mr
Ryan contained an important modification. A clause was
74
QUEENSLAND—


introduced providing that, before any Bill was presented to
the Governor for assent, it should be referred to a Standing
Revisory Committee consisting of members of the Legislative
Assembly, representing in proportion to numbers, as nearly
as might be. His Majesty’s Government and His Majesty’s
constitutional Opposition. The functions of the Committee
were to ensure that the provisions of any Bill passed by the
Assembly were a clear expression of the will and intention of
Parliament, and that, so far as such Bill dealt with existing
legislation, it dealt with the same clearly and effectively.
The Committee was empowered to make recommendations
which thereupon were to be taken into consideration by the
Legislative Assembly. If the Committee made no report,
within a fixed time, upon the Bill submitted for its considera-
tion, the measure was to be presented to the Governor for
the signification of His Majesty’s assent thereto.
The second reading of this measure was carried in the
Legislative Assembly by 34 votes to 15. On being transmitted
to the Legislative Council a very lengthy amendment was
moved on the motion to read the Bill a second time, but no
mention was made of transmitting it by way of memorial to
the Secretary of State. The amendment was carried by 25
votes to 16, thus shelving the Abolition Bill for the third
time. Students of this question will be much interested in
reading the constitutional, political, and general reasons set
forth by the Legislative Council of Queensland in the amend-
ment they carried in the Constitution Act Amendment Bills
of 1915 and 1916. The reasons are set out in full in Queens-
land Politics During Sixty Years (Bernays), pp. 225-228.
The altered situation in the voting strength of Government
members in the Council has already been explained by the
appointments made on 10th and 12th October, 1917. These
appointments, however, did not yet give an absolute majority
to the Government in that Chamber.
In the session of 1919 a Constitution Act Amendment Bill
was introduced by the Acting Premier, Honourable E. G.
Theodore, and its second reading agreed to by 26 votes to 15.
On being sent to the Council an amendment on second read-
ing, somewhat similar in terms to those already mentioned,
was carried on 4th November by 27 votes to 17, and the Bill
was once more rejected. Three appointments had been made
to the Council on 18th August, 1919, but yet there was not a
sufficient majority to carry the Government measure. On 19th
February, 1920, fourteen more appointments were made, and


one on 15th August, 1921, while the Hon. W. Lennon, an
ex-Labour Minister, was elevated to the position of President
of the Legislative Council. Thus the Government had at
last an absolute majority in both the popular and nominee
Chambers. Nevertheless, no attempt was made in the ses-
sion of 1920 to abolish the Council, the Government being
content with carrying all their other measures with an over-
whelming majority.
In 1921 the long struggle reached finality. The Honourable
E. G. Theodore had become Premier, and he carried the
Abolition Bill in the Assembly on second reading by 39 votes
to 30. In the Council the second reading was carried by 28
votes to 10, the Bill was passed through Committee, and re-
served for the signification of His Majesty’s pleasure. The
Act was proclaimed on 23rd March, 1922, and the first ses-
sion of Parliament held under the unicameral system began
on 4th July, 1922.
It may be mentioned that in the final Bill of 1921 the pro-
vision relating to a Revisory Committee was dropped. The
system substituted for it, purely as an administrative act, was
that of perusal of Bills by the Solicitor-General before third
reading, and the issuing of a certificate by him to the Minister
concerned that there was nothing in the Bill to prevent its
being read a third time. This perusal by the Solicitor-General
was, in actual operation, by no means a formality. Certainly,
in the majority of cases no suggestion for further amendment
was made, but there have been some cases in which material
amendments have been suggested and the Bill concerned has
been recommitted before third reading.
The story of the abolition of the Legislative Council would
be incomplete unless specific reference were made to the action
taken with a view of securing the disallowance of “The Con-
stitution Act Amendment Act of 1922” by His Majesty the
King.
On 3rd November, 1921, a memorial was addressed to the
Right Hon. Sir Matthew Nathan, P.C., Governor of Queens-
land, by Messrs Thynne, Brentnall, Marks, Hawthorn, Hall,
Parnell, Dunn, Whittingham, and Fowles, all members of the
late Legislative Council, setting forth at great length the
events which culminated in the final passage of “The Con-
stitution Act Amendment Act of 1922,” and urging upon His
Excellency’s consideration eight aspects of the proposed
abolition of the Council and suggesting to him three alterna-
tive courses of action—
76
QUEENSLAND—


1. That no further action be taken until the will of a
majority of the electors on this question be ascertained
by a specific referendum or by a general election.
2. That in the alternative the validity of the proposed
Act of Abolition be referred to the Judicial Committee
of the Privy Council for decision under the provisions
of 3 & 4 William IV. cap. 41.
3. That in the event of the validity of such Queensland
Act of Abolition being for any reason upheld, final
action thereon be suspended until either by specific
referendum or at a general election the will of the
people of Queensland be ascertained upon so far-
reaching and vital a proposal.
Finally, His Excellency was asked to transmit a copy of
the memorial to the Right Hon. the Secretary of State for
the Colonies, for submission to His Majesty the King.
This memorial was followed on 14th November, 1921, by a
petition to His Majesty the King, the signatories being—
Robert Philp, Arthur H. Whittingham, A. S. Cowley, George
Story, P. J. Leahy, and E. W. H. Fowles.
On Ist December, 1921, the Hon. Edward G. Theodore,
the Premier, in a memorandum to His Excellency the
Governor containing observations by Ministers on the before-
mentioned memorial and petition, traversed at great length
the arguments used in opposition to assent being given to the
Constitution Act Amendment Bill.
Each of these documents it may be said were, from their
respective points of view, extraordinarily able and compre-
hensive, and it is regrettable, from an historical aspect, that it
is not practicable to embody them, in extenso, in this volume.
Students of the subject will find them recorded in vol. 1 of
the Queensland Parliamentary Papers for 1922, pp. 21 to 65.
The net result of the action taken by the contending parties
was expressed in a cablegram from the Secretary of State for
the Colonies to His Excellency the Governor of Queensland,
in wdiich he said that “It has not been found possible to advise
His Majesty to accede to the Prayer of the Petition or of the
request referred to in the Memorial.” Further, he says, “After
careful consideration of all the circumstances, I cannot but
regard the matter with which the Bill deals as essentially one
for local determination.”
From the above it would appear (and it is made clearer by
reading the full text of the published documents) that from
the constitutional standpoint the action of the Imperial Gov-


ernment was a distinct and possibly a final asseveration of
its refusal to interfere in the domestic politics of the
Dominions.
That, shortly, constitutes the history of the successful
attempt to institute the Unicameral System of Government
in an Australian State.
The Legislative Council, on the date of its abolition, con-
sisted of fifty-six members, while the Legislative Assembly
consisted of seventy-two members. Thus it will be seen that
the relative strength of the two Chambers had somewhat
changed. During the lifetime of the Legislative Council, ex-
tending over a period of sixty-two years, numerous appoint-
ments had been made by successive Governments, sometimes
to fill vacancies and on other occasions to strengthen the
voting power of the party in office; and it is of interest to
note that of the appointments made a great many were of
members who had previously sat in the Legislative Assembly.
A very small proportion sat first in the Council and were
afterwards elected to the Assembly, but a total of sixty-
seven members sat both in the Council and Assembly.
Now in order to clarify the position somewhat, let us
examine for a moment how the world stands in regard to
unicameral systems. Although it may be considered by some
that Queensland has accomplished something heroic, it must
not be supposed for a moment that the phrase “unicameral
system” is a mere dictionary term, as it were. There are
numerous examples throughout the English-speaking world
of a one-House Legislature, and it will be useful for purpose
of reference to put them on record. Let us take, first, the
Dominion of Canada, which more nearly approaches the Aus-
tralian ideal of Parliamentary Government. Canada is
divided into nine provinces, each having a distinct Parliament
and administration of its own. Somewhat on the same lines
as Australia, the Central or National administration consists
of a Governor-General, a Senate and a House of Commons.
With the Central administration we are not concerned, but
we will study for a moment the Constitutions of the Pro-
vincial Parliaments, which have full powers over their local
affairs, within specified limits, as is the case in Australia.
Indeed on an examination of the powers of the Provinces, one
is struck by their similarity to those possessed by the Aus-
tralian States. Amongst the nine Provinces, Quebec stands
out prominently as being the only Province which indulges in
the luxury, if we may so say, of the bicameral system. The
78
QUEENSLAND—


Lieutenant-Governor of each Province is appointed by the
Federal Government. Be it remembered that the population
of the whole of Canada is approximately 9,000,000, so that the
comparison it is desired to make between it and the Federated
States of the Commonwealth of Australia, does not appear to
be an altogether unfair one. The Province of Alberta is
governed by one Legislature of 60 members, and is represented
by 6 members in the Senate, and 16 in the Canadian House of
Commons. British Columbia has a Legislative Assembly of
only 48 members, elected for five years, has 6 representatives
in the Senate, and 14 in the House of Commons. Manitoba
(formerly known as the Red River Settlement) has a single
Legislature elected for five years, and is represented in the
National Parliament by 6 members of the Senate, and 17 of
the House of Commons. New Brunswick has a single legis-
lature of 48 members, with 10 members in the Senate, and 11
in the House of Commons. The Assembly is elected for
five years. Nova Scotia, formerly known as Acadia until
ceded to the British in 1713, has a House of Assembly chosen
by popular vote every five years. In the Dominion Senate it
is represented by 10 members, and in the House of Commons
by 14. Ontario is governed by one Legislative Chamber only,
with 112 members. Prince Edward Island has one Chamber
only, of 30 members elected for four years. Quebec models
its provincial Government on the Dominion System. It has
a Legislative Council of 24 members appointed for life, and
a Legislative Assembly of 85 members elected for five years.
Saskatchewan contents itself with one House of Parliament
consisting of 63 members elected for five years. Yukon, and
the Northern Territories have not yet attained the dignity
of Provinces, and are governed by Commissioners.
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA
The Union of South Africa, brought into being by an Act
of the Imperial Parliament of September 20th, 1909, and com-
sisting of the Provinces of Cape of Good Hope, Natal, the
Transvaal and the Orange River Colony, is established on
a widely different basis to that of the Dominion of Canada.
The Provinces are administered by a Governor-General and
provincial Councils elected for three years, each Council
having an Executive Committee of four. The number of
members of each Council is respectively 51, 25, 50 and 25.


UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
It will be of interest now to set out the form of Legislature
of the 48 States of the American Union. Alabama has a
Senate of 35 members and a House of Representatives of
106 members, all legislators being elected for four years.
Arizona has a Senate of 19 members, and a House of Repre-
sentatives of 46 members. Arkansas possesses a Senate of
35 members elected for four years and partially renewed
every two years, and a House of Representatives of 100
members elected for two years. California possesses a Senate
of 40 members elected for four years, half being elected every
two years, and an Assembly of 80 members elected for two
years. Colorado has a Senate of 35 members elected for four
years, one-half retiring every two years, and a House of
Representatives of 65 members elected for two years. Con-
necticut's General Assembly consists of 35 Senators and 258
members of the House of Representatives, all being elected
for two years. Delaware has a Senate of 17 members elected
for four years, and a House of Representatives of 35 members
elected for two years. Florida has a Senate of 35 members
and a House of Representatives of 95. Georgia has a Senate
of 5 1 members and a House of Representatives of 200, both
being elected for two years. Idaho also has two Houses—a
Senate of 44 and a House of Representatives of 59, all being
elected for four years. Illinois has a Senate of 51 members half
of whom retire every two years, and a House of Representa-
tives of 153 members elected for two years. Indiana possesses
a Senate of 50 members elected for four years, and a House of
Representatives elected for two years. lowa has a Senate of 50
and a House of Representatives of 100 members, the latter
being elected for two years and the former for four years, half
retiring every second year. Kansas has 50 Senators elected for
four years and 125 representatives elected for two years. Ken-
tucky’s 38 Senators are elected for four years, half retiring
every two years, and the 100 members of the House of
Representatives are elected for two years. Louisiana has 39
Senators and 101 members of the House of Representatives
who are chosen for four years. Maine has a Senate of 31 mem-
bers and a House of Representatives of 151, both Houses being
elected at the same time for two years. Maryland has a Senate
of 29 and a House of Delegates of 118, all elected for four
years: Massachusetts has 40 Senators elected biennially, and
240 Representatives. Collectively the Parliament is known as
The General Court of Massachusetts. Michigan has a Senate of
80
QUEENSLAND-


-32 and a House of Representatives of 100. Minnesota has 67
Senators and 131 Members of the House of Representatives,
elected respectively for four and two years. Mississippi has a
Senate and House of Representatives elected for four years.
Missouri has a Senate of 34 elected for four years, half retir-
ing each two years, and a House of Representatives of 150,
elected for two years. Montana also has a Senate and House
of Representatives, the number of members being 53 and 102
respectively. Nebraska has a Senate of 33 members and a
House of Representatives of 100, all elected for two years.
Nevada’s Legislature consists of a Senate of 17 and a House
of Representatives of 37. The New Hampshire Senate has
24 members and the House of Representatives from 419 to
422. New Jersey has a Senate of 21 members and a General
Assembly of 60. New Mexico has 24 Senators and 49 members
of the House of Representatives. New York has 53 Senators
elected every two years, and an Assembly of 150 members
elected annually. North Carolina has 5° Senators and 120
members of the House of Representatives. North Dakota has
49 Senators and 113 representatives, elected every two years.
Ohio has a Senate of 35 members and a House of Representa-
tives of 150. Oklahoma’s legislature is composed of 44
Senators and a House of Representatives of not less than 97
nor more than 108. Oregon has a Senate of 30 and a House
of Representatives of 60. Pennsylvania’s General Assembly
consists of a Senate of 25 and a House of Representatives of
208, chosen for two years. Rhode Island has 39 Senators and
100 representatives. South Carolina has a Senate of 46 and a
House of Representatives of 124, elected for two years. South
Dakota’s Senate members are in number not less than 25 or
more than 45 and the House of Representatives not less than
75 o r more than 135. Tennessee has 33 Senators and 99
members of the House of Representatives, elected for two
years. The Senate of Texas consists of 31 members, and the
House of Representatives of 150, elected for two years. Utah
has a Senate and House of Representatives, and the Con-
stitution provides for the Initiative and Referendum. Ver-
mont’s Senate contains 30 members, and the House of
Representatives 248. Virginia has not more than 40 or less
than 33 Senators, and not more than 100 or less than 90
members of the House of Representatives. Washington has
a Senate and House of Representatives. The latter is com-
posed of not less than 63, or more than 99 members; the
Senators being not more than half, or less than one-third of


the members of the House of Representatives. West Virginia
has a Senate and House of Delegates, the Senators number-
ing 30 and the members of the House of Delegates 94, elected
biennially. Wisconsin’s legislative power is vested in a
Senate and Assembly. The Senate has 33 members and the
Assembly 100, elected for two years. Wyoming’s Senate
consists of 25 members, and the House of Representatives of
5T
The foregoing information shows that the States of the
American Union are apparently solid on the question of the
bicameral form of Government, and it seems somewhat
strange that their next-door neighbours in Canada should
hold an exactly opposite view. As far as one knows, the
unicameral system of Government has been no great handi-
cap to the Canadian Provinces. Indeed, judging by the
phenomenal progress of that country, one would gather that
the form of the Legislature is a subsidiary question, the main
desideratum being a desire to work and work hard. And
after all is it not more effective for the Legislature of a
country to be content just to guide the people into channels
of industry and turn their thoughts towards honest labour,
than to bulldoze them with impossible laws and irritate them
by pin-pricking regulations? Every man and woman is happier
at work than in idleness, and it matters very little whether
we have one House of Parliament or ten if the people are in
a perpetual state of discontent, and have no desire to apply
themselves to the one thing that counts —hard and continuous
work from which they derive a happy existence, and the
country in which they live, the ability to pay its way.
The adoption by Queensland of the unicameral system of
Government, has not in the opinion of the author led to any
grave or irremediable abuse. Doubtless it has had the effect
of accelerating and simplifying legislation, and has enabled
the party in power for the time being, to give almost in-
stantaneous effect to its will. If they blunder, or if they are
too impulsive, they alone must take the responsibility. No
doubt a Legislative Council was a check on unconsidered or
insufficiently considered legislation, but it is questionable
whether the good it did by occasionally putting on the brake,
was not outweighed by the fact that a purely nominee
Chamber repeatedly checked the manifest will of the people.
Whatever happened to our Legislative Council, nomineeism
must have been abolished. Eight years have elapsed since
the Council disappeared as an integral part of our Constitu-
82
QUEENSLAND—


tion. It has been proposed as part of the policy of the party
that attained office in May, 1929, that a Referendum should
be held to find out if the electors really desire to re-establish
the Council. If that proposal is carried into effect it is im-
possible to predict the result.
The really doubtful phase of the whole subject is whether
the Labour Government of 1915 was justified, in view of an
important preceding event, in passing the Abolition Act. It
is perfectly true that labour had had for years on its platform
the abolition of the Legislative Council. It is also equally
true (and we see it put into practice daily) that the outstand-
ing principle of labour rule is Majority Government. If a
proposal is only carried by one vote in Caucus, it must, never-
theless, be submitted to Parliament, as a considered legislative
proposal of the party, and the party must vote for it nemine
contradicente. It is in discipline such as that, that the
strength of the party lies. That great authority, Viscount
Bryce, describes “democracy” as meaning “nothing more or
less than the rule of the whole of the people expressing their
sovereign will by their votes.” Now see the position we were
in in the year 1921. We had on our Statute Book at that
time “The Parliamentary Bills Referendum Act of 1908”
which enabled a measure twice rejected by the Council to
be submitted to the people. Use was made of this measure
and the people by a majority of 63,000 votes decided that they
wanted to retain the Legislative Council. That was on the
15th May, 1917, and the Council was not abolished until the
end of the session of 1921. It is extremely difficult to recon-
cile the principle of majority rule within the walls of Parlia-
ment and minority rule without.
Let us see for a moment what our friend Professor Arthur
Berridale Keith has to say on the subject at page 462 of his
most recent edition of Responsible Government in the Do-
minions :
“No doubt Mr Theodore’s action was unconstitutional in
view of the result of the Referendum of 1917, but there was
no doubt that the day for nominee Councils, with no limit of
numbers, was over. But it is not clear that a single Chamber
is really an adequate Legislature for the enormous area of
Queensland, still less that legislation on a purely class basis
such as that of the Labour Government of Queensland is
really the best form of legislation which can be devised. The
retirement of Mr Theodore (25th February, 1925) and the
hasty refuge (22nd October, 1925) taken in the Supreme


Court (sic) (Board of Trade and Arbitration) by his suc-
cessor, indicate that the leaders of Queensland Labour are
not certain of the wisdom of a system, under which one
House in which the Labour Party acts by prearranged agree-
ment, dictated largely by the State Labour Party, decides all
legislative issues within the wide limits of state powers/'
It has been thought desirable to quote the foregoing to
show that recognized authority of a very high order, outside
the limits of the State, definitely pronounces the action of the
Theodore Government as unconstitutional, in connection with
which pronouncement the author has felt bound to express
his personal doubts regarding the consistency of labour in
flouting the expressed will of the people as indicated at the
Referendum of sth May, 1917.
If the abolition of the Legislative Council had been brought
about as the direct result of the expression of the people's de-
sire, who would cavil at it? The author is in entire agree-
ment with Professor Keith that “the day for nominee Coun-
cils, with no limit of numbers, was over" but he has fears
that violation of constitutional usage in one direction may
make politicians bold to engage in other more drastic changes,
and that our noble system of Parliamentary Government
founded on the experience of centuries, may be undermined
and its very existence endangered by persons who have little
or no knowledge of the tribulations through which the nation
went in order to found the most rational and democratic form
of Constitutional Government that the world has yet known.
That the Dominions office declined to interfere, in response
to the Memorial of 3rd November, 1921, is not to be sur-
prised at. The inclination in recent years has been to avoid
argument with Dominion Governments, to treat their every
act as an act of domestic concern, and to allow them to work
out their own destinies in their own way. One ventures to
express the opinion that it is an entirely wise course to pur-
sue, and that much less difficulty is likely to be encountered
by adopting that policy than by keeping the self-governing
States perpetually in leading strings.
It is perfectly remarkable how little interest the people
generally take in the Legislature or its constitution. If one
walked down Queen Street to-day and asked the first half-
dozen intelligent looking people to describe the constitution
of the Queensland Legislature, they would not know and
they would be bored to tears by the mere query. Time and
again the writer has tested the question. The majority of
84
QUEENSLAND—


people do not know the difference between a Legislative
Council and a Legislative Assembly and they positively do
not know that we abolished our Council, or that it ever
existed. Ask them the difference between the bicameral and
the unicameral systems, and they would probably reply that
they did not speak French. Will it be believed that only
three years ago the author had an application from the Com-
monwealth Bureau of Science and Industrv for certain in-
formation concerning the Legislative Council of Queensland
which the Department assumed to be in existence, and that
less than a year ago he had an application from an Australian
Parliament for a list of the members of the Legislative Coun-
cil of Queensland? Moreover, on 18th December, 1930, there
arrived at Parliament House, Brisbane, a Christmas card from
the Honourable J. E. Fenton, Acting Prime Minister of Aus-
tralia, addressed to “The Honourable The President of The
Legislative Council, Brisbane, Queensland.” What is one
to do in the face of such massive ignorance, and if you put to
the popular vote the question “Shall the Legislative Council
of Queensland be re-established,” what species of intelligence
do you expect to be applied towards the solution of the
problem ?
A NATIONAL MOVE TOWARDS UNIFICATION
At the date of writing (March, 1930) there is before the
National Parliament a measure to confer upon it the power of
amending the Constitution without any reference to the
people. Whatever may be the opinion as to the utility of a
Senate or an Upper House, we should be careful to keep well
in the forefront of our minds that if the people confer such a
power it implies under the existing regime, the abolition of
the Senate at the first available opportunity and the conse-
quent unification of Australia. If it is the will of the people
to confer such drastic powers upon its National Parliament
there is no arguing the matter. The people are supreme, but
they should without doubt be carefully educated on the ques-
tion that the conferring of general powers of amendment of
the Constitution involves abolition of the Senate and Unifica-
tion. In this connection a study might well be made of the
jealousy of the people of the United States in regard to the
Constitution. Over a period of 154 years only 19 amend-
ments have been made in their original Constitution, many
of them like our own amendments being of comparatively
minor consequence. This question is of such transcendent


national importance, that one feels justified in calling atten-
tion to the fact that the prime mover in the abolition of the
Legislative Council of Queensland, in violation of the ex-
pressed will of the people as represented by a majority of
63,000 votes, was up to June or July of 1930, second in com-
mand in the National Labour Government. It may be
thought that such pronounced success having attended the
effort to flout the will of the people of Queensland, it will be
comparatively easy to accomplish a similar coup in the Com-
monwealth Electorate. If that should eventuate, then the
average elector will prove himself simpler and even more
stupid, if that be possible, than he has shown himself in the
past.
Under section 3 of the Constitution Act Amendment Act
of 1922 it was provided that the Governor in Council might,
by notification published in the Gazette, declare that the
existing members of the Legislative Council should during
life, or for such period of time as was fixed by such notifica-
tion, retain and continue to be entitled to exercise the privil-
ege of a free pass upon the railways of the State and the use
of the Parliamentary Library and such other existing privil-
eges of such members as might be mentioned in the notifica-
tion. Accordingly a notification appeared in the Gazette of
Ist April, 1922, granting to them a free pass on the railways
of the State and the use of the Parliamentary Library. In
addition they continued to use the Parliamentary Refresh-
ment Rooms and the Billiard Room.
During the session of 1929 the Moore Government abolished
these privileges and put members of the late Legislative
Council on the same footing as members or late members of
the Legislative Assembly: that is to say that if they had
served for three whole Parliaments but not less than seven
years they would be entitled to free railway travelling, and
they withdrew the use of the Parliamentary Library, and
inferentially the use of the Refreshment Rooms and Billiard
Room.
We have come now to the end of our Council Abolition
story. Much more might have been said but it was not desir-
able to indulge in highly contentious argument. It is con-
fidently believed that an interesting story has been told in
an impartial manner and that an informative record has been
made of a highly interesting phase of our political history.
86
QUEENSLAND—


REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE—
ITS ORIGIN AND GROWTH
The history of the origin and growth of the representation
of the people in the Legislative Assembly of Queensland,
should have a few keen readers among Parliamentarians of
to-day, unless, perchance, they are all of the same opinion as
William McCormack, who, on a distant occasion, told the
writer that history of all kinds was a futility, and that the
events and circumstances of to-day were the only things
which should concern the average intelligent man.
With the certain knowledge that there are a few students of
history in the Queensland Parliament, and in the belief that
the opinion of William McCormack will be shared by few, it is
proposed to put on record in permanent form the steps taken
Dy the Legislature from time to time to secure a reasonably
fair representation of the people. It is true that some of this
information has already been printed in one of the author’s
previous books, but that, being primarily a Roll of the
Queensland Parliament, has not had the publicity which the
present volume will have.
Under the Order in Council issued by the Government of
New South Wales on 6th June, 1859, the Governor, prior to
separation, was authorized by proclamation to fix the number
of members “of which the said Assembly shall be composed,”
(that is, the Legislative Assembly of Queensland), and “to
make all necessary provisions for dividing the said Colony
into convenient Electoral Districts,” etc., etc.
The proclamation of 6th June, 1859, signed by Sir William
Denison, declared that “the Act of the Parliament of New
South Wales, passed in the twenty-second year of Her
Majesty, entitled ‘An Act to Amend the Electoral Law,’ shall
be in force in the Colony of Queensland.’ Under that Pro-
clamation it was declared that the Legislative Assembly of
Queensland should consist of twenty-six members, to be
returned for the following constituencies: —
Town of Brisbane, 3.
Town of South Brisbane, 1.
Hamlet of Fortitude Valley, 1.
Town of Ipswich, 3.
Town of Drayton and Toowoomba, 1.
Town of Warwick, 1.
District of East Moreton, 2.
District of West Moreton, 3.
District of Western Downs, 2.
District of Eastern Downs, 1.


District of Northern Downs, I.
District of Maranoa, i.
District of Burnett, 2.
District of Wide Bay, 1.
District of Port Curtis, 1.
District of Leichhardt, 2.
These constituencies existed throughout the First Parlia-
ment, ended on 22nd May, 1863. In the second session of
1 863, the Additional Members Act was passed. This added six
additional electoral districts, namely:—Kennedy, Mitchell,
Warrego, Clermont, Rockhampton, and Maryborough. After
2nd September, 1864, or at the end of the second session of
the Second Parliament, the colony was represented by thirty-
two members. This representation continued during the
Third, Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Parliaments, or until the end
of the session of 1873. During the session of 1872, Parlia-
ment passed the Electoral Districts Act, dividing the colony
into forty-two electoral districts, each returning one member;
and this measure was operative in regard to the Seventh Par-
liament, which opened on 6th January, 1874. The following is
a list of the electorates so constituted:—
Brisbane City Carnavon
Wickham Maranoa
Fortitude Valley Balonne
Enoggera Warrego
South Brisbane Maryborough
Bulimba Wide Bay
Oxley Gympie
East Moreton Burnett
Logan Mulgrave
Ipswich Rockhampton
Bremer Blackall
Bundanba Port Curtis
Stanley Normanby
West Moreton Leichhardt
Fassifern Springsure
Toowoomba Clermont
Aubigny Mitchell
Warwick Bowen
Dalby Kennedy
Darling Downs Ravenswood
Northern Downs Burke
During the session of 1875, Parliament passed “The Cook
District Representation Bill,” which added one member to
the forty-two above mentioned, and the new electorate was
first represented on nth July, 1876, in the Seventh Par-
liament.
The next step taken towards amplifying the representation
88
QUEENSLAND—


of the people in the Legislative Assembly was in 1878, when
Parliament again redistributed the seats and provided under
“The Electoral Districts Act of 1878” for forty-two elector-
ates, thirteen of which were double electorates. The result
was that the representation was increased from forty-three
to fifty-five. The following is a list of the constituencies:
North Brisbane Two Members
Fortitude Valley .. .. One Member
South Brisbane Two Members
Enoggera Two Members
Moreton .. .. .. .. One Member
Bulimba One Member
Oxley One Member
Logan One Member
Ipswich Two Members
Bundanba One Member
Rosewood One Member
Fassifern One Member
Stanley Two Members
Drayton and Toowoomba .. Two Members
Aubigny One Member
Darling Downs Two Members
Warwick One Member
Dalby One Member
Carnarvon One Member
Northern Downs .. .. One Member
Balonne One Member
Maranoa One Member
Warrego One Member
Maryborough Two Members
Gympie One Member
Wide Bay Two Members
Mulgrave One Member
Burnett One Member
Rockhampton Two Members
Blackall One Member
Port Curtis One Member
Normanby One Member
Clermont One Member
Leichhardt Two Members
Mitchell One Member
Gregory One Member
Mackay One Member
Bowen One Member
Townsville One Member
Kennedy Two Members
Burke One Member
Cook Two Members
This new distribution of seats was operative in the Eighth
Parliament, which opened on 14th January, 1879.
In September, 1885, an Act was assented to, giving an ad-


ditional member to Fortitude Valley, dividing Mitchell into
two and creating Barcoo, dividing Townsville into two and
creating Musgrave, and providing for Townsville returning
two members. Thus four seats were added to the existing
fifty-five, bringing the total representation up to fifty-nine.
The new members took their seats in the Ninth Parliament in
July, 1886.
The next general redistribution of seats took place under
“The Electoral Districts Act of 1887,” which divided the
colony into sixty electorates returning seventy-two members,
there being twelve double electorates. This Act was operative
from the beginning of the Tenth Parliament, which opened on
12th June, 1888. The following is a list of the electorates: —
Albert One Member
Aubigny One Member
Balonne One Member
Barcoo One Member
Bowen One Member
Brisbane North Two Members
Brisbane South Two Members
Bulimba One Member
Bulloo One Member
Bundaberg One Member
Bundanba One Member
Burke Two Members
Burnett One Member
Burrum One Member
Cairns .. .. • • • • One Member
Cambooya One Member
Carnarvon One Member
Carpentaria One Member
Charters Towers •• .. Two Members
Clermont One Member
Cook One Member
Cunningham One Member
Dalby .. One Member
Drayton and Toowoomba .. Two Members
Enoggera One Member
Fassifern One Member
Fitzroy • • One Member
Flinders One Member
Fortitude Valley .. .. Two Members
Gregory .. One Member
Gympie Two Members
Herbert One Member
Ipswich Two Members
Kennedy One Member
Leichhardt One Member
Lockyer One Member
Logan One Member
Mackay Two Members
90
QUEENSLAND—


Maranoa One Member
Maryborough Two Members
Mitchell .. One Member
Moreton One Member
Murilla One Member
Musgrave One Member
Normanby One Member
Nundah One Member
Oxley .. One Member
Port Curtis One Member
Rockhampton Two Members
Rockhampton North .. One Member
Rosewood One Member
Stanley .. One Member
Toombul One Member
Toowong One Member
Townsville Two Members
Warrego .. One Member
Warwick One Member
Wide Bay One Member
Woolloongabba .. .. One Member
Woothakata One Member
In the session of 1892, Parliament passed an Electoral Dis-
tricts Act which divided Burke into Burke and Croydon, each
returning one member, but this division did not operate until
the Eleventh Parliament, which opened on 25th May, 1893.
In the session of 1910 Parliament passed an Act to make
provision for the better representation of the people of
Queensland in Parliament. The State was divided by the
three Commissioners, Messrs W. J. Gall, G. G. McLennan,
and F. W. Parkinson, into seventy-two single electoral dis-
tricts, of which the following is a list: —
Albert
Aubigny
Balonne
Barcoo
Bowen
Bremer
Brisbane
Bulimba
Bundaberg
Buranda
Burke
Burnett
Burrum
Cairns
Carnarvon
Charters Towers
Chillagoe
Cook
Cooroora
Cunningham
Dalby
Drayton
Eacham
East Toowoomba
Enoggera
Fassifern
Fitzroy
Flinders
Fortitude Valley '
Gregory
Gympie
Herbert
Toombul '
Toowong ‘
Toowoomba
Townsville
Ipswich
Ithaca
Kennedy
Keppel
Kurilpa
Leichhardt
Lockyer
Logan
Mackay
Maranoa
Maree
Maryborough
Merthyr
Mirani
Mitchell
Mount Morgan
Mundingburra
Murilla
Murrumba
Musgrave
Nanango
Normanby
Nundah
Oxley
Paddington
Pittsworth
Port Curtis
Queenton
Rockhampton
Rosewood
South Brisbane
Stanley
Warrego
Warwick
Wide Bay
Windsor


This redistribution operated for the first time in the Nine-
teenth Parliament, which opened on 2nd July, 1912.
Under “The Electoral Districts Act of 1910” it was pro-
vided in Section 15 that “whenever at any time the number
of electors appearing - upon the Electoral Roll of any district
is, as the case may be, so much above or so much below the
prescribed quota of electors .... that, in the opinion
of the Governor in Council, it has become necessary to reduce
or increase, as the case may be, the number of such electors
so as to approximate the same to the said quota, the Governor
in Council may appoint three Electoral Commissioners in
manner aforesaid for the purposes of this Section.” To arrive
at the quota the total number of electors whose names ap-
peared on the Electoral Rolls of the State on the first day of
January, 1911, was divided by 72 and the quotient became the
quota of electors. Hence, on Bth April, 1921, three Commis-
sioners, Messrs T. A. Ferry, G. A. Carter, and R. A. Dunlop,
were so appointed and there was once again a redistribution
of seats. The Commissioners were specially directed to alter
the boundaries of the Electoral Districts specified in the first
and second schedule to the proclamation of Bth April, 1921,
namely, Bulimba, Bowen, Enoggera, Fitzroy, Logan, Mur-
rumba, Nanango, Nundah, Oxley, Toombul, Toowong, Wind-
sor, Burke, Charters Towers, Chillagoe, Kennedy and
Queenton.
There were several changes made in the names of elector-
ates as provided by “The Electoral Districts Act of 1922,” as
follow: —
Old Name New Name Old Name New Name
Musgrave Burrum Fassifern Oxley
Burrum Wide Bay Oxley Logan
Wide Bay Cooroora Logan Wynnum
Cooroora Murrumba Pittsworth Aubigny
Drayton Cunningham Aubigny Stanley
Cunningham Lockyer Stanley Nundah
Lockyer Rosewood Nundah Enoggera
Rosewood Fassifern Enoggera Kelvin Grove
The complete list of electorates as provided for under the
new distribution was, therefore: —
Albert Brisbane Burrum Cooroora
Aubigny Bulimba Cairns Cunningham
Balonne Bundaberg Carnarvon Dalby
Barcoo Buranda Charters Towers Eacham
Bowen Burke Chillagoe East Toowoombi
Bremer Burnett Cook Enoggera
92
QUEENSLAND—


Fassifern Kurilpa Mundingburra Sandgate
Fitzroy Leichhardt Murilla South Brisbane
Flinders Lockyer Murrumba Stanley
Fortitude Valley Logan Nanango Toombul
Gregory Mackay Normanby Toowong
Gympie Maranoa Nundah Toowoomba
Herbert Maree Oxley Townsville
Ipswich Maryborough Paddington Warrego
Ithaca Merthyr Port Curtis Warwick
Kelvin Grove Mirani Queenton Wide Bay
Kennedy Mitchell Rockhampton Windsor
Keppel Mount Morgan Rosewood Wynnum
The Twenty-third Parliament, which opened on 10th July,
T 9 23, was the first elected under the most recent distribution
of 1921.
The progressive development of the representation of the
people since iB6O, under the various Redistribution Acts which
have been passed since that year, has now been indicated, it is
hoped, with sufficient clarity to give honourable members
authentic information upon a subject which naturally must be
of much interest to them.
It is quite inevitable that as the years go by the distribu-
tion of electors throughout the State undergoes remarkable
changes. New centres of population arise and old centres dis-
appear, and yet it is not practicable to be perpetually redistri-
buting the seats. The Redistribution Commissioners, when
appointed, have legal authority for adopting a margin of allow-
ance, but in no case is the quota to be departed from to a
greater extent than one-fifth more or one-fifth less. When
the inequalities of representation become glaringly apparent,
it would appear to be the implied duty of the Governor in
Council, under section 15 of the Act, to cause a further distri-
bution to be made, but inasmuch as the Act does not make it
obligatory, it has not been the practice in modern times to give
relief, where relief is manifestly essential in order to secure
fair representation.
Now in order to bring home to those interested the in-
equalities which have arisen since the last redistribution in
1921, it may be pointed out that there are at present five
electorates in which the number of electors runs into five
figures, namely, Bulimba 12,115; Enoggera 12,241; Logan
12,391; Nundah 10,876 and Oxley 11,551. There are thirteen
electorates with over 8000 voters and as a contrast we have
Flinders with 3116, in an area of 27,000 square miles; Gregory


with 3819, in an area of 106,360 square miles, and Charters
Towers with 3994, and an area of 9000 square miles.
The time is ripe for a change, and probably during the cur-
rency of the Twenty-fifth Parliament, another redistribution
of seats will be made. Indeed it is thoroughly understood
that it is coming before the Twenty-fifth Parliament expires
and some mention has been made of the probability of a reduc-
tion of members from 72 to 62.
94
QUEENSLAND—


STATE ENTERPRISES
TABLOIDS
When the Labour Government assumed office in 1915 and
at an early stage of their career launched out upon a pro-
gramme of State Enterprises, the author confesses that he had
some hope of the success of Governmental trading. There
had been not much to guide us either in Australia or else-
where, and, given ordinary business management with the
right class of manager, there seemed at the time no sound
reasons why the State, backed by its credit and supported by
its prestige, should not at all events have avoided absolute
loss, and in some cases made substantial profit. The opinion
was expressed in 1919 in Queensland Politics During Sixty
Years that “in one case the wisdom of State encroachment
upon private trade may be proved to the hilt; in another the
result may suggest a cautious curtailment and the calling of
a halt.”
There was nothing very wrong in that expression of
opinion. It was, to some extent, a pious wish inspired by the
author's life-long experience of traders' prices, and it was
perfectly natural to hope that by means of the State coming
in as a competitor, the prices of a few of the necessaries of
life might be steadied, and the great mass of the poorer people
reap a slight advantage. There is nothing criminal in the
expression of such a hope, and it is regrettable that it should
have given offence.
An analysis of the Labour Government’s Trading Enter-
prises is not a task which can be taken in hand lightly by a
layman. The average man has neither the knowledge nor
capacity to handle the figures involved in the business. If,
therefore, one records ventures of the Government in detail
and then, taking official figures, gives the net result attained,
that is about all that can be expected and it is certainly all
that will be attempted in this short article.
It was not until the session of 1918 that the State Labour
Government passed through Parliament “The State Enter-
prises Act.” Consequently, in the early stages of their career
there was really no statutory authority whatever for their
trading ventures. Writers on this subject have strangely


enough overlooked an extremely interesting document to be
found in the Parliamentary Papers for 1917. State Trading,
prior to that year, was looked upon with very grave suspicion
by the late Legislative Council of Queensland. Consequently
on 19th September, 1917, that body carried the following
Resolutions on the motion of Hon. F. T. Brentnall, the Ques-
tion having been originated by The Hon. P. J. Leahy.
(1) That a Select Committee be appointed to consider
and report on the practice of the Government in
spending large sums of public money in acquiring
freehold and other properties and carrying on various
enterprises in violation of law, and subsequently in-
viting the sanction of this Council to such un-
authorized expenditure by including it in Appropri-
ation Bills.
(2) That such Committee have power to send for per-
sons, papers, and records, and leave to sit during any
adjournment of the Council, and that it consist of the
following members: —Mr W. Stephens, Mr Leahy,
Mr Parnell, Mr Fowles and the mover.
Subsequently the Representative of the Government in the
Council endeavoured to have the motion read and discharged,
but this proposal was defeated by 23 votes to 14.
The Committee held 10 sittings and examined 17 witnesses.
At the first meeting, the Crown Solicitor was granted permis-
sion to watch proceedings on behalf of the Crown, and at the
second sitting the Under Secretary for Lands refused to pro-
duce documents in regard to completed State purchases of
Stations, and said that he could not do so without the consent
of the Minister. The Premier (T. J. Ryan) appeared as
Attorney-General on behalf of the Minister for Lands, and
lodged a number of objections against the Committee con-
tinuing their investigations, and these having been considered,
he was informed that the Committee was of opinion that they
“had no warrant either in law or fact/’ The Under Secretary
to the Treasury and Mr Ross, who was in charge of State
Butchers’ Shops, were also asked for papers, but would not
produce them without authority of their respective Ministers.
The Committee reported that “all the officials of the Govern-
ment who were examined were sent for by the Committee,
and neither in procuring witnesses nor in any other way, did
the Government give the Committee the slightest help.”
It is desirable that the remainder of the report should speak
for itself. It is too interesting to condense and is therefore
given in extenso.
96
QUEENSLAND—


STATE STATIONS
The manager of the State Stations has had long experience
of sheep, but has not had so much experience of cattle, and
has had no experience of purchasing and taking delivery of
stations. He did not in all instances inspect the properties
himself, and, in at least one instance, adopted the report of
one of his subordinates.
All the Stations were bought on “book muster;’ which, ac-
cording to the evidence, is likely to be below the numbers
disclosed by the actual muster at a later stage. The figures
m connection with the actual muster at Mount Hutton were
very much below the number of the book muster, and though
it is claimed that, taking the Station properties as a whole, the
numbers of the actual muster exceeded the book muster, the
Committee was unable to obtain documentary evidence to that
effect.
The evidence of Mr Aiming is of particular value. He
stated that the Government gave too large a sum for Wando
Vale, and thus artificially raised the price of the stations sub-
sequently purchased. His evidence with regard to the char-
acter of the country, and the herd (which he described as
the worst m the district) has not been disputed, and there is
no doubt that, taking the facts as known at the time of the
purchase, it was a transaction which cannot be justified.
Ihe State Stations pay neither Local Authority nor any
other rates. This is very unfair to the Local Authorities
whose roads they use. The time devoted to the inspection of
the Stations and stock prior to purchasing was in most cases
insufficient, and, taking these purchases on the whole, the
Committee is strongly of opinion that no prudent company
firm, or individual with experience of station properties would
have made these purchases with the limited information at
the disposal of the Government. Stock was sold from several
ot the Stations, but only a small number (about 800) was for
Imperial purposes, and the great bulk of those cattle were sold
to residents of New South Wales, who, as far as the Com-
mittee could ascertain, removed the cattle to that State.
There is evidence that, taking into consideration the drought
and other factors, the running of stations is more or less a
risky enterprise, and, quite apart from the legal objection it
was not wise for the Government to undertake this class' of
business. Cattle have increased in value since the Govern-
ment purchased the Stations, and probably the properties are
at the present time worth the amount paid for them or a little
more, but it is not likely that the price of cattle will continue


at quite the same figure after the war, and it is too soon at
present to state whether ultimately the ventures will result
in profit or loss.
STATE SAWMILLS AND JOINERY WORKS
The mills have been run at a considerable loss, as disclosed
by the Auditor-General’s Report and the evidence of the
Accountant of the State Sawmills, and there does not seem
to be any likelihood of the Government being able to run the
mills at a profit. ,
Increases in the price of sawn timber have been made by
the private millowners and the Government since the Govern-
ment purchased the sawmill; and though the Government wit-
nesses claim that they are selling timber somewhat lower than
private mills, there does not appear to be much in this con
tention if discounts, etc., by private mills are taken into con-
sideration. There is evidence that the have sold at a
somewhat reduced rate to some Government institutions, but
there is also evidence that timber has been sent from Bris-
bane to Rockhampton for Government buildings in that dis-
trict, and that similar timber could be purchased in Rock-
hampton for about 6s. per hundred feet less than the price
which the timber from Brisbane cost delivered in Rock-
hampton.
The Government paid too high a price for the timber m
stock in Raymond’s mill at the time of the purchase, and
Messrs Raymond and Co., according to the evidence of the
accountant for that firm, were losing money at the time of
the sale to the Government. At the end of June last the
stock-in-trade amounted to about £27,000, and was only in-
sured for half that sum. Had premiums been paid for the
whole amount the loss in running the business for the year
would, of course, have been greater. The loss up to the end
of June, 1917, was £1913 25., and it does not appear from the
evidence that there is any likelihood of running the mill at a
profit. Neither from the Government view, nor from the
point of view of the purchasers of timber, can it be said that
the purchase of the mill has been beneficial to the Govern-
ment or to the public.
On the State Joinery Works a sum of £31,000 has been ex-
pended on buildings, but there is as yet no machinery, and
the money lies unproductive. The evidence of timber and
joinery experts shows that the whole plan was misconceived,
and that there is little or no prospect of successfully running
these works.
9 8
QUEENSLAND—


STATE HOTELS
Evidence was given showing that two hotels had been closed
by the Government owing to their being in a prohibited area,
and that the Government had paid compensation —in one case
amounting to £2OOO. In the same prohibited area the Gov-
ernment then established a State Hotel at Babinda, and, ap-
parently, in doing so acted contrary to law. The hotel has
not been in existence long enough to make out a balance-
sheet, but it is run without a licence and without paying rates
or taxes. Apparently it is being run at a profit.
STATE BUTCHERS’ SHOPS
These shops show a profit of about £35,000 for the financial
year ending June, 1917; but included in this is the sum of
£19,000 received from the Commonwealth Government, an
amount in dispute regarding meat purchased by the Federal
Government, apparently for the troops. It does not appear
that the Government gave any value for this £19,000, and, in
any case, it cannot be said to be a legitimate profit made by
the State Butchers’ Shops. The transaction does not show
much solicitude for the Federal Government or the Imperial
Government in their purchase of meat for the troops. The
evidence disclosed that the Government, in consequence of
their contract with the Imperial Government for the supply
of meat for the Imperial troops, supplied meat to the State
Butchers’ Shops at a price nearly 30% lower than the Im-
perial Government were paying.
ILLEGAL EXPENDITURE
From questions put to the Auditor-General and other wit-
nesses, and from reference made to the decision of the Su-
preme Court in the Insurance case, it is clear that the ex-
penditure on these enterprises was incurred without Parlia-
mentary or any legal authority, and as such deserves the
strongest reprobation.
As pointed out by the Auditor-General, expenditure of this
character is quite different from unforeseen expenditure,
where the Parliamentary vote is exhausted and the extra
amount is paid pending Parliamentary authority. With the
object of safeguarding the public funds, your Committee
strongly supports the recommendations of the Auditor-General
relating to the definition and control of unforeseen expend-
iture. (See Report 1916-1917, page 12.)


The Committee is pleased to be able to report that, in the
matter of establishing- the State Produce Agency and Steel
and Iron Works, the Government have taken the proper course
—namely, obtaining the authority of Parliament for these
purposes; and the Committee is strongly of opinion that a
similar course should have been adopted with regard to the
other State Enterprises.
P. J. Leahy,
Committee Room No. i, Chairman.
Legislative Council,
4th December, 1917.
Apparently this inquiry led in the following session to the
introduction and passage of “The State Enterprises Act of
1918” and from that time onward the Government had legal
authority for engaging in any form of State Enterprise that
they thought desirable. Whether they were wise or not, the
legality of their actions could no longer be questioned.
“The State Enterprises Act of 1918” was assented to on
23rd November, 1918, but the State Trade Department, con-
stituted under Section 5 of the Act, only came into operation
on Ist January, 1919. The Commissioner selected to control
this new and very important branch of the Public Service was
Mr W. H. Austin, an officer of very wide experience in the
Audit Department.
It is proposed now to give a comparatively brief account
of each Enterprise in turn, the object being to avoid detail
which might easily lead one who is not an expert into error,
and yet at the same time to give sufficient information to indi-
cate at a glance the net result of the enterprise being dealt
with. Perhaps the tabloid form of information is of more
general interest and use, than pages of official report from
which it is difficult to winnow the essential facts. The public
man dealing with a specific subject has not often the time at
his disposal to summarize from official documents, and if the
following compendium assists him in his labours, a useful
purpose will have been served, provided always that in avoid-
ing verbosity we have not inadvertently so set forth the facts
as to cause wrong deductions to be made. Naturally, it is
possible to summarize in such a manner as to mislead, for
while brevity has its value, too great conciseness may not
satisfy the seeker after knowledge. One may therefore with
confidence refer students of this very interesting subject to
the valuable annual reports of Mr Austin, the State Trade
Commissioner, who has for years past displayed in the inform-
100
QUEENSLAND—


ation furnished to Parliament, a detailed mastery of his sub-
jects, which could only be shown by a public official of un-
usual industry.
STATE BUTCHERS’ SHOPS
Date of Commencement : 12th November, 1915 (with 3 Shops).
Capitalisation : Approximately £IOO,OOO.
Trading Results: From inception to 30th June, 1929* Profit
= £57,7h.
Capital written off : Nil.
Date of Sale: Between July and December, 1929.
Net Loss to country: The final results cannot yet be shown as
accounts are not yet finalized —two large
freehold and four leasehold properties have
yet to be disposed of. Some considerable
time must elapse before these remaining
assets can be satisfactorily disposed of. A
substantial loss will naturally be made on
the realization of the properties, but on
the total results of its trading this Enter-
prise is expected to disclose a surplus
profit.
General Information: During the period from 19U to *9 2 9 the
number of shops in operation reached a
total of 90; these shops were operating
both in Brisbane and in various centres
throughout the State.
Total customers served . . 40,600,000
Total shop sales £5,° 2 5,540
Average Selling price per lb.
of meat sold . . . . * • 4.82 d.
Beef supplied 205,646,793 lb. = 91,806 tons
Mutton „ 30,182,255,, = 13,474 „
Pork and Veal supplied,
approx. 13,947,189 ~ = 6,271 „
Total 249,776,237 lb. = m,55i tons
From 1915 to 1920, State Butchers’ Shops
operated on frozen meat under agreement
with the Meatworks Companies, but from
1921 onwards they purchased their own
stock, which were killed out at their
slaughteryards, and fresh meat only has
been sold.
Just a few words may be said here regarding the extreme
difficulty of securing the right type of manager of retail shops
of any description conducted by Government. Mr Austin
himself recognized this at an early stage, for in his report to


Parliament for the Financial Year ended 30th June, 1921, he
says: —
“It would be idle for me to attempt to deny that in certain
of the Enterprises we have had negligent and inefficient man-
agement, and in some cases managers who were not loyal
to their employers; naturally these men are not managers of
State Enterprises to-day/’
The mere fact that Enterprises belong to the Government
appears to undermine the honesty (if he ever had any) of
a certain type of man. Mr Austin is almost too kind in re-
ferring to men who “were not loyal to their employers.” If
it would have been in accordance with official procedure, he
might well have said that they were “not honest to their
employers.” The writer is aware of at least one case (and
probably there were many), in which the manager of a State
Butchers’ Shop glaringly took tips from a type of customer
who should have known much better than to offer them, and
who was equally dishonest. The object of the tip was to
secure an advantage of some description, and thus while the
shop manager supplemented his income by means of tips, the
customer assisted him to rob the Government by accepting
abnormally good weight for very small payment.
An allegation has been made, and there is every reason for
believing that the statement is reliable, that a delivery-hand
in a branch State Butchers’ Shop within the Brisbane area was
during the whole period of his employment, the owner of a
retail butcher’s shop operating within half a mile of the State
Shop. Possibly the circumstances were not known to the
authorities, but how such a condition of affairs can be recon-
ciled with efficient management, it is difficult to understand.
Moreover, the audacity of the act on the part of the employee
is additional evidence of the manner in which the moral tone
of a certain type of person deteriorates when he is associated
with a State undertaking.
No such circumstances could possibly exist under the aus-
pices of private trading, or if they did, a remedy would be
found of a short, sharp, and drastic nature.
It is only fair to the Commissioner of State Enterprises to
say that when information came to his knowledge of improper
proceedings, he promptly jumped upon offenders. It is under-
stood that during a period of ten years he had occasion to
dismiss 60 managers of Butchers’ Shops.
102
QUEENSLAND—


£
s.
d.
Net profit 12th
November 1915 to 30th September 1916
7,57616
4
i •
yy
I2th
November
1915 to 30th June 1917
35,045
2
7 7
« 9
99
year
ended 30th
June 1918
22,925
6
4
7 7
99
9 9
99
9 9
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
9 9
„ IQIQ ••
,» J 920 . .
„ 1921
» 1Q22
36,998
36,652
1,876
6,928
0
4
11
15
4
0
3
1
s'
7 7
loss
99
99
„ J 923
10,225
18
6
9 9
profit
99
99
» x 9 2 4 ••
9,320
14
10
9 9
9 9
99
99
„ x 9 2 5
14,626
15
11
99
99
99
99
„ 1926 ..
565 13
1
9 9
99
99
99
„ 1927 ..
5,045
3
1
9 9
99
99
99
„ 1928
6,255
0
4
99
loss
99
99
„ 1929
11,926
0
9
RESULT OF TRADING
Out of the above profits there was allocated (in accordance
with the State Enterprises Act) :
In part settlement of Meat Export Companies claim 1920
£50,000 plus interest £1,047 18s. nd. .. .. .. 5 1 >°47 18 11
Towards meeting the loss on State Cattle Trading A/c
(1920-21) .. .. .. .. •• •• 15,000 o o
Towards meeting loss on consignment of frozen meat to
England .. .. .. •• •• •• •• 22,449 11 2
SUMMARY OF OPERATIONS OF STATE BUTCHERS’ SHOPS
SINCE THEIR INCEPTION
12th November 1915 to 30th June 1929
(Taken from Report of Commissioner for Trade for year ended
30th June 1929)
The accumulated Net Profit of State Butchers’ Shops from their
inception up to 30th June 1929 amounted to £57,7! 1 Is -, Qd. out of
which there has been allocated (in accordance with the State Enter-
prises Act): —
Paid to the Treasury to the credit of
Consolidated Revenue . . . . £5,000
Loan Fund (Account State Fish
Supply) .. .. .. .. £30,000
£35,000 o o
Balance 30th June 1929 £22,711 1 9
made up as under: —
£ s. d.
General Reserve .. .. .. 6,000 o o
Reserve for Depreciation . . 12,120 18 8
18,120 18 8
Profit and Loss A/c .. .. 4,59° 3 1
£22,711 1 9


State Butchers’ Shops were established from time to time
and opened for business at the places and on the dates named:
Roma Street (Brisbane) .. .. .. 12th November 1915
Woolloongabba (Brisbane) .. .. 2nd June 1916
Fortitude Valley (Brisbane) .. . . 29th June 1916
William Street (Rockhampton) .. . . 25th August 1916
Archer Street (Rockhampton) .. .. 25th August 1916
East Street (Rockhampton) . . .. 25th August 1916
Paddington (Brisbane) .. .. .. 16th May 1917
Maryborough . . .. . . . . 24th May 1917
Mellor Street (Gympie) .. .. .. 28th May 1917
Monkland (Gympie) .. .. .. 28th May 1917
Albion (Brisbane) .. .. .. .. nth December 1917
Bulimba (Brisbane) . . . . . . 19th March 1918
Highgate Hill (Brisbane) .. . . sth December 1917
Logan Road (Brisbane) .. •• .. nth March 1918
Spring Hill (Brisbane) . . .. .. Bth March 1918
Teneriffe (Brisbane) .. .. .. 9th October 1917
Victoria Bridge (Brisbane) .. .. nth March 1918
West End (Brisbane) .. . . . . Bth March 1918
Wynnum . . .. . . .. . . 2nd October 1917
Palmer Street (Head shop) (Townsville) 2nd October 1917
Causeway (Townsville) . . .. .. 22nd October 1917
Railway Estate (Townsville) .. .. 23rd October 1917
North Ward (Townsville) . . .. 14th March 1918
Charters Towers .. .. .. .. 2nd November 1917
Bundaberg . . . . .. .. . . 7th March 1918
Head Shop (Mount Morgan) . . . . 7th March 1918
Tipperary Point (Mount Morgan) .. 14th March 1918
In financial year 1917-18 shops were opened at Normanton
and Croydon and were controlled by the manager of the
Vanrook properties (worked in conjunction with State
Stations).
Mossman Street (Charters Towers) 26th June 1918
Walterhall (Mount Morgan) .. .. 14th October 1918
Central Street (Mount Morgan) .. 17th October 1918
William Street (Mount Morgan) . . 17th October 1918
Howard . . . . .. . . .. 20th November 1918
Perry Street (North Bundaberg) . . 2nd December 1918
Charleville .. .. .. .. .. Ist January 1919
Wyndham Street (Roma)* . . . . Ist March 1919
Arthur Street (Roma)* .. .. .. Ist March 1919
Ipswich . . . . . . . . .. 13th August 1919
North Ipswich . . .. .. .. 13th August 1919
North Rockhampton . . .. .. 2nd December 1919
Kangaroo Point (Brisbane) . . .. 17th February 1920
Einasleigh . . . . .. . . .. 26th April 1920
Bowen .. .. .. .. .. 21st May 1920
* A new shop was erected at Roma and opened on the 18th September 1919
and the two shops held on lease were surrendered.
104
QUEENSLAND—


The Butchers’ shops at Normanton and Croydon previously
under control of State Stations taken over by the Butchery
Department in year 1919-20:
Cairns .. .. .. .. .. 2nd July 1920
Toowoomba .. .. .. .. .. 7th July 1920
Rosalie (Brisbane) .. .. .. 26th July 1920
Booval .. .. . . . . .. 26th July 1920
Longreach . . 27th August 1920
Laidley .. .. . . ~ . . 14th September 1920
Gladstone . . . . . . .. .. 14th September 1920
Wandal Estate (Rockhampton) .. 15th September 1920
Newtown (Maryborough) .. .. 6th October 1920
Bundaberg South .. .. .. . . Ist November 1920
Kelvin Grove (Brisbane) .. .. .. Ist December 1920
Emerald . . . . . . . . .. 10th March 1921
Park Avenue (Rockhampton) .. .. 14th March 1921
Herries Street (Toowoomba) . . . . 23rd March 1921
Bridge Street (Toowoomba) .. .. 2nd June 1921
Winton . . . . . . .. .. 9th June 1921
Ayr .. .. .. .. .. .. 16th July 1921
Mary Street (Gympie) 4th October 1921
James Street (Toowoomba) .. .. 10th October 1921
Ruthven Street (Toowoomba) .. .. 19th October 1921
Spring Street (Toowoomba) .. . . 19th October 1921
Mackay Bth May 1922
Mackay (North Side) .. .. .. Bth June 1922
Hermit Park (Townsville) .. . . 12th June 1922
Clayfield (Brisbane) 31st July 1922
Toowong (Brisbane) 25th July 1922
Mackay (South Side) 14th August 1922
East Street (Rockhampton) . . . . i6th September 1922
Newstead (Brisbane) .. .. .. 23rd October 1922
Red Hill (Brisbane) . . . . .. 4th December 1922
Toowong (Terminus) (Brisbane) . . 27th December 1922
Paddington (Hale St.) (Brisbane) .. 27th March 1923
Annerley Road (Brisbane) . . . . 27th March 1923
George Street (Brisbane) . . .. sth June 1923
Walkerston (Mackay) .. .. . . Ist November 1922
West End (Maryborough) . . . . 19th December 1922
Allen Street (Townsville) .. .. 2nd January 1923
Wyndham Street (Roma) .. . . 3rd April 1923
One new branch opened in Metropolitan area during year
ended 30th June, 1924.
During year 1925-26 five new branches opened.
During year 1927-28 three new branches opened, two in
the country and one in the metropolitan area.
There were 45 shops in operation at Ist July, 1928; 6
branches closed during 1928-29 and at 30th June, 1929, there
remained 39 shops; 19 in Brisbane and 20 in the country.


Name.
District.
Area.
Purchase Price.
Mount Hutton
Maranoa
554 sq.
299 „
1,031 „
mis.
£
73,5oo
Maccaroni
Cook
31,000
170,000
Lyndhurst
Cook
J 9
99
Buckingham Downs
Gregory
3,067 „
99
140,000
North
Dillalah
Warrego
514 „
99
51,961
Wando Vale
North
Kennedy
1,108 „
99
82,000
Dotswood
North
Kennedy
"10,580
228^000
Brooklyn
99
Maitland Downs
r* Cook
Silver Plains
Merluna and York Downs .
Vanrook, Stirling
Strathmore and Dunbar „
>■ Cook
9,491 „
99
253,000
Keeroongooloo
Gregory
2,069 n
99
156,000
South
Wallinderry
Gregory
57,844 acres
5,000
South
Kenmore
Warrego
84,000 „
99
20,000
*Diamantina Lakes ....
Gregory
North
1,672 sq.
mis.
STATE STATIONS
Date of Commencement : Bth June, 1916.
Capitalization: Approx. £1,200,000.
Trading Results : From Inception to 30th June, 1930 Foss
(approximate) £1,800,000.
Capital written off : Nil. _ .
Date of Sale: With the exception of two Stations, Kee-
roongooloo” and “Buckingham Downs,
the Stations held at 3°th June, i9 2 9> were
sold between September and December,
1929. Keeroongooloo was sold in Septem-
ber, 1930, and Buckingham Downs is being
handed back to the Lands Department.
Net loss to country: The total loss to the country cannot yet be
stated as the accounts have not yet been
finalized, but it will not be less than
£1,900,000.
General Information: During the period, 21 Stations were pur-
chased by the Government and the main
factors which caused the financial results
shown above were: —
(a) Over-capitalization at purchase;
(b) The unprecedented slump in market
values in 1921;
(c) The heavy mortality losses; and
(d) The comparatively small number of
cattle marketed.
The following- is a list of the Stations purchased and their
cost to the Government:
* Forfeited and used as a State Station.
106
QUEENSLAND-


Making a total of approximately 30,000 square miles at 30th
June, 1919, the total purchase price of which, with stock,
improvements, etc., amounted to £1,210,461. The stock on
hand was estimated to number 192,000.
STATIONS SOLD
Mount Hutton taken over by Lands Department in February IQIQ- Com-
pensation paid to State Stations Department, £14,379 2s.
By an agreement between Queensland Government and Hon. John Mor-
rissey, New South Wales, the Government agreed to sell and deliver the
whole of the Mt Hutton Station herd, comprising about 9700 head of mixed
cattle. Price per head £8 ns.
Dillalah closed as a State Station as at 31st December 1925, and with the
exception of the homestead block —surrendered for subdivision for closer
settlement.
The Dillalah homestead block “Yena” was sold on 14th January 1926 for
£BOOO and Calabar outstation on nth June 1926 for £5920.
Diamantina Lakes leased to Messrs. Hooper and Trenery as from Ist
January 1921 on two years agreement with right of renewal at end of
term.
Kenmore. Sold unstocked in two separate pastoral leases each having 30
years tenure from Ist January 1927 —Kenmore (72 sq. miles; annual rental
£384) to A. R. S. Doyle, in May, 1927 for £5500; improvements (£3030),
plant (£150). Wheatleigh (60 sq. miles; annual rental £320) to A. B. Nagel,
in May 1927 for £5000; improvements (£2120). Part of the improvements
since the property was originally purchased had been removed to Dillalah
and part of the plant sold and the book value of improvements and plant at
date of sale was as shown in parenthesis.
Monamby. Sold unstocked as pastoral lease (30 years tenure from Ist
January 1927, annual rental £869) to G. A. Sevil in June, 1927 for £7500.
The book value of the improvements and plant at date of sale was £2lOO.
Abbotsford. Sold unstocked as pastoral lease (30 years tenure from Ist
January 1927, annual rental £445 55.) to Rocklands Station Propy. Ltd. for
£lO,OOO on Ist May, 1927.
Stations sold (since the close of the financial year 1928-29),
Merluna (including York Downs) to F. H. Keppel for £2500 cash.
Waterloo (Kuparee) to C. M. and W. C. Curr for £7OOO cash.
Lyndhurst to the Australian Stock Breeder’s Co. Ltd. for £70,000 cash.
Vanrook (including Stirling and Maccaroni) and Strathmore to the Van-
rook Pastoral Co. Ltd for £135,000 on terms.
Portion of Strathmore (70 sq. miles) to J. G. Mclvor for £575 on terms.
Dotswood and Wando Vale to Queensland Stations Ltd. for £115,000 on
terms.
Dunbar to J. S. Love and Daley for £50,000 cash.
Since the first purchase by the Queensland Government of
Station Properties, many stories have circulated, some of them
no doubt apocryphal, others founded more or less on fact, con-
cerning the detailed management of the properties concerned.
It is true that the Government, like the individual, is not
exempt from the vicissitudes of the seasons, and apart from
the over-capitalization of the properties and the shrinkage in
the value of stock, it is without doubt that abnormally bad
seasons have been encountered.


In regard to capitalization, there has been expressed in some
quarters, doubt as to the propriety of individual members of
a government having the power to commit the country to a
colossal expenditure of £ 1,200,000, without having any know-
ledge of the value of the properties they were purchasing.
That, however, is a matter upon which there should be no
expression of opinion in a book of this nature, but it has been
alleged outside, that opportunities present themselves under
such a system, of selling to the Government properties which
had been quoted at somewhat inflated values. That this took
place in connection with some of the properties purchased is
a matter only to be determined by experts. Rather rash alle-
gations in regard to the purchase of one property were made
by an ex-Leader of the Opposition —rash because he could
produce no legal proof that there had been any corruption.
Nevertheless, it is wise to point to the danger of individual
members of a Government having the power to negotiate such
huge transactions and thus commit the country to what may
prove, and indeed has proved, disasterous loss.
In regard to loose individual management of the properties
concerned, there are stories without end. In this connection
one is reminded of a tale told many years ago by a Gulf
squatter in regard to a next-door neighbour. Having held
forth at length upon the very fine herd his fellow grazier had
built up and the celerity with which he had developed from a
poor to a rich man, he reached the climax by informing his
audience that the progenitor of the magnificent and numerous
beasts had been “one working bullock.” ETom a story such
as that, one can draw numerous deductions and conjure up
in his mind infinite possibilities. It can well be imagined that
if the doctrine that “the Government is fair game” were ap-
plied to State Stations generally, one would be within com-
paratively easy reach of one of the explanations accounting
for the comparative want of success of the Enterprise.
STATE PRODUCE AGENCY
Date of Commencement : Bth April, 1918.
Capitalization : \pproximately £4OOO.
Trading Results : From inception to 30th June, 1929 —loss
lt should be stated, however, that
in its general business, the State Produce
Agency has shown a profit in each year
of its operations. Unfortunately, in the
year 1920-21, an extraordinary loss of over
£32,000 was sustained as the result of
special purchases of wheat made by the
then manager—without authority, and
apart altogether from the general business
of the Agency.
108
QUEENSLAND—


Profit
to 30th June,
1918
• •
• •
£
170
s.
19
d.
7
yy
for
year
ended 30th J
une,
1919
1,052
10
0
Profit
y y
yy
yy
yy
yy
1920
2,566
15
11
Loss
yy
yy
yy
yy
yy
1921
• • 27,734
0
0
Profit
yy
yy
yy
yy
yy
1922
89
4
7
yy
yy
yy
yy
yy
yy
1923
5i3
2
2
yy
yy
yy
yy
yy
yy
1924
3,009
19
5
yy
yy
yy
yy
yy
yy
1925
2,040
16
1
yy
yy
yy
yy
yy
yy
1926
1,521
0
0
yy
yy
yy
yy
yy
yy
1927
1,611
15
1
yy
yy
yy
yy
yy
yy
1928
L7I3
3
3
yy
yy
yy
yy
yy
yy
1929
• • 4,274
1
5
NET RESULT OF TRADING EACH YEAR
Capital written off : Nil.
Date of Sale: The State Produce Agency business was sold
on 30th June, 1929.
Net cost to country : As one freehold property in Brisbane has
not yet been disposed of, the final result
cannot yet be furnished. It is anticipated,
however, that the final realization of the
assets as at 30th June, 1929 will show a
surplus of over £6OOO, thus reducing the
above trading loss from £13,845 to ap-
proximately £BOOO.
General Information : The operations of this enterprise have cov-
ered mainly general produce, but, in addi-
tion, it has assisted the producers in—
(a) Distribution of fodder for starving
stock at various times on behalf of the
Government.
(b) Distribution of seed wheat at various
times on behalf of the Government.
(c) Distribution of wheat sacks direct to
farmers.
(d) Distribution of seed potatoes direct to
farmers.
(e) Shipment oversea of 55°° tons of
maize to relieve the glut in 1924.
SALE OF AGENCY
Public tenders were invited on 12th June 1929, for the purchase of
the State Produce Agency. Tenders closed on 26th June and subse-
quently a sale of this business (including book debts) was effected to
the highest tenderer, viz:—The State Produce Agency Ltd. as at 30th
June 1929, for the sum of £18,300.
With the exception of property held at Merivale Street, South Bris-
bane, which is valued at from £2OOO to £2500 (book value £1859 2s. 3d.,
Auditor-General) this disposes of the whole of the assets of the State
Produce Agency.


Date of Commencement :
ist July, 1918.
Capitalization :
Approximately £ 22,000.
Trading Results:
From inception to 30th June, 1929 —Profit
*135,751.
£
s.
d.
Result of
Trading to 30th June, 1917 Net
profit
428
11
7
11 11
11
for
year 1917-18
11 • •
11,894
4
2
11 11
11
11
„ 1918-19
11 • •
9,336
11
7
11 11
11
11
„ 1919-20
)) • •
12,750
0
2
11 11
11
11
„ 1920-21
11 • •
6,859
8
4
11 11
11
11
„ 1921-22
11 • •
11,092
11
0
11 11
11
11
„ 1922-23
)) • •
9,071
12
8
11 11
11
11
„ 1923-24
11 • •
13,479
6
1
11 11
11
11
„ 1924-25
11 • •
18,548
16
8
11 11
11
11
„ 1925-26
11 • •
15,256
5
11
11 11
11
11
„ 1926-27
11 • •
9,022
0
4
11 11
11
11
„ 1927-28
11 • •
7,223
14
11
11 11
11
11
„ 1928-29
11 • •
10,788
9
2
Accumulated profit from ist January, 1917 to
30th June,
1929
• •
• •
• • • • • •
• • • •
*135,751
12
7
RAILWAY REFRESHMENT ROOMS
Capital written off : Nil.
Date of Sale : Administration of Rooms transferred to the
Secretary for Railways as from ist July,
1929.
Net cost to country: Nil.
General Information : Prior to 1917 the Railway Refreshment
Rooms were under lease to private lessees
and the annual rental paid by those lessees
in 1917-18 amounted to £14,721. At 30th
June, 1929, there were 49 rooms being
operated by the Government with a staff
of 361 and the annual rentals paid during
the last four years averaged £27,000. The
total rents paid to the Government by this
enterprise during the 11 years 1918-1929
amounted to £241,080. Adding the profits
(£135,750, the Government received dur-
ing that period a total sum of £376,831.
There is nothing very remarkable in substantial profit being
made out of the sale of food and drink, and it is still
remarkable when one bears in mind the fact that the State
had a monopoly in the supply of these necessaries when deal-
ing with the railway-travelling public. He would be a very
poor manager indeed who could not show a profit under such
circumstances. Nevertheless,, it must be said in regard to
this enterprise that it was in most capable hands. Under other
control than that of Mr Daniel Allman, it might easily have
110
QUEENSLAND—


Profit
to 30th J
1
une, 1918
1918-19
UJiiNU Kr
.oUL J
L b
£
£1,143
s.
16
d.
6
yy
for
year
.. 120
I
2
yy
yy
yy
1919-20
i,i7S
9
9
yy
yy
yy
1920-21
1,065
19
0
yy
yy
yy
1921-22
3,324
19
5
yy
yy
yy
1922-23
2,573
11
3
yy
yy
yy
1923-24
3,905
12
6
yy
yy
yy
1924-25
5,106
12
5
yy
yy
yy
1925-26
3,939
6
5
yy
yy
yy
1926-27
2,776
3
11
yy
yy
yy
1927-28
4,261
8
8
yy
yy
yy
1928-29
3,008
5
11
yy
yy
yy
1929-30
i,347
9
3
Total
Profits to
30th June,
1930 ..
• • £33,748
16
2
shown less profit and the public have been less well served.
Gross Profits (i.e., purchases and sales) were much better
than any leading hotel. This indicates a keen supervision by
the management and Mr Allman deserves every credit. The
Railway Department has an undisputed right to the profits
arising from the Enterprise which doubtless will continue to
prosper under existing management.
STATE HOTEL, BABINDA
Date of Commencement : 29th May, 1917.
Capitalisation : £22,000.
Trading Results: From inception to 30th June, 1930 —profit
£33j749-
Capital zvritten off: Nil.
Date of Sale: Property sold in July 1930 for £50,000.
Net loss to country: Nil.
General Information: This Enterprise, at time of sale, was in a
particularly sound position as the hotel
was absolutely free of debt, and in addi-
tion there was a credit to its account in
the Treasury of approximately £4500.
The results of this enterprise have
been highly satisfactory to the Gov-
ernment. Under capable management right
throughout its operations, the hotel has
rendered excellent service to the local resi-
dents, and the travelling public, and the
net return to the Government after realiza-
tion shows a surplus of £62,000 during its
13 years under Government control.
TRADING RESULTS
£SOOO paid during 1927-28 to the Treasurer to the credit of Con-
solidated Revenue. In addition, transfers to Reserve, at different
periods, totalled £16,928 16s. 9d.
There is a story attached to the Babinda State Hotel which
must be told in order to make the record complete. Under
section 12 of the Sugar Works Act of 1911, the sale of in-


toxicating liquor in a Sugar Works Area was declared to be
unlawful. It is to be assumed that Parliament was anxious to
tiy an experiment, and made this provision with due deliber-
ation. Nevertheless, on 29th May, 1917, a different Govern-
ment took steps towards trying a different experiment. With
section 12 of the Sugar Works Act of 1911 still on the Statute
Book, a State Hotel was established in the Babinda area and
it was not until the Moore Government came into office in
May, 1929, that any disturbance of this form of Governmental
trading took place In the session of 1929 Parliament passed
the Babinda State Hotel Sale Act under which, a licence hav-
ing been issued to the Commissioner for Trade, it was possible
to dispose of the freehold, licence and good-will as a going
concern. An objection which was raised to the sale of the
hotel was that it would create a monopoly until the year ic«e
inasmuch as there would be no opportunity of holding a local
option poll in the area until that year. It should not be over-
looked that the provisions of section 12 of the Sugar Works
, Ct m”i, had be^ n whittled away in another respect after
the establishment of the Babinda State Hotel in 1917- for the
Government in 1923 passed a special Act of Parliament
Area° grantm§ ' of ll( I uor licences in the Tully Sugar
STATE FISH SUPPLY
Date of Commencement-. Commenced business Ist April, 1917 a t Fish
Market, Victoria Bridge. The expenditure
sr 1 , .Laud, Wharf Building, Plant,
Machinery etc., amounted to approximately
*54,000, and on the Depot at Wynnum
£BOOO.
Retail shops were opened at—-Victoria
Bridge, May, 1918; Fortitude Valley, 4th
March, 1919. Sold in October, 1929.
Street, 13th June, 1919; Fiveways,
Woolloongabba, February, 1920; Brisbane
otreet, Ipswich, March, 1920; Rockhampton
hebruary, 1921; Toowoomba, February,
1921. Leases disposed of between 1922
and 1924.
1, an agreement was
entered into between the Government and
the Fishermen’s Co-operative Co. Ltd.,
whereby the Company took control of a
portion of the premises of the State Fish
Market for the purpose of conducting an
open market for the sale of fish
The wholesale portion of the business
was discontinued as from the date men-
tioned; but the retail shops still operated,
obtaining supplies the same as other
vendors by competition in open market.
112
QUEENSLAND—


Net
11
loss
to
30th June,
1918 ..
• •
£
. • 2,735
s.
5
4
d.
10
7 7
yy
; i
yy
year ended 30th June,
yy it *•
1919
y / xj
■ ■ 8.536
7
yy
yy
yy
yy yy
w /
yy
1920
■ ■ 8,458
11
9
yy
yy
yy
yy
1921
.. 9,807
11
2
yy
yy
yy
yy yy
yy
1922
• • 4,721
9
9
yy
yy
yy
yy yy
yy
1923
• • 5.293
5
10
yy
yy
profit
yy
yy
yy
yy yy
yy ti
yy
A A
1924
1925
• • 3,922
.. 1,118
8
7
3
10
yy
yy
yy
7 / 77
yy yy
7 7
yy
1926
473
7
6
yy
yy
yy
yy yy
• %
1927
1,809
17
6
yy
yy
yy
w * 7 7
yy yy
j 7
yy
1928
•• 2,031
7
5
yy
yy
yy
yy yy
yy
1929
.. 1,680
6
5
1930
• •
954
14
2
Capitalisation: Approximately £70,000.
Trading Results: From inception to 30th June, 1930 —loss
*31,651.
Capital written off : £4361.
Date of Sale : The two Retail Shops remaining in Brisbane
were sold to the Fishermen’s Co-operative
Co. Ltd. on 19th October, 1929.
Net loss to country : This enterprise has not yet been closed.
General Information : The Government has retained the Market
for the receival and marketing of fish,
although it has gone out of trading, and as
shown above, has disposed of its retail
shops. This business, which came under
State control on Ist April, 1917, is largely
dependent on regular and ample supplies
of fish, which in turn are dependent to a
great extent on favourable weather con-
ditions. Unfortunately, the business was
over-capitalized from its commencement
by the establishment of market premises
and shops at South Brisbane and Depot at
Wynnum far in excess of requirements,
particularly with the limited supplies avail-
able. The total quantity of fish received
into the Market during its first year of
operations in 1918, under the Government,
amounted to 3,399,067 lb., whereas for the
year ended 30th June, 1929, receivals had
increased to 4,220,240 lb. As against the
trading loss shown for the period it should
be stated that the market value of the
assets (land, buildings, plant, etc.), still
remaining with the Government, is at least
£25,000 greater than the indebtedness due
to the Treasury.
NET RESULT OF TRADING
WYNNUM DEPOT
A receiving depot was erected in 1917 at Wynnum by the Works
Department, the cost being £BO5O 3s. 6d.
T


Operations ceased at the end of May, 1926, and as from the Ist July,
1927, the depot was leased to the Moreton Ice and Cold Storage Co.
for a term of 10 years.
The refrigerating plant not required was sold by public tender for the
sum of £ 450, and the depot has recently been sold for £2410.
Previous to the entry by the Government into the Fish
Supply business, it is admitted that the industry was con-
ducted in a somewhat haphazard manner. There was no
regulation of quality, and there was no restriction on the
quantity offered to the public. In fact, it was an “open go”
for the fishermen and far and wide they hawked their wares,
and gave the public the benefit of undoubtedly cheap fish.
One remembers well, in the years gone by, how it was the
commonest occurrence for three or four fish-hawkers to pass
one’s door in the early morning, and how it was possible by
the expenditure of is. 6d. or 2s. to provide a big breakfast for
a large family. With the advent of governmental control of
and trading in fistnsupply, a marked change came o’er the
spirit of* the dream. In the train of government trading came
the fishermen’s rings; with fishermen’s rings came the dump-
ing of huge quantities of wholesome food in order to keep up
prices; with the dumping of alleged surplus supplies came to
a large extent the squeezing out of the suburban fish hawker;
with this squeezing out of the suburban hawkers, and open
competition between them, came the grabbing of the fish
supply by the Greek ring. Thus, by simple stages, free com-
petition in the supply of cheap fish to the people was con-
verted into restricted and over-controlled distribution, and a
necessary article of food which at one period of our history
was in reach of the poorest in the community, became an
expensive luxury. The writer is perfectly prepared to have
all of the foregoing challenged, but he is too old a resident
and too familiar with the conditions which prevailed in the
past to be dismayed by any criticism whatever. The oppor-
tunity comes to tell the truth, and if these truths are unpalat-
able, it will not be the first time unpalatable truths have hurt
the feelings of interested persons.
THE STATE TRAWLER
A primary cause of the failure in the hands of the Govern-
ment of the fish supply industry was the purchase and disas-
trous experimental working of the State Trawler. The cost
of that vessel, delivered in Brisbane, was £32,247 18s. qd. The
complete cost, including full fishing equipment, for probably
twelve months, was £33,435 11s. Bd. (see Votes and Pro -
114
QUEENSLAND—


ceedings 1919-1920, p. 38). During the three months ended
31st October, 1920, the Trawler secured 15,670 lb. of fish and
the gross returns from sales amounted to £412 17s. lod. The
cost of running the Trawler during the same period was
£1,216 16s. 3d. net (see Votes and Proceedings , 1920, p. 122).
This trawler should only have been leased, and not pur-
chased, as it was only intended as a trial of Queensland waters.
Unfortunately our reputed fishing grounds did not produce
any satisfactory results, and in order to secure a haul the
Bar-ea-mul on its last trip had to go 200 miles S.E. of Sydney.
In 1921, the Bar-ea-mul, having proved a complete and
total costly failure, was offered to the New South Wales Gov-
ernment for £25,000 with all spare gear. (See Votes and
Proceedings 1921, p. 237). It is idle to pretend that an enter-
prise of this kind, designed to regulate an essentially primary
industry, can ever pay in the hands of a Government. The
experience of the New South Wales Government has been
exactly the same as that of Queensland. Government Trawlers
landed that State in huge loss, and yet at the present day we
find numbers of privately-owned trawlers operating with Syd-
ney Harbour as a base, and apparently meeting the demands
of the public and paying their way. It is useless pursuing the
subject further.
Government officials, operating State Trawlers, have no in-
terest in making dividends and when an industry is run on the
principle of “Blow the expense—the Government pays,” one
naturally expects the hold of a State Trawler instead of being
full of wholesome, edible, deep-sea fish, to be full of broken
and neglected tackle, ruin and deficits.
STATE CANNERY
Date of Commencement: Bth January, 1920.
Capitalisation : Approximately £60,000.
Trading Results'. From inception to 30th June, 1930 —loss
„ . . £64,432.
Capital written off : £26,482.
Date of Sale: 31st July, 1929.
Net loss to country : Accounts have not yet been finalized, but it
is estimated that the loss on realization
of assets will amount to over £21,000.
The total net loss to the country might
therefore be set down at £112,000.
General Information: The State Cannery was established in 1920
on the recommendation of the Land
Settlement Committee for the purpose
mainly of treating and canning pineapples
from the Soldiers’ Settlements. Alto-


BLOCKS.
£
s.
d.
Loss year
99 ”
99 99
1920-
1921-
1922-
.. £29.741
8,371
15,850
14
15
8
10
11
2
99 99
99 99
Profit
1923-
1924-
1925-
9,513
4,428
287
1
8
14
2
3
1
99 99
1926-27
4,2071»
9
99 99
1927-28
494
2
9
Loss ”
1928-29
1,90019
2
Profit ”
1929-30
• •
• •
• •
• •
• •
390
7
11
gether, the Cannery has treated over
310,000 cases of pineapples purchased
from Soldiers’ Settlements. The enter-
prise, however, was heavily over-capital-
ized from the outset, and the manage-
ment was forced to go into the manufac-
ture of jam in addition to pineapple can-
ing, in order to get turnover. Its heavy
trading losses were experienced during
the first five years, due chiefly to:
(a) Over-capitalization;
(b) Depressed markets;
(c) Slump in tin plates;
(d) Unforeseen factory losses.
Heavy losses were also sustained m the
exportation oversea of canned pineapples
which had for its object the holding of
the Australian market for those en-
gaged in the industry. Possibly, in this
regard, the State Cannery has rendered
useful service, not only to.the pineapple
growers, but to the industry generally.
The administration of the State Cannery was by order in Council
dated 12th February, 1920, transferred from the Secretary for Public
Lands to the Chief Secretary, and in compliance with the State Lnter-
prises Act, operations commenced under the management ot State
Trade Department as from that date.
Factory commenced operations on Bth January, 1920.
The land on which the factory now stands was resumed and addi-
tional land, with three cottages and a shop thereon, was .P urc h
total cost being £8565 19s. 2d. The building was erected by the Public
Works Department, the cost to 30th June, 1920, amounting to ±10,048
05 The can-making portion of the plant was purchased in Sydney and
the greater portion of the remainder from America, the total being
installed at a cost of £19,522 Bs. xod.
(In the report of the Commissioner for Trade for the year ended
3 oth June, 1929, the original capital cost of the cannery up to the 30th
June, 1921, was stated to be approximately £60,000).
RESULT OF TRADING EACH YEAR
Bth January to 30th June, 1920, small profit written off against
“Stocks.” r „ A
116
QUEENSLAND—


In compliance with the provisions of clause 14 of the State Ente -
prises Act of 1918 and on the recommendation of the Capital Cost
Committee” provided thereunder, it was decided by the Government t
write off the accumulated loss to 30th June, 1924, amounting to *03,477
os. id. By writing off this sum, the accumulated loss to 30th June, 1929,
amounts to £i,345 4s. iod.
BOWEN PULPING WORKS
A pulping works at Bowen was operated for one season when it
was closed down. Tomatoes were purchased from farmers, reduced
pulp, and shipped to the cannery at Bulimba. The result for the year
1920-21 was a loss of £1035 7s. id.
PARTICULARS OF SALE
Two tenders received one for £31,690, and the other for £28,000, and
subsequently the sale of this business was effected to the hl g hes i
tenderer, viz.—the Victoria Cross Manufacturing Co. Ltd. tor tne
sum of £31,690. , 1.
The sale was not completed until 31st July, 1929, and as a resu t
of the adjustment in stocks as provided by the conditions of sale, the
sum of £1542 7s. nd. became due to the purchasers.
The actual cash paid by the purchasers was £30,147 12s. id. on which
commission amounting to £766 3s. iod. was paid to the License
mission Agent who lodged the tender.
HAMILTON COLD STORES
Date of Commencement-. 9 th March 1925 (under Department of
Agriculture and Stock). Gazetted as a
State Enterprise as from ist July, 1928,
under the State Trade Department.
Capitalisation: £320,000.
Trading Results: From inception to 30th June, 1930— Loss
£65,345.
Capital zvritten off : Nil.
Date of Sale : Not yet sold.
Net Cost to Country : See above.
General Information: The Hamilton Cold Stores were to supersede
the then existing Cold Stores at Roma
Street, which were considered to be in-
capable of providing sufficient cold storage
space for the quantities of surplus butter
and cheese requiring storage.
The total storage capacity is assessed at: —
Butter .. .. 150,000 boxes
Cheese .. .. 38,400 crates
Fruit and Sundries 27,300 cases
By far the greater bulk of the receivals
have been Butter and the figures for the
past three years are as follow: —
1927-28 1928-29 19 2 9~3Q
585,734 boxes 574,278 boxes 551,891 boxes


£
s
d
Buildings
• •
• •
180,839
15
8
Machinery
• •
• •
84,733
3
10
Wharf
• •
• •
35,115
14
10
Railway Siding
• •
• •
18,798
3
4
Resumption of Land
• •
• •
23
19
10
£3 19,5 10
17
6
The Government has now decided to lease the Stores, provided a
satisfactory offer can be obtained, and to that end negotiations are at
present proceeding with the representatives of the Co-operative Dairy
Companies Association.
The proposition includes the leasing of the Store for a period of
28 years at a rental based on a capitalization of round about £120,000.
COST OF STORES
The completed cost as at 30th June, 1926 was £319,510 17s. 6d. as
under:—
COMMENCEMENT OF OPERATIONS
In March, 1925, to relieve the congestion in cold storage, four rooms
were made available at the Stores by the Department of Public Works
from the 9th March to 16th May, 1925.
However, the Stores were officially opened by His Excellency the
Lieutenant-Governor on 17th December, 1925.
Stores later taken over by Department of Agriculture and Stock
from Department of Public Works on 4th January, 1926.
From ist October, 1926, the Secretary for Labour and Industry took
charge of Hamilton Cold Stores.
STATE SAW-MILLING ENTERPRISE
This Enterprise was commenced in December, 1915, by the purchase
of Messrs. A. J. Raymonds’ Brisbane and Taromeo Sawmill properties
for £23,000, apportioned as follow: —
Brisbane .. .. .. .. .. £11,670 o o
Taromeo .. .. .. .. .. £11,330 o o
£23,000 o o
Subsequently, mills were erected or purchased as follow:
Imbil Mill. Erected during the year 1916 at a cost of £5697.
Liverpool Creek Mill. Erected during the year 1919 at a cost of
£8496.
Injune Mill. Erected during the year 1921 at a cost of £4329.
Birimgan Mill. A Railway Sleeper Mill purchased from the Railway
Department in the year 1921 for the sum of £2500 and costing an addi-
tional £935 to convert to a Scantling Mill. Total Cost £3435.
Varraman Mill. Purchased from Queensland Pines Ltd. in the year
1926 for the sum of £lO,OOO.
118
QUEENSLAND-


Year
Period
Profit
Loss
1916
9 months ended
£1,380 IS
8
30/9/16
1917
9 months ended
532 6
4
30/6/17
1917-18
Financial Year
7,ti6 16
0
1918-19
99 99
*3,156
6
2
1919-20
99 99
10,677
2
1
1920-21
99 99
4.348
7
9
1921-22
99 9 9
4,881
19
1
1922-23
99 9 9
5,001
7
4
1923-24
99 9 9
6,479 s
8
1924-25
99 99
5,937
0
6
1925-26
99 9 9
8,213
13
7
1926-27
99 9 9
5,357
0
6
1927-28
99 9 9
821
9
2
1928-29
99 9 9
1,794
13
0
£50,189
9
0
£15,509 3
8
The following are the results of the trading from inception to 3°th
June, 1929, after paying interest and depreciation:—
The Net Profits of £34,680 ss. 4d. have been disposed of as follow: —
Depreciation written off Assets . . . . £5,75° 0 0
Transferred to Depreciation Reserve .. 4,200 o o
Transferred to Stock Valuation Adjust-
ment Reserve .. .. • • • • 3,4°° 0 0
Repaid to Railway Department —Profit on
Birimgan Sleeper Mill Operations . . 2,913 4 1
Sundry Adjustments ; . . . • • 894 1 1
Balance held in Appropriation Account 17,523 o 2
£34,680 5 4
The only amounts written off Capital, beyond the usual annual charges
for depreciation included in the Profit and Loss Accounts, are as
shown above. . ,
In June, 1923, on account of being a losing proposition, Injune Mill
was closed down.
In May, 1926, Birimgan Mill was partially destroyed by fire and
it was decided not to rebuild.
In October, 1926, on account of losses shown, Liverpool Creek Mill
was closed.
Efforts were made to dispose of these three Mills as going concerns,
without success, and eventually arrangements were made to dismantle
the plants and dispose of the various items for removal.
The whole of the Assets of the three closed-down Mills have not yet
been realized on, but on final realization it is anticipated that a loss of
approximately £2OOO will result on the book values of the three Mdls.
In the financial year 1929-3°, the Yarraman Mill was burned to the
ground, but has been rebuilt.


These saw-mills were established as State Enterprises, but in 1921
were sold to the Forestry Department to which they now form an
adjunct. Most Forestry Acts empower Forest Departments to use
saw-mills in their forestry operations, e.g. the New South Wales, New
Zealand, Victorian, South Australian and West Australian Acts.
See Annual Reports of the Queensland Forest Service, especially
that of 1928-29, for the reasons why these mills should be retained
for the purpose of Forestry.
Viewing impartially the results disclosed in the foregoing summary,
it cannot conscientiously be said that Governmental trading in timber
has been a pronounced success, and the cause is not far to seek.
Trading by Governments or trading by private enterprise can only be
made a success by intensive and continuous application to detail. A
Government engaging in trade cannot be, and is not actuated by the
paramount motive of the private trader —the necessity of building up a
business so that he may live. The Government has no such motive.
It continues to live whether it loses or gains, and if it loses it has a
purse and a credit behind it which the private trader can never have.
In short, the personal equation is cut out of governmental trading, and
it is the personal equation which is the most powerful operating factor
in trade.
How badly we started with our saw-milling industry may be realized
from the report of Mure H. Robertson, Auditor-General, who, re-
porting to Parliament for the Financial Year ended 30th June, 1916,
says:—
“The gross profits to sales show the low rate of 8.34 per cent which,
considering that the business was fully developed at the time of pur-
chase, must be looked upon as very unsatisfactory.
“I am of opinion, however, that the loss of £l3BO 15s. Bd. arises
through the stock of timber on hand at the Brisbane Mill at the date
of purchase, having been over-estimated both as regards quantity and
quality, and that too much was paid for the stock.”
Under all the circumstances, one cannot well be surprised that the
enterprise, having started under such manifestly unfavourable auspices,
was not the success which enthusiasts declared at the outset that it
would be.
CHILLAGOE STATE SMELTERS
Date of Commencement: June, 1918.
Capitalisation : £295,402.
Trading Results: From inception to 30th June, 1929 —loss
£642,317.
Capital and trade losses
written off: £281,821 (trade loss).
Date of Sale: This enterprise has not been sold.
Net loss to country: This enterprise is still in operation. Opera-
tions were discontinued in February, 1927
and re-commenced in July, 1929.
General Information: The State Smelters were purchased to
maintain mining and development in the
Chillagoe, Hodgkinson, Etheridge and
other mining fields, the purchase includ-
ing the private railway owned by the
Chillagoe Company (about 200 miles)
120
QUEENSLAND—


which formed the connecting link between
the Government Railway at Mareeba and
the mining fields above mentioned. The
greater proportion of the known mineral
deposits of these fields comprise ores of
the base metals for which the requisite and
only available metallurgical treatment is
provided by the smelters. The trading
losses were due to a number of causes but
principally to the works being old and un-
economical to operate, to the supply of
suitable ores available being quite in-
adequate to ensure constant operation of
works of such large capacity, and to the
decline in and low market price of metals
since they were put into operation.
IRVINEBANK TREATMENT WORKS
Date of Commencement: October, 1919.
Capitalisation : £3s>°s°-
Trading Results : While operating as a state enterprise—loss
£19,796.
Capital and trade losses
written off : Nil.
Net loss to country: The works are still in operation as a State
battery.
General Information : The Irvinebank works and tramway about
30 miles in length connecting Irvinebank
with the government railway at Boonmoo
were purchased to maintain tin mining
operations and the population dependent
on the industry in the Irvinebank and
Stannary Hills districts. The tramway
was essential as a public convenience and
for the conveyance of metals and ores.
The enterprise was started when the
price of tin was phenomenally high, and
included tin smelting, a class of operations
wherein the risk of metal market fluctua-
tions falls entirely on the smelter. The
trading losses were due to unfavourable
conditions for marketing the products, and
slump in the market price of tin.
STATE ARSENIC MINE
Date of Commencement: January, 1918.
Capitalisation : £42,996.
Trading Results: From inception to 31st December, 1925 —
loss £17, 755-
Capital and trade losses
written off: £13,274. (Trade loss).
Date of Sale: Property not yet sold.


Net loss to country : Accounts have not yet been finalized, but
it is estimated that the loss on realization
of assets will amount to £40,000.
The total net loss to the Country might
therefore be set down at £58,304.
General Information : The State Arsenic Mine was established in
1918, primarily for the purpose of supply-
ing arsenic at a low price for the destruc-
tion of prickly pear.
Altogether 1627 tons of grey arsenic were
produced and supplied to farmers and
others for the destruction of pear and
pests.
The enterprise was started when the price
of grey arsenic was high and the com-
modity scarce, owing to the effect of war
conditions on its production in other parts
of the world. The trading losses were
due to decline in the market price of
arsenic and the adoption of arsenic
pentoxide (imported) for the destruction
of pear in preference to grey arsenic.
WARRA STATE COAL MINE
Date of Commencement : 7th December, 1915*
Capitalization : £37,419 2s. 7d.
Trading Results : While operating as a State enterprise
loss £10,033 17s. sd.
Capital and trade losses
zvritten off : £39, T 54-
Net loss to country : 1 54-
General Information: Loss transferred to Consolidated Revenue.
This enterprise was started primarily
with the object of supplying the railways
with coal. The early operations were
considerably hampered by heavy influx of
water, with resultant disabilities of work-
ing conditions. The mine was not re-
opened after suspension of operations in
1919.
BARALABA STATE COAL MINE
Date of Commencement: April, 1919.
Capitalization : £37,75 1 18s. 6d.
Trading Results : While operating as a State enterprise—loss
£23,161 is. 9d.
Capital and trade losses
written off : £59,209 17s. sd.
Net loss to country : Actual loss cannot yet be determined as a
number of assets still remain for realiza-
tion.
122
QUEENSLAND—


General Information : This mine was closed down mainly as the
result of the closing of the Mount Morgan
Company’s works, which used considerable
quantities of this coal for smelting pur-
poses, thus eliminating the necessity of
the use of coke. It was not considered by
the railway department as being a suitable
coal for locomotives. The abnormal
floods in the Dawson Valley broke into
the workings and flooded the mine, and
owing to the limited demand for the coal
it was not considered economical to un-
water the mine.
STYX Nos. i and 2 STATE COAL MINES
Date of Commencement: April, IQIQ-
Capitalisation : £35> 2 33 3s. sd.
Trading Results : While operating as a State enterprise—loss
£38,514 16s. od.
Capital and trade losses
written off : 2 2 s. Bd.
Net loss to country: Net losses on these mines cannot be given
definitely as a few assets still remain, but
it is estimated that the final figures will
be £71,300.
General Information : Owing to the abnormal nature of the strata,
mining could not be carried on with any
degree of success, and after the commence-
ment of Styx No. 3 in more settled
country, these mines were abandoned and
as much plant as was considered useful
transferred.
STYX NO. 3 STATE COAL MINE
Date of Commencement: December, 1922.
Capitalisation : £105,437 18s. 4d.
Trading Results : While operating as a State enterprise—loss
£12,946 us. 3d.
Capital and trade losses
written off : Nil.
Net loss to country ; This mine is now showing profits annually,
after payment of interest on capital and
on working funds, royalty and deprecia-
tion of plant. Under fair conditions the
whole of the trade losses should be re-
covered and capital returned.
General Information : This mine is showing considerable improve-
ment as development proceeds. The shafts
are sunk on approximately 3' 9" of coal,
but as the workings advance to the west
the thickness of the seam improves, and at
present stands at the face of the west level
at 12 feet of coal, and should now be con-
sidered as being in the main portion of
the field.


BOWEN STATE COAL MINE
Date of Commenceynent : August, 1914.
Capitalization: £103,905 13s. gd.
Trading Results : While operating as a State enterprise
profit £46,773 18s. od.
Capital and trade losses
written off: Nil.
Net loss to country : This mine has earned profits since trading
began, as well as paying interest and
royalty and allowing for depreciation of
plant. Present indebtedness to Treasury
is below value of fixed assets.
General Information: This mine is operating on one of the best
seams of coal in Queensland, with an out-
put of 800 to 900 tons per single shift.
The coal is not difficult to mine, and no
conditions obtain to prevent the mining
of coal on ordinary mining methods. The
seam has an average thickness of 10 feet,
free of bords of dirt, and is of a fairly
high grade quality for steam-raising pur-
poses. Results obtained from shipping, etc.
indicate that it is equal to the average
grade of Southern coals.
MOUNT MULLIGAN STATE COAL MINE
Date of Commencement: July, 1923.
Capitalization: £143,142 19s. 3d. .
Trading Results: While operating as a State enterprise loss
l4s. 6d.
Capital and trade losses
zvritten off: £88,279 15s. iod. # .
Net loss to country: It has been found practically impossible to
work this mine profitably under ordinary
conditions and in consequence the working
of same has been handed over to a party
of tributors who are doing reasonably
well therefrom.
The tribute money is used for payment
of interest on a reduced capital, manager’s
images and other charges which are payable
by the owners.
General Information: Since the taking over by the men of this
mine no loss on working has occurred so
far as it relates to the State. This is due
mainly to the fact that being a co-opera-
tive concern wages are not governed by
any award. The amount of work done and
the conditions obtaining are such that no
Company would be allowed to carry out.
Hundreds of shifts have been worked by
the party without remuneration with a
view to at some time in the future being
recompensed for the work done.
124
QUEENSLAND—


£
s.
d.
loss on —
State Stations
• • • •
1,669,803
14
0
State Butchers’ Shops
• • • •
28,014
17
5
State Fish Supply
• # • •
36,012
0
5
State Cannery
• • • •
112,695
19
6
State Produce Agency
• • • •
18,685
9
2
Hamilton Cold Stores
• • • •
65,344
19
11
i 1,930,557
0
5
Less Profit, State Hotel,
Babinda
62,217
10
1
Total net loss to 30th June,
1930 . .
£1,868,339
10
4
THE NET RESULTS OF SIX STATE ENTERPRISES
A valuable summary of the net trading losses on six State
Enterprises is furnished by the Auditor-General in his report
to Parliament of date 3rd November, 1930. Coming from such
a source, the facts are necessarily cold, hard and convincing.
It is tragic to be compelled to give them further publicity,
but as the object of this article is to make the truth known,
the figures are repeated here for future reference and without
comment.
The net loss of the Enterprises in trading and realization of
assets, from inception to 30th June, 1930 (State Hotel to 13th
July), was £1,868,339 lOS * 4d.
This amount is accounted for by—
THE LARGEST JOKE OF ALL
A State Enterprise for which the Labour Party is in no
way responsible is the overgrown and unwieldly institution in
George and William Streets known as the Government Print-
ing Office. Year after year, for the past quarter of a century,
it lias been held up to public admiration as a money-spinner
—an institution which not only pays its way, but contributes
large profits to the public revenue. The time is ripe for tell-
ing public men that it is a humbug and a fraud, and that its
alleged profits are myths. It is pleasing to note that in
quite modern times this knowledge has begun to filter into
the brains of a few people who take an interest in profits and
losses, and it is therefore quite possible that in the hard times
which have struck us, a heavy foot may be put upon an
amiable swindle. If it were possible to give a privately-
owned printing establishment carte blanche to charge like the
Light Brigade for all the copy it set up, one would not express
any surprise at the success of the firm. That indeed is the


delectable position in which this State Enterprise has found
itself for numbers of years. If it was ever asked for a price,
which was an unusual procedure, it just named its own, got
the job, and thus turned in fabulous profits. Time and time
again, certain persons in high places have endeavoured to dis-
cover its system of costing and charging, but have met with
determined passive resistance. Two Speakers of the Legis-
lative Assembly, Sir Alfred Cowley and Sir Arthur Morgan
(the latter a practical newspaper man), endeavoured to fathom
the intricacies of its charges and ignominiously failed. Take
the case of a large Bill brought before Parliament. The
method appears to be to charge portion of the printing to the
Department concerned, and portion to Parliament; no one
knows who pays for the amendments; there is no knowledge
of what proportion of the final and completed document is
charged to Parliament, or how much, if any, is debited to the
Public Department.
It is shrewdly suspected that the charge for producing the
Parliamentary Debates is probably the biggest printing jest
of which there is record. For the session of 1929 the printing,
corrections, and binding of Hansard cost the unhappy country
£3901 is. 9d. for quite a moderate session, and it is positively
amazing to discover that for a session extending only 15
days longer (1930) the House having sat for an increased
period of 140 hours, the cost of this publication ran up to the
huge sum of £5240 ns. od. Verily it would appear as if we
were allowing the luxuries of to-day to become the necessities
of to-morrow.
A fine example of the greedy swindle was exposed on a
quite recent occasion. The Department of Public Instruction
wanted some thousands of simple little exercise books. The
Printing Office being asked to quote, named is. 3d. each as
its price. A suspicious Under Secretary had his doubts about
the legitimacy of the charge and received a private quotation
of 3d. each, whereupon the Government Printing Office offered
to undertake the task at 2|d. each.
There is on record in the Legislative Assembly a charge of
16s. for printing on thin paper six small notices containing the
mystic words “Members Only.”
Recently, the Railway Department, a large consumer of
printed matter, has become wise to the fake prices of this
concern and is making urgent inquiries with the object of
reducing its enormous printing bill to reasonable limits.
Countless instances could be quoted of Government Printing
Office charges which are nothing short of fraud, but probably
126
QUEENSLAND—


the best instance of all is the charge of £750 f° r producing, in
1919, twelve hundred copies of the author’s first Political
History.
The time is over-ripe for a business overhaul of this jestful
institution. The job is difficult, but it can be done. More-
over, in the interests of economy, it should be done, and any
effort to bring into operation the passive resistance methods
of the past should be promptly jumped upon.
Taking a conjunct view of State Trading one is perforce
driven to the conclusion that while in theory it seems to be
justified on the broad general ground that it more or less
holds in check the private trader and prevents him going to
extremes, yet in actual practice, as we have seen it operate in
Queensland, it has not displayed the merits that were expected
of it, nor has it realized the successes that were hoped for.
Apparently theories have been confounded by facts. With its
enormous relief from taxation to which the private trader is
subjected; with the credit of the whole State behind it; with
the assurance that if it should fall upon bad times and need
assistance it was relieved of the necessity to argue out the
situation with a matter-of-fact and sometimes hard-hearted
banker, we had every right to anticipate, if not triumphant
success, at least the -same measure of success which attends
the cautious private trader. No man or woman who has had
domestic responsibilities to carry can doubt for a moment that
the public is looked upon as fair game and that the widespread
ignorance of the great mass of the people in regard to costs
of manufacture and distribution is traded upon from year’s
end to year’s end. We look back to the days when we had con-
trol of our own tariff, and an actual case can be cited in which
Mcllwraith imposed an extra 3d. a gallon on beer, and when
the grocer next morning increased the price of soap in con-
sequence and with a flippant disregard to truth, told women
customers that the tariff was the cause of the increase. To-
day exactly the same principles are in operation. The Austra-
lian trader is receiving abnormal protection and is engaging
in abnormal exploitation. For instance, no human being will
credit for a moment that the cost of material, manufacture and
distribution, with a fair profit added, of an Australian-manu-
factured man’s woollen singlet should be £1 os. od. The same
conditions prevail in regard to Australian hats, hose, boots,
and a hundred and one other necessities. The public is in a
cleft stick; they are at the mercy of the manufacturer and
trader who are merciless and devoid of the bowels of com-
passion, the former seizing with both hands the whole of the


protection given to him. What then is the remedy ?Isit to
be found in State trading? Apparently not, for a variety of
reasons, the principal one of which is that the element of
personal interest is not present and that the shameful doc-
trine that “the Government is fair game” was, and always will
be, rampant in association with State trading ventures. It is
deplorable to be compelled to say it, but the interests of the
State are not the interests of the manager of your State
Butchers or Fish Shops or your State saw-mill or coal-mine
even though the manager may be the average man with the
average moral sense.
There is an indefinable something which makes individuals
more or less lax and careless when they are not taking any
risk themselves and when in cases of difficulty somebody else
has to bear the load and pay the cost. At intervals you will
discover an almost superman with a conscience so clean and
devoid of guile that he will endeavour to conduct a govern-
ment retail concern on the same matter-of-fact principles that
he would apply to his own business. He is rare, but he can
be found. When he has been found, he has not always been
given a free hand to engage and dismiss at will when the
interests of his employers, the Government, demand it. And
therein lies the chief weakness of Government trading. There
is no freedom to exercise instant authority and the manager
who conscientiously desires to cultivate a reputation for trad-
ing on every-day business principles and at all times treating
the business of the Government as his own business, is hurt
by the non-recognition of his loyal service and gradually be-
comes infected with the virus of “The Government is fair
game.” Then ensues slackness and indifference on the part
of the staff and by insidious means, evils creep in; doubtful
honesty obtains a foothold and in the end there takes root a
system which shows wholesale disregard of the meaning of
meum et tuum. It is hateful to have to state the case in
plain, everyday language, but it is true, and though the print-
ing of truth may be unpalatable, yet it at times serves an
unexpectedly good purpose.
And where is the remedy to be found? If Government
trading fails to protect the public from exploitation, where
are we to look for relief? It would not be surprising to find
that Government trading became another football for political
parties. Possibly a change of Government at some future
period may mean a reversion to Government retail trading,
but it is moderately certain that never again will any Gov-
128
QUEENSLAND—


ernment venture upon a course of trading which would include
the primary products of the country.
But even without Government trading, how can the public
be protected? Do they not deserve it? They and they alone
provide the means by which the retailer may grow rich and
fat and prosperous and their rights are founded upon that one
broad fact. We in Queensland have established a system of
price fixing which, while excellent in theory, has been feeble
and futile in experience. It is good, no doubt, to fix the price
of fencing wire and chemical manures, but as already pointed
out elsewhere, the great general public do not eat fencing wire
or clothe themselves in chemical manure. What the general
non-trading public want, and what they have a right to expect,
is a due recognition of the purpose they serve in the great and
complicated social machine. To-day, Australia finds itself in
a singular position indeed. With a tariff wall around the Con-
tinent, so high and so strong as to be impenetrable, she is
giving to her established manufactures and her incipient indus-
tries, an unbelievable privilege possessed to the same extent
by no other manufacturing class in the great expanse of the
civilized world. What are we to expect; what have we a
right to expect from this buttressed class of manufacturers
who have been given so great an opportunity? We have an
undoubted and righteous claim to reasonable prices, and if
Government trading is not to be the steadying influence so
much needed to curb the rapacity of protected industry, then
there is nothing left but a limitation of profits enforced with
rigidity and ruthlessness. It need not of necessity cause one
single case of hardship; it is possible to so analyse costs, and
estimate overhead charges, as to focus the operations of trade
to a pin-point, and having accomplished that purpose, if Gov-
ernmental authority provided by law for a universal trading
profit of 10%, it would have done more than a fair thing by
the trader, and afforded that permanent protection to the
consumer of which he stands so much in need.


THE COMPLETE HISTORY OF THE BASIC WAGE
The following short history of the basic wage can be accepted
as absolutely authentic :
The first declaration was made on the 15th February, I9 2l >
to take effect from the Ist March of that year. The basic wage
for industries of average prosperity was declared at £4 ss. od.
per week by Mr Justice McCawley, President, and Mr Justice
Macnaughton. On nth November, 1921, the Court refused to
alter the basic wage but adjourned the hearing to February,
1922. The Court, however, divided the State into Divisions
and Districts, and fixed the extra allowances for the different
districts. That is the reason why “The Basic Wage Act of
1925” uses the words “on the fifteenth day of February 1921
and the eleventh day of November 1921.” In February, 1922,
the same two judges reduced the basic wage to £4 per week.
In March, 1924, the Full Bench of the Court, consisting of
McCawley, President, and Macnaughton and Douglas JJ. re-
fused an increase beyond £4 per week, the then declaration. In
March, 1925, the industrial unions made a further application
for an increase in the basic wage. The Court sat on the 6th
and 7th April, and consisted of McCawley, President, and
Macnaughton and Douglas JJ. After the hearing was com-
pleted but before judgment was given, Mr Justice McCawley
died. The judgment was delivered by Macnaughton and
Douglas JJ. on the Bth May, 1925, and they refused to in-
crease the basic wage beyond the existing declaration of £4
per week.
The industrial unions then agitated for an alteration of the
Constitution of the Court, and brought pressure to bear on the
Government to appoint laymen to the Bench. Mr W. Forgan
Smith, who was then Minister for Public Works, drafted a
Bill to provide childhood endowment, the idea being to regard
the existing basic wage of £4 per week as the wage for a man
and his wife. These matters are of course not officially re-
corded, but the reports in the newspapers of the day will bear
them out.
On 19th August 1925, Mr Justice Webb, the President of


the Court, began to hear the application of the railway unions
for a new award. Among other claims the unions applied for
an increase in wages. The President heard this application
first and refused it, stating that he was bound by the decision
of the Full Bench in the preceding May. The railway em-
ployees in the Ipswich Railway Workshops led by the boiler-
makers held stop-work meetings. These stop-work meetings
were forbidden by the Commissioner, and the unions called a
strike ostensibly to establish their right to hold stop-work
meetings. The real reason, however, for the strike, was the
refusal of the Court to grant them an increase in wages. Dur-
ing the course of the strike several conferences were held,
presided over by the President, at which the Government was
represented by the Public Service Commissioner and the
Commissioner for Railways. The strike was eventually
settled on the Government agreeing to grant the employees of
the Commissioner for Railways the basic wage of £4 ss. od.
per week, and making certain arrangements about the holding
of stop-work meetings. It was common knowledge at the time
that the Government promised the unions of employees out-
side the Railway Service that they would restore by legisla-
tion the basic wage declared in 1921.
It was during the progress of the session of 1925, that the
railway employees of Queensland struck work from one end
of the State to the other, their action being the source of
much loss to the trading community and much embarrassment
to the Gillies Government. Twice during the progress of
the strike, Parliament adjourned for the purpose of giving
opportunity for negotiation, and in the end a modus vivendi
was found and the strike was brought to a conclusion.
The Basic Wage Act of 1925 was alleged to have been one
of the terms of the strike settlement. In the year 1922 there
had been a reduction of the basic wage, and this had been
followed five months later by the Government sending the
employees of the State to the Court, and they in turn had
their salaries and wages reduced in conformity with those out-
side. This was followed by a drastic piece of legislation which
took arbitrarily five per cent from those who had not access
to the Court. This action was reversed in the session of 1924,
and at the time the Basic Wage Act of 1925 was passed, every-
body employed by the State had access to the Arbitration
Court. It was the first time in the history of the State that
every worker in the State was given access to the Arbitration
Court.
The basic wage, at the time the Basic Wage Act of 1925


was passed, was £4 per week with Central and Northern
parity. Prior to the 1922 declarations it was fixed at £4 ss. od.
in the South; £4 10s. 6d. in the Mackay district; and £4 15s. od.
for the North. The Basic Wage Act of 1925 re-enacted the
Basic Wage of £4 ss. od. with Northern and Central parities
for a limited time. The Bill did not profess to fix a minimum
wage. It simply re-enacted as a temporary measure the basic
wage as it existed prior to 1922 —not a minimum wage, not a
living wage, and not a maximum but the former basic wage.
The Court was left with its then existing powers and it was
competent for it —indeed it was obligatory upon it, as soon as
the Basic Wage Act became law, to review all awards then
subsisting, affected by the Basic Wage Act, and fix wages ac-
cordingly. It is of interest to note that at this period there were
fifteen operative awards below the declared basic wage.
There was a strong contention at the time that the passage
of the Basic Wage Act was tantamount to a usurpation of the
functions of the Court, and that it was an immoral and highly
improper proceeding to confer powers of fixation of wages on
a Court, and then for Parliament to fix the wage in order to
pacify some thousands of recalcitrants who had defied the
authority both of the Government and the Court and prac-
tically held up the State to ransom.
One of the outstanding features of the Moore Government's
programme was the freeing of the newly constituted Court
from all influence whatever —Parliamentary or other. It was
contended that the Court should be untrammelled in the fixa-
tion of both hours and wages, and one of the leading features
of the Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Act of 1929,
was designed to accomplish that purpose.
Such then is the story, in brief, of the fixation of a Basic
Wage by Act of Parliament in 1925. The placing on record
of the outstanding facts serves a useful purpose in more ways
than one.
It should be mentioned that on 16th September, 1925, Par-
liament declined to hear at the Bar of the House the repre-
sentatives of certain Employers Associations regarding the
proposed basic wage legislation, and that the measure was,
in spite of strong protest, passed through all its stages in one
day, the closure having been applied on the Motion to read the
Bill a second time, once in Committee, and again on the
Motion to read the Bill a third time.
132
QUEENSLAND—


THE PROCEEDINGS IN 1930
Under the provisions of the Industrial Conciliation and
Arbitration Act of 1929, the Industrial Court, consisting of
Mr Justice Webb, and Conciliation Commissioners Dunstan
and Ferry, on 18th March, 1930, commenced an inquiry pre-
paratory to making a declaration as required by the Act as to
the “Basic Wage” and the “Standard Hours.” The com-
bined unions claimed an increase of the basic wage from
£4 ss. od. to £4 10s. od. per week. The hearing was continued
on subsequent days, the Government, through their represent-
ative, asking for a reduction of the basic wage to £4 is. od.
per week. He claimed that, on the cost-of-living figures for
the last quarter of 1929 the then “Harvester” equivalent of
£3 17s. xod. had the same purchasing power in Brisbane as a
wage of £4 12s. 6d. would have in Sydney. (Note: There is
no specified number of children though it was usually as-
sumed to be three.) The Railway Department was separate-
ly represented and also claimed a reduction to £4 is. od. per
week. The sugar growers in view of the agreement with the
Federal Government, were content to allow the basic wage
of £4 ss. od. per week to stand. The northern and Mackay
employers claimed the abolition of the Northern and Mackay
parities of 10s. and ss. 6d. per week respectively. The United
Graziers Association asked the Court to reduce the basic wage
to the federal equivalent of £3 17s. lod. per week. The general
body of employers made no specific claim for an alteration
of the basic wage but left the matter entirely to the dis-
cretion of the Court. Thus the Court had a big problem to
face, and a wide margin to come and go on. The hearing
of the case excited unusual interest among the industrial sec-
tion of the community, and each day the court was not only
full, but overflowing.
On 25th March, 1930, the Court made its pronouncement.
It declared that the basic wage of £4 ss. od. should remain,
but in view of the downward trend of the cost-of-living figures
it stated that it would make a fresh declaration of the basic
wage in the following July, and that in the meantime the
Commissioner for Railways and the Crown, so far as it could
be established that the Crown was engaged in industry, could
make a special application under section 62 of the Act.
THE BASIC WAGE DECREASED
Pursuant to the pronouncement of 25th March, 1930, the
Industrial Court on 14th July, 1930, proceeded to hear argu-


ment on the question of the revision of the basic wage. The
parties to the argument in favour of a reduction —the Crown
representative, the Railway Commissioner’s representative,
and the various employers’ associations —were agreed upon
the necessity of making a reduction from £4 ss. od. to £3
16s. od. per week. Their contentions were naturally opposed
with the utmost vigour by the representatives of the com-
bined unions and of the State Service Union.
The hearing extended over two days and on 16th July the
Court delivered its unanimous judgment, reducing the rate
for adult males from £4 ss. od. to £4 per week, the equivalent
for adult females being £2 is. od. per week. The Court de-
clared it to be imperative that a substantial reduction should
take place and, in the words of the learned President, “pro-
ceeding with due caution,” decided to fix the reduction at ss.
per week, intimating at the same time that after October 13th
it would be prepared to review the basic wage again upon the
application of any of the parties. An application by the North
Queensland employers for the abolition of the Northern parity
of 10s. was refused.
In pursuance of section 13 (1), the Court declared that as
from August Ist, 1930, the basic wage should be
(a) For adult males, £4 per week.
(b) For adult females, £2 is. od. per week.
And further, that the hourly and daily rates shall be ad-
justed as heretofore.
THE PROCEEDINGS OF NOVEMBER, 1930
A FURTHER DECREASE
A reduction of the basic wage in Queensland from £4 to
£3 13s. od. per week was the subject of a further application
made to the Industrial Court on Monday, 3rd November, 1930,
the ground of the applicants being that the cost of living had
been reduced to such an extent that the same standard of
comfort would be afforded by a wage of £3 13s. od. per week
as was afforded by £4 ss. od. per week when the Court fixed
that standard in 1921. The application emanated from the
Queensland Employers’ Federation. A separate application
for a reduction of the wage to £3 7s. 6d. per week was made
by the Toowoomba Foundry Company. The Court was con-
stituted by Mr Justice Webb (President), Mr T. A. Ferry
(Conciliation Commissioner), and Mr P. J. Wallace (Acting
Conciliation Commissioner).
After a patient hearing, the Court failed to come to a unani-
134
QUEENSLAND—


mous conclusion. Mr Justice Webb was of opinion that the
wage should be reduced to £3 16s. od. per week for males and
£1 19s. od. for females as from Ist December, 1930. Mr
Ferry was of opinion that there was no satisfactory evidence
that any further reductions in the basic wage might conceiv-
ably reduce unemployment and that there should be no change.
Mr Wallace favoured a reduction to £3 17s. od. per week.
The ultimate declaration of the Court was as follows: —
“In view of the differences of opinion among the members
of the court, the only course open is to make the following
declaration:—l
“In pursuance of section 13 (1) of 'The Industrial Con-
ciliation and Arbitration Act of 1929/ the court declares that
as from the first day of December, 1930, the basic wage shall
be: —
(a) For adult males, £3 17s. od. per week.
(b) For adult females, £1 19s. 6d. per week.
“Further, it shall be a direction to the registrar, in varying
the awards affecting rates of pay, to reduce the rates of
juniors by one-half the amount of the reduction of the rates
of seniors, and that piecework and casual rates be reduced by
3i per cent.”
On 21st May 1931, a further declaration was made reducing
the basic wage for adult males to £3 14s. od. per week and
for adult females to £1 19s. od. per week.
THE 44 HOUR WEEK
Under section 10 of the Industrial Arbitration Act of 1916,
it was provided that “Employees shall not work on more than
six out of seven consecutive days, and the time worked by
them within any period of six consecutive days should not
exceed forty-eight hours.”
A short amendment of the Act of 1916 was passed in the
session of 1924, and assented to on 30th October, 1924, sub-
stituting the words “forty-four” for the words “forty-eight.”
From that time forward forty-four hours became the stand-
ard working week in Queensland. Considering the vital
change that was being made in our social conditions it is
somewhat remarkable that this proposal slipped through Par-
liament with comparative facility, the second reading of the
Bill being carried without division. It is true that in Com-
mittee an amendment was moved by the Leader of the Oppo-
sion providing that a greater number of hours (not exceeding
forty-eight) might be fixed by an award, if the Court certified


that in order to prevent unemployment arising from the dis-
continuance of or serious retrenchment in an important indus-
trial undertaking, a greater number of hours should be worked
in a calling, but the amendment was defeated on division by
28 to 16.
In the world of politics it is an extremely popular proceed-
ing to hand out favours to the populace, giving them higher
and higher wages and fewer hours. One would think that
such proposals would entrench a Government in power for
ever. Yet there are after all certain hard, cold, natural laws
governing this universe, the defiance of which places com-
munities in an unenviable position and isolates them from
the rest of the world. One of those laws is the law of com-
petition. Trade, as we well know, is predatory and cannibal-
istic. Trade knows not the bowels of compassion. The
trader who has at his back employees who will work forty-
eight, fifty or even sixty hours per week, can laugh to scorn
his competitor who has behind him employees of a more ef-
feminate and luxurious type who work only forty-four hours
per week and bask in the sunshine for the remainder of the
time.
It is quite manifest that if you promise the moon to free
and independent electors and if, perchance, you are able to
fulfil your promise it is only a matter of quite a short time
when you will be asked for Venus, then for Orion, and then
for the Milky Way. We are all more or less built on the lines
of Oliver Twist and want more and more. If, then, you go on
fulfilling extravagant uneconomic demands, and your neigh-
bour with wider vision realizes with the economist McCor-
mack that there are only 20 cwt. of potatoes in a ton, it is
only a question of a comparatively short time when the mem-
bers of a too luxurious community reach that delectable but
quite unprofitable position of taking in one another’s washing.
These few pearls of wisdom are offered in the kindest spirit
to the political economists of this State.
THE PROCEEDINGS OF 1930
44 HOUR WEEK
At the inquiry into the Basic Wage and Standard Hours
on 18th March, 1930, when the combined unions made
an application to the new Industrial Court for an increase of
the basic wage from £4 ss. od. to £4 10s. od. per week, they
accompanied it with a claim for a reduction of the standard
hours from 44 to 40. In the judgment of 25th March this
136
QUEENSLAND—


proposal was not entertained. The Court declared that it had
no information justifying a change from the present standard
hours, but that, on the contrary, the Government represent-
atives had satisfied the Court that the cost of the reduction of
hours, as from July, 1925, had become an unfair burden on the
Crown and the railways under present conditions, and that
relief should be afforded. That, however, required a separate
application. The Court further stated that a separate appli-
cation to change the standard hours in any particular industry
could be made by the employers in that industry.
BACK TO 1925
On April 29th 1930, the Court, consisting of Mr Justice
Webb, and Industrial Commissioners Dunstan and Ferry,
commenced the hearing of an application, filed on April 7th,
on behalf of the Government for a 48-hour week for certain
Crown employees, such as attendants at Hospitals for the
Insane and Benevolent Institutions, cooks and domestic em-
ployees at Government Institutions, Prison Warders, Police,
and Employees on Government steamers and dredges. A
separate application of the same nature had been filed on be-
half of the Railway Department. The application of the
Crown generally amounted in effect to an attempt to get back
to the working hours in force prior to Ist July, 1925. That of
the Commissioner for Railways went much further. It sought
to extend the working hours of all employees of the Commis-
sioner other than the professional and clerical staffs to 48 per
week notwithstanding that the workshops, maintenance and
construction sections had been awarded a 44-hour week by
the Court of Industrial Arbitration some seven years prior
to 1925.
The combined Unions sought an adjournment of the hear-
ing for a month, contending that they had not been given an
opportunity to prepare their case.
The application for an adjournment was strongly opposed
by the Government representative. In the end, the hearing
was adjourned for a week, the application of the Railway
Department being adjourned also.
The hearing of the application was resumed on the appoint-
ed day and continued on subsequent days.
On Monday, May 12th, the Court delivered its reserved
decision which is of such paramount importance that it is
quoted, in extenso, as follows :— 1
“The Court finds that the state of the public and railway


finances completely outweighs the considerations so vigor-
ously advanced in the able addresses of the principal union
advocates, and warrants the restoration of the weekly hours
worked before the introduction of the 44 hours week in July,
I9 u 5;
“The railway deficits are met out of consolidated revenue.
“The figures are referred to in the Court’s reasons for its
general declaration of the standard hours given on April 4
last, and need not be repeated here.
“The Court has decided to make general declarations to give
effect to that finding, but to these general declarations excep-
tions are stated.
“Under the repealed Acts hours were fixed for callings, not
for industries.
“Mr P. R. T. Willis, for the Commissioner for Railways, con-
tended that while the court consisting of the Judge and the
Industrial Commissioners must fix the maximum weekly hours
for a particular industry, under section 13 (4) it would be
open to the Judge, sitting alone, or to a Conciliation Board to
fix a lower maximum for the separate callings comprised in a
particular industry.
“If that were so, the Judge or Board would be in a position
to fix lower maximum hours for every such calling, thus ren-
dering the general declaration futile to that extent.
MAXIMUM HOURS
“Section 29 of the Act provides that the court’s declaration
as to the standard hours shall be binding on the Conciliation
Board. This would not be completely so if those boards could
fix a lower maximum. It must be kept in mind that the em-
ployer is always at liberty to work his employees less than
the hours fixed by the award so that what the award fixes is
not the actual hours, but the maximum hours. It is no answer
then to say that while the Judge and the Commissioners shall
fix the maximum hours, the judge alone or the board shall fix
the actual hours. The Judge and the Board also fix the maxi-
mum which must conform to the general declaration as sec-
tion 29 requires.
“Reference was made to section 10 (1) (a) of the repealed
Acts, but clearly under that provision the court was given
authority to fix by its awards weekly and daily hours not
exceeding those stated in the section. No assistance, there-
fore, can be derived from a consideration of that section.
“But as the Judge and the Board cannot fix a lower maximum
138
QUEENSLAND—


than that declared under section 13 (4) then, if exceptions
cannot be included in the general declaration, all callings in
the industry are liable to be called upon to work the declared
hours, although that is not desired by the court or the parties.
The Court has come to the conclusion, however, but not with-
out considerable hesitation, that there is power to state such
exceptions. That is a sensible construction not contrary to the
clear letter of the Statute, and which, therefore, the court has
decided to adopt.
ADJUSTMENTS OF WAGES
“It will be the duty of the Court, consisting of the Judge
sitting alone or of a Conciliation Board constituted by him,
to determine the spread of hours, the adjustment of wage rates
and the extent to which any industrial agreement dealing with
working hours is affected by this declaration.
“Such Court will also decide all questions arising under sec-
tion 53 of the Act in relation to statutory holidays or annual
leave in lieu thereof.
“The Judge has fixed to-morrow, May 13, at 10 a.m., for
conferences of the parties to endeavour to come to some agree-
ment as the result of this declaration.
“The formal declarations are: —
“In the matter of certain awards and industrial agreements
in regard to the Public Service between the Honourable
Arthur Edward Moore, Premier and Chief Secretary, and
others, and in the matter of an application by the said the
Honourable Arthur Edward Moore and others for a variation
of the said awards and industrial agreements filed on April
1 7,193°.
“In pursuance of section 13 (4) of the Industrial Conciliation
and Arbitration Act of 1929 the Court declares that the maxi-
mum weekly hours to be worked in the industries covered by
the award and industrial agreements referred to in application
72 of 1930 shall be 48; provided that this declaration shall not
apply to employees whose maximum weekly working hours
are not thereby sought to be changed, which hours shall re-
main as at present.
RAILWAY APPLICATION
“In pursuance of section 13 (4) of the Industrial Concilia-
tion and Arbitration Act of 1929 the Court declares that the
maximum weekly hours to be worked in the railway industries
covered by the award and industrial agreements shall be 48;


provided that this declaration shall not apply to employees
covered by the railway construction workers’ award (Gov-
ernment Gazette , November 10, 1925), and the clerical, work-
shops, maintenance, engineers and draughtsmen, stores and
coal stores sections of the railway award (Government Gazette ,
November 9, 1927), whose maximum weekly working hours
shall remain as at present.”
The decision in effect amounted to a restoration of the work-
ing hours that were in force in respect of employees of the
Crown (including the Commissioner for Railways) prior to
the statutory reduction which operated from Ist July, 1925.
One naturally looks back to-day (1930) over the years that
have passed, and recalls the almost continuous struggle from
Separation (December, 1859) onwards for the enactment of a
Statutory Eight-Hour Day. In the early days of the cam-
paign, there were those who put the ideal in the category of
the impossible, yet there were public men in those days who
saw much merit in limiting the hours of labour, and who
visualized the 24 hours being divided into three periods of 8
hours —one for labour; one for rest; one for recreation.
C. H. Buzacott, in 1874, failed to pass his Bill to provide
a statutory day for labour.
Mcllwraith, a man of quite different type, had a similar
experience in the session of 1883-1884.
Griffith’s Eight-hour Bill of 1889 passed the Assembly, but
was rejected by the Council by 14 votes to 4. Again Griffith
tried in 1890, and once more failed.
As a matter of fact, the Statutes were never embellished
with an Eight-hour Day Act, but the agitation merged itself
ultimately into the operations of the early Wages Boards Acts,
and subsequently of the Court of Industrial Arbitration and
by gradual processes, the manual worker acquired a uni-
versal Working Day of Eight Hours, partly by means of col-
lective bargaining and partly by direct awards of Industrial
Courts.
The first statutory provision for a forty-eight hour week
was made by “The Industrial Arbitration Act of 1916,” which
directed the Court appointed under it that in making awards
it was to observe certain directions, inter alia “that employees
shall not be worked on more than six out of seven consecutive
days and the time worked by them within any period of six
consecutive days shall not exceed 48 hours.” Thus the Court
was restricted to a maximum of 48 hours per week but had
discretion to fix a lesser number of hours in the various call-
ings, subject to its jurisdiction.
140
QUEENSLAND—


It is interesting at the present time to examine the prin-
ciples which guided the Court in fixing the weekly working
hours, and a careful study of the awards made by it reveals the
fact that it followed certain definite principles. Briefly, they
are these. Generally speaking the Court fixed a 44-hour week
in callings which had a fixed starting and ceasing time where
all employees commenced and ceased work at the same
time, such as iron foundries, workshops and factories gener-
ally and all construction work, whether railway, road or build-
ing. On the other hand in Agricultural and Pastoral callings
(other than shearing which is done on piecework), callings
of a domestic nature, callings involving more than one shift
per day or callings having irregular hours, callings dealing
with the transportation of passengers and goods (e.g., carters
and drivers and employees engaged in the transportation and
traffic sections of the Railway and Tramway Departments)
and in the case of employees on river and bay vessels, the
hours were fixed at the maximum allowed, namely, 48 per
week. The forty-eight hour week also applied in callings af-
fecting the convenience of the “shopping” public (e.g., shop
assistants in retail establishments and butchers’ shops).
The question of the hours of labour really resolves itself
into the question of what industry can afford when faced with,
the competition of countries which do not limit hours of
labour, or which do not place so drastic a limitation upon them
as has operated throughout Australia.
That a 48-hour week should be regarded as a heavy burden
and an unbearable hardship, does not appeal very strongly to
the man who takes a serious view of life and who realizes
how much there is to do and how little time there is to do
it in.
The beautiful words of Cecil Rhodes —“How little done;
how much to do” —must make a strong appeal to those of us
who set ourselves tasks and who watch the flight of time.
Ideals in relation to labour conditions doubtless have their
value, but ideals which merely aim at the acquirement of
privileges without regard to economic facts, should have no
place in the minds of serious persons. The communistic de-
mand for a 30-hour week is merely idealistic bosh, the real-
ization of which would end in national bankruptcy.
If then, having returned once more to the hours of 1925, we
take seriously and conscientiously our everyday work, there
would appear to be a greater prospect of moderate prosperity,
the change being unaccompanied by anything approaching
hardship.


THE 44-HOUR WEEK CHALLENGED
JURISDICTION OF THE INDUSTRIAL COURT
Argument was commenced in the Full Court on Tuesday,
June 10th, 1930, on the question of the jurisdiction of the In-
dustrial Court to determine the matter of maximum weekly
hours for certain sections of the railway service.
The matter came into the Full Court on a reference by Mr
Justice Macrossan, Senior Puisne Judge, to whom applica-
tion was made for an order calling upon the Industrial Court
and the Commissioner for Railways to show cause why a writ
of certiorari should not be issued to remove into the Supreme
Court a judgment order, or a declaration made by the Indus-
trial Court with respect to the maximum weekly hours to be
worked by employees in certain railways industries, and fur-
or in the alternative, why a writ of prohibition should
not issue.
The grounds of appeal were that the Industrial Court as so
constituted had no jurisdiction to make such an order or de-
claration or to make any such order or declaration for hours
exceeding 44, which limit had been fixed by a former declar-
ation of the same court.
The Full Court was constituted by Mr Justice Macrossan,
Senior Puisne Judge, Mr Justice R. J. Douglas and Mr Jus-
tice E. A. Douglas.
After hearing lengthy argument the Full Court gave a
unanimous judgment that the declaration of the Industrial
Court providing for a standard week of 48 hours in certain
divisions or sections of the Railway service was valid.
Under “The Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Act
of 1929” The Court (consisting of the Judge and the two
Conciliation Commissioners) has exclusive jurisdiction to
declare “what shall be the maximum weekly working hours
to be worked in industry or in respect of particular industries
or callings or any section or sections of any industry or
calling.”
Applications have been made to the Court to increase the
working week beyond 44 hours in certain industries and
callings. The principles on which the Court will act in con-
sidering such applications are set out in their Judgment
delivered on 13th March 1931 as follows:
In dealing with the standard hours of industries or callings the Court
has on more than one occasion stated that, unless good reasons can
be shown why it should not do so, it proposes to revert to the hours
142
QUEENSLAND—


fixed by the Court of Industrial Arbitration prior to Ist July 1925 when,
by statutory enactment, the maximum working week was fixed at 44
hours. To put it another way—the onus will be on the unions to show
why an application to revert to the hours in force prior to Ist July
1925 should not be granted and the onus will be on the employers to
show why there should be any increase in those hours. In every
instance, however, the Court must be satisfied that the increase in hours
will not inflict hardship on the employees.
On 27th May 1931, the Court made a further declaration
increasing the weekly hours of civic employees to 48 but
preserving the 44-hour week for shop issistants.


BORROWED MONEY AND OTHER THINGS
In Queensland Politics During Sixty Years we dealt at length,
in an article covering 22 pages, with “The money we
Borrowed, and how we Spent it.” We concluded with the
Financial Year 1917-18 in which we borrowed £9,847,327;
£4,000,000 of which was for railways; £488,229 for buildings;
£934,525 for industrial undertakings; £294,002 for water con-
servation; £1,149,378 for Soldier Settlement, and the balance
for expenditure under the Sugar Works Act of 1911.
How easy it was, to be sure, to borrow money in those
halcyon days. We asked and we received, and we spent in a
“blow the cost” frame of mind, and it never occurred, to the
politician at least, that some day the chickens would come
home to roost. Fools that they were! They had been warned
weekly for five and twenty years with almost wearisome re-
iteration by a Financial Authority of great standing—the
Sydney Bulletin —that in essential principle there is no dif-
ference whatever between the borrowing of a State and the
borrowing of an individual. It is merely the difference be-
tween tweedledum and tweedledee. It is a difference of scale,
and hence possibly a difference of rate of interest, but the
main essential is that in each case the borrower must pay
and the lender receive, and that failing the completion of the
contract the borrower becomes a defaulter and files his
schedule. As a Nation, as a State, we have not quite reached
that stage, but the adverse balance of trade has become so
marked, the shrinking of the Value of our Stock in London so
apparent, and the impossibility of raising further loan re-
plenishments so manifest, that an acute stage has been arrived
at —a stage which had to come as the result of reckless dis-
regard of the elementary principles of sound finance. What
kind of reception would our banker give us if we asked him
for a loan to pay the interest on the money we had borrowed
from him? That is the unique position Australia has been in,
not once, but over a series of long years. It is wicked to think
that the time is at hand when leading politicians walk the
street and in hoarse whispers tell their friends that it is doubt-


1917-1918
• •
• •
£409,451
13
5
1918-1919
• •
171,988
3
0
1921-1922
• •
188,59!
13
10
1922-1923
• •
1 §4,979
3
II
1925-1926
• •
554,68s
13
10
1926-1927
• •
• •
343.166
14
II
£1,852,863
2
II
Less amounts appropriated in reduction
From Revenue 1920-1921
£145,000
0
0
Surplus 1923-1924 ..
12,707
9
3
From Revenue 1924-1925
350,000
0
0
Surplus 1924-1925
16,967
12
4
£524,675
1
7
ful whether Australia can meet its obligations this year —
some of them being the very politicians who have been wholly
responsible for the financial orgy of the past ten or fifteen
years.
Before proceeding to record the increased loan obligations
which the State has taken upon itself since the Financial Year
1917-18, let us glance for a moment at the revenue deficits
between 1917-18 and 1928-29, for it seems more or less
elementary that as we fail from year to year to meet current
obligations, so a more strict hand should be kept on loan
expenditure and an attempt made to limit our interest obliga-
tions by refusing to raise more loan money at ruinously high
rates.
ACCUMULATED DEFICITS
leaving a net deficit over six years of £1,328,188 is. 4d.
In the year 1919-20 there was a surplus of £26,833 ns. 2d.;
and in 1920-21 a surplus of £9830 os. Bd. These sums were
handed over to the Trustees of the Public Debt Reduction
Fund (Audit Act 1895-1906) and were not applied towards the
reduction of Revenue deficits, as was done in subsequent
years. While there was an actual surplus of £10,505 17s. od.
for the year 1927-28, yet the following year 1928-29 gives
us a further sum of £165,957 14s. sd. to be added to the accu-
mulated deficit. In February 1929 the Commonwealth Gov-
ernment issued an Australian Loan for the States amounting
to £7,000,000 at Si P er cent. Queensland’s share of this was
£1,434,000, and out of that amount the accumulated deficits
were met by transferring the amount from Loan Funds to
Consolidated Revenue Account. If that is not high finance
where can we get an example of it, and how in the face of
L


such transactions we can continue to make a jest of Mr
Micawber’s figure juggling is beyond all human ken. It looks
much as if we had all been born without any sense of humour.
Since the session of 1917-18 Parliament has authorized the
raising of new loan money to the following extent: —
In the Session of 1921 .. .. .. .. £9,185,915
In the Session of 1924 .. ~ .. .. 9,000^000
In the Session of 1926 .. . . , , .. 9,000,000
In the Session of 1928 . . .. .. .. 9,328,188
Up to 30th June, 1929, only £1,434,000 of the money author-
ized by the Loans Act of 1928 had been raised. Of that amount
£1,328,188 is represented by accumulated deficits to 30th June,
1 9 2 7-
Thus we were given in twelve years the tidy little sum
£36,514,103 as an addition to our interest bearing liabilities, and
at a very rough calculation we have not acquitted ourselves of
this additional annual liability at an expenditure of less than
£200,000 and probably even more than that during each of the
eight years ended on the 30th June, 1929.
The gross Public Debt at 30th June, 1921, was £80,744,559,
and on 30th June, 1929, £112,862,049; an increase of £32,117,490.
The interest actually paid on the Public Debt during the year
ending 30th June, 1921, was £2,930,703, and for the year ending
30th June, 1929, £5,170,948, an increase of £2,240,245, or an
average annual increase (accumulating) of approximately
£280,000.
While the going was good, that is to say while our pro-
duction maintained itself at a moderately high level, so long
as our products maintained their prices and nature was good
to us and we were not afflicted by long sustained drought,
nothing very alarming appeared on the surface of things, but
flies got into the ointment when upon a long series of years
of adverse trade balances, there was superimposed, firstly,
continuous industrial trouble affecting our export trade;
continuous drought affecting our wool, skins, hides and
tallow production and an alarming fall in the prices of our
principal exportable products. It was then that the lender
began to take notice of the situation, and by casting unkind
doubts upon our Micawber methods of financing ourselves,
brought about so marked a shrinkage in the London price of
our stock that there was no hope whatever of raising further
loan funds, except at an absolutely ruinous discount and a
rate of interest which makes one shudder. The cost of money
on mortgage of house property in the sixties and seventies
146
QUEENSLAND—


was a standard 10%. In the early eighties the writer himself
paid 9% to a Brisbane Building Society, but a State borrow-
ing money for developmental purposes could not for a mo-
ment contemplate the payment of such a swollen rate, which
must inevitably be a prelude to repudiation of obligations on a
vast scale. Thus an honest country is forced to look for a
remedy, and it becomes necessary to fall back upon things
elemental in their simplicity, such as the good little boy learns
from his honest father. First, we must remember that the
cake that is eaten or wasted, no longer remains an asset in
the shape of cake. If our regimen is to consist of cake for
seven days, and if we eat it all on Monday, then perforce we
must go hungry for six long days. Secondly, we must bear
in mind that homely aphorism—“ Let not the luxuries of to-
day become the necessities of to-morrow.” If we can afford
a luxury to-day, we should not allow ourselves to get into
the habit of thinking that we can afford luxuries every day.
If we are prosperous this year, let us not forget that prosperity
is a fleeting condition of things, and just as we ask the Gov-
ernment to average our incomes over five years, so that our
income taxes may not be next to nothing this year and im-
possible of payment the year after, so it is worth a passing
thought that we should average our luxuries, not buying too
many Rolls-Royce cars this year and having to fall back upon
a dog-cart as a means of transportation a year or two hence.
Then in regard to work and production, the desire to work
is a psychological movement, just as a desire to fight is a
psychological manifestation. When nations and individuals
“thought” war, they killed one another; when the people’s
minds turned in the direction of peace and work, they became
mild as mother’s milk and turned to labour as the normal occu-
pation of the individual. The nations of Europe bled them-
selves to death for a cause which some think good and some
bad. Haying shot and stabbed one another for five years they
became tired of the sight and smell of blood, and now having
regained their sanity, they are working feverishly to produce
and repair the damage wrought by their lunacy. The psycho-
logical movement in favour of normal work and normal pro-
duction has not yet spread to far distant Australia, but there
are a few slight evidences that it is regaining its hold upon
this continent and may yet assert itself above the blatant roar
of a few malcontents in favour of eternal discord.
Having reached the unhappy position of being in a slough
of despond, there are those who set up the utterly false pro-
position that the remedy is to be found in lower wages and


wholesale retrenchment. It is not. Low wages lead a pro-
gressive country nowhere except towards lower standards of
living and incredibly poor social conditions; while wholesale
retrenchment means decreased spending power among the
people and results in inevitable reduction of hands by business
concerns, thus throwing more and more men and women on
the charitable funds of the State. A low-wage country may
smash itself to pieces on the economic rocks and come to a
standstill. In the same way a high-wage country may
through defiance of natural law reduce itself to a state of
beggary. The natural law is that if a man will not work,
neither shall he eat, and thus we arrive at McCormack’s
formula—“ Root hog, or die.” If we borrow, if we pile up
huge annual liabilities, then above and beyond all other ne-
cessities is the necessity for continuous work and continuous
output. The standards of the people rise higher and higher
in proportion to their per capita output, and they sink lower
and lower as their per capita output diminishes. You can
point to no country on the civilized globe where the per capita
production is great and the standards of the people are low.
How elementary it is to say that production connotes work.
Nevertheless work does not connote production. Work per
se, has its utility in that it tends to keep people in a less mis-
chievous frame of mind than if they were idle, but work in the
sense of productive, profitable labour is the sine qua non of
a State’s ability to meet its obligations. Empty a million boxes
of wooden matches on the floor and start filling them again.
That is work, but it is not production. Make the matches;
make the boxes and you instantly produce value —something
you can exchange for another commodity —something, how-
ever small, which will assist you in discharging your debts.
In the dozen or more processes that it is necessary to go
through, productive labour comes into operation, from the
timber-getter hewing the trees in the forest to the shingled
flapper who pastes the pretty pictures on the outside of the
box. Is it too much to say that capital, properly used, is an
essential commodity for the world’s progress? But the cap-
italist can misapply capital just as the burglar misapplies
human skill by breaking open safes. Capital must have a pro-
ductive purpose without which it is as dross. It is because
the productive purpose has been so conspicuous by its absence
in the expenditure of our millions upon millions of loan funds,
that to-day (1930) we are reaping the reward of our want of
foresight and absence of that frugality which the individual
must practice in order that he may reap the reward. Verily
148
QUEENSLAND—


we have sown the wind and we are reaping the whirlwind.
In the bad old days, the days which were really our ruin,
though we knew it not, cartloads of sovereigns might be had
for the asking at an absurdly low rate of interest. Cheap
money deluded us into the belief that so long as we spent,
all would be well. It was to some extent, but we created
a paradise for fools who forgot that there was a quarter
day when the hardhearted landlord would come round
and demand his rent. What crass stupidity of our “nation
builders” as they are called, forsooth! If any one of them
bought a Stetson hat, he knew well that he would have to
pay for it, yet a hundred or so of them, calling themselves
“politicians,” bought a dead-end railway, borrowed money to
pay interest on cost, and thought the mortgagee would never
come round to gather his capital. Sand-shifting is a noble
occupation if one wants to work up a muscle, but not as a
productive enterprise, and the man who found the wages is
after all only asking for his due when he calls on quarter
day.
To-day Australia is regaining its sanity. It may be a
lengthy process: it may require a skilled alienist, or many of
them to pull her round, but in the end we may be the better
for our tribulation and profit by experience dearly bought.
GOVERNMENT LOANS REDEMPTION AND CONVERSION
ACT OF 1923
Without undue boastfulness the writer of this article can
assert that no one knows more about the history of this Act
than he does. He it was who drew Theodore’s attention to the
fact that an Act with somewhat similar provisions was in
force elsewhere. Prior to the session of I9 2 3 he called the
attention of the then Premier (Theodore) to a note he had
made on the measure in his reference book, but the reception
he received was chilly and grumpy, and it was almost treated
as an act of presumption that even the principal official of Par-
liament should dare discuss so mystic a thing as “Finance”
with the “Treasurer” of the State. Weeks went by and appar-
ently the Treasurer put on his thinking cap. He actually had
the grace to send for the principal Officer of Parliament and
ask him to lend him a copy of the before-mentioned act. This
having been done, it was impounded for a considerable time,
and then, with great suddenness the measure we are now
dealing with was placed before Parliament and passed without
very much if any opposition. At its concluding stage Theo-


dore was gracious enough to leave his seat on the front bench,
come to the Table and say to the principal Official in a very
abrupt manner, “You see we adopted your suggestion, and a
very good suggestion too.” The second reading debate on
the Bill was entirely overshadowed by the fact that loans
totalling £25,000,000 were falling due the following year, and
members did not seem to interest themselves in the details of
the measure. Nevertheless it was a measure of very great
consequence and gave absolute power to the Governmnt to
go on the market for a redemption loan, to be floated at any
time it was thought appropriate and on any terms the Execu-
tive pleased. Previously, Parliament had fixed the terms and
conditions of all loans whether for redemption purposes or not.
One sees now, in the light of further experience, that that was
a wise and cautious proceeding. The fixation of interest terms
by Parliament was an undoubted safeguard and the abandon-
ment of that safeguard was rash and inexpedient. One does
not want to say too much on this subject. There is no sug-
gestion, by innuendo or otherwise, that anyone profited by the
raising of the Queensland redemption loan of £25,000,000 but
it would seem to be unwise to unnecessarily put temptation in
the way of frail human nature. There is a type of public man
who might succumb to it. Why therefore should an unneces-
sary risk be taken?
QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT LOANS
SUBSCRIPTION BILL— 1920
In the year 1920 the Treasury of Queensland was in the
hands of John Arthur Fihelly and during the session he intro-
duced this measure, which provided that the Government, in
the event of a loan not being fully subscribed in Queensland,
might resort to compulsion. It was proposed to float a
£2,000,000 loan locally, authority for the flotation being al-
ready on the Statute Book, and Parliament was asked for
authority to collect, under compulsion, subscriptions from
those who could afford to pay them, if they would not sub-
scribe voluntarily. An exemption of £IOOO per annum was
proposed. The legislation was drafted on the legislation of
the Commonwealth and New Zealand. It was entirely novel
to Queensland and it is hard to say what kind of impression
it would have made if passed into law and put into operation.
As a matter of fact it never proceeded beyond the second
reading speech of the Treasurer, and no one knows what in-
fluences were brought to bear in order to check its wild career.
150
QUEENSLAND—


Services.
Amount.
Total.
RAILWAYS GENERALLY
Southern Division —
£
s.
d.
£ s. d.
Allora to Goomburra
2,600
0
0
Blackbutt to Yarraman ..
Brisbane Central Station
42,200
0
0
Buildings
Brisbane —Roma Street
35,000
0
0
Yards —Alterations
Brisbane —Roma Street —
Re-arrangement of Yard,
Passenger Station, Mayne,
35,ooo
0
0
Brisbane to Cleveland —
325,000
0
0
Duplication
45,ooo
0
0
Bullamon to Dirranbandi ..
12,000
0
0
Cordalba to Dallarnil
10,200
0
0
Dalby to Jandowae
50,000
0
0
Dalby to Tara
22,275
0
0
Drayton Deviation
35,ooo
0
0
As a matter of history it may be said that £2,000,000 was
floated locally with comparative ease, but if Treasurer Fihelly
had offered the Queensland public 5% instead of the very
tempting rate of 6J% there is a strong probability that he
would have been compelled to pass his measure and “search
the pockets of the people.”
LOAN PROPOSALS
Ever since the establishment of the Parliament of Queens-
land, and up to the year 1918, it had been the custom to ac-
company a Government Loan Bill with what were termed
“Loan Proposals.” These “Loan Proposals” were tabled,
ordered to be printed and referred to the Committee of Ways
and Means. As the personnel of Parliament has recently so
materially changed, and as it is desirable to educate members
and point out to them how their privileges have been invaded,
we give herewith, as an example the “Loan Proposals ’ of
1914 which accompanied the Loan Bill of that year. The
“Proposals” being before the Committee of Ways and Means
it was the custom to put each item, seriatim , to the Commit-
tee, and it was accepted or rejected accordingly.
LOAN PROPOSALS —1914-1915


Services.
Amount.
Total.
£
s.
d.
£ s. d.
Gayndah to Mundubbera
Ipswich New Locomotive
15,000
0
0
Workshops
100,000
0
0
Kannangur to Blackbutt ..
Keefton to Imbil (Mary
10-.000
0
0
Valley Branch)
40,000
0
0
Kingaroy to Nanango
3,000
0
0
Kingaroy to Tarong
Kingsthorpe to Goombun-
80,850
0
0
gee
4,000
0
0
Logan Village to Canungra
113,000
0
0
Mayne to Enoggera
1,000
0
0
Miles to Taroom
25,000
0
0
Miscellaneous Works
1,000,000
0
0
Mungar to Gayndah
Northgate Maintenance
1,000
0
0
Workshops
Northgate to Caboolture
16,500
0
0
Duplication
135,000
0
0
Oakey to Cooyar
30,500
0
0
Oakey to Mount Russell ..
75,000
0
0
Pialba to Urangan
27,000
0
0
Pittsworth to Millmerran
Raising Line above Flood
5,350
0
0
Level
Relaying with Heavier
10^000
0
0
Rails
50,000
0
0
Roma to Orallo
100,000
0
0
Rosewood to Marburg
South Brisbane—Improve-
13,500
0
0
ments Railway Wharf
70,000
0
0
Strengthening Bridges
Toowoomba —New Engine
250,000
0
0
Shed, &c
2,75°
0
0
Woodford to Kilcoy
Central Division—
Comet and Nogoa Rivers
500
0
0
2 t793. 22 5 0 0
Bridges
Deviations and Reductions
20,000
0
0
of Grades
20,000
0
0
Miscellaneous Works
500,000
0
0
Port Alma Railway
Raising Line above Flood
5,000
0
0
Level
Relaying with Heavier
10,000
0
0
Rails
20,000
0
0
575,000 0 0
152
QUEENSLAND—


Services
Amount
Total
£
s.
d.
£ s.
d.
Northern Division—
Atherton to Evelyn
5,250
0
0
Malanda to Millaa Millaa
95,000
0
0
Mackay—Purchase and Ex-
tension McGregor and
Cattle Creeks Tramways,
& c.
11,500
0
0
Mount Mulligan Branch ..
135,000
0
0
Miscellaneous Works
250,000
0
0
Purchase of Mourilyan and
Geraldton Tramways
70,000
0
0
Reid River, High Level
Bridge
16,000
0
0
Tolga to the Johnstone
River
12,000
0
0
Townsville —Northern Rail-
way Extension
20,000
0
0
Townsville—New Station
and Alteration to Station
Yard, &c
12,000
0
0
Tumoulin to Cedar Creek
50,000
0
0
676,750
0
0
ADDITIONAL RAILWAY
TELEGRAPHS
• •
125,000
0
0
PERMANENT WAY
MATERIAL
• •
100,000
0
0
ROLLING STOCK, ALL
RAILWAYS
• •
1,923,250
0
0
Total Railways
• •
6,193,225
0
0
PURCHASE OF WIRE
NETTING
• •
150,000
0
0
SUGAR WORKS ACT OF
IQIT
• •
400,000
0
0
LOANS TO LOCAL
BODIES
• •
1,000,000
0
0
DEFICITS ON LOANS ..
• •
501,843
0
0
Total
• •
8,245,068
0
0
The total sum authorized to
be raised to include such
additional sums as may be
necessary in order to actually


produce to the Treasury the
said sum after providing for
all costs, charges, and ex-
penses connected with the
raising thereof or with the
redemption, retirement, or
renewal of the Government
Stock or Inscribed Stock
issued or created in respect
thereof.
The Treasury, Queensland,
December, 1914.
W. H. BARNES,
Treasurer.
Now the object of such a precautionary proceeding is quite
manifest. Persons unfamiliar with Parliamentary procedure
are apt to think that we adopt round about methods to accom-
plish our objects, but let it not be forgotten that every form
of procedure has its explanation and is the result of very many
years of practical experience. In most walks of life we tread
warily where finance is concerned. The element of suspicion
enters largely into all financial transactions and the rights of
individuals are watched with jealousy. Precisely the same
principle applies to Parliament. The procedure of submit-
ting “Loan Proposals’' to Parliament, and having the items
voted seriatim, was designed for the express purpose of pro-
tecting the rights of Parliament and for fixing the Execu-
tive down to definite items of expenditure for definite and
specific public works. Any other system whatever affords a
wide field for irregular and highly improper expenditure, and
to a large extent deprives Parliament of the power of the
purse. What is or used to be known in Parliament as “the
destination of a vote” is or ought to be a sacred thing and in
times past, when it has been proposed to “alter the destination
of a vote,” it was found necessary either to pass an Act of
Parliament, or a Resolution of Parliament altering the “destin-
ation.” It will be sufficient to quote two examples of this as
showing the importance Parliament attached in the past to
a rigid adherence to its Resolutions. In the session of 1886,
Parliament, on the initiative of the Treasurer (Dickson)
passed the Bowen to Townsville Railway Act which had for
its object the consolidation of two sums of £150,000 and
£IOO,OOO, authorized to be raised by previous Loan Acts, the
first sum of £150,000 authorized by the Loan Act of 1882 with
a view to providing a Railway from Bowen to Haughton Gap,
154
QUEENSLAND—


and the second sum of £IOO,OOO authorized by the Loan Act of
1884 for the construction of a line of railway from Bowen to
the Coalfields. The consolidated vote was to be devoted to
the construction of a line from Bowen to Townsville by way
of Ayr. In the second case Parliament in 1887 desired to
divert money voted for the construction of a line from Nor-
manton to Cloncurry, to the construction of the line towards
Croydon. The Bill was not passed, but the alteration of the
destination of the vote was accomplished by Resolution. Noth-
ing could be plainer therefore than that Parliament at this
period jealously guarded its privileges, and having once deter-
mined the destination of a vote would not allow the Executive
to tamper with its decision. An interesting case arose in the
year 1889, when Morehead’s Government proposed a Vote of
£1,000,000 for “unspecified railways.” This was considered at
the period as such a violent breach of Parliamentary law and
precedent, that a stonewall was set up which afforded Horace
Tozer, that politician of iron jaw, an opportunity of speaking
for eight hours on end. In this case Morehead’s Government
in the end gave way, and reintroduced the Estimates in an-
other form.
Now in the session of 1918 an entirely new procedure was
initiated. Certainly the Labour Government printed certain
“Loan Proposals,” and had them circulated on going into
Committee of Ways and Means to pass the Loan Resolution,
but that was only intended as a “general indication” of the
allotment of the loan, and it is understood that the practice
was adopted with a view to securing more elasticity in the
allocation of Loan Money. The same practice, slightly varied,
has been followed ever since. The “slight” variation consisted
of no “Loan Proposals” whatever being circulated either as a
“general indication” or otherwise.
That Parliament has made a bad slip is undoubted: that it
should have abrogated its undoubted privileges is a matter
of grave regret. As the years go by there is a stronger and
stronger move towards making it a mere registration office
for the will of the Executive Government. It is a profound
error and materially weakens its general influence.
VOTES ON ACCOUNT FOR THE ENSUING YEAR
Students of Constitutional Practice and Parliamentary Pro-
cedure could do worse than study the practice of the Queens-
land Parliament in the matter of granting supplies for the
Public Services. Prior to the session of 1908 it had been the


fixed habit of Parliament to pass Temporary Bills of Supply
during the currency of the session, and then, at the termin-
ation of the session to pass the final Appropriation Bill which
granted Supplies to the 30th June, being the end of the cur-
rent Financial Year. Thus in order to replenish the Public
Funds it became necessary for Parliament to assemble before
the second week in July and pass a Temporary Bill of Supply,
otherwise the public servants would remain unpaid and pub-
lic services generally would become disorganized through
want of funds.
In the session of 1908 a procedure entirely new to Queens-
land was adopted, the Treasurer having come down with a
final Appropriation Bill “to apply certain Sums of Money out
of the Consolidated Revenue Fund to the Service of the Years
ending on the last days of June, 1908 and 1909/’ A protest
against this innovation was made at the time, and we do not
find the practice revived until the session of 1915-16. Put
briefly, the effect of such a provision was to give the Govern-
ment control of sufficient public funds to enable them to post-
pone the meeting of Parliament in the following year long
beyond the accustomed time of meeting—probably as late as
the end of the second week in August. This practice has been
continued ever since, with the result that when Parliament
meets, it is frequently necessary, before even the Address in
Reply is disposed of, to pass a Temporary Supply Bill. Right
up to the end of the session of 1930 Parliament has been asked
annually to follow the same course.
There are a few serious-minded students of Parliamentary
Practice who see in this innovation a regrettable departure
from Constitutional usage. It has been argued time and again
that in modern times it has been the practice of Executive
Governments to usurp more and more of the power formerly
wielded by Parliament alone. The charge is to a great extent
true. Year by year we observe further encroachments upon
the real power of the Parliament as a whole, and the conver-
sion of Parliament more or less into an institution for regis-
tering the will of the Executive Government. One could well
conceive of a situation in which a moribund and unpopular
Government having just scraped through a session without
disaster, and, adjourning say at the end of October, failed to
call Parliament together until the second week in the fol-
lowing August. It will be admitted that such a state of
affairs would be somewhat of a scandal, and yet Parliament
in letting go control of the purse strings, as it undoubtedly
has, is responsible for having brought the evil upon itself. One
156
QUEENSLAND—


remedy is to be found in the compulsory meeting of Parlia-
ment each year not later than the first week in July. This
would to some extent have the effect of restoring to it portion
of its lost control, and so stabilizing its meeting that Members
would not have to guess at the probable date of its re-
assembling.
COMMONWEALTH AND STATES FINANCIAL AGREEMENT
RATIFICATION ACT OF 1927
The political history of the past ten years would be strangely
incomplete if reference were not made to that masterstroke in
political achievement “The Commonwealth and States Finan-
cial Agreement Ratification Act of 1 9 2 7-”
Twenty-nine years after the event we look back now to the
accomplishment of the Federal pact. We wonder first of all
where the years have gone, for it seems but yesterday when
Referenda were taken in the various States of Australia upon
the proposal to initiate a united, federated Australia. In those
days, as in these, much turned upon finance and it may almost
be said that the compromise on the question of finance, as
embodied in the original Federal Constitution, removed the
last stumbling block to unity, and brought about the final fed-
eration of the Australian Colonies as independent Sovereign
States under the Crown.
Without amplifying the subject at too great length it will
be extremely useful for reference purposes if we indicate what
were the original financial relations between the Common-
wealth and the States under the Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution Act of 9th July, 1900; how those relations have
per force of changed circumstances evolved, and how a finan-
cial agreement entirely suitable to the present day require-
ments of the States was finally arrived at.
The original Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act
of 1900 embodied a section commonly known as “The Brad-
don Blot.” Section 87 reads as follows: —
“During a period of ten years after the establishment of the
Commonwealth and thereafter until the Parliament otherwise
provides, of the net revenue of the Commonwealth from duties
of customs and of excise, not more than one-fourth shall be
applied annually by the Commonwealth towards its expend-
iture.”
“The balance shall, in accordance with this Constitution, be
paid to the several states, or applied towards the payment of
157
OUR SEVENTH POLITICAL DECADE, 1920-1930


interest on debts of the several States taken over by the
Commonwealth.’’
As a matter of fact the “Braddon Blot” was only a blot,
firstly in the eyes of super-federationists or unificationists,
and, secondly, from the point of view of those States, such as
Queensland and Tasmania, which did not receive the complete
three-fourths of their portion of the Commonwealth Revenue.
Unfortunately for them the Braddon Section did not make it
sufficiently clear that each individual State must receive the
three-fourths proportion. From the States’ point of view it
was practically an essential. In pre-federation days we were
largely dependent for our revenue on duties of customs and
excise, and if, when federation had become a fait accompli , the
States had been peremptorily deprived of their duties of cus-
toms and excise, they would have been turned loose upon a
cold and unsympathetic world wellnigh financially naked.
Thus by virtue of the “Braddon Blot” the Commonwealth
compulsorily handed over to the States between January 1901
and June 1910 (a period of over nine years) the enormous
amount of customs and excise revenue of £68,140,353. But
the end was not there. Section 94 of the Commonwealth of
Australia Constitution Act provides:—
“After five years from the imposition of uniform duties of
customs, the Parliament may provide, on such basis as it
deems fair, for the monthly payment to the several States of
all surplus revenue of the Commonwealth.”
And so it came about that the payments to the States in
years amounted to the colossal sum of £74,000,000 and the
Commonwealth was left with only 19% of the collected cus-
toms and excise revenue. Verily we now begin to realize the
financial relations from the National Government’s point of
view.
After the expiry of ten years from the date of the enactment
of the Federal Constitution, the financial relations between
the Commonwealth and the States came up for review and a
referendum was taken throughout Australia on a proposal to
embody in the Constitution a provision by which 255. per
capita of the population should be permanently returned to
the This proposal was not endorsed by the people, but
as a substitute the Commonwealth Government gave effect to
a similar proposal by means of legislation, by granting to the
States 255. per capita of the population for ten years, or until
the Parliament of the Commonwealth otherwise provided. In
1910 the National Parliament passed the Surplus Revenue Act,
under which all surplus revenue was to be returned to the
158
QUEENSLAND—


States. The arrangement was theoretically perfect, but suc-
cessive Federal Treasurers having large commitments to
meet, took meticulous care that there never was any surplus
revenue to distribute. Indeed the legislation was a complete
delusion and snare. The Surplus Revenue Act expired in
1920, and from that time onward the Federal Government con-
tinued to pay the 255. per capita to the States. At one
period of our history it was proposed to make the per capita
payments a diminishing quantity at the rate of 2s. 6d. per
annum until the total per capita payment was reduced to 10s.
This suggestion was as ingenious as the disappearing ex-
emption under our Income Tax Acts, and met with violent
hostility from the States. Then in 1920 it was proposed to
absolutely abolish the per capita payments, but again the
National Government were compelled to retreat in view of the
united objections of the States. In 1923, a further proposal
emanated from the Commonwealth Government to abolish the
per capita payments, and for the Government to vacate certain
fields of taxation. The two States which would suffer by the
arrangement —Western Australia and Tasmania were to
have special grants made to them. The States showed their
grave suspicion of this proposal also. Even the individual
becomes doubtful of the bona fides of his friend who will not
keep his hands in his own pockets. Then the States made a,
counter-proposal that the Commonwealth should retire from
the income-tax field absolutely, the States to abandon their
share of customs and excise revenue. On this occasion the
Commonwealth declined the proposal, but suggested that they
collect 2/6 in the £1 income tax on companies only, and that
they should pay no interest on transferred properties. It is
understood that all the States, excepting New South Wales,
were agreeable to the proposal. Tasmania was non-committal,
and as unanimity could not be secured, negotiations fell
through. No further action was taken until 1926, when the
Commonwealth Government suggested discontinuance of per
capita payments and the evacuation of the income tax field on
individuals. Assistance was proposed to be given to such
States as found their finances dislocated by the new financial
proposals. At this stage the States unanimously stressed their
“moral” right to a share of the customs and excise duties, and
they showed grave alarm at the possible dislocation of their
finances by the Commonwealth proposals.
Coming now to the Financial Agreement which received
legislative sanction in 1927 and was subsequently endorsed


by the people when submitted to a referendum, its contents
may be briefly summarized as follows:
1. The Commonwealth to take over the whole of the
public debts of the States.
2. The Commonwealth to apply £7,584,912 annually from
its revenues towards payment of interest charges; the States
to contribute the balance.
3. Properly safeguarded sinking funds to be established
in respect of State debts existing on 30th June, 1927, and
new borrowings: the Commonwealth to make substantial con-
tributions to those sinking funds.
4. The management of debts and future borrowings on
behalf of the Commonwealth and the States to be vested in an
Australian Loan Council, consisting of a representative of
the Commonwealth and a representative of each State; such
Council to be given powers under an amendment of the Con-
stitution.
5. A final settlement in respect of “Transferred Properties/'
based on the Commonwealth assuming the liability for inter-
est and principal of an equivalent amount of State debts.
One of the outstanding advantages of the agreement was
the permanent constitution of the Australian Loan Council.
A Loan Council—a consultative body, not having any legal
backing, had been in operation for a considerable period prior
to the agreement. In its early stages it had functioned with-
out the co-operation of New South Wales which had con-
sistently refused to join, but at the period when the States
and Commonwealth sufficiently advanced their agreement to
enable them to submit it to the respective Parliaments, New
South Wales had relented and consented to join the other
States.
An Australian Loan Council without legal authorization and
with no power of enforcing its decisions, was a somewhat
futile body, and could only serve a very circumscribed pur-
pose. The Australian Loan Council as constituted by the
Financial Agreement is a very real and live body. Broadly
speaking, it deals with all those financial problems embodied
m the Agreement of 1927, such as the flotation of loans, the
allocation of loan money, the fixation of interest, the making
of all arrangements appertaining to borrowing on behalf of
the States and the Commonwealth. The Commonwealth
Government and each State Government must submit their
loan programmes to the Loan Council, and the Council deals
with those programmes from the point of view of the inter-
160
QUEENSLAND—


ests of the whole Commonwealth. The Council’s functions are
extremely definite and of paramount importance. Its utility
at the period of which we now write (1930) stands out in
great prominence. That Australia should have one financial
mind, instead of seven, and that it should speak with one voice
in a matter which is the very basis of good and successful
Government, is something upon which Australia generally
should congratulate itself. We have fallen upon difficult
times financially, and the States can no longer afford to
compete selfishly one with the other in financing their require-
ments. It would seem that the Loan Council has come to
stay, and that it will prove itself a powerful factor in putting
Australia on a sound financial basis.
In the permanent Constitution of the Australian Loan Coun-
cil some controversy arose concerning the voting power of the
States and the Commonwealth. Ultimately it was agreed to
give each State one vote and two to the Commonwealth, with
a casting vote for the Commonwealth. Some doubt was ex-
pressed as to whether this would not give the National Gov-
ernment undue influence over the weaker States, but it may
be noted here that the wise and conciliatory attitude of the
Commonwealth Government has removed that suspicion, and
that the Australian Loan Council bids fair to develop into a
national institution of supreme importance.
One may be pardoned for mentioning here the parts taken
by Messrs William McCormack and W. Forgan Smith, both
members of the late Queensland Labour Ministry, not only
in the establishment of the Loan Council and the subsequent
enactment of the Financial Agreement of 1927, but in the
efforts they made to preserve intact the rights of the State
they represented when the Commonwealth Government made
their various proposals as substitutes for the per capita pay-
ment of 255. Queensland owes much to those two politicians
for the fine grip they obtained of a difficult situation, and for
their patriotic desire to serve their State faithfully and well.
One of the provisions of the Financial Agreement is that it
is subject to alteration by agreement of all the parties thereto,
so long as the amendments come within the main principles
of the Agreement. The alterations will be by order in coun-
cil and must be published in the Gazette. The Financial
Agreement of 1927 is a document of such far-reaching influence
and of such outstanding importance to the future development
of Australia, that one naturally engages in speculation as to
how far politicians have been responsible for its origination
and subsequent perfection. If one were to judge of the


capacity of politicians by the “Braddon Blot;” if that was the
most brilliant coup d’etat of which they were capable in
days when Australia boasted of the possession of quite a
number of “clever” public men, then we must perforce look
elsewhere than in the Parliaments of Australia for the origin-
ators of the Financial Agreement of 1927. It is comparatively
easy to build on the foundations laid by others: it is simple
to improve from day to day on broad general principles origin-
ating behind the political scenes, and there is some foundation
for saying that although the germ of the idea originated in the
mind of the Rt. Hon. S. M. Bruce, the permanent Treasury
officials in all the States have pooled their brains to produce
a masterpiece which certainly politicians have improved, but
for which they claim the entire credit.
The foregoing is necessarily a brief resume of a very im-
portant subject. In a volume dealing with so many phases of
public life, condensation is an essential, but having set out
the main features of a subject and having afforded the neces-
sary references, those who are in search of more detail can
build up from the sketch here given to them.
162
QUEENSLAND—


PAYMENT OF MEMBERS
THE UPS AND DOWNS OF LEGISLATORS
In the early days of the Parliament of Queensland, the sug-
gestion that Members should be paid for their services would
have been met with a species of hushed and shocked horror.
In those times the representation of the people was conceived
to be so great an honour that the most distant suggestion of
payment was received with abhorrence, it being understood
that the glory, the distinction, the notability and fame thrust
upon the successful candidate was more than sufficient reward
for the service rendered. Yet we must assume that in so
recent times as seventy years ago human nature was consti-
tuted in pretty much the same way as it is to-day. The desire
to do something for nothing is not glaringly manifest in any
of us, and it would seem a more or less justifiable assumption
that if no direct payment was made to Members of Parlia-
ment, some of them at least searched diligently for an indirect
method of rewarding themselves. There were cases in early
days when candidates boldly declared that they could not
afford the honour, and when liberal constituents subscribed a
salary, but these were naturally few and far between. In our
early history it is true that many men of substance were
elected to Parliament. The Squatocracy in those days was in
strong force, and numerous instances could be cited of wealthy
citizens, who entered the Legislature and showed their un-
disguised belief that they were the chosen of the earth and
were born to govern. Thus it came about that a section of
the Legislature was composed of persons of comparative
leisure who were not compelled to adopt politics as a pro-
fessional occupation, and it was this class which, when the
time approached for seriously considering the propriety of
payment of members, so strenuously and bitterly opposed it.
It is not to be supposed for a moment that in those distant
times they had any acquaintance with that quaint little volume
Modus Tenendi Parliamentum in which the payment to be
made to the “barons,” no less, for attending Parliament, was


set out in detail—“some more and some less according to the
rank and respect of the persons.” We speculate upon what
would happen in these days if, for instance, some leading pub-
lic servant were allotted the task of separating the sheep from
the goats “according to the rank and respect of the persons”
elected to Parliament.
We pass now to the historical aspect of the direct payment
of Members for services rendered, and we find that it was
not until 1871 that a member had the courage to introduce in
Parliament a resolution in favour of payment of members.
This was sponsored by Mr Alexander Fyfe, then Member for
Rockhampton, who gave the House some very ancient and
world-wide history on the subject of the remuneration of Mem-
bers of Parliament. It was quite apparent that he was a
student, for we find him quoting the Plantagenets Edward I
and 111, digging up the Norman Conquest of England, delv-
ing into the history of the Wars of the Roses and making ex-
cursions into various other by-ways in order to prove the
equity of his case. His motion read:—
“1. That it is expedient to provide adequate compen-
sation to Members of the Assembly for loss of time and
expenses incurred as representatives.
“2. That a Bill be brought in to provide compensation,
at the rate of per annum, for every member, from
the commencement of the ensuing session of the Legisla-
ture, and that members shall not be at liberty to renounce
such compensation as may be determined.”
After a very lengthy debate, during which amendments
were moved, the original motion was carried on division—
Ayes 16, Noes 12.
PAYMENT OF MEMBERS BILL OF 1872
In the session of 1872 the matter was further pursued by
Charles Lilley, Member for Fortitude Valley, who proposed
a motion that every member should be entitled to receive
£3OO per annum, that a deduction of £lO per day be made for
every day of non-attendance , from any cause, and that the
Act giving effect to the resolution should take effect from the
day of the meeting of Parliament after the General Election.
The Bill was actually brought in, passed, and sent to the
Legislative Council, but it was ordered on 20th August, 1872,
to be read a second time that day six months.
164
QUEENSLAND—


PAYMENT OF MEMBERS BILL OF 1873
In the session of 1873, C. J. Graham, Member for Cler-
mont, proposed a resolution affirming that each member shou
receive £l5O per annum and is. 6d. per mile travelling ex-
penses, and cost of passage per steamer, and that the measure
giving effect to such resolution should take effect frorn the day
of the meeting of Parliament after the next General Election.
The Resolution was agreed to on division—Ayes 12,
N °ln S the Legislative Council, although the second reading of
the Bill was carried, it appears to have been lost in Com-
mittee.
PAYMENT OF MEMBERS BILL OF 1874
In the session of 1874 the Colonial Secretary (Palmer) in
troduced a Payment of Members Bill. It provided for pay-
ment at the rate of £3 3S. per day for the first sixty-four work-
ing days in each year, and it was proposed to pay only for
services performed, compensation being payable for wor
actually done.” A travelling allowance of is. 6d per mile was
also proposed. The second reading was carried by 29 votes
to 7. The Bill was put to division on the third reading and
carried by 24 to 10. It then went to the Council, but on 20th
May it was ordered to be read a second time that day six
months.
PAYMENT OF (TRAVELLING ALLOWANCES OF)
MEMBERS BILL OF 1875
In the session of 1875 the Colonial Secretary (Macalister)
introduced a Payment of Members Bill on similar lines to the
Bill of 1874, dropping the provision for travelling expenses
and providing for a payment of £2OO per annum. Phis went
to the Council. On 9 th June an attempt made to read it a
second time that day six months failed. In Committee the
£2OO was eliminated. The Council apparently was beginning
to compromise on the question, for they were willing to grant
travelling allowances without salary. The Assembly declined
the amendments because (1) the main object of the Bill was
the compensation of Members for services in attending ar-
liament and the Council’s amendments defeated that object;
(2) because the Bill, as amended, was a Bill with a different
Title and for a different purpose; (3) because the Bill was a
Bill imposing a pecuniary burden on the _ people, and the
amendments of the Council altered the intention of the


Assembly with respect to the amount of the charge, its dur-
ation, and the persons who should receive the benefit. The
Council was obdurate and insisted upon its amendments, and
thus the Bill was lost once more. Apparently between the
years 1876 and 1884 no further effort was made to persuade the
Legislative Council to agree to the payment of members in any
form.
MEMBERS EXPENSES BILL OF 1884
In the year 1884, Griffith, being Premier, introduced an
entirely new form of Payment of Members. The measure
was entitled ‘‘The Members Expenses Bill” which made a daily
allowance for expenses up to £2 2s. od. with a maximum of
£2OO, and it was further provided that for every day on which
the Legislative Assembly was appointed to sit and on which
a member did not give his attendance, there should be de-
ducted from the sum which would otherwise be payable to
him, a sum bearing the same proportion to the whole of such
sum as the number of days on which he failed to give his
attendance bore to the whole number of days on which the
Assembly was appointed to sit. In short the new Bill laid
down the principle of “No work, No pay.” It was a fair pro-
vision and a very salutary one, for there does not appear to be
any reason for excepting members of Parliament from the ne-
cessity of doing the work for which they are paid. A further
clause provided for travelling expenses at the rate of is. 6d.
per There was a division on the second reading which
was carried by 39 to 8. The Council debated the measure at
length and on 17th December, 1884, decided that the Bill
should be read a second time that day six months.
MEMBERS EXPENSES BILL OF 1885
Not to be beaten, Griffith came forward again in 1885 with
an exactly similar measure, the second reading of which was
passed by 22 votes to 13. It went to the Legislative Council
and there on 29th July it was ordered to be read a second time
that day six months. Thereupon the expenditure involved in
the proposed payment of members' expenses was tacked on to
Appropriation Bill No. 2, and sent to the Legislative Council.
In Committee the Legislative Council excised the Vote of
£7OOO for Members’ Expenses and returned the measure to the
Assembly. Naturally the Assembly could not agree to such
high-handed action on the part of a nominee body. Parlia-
ment had come to the last day of the session; the Supplies for
the Public Services had been held up, and a constitutional
166
QUEENSLAND—


crisis had arisen which was without precedent in Queensland.
A way out of the impasse was sought, and a joint Select Com-
mittee of the two Houses was appointed “to consider the pre-
sent condition of public business.” The net result was that
the Council retreated temporarily from the position it had
taken up, pending the submission of a case to the Privy Coun-
cil to determine its powers in regard to the amendment of
Money Bills. For the details in relation to the difference
which had arisen between the two Houses, students of Con-
stitutional Government are referred to pp. 247-253 of Queens-
land Politics During Sixty Years (Bernays). The case was
unique; the claim of the Legislative Council an outrage upon
constitutional government, and it was rightly put in its proper
place in a letter, dated Whitehall 3rd April, 1886, containing
the decision of the Privy Council.
Thus is came about, to use a colloquialism, that Members
of Parliament in Queensland got a “leg in” in regard to pay-
ment of members, and although it has passed through numer-
ous vicissitudes since, the Legislature remains to-day a paid
body.
MEMBERS EXPENSES BILL OF 1886
In the following year Griffith placed upon the Statute Book
his Bill of 1885. On Ist September, 1886, certain members ot
the Legislative Council adopted the remarkable course (after
the decision of the Privy Council) of moving that the Bill be
read a second time that day six months, but the amendment
was rejected by 14 to 5- It desirable to immortalize tie
diehards by recording their names in history. They were
A. C. and F. T. Gregory, F. H. Hart, W. G. Power, and A. J.
Thynne.
PAYMENT OF MEMBERS BILL OF 1889
We hear nothing more of this highly interesting subject
until 1889. Morehead, being Premier at the time, introduced
a measure to provide for the payment of £3OO a year to mem
bers plus travelling expenses—the payment to commence only
from the day on which they were sworn in. The second
reading was carried by 43 to 15, and the Bill went to the
Legislative Council where the second reading was carried by
the narrow majority of two.
We have now arrived at the stage when members received
a definite annual salary, without conditions, and certain tra-
velling allowances coming to and returning from Parliament.


PROPOSED REDUCTION OF PAYMENT IN 1891
In the session of 1891, Luya, then representing South Bris-
bane, asked for leave to bring in a Bill to Amend the Pay-
ment of Members Act of 1889 by reducing the salary to
£2OO per annum. There was an animated debate upon the
subject, but leave was refused, the voting being Ayes 15,
Noes 23.
It will be remembered that up to this period Labour repre-
sentation in Parliament had been a negligible quaniiyt. In-
deed it was not until the General Election, 1893, that the
Labour Party in Parliament became a power to reckon with.
After that election the Labour opposition numbered sixteen,
and the ordinary opposition ten, with Mcllwraith in power
with a party of forty^six.
Rightly or wrongly the writer associates the Great Shearers’
Strike of 1891 with certain action taken by Parliament in
1892.
PAYMENT OF MEMBERS BILL OF 1892
In the session of 1892, Griffith, then Premier, proposed to
reduce the payment of members to £l5O per annum, being
obsessed by the fear that there zvas a danger that it (the pay-
ment of members ) would give rise to a class of professional
politician to whom £3OO a year would he a much larger amount
than they would ordinarily earn in the exercise of their calling.
Looking back one cannot help thinking that Griffith saw
the rising tide of democracy approaching in the distance, and
had no desire to give it any encouragement. If that was so,
then his action was futile and comparable only to that of the
good King Canute who commanded the rising tide of the
Thames at Westminster to go back. Nevertheless, the Bill
became law, and honourable members of that year and the
sixteen Labourites which the General Election of 1893 threw
up, had to be content with a modest £3 a week. Would it be
lese-majesty to say that it was in this very session that
Griffith estimated his own worth at £67 per week and trans-
lated himself to the Supreme Court Bench as Chief Justice
at £3500 per annum?
PROCEEDINGS OF 1893
In the session of 1893, John Hamilton asked the House to
affirm the principle of amending the Payment of Members
Acts, 1890-1892. On division the numbers were equal—27 on
each side, and Speaker Cowley gave his decision with the
“Noes.”
168
QUEENSLAND-


PAYMENT OF MEMBERS BILL OF 1894
In the session of 1894, the persistent John Hamilton ob-
tained leave to amend the Payment of Members Act of 1892
by providing that £3OO per annum should be paid to members.
He was not entirely successful but he secured £250 per annum,
and an amendment moved by the Premier (Nelson) that the
measure should not apply to the then existing Parliament,
was defeated by a majority of eight votes. This measure was
rejected by the Legislative Council by 24 votes to 2, but Ham-
ilton, not to be outdone, proposed a resolution, which was
carried late in the session, that £6OOO be placed on the Sup-
plementary Estimates to provide an additional sum of £lOO
a year to each unofficial member. This was carried by 24
to 17 votes.
CONSTITUTION ACT AMENDMENT BILL OF 1896
Nelson being Premier in 1896, submitted a Payment of
Members Bill which he proposed to make part of the Consti-
tution. That measure was ultimately passed. It provided
£3OO a year for unofficial members and a travelling a lowance
of is. 6d. a mile. As the Legislative Council assented to this
measure, honourable members got back to where they were
when Morehead was Premier in 1889.
AN EFFORT AT ECONOMY
In the session of 1903, Jenkinson, Member for Fassifern,
proposed that in order to assist the Government in their laud-
able endeavour to balance income and expenditure, members
should be paid £l5O per annum each, Ministers £4500 between
them \ the President of the Legislative Council and Speaker
£700; the Chairman of Committees of the Council and As-
sembly £250 each; and the Leader of the Opposition £350.
The motion was defeated by 34 votes to 13.
CONSTITUTION ACT AMENDMENT BILL OF 1909
ANOTHER PRIVILEGE FOR MEMBERS
Under pressure from members, William Kidston, the Premier,
introduced an amendment of the Constitution Act in 1909
which had the effect of paying members their salaries
from Polling Day to Polling Day instead of “from the day on
which the writ of election is returnable.” Another amendment
gave the Leader of the Opposition £2OO a year as Leader, in
addition to his £3OO a year.


CAMPAIGNING FUNDS
AN ADDITIONAL VOTE FOR MEMBERS
In the session of 1918 a vote of £25,000 appeared upon the
Estimates for “Expenses of Referendum to be taken under
the Parliamentary Bills Referendum Act of 1918 on the ques-
tion of the Abolition of the Legislative Council, including ex-
penses in connection with placing the issues thereon fully
before the electors in the State and on active service abroad.”
£13,000 of this amount was to be allotted to sixty-five un-
salaried members of the Legislative Assembly, at the rate of
£2OO each. As a matter of fact the campaign was opened by
Theodore in 1918 at Ipswich, but it is understood that the
severe outbreak of pneumonic-influenza in that year prevented
its being carried on. It was alleged in the Legislative Assembly
Chamber that the action of the Government was an insidious
method of increasing the salaries of members of Parliament.
It is understood that one or more members declined to re-
ceive this extra allowance; while there were two or three
members who made no secret of the fact that they used the
money as deposits on the purchase of private residences. The
outstanding fact remains that during that financial year certain
members received an addition to their emoluments of £2OO.
CONSTITUTION ACT AMENDMENT BILL OF 1919
This measure increased the salaries of members of Parlia-
ment from £3OO to £5OO per annum, increased the salary of the
Chairman of Committees from £5OO to £7OO per annum, and
that of the Leader of the Opposition from £5OO to £7OO per
annum. In justification of the increases, Larcombe, who
moved the second reading of the Bill, quoted the increased
earnings of tailors, carpenters, blacksmiths, shoe-makers,
engine-drivers, and general labourers. He referred to the
measure as “A Restoration of Rights Bill,” as it restored to
members the purchasing power they had in 1896, and he im-
pressed upon the House that it was not a “Parliamentary
Salaries Grab Bill.” There was a provision in the Bill that any
moneys payable to a member, which had not been drawn by
him before the expiration of seven days after the sixteenth
day of March in each year, should revert to the Consolidated
Revenue. This measure received the assent of the Legis-
lative Council.
170
QUEENSLAND—


THE CONSTITUTION ACT AMENDMENT BILL OF 1926
This measure increased the salaries of Members, including
the Speaker, Chairman of Committees, and Leader of the
Opposition by £250 per annum. Thus, in future. Ministers
would receive £1250 per annum; the Speaker £1250; the
Chairman of Committees £9s°; the Leader of the Opposition
£950, and the rank and file £7s°- The measure was passed
after some Opposition protest and members were made com-
paratively happy until the first session of 1929.
THE CONSTITUTION ACT AMENDMENT BILL OF 1929
One of the pledges given by the Leader of the Opposition
at the General Election of 1929 was that, if returned to
power, he would revert to the payments made under the Act
of 1919. That is, Ministers and the Speaker would be paid
£lOOO per annum; Members £5OO per annum, and the Leader
of the Opposition and Chairman of Committees £5OO plus £2OO
per annum. The party having been returned to power, this
promise was fulfilled early in the session of 1929.
TEMPORARY REDUCTIONS OF SALARY
From time to time during the past quarter of a century
various Governments have seen fit to impose special taxation
upon the public servants of the State in times of financial
stringency. Such impositions have not been confined to any
particular party, and in most if not all cases, it has been made
applicable to members of Parliament as to other persons who
serve the public. It is hardly necessary to say that no one
is very enthusiastic concerning loss of income, but if economy
is necessary, the principle seems sound that it should be of
universal application.
The foregoing somewhat lengthy story concerning the pay-
ment of members of Parliament is put on record for historical
purposes. Payment of Members is no longer on trial. It has
wisely been made part of our Constitution, yet there is no
doubt that the principle would be all the better for stabil-
izing. To refer such a matter to the electors who know little
or nothing of a member’s duties could not under any circum-
stances be regarded as fair. To adopt the New South Wales
system of leaving the remuneration to be determined by an
Arbitration Court or other independent tribunal would appear
to have merits, but to make the question one for political
party contention is probably the system which would com-
mend itself least to the majority of thinking people.


MINISTERS OF THE CROWN AND THEIR SALARIES
From an historical aspect much interest attaches to the
occupancy of office by Ministers of the Crown, and it will
therefore be informative if the authority for their holding
office is briefly traced, and reference is made to the occasions
when Parliament authorized the holding of office by an in-
creased number of salaried officials. Persons associated with
Parliament are much too apt to accept situations as they find
them, and not to concern themselves with the raison d’etre of
any particular circumstance or set of circumstances. Now
“The Disqualification of Officers Act” of iB6O, passed on 17th
July of that year, provided that any person holding an office
of profit under the Crown or having a pension from the crown
. . . shall be incapable of being elected or of sitting and
voting as a member of the Assembly unless he he one of the
following official members of the Government, that is to say:—
The Colonial Secretary
~ Colonial Treasurer
„ Attorney General or one of such additional officers not being
more than two as the Governor with the advice of the
Executive Council may from time to time by a notice in
the Gazette declare capable of being elected as a member
of the said Assembly.
Thus we find that in iB6O it was possible for five Members
of Parliament to hold offices of profit under the Crown and be
capable of being elected as Members of the Legislative As-
sembly. A perusal of the preamble to 24 Vic. No. 2 (Pring’s
Statutes Vol. 1, pp. 257-258), “The Disqualification of Officers
Act of i 860,” quoted above, links up the early history of this
question with New South Wales legislation.
CIVIL LIST AMENDMENT ACT OF 1862
The Parliament of Queensland passed on 16th June 1862,
“The Civil List Amendment Act” (See Pring’s Statutes, p.
260) which set forth that there shall be payable annually to
Her Majesty from the consolidated revenue fund the sums
specified in the schedule to be appropriated to the services
therein prescribed:—
Colonial Secretary .. . . , . .. . . £lOOO
Treasurer .. .. .. .. .. .. 1000
Secretary for Lands and Public Works .. . . tooo
Attorney-General .. .. .. .. .. 1000
and it would appear from the earliest Hansard , published in
1864, that the Ministry was composed of four persons holding
the above-mentioned portfolios.
172
QUEENSLAND—


CONSTITUTION ACT OF 1867
The Constitution Act of 1867, section 37, fixed the follow-
ing appropriations for Ministers’ Salaries by Schedule A: —
Colonial Secretary iiooo
Attorney-General .. .. .. .. .. 1000
Colonial Treasurer .. .. .. .. 1000
Secretary for Lands and Works .. .. .. 1000
A perusal of Hansard of 1869 indicates that there were five
Ministers of the Crown —four in the Legislative Assembly and
one honorary Minister in the Legislative Council.
CIVIL LIST AMENDMENT ACT OF 1870
Section 1 of the above-mentioned Act (Handy’s Statutes p.
379) repealed so much of section 36 and Schedule of “The
Constitution Act of 1867” as related to the number of Min-
isters of the Crown and the amounts payable for their salaries
respectively, and under the schedule it provided for the fol-
lowing six Ministers:—
Colonial Secretary
Attorney-General
Treasurer
Secretary for Public Lands
Secretary for Public Works
Postmaster-General
but the salaries were reduced to £BOO per annum.
CIVIL LIST AMENDMENT ACT OF 1874
The Act of 1870 was repealed by the Civil List Amendment
Act of 1874 which made the following provision:—
Vice-President of the Executive Council (in
addition to his salary if any as Minister) .. £3OO
Colonial Secretary . . .. .. . . .. 1000
Treasurer .. .. .. .. .. .. 1000
Secretary for Lands .. .. .. .. .. 1000
Secretary for Public Works .. .. .. 1000
Attorney-General .. .. .. .. .. 1000
Postmaster-General .. .. .. .. .. 1000
(See Hansard 1874, vol. XVI, p. 304).
It will be observed that an innovation was introduced by
providing £3OO per annum for the Vice-President of the
Executive Council in addition to his salary, if any, as a Min-
ister. It has been the practice for very many years for the
Premier for the time being to hold this office.


OFFICIALS IN PARLIAMENT ACT OF 1884
The law remained unchanged until the Officials in Parlia-
ment Act of 1884 was passed. This was the first Act adopt-
ing the present practice of proclaiming portfolios instead of
fixed names as previously. The Act of 1884 provided for in
all seven Officers of the Crown liable to retire on political
grounds, six to be members of the Assembly.
The Act specified portfolios as under (but until otherwise
declared) —
Colonial Secretary
Colonial Treasurer
Attorney-General or Minister of Justice
Secretary for Public Lands
Secretary for Works and Mines
Postmaster-General
Secretary for Public Instruction.
The salary of Ministers was fixed at iiooo per annum, except
one officer to be designated by the Governor who was to
receive £3OO per annum extra. This Act remained in force
until the passage of
“THE OFFICIALS IN PARLIAMENT ACT OF 1896”
when the number of Ministers was increased to eight (seven
to sit in the Assembly), the salaries being the same as in the
Act of 1884.
OFFICIALS IN PARLIAMENT ACT OF 1920
An extra Minister was added by the Officials in Parlia-
ment Act of 1920, the number to be nine (eight to sit in the
Assembly) and salaries remained the same.
OFFICIALS IN PARLIAMENT AMENDMENT ACT OF 1922
This Act fixed the number of Ministers at nine, nine to sit
in the Assembly, as the Legislative Council had at this period
been abolished. Salaries remained the same as in the former
Act.
THE CONSTITUTION ACT AMENDMENT ACT OF 1926
This Act increased the number of Ministers from nine to
ten, but raised the salaries to £1250 with £3OO in addition to
the “officer designated in the proclamation.”
174
QUEENSLAND—


THE CONSTITUTION ACT AMENDMENT ACT OF 1929
This Act allowed the number of Ministers to stand at ten,
but reduced the salaries to iiooo per Minister. It also re-
tained the £3OO extra to the officer designated in the procla-
mation.
Such, then, is the history in brief attaching to the creation
and payment of Ministers of the Crown. There yet remain
to be said a few words on two other subjects—
THE OFFICIALS IN PARLIAMENT ACTS 1896-1922
On two separate occasions the author has been asked (once
by a lawyer) to explain the meaning of the Proviso to Sec-
tion 3 of the Officials in Parliament Act of 1896 which
reads: —
Provided that not more than seven of such officers shall at any one
time be members of the Legislative Assembly, and if at the time of
the election of any such officers to be a Member of the Legislative
Assembly seven of such officers are already members thereof, his
election shall be null and void, and a Writ shall forthwith issue for
the election of a member in his stead.
The proviso can be best explained by quoting a concrete
case. When the Labour Party assumed office in 1915 the
following Ministry was chosen: —Messrs. Ryan, Theodore,
Hunter, Hardacre, Adamson, Lennon, and Bowman (7).
It was necessary to appoint a representative of the Govern-
ment in the Legislative Council, and a few days afterwards
William Hamilton was chosen. He, however, made the
eighth salaried officer who had been elected to the Legislative
Assembly and only seven could hold office in that Chamber.
He resigned his seat as Member for Gregory, and went to the
Council as Government Representative, but if he had not
resigned, his seat would automatically have become vacant
under the terms of that proviso. The proviso was repealed
by section 3 of the Officials in Parliament Act Amendment
Act of 1922 and now reads: —
The Governor may from time to time, by Proclamation, declare any
Officers of the Crown not exceeding “nine” (since altered to ‘‘ten” by
the amending Act of 1926) in all, and being officers liable to retire
from office on political grounds, to be capable of being elected
Members of the Legislative Assembly, and of sitting and voting therein
at the same time.
RE-ELECTION OF MINISTERS
Under section 6 of the Legislative Assembly Act of 1867
it was provided :


If any member of the said Assembly shall accept of any office of
profit or pension from the Crown during pleasure or for term of years,
his election shall thereupon and is hereby declared to be void, and a
writ shall forthwith issue for a new election. . . .
This provision was repealed by the Officials in Parliament
Act of 1884 (48 Vic. No. 29). Prior to the repeal, for which
Griffith was responsible, when a member assumed a paid
office as a Minister of the Crown, he, as a matter of course
went up for re-election. This matter is dealt with at page
291 of Queensland Politics During Sixty Years but it is
worth referring to again. There is nothing to indicate by
the Hansard reports of the day that Parliament was aware
of the effect of the repeal. Indeed Griffith himself never drew
attention to the effect of the repeal of section 6 of the 1867
Act. It is believed to have been during the T. J. Byrnes’
regime that this surprising discovery was made and from that
time forth Ministers who assumed offices of profit under the
Crown ceased to go before their constituents for re-election.
It is worth repeating here that “The Emergency War Act,”
passed by the House of Commons in 1915, abolished the
necessity for the re-election of the Coalition Ministry in Great
Britain (see House of Commons Hansard of 3rd June, 1915).


OUR LAND LAWS
SINCE 1918
In Queensland Politics During Sixty Years we brought our
history of the Land Laws of the State up to the end of
1918. We had mentioned the Land Act Amendment Bill
No. 2 which proposed to increase pastoral rents, and the
Land Act Amendment Bill No. 3, consisting of one clause,
and which was intended to declare more clearly the meaning
of section 125 of the Principal Act and possibly save costly
litigation. Both were unceremoniously bumped out by the
Legislative Council, the latter chiefly because a case was
pending which might be affected by the altered law.
We look back now just a short seventy-one years and have
pleasure in quoting once more the opinion of a leading public
organ in iB6o—
from the experience of older countries it would
seem safe to predict that Queensland will not settle its land
policy until two or three Parliamentary sessions have ex-
pired/’
Queensland is still struggling with the eternal question a
lifetime after that forecast, and without being a prophet, or
the son of one, one can visualize efforts being made 100 years
hence to find a solution of the land problems of that day.
The Land Laws are kaleidoscopic: there is nothing immutable
about them. They are so intimately associated, directly and
indirectly, with the lives of the people that they require
practically yearly adjustment to new conditions which arise,
and new purposes which it is found desirable to give effect to.
And now we have arrived at the session of 1919-20 during
which two Land Bills were introduced, both of which were
passed into law, and one of which created interminable trouble
for the State, for the Land Act Amendment Bill No. 1 of the
session of 1919-20, was in very truth the famous measure
which subsequently came to be known as the Repudiation
Act. When the Financial Statement was introduced in Com-
mittee of Ways and Means on 6th January, 1920 it concluded


with two very lengthy resolutions—one with respect to in-
come tax, and one with respect to Crown Lands Rentals.
As it was upon the latter Resolution that the Land Act
Amendment Bill No. i of 1919-20 was founded, it is im-
portant to quote the whole Resolution, for in doing so the
great main principle of the Bill is quoted.
B.—WITH RESPECT TO CROWN LANDS RENTALS
“(25) (i) The provision in section 43 of ‘The Land Act of
1910’ enacting that, with respect to all pastoral holdings men-
tioned in the Second Schedule of the said Act, except when
otherwise expressly stated in the said Schedule, the annual
rent for each period after the first shall not exceed the annual
rent payable for the next preceding period by more than one-
half of the annual rent payable for such preceding period,
shall be repealed, and that the said Second Schedule shall be
amended accordingly, and that the said amendments of the
said section 43 and Schedule 11. shall have effect with respect
to every pastoral holding, whether the annual rent thereof
has or has not been actually determined by the Land Court at
the date of the passing of the Act founded on these resolu-
tions.
“Provided that with respect to pastoral holdings the annual
rent whereof has been actually so determined at the date of
the passing of such Act, whether any appeal is pending from
any such determination or not —
(a) The Governor in Council may, by notification in the
Gazette, direct and declare that the annual rent of
certain holdings mentioned in such notification is a
sufficient rent for the period for which it has been so
determined, in which case the Land Court shall not
reconsider and determine afresh such rent;
( b ) In all cases except those referred to in paragraph (a)
hereof, it shall be the duty of the Land Court to
consider whether the annual rent of each holding for
the period for which it has been determined is less
than a sufficient rent, and if the Court considers that
such rent is less than a sufficient rent the Court shall
determine afresh such annual rent; and the annual
rent so determined afresh shall be the annual rent
for the period for which the rent is to be determined.
The pastoral tenant shall forthwith pay the arrears
of rent due by reason of any increase in rent under
178
QUEENSLAND—


such fresh determination so as to adjust the balance
due to the Crown: Provided that in any case
where the Minister is satisfied that the immediate
payment of such arrears would be a hardship he may
accept payment thereof in such instalments as the
Minister thinks just.
(ii) The provision in section 109 of ‘The Land Act of 1910’
enacting that with respect to every Grazing Selection which
was applied for prior to the 26th day of December, 1902, the
annual rent for each period after the first shall not exceed
the annual rent payable for the next preceding period by more
than one-half of the annual rent payable for such preceding
period shall be repealed, and that the amendment of the said
section 109 shall have effect with respect to every Grazing
Selection the annual rent whereof has been actually deter-
mined by the Land Court since the Ist day of January, 1916,
and to every Grazing Selection the annual rent whereof is to
be hereafter determined:
“Provided that with respect to Grazing Selections the
annual rent whereof has been actually so determined since the
Ist day of January, 1916, whether any appeal is pending
from any such determination or not —
(a) The Governor in Council may, by notification in the
Gazette, direct and declare that the annual rent of
certain Grazing Selections mentioned in such noti-
fication is a satisfactory and sufficient rent for the
period for which it has been so determined, in which
case the Land Court shall not reconsider and deter-
mine afresh such rent;
( b ) In all cases except those referred to in paragraph (a)
hereof, it shall be the duty of the Land Court to con-
sider whether the annual rent of each grazing selec-
tion for the period for which it has been determined
is less than a sufficient rent, and if the Court considers
that such rent is less than a sufficient rent the Court
shall determine afresh such annual, rent; and the
annual rent so determined afresh shall be the annual
rent for the period for which the rent is to be deter-
mined. The selector shall forthwith pay the arrears
of rent due by reason of any increase in rent under
such fresh determination so as to adjust the balance
due to the Crown : Provided that in any case where
the Minister is satisfied that the immediate payment


of such arrears would be a hardship he may accept
payment thereof in such instalments as the Minister
thinks just.”
It must be remembered that the principle contained in this
measure was originally introduced in 1915, and this was the
third occasion on which the Bill had been introduced in its
then form. In opposition to the measure it was strongly con-
tended in both Houses, that between the years 1869 and
1905 every Land Act passed had always had a proviso limiting
the maximum amount of rent payable for pastoral tenures.
In 1869 the minimum for pastoral leases was 55., 10s. and 12s.
per square mile for the first second and third periods respec-
tively; while the maximum was 75., 15s. and £1 ss. per square
mile. No change was made until 1884, when the minimum
rent was fixed at 10s. per square mile, and the maximum at
£4 10s. The margin was wide, but the determination was
left to the Land Board, or as it was called later the Land
Court, which gave general satisfaction. In 1886, the minimum
of 10s. and the maximum of £4 10s. were retained, but a new
section was inserted which read —
“The annual rent for each period after the first, shall not
exceed by more than one-half the rental of the preceding
period.”
When Queensland was ravaged by the great drought of
1898-01 the pastoral leases issued under the Act of 1884-6
were drawing to a close. In order to give lessees an oppor-
tunity of rehabilitating themselves after the drought, “The
Land Act of 1902” allowed them to obtain new leases of their
holdings. No limit as to rental for the different periods of
the leases was inserted in that Act, and for this reason large
numbers of pastoral lessees would not elect to take advantage
of it. Thereupon the Government introduced and passed the
Land Act of 1905 which again enacted the 50 per cent
rental limitation, and the vast majority of pastoral lessees
then elected to take up new leases subject to this provision.
“When, therefore, the rental limitation was removed in 1920,
it was said by the lessees to be a breach of contract amounting
to repudiation of a lawfully made bargain.
That was the argument thrown with much force at Theo-
dore when later on he went to the London Money Market
for a loan and when he had to return crestfallen and pockets
empty, because of his alleged repudiatory land legislation.
180
QUEENSLAND—


THE LAND ACT AMENDMENT ACT NO. 2 OF 1919-20
The purpose of the Act was to ensure that the rights of
priority conferred on a late lessee by section 72 of the Prin-
cipal Act extended to :
(a) The executor or executors or administrator of the late
lessee deceased; or
(b) The trustee of the insolvent of the late lessee; or
(c) The Committee of the late lessee insane; or
(d) The trustee of a marriage settlement comprising such
holding or selection.
notwithstanding any restrictions imposed by other sections of
the Act.
The Department had in practice allowed this to be done in
the past, and had thought they were acting within the letter
and spirit of the law. The Full Court had decided otherwise
and hence it was desired to legalize what had been done.
Neither in the first nor second sessions of 1920 was any
land legislation introduced. A session without a Land Bill
is as welcome as an oasis in the desert. A Land Bill is mostly
full of technicalities which are only partially understood by
about four members out of seventy-two, and it is full of
dreary, meaningless phrases for the rest.
In 1921, we had another breathing space, and then in 1922,
J. Harry Coyne introduced a Land Bill to remove certain
anomalies which had been disclosed in the Land Laws.
The Jimbour Selections Act having served its purpose, it
was proposed to repeal it and a further provision of the Bill
validated certain acts of the Minister in affording relief to
discharged soldier settlers throughout the State without
statutory authority.
In 1923, McCormack had become Secretary for Public
Lands, and that was the year of the Land Acts (Review of
Cattle Holding Rents) Amendment Act.
The rents for review were, it was explained, fixed by the
Land Court when high prices were ruling for stock, but at
the time the Bill was introduced there was practically no sale
for Queensland meat overseas; the meat works were not
operating, and the market was practically confined to local
consumption. It was proposed to allow the leaseholder to
ask for a review of his rent, and the matter would then be
referred once more to the Land Court. The rents to be
reviewed would have a currency of five years from Ist July
1921 to 30th June 1926, and were what the Minister described


as slump period rents.” Provision was also made for the
expeditious hearing of the cases by the Land Court in
Chambers instead of in Open Court. Later on an amend-
ment was carried in Committee including occupation licences
as well as pastoral leases within the scope of the measure.
The same year an amendment was made in the Closer
Settlement Acts introducing a new form of tenure —Settle-
ment Farm Lease. This was a kind of midway tenure
between Grazing Selections and Agricultural Farms, and
was intended for the settlement of the Mount Abundance
lands, near Roma, which had recently been resumed.
THE UPPER BURNETT AND CALLIDE LAND SETTLE-
MENT ACT OF 1923
McCormack’s first year as Minister for Lands saw yet
another Land Bill designed to settle the Upper Burnett and
Callide Valley Lands. This settlement scheme has been des-
cribed as “the most ambitious land settlement project in
Queensland’s history” and embraced an area of two and a
half million acres (actual area 2,411,834 acres). About half of
this area was Crown land and half was land resumed from pas-
toral lessees and grazing selectors for closer settlement. The
Bill was to regulate the mode and conditions of settlement over
this large area and to give the Minister power to put down
water facilities for the benefit of selectors, and to secure re-
payment from the selectors of interest and redemption over
a period not exceeding 20 years. (Special Report of Land
Administration Board, May 1929.)
THE LAND ACT AMENDMENT ACT OF 1924
This Act was described by McCormack, Secretary for Public
Lands, as non-controversial—a Departmental Bill providing
for small amendments that were necessary for the better
working of the existing law. There was a provision for the
simple recovery of the half cost of marsupial, rabbit and
dingo netting.
Hitherto the right of a person to recover half cost of such
a netting fence from a neighbour depended on giving certain
notice under the Fencing Acts, and technicalities of that kind.
The Amendment brushed aside all this and reduced the whole
matter to the simple question of fact as to whether the person
claimed against was, at the time of the claim, receiving a
material benefit from the fence, or would receive a material
182
QUEENSLAND—


benefit from it in the future. If so, he was liable to contribute
his share of the cost of the netting fence.
In this Act very extraordinary discretionary powers were
given to the Minister in regard to the aggregations of land.
It was alleged that there was a tendency in Western Queens-
land for pastoral lessees to acquire grazing selections which
they would work with their pastoral leases, and thus get back
aggregations of land equal in area to their original big hold-
ings. The Minister was given an absolute discretionary
power in deciding whether a selector, after fulfilment of
conditions, should transfer his selection. Another clause
dealt with dummying. If a Pastoralist financed a dummy
and made use of a dummied selection for his own purpose he
would render the whole of his property in Queensland liable
to forfeiture. Provision was contained in the Act to allow
soldiers and other settlers who hold their land under licence,
to mortgage their land to the Government. Another power
taken was the same as that applied to the Upper Burnett and
Callide Valley Scheme —namely the power to open land sub-
ject to the condition that a certain area be cultivated and to
dictate to selectors to some extent what crops they should
grow. It was a moderately ridiculous statement to make
that the Bill was non-controversial. It gave enormous, novel
and drastic discretionary powers into the hands of the Min-
ister alone, which could under certain circumstances be
gravely misused, and the provisions which told the selector
what he should cultivate and how much, were not the class of
provision at all likely to appeal to the practical farmer who
rightly thinks he knows more about the cultivation of the
land than the estimable gentleman who for the time being
may be presiding over the Department of Public Lands. In
later years this principle of dictating to the farmer was per
force of circumstances absolutely abandoned, as were many
of the other restrictive provisions imposed by this Act.
Altogether the Act of 1924 may be regarded as one of the
least successful of our Land Measures.
THE LAND ACTS AMENDMENT ACT OF 1925
This was a measure of comparative simplicity, brought
down within the last few days of the session and was not
of a very controversial character. The clearing of noxious
weeds as defined in the Bill, was made a condition of the
lease. In some parts of Queensland noogoora burr had be-
come a very bad pest along the watercourses, and people


living below the infested land suffered in consequence. There
were provisions to widen the powers with respect to borrow-
ing, and remove the restrictions which prevented new selectors
from mortgaging their selections to Institutions other than
the State Agricultural Bank. Generally the new provision
allowed tenants wider scope in regard to financing their
properties. Protection was given to financial institutions or
money-lenders in cases where advances had been made on
selections in good faith, and where the selections were after-
wards proved to have been held illegally by the borrower.
If the lending authorities could prove bona tides, they were
allowed to enter into possession and sell the securities. The
Act was brought into conformity with the Commonwealth
Bankruptcy Act. The only other new provision in the Act
related to group-netting. Any group of selectors were to be
allowed to form a trust for the purpose of erecting group
netting, by way of ring fencing round their group of selec-
tions and thus saving much money to the individual members
of the group.
There was no attempt to further amend the Land Acts
during the session of 1926.
LAND ACTS AMENDMENT ACT OF 1927
Thomas Dunstan became Secretary for Public Lands on
26th February, 1925, and in the session of 1927 introduced
yet another Land Bill. It was a Bill providing for a measure
of relief to certain settlers detrimentally affected by drought
conditions and providing for the further encouragement of
pastoral development, and may be regarded as the most
important Land Bill introduced during the long fourteen
year’s regime of the Labour Government. This Bill was
really founded on the advice of the Land Settlement Advisory
Board, consisting of Messrs Payne, Kingston and Davies.
McCormack must be given credit for having imitated that
body, and this probably was one of his best administrative
acts. Apparently he chose not only able men but fearless
men with initiative, who brought in and presented to Parlia-
ment an invaluable report which was very highly spoken of
at the time in all interested quarters. The Bill practically
carried out the recommendations of the Land Settlement
Advisory Board with one exception—the recommendation for
an extension of leases of one-third of the pastoral lands to
the pastoral lessees of the State, the Government holding
that the interests of Closer Settlement were paramount, and
184
QUEENSLAND—


tat it was their bounden duty to exhaust every effort to
promote the closer settlement of Queensland’s lands before
giving any consideration to repeating what was done in 1902,
when an extension of pastoral leases was granted.
THE LAND ADMINISTRATION BOARD
Section 4 of the Act of 1927 provides for the appointment
01 this Board which had been recommended for creation by
the Land Settlement Advisory Board, whose report may be
ound m volume 2, page 121 of the Parliamentary Papers for
w 27 V A l 6 Land Administration Board consisted of Messrs.
’ 7*' R yj^ e (Chairman) A. G. Melville, Under Secretary,
and b. D. Power. Their First Report was presented to Par-
liament in the session of 1928, and is to be found in volume
2 > P a g e 3 of th e Parliamentary Papers.
U j indicate now the most important provisions of
the Land Acts Amendment Act of 1927. The Bill was des-
cribed by the Minister as “an instrument of improved land
policy which would do much to promote closer settlement of
our pastoral lands.” One of its first provisions was to grant
relief to grazing selectors who had been affected by the
drought. Any grazing selector whose lease would expire
within ten years, might apply for a reconsideration of his
lease. The matter was then to be referred to the Land Ad-
ministration Board thereafter to be constituted, who might
consider and determine the area of land to be granted as a
new lease, and the rental for the first period. The term of
lease was not to exceed in any case twenty-eight years. The
then existing law gave the selector on expiry of his lease, a
priority right over one portion of the selection, if subdivided,
or over the whole portion if there was no subdivision The
new law anticipated that priority right giving a fixity of
tenure and more effective security for the purpose of financing
the holding.
As already indicated this particular provision was intended
th° se grazing selectors who had been detrimentally
affected by drought. It was therefore a provision to meet
passing conditions only. But the Bill contained another
provision m regard to all grazing selections, whether affected
3y drought or not, which must be regarded as a great forward
step in land legislation.
Hitherto a grazing selector had no means of knowing what
would happen to his selection on the expiry of the lease.


Would it be subdivided or would he be allowed to exercise
his priority right over the whole area?
On these points he was kept guessing till his lease expired
and the land was dealt with afresh. One can imagine the
difficulties in conducting a grazing business, in making im-
provements, or in obtaining finance, which this insecurity of
tenure created. Now it was provided that, at any time and
irrespective of drought conditions, any grazing selector
whose lease was within seven years of expiry, could approach
the Department and have the whole lease renewed or have the
land subdivided as the case might require. The Crown
tenant, therefore, could ascertain exactly how he stood. The
menace of expiring leases had long been a problem in Queens-
land. It was hoped that, by this simple provision, and by
establishing administrative machinery to give effect to it,
this menace would be overcome.
The recommendation of the Land Settlement Advisory
Board, in regard to the constitution of the Land Administra-
tion Board, was slightly varied, the Government having some
doubt about setting up a Land Commission superior to the
Government and to some extent to Parliament. Perhaps in
that respect they were right, but they went far enough to
create an extremely effective Land Administration Board
whose appointment has been justified over and over again. It
is a poisonous postulate to set up that “no good can come
out of Nazareth.” There are bigots who would not credit a
labour Government with the capacity to initiate anything
useful. In this case their theories were put to utter confusion
for associated with our most important and far-reaching
Public Department they initiated a system of administration
whose far-reaching influence for good can hardly be over-
estimated.
Other provisions of the Act had to do with personal resid-
ence. All grazing selections taken up after Ist January, 1917,
were to be subject to personal residence for a term of seven
years only, and thereafter to occupation, instead of personal
residence for the whole term. In the case of transferred
leases, five years residence would be regarded as fulfilment
of conditions. A living area though not actually defined, was
to be such an area as would permit the lessee to —
(a) Carry sufficient sheep or cattle from which a reasonable
income might be obtained and a reasonable reserve
be available to assist selectors over drought periods.
186
QUEENSLAND—


(b) Maintain both quality and quantity of wool or beef so
that revenue both direct and indirect from Crown Lands
might not diminish.
(c) Make necessary working improvements on the holding
without overcapitalizing it.
Provision was made for the selection of further areas by
grazing selectors. The holder of an inadequate grazing selec-
tion was, at the descretion of the Minister, to be allowed to
supplement his area either from vacant Crown Lands or other
lands becoming available. A grazing selector remote from a
railway, and with less than a living area, was to be allowed
to surrender his lease and obtain a preferential pastoral hold-
ing without personal residence conditions. Power was also
given to review rents of grazing selections taken up since ist
July, I9 2 4> an d to redetermine the rent for the first period
of years. Overpayment of rent, resulting from the
redetermination, was to be credited to future rent. Another
important provision dealt with partnership agreements and
removed many of the restrictions which had been imposed
by the Act of 1924. Another important provision was that
providing for the development of difficult country as pastoral
holdings or grazing selections. In such cases the lessee or
selector might be granted an extension of lease up to twenty
years. A similar concession applied under certain conditions
to lessees who desired to use their holdings for stud sheep
purposes. Another important provision was that relating to
stocking conditions and dealt with applicants for ballot for
grazing selections. The applicant was required to furnish a
declaration with his application undertaking to fulfil the stock-
ing conditions, and setting out his pastoral or land experience
and the means by which he intended to finance the selection.
The object of this clause was to prevent newly selected lands
from lying idle and unproductive.
The Act also re-enacted the Land Acts (Review of Cattle
Holdings Rents) Amendment Act for a period of five years
from ist July 1926 to 30th June 1931. It also gave certain in-
creased powers to the Prickly Pear Land Commission to
utilize their funds not only for the destruction of pear but
for the destruction of other noxious weeds. There was also
embodied in the measure a small amendment of the Water
Act substituting the Land Court for a Police Magistrate in
case of disputed land values.
Such, then, are the principal provisions of this measure


which found a place on the Statute Book at the end of the
session of 1927.
Once more, during the session of 1928, we were given
breathing space and time to gird our loins in order to deal
with the measure brought down by the New Government
during the session of 1929.
FREEHOLD VERSUS LEASEHOLD
Shortly after the Labour Government came into office in
1 9 1 5> they put into operation an important plank of their
platform and absolutely abolished the future selecting of land
under a freehold title. It was their policy and, having the
power, they had the right to enforce it. It is not proposed to
argue the question of freehold versus leasehold title as a
matter of public policy. One sees merits in the leasehold title
as applied to city lands, and one can visualize the enormous
revenue accruing to the Governments of the various States
to-day if city lands could in the initial stages of colonization
have been reserved for all time as public property. How-
ever, the opportunity was lost and it is no use deploring now
the want of vision of our early administrators.
In regard to suburban and country land used for purely
residential purposes and farming lands of moderate area used
wholly for farming purposes, there seems to be no reason in
life why freehold tenure should not operate. The instinct
and love of ownership is inbred in our race. We rejoice in
our modest freehold homes: we devote infinite pains to
beautifying and improving them: we cultivate our gardens
and make the surroundings attractive and, right in the
forefront of our minds we always have the word “Mine.” It
is something we can do what we like with—sell it, lease it,
let it, pull it down, re-erect it, add to it, and we are under no
obligation whatever to anybody. There is something wonder-
fully captivating in personal ownership, and with great respect
to the exponents of the teachings of Henry George and others
we are unable to realize that we are doing a moral wrong to
the community by owning the freehold of our own home.
It is a singular circumstance that the very men who are most
extravagant in their demands for public ownership of land
are the very first to rush into the market and buy a site for
a freehold home. Even moderate consistency would suggest
that the man who treats Progress and Poverty as his family
Bible, should not be so desperately anxious to commandeer
something which he declares belongs to the people as a whole
188
QUEENSLAND—


and that the individual who acquires it is doing an outrageous
wrong to his State. Having said so much, let us deal now
with —
THE LAND ACTS AMENDMENT ACT OF 1929
This probably was one of the most important measures of
the Moore Government which came into office in May, 1929.
William Deacon, member for Cunningham, had become
Secretary for Public Lands, a man of practical experience on
the land as a farmer and endowed by nature with much horse
sense on most subjects.
At the outset the Minister assured the House of the “non-
revolutionary” character of the Bill and therefore claimed
for it “generous support.” It was claimed that the object of
the Bill was to set up conditions to suit the settler, instead of
following the former practice of attempting to mould the
settler to suit theoretical conceptions. The object was to
remove restrictions, to do away with insecurity of tenure, to
remove obstacles to development and the fear of interference.
The first reform was in the direction of extended leases to
owners of cattle runs which were not likely to be required
for closer settlement. The Bill also set up conditions to en-
courage the land holder to improve his country and its carry-
ing capacity, enabling him to secure the full benefits of the
improvements at the end of the lease. So far as the small
land holder was concerned the most important provision was
that which allowed him to make his land freehold. The Bill
permitted every class of small landholder whether a selector
or the holder of town or suburban allotments, to exercise his
option between leasehold and freehold.
Another object of the Bill was to bring about improvement
of the country by encouraging the destruction of useless timber
and vegetation. At the end of his term the lessee would not
be rented on his improvements.
Provision was made in regard to the Upper Burnett and
Callide Areas. Power was given to re-arrange the areas and
grant additional areas. There was also to be a review of the
capital value or rentals under which the lands had been
selected, and of the cost of Water Facilities which had been
provided by the Government.
When a selector made application to have his tenure
changed from a perpetual leasehold to a freehold, he could if
he chose, make application at the same time to have the
capital value reviewed, which could be done in some instances


by the Land Court, and in the case of prickly-pear land by
the Prickly-pear Land Commission, but he had to accept the
revised value whether it was higher or lower. Regarding
conversion to freehold tenures the operation was to begin on
all perpetual lease selections and Perpetual Lease Prickly-
pear Selections. Perpetual Lease Selections would be con-
verted to Agricultural Farms, and the freehold be obtained by
payments, over 30 years or such shorter time as the selector
desired. Perpetual Lease Prickly-pear Selections would be
converted into Prickly-pear Selections and be freeholded by
payments over 40 years or such shorter time as the selector
desired. The area which could be freeholded was 1280 acres in
the case of an agricultural farm, but nothing beyond 5000
acres in the case of prickly-pear land. It was proposed under
the Bill to extend a little more consideration to soldier settlers
than to other settlers. They were to be permitted to freehold
their country, to secure additional areas where available, and
to have their land revalued. Power was also given to remit
arrears of rent and to remove the personal residence condition
after five years residence. There were many miscellaneous
provisions in the Bill all tending to remove restrictions.
During the term of the late Minister Mr Dunstan, a Re-
valuation Board was appointed to deal with Soldier Settle-
ments. The Bill authorized the Minister to grant to the
soldier settlers whatever relief the Revaluation Board recom-
mended.
Subsequently Mr Justice Pike was appointed by the Com-
monwealth Government to lay down bases for a final adjust-
ment of Soldier Settlement finances between States and Com-
monwealth.
None of his recommendations have yet been accepted by
the States. The matter is still under negotiation with the
Commonwealth.
Such, then, is a rough sketch of the Land Acts Amendment
Act of 1929* as introduced by the Moore Government. It
embodied more than one drastic reversal of policy, and so far
from being “non-revolutionary” as the Minister contended at
the outset, it afforded food for many weary hours debate,
confined chiefly to an insignificant number of members of
Parliament. The Act having now taken its place among the
noble array of Statutes which the State is accumulating, we
await the next Land Acts Amendment Bill which like every
one of its predecessors is going to finally solve the problems
of land settlement.
190
QUEENSLAND—


PRICKLY-PEAR
In the year 1923 a Royal Commission was appointed to in-
quire into certain matters relating to the Prickly-pear problem.
It consisted of
Professor B. D. Steel, D.Sc., F.R.S., F.I.C. (Chairman)
Mr W. L. Payne,
Mr W. Purcell,
Mr R. J. Winten.
The Report of the Commission was followed by the intro-
duction of “The Prickly-Pear Land Act of 1923/’ under which
a permanent Board was appointed consisting of —
Mr W. L. Payne, (Chairman)
Mr F. D. Power,
Mr W. Purcell.
Their first Report was presented to Parliament in the year
1925, and it is to be found in Volume 2 of the Parliamentary
Papers on page 155. McCormack who was the originator of
this new method of attacking a dangerous national pest,
deserves all the credit that can be given to him. But if the
then Minister is applauded, what shall we say of a body of
men who after only five years control, have assumed almost
a strangle-hold over the pest. They started out in April
1924, with an almost impossible task in front of them and with
an annual estimated encroachment of pear to the extent of
nearly 1,000,000 acres. With the aid of mechanical appliances
such as injectors, atomizers and poison guns, applying with
system arsenic pentoxide, and with the further aid of natural
enemies of the pear such as Cactoblastis, Cochineal and
Chelinidea, introduced by the Commonwealth Prickly-pear
Board with which the Commission worked in co-operation,
it may be said with certainty that the pest not only has
received a severe check but proof has been afforded that it is
capable of entire extermination. The cactus destroying insects
take control of one section of this work, namely the dense pear
areas, and prevent the advance of the enemy. On the other
hand by mechanical means it has been proved possible to
clear and keep clear all lightly infested areas.
The State owes much to the men constituting the Com-
mission who with clear vision and persistent application to
their job have shown that a task which at one time was re-
garded as absolutely hopeless, has now not only entered the
realms of the possible, but is, if nothing unforeseen occurs,
to be numbered among the great successful certainties of
Scientific accomplishment.


PRICKLY-PEAR LAND ACTS AMENDMENT ACT OF 1930
This simple measure was designed with the object of bring-
mg into cultivation prickly-pear lands which had been cleared
y means of biological and other agencies. All the land
ea t with was held under lease, and the Bill gave power of
resumption either compulsorily or by voluntary surrender.
Ihe resumed land was to be classified into agricultural and
grazing land and the existing lessee was given a prior right to
one selection representing a living area, either on a freehold or
leasehold basis, but for agricultural farm purposes only.
Grazing lessees were given a prior right, following voluntary
surrender, to a grazing lease only. The payments to be made
by an agricultural farmer were very low for the first five
years the price being subsequently fixed in thirty-five annual
instalments. As a means of inducing voluntary surrender, a
s ightly larger area was proposed to be given to present
ho ders. For agricultural farm purposes (freehold or lease-
hold), an area of five thousand acres was determined upon
A person holding more than one lease, and entitled to priority
in respect of each, was limited to six thousand, two hundred
and fifty acres. The limit of area in respect of holders for
grazing purposes was thirty thousand acres. Conditions
were to be imposed both in respect to grazing and agricultural
lands. It sounds almost incredible, but it nevertheless ap-
pears to be a fact, that eleven million acres of land had been
made available for use by virtue of the good work performed
by the humble little cactoblastis. The outlook at present
appears to be excellent, and, a new aspect appears to have
been put upon land settlement in Queensland, attributable to
the work of a humble insect.
LAND ACTS AMENDMENT ACT OF 1930
A small Bill of almost thirty clauses, every one of which
was designed for the purpose of removing some small irrita-
tion. The principal features were an extension of time for
appeal from the Land Court to the Land Appeal Court from
four to six weeks; defining more clearly the power of the
Minister regarding withdrawal of land from selection without
the authority of the Governor in Council; power to issue a
licence to occupy in cases where a lease expires and the holder
has a prior right to the land; power to the Crown to agree
with an incoming tenant as to the value of Crown improve-
ments; provision for paying for improvements by instalments;
1 92
QUEENSLAND—


refunds to mortgagors in case of forfeited selections when
amount realized is in excess of the moneys due to the mort-
gagee ; compulsory notification to mortgagee before action is
taken for forfeiture; determination re compensation to be
heard by Land Court instead of Land Appeal Court where
amount involved is small; holders of special leases, in some
cases, to raise money on the leases; when an area is granted
as an additional area, the whole area must be mortgaged as
one selection, the two being treated as one; authority to the
Department to put through transmissions up to the value of
£so°, instead of £ 2OO, without taking out probate; amend-
ment of the Fencing Act for the purpose of putting beyond
all doubt the rights of the owner of the fence and how
much an adjoining lessee has to pay. Agreements made for
the destruction of marsupials, dingoes, and other vermin are
made enforceable by law, and there is power to sell special
leases without competition, where improvements have been
effected in suburban and industrial areas and township allot-
ments. The measure amends several other Acts, particularly
in regard to the droving of cattle and sheep, which the drover
is compelled to travel eight and six miles a day respectively.
There are quite a number of other small amendments. A
definite time, for instance, is fixed within which to convert to
freehold. Further, an extension of the maximum area which
can be held in the Burnett district is provided for, and power
is taken to give relief to the Mount Abundance settlers.
Further, the measure deals with rabbit netting charges by
giving an extension of time for payment, and by revising the
schedule, and opportunity is taken for making uniform the
application of amended fencing provisions to marsupial and
rabbit fences.
GRAZING DISTRICTS IMPROVEMENT ACT
This is an entirely new measure intended to replace the exist-
ing law under which rabbit and dingo boards have hither-
to functioned. Under this measure the rabbit boards, with
three exceptions, and all the dingo boards, together with the
business carried out by those boards and the duties assigned
to them, are abolished. The Act is founded upon the recom •
mendation of the Royal Commission appointed to inquire into
certain matters relating to rabbits, dingoes, and stock route
administration. The commission comprised Mr W. L. Payne,
chairman, Mr J. W. Fletcher, and Mr B. Tomkins. The com-
mission travelled over the biggest part of the State, took


evidence from witnesses, and made the recommendations
upon which the Act is founded. It was found that, with the
exception of the Moreton Rabbit Board, the Darling Downs
Rabbit Board, and the Leichhardt Rabbit Board, the rabbit
boards have not in later years carried out the duties assigned
to them. A good deal of money has been wasted and un-
necessary taxation imposed. It is not proposed to interfere
with the three boards mentioned, which have carried out
their duties and are doing useful work, except to reduce the
present number of members from nine to five, and it is not
proposed for the present to establish district improvement
boards east of Dalby or Goondiwindi, or in the coast districts.
The district improvement boards will deal with the western
grazing areas.
It is not practicable to go into greater detail regarding this
measure of seventy-three sections. It is just what its title
indicates, and has more relation to the pests with which the
pastoral industry is afflicted than anything else.
MAIN ROADS COMMISSION
Prior to the 1919-20 session of Parliament, the State of
Queensland had accomplished practically nothing in the way
of the creation of main arterial or developmental roads. Any-
thing that had been accomplished had been the work of local
authorities throughout the State, and it had been feeble,
without system, without vision, and in no sense formed part
of a big general policy. Indeed Queensland visibly lagged
behind other States in this respect, although our State, on
account of its great and varied interests was perhaps in more
urgent need of reasonably good highways than most other
parts of Australia.
It is natural and appropriate that the account of our land
legislation during the past ten or eleven years should be
followed by a very brief reference to our Main Roads
activities and the work accomplished by the Main Roads
Commission, for it is futile to make available the lands of the
State for Closer Settlement, no matter how fertile they may
be, if we do not give the people reasonable access to markets.
It has been remarked more than once in this and our
former Political History that political bigotry should form
no pari of the equipment of a political historian. The writer
who wishes his words to carry weight should be able to
separate the good from the bad in the programmes of all
political Parties and if the good outweighs the bad, or if the
194
QUEENSLAND—


bad is more manifest than the good, he should have the
courage to say so. To postulate that one party only is pos-
sessed of vision and foresight is a narrow and mean view
which gets us nowhere. It is for this reason that farmer
Gillies is commended for his far-sighted action in passing
through Parliament in the session of 1919-20, the Main Roads
Act of 1920. He was a practical farmer; he knew all of
the troubles of the tiller of the soil; he knew all the
handicaps under which he suffered, and he recognized that
probably the worst of them all was the absence of reasonably
good roads. The farmer cannot expect wood blocks, or
concrete or bituminous roads right up to his entrance gate,
but he has every reason to expect the State to give him
something better than he was accustomed to, prior to
1 9 1 9-20. The Act of 1920 was quite a comprehensive
measure and provided, amongst other things, for the ap-
pointment of a Main Roads Board of three members. Sub-
sequently three members were appointed in the persons of
Messrs. J. R. Kemp, Chairman; T. A. Fraser, and D. A.
Crawford. A friend of the author, who was possessed of a
considerable sense of humour, once remarked that the Chair-
man of the Board was T. R. Kemp: that the second member
was J. A. Fraser, alias J. R. Kemp: and that the third member
was D A. Crawford, alias J. R. Kemp and that on the whole
it made quite a strong and effective body.
The first Report of the Board was presented to Parliament
in the session of 1922, and it is to be found in volume 2
page 1429 of the Parliamentary Papers.
On 10th September, 1921, the administration of the Main
Roads Act was transferred from the Secretary for Public
Works to the Secretary for Public Lands. Later on, the
administration was transferred, towards the end of 1929, to
the Secretary for Railways. Under the Main Roads Acts
Amendment Act of 1925, the Main Roads Board was abolished,
and the Chairman of the Board became the Commissioner of
Main Roads. As he had been the ruling spirit from the com-
mencement of the Act, there was nothing very remarkable in
this change of policy.
A rough idea of the work accomplished by the Commission
may be gathered from the fact that since the Act came into
operation, up to 30th June, 1929, ss. id. has been
expended on permanent works on main and developmental
roads. This amount is inclusive of all subsidies by the
Federal Government. During the year 619 miles of Main


Roads were gazetted, and of Developmental Roads 54 miles.
The magnitude and ramifications of the Commissioner’s work
can be gauged from the fact that at 30th June, 1929, 6195
miles of Main Roads and 416 miles of developmental roads
had been gazetted, in addition to which, 6000 miles of main-
tenance work on roads and bridges had been carried on.
Under a recent amendment of the Act, provision has been
made for the declaration and construction of Tourist Roads.
From a State-wide point of view one can hardly over-estimate
the value of such highways. Queensland with all its natural
advantages and scenic beauties, has done much too little in
building up a tourist traffic such as other countries have found
great profit in promoting.
The operations of the Main Roads Commission with all the
technicalities associated with the construction of main high-
ways and developmental roads, are dealt with yearly by the
Commissioner and his engineers. Those interested in such
details are referred to the Parliamentary Papers published
annually.
Queensland is in the happy position of having a very live
and active Commissioner with a capacity for organization of
an unusual character, and under his able guidance we may
confidently expect great strides in the development of the main
and developmental roads of the State.
It would not be altogether inappropriate if the vision of
Gillies were recognized by giving his name to one of our
principal arterial roads, by preference in his own electorate.
196
QUEENSLAND—


THE PRIMARY PRODUCER AND WHAT WAS DONE
FOR HIM
When on 26th February, 1925, William Forgan Smith
became Secretary for Agriculture and Stock in the Gillies
Ministry, having been Secretary for Public Works in the
Theodore Ministry from 6th October, 1922, a somewhat novel
driving force was introduced into a Department which at one
time or another handles in some form or other every phase
of primary production. It is true that William Neal Gillies
was also an enthusiast when handling the Department, and a
great deal of credit is due to him for excellent work accom-
plished during his term as Minister. Being a farmer he would
naturally be enthusiastic in the cause of primary production
but he differed from his successor in that he possessed neither
the same initiative nor the same push.
It was during Forgan Smith’s regime that organization of
the primary producers of Queensland received the greatest
impetus.
In Queensland Politics During Sixty Years a humorous
incident is mentioned as having occurred in the Queensland
Parliament in 1864. William Henry Groom, who for years
had a lien on the agricultural constituency of Drayton and
Toowoomba, asked Parliament to vote £SOO for the purpose
of offering premiums for the best samples of wheat, barley,
oats, tobacco, sugar and cotton. The question was debated at
length, and ultimately J. D. McLean, moved an amendment
reducing the amount to one shilling. This amendment was
was carried, but early colonists have left no record behind
showing how that one sjiilling was spent. We have made
material advances since those days, as the Estimates for
the Financial Year 1929-30 very clearly indicate. Parliament
appropriated from revenue no less than £176,601, from Trust
and Special Funds £273,357, and from Loan Funds £310,000,
all in the cause of Primary Production and for the purpose of
inspiring the farmer to further and further effort. Thus it
will be seen that between the years 1864 and 1930 we increased
our expenditure upon Agriculture by £759,957 19s. od. per
annum; or, putting it on a percentage basis, by 15,199,150%.


Surely this may justly be put in the category of high finance,
it is true that in early days some very excellent Colonists
settled down upon absurdly cheap land in the best of our
agricultural districts, and prospered exceedingly without the
aid of a Department of Agriculture. They were, however,
mostly real agriculturists by birth or instinct. To-day we are
faced with a different situation. Many a man goes on the
land without much experience of agriculture, but if his
initial industry is aided by scientific advice he has quite a
reasonable chance of making a good average living.
To the Labour Government may justly be attributed a
desire to help the settler. Possibly there was at the back of
their minds the cultivation of votes as well as farms. If
there was, it was a harmless procedure, though it is evident
from the representation of the farming constituencies that
they did not succeed, and therefore all the more credit is due
to them for continuing to pursue a policy out of which they
derived no material party benefit.
Queensland during the past eight years has rather set the
pace in the matter of the scientific encouragement of agri-
culture, the organization of the farmer, the initiation of the
pool system, and the co-operative marketing of primary pro-
ducts. Indeed much inquiry has come from the other States
and the outside world regarding its efforts in these directions,
and other countries have not been slow to follow our example,
even though some of the legislation has been more or less of
an experimental nature. The farmer is essentially a con-
servative person. If he has come from a farming family, he
inherits the methods of his father; if he has had little or no
experience, he imitates the methods of his nearest neighbour.
Thus it comes about that he is a difficult person to impress
with new and up-to-date schemes, and his suspicions are
aroused when a well-meaning enthusiast endeavours to con-
vince him that his methods of cultivation have been inherited
from the Pharaohs, and that his system of marketing is crude
and out-of-date.
It is now proposed to take the agricultural legislation of the
late Government item by item, and give a succinct account of
each of their legislative Acts.
PRIMARY PRODUCERS’ ORGANIZATION ACT OF
1922 (GILLIES)
This measure was elaborately explained to Parliament bv
Gillies on 13th July, 1922, and constitutes by far the most
198
QUEENSLAND—


important agricultural legislation enacted by the Labour Gov-
ernment. This was essentially a constructive measure de-
signed to place the farming community on a better footing.
On 21 st February, 1922, a Provisional Council of Agriculture
was brought into existence following a declaration of the
then Premier (Theodore) at Laidley that —
“Organization of agriculturists on the farm-bureau system
is essential. The local organization will be linked up with
district councils of agriculture, and these in turn will be rep-
resented on the Central Council of Agriculture. Provision
will be made for Advisory Boards for the dairying industry,
fruit industry, and for other branches of agriculture.”
Briefly stated, the Act set out to promote the agricultural
and rural industries by the bringing of the primary producers
of Queensland within a completely unified national organiz-
ation. The constitution of the Primary Producers’ Organiz-
ation was, as it were, in three tiers. A centre, where there
were fifteen or twenty primary producers, could form a local
producers’ organization. They in turn elected the district
councils, and the district councils in turn elected the Council
of Agriculture, which in reality was the executive of the
Producers’ Associations and voiced the views of the Dis-
trict Councils and the Local Producers’ Organizations. Prim-
ary Producers were defined as persons engaged in the
occupation of dairy farmer, wheat, maize or cereal grower,
cane farmer, fruit grower, grazier farmer, whether engaged
in general or mixed farming, cotton, potato or vegetable
growing or poultry or pig-raising. The Secretary for
Agriculture was Chairman of the Council. The functions
of the various units in the organization were set out with
great particularity in the Act, all having for their primary
purpose the promotion of the general well being of pro-
ducers in co-operation with the Department of Agriculture.
The expenses of the Council were covered by a minute levy
on products, by which was created the Queensland Pro-
ducers’ Association Fund, and the Government undertook to
finance the scheme for the first year. Although the scheme
was subjected to considerable criticism, the opponents were
to some extent disarmed by the Premier’s announcement that
it would be purely voluntary, although it was clear that the
Council of Agriculture, exercising its authority under the Act,
must have power to impose levies with a view of financing
proposals for improving agriculture in any particular branch
of the industry.
One of the earliest actions of the Provisional Council of


Agriculture was the appointment of a Director of the
Queensland Producers’ Association and Mr L. R. Macgregor,
a gentleman of wide experience in agricultural organization
and the co-operative movement generally was chosen from
Western Australia to fill that important position. Those inter-
ested in the initial organization of the Council of Agriculture
will find Mr Macgregor’s first report among the Parliamentary
Papers of 1923 P a ge J 6i. Mr Macgregor’s later reports as
Director of Marketing are also available. They trace the
results achieved by the organization which the 1922 Act
set up.
PRIMARY PRODUCERS’ ORGANIZATION ACT
AMENDMENT ACT OF 1923 (GILLIES)
In the session of 1923, Gillies introduced an amending Bill
of two clauses and one principle. It was really for the pur-
pose of clearing up a doubt as to whether the Council of
Agriculture had power to make a levy for general purposes
without a referendum of the farmers. The Government had
agreed to finance the organization for another year at a cost
of £26,000, and thereafter it was proposed that it should fin-
ance itself with the aid of a £1 for £1 subsidy for five years.
It was estimated that the levy would not amount to more
than 2s. in every £IOO worth of primary produce. It was
claimed that with all the disabilities and disadvantages facing
the original organization, it had been responsible for putting
£200,000 into the pockets of the farmers of Queensland by
better marketing organization brought about during the first
year.
PRIMARY PRODUCERS’ ORGANIZATION ACT AMENDMENT
ACT OF 1925 (SMITH)
This Amendment of the Primary Producers’ Organization
Act was introduced and explained by Forgan Smith on 19th
August, 1925* It was closely related to another measure,
discussed on the same date, “The Primary Products Pools
Act,” and it had as its object the reorganization of the
Council of Agriculture on a commodity basis; that is to say
that each industry was to be represented by a commodity
board elected by the producers in the industry; they in turn
electing one of their representatives to the Council of Agri-
culture which continued to act as an executive of the organ-
ized producers within the State. These Commodity Boards
had been established by the Council of Agriculture
200
QUEENSLAND—


and by vote of the producers of the commodities con-
cerned. They were the executive bodies of compul-
sory co-operative pools to control marketing", on which
phase of organization the Council of Agriculture and
its districts had concentrated with marked success. The very
success of this policy restricted the sphere of the District
Councils, as much of the work was now being undertaken
on the basis of Industries rather than of Districts. The intro-
duction of this measure was claimed as a triumph for the
Country Party. On the origination of the Council of Agri-
culture they had very strongly urged, led by A. E. Moore,
that the commodity basis was the only true and lasting basis
on which organization could take place. The Labour Govern-
ment on the other hand had contended that the district basis
was essential at the outset even if it should later be discon-
tinued. It is only by practical experience that the best results
can be arrived at in all experimental legislation, and the
Government was wise not to hesitate to amend the legislation
when it became timely to do so.
The measure, as explained by the Minister, provided for
a complete method of organization in what might be termed
the “One Big Union 5 ' of the farmers. Instead of districts
being formed arbitrarily throughout the State and the dis-
trict councils representing a number of different associations,
and in turn electing the Council of Agriculture, which dealt
with every question affecting the farmers, the measure pro-
vided for bodies which had been constituted by election
on a commodity basis by the producers of those commodities
with the Council of Agriculture as an Executive. The
measure made it optional to continue the system of having
Government nominee representatives on the Council. Sub-
stantial Government representation in the initial legislation
was essential, the Government having assumed large finan-
cial obligations but it was felt that when the organization
became self-supporting, the same reason might not exist for
continuing the system of Government nominees.
PRIMARY PRODUCTS POOLS ACT OF 1922 (GILLIES)
It is desirable now to return to the year 1922, and trace
the history of the Pools legislation, placing it side by side
with the Primary Producers 5 Organization Acts and as a
necessary complement to them.
The measure gave the Governor-in-Council power to pro-
claim any primary product a product within the meaning of


the Act, and to bring into existence a committee or pool to
control that industry. It was not an experimental measure,
because already there were in existence the Wheat Pool Act
and the Cheese Pool Act. The Act originated through the
desire on the part of the Council of Agriculture to constitute
bodies charged with authority to create compulsory market-
ing units and it was considered preferable to pass a general
pooling Bill making the setting up of pools conditional upon
a majority of producers of a commodity proving to be in
favour of marketing their product by that means. The Act
was largely based on the Wheat Pool Act and the Cheese
Pool Act —the first of their kind passed in the Common-
wealth. The principal Clause of the Act provided—
‘‘The Governor-in-Council may from time to time by Order
in Council declare that any grain cereal, fruit, vegetable, or
other product of the soil in Queensland, or any dairy produce
or any article of commerce prepared other than by the pro-
cess of manufacture from the produce of agricultural or other
rural occupations in Queensland, is and shall be a commodity
under and for the purposes of this Act.”
After declaring a commodity, the Governor-in-Council de-
clared the clas'S of persons who should be deemed to be
growers of that particular commodity. Provision was made
for the constitution of Boards and the growers were afforded
an opportunity of saying whether they wanted a pool. If
at least three-fourths of those interested in the matter did
not vote in favour of the pool, it would not be formed. There
were numerous machinerv Clauses in the Act but the main
principle was the taking of polls to determine what the pro-
ducers wanted and the voting of at least three-fourths of the
persons interested in favour of the pool.
PRIMARY PRODUCTS POOLS ACT AMENDMENT ACT OF
1923 (GILLIES)
This measure removed certain anomalies, and extended the
application of the word “commodity” to such articles as
butter, cheese and eggs. The Council of Agriculture was em-
powered to take polls instead of applying to the Department
of Agriculture. The Council was also given a representative
on each Pool Board. Pool Boards were given power to hold
property, and they were relieved of the necessity of adver-
tising polls in any paper except the Council of Agriculture’s
own paper the Queensland Producer.
202
QUEENSLAND—


PRIMARY PRODUCTS POOLS ACT AMENDMENT ACT OF
1925 (SMITH)
This measure introduced amendments rendered necessary
in the light of experience. The Act altered the percentage
required for the approval of a pool. Experience had been
forthcoming of pools being prevented by a very small margin
and it was proposed to alter the percentage basis from 75
per cent to 66f per cent. Provision was made for the elec-
tion of members of the Pool Board at the same time as
the taking of the poll. This measure and the Amendment
of the Primary Producers’ Organization Act were in reality
supplemental one of the other. Power was given to the
Secretary for Agriculture to appoint a representative on any
board and power was also given to producers, if they so
desired, to give the Pool Board property in the commodity
concerned. In that case the Board became the sole authority
to enter into any contract whatsoever for the disposal of
the commodity. Another provision dealt with levies for the
purpose of providing necessary administrative costs and its
share of the cost of carrying on the Council of Agriculture.
PRIMARY PRODUCERS’ CO-OPERATIVE ASSOCIATION
ACT OF 1923 (GILLIES)
As well as encouraging and organizing compulsory pools
the Council of Agriculture considered it desirable to provide
for voluntary co-operative organization. Accordingly, this
measure provided for three leading types of modern Co-
operative activity:—
1. Associations having a capital divided into shares and
with a limited liability.
2. Associations without any share capital and with a liabil-
ity limited to the assets of the Association.
3. Associations without any share capital and with un-
limited liability.
The first type of Association was already represented in
Queensland by the Butter Companies which had capital
divided into shares. The Industrial and Provident Societies
Act of 1920 embraced provisions suitable to industrial or con-
sumers’ Co-operation, and for provident Societies, but, being
limited in scope, did not enable adequate development of
agricultural co-operation. The measure provided for legal-
izing contracts by co-operators in the associations that they


set up, which formed the basis of the modern Co-operative
system. The principal advantages of the measure were:—
1. The better security of business and finance.
2. Holding of members together.
3. Ensuring a volume of business.
4. Enabling of the management to plan intelligently in a manner cal-
culated to be for the benefit of producers.
5. Protection of producers against one another.
6. Protection of producers against the using by opposing interests
of some of their number and the produce of such, with a view of
wrecking or undermining the co-operative enterprise.
The measure did not interfere with the voluntary principle,
but limitations were set up with regard to dividends, and
certain guiding principles were laid down which must be
followed in all new Companies.
PRIMARY PRODUCERS’ CO-OPERATIVE ASSOCIATIONS
ACT AMENDMENT ACT OF 1926 (SMITH)
This measure was designed to give further powers and
further assistance to the effective and proper carrying on
of Co-operative associations in Queensland. The Principal
Act provided that, first of all, a co-operative association, to
be registered under the Act, must be composed of producers
of the commodity, who supplied their product to the com-
pany of which they were members. Two-thirds of the share-
holders must be bona fide producers. The remaining third
might be “dry” shareholders, i.e. those representing non-
producing interests. The Amending Act provided that exist-
ing companies, or companies to be formed, should be able
to finance their undertakings by the issue of debentures and
might purchase the interests of “dry” shareholders. The
principle of one member one vote was established. Under
the original Act, ninety-seven companies had been registered—
thirty-eight dairy companies and forty-seven fruit companies.
Another provision dealt with the purchase of commodities on
credit. This provision had its origin in the affairs of the
Farleigh Co-operative Association formed to take over the
old Farleigh Estate which had closed down and put growers
of sugar in an awkward predicament. After lengthy nego-
tiation the old concern was purchased on terms. Another
provision dealt with administration generally, particularly
in regard to regulations, which instead of being made by the
Governor-in-Council on the recommendation of the Council
of Agriculture, were in future to be made under the ordinary
machinery section found in other Acts of Parliament.
204
QUEENSLAND—


FRUIT MARKETING ORGANIZATION ACT OF 1923
(GILLIES)
This measure was designed to meet the chronic disorgan-
ization in the fruit industry of Queensland. The industry
had suffered for years, not from over production, but from
under consumption due to lack of organization. The organ-
ization consisted of local organizations, section group com-
mittees and a central Committee of Direction. The central
Committee of Direction had power to arrange finance, and to
finance the sectional groups and the local organizations. The
Committee of Direction was a body corporate, and its powers
were pretty drastic. They included the control of all the
fruit produced in Queensland and the regulation of the trans-
port and disposal of fruit. Under this measure the primary
producer is certainly in a very much sounder position than
te used to be. The wastage is less, and the opportunities for
the disposal of the product have been vastly improved.
FRUIT MARKETING ORGANIZATION ACT AMENDMENT
ACT OF 1925 (SMITH)
This measure set out some important new principles. Mar-
keting was to include everything involved in the preparation
and packing of fruit for sale, and in the offering thereof for
sale and the selling thereof, and in the transmission of fruit
from producer to consumer. The Committee of Direction
was given wider powers in the purchasing of land and in
arranging financial accommodation. The most important
section was section 4, giving the Committee of Direction
power to issue directions in given matters. An important
provision gave thirty fruit growers power to demand a poll
concerning any given direction, a two-thirds majority being
necessary before the direction had legal status. Another
important section enabled the vesting of property in the com-
modity, in the Committee of Direction.
PRIMARY PRODUCERS’ ORGANIZATION AND MARKETING
ACT OF 1926 (SMITH)
This measure was primarily a consolidation and codifica-
tion of existing Acts which had been found of advantage to
the primary producers of Queensland. It repealed the Prim-
ary Products Pools Acts 1922 to 1925, and the Primary
Producers' Organization Acts 1922 to 1925. The Act further
established the principle of dealing with organization purely


on a commodity basis. Local Producers' Associations formed
the first line of organization of the farmer. Commodity
Boards might be established either for marketing purposes or
without marketing functions. They were to be elected by
those engaged in the production of the commodity concerned,
the dairyman being the elector of the Butter Board, the sugar
grower the elector of the Sugar Board, and so on. Those
Boards in turn elected one of their number to the Council
of Agriculture. Therefore the new Council of Agriculture
was an executive comprising the commodity Boards. The
policy of withdrawal of Government representation on the
Council was carried a further stage. There were no Govern-
ment nominees on the Council, the Secretary for Agriculture
was not necessarily President, and an officer designated the
Director of Marketing was to act as a liaison officer between
the commodity Boards, the Council of Agriculture and the
Government. The Act entirely abolished district councils
which were no longer necessary, the 1925 Act having pro-
vided a transition stage between the District plan of organ-
ization and the commodity basis by this time firmly estab-
lished. The Act provided for the continuance of the com-
modity Boards which had been formed under previous legis-
lation principally under the Primary Products Pools Act. In
addition to the powers thereunder they had power to levy
for —
1. Administrative purposes.
2. Paying the precept to the Council of Agriculture.
3. For establishing an Insurance fund, the Council of
Agriculture’s power to levy being abolished.
The establishing of Pools and the conferring of marketing
functions were to be decided by a two-thirds majority. There
was some alteration made in the functions of the Council
of Agriculture, its duty being to co-operate with the Depart-
ment of Agriculture in—
1. Developing the rural industries.
2. Advising upon matters to the interest of primary
producers.
3. Advising the Minister upon matters referred by him
to them.
4. Advising upon matters brought before the Council by
associations or boards.
The Act provided for the maintenance of the existing organ-
ization in the sugar industry and for the appointment of a
206
QUEENSLAND—


Director of Marketing. It also dealt to some extent with
other Acts that affected rural organization. It deleted from
the Fruit Marketing Organization Act, the Stallions Regis-
tration Act and the Agricultural Bank Act the mandatory
clauses which made it necessary for the Governor-in-Council
first to secure the approval of the Council of Agriculture on
certain matters of administrative detail. Also in connection
with the Committee of Direction of Fruit Marketing, the ref-
erendum to decide whether it should continue was to be
decided by the majority of fruit growers actually affected.
This Act received very general approval but when the Bill
was passing through Parliament the Leader of the Oppo-
sition pointed out once more that from the very initiation o£
the organization of the agricultural industry it had been the
contention of his party that the organization should be on a
commodity basis, Forgan Smith again contending that with-
out active district organization at the inception, the Com-
modity Boards could never have been established.
PRIMARY PRODUCERS & ORGANIZATION AND MARKET-
ING ACT AMENDMENT ACT OF 1928 (SMITH)
This measure amended the Principal Act and dealt with
certain sections of the Fruit Marketing Organization Acts,
the Primary Producers’ Co-operative Associations Acts and
the Wheat Pool Acts. Originally 75 per cent majority was
required to establish a pool; this was subsequently reduced
to a two-thirds majority. The new Act reduced the majority
to 60 per cent. The Governor-in-Council was given power to
extend the life of a pool for a further period, subject to rati-
fication if a vote was demanded by 10 per cent of the growers
affected. In connection with ballots for new pools, before a
pool could be set in operation it was necessary to have a
50 per cent effective vote of those known to be entitled to
vote before the initiation could take place. As showing the
development of this form of primary produce organization,
it may be stated here that the value of the commodities con-
trolled by the commodity or marketing boards up to 30th
June, 1926 was £14,770,936. The measure made it a criminal
offence to attempt to intimidate a producer in the exercise
of the franchise at a ballot for the constitution of a pool board.
Provision was made for two or more pools to be amalga-
mated and for the subdivision of an existing pool, and also for
the liquidation of the affairs of a pool. A further important
provision was that relating to the building up of reserves.


Another provision dealt with the Mossman, creating it a separ-
ate district in the organization dealing with the sugar industry.
The Act also amended the Fruit Marketing Organization Acts
by giving the Committee of Direction power to raise money
on the security of fruit, and it provided that the majority
in a referendum should be reduced from two-thirds to three-
fifths. The Committee of Direction was given a further
lease of activity subject to referendum, if demanded. The
measure also contained provisions relating to fruit-barrows,
and placed them under the control of the Home Secretary.
The Act limited the number of members of a sectional group
Committee to ten, in accordance with the principle obtaining
among sugar growers: under this measure application could
be made to constitute a marketing Board under the Primary
Producers’ Organization Act, in which case the Committee
of Direction would go out of existence. A further provision
dealt with the acquisition by co-operative associations of the
assets of companies registered under the Companies Acts
and in liquidation. The assets of the Wheat Board were
dealt with under the Act, the assets being handed over to
the Board after liquidating its indebtedness to the Govern-
ment.
COTTON INDUSTRY ACT OF 1923 (GILLIES)
This measure was primarily introduced to give legal back-
ing to the policy of the Government which, it may be said,
was more or less responsible for increasing the annual value
of the cotton output in Queensland from £853 in 1919, to
over £250,000 for the crops harvested in 1923. It was estim-
ated that had the season been good, the latter crop wou|ld
have been worth £500,000. The Government as a matter of
fact had guaranteed a price of for cotton, and the guar-
antee relieved the farmer of all responsibility in the matter
of transport, ginning, shipping and marketing. It is not pro-
posed to follow this Act through in detail, or to deal at length
with the almost interminable controversy concerning Plant
versus Ratoon cotton. The Act and its amendments of 1924
(Gillies) and 1926 (Smith) are available to those who are
interested. It is a long cry from the days of the American
War when cotton growing, owing to phenomenally high prices
was a successful industry in Queensland —up to the year 1923,
when it had obtained a new start under new conditions, and
when it became necessary to regulate its growth and impose
somewhat drastic regulations as to the conditions under which
it should be grown. Seasonal setbacks have caused the inter-
208
QUEENSLAND—


est in cotton growing to wane somewhat in some districts.
It has yet to be proved whether under conditions entirely
dissimilar to those prevailing in other countries (especially
cheap labour countries) the growing of cotton in Queensland
will ever really become a staple industry. There is a large
section of very practical colonists who are of opinion that it
never will. As against this it is urged by some that as a
supplementary crop it will always be of more or less value
as a side-line, having regard to the fact that there is at hand
a growing Australian market. Later experience is showing
however that in some districts mass cultivation methods and
large areas are more remunerative to the farmer than small
areas on one man farms. The picking cost difficulty is being
overcome by coarser picking on the fields and more elaborate
cleaning equipment in the ginneries.
FRUIT AND VEGETABLES ACT OF 1927 (SMITH)
This measure consolidated the measures of 1912, 1916 and
1922. Hitherto vegetables had not come within the scope
of the measure. It dealt in detail with the grading and pack-
ing of fruit and vegetables, regulated the sizes and con-
ditions of cases and packages, contained drastic provisions
regarding discarded fruit and vegetables, and introduced new
provisions, particularly in regard to “topping” which were
designed to protect the interests of the public.
PRIMARY PRODUCE EXPERIMENT STATIONS ACT OF
1927 (SMITH)
The main object of this measure was to enable the Govern-
ment to establish experiment Stations for all forms of prim-
ary produce, following largely on the principles set out in
the Sugar Experiment Stations Act. There was more particu-
larly in view the improvement of the banana which at the
time of the passage of the Act was producing a revenue to the
State of somewhat over £ 1,000,000 a year.
PRIMARY PRODUCER LEGISLATION OF 1929
During the first session of the Moore Government, in 1929,
the good work of assisting the primary producer was con-
tinued. H. F. Walker, as Secretary for Agriculture and Stock,
put upon the Statute Book the following three measures:—


SOIL SURVEY ACT (H. F. WALKER)
This Act enabled any authorized person to enter and re-
enter upon any land for the purpose of carrying out a soil
survey. The measure had long been in contemplation and
it was contended that it would be of infinite value to the
Department to have accurate records of the soils in various
districts and their suitability for the growing of specific crops,
so that advice and assistance might be given to the agri-
culturist. The measure was strongly supported by the late
Secretary for Agriculture and Stock and passed without
opposition.
DISEASES IN PLANTS ACT (H. F. WALKER)
This Act was likewise uncontentious. It repealed the exist-
ing law and re-enacted it in an amplified form, affording
material assistance in checking the spread of plant diseases,
localizing them and preventing the introduction of new
diseases.
BANANA INDUSTRY PROTECTION ACT (H. F. WALKER)
This, like the two former measures, received the benedic-
tion of the late Minister for Agriculture. The banana in-
dustry, like most industries, is subject to many vicissitudes.
It is worth to Queensland over ii,000,000 per annum and
when an industry assumes those proportions, it is worth
looking after for the sake of the general welfare and product-
ivity of the State. Moreover there is a type of agriculturist
who requires not only protection from himself but is all the
better for being taught that selfishness and greed on the part
of a few cannot be allowed to endanger the welfare of thje
many. When in full operation this Act will materially assist
an industry of growing importance.
PRIMARY PRODUCERS’ ORGANIZATION AND MARKET-
ING, FRUIT MARKETING ORGANIZATION, WHEAT POOL,
AND DISEASES IN PLANTS ACTS AMENDMENT BILL
(H. F. WALKER)
Provides many amendments of the existing Acts; but there
is nothing very grave or particularly far-reaching about it.
The amendments were necessary for the smoother working
of the Acts referred to.
In introducing the measure, the Minister referred to the
general success of the pool system, and showed that the
210
QUEENSLAND—


efficient selling and marketing of the various products have
meant a saving of many thousands of pounds to the farmer,
thus giving him confidence to go in for further production.
The administration of all the above-mentioned Acts, directly
affecting as they do the intimate concerns of individual grow-
ers and organizations, necessarily reveals in them, from time
to time, points in respect of which they are capable of im-
provement so as to ensure dealing in a proper manner with
constantly changing conditions of primary production. In
this Act, no fresh principles are introduced, the amendments
being all on matters of detail.
Having now arrived at the end of a somewhat long story
in regard to the assistance given by the Parliament of
Queensland to the primary producer, it is only fair to say
that his education in the matter of co-ordinated and co-
operative effort, and the advantages accruing therefrom, must
have been, and indeed has been of very material benefit to
him. The primary producer is a difficult person to convince
and of an entirely conservative nature. On account of the
wide distribution of production of all kinds, the task of organ-
ization has been very slow, and the benefits to be derived by
continued effort not very rapid in disclosing themselves.
Nevertheless by persistent effort and much forethought on
the part of enthusiasts in the cause of co-operation, results of
quite a remarkable nature begin to disclose themselves —
results which authorities in other States throughout Australia
have not been slow to take advantage of. After his long
and arduous struggle when playing a lone hand in the years
that have passed, he would be a dull and unappreciative pro-
ducer who could not realize all that is conveyed in the one
word “co-operation” and all that organized effort means to
him in the way of material prosperity. One naturally recalls
the days of one's youth when the standard price for maize was
is. a bushel, when wheat was so cheap that we could buy our
2lb. loaf at 3d. and sometimes 2-|d., when milk was 2d. and
3d. a quart instead of or Bd.; when peanuts were grown
only for little boys to chew at school, and when id. would
buy enough to last a couple of days; when we gathered cape-
gooseberries in the three mile scrub, and gorged ourselves
without cost (to-day they are sold in strawberry boxes and
worth their weight in silver) ; when a tableful of vegetables
might be had for 2s. 6d.; when our cow was fed in the
back yard on pumpkins at 10s. to 18s. a ton; when it was
considered an extravagance to pay an all-the-year-round price


of is. 6d. a lb. for butter to an Enoggera farmer who never
even had a nightmare about a cream separator or “the Pat-
erson scheme”; when our domestic canary had no anxieties
about his breakfast or the effect of the canary seed pool;
when cheese was a drug in the market at 6d. a lb.; when rich
black and brown sugar which we so dearly loved, was some-
times id. never more than a lb.; when we would have
laughed to scorn the Easter egg that asked 3d. for itself.
Alack-a-day, those were great old times; we lived well on
very little, and the word “Pool” (except on a billiard table)
had not been invented.
212
QUEENSLAND—


THE AGRICULTURAL BANK
It was not until the year 1901 that the Parliament of Queens-
land set itself the task of establishing an Agricultural Bank,
the attempt of Chataway in the previous year having
been frustrated by the Legislative Council. Certainly the
Parliament had had the foresight and generosity to vote in
the year 1864 the sum of one shilling “to encourage agricul-
ture,” but, as might be supposed, this benevolence did not
put the business on a very sound footing. It is a curious
circumstance, well worth recording, that the very man who
was responsible for reducing a proposed vote of £SOO to one
shilling was John Donald McLean who represented an agri-
cultural constituency on the Darling Downs.
The financing of the agriculturist has ever been a subject
which has engaged the active attention of Parliaments
throughout the World. For reasons which are elementary and
manifest it has time and again presented itself to Parlia-
ments as an extremely difficult and intricate problem, and
possibly twenty-nine years ago it was more intricate even
than it is to-day.
The Act of 1901 was introduced and passed under the
auspices of David Hay Dalrymple, Secretary for Agriculture
in the Philp Ministry. An Agricultural Bank was established
under a board of three trustees. The Act provided for ad-
vances for making improvements not exceeding 13s. in the
£ of the fair estimated value of the improvements proposed to
be made. (The 1900 Bill had provided for advances not ex-
ceeding one-half of the value of the improvements.) The
limit of advance to one person was £Boo, and applicants for
amounts not exceeding £2OO received preference. The interest
was limited to 5 per cent, and no advance was to be made
except on first mortgage. Interest only was payable for five
years; after that there was a redemption period of twenty
years during which the borrower repaid advances by half-
yearly instalments of £4 os. 3d. for every iioo advanced; this
instalment covered both interest and redemption. The whole
basis of the Act was to endeavour to add to the productive


capacity of the State, and the security of the State lay in the
lien over the land plus the improvements which were made
as the result of advances. The original Agricultural Bank
was managed by Trustees, of whom Hugh M. Nelson was
Chairman, and up to the year 1904, when the Act was first
amended, the instalments paid on approved advances
amounted to £20,370, distributed amongst 227 mortgagors.
For two years’ business, this result was paltry in the extreme
and displayed an amount of Scotch caution, which while
highly commendable, did not afford a great amount of assist-
ance to the agriculturist of Queensland.
In 1904, Digby Frank Denham had become Secretary for
Agriculture in the Morgan Government, and he introduced
an amending Act. The principle of the original Bill of 1900
and of the Act of 1901 was not that advances should be made
on what the agriculturist possessed, but upon what he was
going to do. Section 15 indicated that, because it was laid
down that sums not exceeding 13s. in the £1 on the estimated
value of proposed improvements should be advanced. Indeed
the operations of the measure were severely limited to assist-
ance for proposed improvements. The following year (1902)
Fox, member for Normanby, introduced an amending Bill
contemplating that advances should be made for the pur-
chase of implements and stock. The measure was not op-
posed by the Government, but it met the not uncommon fate
of a measure introduced by a private member—it did not
become law. The prime feature of the 1904 Act was the
enlargement of the purposes for which advances might be
made. It further liberalized the advances by providing for
advances for the payment of liabilities already existing on the
holding and for the purchase of stock, machinery and imple-
ments. The measure provided for advances to be made upon
the fair estimated value of the holding, with the improvements
made, or proposed to be made. The Act of 1901 was severelv
restricted to improvements to be effected. It was proposed
to vary the amount to be advanced: 10s. in the £1 was to be
advanced for the purpose of liquidating existing liabilities and
for the purchase of stock, implements and machinery,
and 12s. in the £1 for improvements such as irrigation, drain-
age, clearing, cultivating, ringbarking, fencing or building,
always supposing that the advance would tend to increase
the productivity of the land. The loan periods and the re-
payments were also differentiated. Repayments for liquid-
ating a liability, or the purchase of stock, implements and
machinery were to be in fifty half-yearly instalments .of
214
QUEENSLAND—


£3 ns. od. in the £IOO. Repayments of advances at the rate
of 12s. in the £i were payable in forty half-yearly instalments
of £4 os. 3d. in the £IOO. In the original Act Queensland fol-
lowed very largely on the lines of the Western Australian
Act, and in amending the measure a close study had been
made of the experience gained by that State.
In the following year (1905) Denham introduced another
amendment of the Agricultural Bank Act. It appears that
the Imperial Government took exception to subsection 3 of
section 3 of the Act of 1904 which read —
“No advance under the Principal Act or this Act shall be
made to any aboriginal native of Asia, Africa, or the Pacific
Islands.”
And the Queensland Government was asked to make that
read —
“No advance under the Princpial Act or this Act shall be
made to any alien.”
The objection was to the distinction of race and colour.
The amendment, together with an additional amendment in
a later Act of 1911, practically brought the Act into conform-
ity with the Commonwealth Immigration Act of 1901 which
said —
“Any person who when asked to do so by an officer, fails
to write out at dictation, and sign in the presence of the
officer, a passage of fifty words in a European language
directed by the officer &c.”
So that the Trustees would be able to apply the dictation
test to an alien applicant for an advance. Section 3 of the
new Act gave the Trustees power to acquire in the name
of a mortgagor, the freehold of land held under lease or licence
from the Crown under freeholding tenure.
provision for retaining security over grazing selections. A
grazier might have an advance of twenty-five years currency,
with his Crown lease only eighteen years to run. The amend-
ment gave the Trustees the right to have the term of the lease
extended to suit the currency of the advance.
There was no further amendment of the Agricultural Bank
Act until 1911. In the meantime James Tolmie member for
Drayton and Toowoomba, had become Secretary for
Agriculture.
It is interesting just here to quote a few figures indicating
the growth of operations under the three Trustees of the
Bank. Operations began in 1902-3, when advances to the
amount of £6391 were paid. In the year 1907-8 advances paid
for the year had grown to £23,867. In 1908-9 advances paid


totalled £33,786. In 1909-10 they had grown to £48,244 and
for the year ended 30th June 1911 advances totalling £71,150
were paid. Up to 30th June, 1911, the total advances paid
from the inception of operations in 1902 amounted to £306,944
and the balance owing by borrowers was £206,997. The
principal fault found with the Act had been in its adminis-
tration, and the long delays to which applicants were sub-
jected owing to shortness of the inspectorial staff. The new
Act of 1911 abolished the system of appointing Trustees. Two
Trustees were continued and the third was also to be man-
aging director. Section 5 enabled the bank to come to the
assistance of persons who had purchased stock or farming
equipment but were not in a position to find the whole of the
purchase money at the time. An important alteration was
made by section 6 in the basic principle of the Act. For
general purposes in connection with the farm the bank would
advance 12s. in the £1 on the value of the security offered,
together with the estimated value of the improvements to be
made, but for certain improvements necessary to the pioneer
settling on unimproved land, special assistance was provided
for. For such improvements as buildings, ringbarking, clear-
ing, fencing, draining, or water conservation he could have
advances approved (not exceeding £200) up to the full value
of the improvements to be effected under those headings, and
progress instalments could be paid to him from time to time
as the work proceeded and was found on inspection to have
been satisfactorily carried out. A man took up a selection
and his sole assets were a few tools. As his initial improve-
ments progressed he could draw up to £2OO. Obviously this
was of great assistance to the settler without capital taking
up virgin land. The Act of 1911 gave authority to consolidate
the Agricultural Bank Acts and reprint them in up-to-date
form.
In 1914 there was another amendment of the Act introduced
by Tolmie as Secretary for Public Lands.
As showing the growth of the operations of the Bank, it
might be well to mention here that the applications for ad-
vances during the Financial Year ended 30th June 1914
totalled 1946, the amount applied for being £409,156. Appli-
cations to the number of 1852 were approved, for an amount
of £301,476. Since the Bank first came into operation £851,599
had been paid in advances to settlers, the greater part of it
within the preceding three or four years. The total principal
owing by borrowers at 30th June, 1914, was £636,789. The
new Act of 1914 transferred the Administration to the Depart-
216
QUEENSLAND—


ment of Public Lands; provided for cash advances up to
£2OO for unspecified purposes on the usual security basis and
increased the advance for purposes other than initial special
improvements, from 12s. to 13s. 4d. in the £l. Another
change had relation to grazing farms. Formerly the advances
from the Bank had the effect of extending the term of the
lease to make it expire with the term of the loan which had
to be twenty-five years. It was proposed instead of extending
the lease, to allow the trustees to lend to grazing farmers only
for such time as would coincide with the term of the lease.
Fortunately very few grazing farmers had taken advantage of
the Act. If they had, the probability was that some thousands
of persons, would by a side wind have had their leases
extended.
In 1915 J. M. Hunter had become Secretary for Public
Lands, and he introduced an Act, as he said, simply for the
purpose of preparing the way for a Bill on a much more
extended scale to be introduced in the following session.
Under the existing Act the term of appointment of two
trustees would expire on 31st December, 1915, and they
would, unless the Act was amended, have to be appointed for
another two years. This would embarrass the Government
when amending the law in the next session.
In the 1916 session the control of the Agricultural Bank
was completely altered when Theodore introduced and passed
the Queensland Government Savings Bank Act, which re-
pealed the Agricultural Bank Act and dissolved the corpor-
ation of the Trustees of the Agricultural Bank, and on Ist
January 1917, the existing assets and liabilities and future
operations in connection with advances to settlers were taken
over by the Government Savings Bank Commissioner.
Up to 1916 the business of the Agricultural Bank showed
the following results for its fifteen years' activities: —The
number of borrowers' accounts was 7327; the total advances
approved amounted to £2,115,604, of which £1,517,040 had been
actually paid to borrowers, £369,044 having been paid in the
closing year; the total principal owing by borrowers at 30th
June 1916 was £1,186,895.
The principal changes effected by the Queensland Govern-
ment Savings Bank Act as regards advances to settlers were
as follow: —
Section 21 provided for advances up to a maximum of £I2OO
instead of the £BOO which previously obtained. The maximum
advance for unspecified purposes was increased from £2OO to
£4OO, with the proviso that the applicant must be a bona fide


settler residing* upon and working* the farm, and provided
further that such advances could not be made on properties
infested with prickly-pear. The maximum advance to the full
value of initial special improvements was increased from £2OO
to £3OO. A new class of special advance was provided to
assist beginners in dairying, namely, where a settler had at
least thirty-five acres cleared, fenced, and sown with approved
grass an amount not exceeding £IOO could be advanced to the
full value of such improvements, for the purchase of approved
dairy stock. The total advances for all purposes, other than
for initial improvements and for dairy stock as just mentioned,
was increased from 13s. 4d. to 15s. in the £ of the fair estim-
ated value of the security. The Bank was guaranteed by the
Government against loss on advances made on selections in-
fested with prickly-pear; this was done to enable the Bank
to take additional risks to assist in land settlement in prickly-
pear areas with a view to the destruction of this pest. The
Agricultural Bank Act Amendment Act of 1914 had author-
ized the Trustees to carry on insurance business and establish
an Insurance Fund for insuring against fire, storm, tempest
or other disaster all properties over which they held security.
This power was never put into operation, the insurance, as
before, being effected with the insurance companies by ar-
rangement with the Trustees. A similar power was included
in the Savings Bank Act, but the Bank Commissioner decided
to transfer to the State Government Insurance Office, which
had recently been established, the whole of the fire insurances
on farming properties on which advances had been granted.
The next change came about under the Commonwealth
Bank Agreement Ratification and State Advances Act of
1920, as a result of which the corporation of “The Commis-
sioner of the Queensland Government Savings Bank” was dis-
solved, due to the transfer to the Commonwealth Bank, as
mentioned elsewhere, of the depositors' accounts of the State
Bank; however, the business of advances to settlers (together
with that of Workers’ Dwellings) was retained by the State.
y II IS successors in office,
then became the State Advances Corporation, and thereafter
this corporation took over all the assets and liabilities and
undertook the future business in connection with advances to
the man on the land.
At this time the loan business had assumed fairly large
proportions, as will be observed from the following particu-
larsat 30th June, 1920, the total amount advanced was
2 >57 2 >4°L of which £1,775,000 was outstanding, the number
218
QUEENSLAND—


of borrowers on the books being 8458. Applications dealt
with during the year numbered 2059, the total amount applied
for being £833,527; loans aggregating £478,167 were granted
to 1502 applicants; advances actually paid for the year
amounted to £326,926. In addition to the foregoing the Sav-
ings Bank had transacted a large volume of loan business on
behalf of the Government, in connection with the settlement
of returned soldiers: —£428,800 had been paid to 1125
borrowers.
In 1923 W. N. Gillies was Secretary for Agriculture and
had charge of a new measure in connection with advances to
settlers. Roughly it was twenty years since the first Act was
passed and it had been under the control of three different
Departments —Agriculture Department, Lands Department,
and Treasury, and it had now come back to the Agriculture
Department. When under the Administration of the Gov-
ernment Savings Bank, it had assumed the title of the Ad-
vances to Settlers Branch, and later, the State Advances
Corporation, but the farmers generally had clung to the title
“Agricultural Bank” and this title was restored by the new
measure entitled “The Agricultural Bank Act of 1923” under
which the Secretary for Agriculture became the Corporation
of the Agricultural Bank. Under this Act it was proposed to
advance up to 16s. in the £1 on approved securities, and to
provide for advances to Co-operative Companies and Associ-
ations connected with primary production. A new feature
embodied in the Act was founded on the principles laid down
in the Primary Producers’ Co-operative Associations Act. It
was provided that advances for works could be made to
those companies which complied with the principle of that
Act, i.e. that two-thirds of the shares of the Company and of
the voting power of the shareholders should always be held
by persons who were producers of primary products. Another
important provision related to new Companies unable to find
one-third of the necessary capital to start the Company/.
Under certain conditions the Bank might provide more than
two-thirds of the money necessary to start a new Company,
thus reducing the Company’s contribution to less than one-
third. That would only be done in cases where certain clearly
defined conditions were complied with. Section 15 of the
Act was introduced to bring the measure into line with the
Primary Producers’ Co-operative Associations, and to make
it possible for Co-operative Associations to get money for
quite a lot of purposes. These advances are in the nature


of co-operative credit, enabling a group of settlers formed into
an association to obtain loans for the purchase of machinery
and other appliances for their joint use or for the construction
of works to assist primary production. An important alter-
ation in the law enabled an individual, if he had the security,
to obtain an advance up to £I7OO, the maximum being in-
creased from £I2OO to that amount. There was also pro-
vision for advances for relief in cases of drought, flood, tem-
pest, fire and other adverse conditions beyond the control of
the borrower. The maximum advance up to the full value
of new settlers’ improvements was increased from £3OO to
£SOO, and the class of improvements eligible for these advances
was extended to include silos, haysheds, dairy buildings and
piggeries. Provision was made that in the case of a loan
for “unspecified purposes” the borrower should continue to
live on his land until the loan was paid off. Other provisions
enabled the settler to borrow under special conditions up to
£SO for the purchase of a separator and dairying plant, and
up to £l5O for the purchase of machinery and plant for fodder
conservation. The special amount to be advanced for the
purchase of sheep was increased from £2OO to £3OO. The
terjn of each loan and the rate of interest were to be fixed
by the Bank when the loan was approved; the maximum term
was fixed at twenty years, following a maximum period of five
years during which interest only is payable. Those were,
briefly, the principal provisions of the Act of 1923.
A small amending measure of the Agricultural Bank Act
was introduced by H. F. Walker, the then Secretary for Agri-
culture, in the session of 1929. One of its objects was to
provide for the relief of certain necessitous clients of the
Bank in the repayment of their loans by suitably extending
the term of the loan within the maximum term provided in
the Principal Act, and thus reducing the rate of half-yearly
repayments. Under existing conditions relief could only be
given by making a further advance. When the original Agri-
cultural Bank Act was passed in 1901, the intention was that
the Crown should have priority over all other creditors; but,
following on the passing of the Agricultural Bank Act of
1923, it was found that a purchaser buying a foreclosed pro-
perty from the Agricultural Bank became liable for all arrears
rates thereon. The Bill gave the Crown’s debt its usual
priority over all other charges, assessments, etc., that might
have been levied by various authorities. It provided also that
local authority rates and other dues should not be recover-
able from the Bank or the person who bought the foreclosed
220
QUEENSLAND—


property from the Bank. However, where sufficient moneys
were realized on the sale of the assets, the Bank might
liquidate such rates, etc. out of the surplus. That was the
principal clause of the Bill, and the only one which was of
any great importance. This amendment arose in consequence
of a decision given in a recent law case.
There was another small clause giving the manager of the
Agricultural Bank or any officer of that bank the right to
become an auctioneer to sell properties disposed of by the
Bank.
The following figures covering the period from the estab-
lishment of the Bank in 1901, up to the end of 1929, indicate
the progress made by the Blank in assisting the primary pro-
ducers of Queensland. The total loans approved by the Bank
to settlers and Co-operative Companies since its inception
amounted to £7,431,360 in respect of 30,027 applications and
the instalments actually paid during that period amounted to
1 4T59- The balance owing by 7765 borrowers at the
close of the year was £2,513,794.
In addition to the foregoing figures the Bank has handled
considerable sums on behalf of the Government in connec-
tion with soldier settlement. The aggregate advances ap-
proved amount to £2,160,210 in respect of 6136 applications of
which £1,512,903 was actually paid in advances.
Under the circumstances it cannot well be disputed that
the Queensland Agricultural Bank has served a good and
useful purpose. It has not yet reached the dimensions of
similar banks in some other States, but it has not been the
slowest in making reforms and giving added privileges to the
primary producers. In the early days of its history it was
administered with great caution, a fact which led to much
discontent expressed largely by members of Parliament. It
must, however, not be overlooked that caution is the keynote
to success in all transactions of a financial nature. If we
are lending our own funds on mortgage we do not accept
every security which is rushed upon us. Neither do we
accept the proposed mortgagor’s opinion in regard to the
margin of security offered. There is no sound reason why
success should not reward the efforts of a Government in
this branch of enterprise. It is difficult, naturally, in any
Government enterprise to make the element of personal
interest the dominant factor as it is in private ventures; but
when the lending of vast sums of money is the main feature
of the enterprise, the Government, who after all are the


people, is bound to be watchful lest the people's funds be
unduly imperilled.
As our vast State progresses, as the settlers on our fertile
areas become more and more numerous, so must the rami-
fications of the Agricultural Bank widen and extend and be-
come more and more a prop and mainstay to the primary
producers.
222
QUEENSLAND—


IRRIGATION
In a State possessed of such an erratic climate as that of
Queensland, it is somewhat remarkable that early politicians
did not place in the forefront of their policies schemes for
providing- water in the more arid sections of the State. There
seems to be a general recognition in the State to-day that if
there had been more concentration upon road building and
irrigation works and less upon certain railways of very doubt-
ful utility, Queensland might well be in a very much sounder
and more prosperous condition. Early politicians seem to
have been obsessed with the belief that the millennium could
be brought about by the construction of a railway, whereas
the construction of one or two small irrigation works at the
same cost would have made possible the doubling of our
production. Naturally, if we have irrigation and its natural
corollary production, we must have the means of bringing
our products to market. Nevertheless one cannot help re-
gretting that apart from main trunk lines, there was not more
concentration on moderate roads and numerous minor irriga-
tion schemes to act as insurance against the ravages of those
droughts with which, unhappily, we are so familiar.
It will hardly be believed that until the year 1922 when
Parliament passed the Irrigation Act, no attempt whatever
from a governmental point of view, had been made to con-
serve our water-supply and store our surplus water for future
use.
In a minor degree private enterprise set an excellent
example to the State, for quite in early days the immeasurable
advantage of irrigating sugar-cane crops on the Lower Bur-
dekin was made manifest by an enterprising firm of planters
as far back as 1880.
One cannot say even now that the irrigation efforts of so
great a State as Queensland do it very much credit, but a
beginning has been made, and doubtless if more money were
available more would be done. One would like to see, not
so much the conception of big schemes which cost vast sums
of money, but the realization of quite a number of minor


storages for which there are numerous natural advantages in
the wide spaces of our State. There are said to be water
storage possibilities—notably on the Condamine River, which,
by the expenditure of only a few thousand pounds would not
only serve a wonderful irrigation purpose, but would act as
visible inspirations to governmental authorities to supplement
existing water-supplies. How many hundreds of thousands
of pounds have we frdm time to time squandered upon wild-
cat propositions, when the expenditure of similar sums on
minor water storages would have given that impetus to pro-
duction the value of which can hardly be estimated.
Two large Governmental Irrigation schemes were initiated
during the regime of the Theodore Government.
THE DAWSON VALLEY SCHEME
As regards the Dawson proposition, the estimated cost
of the completed scheme was £1,987,000, but this included
provision of the large storage dam at Nathan Gorge, reticu-
lating the water by gravitation to the lower lands on the
Dawson River. So far as the big scheme is concerned, there
is no loan money available to proceed with it at present. One
section of the scheme, however, comprising 30,000 acres
known as the Theodore Area, has been completed, and there
have been settled on that area over 100 farmers. To date,
June, 1930, approximately £600,000 has been spent on the
Dawson Scheme.
THE INKERMAN SCHEME
The estimated cost of the Inkerman Scheme was £131,000, but
that was just prior to the war. About the time it was com-
menced there was a very large increase in wages and cost of
materials which consequently made the actual cost much in
excess of the estimate. The large amount of £171,000 was
written off the cost of this scheme by the Labour Govern-
ment.
At a later date (May, 1930), the Government which came
into office in 1929 wrote off a further sum of £57,000, making
the total amount written off £228,000. Thus the capital cost
would have been reduced at 30th June, 1930, to £350,000.
A proposal was made that the Inkerman Mill Suppliers
Committee should take over the scheme, but as no finality
could be reached with that body as to the terms under which
they would take it over, the Government decided to continue
control of the scheme. From July 1, 1930, the farmers would
224
QUEENSLAND—


require to maintain their spears, pumps, and wells, but the
Department would assist them by carrying out any necessary
repairs, charging only the actual cost. From January 1, 1931,
the present rate of £5 per acre per annum would be increased
to £6 ios., and the £350,000 would be granted as a loan from
July 1, 1930, for a period of twenty-eight years by periodical
payments of interest and sinking fund, at the rate of six per
cent per annum, as was provided in the Order in Council,
constituting the area in 1917.


THE PEOPLES’ HOMES
The original Workers’ Dwellings Bill was introduced in
1908 into the Queensland Parliament by A. G. C. Hawthorn,
who was a member of Kidston’s second ministry, but on
account of lack of time it was dropped and was reintroduced
the following year by the same Minister. This measure pro-
vided for loans for building workers’ dwellings and had its
basis on the freehold system of land tenure, a fact which was
strongly emphasized by the Minister when introducing the
Bill. Primarily it was administered by a Board of three Under-
secretaries. Advances were to be made firstly to owners of
freehold lands, and secondly to holders of miners’ homestead
leases or residence areas under the Mining Act. The advances
were only to be made to persons in receipt of incomes up to
£2OO per annum, who were not the owners of dwellings at the
time they made the application. Advances were not to exceed
13s. 4d. in the £ of the estimated value of the house to be
erected and the land on which it was to be built, and the
total advance was not to exceed £3OO. For the first six
months the borrower paid interest only at 5 per cent per
annum on his loan. After that he paid 13s. 3d. per month
for every £IOO advanced. This monthly payment would repay
the loan in twenty years, including interest at 5 per cent per
annum on the reducing balance.
In the session of 1911-12 the Act was amended by W. H.
Barnes. The scheme, having proved a great success, was
liberalized by allowing a borrower to obtain 15s. instead of
13s. 4d. in the £1 and making Town Leases under the Land
Act eligible tenure.
Up to 30th June, 1914, no less than £872,617 had been
spent in the erection of cottages.
In the session of 1914, another amendment of the Work-
ers’ Dwellings Act was introduced by W. H. Barnes. The
sole object of this amendment was to simplify the matter of
fire insurance. An Insurance Fund was inaugurated by the
Board on Ist June, 1915, the intention being for the Board
to insure all Workers’ Dwellings and to charge the same rate


of premium as had been previously charged by the Insurance
Companies. This really was the thin end of the wedge so
far as State Insurance is concerned, and those familiar with
the ramifications of the State Government Insurance Office
will appreciate the extent to which the system has grown in
about fifteen years. It is interesting here to note that after the
State Insurance Office had been established, the whole of the
fire insurances on Workers’ Dwellings were transferred to
that Office, and have remained with it ever since, thus con-
tributing materially to the success of the Fire Department of
State Insurance.
Up to 30th June, 1916, since the inception of operations in
1909, 6940 applications had been received for £1,901,420; loans
were granted to 6665 applicants to the extent of £1,761,959.
The total amount of loans actually paid was £1,586,037.
Dwellings numbering 1069 were erected during the year to
30th June, 1916, making a total of 6083 since the scheme was
commenced. At this time the Insurance Fund showed a credit
balance of £6905, after being in operation for only one year.
The next step in connection with Workers’ Dwellings was
taken in the session of 1916, when Theodore introduced and
passed the Queensland Government Savings Bank Act. Sec-
tion three repealed the Workers’ Dwellings Act, and section
12 dissolved the Workers’ Dwellings Board and transferred all
the assets and liabilities to the Bank; advances for Workers’
Dwellings were provided for under section 22, the whole ad-
ministration being placed in the hands of the Government
Savings Bank Corqimissioner for purposes of economy and
efficiency. The change took effect on Ist January, 1917. The
Workers’ Dwellings Branch was not altered in any essential
particular, although the amount of the advance was increased
from £3OO to £350 account of the higher cost of labour
and materials.
About this time the principle was established of not mak-
ing it an essential qualification that a person who desired to
borrow should be the possessor of a freehold. The possessor
of a perpetual lease might get an advance for the purpose of
erecting a dwelling, but he only secured the advance in the
same ratio with regard to the market value of the security
as he would if he held a freehold.
In 1919 an amendment of the Savings Bank Act further
liberalized the Workers’ Dwellings provisions; the income
limit of applicants was raised from £2OO to £416 per annum;
the rate of advance was increased from 15s. to 16s. in the
£; and the maximum advance was allowed at £BOO instead of


£3s°. These amendments were due to the altered values fol-
lowing the Great War, but notwithstanding the changes in
values, the interest charged to borrowers remained at the
original rate of 5 per cent.
Up to 30th June 1919, that is ten years from the passing of
the first housing legislation, there had been built in Queens-
land 7312 Workers’ Dwellings, and the total amount advanced
was £1,969,433.
WORKERS’ HOMES ACT
In the session of 1919-20 there was introduced into the
Legislative Assembly by the Secretary for Public Works, the
office at that time being filled by E. G. Theodore, a Bill
entitled “The Workers’ Homes Bill.” It was explained that
the Workers’ Dwellings Act did not sufficiently cope with
the housing problem. Under that Act a borrower proposing
to acquire a £SOO house must contribute £125 in cash deposit
or land value, which had prevented many persons from avail-
ing theselves of the Act.
Under the new Act land might be acquired by the Govern-
ment as sites for homes, and the homes would be erected in
groups in centres of population where a shortage of dwellings
existed. Where the group was large the scheme would take
the form of a model suburb or township. An applicant must
be a homeless worker with an income of not more than £5
per week, and with the bona fide intention to use the home
himself. He only had to deposit 5 per cent of the cost of the
house; he was granted a perpetual lease of the allotment of
land, and became the weekly tenant of the Government until
the debt on the house was discharged. Rents under the rent-
purchase agreement covered interest on the debt calculated at
5 per cent and rent on the perpetual lease at 3 per cent of the
capital value of the land. Rent instalments, in addition to
paying interest and redemption on the debt, also included a
small monthly contribution to cover the expenditure from
time to time on painting, repairs, and fire insurance. The
borrower was required to insure his life for at least the
amount of the balance of the debt, thus securing to his de-
pendents, in the event of his death, the home free of debt.
With certain exceptions this insurance was required to be
taken out with the State Government Insurance Office. A
leading feature of the scheme was the grouping of dwellings
in order that sufficient control might be kept over them and
the rules be properly observed.
In view of the high cost of building at this particular time,
228
QUEENSLAND—


the new scheme was not put into operation until a few years
later.
Under the Commonwealth Bank Agreement Ratification
and State Advances Act of 1920, the corporation of “The Com-
missioner of the Queensland Government Savings Bank” was
dissolved. This became necessary owing to the transfer to
the Commonwealth Bank, as referred to elsewhere, of the
depositors’ accounts of the State Savings Bank; but the
business of the lending sub-departments, namely, Workers’
Dwellings and Advances to Settlers, was retained by the
State. The Treasurer of Queensland, and his successors in
office, then became a corporation sole under the name of the
“State Advances Corporation” and henceforth the State Ad-
vances Corporation took complete control of all advances
made or to be made under the Workers’ Dwellings Act and
the Workers’ Homes Act.
WORKERS’ HOMES ACT AMENDMENT ACT OF 1922
This measure did not involve any new principle but con-
tained a series of machinery clauses to enable the Department
to carry out the work under the Act with greater facility. The
chief provision gave power to extend the term of repayments
from twenty to twenty-five years. Arrangements were also
made to enable an individual building site in a residential area
to be acquired for an applicant and converted into a perpetual
lease, instead of requiring him to live in a group area.
WORKERS’ HOMES ACT AMENDMENT ACT OF 1925
This measure provided for adding to the capital cost the
cost of subsequent improvements made to the home by the
Government after the original erection. Another provision
gave the Government the benefit provided under the Fencing
Act.
It is interesting to note that at 30th June, 1929, since the
inception of housing schemes in Queensland, there had been
completed 13,901 Workers’ Dwellings at a cost in advances
of £5,368,286; 612 Discharged Soldiers’ Dwellings at a cost of
£231,858; and 1938 Workers’ Homes at a cost of £1,070,667.
Of the 16,685 borrowers, 6680 had completely discharged their
indebtedness to the State.
From the beginning of the housing scheme, in 1910 up
to 30th June 1919 the losses on Workers’ Dwellings advances
to £476 of which £446 was a result of a flood and
cyclone at Rockhampton in 1918. For the subsequent ten


} ears up to 1929 losses on Workers* Dwelling's advances
were sustained.
Such then is a brief account of the provision made for
the acquirement of homes in Queensland by persons of limited
means. Doubtless the easy terms under which persons may
become the owners of their homes as provided under Govern-
ment housing schemes have had a considerable effect in
increasing the proportion of houses owned by their occupants,
d his is more pronounced in Queensland than in any of the
other States of the Commonwealth; in this State not less
than two householders out of every three own the houses
which they occupy. If in devising means by which the poorer
members of the community can acquire homes at reasonable
cost without being subjected to the possible exactions of land-
lords, you also inculcate habits of providence amongst the
people, it must be admitted that two very excellent purposes
.lave been served and a valuable addition made to the social
welfare of the community. Particularly, in these days, is it
necessary to encourage thrift rather than that people should
live up to the very limit of their incomes and when in difficulty
fall back upon a benevolent State for assistance.
In the session of 1929, it was proposed to take advantage
of housing loans offered by the Commonwealth Government
from funds to be provided by the Commonwealth Savings
Bank. This Commonwealth Housing Scheme required the
State to so amend its legislation as to provide that people
with an income up to £l2 a week could secure a 90 per cent,
advance for much more expensive houses involving advances
up to a maximum of £lBOO. A Bill was brought down in the
State Parliament, but before it could be passed the Central
Government, probably on account of shortage of funds, shut
down, temporarily at all events, upon this feature of housing
of the people. One is inclined to ask oneself whether a person
in receipt of ii 2 a week is, in the ordinary acceptation of the
term, a “poor person” who is unable to find shelter, without
Government assistance, for himself and family. The writer
has visions of a young man with a very small income purchas-
ing in 1885 a modest dwelling at a cost of £6OO and borrowing
£4OO of that amount from a city Building Society at q per
cent per annum. It is naturally not forgotten that that was
lhe unregenerate, bad old days before the independence and
spirit of self-sacrifice of the people had been undermined and
when frugality was numbered among the virtues instead of
the besetting sins. One cannot help thinking that while under
present social conditions we cannot to-day be “passing rich
230
QUEENSLAND—


on £4O a year,” yet we are not actually on the bread line and
in dire need of assistance on £l2 a week.
STATE HOUSING RELIEF ACT 1930
The objects of this measure were to grant relief to those
tenants of the Crown who had purchased homes under the
housing legislation of the State, but who had been detriment-
ally affected by unemployment, loss of wages, rationing of
work, and generally by the financial depression. It is inter-
esting to note that under the Workers’ Dwellings Acts the
percentage of arrears to indebtedness is only .483; under the
Discharged Soldiers’ Settlement Acts it is 1.304; and under
the Workers’ Homes Acts 2.334.
PURCHASERS OF HOMES RELIEF ACT 1930
This measure, which was of general application and had
no particular relation to State housing, was a species of modi-
fied moratorium. It enabled purchasers of homes to state
their difficulties in an inexpensive manner to the Magis-
trates Court and the Court might grant an extension of the
period of repayment; an extension of the period of payment
of the purchase money in the case of an agreement for sale;
might make interest only payable for a term; or fund arrears
of instalments.
WORKERS’ HOMES ACTS AMENDMENT ACT 1930
Gave expression to a part of the policy of the Government
by providing freehold titles to land, with perpetual leasehold
optional not only in the case of agricultural lands but also
in the case of owners of town and suburban allotments and
workers’ homes.
THE LOCAL AUTHORITY FRANCHISE
Prior to 1920, the local authority franchise had been con-
fined to —
“Every person, whether male or female, of the age of twenty-
one years who is a natural born or naturalized subject of His
Majesty, and whose name appears in the Rate Book as the
occupier or owner of rateable land.”
The people of the State had accepted that franchise with
more or less equanimity since the initiation of local Govern-
ment in Queensland, it having become almost axiomatic that
a vote in local affairs should follow the payment of rates.


Nevertheless it must be admitted that a section of the people
contended that a strictly restricted franchise of that nature
had a somewhat depressing effect on initiative, and that pro-
perty owners were prone to conservatism when large local
schemes involving the expenditure of considerable sums of
money, which would inevitably lead to an increase of rates,
were proposed. Be that as it may, it became in due course
the fixed policy of the party which reigned between the years
1 9 1 5 and 1929, to widen the local government franchise and
put it on the electoral roll basis. Thus, if a man or woman
was not otherwise disqualified, they desired to put the local
authority franchise on the basis of one adult one vote. In
the session of 1920, McCormack being Home Secretary, intro-
duced a measure to give effect to the policy of the Govern-
ment. The amending legislation, which also involved another
departure, in the election by the electors of the Chairman (not
being assigned to any particular Division) as distinct from
the members of the local authority, was, it is needless to say,
hotly contested. It was described by A. E. Moore, an enthu-
siast m the cause of local government, as “a party fad” which
had been put on the platform of the Labour Party by a sec-
tion of the people only. A division was taken on the second
reading of the Bill which was carried by thirty-six to thirty-
two, and having been assented to by the then Legislative
Council, it became the law of the land on 4th January, 1921.
The people, ever law abiding, accepted the situation as they
found it, and the local authority franchise continued to be the
adult electoral franchise from January 1921 until the session
of 1929. A new Government having gained possession of the
treasury Benches in May, 1929, naturally proceeded to put its
own policy into force. This involved the immediate abolition
of the adult franchise as applied to local authority elections
and a return to the property qualification. Furthermore the
measure of 1929 also reversed the policy of the Chairman
being elected by the electors as a separate office holder.
It seems somewhat unfortunate that local government in
Queensland, which has been made such a pronounced success
by the self-denying efforts of many public spirited men, should
in the end become the football of party politics. It would
however, that that is the case, and so strong are the
convictions in regard to the local authority franchise on the
part of both political parties that one expects to observe, as
the years go by, a perfect seesaw so far as the franchise is
concerned, each party altering the law to suit its own con-
victions as it attains power.
232
QUEENSLAND—


A rather curious circumstance in connection with this mat-
ter :s that the City of Brisbane Act of 1924 makes provision
both for the adult franchise (the city of Brisbane being
divided into 20 divisions more or less coterminous with the
20 Electoral Districts concerned) and the election of the Lord
Mayor ihe principles laid down in the Local Authorities Act
Amendment Act of 1929 were, during the session of igto
applied to the Metropolis and the election of Lord Mayor bv
the electors was abolished. Naturally this could not be done
m an amendment of the Local Authorities Act, but we may
see developments in this direction in the near future.


QUEENSLAND STATE GOVERNMENT INSURANCE
OFFICE
This office was established in the first instance as the State
Accident Insurance Office under “The Workers’ Compensation
Act of 1916.”
The scope of the business was limited strictly to Workers’
Compensation Insurance, of which the Office was given a
monopoly by the Act in question, which was assented to on
sth January, 1916, and came into operation on Ist July, 1916.
The passage of the Workers’ Compensation Act of 1916
calls to mind the very strenuous and persistent fight that took
place during the passage of the Bill by the Companies engaged
in this class of business. The Companies were undoubtedly
angry, and in negotiation with leading opponents of the Bill
in the Legislative Council, suggested certain verbal amend-
ments which would have given them three years’ grace, during
which they were to be permitted to continue to transact
Workers’ Compensation business. In returning the Bill with
amendments to the Legislative Assembly, the Council forgot
to make these amendments, and consequently the three years’
grace went by the board, and the Government monopoly
was established. A reference to pp. 273 and 4 of Queensland
Politics During Sixty Years will show the grotesque position
in which the Council subsequently placed itself by making a
request to the Assembly which it was physically impossible
to comply with.
Memory takes one back to the days of the Employers
Liability Act; the days when the feelings of stupid jurors
were played upon by plausible and special pleading barristers;
when the hideously unjust doctrine of “contributory negli-
gence” was pleaded again and again by unfair employers;
when weeping widows deprived of their natural protectors
struggled against hopeless odds in the Law Courts to gain a
miserable fifty or one hundred pounds as compensation for
the loss of a husband and father. It was a vile, wicked, un-
equal struggle of the weak against the strong; a struggle


in wh \ cll tll( r we ak went to the wall, and the strong gloated
o\er the deteat of orphans and heart-broken mothers. To-
/r* 1 -? f UC - 11 deous wrong is possible. If we employ labour,
we r I at OUr OWn risk - In the event of accident
Zl are still liable to pay compensation, but the charge for
smTli n L 1S r 1 W °i th thG T risk 0f avoidin £ m the case of the
small private employer. In that of the big employer, the
on ar to e t C h°e U n tS f °f notkln f/ for a burden which is passed
of vpat-Q I ] lU J e ~bke public who have over a series
mules familiarized themselves with the fact that they ar^
r^ n t?, A , e I 9 l b session of Parliament, “The Insurance Act
of 1916 was passed, authorizing the transaction of all classes
of Insurance business other than Workers’ Compensation In-
surance already authorized by “The Workers’ Compensation
Act of 1916.
Before proceeding further, let us refer to a very ancient
Act passed by the Parliament of Queensland in 1865, and
entitled The Government Annuities Act.’’ It was an Act
d o Grant Facilities for the purchase of small Government
Annuities and for Assuring Payments of Money on Death.”
Year after year a feeble little report was made to Parliament
on “The Government Life Insurance and Annuity Business.”
To show how inconsequent the operations under the Act
were, and to mark a contrast between it and the operations
under the Insurance Act of 1916, it is only necessary to say
that T 7 years after it came into operation (that is to say in
I 8 8 2), there were only 36 Life Policies in force, representing
a liability of £3400, and one annuity contract for £5O payable
from and after Ist September, 1889. During the year, then
passed, only two proposals for Life Insurance were
received and accepted and one death claim of £lOO was paid.
Going still further ahead to the year 1914, or 49 years after
the passage of the Act, we find that the only remaining policy
was surrendered at a cost of £B3 19s. yd., leaving a balance
to the credit of the Fund of £396 15s. nd., and as there
were no further claims to be met, the amount was transferred
to the Government Savings Bank Profit and Loss Account.
Thus this poor little measure died a lingering death, having
tailed to inspire any enthusiasm whatever among the insuring
public. s
L L nder “The Insurance Act of 1916,” the Office is carrying-
on Fire, Life, Accident and Marine Insurance on competitive
lines and with very considerable success.


The achievements of the State Government Insurance Office
summarized are that it has: —
(a) WORKERS’ COMPENSATION:
1. Substantially reduced the rates charged by the Insurance Com-
panies for Insurance under the old Queensland Act of i9°s-
- More than doubled the benefits to Injured Workers; the
maximum weekly allowance to disabled wage-earners has been
raised from £i per week (under the previous Act) to £2 15s. od.
per week, with a special provision that married workers shall
receive the basic wage per week according to the number of
children under 14 years of age; increased from £4OO to £7s°»
the maximum amount payable in respect of total incapacity,
and in respect of death from £4OO to £600;
3. Settled 153,493 claims and paid over £3T99,344 to Injured
Workers in cash, only 45 cases having been taken before
Police Magistrates;
4. Given general satisfaction, not only to workers and their
organizations, but also to employers who are relieved of a vast
amount of the work of claim settlements which devolved upon
them under the old system of private insurances;
5. Made profits of approximately £430,000.
6. Brought sufferers from Miners’ Phthisis and other specified
Industrial Diseases, including Pulmonary Tuberculosis where
traceable to work in mines, etc., within the scope of the Act;
in November, 1925., increasing the amount payable from £4OO
to £450 in case of disablement or death;
7. Enacted that compensation shall be paid direct to the injured
Worker, or to his Agent, acting for and on his authority, or
in the event of a fatal case, that the compensation be paid to
the dependant or to an Agent acting for or on his or her
authority—in other words, payments of compensations are made
direct to the worker or his dependants;
8. The operation of the 1905 Act was restricted to manual workers
only, but under the present Act no such limitation exists. All
workers in receipt of earnings not exceeding £520 per annum
come within the scope of the present Act. Originally, casual
workers and domestic servants were excluded; this too, has
been altered;
9. Under the 1916 Act, the employee is given power to apply for
his compensation in a lump sum if he so desires; this privilege,
under the 1905 Act, belonged to the employer only.
(b) FIRE AND MISCELLANEOUS ACCIDENT INSURANCE:
These Departments started on Ist February, 1917* at rates
10 per cent below the rates previously charged by the Insur-
ance Companies for risks of this class.
On Ist May, 1918, the Government granted a further reduc-
tion in Fire Rates of 25 per cent on dwellings, now also applied
to Schools, Churches, Colleges and the like, and 10 per cent on
other Fire Risks and on Miscellaneous Accident Risks.
236
QUEENSLAND—


The Companies followed and the net result has been that on
welhngs, Schools, Churches, Colleges and the like, rates have
been lowered by 33 1/3 per cent and other rates by 20 per cent
since the establishment of the Office.
The effect of the Companies following this Office in the re-
duction of rates means, of course, that competition has been on
even terms.
In the early stages there was a tendency on the part of certain
sections to boycott the Office as a political institution, but this
phase has largely passed away, and it may now be fairly claimed
that the Office is looked upon as a useful National Institution
with which all classes are doing business, and the position of the
Office at the present moment was never stronger.
Since Fire, Marine and Accident Departments were
opened, business has been secured amounting to over £264,705
per annum in premiums.
The business has been conducted at expense and claim ratios
lower than those of Insurance Companies in Queensland during
the same period, and has on the whole, been rather more pro-
fitable than the Companies’ Business during the same period.
LIFE INSURANCE:
This Department was opened on Ist January, 1918, and has
been phenomenally successful, the amount of new business trans-
acted being very considerably in excess of the amount of new
business transacted in Queensland by any Office during the same
period.
The success of this Department may be gauged by the fact
that following on the Actuary’s valuation of the liabilities under
the Contracts in force at 31st December, 1922, the Office
declared a Reversionary Bonus of £1 10s. per £lOO per annum on
Whole Life Participating Policies and £1 per £lOO on Endow-
ment Assurance and Endowment Policies.
An increase of Bonuses to £1 16s. and £1 4s. respectively, was
declared on the Whole Life and Endowment Assurance Policies
in force at 31st December, 1925.
Further increased Bonuses were declared each year since 1925,
that on policies in force at 31st December, 1928, being £2 10s. per
£lOO per annum on Whole Life Participating Policies, and £1 14s.
per £lOO on Endowment Assurance and Endowments.
The Bonus declared on Policies in force on 31st December,
1929, was of the Graded Reversionary type, commencing at
£2 15s. per £lOO per annum on Whole Life Participating Policies
under one year in force, and at £1 17s. per £lOO per annum on
Endowment Assurance and Endowment Policies under one year
in force, and increasing to £3 ss. per cent and £2 4s. per cent
respectively for Policies ten years in force.
Therefore, since the first valuation every year has been a
bonus year.
No Australian Life Office except one has declared a Bonus
so early in its existence, and few, if any, Life Offices have
declared a Bonus on the first three years’ working in any way
approaching that distributed by this Office.
Amounts insured to date exceed £8,766,455.


(d) MARINE INSURANCE:
This Department was opened in May, 1919, and continues to
make steady progress.
(e) GENERAL:
£272,951 has been made in the way of profits in the Fire
and Marine and Accident Departments and £431,430 in the
Workers’ Compensation Department.
As a result, there stands to the credit of the General Reserve,
including Interest, £467,373, and in the Departmental Reserves,
including Interest, £267,179.
These, together with the Life Funds, which amount to
£1,708,160, give a total of £2,442,712 to pay future claims. In
addition, the reductions in Fire and Accident Rates mean a sav-
ing to the Public of approximately a quarter of a million pounds
annually. These facts alone may be claimed as sufficient justifi-
cation for the establishment of the Office even if no direct profits
had been earned.
The results have clearly demonstrated that there is a very
considerable desire for State Insurance on the part of the public,
and that it is a business on which with proper management, a
State can safely and profitably embark.
As a State enterprise, who shall dispute the remarkable
success of this venture?
The pity is that all State enterprises could not have been
conducted on the same strictly business principles and with
the same regard to the interests of the State. There is no
hesitation whatever in giving credit to the Labour Govern-
ment for having conceived such an institution, and for having
allowed it to be managed on such up-to-date principles without
any undue interference and apart altogether from political
considerations. Certainly, the State has been extraordinarily
fortunate in its choice of management. In Mr John Goodwin,
A.LA. (now deceased) the Government had a live, enterpris-
ing business man. Insurance organization in all its ramifi-
cations was his very life’s blood. While on the guard against
fraud in all branches of his business, he was fair and even
generous in all his dealings with the public. His successor,
Mr John Watson, F.1.C.A., carries on his ideals and thus
a public confidence is being bred in the people, who yearly
show more and more trust in their own institution, and as the
years go by, establish it on a firmer and more impregnable
base.
238
QUEENSLAND—


THE PUBLIC CURATOR
Shortly after the Ryan Government assumed office in 1915,
it performed an extremely useful service by passing the
Public Curator Act of 1915, subsequently amended in 1924,
and thus brought Queensland into line with Great Britain,
New Zealand, and some of the other States by creating an
Institution, not only of great utility to the people, but having
regard to the requirements of the times, an Institution of abso-
lute necessity. It is true that very trustworthy and financially
sound private companies had been in operation in Queensland
for some years, before the Public Curator was brought into
existence, and to some extent performed functions similar
to those performed by the Public Curator. They worked
under special Acts of Parliament; they gave security to the
Government for the due fulfilment of their obligations and
generally speaking, they performed a useful public service.
Nevertheless, there was a link missing in the chain of useful-
ness. The Private Company, while widely known and trusted
among a class, was not what might be termed “a people’s
Company.”
The Public Curator’s Office, on the other hand, is dis-
tinctly an institution of the people. We can picture the
Head of the Institution as a benevolent benefactor whose
life’s purpose is to serve the humblest and poorest mem-
bers of the community, while not despising the administra-
tion of the estates of the wealthy. He is the guardian
of widows and orphans; he protects the interests of inca-
pacitated persons; he acts as administrator under the wills
of the poorer classes of the community; he gives free ad-
vice in the matter of testamentary dispositions; he makes
wills without charge; he is an officer of the Supreme Court
of Queensland to whom the court can commit any duty
it pleases concerning administration or trusteeship, with the
certainty that the duty will be efficiently performed, and stand-
ing out above every other circumstance, he has the credit
of the State behind him, and thus offers the very widest and
most ample security for the due performance of his func-
tions.


The office of Public Curator is to-day in the hands of a
highly skilled and trusted official, Mr F. W. Mole, who is also
a Notary Public and Conveyancer of the Supreme Court.
A summary of the functions and utility of the Public Cura-
tor is to be found in a useful pamphlet published in 1920.
It is well worth reprinting for public enlightenment.
SAFETY AND PERMANENCE
The Public Curator is constituted a corporation sole with perpetual
succession and a seal of office. Regarding his power as trustee —(a)
Where the Crown, Governor in Council, Court, judge, or any person
can appoint a trustee, executor, administrator, guardians, etc., any of
such appointments may be made of the Public Curator if he consents;
(b) where the Crown, etc., desires to or can create any trust then,
unless expressly prohibited, the Crown, etc., may appoint the Public
Curator to be trustee; (c) trustees may appoint the Public Curator in
their place, but in some instances the consent of the Court must be
obtained; (d) the Public Curator may be appointed a new or additional
trustee. Wide powers are given to him in the administration of small
estates. In administration of trust estates as trustee, the Public
Curator may act with advisory trustees. He may also be appointed
custodian trustee. He may be appointed guardian of infants. When
acting in any capacity under and for the purposes of the Act, he has
the same powers, duties, and liabilities, and is entitled to the same rights
and immunities as an individual person acting in the same capacity.
He has a safe deposit office where any wills, debentures, etc., may be
kept for safe custody. In addition to any other powers in the Act,
the Curator has wide powers of dealing with trust property, such as
selling, leasing, exchanging, bringing or defending actions, etc. He
has also certain powers with respect to unclaimed property, including
unclaimed land, other property, and unclaimed money. Power has
been given to him to make regulations providing, inter alia, for legal
aid in any legal proceedings, by or against poor persons. The purport
of the Office is to ensure stability in the administration of trusts, in-
vestments, etc., combined with economy, and also to secure the speedy
and cheap administration of estates.
Safety in the first place and permanence in the second are indis-
pensable factors in administration. Due appreciation of this fact would
have saved from sorrow many a widow or orphan, who through ignor-
ance or misplaced trust has lost all or part of the money so laboriously
provided by husband or parent.
HE NEVER DIES OR BECOMES INSOLVENT
The Public Curator never dies, never leaves the State, never becomes
incapacitated, can always be found, cannot become insolvent, cannot
speculate with or improperly use trust moneys.
When there is not sufficient ready money in any estate to meet pres-
sing claims, the Public Curator may, to avoid the necessity of a forced
realization, advance moneys from his Common Fund on account of
the estate.
The officers and agents of the Public Curator are liable for any loss
due to neglect of regulations or instructions.
240
QUEENSLAND—


STAFF IS BOUND TO SECRECY
Every member of the staff of the Public Curator, and every agent
of the Public Curator, is bound to secrecy by declaration under the
Oaths Act.
Any solicitor, auctioneer, or agent employed by a testator, or settlor,
or acting in his professional capacity for the estate of a deceased person
which comes into the hands of the Public Curator for administration
will be retained by the Public Curator to act in that capacity for the
estate, unless for good cause shown to the contrary.
Nothing could be more inspiring than the record of the
growth of this People’s Institution. From necessarily small
beginnings, it has expanded from year to year, and, as time
goes by, promises to develop into an institution whose utility
is difficult to measure. Unlike its privately-owned prototypes,
it is not intended to be a money-making concern; while, on
the other hand, the small charges made preclude it from be-
coming a burden on the Treasury. Thus we find that in
the latest report dated sth September, 1929, the office had
continued ‘ho live up to its statutory duty of being self-
supporting” and that the surplus on the year’s transactions
amounted to 1 55 2S - Tl d- Since the inauguration of the
office of Ist January, 1916, the accumulated surpluses have
amounted to £53,035, of which sum £49,479 14s. id. has gone
towards the establishment of a reserve fund. Thus it will
be seen that in addition to having at its back the entire credit
of the State, there is a substantial sum available to make good
losses without calling upon the funds of the State for assist-
ance.
As showing the ramifications of the Institution, it may be
said that to 30th June, 1929, the Cash Receipts of the office
amounted to £1,126,044 3s. and the Disbursements to
£1,118,524 Bs. .rod. The above-mentioned Cash Receipts have
grown to their present dimensions from £281,533, at which
figure they stood in 1916. The estimated value of wills and
trusts taken over during 1928 was £2,085,750, and the number
of estates administered during the same year reached a total
of 1580, of a value of £907,785
To indicate the growing popularity of the Institution, it
may be said that the number of wills held for safe custody
on 30th June, 1929, was 28,159, it being assumed that the
testators in all cases have provided for their estates being
administered by the Public Curator.
It is pot proposed to overburden this short reference to
an Institution of great and growing importance with too
great detail. Year by year, the general public are learning


the value of a Government guarantee in the administration
of their estates. Year by year, it becomes increasingly less
necessary to advertise the Public Curator. The people are
advertising him and his beneficent Institution themselves.
He is in very truth a species of benevolent uncle to the public,
and should there be anyone in doubt, let it be repeated again
that the main advantages to be gained by testing his benevo-
lence are as follows :
1. The Public Curator never dies.
In this respect he is like the King. Just as we say “The King is
dead; long live the King,” so we can apply the same principle to
the Public Curator.
2. The Public Curator in all his transactions is backed by a State
Guarantee.
3. The Public Curator could never make default —unless the State
itself made default. Therefore, you can trust him with your gold
sleeve links or the £IOO,OOO legacy which you are going to make to
the Queensland University.
4. The Public Curator never neglects his work. He has a trained
staff of skilled assistants in all Departments and the work of his
office is done with the regularity of a ticking clock.
5. The Public Curator, unlike some private trustees, never refuses to
act from caprice or by reason of want of experience. The business
of Trustee is his life’s job, and he knows it from Alpha to Omega
6. The Public Curator is always on the job. You could not find him
absent from duty in business days and during business hours.
7. The Public Curator can be relied upon not to chatter about your
private business. All his transactions are carried out on a strictly
confidential basis.
8. The Public Curator will follow your instructions during your life
or after your death. He will protect the interests of your widow,
and will be a sort of stepfather to your children.
9. The Public Curator never tires of his job even if it is laborious and
intricate. A private trustee can, and sometimes does, grow weary,
but this official knows no fatigue. Like a heavenly body he travels
in his orbit; does everything he should do at the appointed time,
and never wants winding up.
10. The Public Curator is not a cheap and nasty Trustee. He is
reasonable in his charges, but he is efficient in performance.
The foregoing ten reasons for patronizing your own Insti-
tution cannot be challenged on the ground of unsoundness.
They are just ten facts, and it is a dull public who will not
appreciate them.
242
QUEENSLAND—


SAVINGS BANKS
As early in the history of the State as 1864, the Queens-
land Parliament passed the Government Savings Bank Act.
An institution so closely bound up with the social conditions
of the people deserves some mention when the political his-
tory of the State is being recorded.
In a report dated Bth June, 1865, W. L. G. Drew, then Under
Secretary to the Treasury, spoke of the opening of the first
branch offices on Ist January, 1865* They were established
at Brisbane, Ipswich, Rockhampton, Maryborough, Too-
woomba, Gladstone, Dalby, Surat, Warwick, Gayndah, Bowen,
Mackay, Cardwell and the Shipping Office, Brisbane.
Branches were entrusted to the care of Police Magistrates.
There was a Brisbane Branch of the Moreton Bay Savings
Bank which had been established under the Moreton Bay
Savings Bank Act of 1854 (New South Wales), with the
Governor as president and a board of trustees. At the end
of 1864 there were 877 depositors with a total credit of
£31,481, or an average of one depositor to about 84 head of
population, and an average sum of Bs. 6d. per head. On Ist
July, 1865, this business was taken over by the Government
Savings Bank.
On 31st December, 1874, there was to credit of 11,426 de-
positors no less a sum than £576,536, or an average of one
depositor to about 14 head of population, and an average sum
of £3 10s. 6d. per head. It will thus be seen that in 10 years
the Bank had established itself firmly in the confidence of the
people, and was cultivating amongst them habits of frugality.
We next turn to the report of E. B. Cullen, Under Secretary
to the Treasurer in 1884, and we find that at the end of that
year the depositors numbered 33,067, with deposits to their
credit amounting to £1,220,614, that is, one depositor to every
9 head of population, and £3 18s. gd. per head in accumulated
savings. The average amount at credit in each account was
£36 18s. 3d. As compared with the previous year there had
been an increase of 4249 depositors and of £56,641 in the
total amount at credit.


At the end of 1894, T. M. King, then Under Secretary to
the Treasury, reported still further progress. Compared with
1893, the deposits for 1894 showed an increase of £220,277,
and ati the end of the year the depositors numbered 51,455
with a sum at credit amounting to £2,095,892, averaging one
depositor to less than 9 head of population and £4 14s. 2d.
per head at credit; the average sum at credit in each account
was £4O 14s. Bd. There were at this time 126 branches
throughout the State, compared with 104 in 1884, 63 in 1874
and 29 in 1865.
In August, 1904, C. S. Miles, Manager of the Bank, re-
ported that to 30th June of that year the total to the credit
of 80,959 depositors was £3,741,967; the number of depositors
averaged one in about 6 of the population, with £46 4s. sd.
per depositor at credit, or an average of £7 Js. 2d. per head
of population.
In August, 1914, C. S. Miles again reported on the opera-
tions of the Bank, and gave a most interesting comparison of
transactions, which is the more remarkable because in the
meantime the Commonwealth Bank had entered into com-
petition with the State Savings Bank, as referred to later.
At the end of the financial year, 30th June, 1914, there had been
an increase in depositors’ balances in the last decade aggregat-
ing no less a sum than £5,609,032, and an increase in the
number of depositors of 96,002. By this time the total num-
ber of depositors had grown to 176,961, and the interest added
to their accounts for the year was £247,647. Since the Bank
had opened in 1865, frugal citizens had put by a total of
£9,350,999; there were now depositors numbering one to less
than every four of the population; the average at credit per
depositor was £52 16s. lod. and per head of population £l4
os. id.
The method of control of the Savings Bank was altered
by “The Queensland Government Savings Bank Act of 1916.”
Previously it had been a sub-department of the Treasury.
On Ist January, 1917, it came under the control of a Com-
missioner appointed by the Government, and became a self-
contained financial institution, with a wider sphere of activity
for two other lending sub-departments were combined with
the Savings Bank proper, namely, the Agricultural Bank,
which dealt with Government loans to the man on the land,
and the former Workers’ Dwellings Board, which managed
Government loans for housing the people.
In September, 1920, W. L. Fowles, the Savings Bank Com-
missioner, reported that the deposits made during the year
244
QUEENSLAND—


Cash on hand and at call
ii, 572,789,
or
234%
Bank premises
179,690,
or
ii%
Advances to settlers
Advances for Workers’ Dwellings
i,77S,ooo 1
1,149,304 J
■or
195%
Queensland Government Securities
7,802,156,
or
5ii%
Commonwealth War Loan Securities ..
696,820,
or
44%
*I5J75,759
100%
to 30th June, 1920, amounted to £13,241,007, while the with-
drawals were £13,189,140. With interest amounting to
£477,123 at per cent per annum, accrued for the year, the
large sum of £14,851,136 stood to credit of the Bank’s 275,428
depositors, being an increase of £528,990 on the year’s trans-
actions, and an increase of 13,526 in the number of deposi-
tors. The average sum at credit of depositors was £53 18s.
sd. and the total at their credit was equivalent to £2O Bs. 4d.
per head of population. The proportion of depositors to the
population of the State was one to about every two and a
half, that is out of every hundred men, women and children,
about forty had Savings Bank accounts.
There were at this time 528 branches of the Bank distri-
buted throughout every district in the State. The funds of
the institution were held as follows: —
The large sum invested in Government securities as shown
by the foregoing table reveals the extent to which the Savings
Bank was helping to finance the Government.
At this period, 1920, the history of the Queensland Govern-
ment Savings Bank comes to an abrupt termination.
The Commonwealth Bank of Australia was established on
22nd December, 1911, and up to June, 1912, it was content
to leave the Savings Bank field free and open to the States.
Very early in its history, however, Denison Miller, the first
Governor of the Bank, cast avaricious eyes on the people’s
savings, and by 13th January, 1913, Commonwealth Savings
Bank operations were extended throughout the whole of Aus-
tralia.
It was not an altogether satisfactory arrangement to have
two authorities competing for these funds. The Common-
wealth, being the National Bank, had a slight advantage in
prestige, and as some depositors thought, in security. Never-
theless, the State Bank continued its operations; funds flowed
freely into it, and the State Government had the great advan-
tage of having trust funds at its disposal which could be pro-


fitably used for developmental purposes. After the Labour
Government had been in Office for about five years, an agree-
ment was come to with the Commonwealth Bank of Australia
for the State to abandon the State Savings Bank on certain
conditions which were embodied in an Act of Parliament,
dated 6th December, 1920, ratifying an Agreement which had
been entered into between the State Government and the
Commonwealth Bank on 22nd June, 1920.
It is quite impracticable to quote the whole agreement here,
but it can be said that the Government transferred to the
Commonwealth Bank of Australia the business and assets of
the Queensland Government Savings Bank, and the Com-
monwealth Bank accepted the liabilities of the State Savings
Bank as on 30th June, 1919, amounting to £14,325,069 12s. 2d.
The actual transfer of operations did not take place until Bth
December, 1920, on which date the State Savings Bank ceased
to function; the assets had at that time increased to nearly
£15,000,000, with a corresponding increase in the liabilities.
The State retained the accumulated profits of the Bank. The
two lending sub-departments dealing with advances to Settlers
and Workers’ Dwellings were retained by the State.
There were quite a number of conditions attached to the
agreement which will be found set out in detail in the Act of
1920; one of the conditions was that the State Government
should receive half the profits on the Savings Bank business
in Queensland, but the one which affected the State most
materially was that the State Government should have the
right to draw from time to time on loan from the Common-
wealth Bank of Australia 70 per centum of such sum or sums
as the Governor of the Bank from time to time notified to be
the increase in the amount of the Savings Bank depositors’
balances in Queensland. The apportionment of 70 per centum
was based on the proportion of Savings Bank business being
dealt with by the two institutions in competition, namely 70
per centum by the State and 30 per centum by the Common-
wealth Savings Bank in Queensland. In the eyes of some
critics the loss of control of the Savings Bank Trust Funds was
the dy in the ointment. By this arrangement we had behind us
the prestige and security of the Commonwealth Bank with
which it was not good policy to compete. Nevertheless it
must be admitted that some other States have continued their
competition, notably Victoria, and New South Wales with
its recently completed palatial building in Castlereagh Street,
Sydney. Note: Just before this book went to press the old-
established Savings Bank of N.S.W. closed its doors. Prob-
246
QUEENSLAND—


ably Queensland did the right thing in coming to an agree-
ment with the Commonwealth Bank regarding the collection
and safe keeping of the people’s savings; the agreement was
linked up with a general arrangement between the two
Governments for the State Government to hand over to the
Commonwealth Bank the general banking business of the
State in Australia, London and abroad, including the flotation
of State loans.


AN ELECTION DISAGREEMENT
THE CASE OF F. M. FORDE AND OTHERS
The Commonwealth Act of 10th October, 1902, “to Regulate
Parliamentary Elections,” provided in section 96, p. 356, of
Vol. 1, Federal Statutes, that “No person who is at the date
of nomination or who was at any time within fourteen days
prior to the date of nomination a member of the Parliament
of a State, shall be capable of being nominated as a Senator,
or as a member of the House of Representatives.”
In its session of 1921, by an Act assented to on 24th
November, 1921, entitled “The Legislative Assembly Act
Amendment Act of 1921,” the Queensland Parliament enacted
that —
‘T. Whenever a vacancy occurs in the Legislative Assembly
by reason of any member resigning his seat therein for the
purpose of seeking election for the Parliament of the Com-
monwealth of Australia, if such member tenders his resigna-
tion within fourteen days prior to the date of the issue of the
writ for the said election, and notifies in writing to the Speaker
his intention to seek such election, and his intention, in the
event of his failing to secure such election, to become again a
candidate for the vacancy in the Legislative Assembly afore-
said, then the issue of the writ for the election of a member
to fill such vacancy shall be delayed until the result of the
said Commonwealth Election shall have been first officially
declared by the Returning Officer thereof.
“2. If the member so resigning his seat and notifying the
Speaker as aforesaid —
(i.) Having become a candidate, fails to secure election
for the Parliament of the Commonwealth; and
(ii.) Is nominated as a candidate for the vacancy occur-
ring by reason of his own resignation as afore-
said ;
the Returning Officer to whom the writ is directed shall forth-
with, without holding a poll, and notwithstanding the nomin-


ation of any other candidate or candidates, publicly declare
him to be duly elected to fill the said vacancy; and the writ
shall be so returned.”
It must be admitted now, even by political partisans, that
this was a somewhat cavalier way of wiping off the slate the
Commonwealth electoral law. It was in fact an indignity
inflicted upon the Commonwealth itself and naturally could
not be tolerated. Moreover, such law while it placed Mr
F. M. Forde and others outside the provisions of the Com-
monwealth electoral law, also had the effect of denying
the right of any other duly qualified elector to stand for
the vacancy in the Electoral District of Rockhampton, or
any other Electoral District. No doubt, whoever was re-
sponsible for the idea, it was a clever conception, but in order
that the scheme might work without hitch it would have been
necessary to drug the Commonwealth Electoral officials as
well at the Commonwealth Government.
Only a month after the Queensland law had been passed,
the Commonwealth Government took up the challenge and
by the Commonwealth Electoral Act of 1921 it was provided
that—
1. No person who
(a)
(b)
(c) has resigned from the Parliament of a State and has the
right, under the law of the State, if not elected to the Parliament of
the Commonwealth, to be re-elected to the Parliament of the
State without the holding of a Poll, —
shall be capable of being nominated as a Senator, or as a Member
of the House of Representatives. (See Commonwealth Statutes,
1921, Vol. XIX, p. 54).
Thus it came about that the Commonwealth Government
promptly suppressed the Queensland attempt to nullify its
electoral law, and withdrew from Mr F. M. Forde and others
the opportunity of having two strings to their bow, and re-
maining, if defeated at the Commonwealth election, members
of the local legislature without having to incur the cost or
trouble of contesting the seat.
Subsequently —on sth October, 1922, the day after the
session was completed, Mr F. M. Forde resigned his seat in
the local legislature and won the Commonwealth Capricornia
election.
In the following session (1922) the Queensland Legisla-
ture repealed the law passed in the session of 1921, for it
appeared quite manifest that if the law remained on the


Statute Book, a member would probably be debarred from
contesting a Federal Election whether he resigned his seat
in the ordinary way or whether he took advantage of the Act
of 1921.
Thus we find that there can be no short cuts either into
the Federal Parliament or the Queensland State Parliament,
and that the Commonwealth law being paramount in election
as well as in all other matters, it must be complied with,
even though it may place some restraint upon ambitious
politicians.
EDUCATION TESTS
A study of the trend of legislation in modern times would
indicate that in a growing number of the principal walks of
life it is now recognized as essential that persons desiring to
practise certain professions must qualify, not only by exam-
ination in the technical details of the calling by which they
propose to make a living, but also by passing a general
education test as a proof that they are possessed of an
amount of mental cultivation somewhat above the average
citizen. In the profession of the law a very high standard
is set. Not only is a man compelled to prove by examination
that he has a close familiarity with legal subjects, but that
he has had a mental training in dead and live languages,
mathematics, etc. A similar procedure is followed in the case
of the noble profession of medicine, which necessitates a Uni-
versity course. As the years have passed persons interested
in the various professions have been concerned in keeping
up the istandard of the practitioner who desires to enter the
ranks, and hence from time to time Parliament has gladly
come to the rescue by passing such measures as the Dental
Act, the Opticians Act, Electricians Act, the Professional
Engineers Act, et hoc genus omne. Argument has been used
time and again that by passing such Acts close corporations
are created which prevent skilled persons from becoming re-
gistered, by reason of the fact that they are devoid of book
learning in subjects isomewhat foreign to their profession.
In days of long ago the famous John Hoolan, M.L.A., con-
vulsed the House by a lecture he gave upon dentistry, prov-
ing to his own entire satisfaction that back country residents
were doomed to perpetual toothache, if the village blacksmith
was prevented from practising elementary dentistry. Since
those days we have passed the Dental Act and other measures
of like nature which restrict the practising of professions
250
QUEENSLAND—


of various kinds to qualified persons who are willing
to submit themselves to examination. There seems
little doubt that such restrictions are wholesome and in
accord with the most modern ideas on such subjects, provided
always that special Acts of the nature referred to are not used
for purposes of exploiting the public by making ridiculously
extravagant charges. Infinite harm may be and has been
wrought by ignorant charlatans, who by imposing on the
public seek an easy method of earning a living. Such restric-
tions as have been imposed have been conceived entirely in
the public interest, and in the end the public are the gainers.
They may have to pay a little more for skilled attention, but
the risk of being permanently injured by imposters has been
eliminated.
The foregoing remarks are written with a view of calling
attention to the somewhat pressing necessity for the initiation
of an education test for Members of Parliament. One could
give a very great number of instances in which the educational
qualifications of Members of Parliament are extremely ele-
mentary. It is somewhat amazing that in order to practise
that complicated profession of political economist; in order
to make laws for the governance of the most illiterate and
the most cultivated members of the community alike, no
qualification whatever appears to be necessary beyond that
of being able to persuade electors to put the figure “1” in a
square. Now that feat calls for quite an insignificant amount
of education, but once having cajoled a sufficient number of
stupid people to put a sufficient number of figure “l’s” in a
sufficient number of squares, the person who has accom-
plished that educational wonder, has then merely to take
the oath of allegiance to his Sovereign and is let loose in
the legislature, not merely to commit murderous assaults
upon his mother tongue but to do an infinity of harm
by recording his vote for quite a number of propositions
which he has not the mental qualifications to grasp. It
is a situation which, while full of humour, has its tragic side
and one which is well worthy of the attention of reformers. It
certainly does add to the gaiety of nations to hear one of the
people’s chosen representatives refer with great solemnity
to “ ’ams, ’ats, ’oney, and ’ops,” or to listen to the Chair-
man of Committees chiding the House by declaring “Hi ham
the Standing Horders,” or to be told in dulcet tones that
“If you ’eave a stone at a ’eap of dogs and you ’ear a ’owl
you know you’ve ’it one,” but one never knows what im-
pression it may make upon a distinguished visitor sitting on


the dais beside Mr Speaker. What reward shall be given
to a legislator who speaks of “a lodestone around the neck
of a dead debt/’ or to the one who with great solemnity tells
a House, which is hanging on his every word, that “the public
debt is not paying its way.” Are we to be sorry or angry
when one of the people’s choice gives this advice —“Let
us go into this properly. Let the soldier put his heart and
soul, his war bond, and his pension into the land.” What
shall we say about emphasizing the obvious when we are told:
“The wool which these sheep would have grown, if they had
not died, will not be sold this year;” or that “the dead hand
of socialism, growing year by year, causes a festering sore
which should be removed.” Is it through excessive egoism
or modesty that we are informed that “The people who go
to make up my electorate are very optimistic, otherwise I
would not be hereand what an observer of nature was he
who remarked, “You’re like the death adder. You stick
your tail in your ear.” And did you ever hear of the Parlia-
mentary institution which was “ ’amstringed,” or of the ostrich
“who sticks his ’ead in the sand and defies the public?” Some-
times we have heard of that futile effort made by some
people “to paint the Lily,” but did you ever know that “the
Lily cannot be painted when there is a £2,000,000 deficit?”
And so we might wander on endlessly giving example after
example of unpolished diction, mixed metaphor, and the
unfamiliarity of members with the English language. Under
such circumstances, is it to be wondered at that a call goes
forth for the application of the same rule to the Legislature as
is applied to the professions. Is not law-making a profes-
sion? Is not political economy a science? And why should
certain persons be allowed to practise a science under the
authority of votes only, and be assumed to have wisdom
above the ordinary to make laws on every subject under the
sun, when the same persons require that a man who draws
a tooth, makes a pair of spectacles, builds a bridge, or dis-
penses a simple medical prescription, should be an educated
and cultivated man. This aspect of the legislative machine is
well worth thinking over.
THE VIRTUE OF SILENCE
Honourable Members of to-day will hardly believe that
in times long since passed, it was not considered etiquette
for a new member to speak at all during his first session
252
QUEENSLAND—


in the House. The change which has come over the spirit
of the dream is so marked that it is well worth while calling
attention to the altered circumstances. The new politician,
so far from “sitting at the feet of Gamaliel” and drinking
in the words of wisdom and experience which fall from the
lips of wise old politicians who have weathered the storms
of Parliament after Parliament, now seeks the very first
opportunity of airing his eloquence and teaching the sages.
We are told that “When Rabban Gamaliel the Elder died,
regard for the Torah (the study of the law) ceased, and
purity and piety died.” If we are to judge by our experience
of the local legislature, our own Rabban Gamaliel died long
long ago, for to-day we see very little evidence among new
politicians of the virtues of his teaching, nor does there appear
any great desire, even on the part of the most obscure poli-
tician, to sit at anyone’s feet and learn. Rather do many
of them come to Parliament to teach profound doctrines
which years before had been exploded by experienced poli-
ticians and cast aside as mere futilities. To-day the poli-
tician with the non-stop tongue is a commonplace and
more or less of a nuisance when serious business is being
handled. A wise man once advised us not to judge the
speed of a motor car, the importance of a man, or the
weight of a baby, by the noise they make. There are poli-
ticians who could take such advice to heart with advantage.
It is more or less true that the existence of Hansard is
responsible for undue activity in the matter of speech. It has
come to be used in modern times merely as an advertising
medium, and considering the enormous expense of the pro-
duction and the uses it is put to, it is well worth consideration
whether it has not outlived what little usefulness it ever had.
Law-making is a science. The unfortunate fact is that it
has come to be regarded as a mere occupation. While that
condition of affairs remains, then it is natural that the adver-
tising side of the politician’s job will not be lost sight of.
Honourable members with ambitions might well remember
the experience of the late A. H. Barlow who when first re-
turned for Ipswich was eternally in evidence. A day came
when the Courier told him he had the makings of a Minister
if he would but keep quiet. He did keep quiet for a while,
with the result that for many years afterwards he filled the
role of a-species of journeyman Minister with a permanent job
in any Ministry that was going. Think of the possibilities 1
If seventy-two men all restrained their tongues they might all
become Ministers.


THE SPEAKERSHIP
No apology is offered for saying a few words in this volume
in regard to the Speakership of the House. The office of
Speaker throughout all English speaking Parliaments should,
even if it has not always done so, typify the three great
characteristics of dignity, tact, and impartiality. Generally
speaking it may be said that Speakers as we have known
them in this State have been seized of the great traditions
of the office as handed down to us by the Mother of Parlia-
ments, and have performed their duties with becoming dig-
nity and decorum. If there have been exceptions it is not
desirable to mention them, for it would have a lowering effect
on the honour and dignity of Parliament and on the estima-
tion in which the high office is held by serious-minded citi-
zens. If in the view of a few flippant persons “dignity” is
an old world attribute which should be discarded; if ceremony
be regarded by them as a relic of savagery; if distinctive
official dress be viewed as effeminacy, well —what matter!
Let them take pleasure in their ignorance; let them derive
what satisfaction they can from idle chuckles and ribald
utterances. The more we surround our high public offices
with dignity, the more we emphasize power and authority;
and the less we respect power and authority, the nearer shall
we draw to violent disregard of it. Only a very thin par-
tition divides irresponsibility and disrespect for conventions,
from defiance, and it is all the more necessary therefore that
in these days of equality we should do nothing to lower our
standards and our traditional respect for authority. It is of
high importance that we should ever remember the signi-
ficance of emblems. The Lord Mayor in his Chain and Robes
of office symbolizes civic power and authority. Would we
prefer to see him in a blue serge suit covered with grease
spots? We take off our hats (or some of us do) when “God
Save the King” is played by the band. Why? Because it
is emblematic of nationhood and our love for our country.
Mr Speaker's gown and lace bands, what are they? Emblems
of power and authority, of order and decency in debate. On
3rd June would we like to see His Excellency the Governor
come down to Parliament House in a suit of grey flannel to
receive the homage of the people to their King? His uniform
and decorations are emblematic of the Head of the State.
Would we like to see our judges on the bench in shirt sleeves
and smoking cigarettes? It is to be hoped not. And why?
254
QUEENSLAND—


Their gowns, their wigs are emblematic of the fount of justice
and the strength of justice pure and undefiled. Our church
dignitaries, shall they go into their pulpits clothed in singlets
and a pair of trousers and bedroom slippers? What are their
robes but symbols of Christianity. And so right through the
whole gamut. One remembers how at the unveiling of the
statue erected to the memory of Tom Ryan, a youth in the
crowd was reminded that he had not taken off his hat:
“Mister/’ he said, “this is my ’at and it’s going to stay on
my ’ead.” The poor boor. He had no knowledge that
the removal of his hat was symbolic of respect for the dead.
Unhappily in Australia there is an inclination to scorn sym-
bols and emblems. In the National Parliament Charles Mac-
donald as Speaker in the House of Representatives scorned
the gown and wig, and Harry Tuley followed suit in the
Senate President’s Chair. In Queensland McCormack thought
hard before he came to a decision, and to his credit be it said,
he saw the mighty power for good a distinctive dress con-
noted. Bertram for his first session scorned the Speaker’s
robes, but subsequently domestic vanity prevailed, and
father’s intensely democratic instincts gave way before the
onslaughts of conceit and the gratulation of the multitude.
Lennon adhered during his short Speakership to a plain grey
suit with never a mark upon him to distinguish him from the
messengers except that he sat in a commanding position. In
this connection it is highly interesting to quote the observa-
tions of the London Observer on the latest developments in
the Federal Parliament.
“The photograph of the new Speaker of the Australian
House of Representatives, wigless, gownless, and maceless,
is a gaunt and disappointing spectacle. Mr Makin looks
merely an unvenerable man of no importance, which is exactly
how a Speaker should not look. Whatever he may be as a
lay figure, he puts on with the wig and gown the historic
and tremendous personality of Parliament: He is no longer a
member, but an Idea. He speaks with another voice and
authority than his own. Indeed in a profoundly metaphysical
sense the office makes the man. Mr Gladstone once said
that every man he knew who was appointed Archbishop of
Canterbury had proved adequate to the position in a degree
which could not in some cases have been conceived possible
from a study of natural qualifications. I imagine that to
a large extent the same has held good of the Speakership of
the House of Commons.”
One cannot help being struck with the propriety and dig-


nity of such a remonstrance. That the high office of “First
Commoner in the Land” should be so belittled by people
who have never taken the trouble to read or understand the
traditions of the Speakership, and who regard it in the com-
monplace light of the chairmanship of a meeting, is an un-
doubted misfortune. If our Speakers abandon robes and
lace bands; if our Church dignitaries resolve to go bare-
footed and with their trousers in holes; if our University
professors of great learning despised the time-honoured cus-
tom of wearing distinctive coloured hoods; if our judges
sat in their shirt sleeves and squirted tobacco juice over the
court flour, what a commonplace and vulgar thing a public
function would become, and how cheap and disrespectfully
it would be held by the populace. The writer ventures to
assert that the more we exalt our high offices, the more dis-
tinctive we make the dress of our high functionaries, the
more respect we instil into the minds of the people for con-
stituted authority, the better citizens they will become and
remain.
VANISHING PETITIONS
In the good old days of fifty years or more ago a Petition
to the Legislature was something to conjure with. Indeed
if we look to our “May,” our “Redlich,” “Cushing,” “Bouri-
not,, Todd” and away back to our old friend “Hatsell,” we
find that the petition was an almost sacred document and
the signatories privileged persons who addressed in humble
language a fervid prayer to the High Court of Parliament
praying for the righting of a wrong, real or imaginary. “May”
says that “the right of petitioning the Crown and Parliament
for redress of grievances, is acknowledged as a fundamental
principle of the constitution, and has been uninterruptedly
exercised from very early times.” Indeed we find in the
Magna Charta of King John the mystic words nulli nega-
bimus vel justitiam, which being interpreted mean “To no
one will be denied justice” or words to that effect, and if we
want further evidence of the right of petition we have only
to refer to Article 5 of the Bill of Rights (William and Mary).
The old form of receiving petitions and having them ex-
amined by “triers,” consisting of prelates peers and judges,
who submitted the cases to the High Court of Parliament if
the common law offered no redress, has long since fallen into
desuetude though the House of Lords continued the system
as late as 1886. It is difficult to say why Petitions, in the
256
QUEENSLAND—


Parliament of Queensland at least, have almost vanished
as dreams. Probably it arises in consequence of the inten-
sive system of party Government which has taken possession
of the legislature, and the suspicion which arises in the minds
of politicians that a petition must necessarily be a party
weapon, and that behind it lies a dark and deep-laid scheme
to a temporary political advantage. If that is not the
reason it is difficult to find one. The petitions of individuals
to Parliament have possibly shrunken out of sight because
of the recognition by the people that Parliament is a futile
court to which a personal grievance may be submitted with
any hope of redress. Rather do they depend for the righting
of wrongs more than they used to, upon police courts, arbi-
tration courts, and other means of defence which a thoughtful
Parliament has conferred upon a down-trodden people.
Moreover in the case of petitions from corporations or
other concerning proposed legislation, the jealousy
of party politics is again manifest. A party makes up its
mind to legislate in a given direction, and if those engaged
in occupations likely to be adversely affected by the legisla-
tion even petition to be heard by Counsel at the bar of the
House, the request is regarded with suspicion and the process
has no semblance of popularity. In days long gone by,
private legislation was always initiated by petition, and then
followed an elaborate and complicated process of referring
the Bill to a Select Committee and subsequently devoting a
portion of private members’ time to the consideration of the
measure. That practice too is fast vanishing. There is
practically no time allotted to private members, on account
of the urgency of Government Business, and the only hope a
private Bill has of passing through the legislature is that it
may be endorsed by the ruling party and be put through
all its stages by a private member as if it were a Govern-
ment measure. We look back to the days as far away as 1871
when we find as many as sixteen petitions presented and read
to Parliament, and action of some kind taken on all of them.
There have been years when many more have been presented
but the majority of them were on one subject which happened
to be agitating the people at the period. Compare that condi-
tion of things with what happened in the session of 1929,
when T. A. Dunlop, member for Rockhampton, presented
a petition from the Queensland Petroleum Institute of Bris-
bane in relation to. certain clauses of the Petroleum Act
Amendment Bill then before the House and the House
abruptly refused to have the petition read. If T. A. Dunlop


had ever heard of Magna Charta, this indeed would have
afforded him a noble opportunity of expounding the provisions
of that charter of liberty and enlarging upon such a wicked
infringement of the people’s liberties. It would have been
an impressive incident if he had, under cover of privilege,
taken as his text Nulli negabimus vel justitiam and addressed
the House in the Latin tongue. It was a lost opportunity
which may never arrive again. Viewing the situation as a
whole one is inclined to express the view that petitions are
to a large extent futile documents. Parliament does not
need petitions to call its attention to grievances in these days.
A genuine grievance, public or private, will be taken up by
the press and by numerous Parliamentary watchdogs who
are ever ready to make known the woes of either individuals
or corporations. There is no harm in allowing the right of
petitioning Parliament to remain, but in these advanced days
it leads us nowhere.
THE COUNTRY-NATIONAL PARTY
The Country Party was first announced in Parliament as a
separate entity by the Honourable J. G. Appel in Hansard
of 13th July, session of 1915-16. This followed Macart-
ney’s statement that he had been elected Leader of “The
Constitutional Opposition.” Approximately, the Country
Party at this period numbered twelve to fifteen. Some useful
information concerning former Country Parties in the Legis-
lative Assembly of Queensland is to be found in Queensland
Politics During Sixty Years (Bernays), pp. 147-149. Right
throughout the history of the Parliament, from its earliest
days, a desire has been manifest to distinguish country
representatives per se from the representatives of large
centres of population. It is a perfectly natural manifestation,
but naturally has the effect at times of preventing that
cohesion so necessary in a composite opposition when opposed
to a strong Government party. It is true that in the past
difficulties have arisen which have prevented the necessary
cohesion being maintained, but in the end sound common-
sense has prevailed and the two opposition parties have
coalesced; though the Country Party still maintains its right
to hold separate party meetings for the discussion of problems
exclusively attached to land settlement and production.
The announcement of a “working arrangement” between
the two parties was first made in Parliament by A. E. Moore
258
QUEENSLAND—


on 29th July, 1924. On that occasion he said that each party
would retain its identity, its officers and organization being
entirely separate, but that they had enough in common, in
the interests of the State, to work together in Opposition on
the Floor of the House. This statement was made after
a joint meeting of the two Opposition Parties held on 9th
April, 1924, at which Mr Moore was elected Leader of the
Opposition, Mr Taylor having announced that he was not a
candidate. The two parties went to the country as one party
in 1926, and have been a united party ever since.
PARLIAMENT HOUSE AS A DANCING SALOON
Shortly after the Moore Government came into office in
1929 Queensland was honoured by a visit by that very fine
French Warship Tourville. At the same period there were
in port two units of the Australian Navy, and opportunity
was taken by the Government to entertain the officers of the
various ships at an evening reception in Parliament House.
The novel plan was conceived of clearing the large refresh-
ment room of furniture and giving a dance. It was a some-
what unique spectacle to see the sacred feeding and drinking
ground of Parliament, which Members so jealously guard,
occupied by hundreds of flappers, semi-flappers and their
elders, all devotees of the muse of dancing and choral song—
Terpsichore. Having regard to the craze for amusement by
the present generation this action on the part of the new
Government made Parliament House quite fin de siecle and
had the effect of lightening the gloom which rests upon this
somewhat dour structure. There were possibly a few mutter-
ings over what was regarded by some as a sacrilege, but on
the whole the experiment was distinctly successful and might
with advantage be repeated.
THE VISITS OF THE PRINCES
The use of Parliament House for purposes other than legis-
lation and supplying the needs of Members of Parliament is
not without precedent. In 1920, the whole of the western
wing was set apart for the use of His Royal Highness The
Prince of Wales and suite. The arrangement was an excel-
lent one, for there was no other building in the city so well
adapted to such a purpose or which provided such ample


accommodation. Later on in 1927? Queensland was honoured
by a visit from Their Royal Highnesses The Duke and
Duchess of York, and a very spectacular function in the form
of an evening reception was arranged in Parliament House
by the late Labour Government.
EARLY POLITICIANS AND THE FROZEN MEAT
TRADE
Politicians of wide vision and a sense of responsibility to
their country are in a position to perform many useful acts
entirely outside the walls of Parliament. An illustration of
that fact can be found in the circumstances that it was due
to the action of politicians fifty years ago that Queensland
initiated a frozen meat export trade. Certainly the trade has
met with many vicissitudes since those far-off days through
a variety of causes, but the men who had the vision to try
an experiment, having very far-reaching effects on Queens-
land production, and try it too at their own cost, deserve
something more than a passing mention. It is interesting
to note, therefore, that the initiation of the frozen meat trade
was celebrated in London, at the Savoy Hotel on February
6th, 1930, by a Jubilee Banquet. It was the fiftieth anniver-
sary of the arrival at the East India Docks of the steamer
Strathleven with the first shipment of forty tons of beef and
mutton, loaded at Sydney, and frozen aboard. The meat
landed in good condition, a carcass of lamb being sent to
Queen Victoria. The shipment was arranged by four Queens-
landers, Sir Thomas Mcllwraith and Messrs. B. D. Morehead,
William Collins, and Robert Collins. They were assisted
by Messrs Hastings, Cunningham, and George Fairbairn, of
Melbourne. The Strathleven was chartered by Mr Andrew
Mcllwraith, and fitted with a Bell-Coleman refrigerator. The
risk of the shipment was borne by Mcllwraith, McEachern
and Co.
260
QUEENSLAND—


THE MUNGANA-CHILLAGOE INQUIRY
held before
MR EX-JUSTICE J. L. CAMPBELL
under the
OFFICIAL INQUIRIES EVIDENCE ACT
1910-1929
For the purpose of accurate historical record, the Complete
Reference to The Royal Commissioner, and the summary of
his Report, are printed here as constituting an important
incident in the Political History of Queensland.
The Reference to the Royal Commissioner indicates quite
clearly the outstanding features of certain transactions which
for years were the cause of much political contention
between the two opposing parties in the Queensland Legis-
lature. The Opposition led by A. E. Moore, had again and
again endeavoured to secure the appointment of a Royal Com-
mission of Inquiry, but had met with no success. When,
therefore, the Moore Party attained power in May, 1929, it
was determined to finally clear up the matter by referring it
for Inquiry by a Judge of the Supreme Court under the
Official Inquiries Evidence Act. It is understood that no
Judge of the Queensland Bench was desirous of being as-
sociated with a matter which had caused so much political
contention, and the Government were therefore forced into
the position of seeking assistance from another State. Mr
Ex-Justice J. L. Campbell, late of the New South Wales
Bench, was finally persuaded to undertake the Inquiry.
A sequel to the Royal Commissioner’s Report was the in-
stitution of Civil Proceedings against Messrs E. G. Theodore
and W. McCormack, (both ex-Premiers of Queensland), and
Messrs Peter Louis Goddard and Frederick Reid for the
recovery of certain sums of money claimed from them by
the Queensland Government. At the time of writing, these
Civil Proceedings had not been concluded. It is not within
the scope of this history to record more than the bare facts


as embodied in official documents which have had an Aus-
tralian-wide circulation. Personal comment upon such a
delicate matter is specifically avoided.
ROYAL COMMISSION REFERENCE
Whereas it is expedient in the public interest that full and
careful inquiry should be made into:—
(1) The circumstances surrounding and leading up to the
appointment of Peter Louis Goddard as Chillagoe
Mines Manager under the provisions of “The Chillagoe
and Etheridge Railways Act of 1918
(2) The management of the works and property subject to
the management of Peter Louis Goddard as such
Chillagoe Mines Manager aforesaid;
(3) The conduct of the said Peter Louis Goddard generally
in the performance of his duties as such Manager and
more particularly his conduct as the Manager of the
Smelters and Ore Reduction and Treatment Works
and other property subject to his control, and man-
agement as such Chillagoe Mines Manager aforesaid;
(4) The interest or interests if any of the said Peter Louis
Goddard in any firm, company, or business, having
dealings or any business relationship with the said
Peter Louis Goddard as such Chillagoe Mines Manager
aforesaid;
(5) The circumstances surrounding and leading up to —
(a) The forfeiture of certain Mineral Leases in the
Area now known as the Chillagoe Gold and Mineral
Field held by or in the name of The Chillagoe
Railway and Mines Limited or by or on behalf of
the Mungana Mining Company Limited, and for-
feited on or about the First day of April, 1917;
(b) The acquisition of any Mineral Leases in the said
Area in the name of one Frederick Reid after the
said forfeiture;
(c) The formation and registration of a company called
“Mungana Mines Limited;”
( d ) The acquisition by the said “Mungana Mines
Limited” of certain Mineral Leases acquired as
aforesaid in the name of the said Frederick Reid or
any interest therein;
2 62
QUEENSLAND—


( e ) The sale by the said Frederick Reid and/or ‘ Mun-
gana Mines Limited” to the Government of
Queensland of any Mineral Leases in the said
Area;
(/) The purchase by the management of the smelters
and ore reduction and treatment works acquired
under “The Chillagoe and Etheridge Railways Act of
1918” of ores supplied from any Mineral Leases
sold as aforesaid to the Government of Queens-
land before or after such sale;
(6) The circumstances surrounding and leading up to the
formation and registration :
(a) of a company called “Fluorspar Mining Company
Limited
(b) a company called “Argentum Mining Company
Limited
(7) The dealings by and between the said Peter Louis
Goddard as such Chillagoe Mines Manager as afore-
said or any other person for or on behalf of the manage-
ment of the said smelters ore reduction and treatment
works and the said Fluorspar Mining Company Limited
and the said Argentum Mining Company Limited, the
firm of “Dunlop & Reid” carrying on business as
Sawyers and Timber Merchants at Tarzali, and the
firm of “Goddard & Reid” carrying on business as
Landowners and/or Hotelkeepers at Cairns;
(8) (a) The conduct and (b) the interest of any Minister
of the Crown or any person having any public or official
position under the Crown in relation to or in all or any
of the abovementioned matters, transactions, or things,
or any matter, transactions, or thing arising out of or
incidental to such matters, transactions, or things or
any of them ;
AND THAT such full and careful inquiry should be made
into all the abovementioned matters to the intent that the
whole truth as to such matters should be determined and
reported as hereinafter required and that it should be deter-
mined and reported as hereinafter required whether and if
so in what respect and to what degree any and what Minister
of the Crown or any and what person having any public or
official position under the Crown or any and what person
having any duty to the Government of Queensland was guilty
263
OUR SEVENTH POLITICAL DECADE, 1920-1930


of any conduct in relation to any of the abovementioned
matters, transactions, or things, or any matter, transaction,
or thing, arising out of or incidental to such transactions,
matters, or things, or any of them, which was improper, hav-
ing regard to the position and duty of such Minister of the
Crown or person the public interest and the whole of the cir-
cumstances, and that it should be determined and reported as
hereinafter required whether and if so in what respect and
to what degree any and if so what transaction hereinbefore
mentioned was inexpedient in the public interest or improper:
Now, therefore, know Ye that We, reposing especial trust
in your zeal, knowledge, learning, industry, discretion, and
ability, do by these Presents, by and with the advice of Oui
Executive Council of Our State of Queensland, constitute
and appoint you, the said the Honourable James Lang Camp-
bell, to be Our Commissioner, for the purpose of inquiring
into the matters hereinbefore mentioned and any other
matter pertaining thereto which to you should seem proper
and meet in the public interests: And We do hereby require
and enjoin you to make diligent inquiry into the matters
aforesaid, and for the purpose to exercise all the powers con-
ferred upon a Commission by “The Official Inquiries Evidence
Acts , 1910 to 1929:” And we do furthermore command and
enjoin you to summon before you and to examine all such
persons as may appear to you able to inform you concerning
the premises and to cause to be taken down in shorthand and
reduced into writing the evidence of the -several witnesses that
may appear before you, and such evidence, together with a
full and faithful report touching the matters aforesaid, to
transmit to the Honourable the Premier and Chief Secretary
of Our said State.
In testimony whereof, We have caused the Public Seal of
Our said State to be hereunto affixed.
Witness Our Trusty and Well-beloved His Excellency
Sir Thomas Herbert John Chapman Goodwin,
Lieutenant-General on the Retired List and in the
Reserve of Officers of Our Army, Knight Commander
of Our Most Honourable Order of the Bath, Compan-
ion of Our Most Distinguished Order of St. Michael
and St. George, Companion of Our Distinguished
Service Order, Governor of Our State of Queensland
and its Dependencies, in the Commonwealth of Aus-
tralia, at Government House, Brisbane, this twenty-
eighth day of February, in the year of Our Lord One
26 4
QUEENSLAND—


thousand nine hundred and thirty, and in the twentieth
year of Our Reign. j OHN Goodwin.
By His Excellency’s Command,
A. E. Moore.
SUMMARY OF MR JUSTICE CAMPBELL’S REPORT
(1) The appointment of Peter Louis Goddard was not made
honestly in the true interests of the State by those who
were responsible for it.
(2) The management of the State Smelters and the conduct
of Peter Louis Goddard in the performance of his duties
were generally highly censurable, as displaying indiffer-
ence to both moral and legal obligations, recklessness in
expenditure, unscrupulousness in administration, dis-
honesty in advice and action in connection with the sale
of the Mungana Mines to the State, and systematic con-
cealment and misrepresentation of facts material to be
disclosed in the public interest in the course of his
duties, all of which conduct was actuated by considera-
tion of his pecuniary or other personal advantage.
(3) The enterprise was disastrous to the State in its financial
results. These results were aggravated by faulty man-
agement, but were largely the inevitable consequence of
the policy imposed by the Government on the enterprise.
(4) There was deplorable laxity of control exercised by the
Treasury and the Department of Mines over expenditure
at the Smelters and associated mines, including Mount
Mulligan. This laxity must be ascribed to a large extent
to the improper business relations existing between
Messrs Theodore, McCormack, Goddard, and Reid.
(5) Messrs Theodore, McCormack, Goddard, and Reid were
guilty of fraud and dishonesty in procuring the State to
purchase the Mungana Mines for £40,000.
(6) The moneys shared between them as the proceeds of that
transaction were fraudulently obtained.
(7) Mr Theodore was guilty of the grossest impropriety in
becoming secretly associated with Mr Goddard in the
Fluorspar Mining Company and the Argentum Mining
Company when he must have known that Goddard’s con-
nection with them constituted, not only a serious breach
of Goddard’s duty as Manager of the State Smelters, but
as also a breach of the statute under which he had been
appointed.
265
OUR SEVENTH POLITICAL DECADE, 1920-1930


REFERENCES TO INTERESTING FACTS AND
OUTSTANDING EVENTS
Abbreviations:
Q.P. — Queensland Politics During Sixty Years , by C. A.
Bernays.
V. & P. — Votes and Proceedings.
P.P. — Parliamentary Papers.
A
Abolition of Council —Result of Poll: Q.P. 173*
Absent Voting, 1908: Q.P. 301; 1915: Q.P. 3°6-
Accidents at Mt. Morgan, Report of Board: P.P., 1908, Session
2, vol. 3, p. 623.
Accidents in Coal Mines, Report of Royal Commission: V. &
P., 1900: vol. 2, p. 397.
Adult Suffrage, 1905 : Q.P. 300.
Age of Consent, 17 years, 1913: Q.P. 439-
Agricultural Lands Purchase Acts, 1894, etc.: Q.P. 3
Estates Purchased under: Q.P. 328-9.
Allotted Days for Supply. Practice introduced 1910: Q.P.
1 77-
Annexation of New Guinea: Correspondence: V. & P., 1883,
p. 773; 1883-4 p. 207; 1884, vol. 2, p. 969.
Arbitration Court established, 1916-7: Q.P. 487-8.
Assault on Prime Minister Hughes at Warwick; Report of
Police Commissioner: P.P. 1917, vol. 3, 493.
Australian Federation and the Draft Commonwealth Bill —
Paper by Hon. Sir S. W. Griffith: V. & P. 1899, Session
1, 107.
B
Babinda and South Johnstone Mills established 1911: Q.P.
148.
Baby Clinics established: Q.P. 436.
Ballot Papers, numbering of, introduced 1913: Q.P. 303.
Barron Falls, utilization of power of: Report by Wm. Corin:
P.P. 1906, vol. 2, p. 1369.


Beef Cattle Industry, Report of Commission: P.P. 1928, vol.
2, p. 581.
Bell’s “Green backs/’ 1866: Q.P. 35 and 448.
Bible in State Schools, 1908: Q.P. 434.
Result of Referendum: Q.P. 437.
8.1. Company’s Torres Strait Mail Contract, 1880: Q.P. 88.
Blind, Deaf and Dumb Institution nationalized: Q.P. 439.
Brisbane, Greater, Scheme; initiated 1917: Q.P. 411; accom-
plished 1924.
Brisbane River, improvements in, etc., Reports by Lindon W.
Bates: V. & P.: 1901, vol. 3, p. 1339.
Brisbane Sewerage Act for 1909: Q.P. 177.
Brisbane Sewerage Scheme—
Report of Royal Commission: P.P. 1921, vol. 2, 893.
Report by Small: P.P. 1918, vol. 1 1641.
C
Capital invested in North Queensland in 1885: Q.P. 514.
Capital punishment abolished, 1922.
Central Technical College established, 1908: Q.P. 435.
Charters Towers, discovery, 1872: Q.P. 358.
Child Endowment, Conference between Commonwealth and
States —Debates of Conference: P.P. 1927, vol. 1, p. 521.
Civil Service Commission Report: V. & P. 1888, vol. 1, p. 271;
1889, vol. 1, p. 607.
Clinics, Baby, established: Q.P. 436.
Code of Criminal Law —Report of Royal Commission: V. &P.
1899. Session 1. p. 283.
Compensation, Worker’s, introduced 1905: Q.P. 477-8.
Compulsory Enrolment, 1914 and 1915 : Q.P. 303-4, 305.
Compulsory Voting, 1914 and 1915: Q.P. 183, 303-4.
Constitution Acts —Two-thirds Majority provision repealed,
1908: Q.P. 173.
Contingent Vote, introduced 1892: Q.P. 296.
Co-operative Land Settlement, 1893 : Q-P. 325.
Council Abolition—Result of Poll: Q.P. 173.
Country Liberal Party, 1909: Q.P. 148.
Cremation Bill passed (Dr Taylor), 1913: Q.P. 181.
Croydon Discovery, 1886: Q.P. 367.
D
Day Labour in 1866: Q.P. 38.
“Dirt Money” paid to Railway Employees—Report of Royal
Commission: P.P. 1917, vol. 3, p. 1067.


Double Electorates abolished, 1910: Q.P. 178.
Duration of Parliament; Philp’s attempt to extend to 4 years:
Q.P. 165.
Dwellings, Workers’, Board constituted, 1909: Q.P. 482.
E
Education, Board of National, appointed 1859: Q.P. 4 I S-
Education, Free, Birth of Movement, 1901: Q.P. 43L
Educational Institutions of the Colony—Report of Royal
Commission: V. & P. 1875, vol. 2, pp. 83, 433, 439.
Eight-Hour Day—
First proposed (Buzacott), 1874, 1876: Q.P. 469.
Mcllwraith’s effort, 1883-4: Q.P. 470.
Griffith’s efforts, 1889, 1890: Q.P. 472, 473.
Elections —
Compulsory Voting and Enrolment, 1914, 1915 • Q.P. 183,
303-4: 5-
To be held on Saturday, 1915: Q.P. 305.
Elections Tribunal Instituted, 1886: Q.P. 294.
Elective Legislative Council, motion for, negatived 1914:
Q.P. 224.
Electoral Division of Queensland, First, i 860: Q.P. 283.
Electorates, Double, abolished, 1910: Q.P. 178.
Elementary Property Law (Griffith), 1890: Q.P. 121.
F
Farmers’ Union, 1895 : Q.P. 147*
Federal Council of Australasia —
First session held 25th January, 1886: Q.P. 105.
Seventh and last held 26th January, 1897: Q.P. 106.
Financial Relations between States and Commonwealth —
Debates of Conference: P.P. 1927, vol. 1, p. 497.
Financial Separation of the Colony—Report of Royal Com-
mission : V. & P. 1877, vol. 2, p. 147.
Financial Smash, 1866: Q.P. 35, 44^.
First Grammar School, Ipswich, 1863: Q.P. 422, 441.
First Loan Act, 1861 : Q.P. 446.
Free Education, Birth of Movement, 1901 : Q.P. 431.
Freehold Tenure abolished, 1916-17: Q.P. 337.
Freehold Tenure re-established 1929.
Franchise —
Adult Suffrage—accomplished 1905.
1894, 1897 —Glassey’s attempts: Q.P. 297, 298.
1904 — Airey’s attempt: Q.P. 299.
1905 — Morgan’s attempt: Q.P. 300.
268
QUEENSLAND—


Attempt to reduce age to 18, 1918, 1919-20: O.P. 187,
3 ° 6 ‘
Local Authorities extended to electors, 1920. Efforts in
i 9 i s- i 6; 1916-17: Q.P. 410, 411.
Occupier Franchise restored: Session of 1929.
Police, 1905.
Women’s Franchise accomplished, 1905.
1890 —Hynes’s attempt: Q.P. 122.
1894 —Power’s attempt: Q.P. 297.
I 9°3 —Foxton’s attempt: Q.P. 165.
I 9°5 —Morgan’s attempt: Q.P. 168, 300.
Women qualified to become Legislators, 1915 : Q.P. 305.
G
Gavel in Parliament (Speaker Walsh) : Q.P. 77.
Gold Production to end of 1917: Q.P. 382.
Goldfields discovered—
Charters Towers, 1872: Q.P. 358.
Croydon, 1886: Q.P. 367.
Gympie, 1867: Q.P. 355.
Mount Morgan, 1882: Q.P. 365.
Peak Downs, 1862: Q.P. 355.
Government, Local, Scheme, Lilley’s, 1869: Q.P. 388.
Governor Blackall, State Steamer, 1870: Q.P. 53.
Governor’s Salary, attempt to reduce to £2OOO per annum,
Ist Session, 1904: Q.P. 220.
Governor’s Salary, reduced to £3OOO per annum, 2nd Session,
1 9°4: Q.P. 168, 220.
Grammar School, First, Ipswich, 1863: O.P. 422. 441
Grazing Selections—
Ballot system, 1884: Q.P. 335.
Tender system, 1897: Q.P. 335.
Ballot system, 1909: Q.P. 335.
Greater Brisbane scheme—
Initiated 1917: Q.P. 411; accomplished 1924.
“Greenbacks,” Bell’s, 1866: Q.P. 35, 448.
Guillotine, Standing order brought into existence iqoo*
Q;P. ISS.
Gympie, discovery, 1867: Q.P. 355.
H
Hansard first issued 1864: Q.P. 29.
Hemmant’s Steel Rails Petition, 1880: Q.P. 87.


I
Income Tax, birth of, 1902: Q.P. 164.
Industrial Arbitration Court established, 1916-17: Q.P.
487-8.
Instruction, Department of Public, created 1875: Q.P. 4 2 3“4-
Ipswich to Toowoomba Railway opened, 1867: Q.P* 39-
Iron and Steel Works, State, Negotiations: Q.P. 503.
Iron and Steel Works, State —Report of Royal Commission:
P.P. 1917, vol. 3, p. 709; 1918, vol. 2, p. 1815.
Itinerant Teaching, birth of, 1899: Q.P. 430.
J
Jimbour Estate Settlers —Report of Royal Commission: P.P.
1919-20, vol. 2, 721.
K
Kitt, Benjamin, The Case of: Q.P. 116; V. & P. 1888, vol. 1,
679, 691 ; 1889, vol. 1, 601.
Kyogle —South Brisbane Railway —
Railway Council constituted 1924.
No. 1 Section (South Brisbane to Salisbury) commenced
January, 1925.
Cost of Whole Scheme approx. £4,000,000. Queensland’s
Share, £468,613.
L
Labour Government, First (Dawson), 1899: Q.P. 155.
Labour Government, 1915: Q.P. 183.
Labourers introduced into Queensland from New Guinea and
other islands —Report of Royal Commission: V. & P.
1885, vol. 2, p. 797-
Lady Member, First (Mrs Irene Longman), Twenty-fifth
Parliament, 1929.
Land Court, 1897: Q.P. 331.
Land Grant, Transcontinental Railway, Bill, 1883: Q.P. 91.
Land Leases extended, 1902: Q.P. 333.
Land Orders: Q.P. 310, 317.
Land Settlement Advisory Board on matters relating to Land
Settlement (Sheep Industry) : P.P. 1927, vol. 2, p. 121.
Land Settlement, Co-operative, 1893 : Q.P. 325.
Lane, William, and “New Australia,” 1893: Q.P. 135.
Leasing Principle introduced in Land Legislation, 1884: Q.P.
3 21 -
Legislative Council—
Abolition—Result of Poll: Q.P. 173.
Elective, motion for, negatived, 1914: Q.P. 224.
Veto Abolition Bill, 1895: Q.P. 279.
270
QUEENSLAND—


Legislators, Women qualified to become, 1915: Q.P. 305.
Liberal Country Party, 1909: Q.P. 148.
Licensing and Liquor Laws —Report of Royal Commission:
V. & P. 1901, vol. 3, p. 1.
Lindon Bates Dredges—Report of Board of Inquiry: P.P.
1902, vol. 3, p. 683.
Liquor Laws in Southern States—Report by Mr Ranking: P.P.
1909, Session 1, p. 29.
Loan, First Act, 1861 : Q.P. 446.
Local Authorities Association formed, 1895 : Q.P. 405.
Local Authorities Boundaries—Report of Royal Commission:
P.P. 1928, vol. 2, p. 1209.
Local Authorities Franchise extended to electors, 1920.
Local Authorities Franchise occupier, 1929.
Local Government—Report of Royal Commission: V. & P.
1896, vol. 2, p. 525.
Local Government Scheme of Lilley, 1869: Q.P. 388.
M
Meat Industry of Queensland —Report of Royal Commission:
P.P. 1913, vol. 2, p. 671.
Member, First Lady (Mrs Irene Longman), Twenty-fifth
Parliament, 1929.
Member resigning from Legislative Assembly to contest
Federal seat may be re-elected without Poll; Legislative
Assembly Act Amendment Act, 1921; repealed 1922.
Members, number of, increased to 72, 1887: Q.P. 108.
Members, number of, in first Parliament, 26: Q.P. 283.
Members, payment of —
Bill of 1873: Q.P. 288.
Bill of 1886 —£2 2s. per sitting (Maximum of £2OO per
annum) : Q.P. 217, 219, 294.
Bill of 1889 —£300 per annum: Q.P. 218, 219, 295.
Bill of 1892 —£150 per annum: Q.P. 219, 297.
Bill of 1896 —£300 per annum: Q.P. 151, 219.
Bill of 1919 —£500 per annum.
Bill of 1926 —£750 P er annum.
Bill of 1929 —£500 per annum.
Memonitch, John: Q.P. 203.
Mineral Production to end of 1917: Q.P. 382.
Miners’ Phthisis —Report of Royal Commission: P.P. 1911-
J 2, vol. 3, p. 469.
Mining Commission Report: V. & P. 1871, p. 569.
Ministers, number of, increased to 10, 1926.


Mount Morgan Discovery, 1882: Q.P. 365.
Murphy’s Creek Railway Disaster —Report of Railway Board:
P. 1913, vol. 3, p. 541.
N
National Park: Q.P. 341.
“New Australia,” William Lane and, 1893: Q.P. 135*
New Guinea Coup d’Etat, 1883: Q.P. 9 2 *
Norman School taken possession of, 1862: Q.P. 418.
North Coast Railway and Great Western Railway, 1910:
Q. 178.
O
Ophthalmia, fight against, begun 1908: Q.P. 435-6.
Ophthalmia in Western Queensland —Report by Dr Taylor:
P. 1908, Session 1, 435.
P
Parliament, duration of, Philp’s attempt to extend to 4 years:
Q. 165.
Parliament, First Meeting of, in George Street, 4th May, 1869:
Q.P- SI.
Parliament, First, number of Members in, 26: Q.P. 283.
Parliament, First Queensland met, in Queen Street, i 860: Q.P.
7.
Parliament, Gavel in (Speaker Walsh) : Q.P. 77-
Parliament House, George Street: In occupation 4th May,
1869.
Parliament House: New Wing opened June, 1891.
Parliament, Two Houses, Relations between; Reference to
Privy Council, 1885 : Q.P. 248.
Payment of Members —
1886—£2 2s. per sitting (Max. of £2OO per annum) : Q.P.
217, 219, 294.
1889 —£300 per annum: Q.P. 218, 219, 295.
1892 —£150 per annum: Q.P. 219, 297.
1896 —£300 per annum: Q.P. 151, 219.
1919 —£500 per annum.
1926 —£750 per annum,
1929 —£500 per annum.
Peak Downs Discovery, 1862: Q.P. 355.
Pearl Shell and Beche-de-mer Industries —Report of Royal
Commission: P.P. 1908, Session 2, vol. 2, p. 395.
Perpetual Lease Selections, 1908: Q.P. 334.


Plague in Queensland —Report by Dr Ham: P.P. 1907, vol. 2,
p. 53.
Police Department —Report of Royal Commission: V. & P.
1899, Session 2, vol. 4, p. 137.
Police Superannuation Scheme established by Act of 1921.
Police Enfranchised 1905.
Police Union —
Members of Police Force empowered to register as an
Industrial Union. (In Arbitration Act of 1916) :
1916.
May affiliate with other Unions (Industrial Arbitration
Act Amendment Act 1923) : 1923.
Political Crisis —Memorial to Governor Normanby—Papers
and correspondence: V. & P. 1872, 487.
Polynesian Labour —Report of Select Committee: V. & P.
1876, vol. 3, 51.
Population in 1864, 61,640: Q.P. 285-
Port Norman, Normanton, and Cloncurry Railway Bill
Scandal: Q.P. 156; V. & P. 1900. vol. in, 941-
Postal Voting, 1905: Q.P. 300.
Postal Voting—Repealed 1908: Q.P. 301.
Postal Voting—Reintroduced in modified form, 1913: Q.P.
303.
Preference to Unionists —Dispute between Council and As-
sembly: Q.P. 488.
Privy Council Reference —Relations between the two Houses,
1885: Q.P. 248.
Property, Elementary, Law (Griffith), 1890: Q.P. 121.
Property Tax, Proposal to impose, 1890: Q.P. 456.
Prorogation Speeches discontinued after ninth Parliament in
' 1887: Q.P. 108.
Proxy Voting introduced, Legislative Assembly Act of, 1922.
Public Service Commissioner, office created by Act of 1920;
Session of 1919-20.
R
Railway Administration —Report of Royal Commission: P.P.
1918, vol. 2, 159.
Railway Commissioners, friction between, 1894: Q.P. 138*
V. & P. 1900, vol. in, 941.
Railway Guarantee abolished 1915.
Railway, Ipswich to Toowoomba, opened 1867' Q.P. 39-
Railway Mileage, 1918: Q.P. 34°-
Railway Scandal (Port Norman, Normanton and Cloncurry
Railway Bill) : Q.P. 156; V. & P. 1900, vol. m, 941.


Railway Strike, 1925.
Railway Workshops—
Report of Inquiry Board into statements by F. A. Cooper,
M.L.A.: P.P. 1923, yob 2, p. 1415.
Report of Victorian Experts: P.P. 1929, vol. 2, p. 1185.
Railways in Gulf of Carpentaria—Report by Geo. Phillips:
P.P. 1909, Session 2, vol. 2, p. 591.
Rating based on unimproved value of Land, 1890: Q.P. 403.
Real Property Acts, 1861-77 —Report of Royal Commission:
V. & P. 1879, Session 2, vol. 1, pp. 577, 713, 721.
Relations between the two Houses; reference to Privy
Council, 1885 : Q.P. 248.
Roll, Joint Electoral, provision for enabling agreement, 1915:
Q-P- 305-
s
Saturdays, elections to be held on, 1915: Q.P. 305.
Scholarship System: Q.P. 441-2.
Schools and Scholars in 1859: Q.P. 414.
Seaforth Estate: Q.P. 329.
Separation movement (Queensland) born in Rockhampton,
1866: Q.P. 508.
First Movement to have separate States in Queensland,
1864: Q.P. 507.
Motion carried in the House, 1897: Q.P. 529, 530.
Sewerage Act for Brisbane, 1909: Q.P. 177.
Shearers’ and Sugar-Workers’ Accommodation, 1905: Q.P.
478-9.
Shearers’ Strike, 1891: Q.P. 123.
Shop Assistants’ Association, 1897: Q.P. 475.
Shops, Factories, and Workshops—Commission Report: V. &
P. 1891, vol. 2, p. 927.
Six O’Clock Closing of Hotels —Demonstration in the Gal-
leries: Q.P. 188.
Six O’Clock Closing for Shops—
Tozer’s attempt, 1895: Q.P. 474.
McDonnell’s attempt, 1897: Q.P. 475.
Foxton’s attempt, successful, 1900: Q.P. 476.
South Brisbane —Kyogle Railway—
Railway Council constituted, 1924.
No. 1 section (South Brisbane to Salisbury) commenced
19th January, 1925.
Cost of Whole Scheme approx. £4,000,000; Queensland’s
share, £468,613.
South Johnstone and Babinda Mills established, 1911: Q.P.
148.
274
QUEENSLAND—


Speech, prorogation discontinued after Ninth Parliament in
1887: Q.P. 108.
Speeches, time limit of, introduced, 1909; Q.P. 177-
State Enterprise in 1870 (Lilley Ministry) ; State steamer
Governor Blackall: Q.P. 53-
State Enterprises, establishment of —
Butchers’ Shops, 1915* Q-P- 495-
Fish Supply, 1916-17: Q.P. 498.
Sawmills, 1915: Q.P. 500.
Produce Agency, 1917: Q-P. 501.
Stations: Q.P. 496.
Coal Mines: Q.P. 501.
Railway Refreshment Rooms: Q.P. 5 00 -
Arsenic Mine: Q.P. 5 02 -
Insurance: Q.P. 504.
State Iron and Steel Works, negotiations: Q.P. 503.
Steel Rails, Petition of William Hemmant 1880: Q.P. 87.
Sugar Agreement (Commonwealth and Queensland). Pur-
chase of raw sugar for years 1920, 1921, 1922: Journals
and P.P., Ist Session, 1920: p. 95.
Sugar Industry—
Report of Board of Inquiry: P.P. 1916-17, vol. 2, p. 807.
Report of Royal Commission: V. & P. 1889, vol. 4, p. 37.
Sugar Industry Labour Commission Report: P.P. 1906, vol. 2,
P- 395-
Sugar Mills, Central —
Erection of More, Correspondence with Prime Mini-
ster of Commonwealth: P.P. 1912, vol. 3, pp. 397, 399,
401.
Locations for —Report of Royal Commission: P.P. 1923,
vol. 2, p. 185.
Report of Royal Commission on Desirability of establish-
ing More: P.P. 1911-12, vol. 2, pp. 1005, 1213.
Superannuation Scheme for Police —Act of 1921.
Supply, Days Allotted for, Practice introduced 1910:
Q.P. 177.
T
Tax, Border, 1893: Q.P. 134.
Tax, Income, birth of, 1902; Q.P. 164.
Tax, Property, proposal to impose, 1890: Q.P. 456.
Technical College, Central, established 1908: Q.P. 435.
Time Limit of Speeches introduced 1909: Q.P. 177.
Toowoomba, Ipswich to, Railway opened, 1867: Q.P. 39.
Torres Strait Mail Contract, 1880: Q.P. 88.
275
OUR SEVENTH POLITICAL DECADE, 1920-1930


Trade Unions Act passed, 1886: Q.P. 471.
Traffic Departments of Railways—Report of Royal Commis-
sion: V. & P. 1883-4, p. 1611.
Transcontinental (Land Grant) Railway Bill 1883: Q.P. 91.
Traveston Railway Disaster, June, 1925: P.P. 1925, vol. in,
p. 701.
Triennial Parliaments, 1890: Q.P. 217, 291, 296.
U
Union, Farmers’, 1895 : Q.P. 147.
Unions, Trade, Act passed, 1886: Q.P. 471.
University first proposed, 1877: Q.P. 424.
University established 1909: Q.P. 436.
Upper Burnett and Callide Valley Lands—
Gullett’s Report on Commonwealth Proposal: P.P. 1921,
vol. 1, p. 611.
Report of Land Administration Board: P.P. 1929, vol. 2,
P- 349.
Upper Burnett District, opening up of—Report by Lethem,
Sexton and Chambers: P.P. 1910, vol. 3, p. 551.
V
Voter’s Right, 1871-2: Q.P. 286, 288.
W
Wages Boards, origin of, 1900: Q.P. 479.
Wages Boards, instituted, 1908: Q.P. 481.
Wando Vale—Report by Royal Commission: P.P. 1917 vol
3> P* 1013.
Water Resources of Queensland—Report bv Elwood Mead*
P. 1910, vol. 3, p. 843.
Western, Great, Railway, and North Coast Railway, 1910:
Q. 178.
Wheat and Flour, Supply and Distribution of, in Queensland
—Report by Royal Commission: P.P. 1915-16, vol 1 p
43-
Women qualified to become Legislators, 1915: Q.P. 305.
Women’s Franchise, 1905 —
Hyne’s attempt, 1890: Q.P. 122.
Power’s attempt, 1894: Q.P. 297.
Foxton’s attempt, 1903: Q.P. 165.
Morgan’s attempt, 1905: Q.P. 168, 300.
Workers’ Compensation introduced, 1905: Q.P. 477-8.
Workers’ Dwellings Board constituted 1909: Q.P. 482.
Works Department Administration—Report of Roval Com-
mission: V. & P. 1900, vol. 3, p. 979.
276
QUEENSLAND—


SOME POLITICIANS AS I HAVE SEEN THEM


Speak of me as I am; nothing extenuate,
nor set down aught in malice.”


THE HONOURABLE ARTHUR EDWARD MiOORE
Coincident with labour attaining office in 1915, Arthur
Edward Moore made his bow to Mr Speaker, having been
successful at the General Election of 22nd May, 1915. He
was returned for the Downs constituency of Aubigny which
is the proud possessor within its borders of Goombungee. If
that does not give a clue to his occupation nothing will, for
it has both the sound and the smell of a farm yard, and sug-
gests pigstyes, and lucerne, and milk-bails, and haystacks,
and country children on the fences looking at the train going
by, and fat sheep and skipping lambs. As a fact he is a
dairy farmer and grazier of quite an exceptional kind. Instead
of an oaf or a yokel he is a well-educated man who speaks
good English and owns a dress-suit. This doubtless would
stamp his among some people as a “silvertail.” Well, if he
is, then he is quite an unassuming silvertail, and the day after
being at a Government House Dinner in a dress-suit, he can
milk the cows, separate the milk, and build a haystack with
the best of them. A. E. Moore is a no-breakfast faddist. How
a man who eats no breakfast can be a good farmer and an
earnest politician, is an inscrutable mystery. Yet he is both.
After many vicissitudes the two sections of the Opposition
found in him a common Leader possessed of much tact, under
whom they could work with enthusiasm. Even under him
there was a period of disunity, but he was responsible for, in
the end, bringing them together It cannot justly be said
that no better man could be found for a Leader in the whole
wide world. The world is a big place containing some big
men, but the choice was limited and the best was chosen. The
Opposition as a fact had no very big man to lead them, and
the next best thing was to choose a moderately big man and
an undoubtedly honest one. Parliament wanted an earnest,
honest and fearless man to oppose the Governments of Theo-
dore, Gillies and McCormack and they got him in A. E.
Moore. Born at Napier, New Zealand, 9th February, 1876.
Son of Edward Moore, General Manager Union Bank, Mel-


bourne and London. Educated at Akaroa and Church of Eng-
land Grammar School, Melbourne. So that he has not yet
reached the age at which all public servants (except poli-
ticians) are put into the garbage-tin. No one ever said A. E.
Moore was born with angel’s wings, but he is a man whose
plain, everyday honesty sticks out all over him; who is never
bitter, mean or scurrilous, but whose candour and straight-
forwardness are outstanding characteristics. If we could
only leaven our public life with men of his type we would
have better Parliaments, less self-seeking, and more simple
honesty. One does not hesitate to say that he has no
enemies. There are many more smiles than snarls about
him, and though at times when speaking there appears to be
a certain modicum of cynicism in his speech, yet it is ex-
plained by his palpable inability to reconcile certain actions
with his ethics. Often will he indulge in a few rush sen-
tences of reproach, and then being met by some flippant and
disingenuous explanation, he will shrug his shoulders and
seem to throw in the sponge. In speech he is fluent, with a
moderately good vocabulary. The modern politician is all
the better for the acquisition of a little Billingsgate which,
however, he does not lay claim to. He would bring him-
self so much more abreast of modern political methods if he
could add to his list of adjectives. All through the 23rd and
24th Parliaments, the opposition, led by Arthur Edward
Moore, had a hard row to hoe. Time and again had the elect-
ors turned them down, yet they came up smiling, and did
their little best, session after session. Then came the termin-
ation of the 24th Parliament. The public are fickle; they
were looking for change, but even then the change might not
have come but for new organization and for the genius who
invented a popular slogan or two. The public stampeded, and
Arthur Edward Moore, with an overwhelming majority swept
the polls and formed the Moore Government on 21st May,
1929. His accession to the Premiership brought out new
and unsuspected characteristics. His opponents had wrongly
estimated his apparent placidity. He suddenly deyeloped
emphasis and finality in his speech. He let it be known that
he was Leader of the House and of a Party who worshipped
him, and he put his foot down firmly when it came to a ques-
tion of putting into force Government policy. More than
once in his first two sessions he declared in response to vig-
orous remonstrance, “It is our policy; that is why we are
introducing this legislation. When your turn comes you
can enforce your policy,” and then he smoothed over the ele-
280
QUEENSLAND—


merits of an angry scene by a friendly laugh. As a leader of
men he has been one of our most pronounced successes. His
lovable nature explains his success in public life. Everyone
trusts Arthur E. Moore because he is so transparently honest,
and it is safe to say that not one member of the Labour
Opposition has a hard word to say against him. They oppose
him, as is their business, but in their innermost hearts they
recognized in him one of Nature’s gentlemen—a man pure in
public and in private life and loyal to his beliefs.
Summary : An honest and industrious “worker.” Kindly,
genial, with a strong saving sense of humour.
WILLIAM FORGAN SMITH
Born at Mylnefield House, via Invergowrei, Perthshire, in
1887, so that at the period of writing this sketch he is still
in the prime of life with many years of political activity in
front of him if the electors so ordain. He was educated at
Dunoon Grammar School, and came to Queensland a very
young man. Having made his home in Mackay, he became
actively associated with the Labour movement. The local
labour organization in that centre may well congratulate itself
on having secured this recruit because of his infinite energy,
his capacity for organization, his student nature, and generally
speaking, his pushfulness. He was returned to the Parlia-
ment of Queensland in 1915 when labour wiped Digby Frank
Denham off the political map, and he has sat in it ever since
through five Parliaments and a bit. He did not immediately
come to the front with his party, but after an apprenticeship
of something over four years, he was elected Chairman of
Committees, which office he held from 13th January to 15th
December, 1920. In this position he showed a sound common
sense and a capacity for getting at the bottom of things. On
16th December, 1920, he was elected Minister without port-
folio in Theodore’s Government, subsequently gaining full
Cabinet rank as Secretary for Public Works on 6th October,
1922, which office he held until 26th February, 1925. In the
Gillies Ministry which followed, he was appointed Secretary
for Agriculture and Stock on 25th February, 1925, occupying
also the important position of President of the Council of
Agriculture. He assumed the same office in the McCormack
Ministry on 22nd October, 1925, and was unanimously elected
Deputy Premier by his party. On nth May, 1929, he and his
party met their Waterloo at the General Election but again
with much unanimity his party elected him Leader of the


Opposition. William Forgan Smith may truthfully be said
to be an outstanding figure in Queensland politics. He is
a fine debater (though at times somewhat diffuse) ; a voracious
reader with the additional advantage of possessing a retentive
memory. He has represented Queensland at a number of
Interstate Cabinet Conferences, and as Acting Premier took
an outstanding part at the Premiers Conference in Melbourne,
in June, 1927, M which the Commonwealth and States Finan-
cial Agreement received its finishing touches, and under
which the Australian Loan Council was given permanent
recognition. He has made a special study of the economics
of the Sugar Industry and the now highly organized primary
industries of Queensland owe much to his industry and grasp
of the co-operative and pooling movements. Outside Par-
liament he is a prominent member of the Queensland Central
Political Executive of the Australian Labour Party. In debate
he is fluent, though as before indicated somewhat diffuse and
perhaps enters unnecessarily into detail. Another weakness is
an inclination towards dogmatism which is rather common
among industrious and well read men. They lose patience
with stupidity. Nevertheless, he is an undoubted strength in
the Queensland Parliament and the Labour Party, both inside
and outside Parliament, would just now be a somewhat futile
body without his aid. Forgan Smith as Leader of the Oppo-
sition during the session of 1929 and 1930 continued to display
those characteristics which had distinguished him as a Min-
ister. His criticisms like his speeches on his own Bills, were
prepared with meticulous care and in a well-ordered sequence.
Indeed his industry was a conspicuous feature in his public
life and could well be taken as an example by those all too
common politicians who display a casualness in relation to
Parliamentary business which would get them nowhere in
their private affairs. In private life he is a devotee to golf.
It is in the blood of all Scotsmen and after all is a wholesome
although expensive recreation. Industrial economics are his
forte, and if he has the strength to keep labour on the sane
side of the Industrial path he has the opportunity of going
much further than he has gone already.
Summary : A fluent but slightly dogmatic speaker: Indus-
trious, well-read; a tower of strength to his party. Special-
izes in Industrial Economics. Might have been an “Honour-
able” but “Labour” does not approve of titles.
282
QUEENSLAND—


THE HONOURABLE WALTER HENRY BARNES
Born at Castlemaine, Victoria, on 7th September, 1858.
Educated at old Normal school and Presbyterian College,
Brisbane. Chairman of Directors of Barnes and Coy. Ltd.
and Manager of the Firm in Brisbane. In the milling and
produce business there is no better known business man.
A strong supporter of the Methodist Church, and takes a
keen interest in all social welfare movements, particularly
the Young Men s Christian Association. As a trader he has
a reputation that would take some beating. The man who
suggested that W. H. or his Firm could be associated with
a dishonourable act, or with sharp practice of any kind, would
be a strong competitor as a liar with Baron Munchausen.
He came into the Thirteenth Parliament as Member for
Bulimba and he sat there right through the next seven Par-
liaments. Then he was defeated for the Twentieth Parliament
but came back into the Twenty-first, and until May 1929 has
been criticizing Labour administration ever since. He gained
office as Secretary for Public Lands under Philp in 1907, and
was Secretary for Public Instruction and Public Works under
Kidston in 1909. In 1911 Denham took him into his Govern-
ment as Treasurer and Secretary for Public Works, and he
became Treasurer again in the Moore Government on 21st
May, 1929. Acting Premier during Denham’s absence in Eng-
land. J.W. Blair opposed him and a’Court, the Clerk of the
Legislative Assembly, was given the job of conducting a
Secret party ballot for the job. Having stopped up all the
keyholes and darkened the windows, the fatal count was made
in mysterious surroundings and "W. H. Barnes won hands
down. If W. H. B. becomes possessed of half a crown, it
is not his practice to spend 2/7. He wants to see and handle
public money before he spends it; consequently it is very
difficult to lift him off the lid of the Treasury Chest. There
are many merits in a practice of that sort, but unhappily in
politics it does not lead to popularity. The popular Treasurer
is the one who never tires of saying “Oh; certainly: take
what you want and pay me back when you can.” There have
been a good many Australian Treasurers like that. Hence
the financial situation in 1930. As a speaker he is fluent, but
with a strictly limited vocabulary. Nevertheless he is a good
critic and gets down to bed-rock, which at times makes his
opponents unhappy. When W. H. Barnes makes up his mind
it would take a dozen thunderbolts and a large charge of
T.N.T. to shift him. He is the most uncompromising Nation-
283
OUR SEVENTH POLITICAL DECADE, 1920-1930


alist Queensland has known. He never changes his mind
once he has made it up, and his political opinions are as firm
as the rock of ages. On the Treasury Bench he is accustomed
to assume an eternal smile. He refuses an amendment and
there is the end of it. No special pleading, no touching en-
treaty, no reproach could make him do other than smile. In
the 1912 General strike he issued an ultimatum to Employees
of the Government Printing Office which made them sit up
and think: “Strike and you never come back.” They did not
strike.
There are many merits in firmness and decision; there is
absolute virtue in paying either private or public debts, and
in making quite sure that the money is in sight before incur-
ring the obligation. These are outstanding characteristics of
W. H. Barnes.
In private life he is rather a devotee to fishing and takes
considerable interest in cricket and other wholesome sport.
Summary : Courteous always: firm always: knows his own
mind: loves politics: has a keen realization of his obligations
as a public man. Is an ultra-loyal subject of his King.
WILLIAM BERTRAM
Born at Hamilton, Scotland, nth January, 1875, and arrived
in Australia at the early age of eight years. Educated at East
Warwick State School. A tall, lithe, rather good-looking man,
extremely amiable, but extremely weak. A grocer’s assistant.
There is no reason in life why a grocer’s assistant should not
enter Parliament if he can get there, but a grocer’s assistant
representing labour suggests rather a canary being employed
to hatch out emus’ eggs. No one surely would suggest that
a grocer “labours.” Measuring out sugar and tea, and cut-
ting up.bacon with an up-to-date mechanical appliance sounds
rather like recreation. Probably among the big labour party
which ruled Queensland between 1915 and 1929, Billy Bert-
ram was as popular as any one of them, not only with his
own party for the opposition always found him a courteous
and friendly opponent. If he had taken things more seriously,
and made a study of the subject, he might have established a
reputation as some sort of financial authority, for he could
analyse figures quite well, and on a few occasions made excel-
lent financial speeches in Parliament. He might even have
been able to produce a deficit or two. That appears to be
the easiest branch of State finance. If we look through Aus-
tralian State Balance Sheets we find that ever since Founda-
284
QUEENSLAND—


tion Day, the majority of State Treasurers have specialized
in deficits. Billy was a most domesticated politician of a very
tender disposition. If he killed a flea that was biting him
on the back of the neck, it would be quite by accident, and
he would take the earliest opportunity of making amends by
killing no more fleas. He won the amateur Middleweight
Boxing Championship of Queensland in 1890 and 1900, but
that was before he became soft through sitting on soft cush-
ions. Early in his Parliamentary career he used to go up
on the Hansard flat, and box with Arnold Weinholt the
African lion slayer, and then member for Fassifern. At that
time “Billy” was a little bit harder than grocer’s cheese, but
not much, and Arnold marked him more than once. When
labour had been in office for a year or more, he was rewarded
with the Chairmanship of Committees, and in January, 1920
he became Speaker. In his first term he would not wear a
gown, but in his second, domestic pressure was brought to
bear, and father wore an eighteen guinea skirt and very badly
laundered bands. As Chairman of Committees he was not
by any means a failure. He was chosen Speaker in January,
1920, and was remarkable chiefly for his stentorian voice. He
and Kirwan were strong competitors in this respect. Indeed
if Billy had been Master of Ceremonies at the Prince of Wales
Banquet he might have jockeyed Mick out of a Royal Com-
pliment. To do him bare justice he tried hard to be a fair
Speaker. The Opposition liked him much better than
McCormack. It was amusing sometimes to hear the sten-
torian voice crying “Order” and to observe how the command
was treated with hilarity and disrespect, for there were times
when it was not modulated as it might have been. As an
administrator in the high executive office of Speaker it is sad
to say that he was anything but firm. He would take no
responsibility and always had on the tip of his tongue the
indecisive man’s phrase—“Do the best you can.” If he gave
an instruction under his signature, and things went wrong,
he could not well repudiate his order, but if that little form-
ality had not been complied with, he was ever ready to shift
blame from his own shoulders. That characteristic made it
rather difficult to work with him. One never knew what
surprise was in store. Strange as it may appear, he had one
continuous complaint “I cannot live on £IOOO a year,” and
yet search where you will among the Arbitration Court’s rec-
ords you cannot find that it is compulsory to pay a grocer’s
assistant £B3 6s. Bd. per month. When the screw rose to
£1250 matters became more acute still. He was hard up in


inverse ratio to the size of his income. The fact is he was
not conversant with that sage advice —“Do not let the luxur-
ies of to-day become the necessities of to-morrow.” If he had
learnt that off by heart, and acted upon it, he would have be-
come quite a well-to-do man by comparison with his former
occupation. Billy was terribly fond of motor cars, and though
he did not propose, as one of his predecessors, William Dray-
ton Armstrong did, to buy a Speaker’s car (and a Rolls-Royce
at that) yet he made a distinct dent in the office contingency
vote.
He posed as an authority on Robert Burns and at the
annual meeting of the Caledonian Society distinguished him-
self greatly by speeches made up chiefly of quotations. His
pride in the office of Speaker was unbounded. Wherever and
whenever he could, not even excluding a public funeral, he
asserted the dignity of his office and insisted upon being given
his proper location.
It may possibly have been a characteristic Scottish habit
but in the matter of the positively furious twirling of his
stick as he marched along the road, he reminded one strongly
of that aggressive Scotsman William Kidston.
There is nothing more to be said about William Bertram
except that disaster overtook him on nth May, 1929, when he
was one of the slain at the General Election.
Summary : Amiable: popular: weak. Could use his fists.
Passionately fond of motor cars.
THE HONOURABLE JOHN GEORGE APPEL
A product of the Brisbane Grammar School in its very ear-
liest days. Born at South Brisbane 15th March, 1859. One
remembers so well the tall, lithe, good-natured, good-looking
boy, the life-long friend of so many of us, and it seems like
a dream that the passing years should have developed out of
such material the portly presence that we knew in later life —
the embonpoint that gave him so much distinction. But
though his appearance changed, his nature never did, and
right throughout a long life he preserved among his intimates
that boisterous friendship and that love of the humorous
which made him so lovable a character from schooldays right
away to the close of his career. One remembers, too, how
keen he was to gain the French prize of his class and how
his failure to do so was one of his boyhood’s griefs. And what
a joy it was, to be sure, to watch his courtly bow in the street
or the passages of Parliament House to the friends he met, or
286
QUEENSLAND—


the almost reverential obeisance he made to Mr Speaker, so
strongly reminiscent of one of the figures in a stately minuet.
It may be perhaps, indeed it is apparent, that the work-a-day
world no longer estimates at its true value the polished man-
ners of an earlier generation.
He became an articled clerk in a lawyer’s office, and passed
the comparatively easy examination required to qualify as a
solicitor in those days. After practising his profession for
some years he married and proved a very excellent husband
and father. Later on, he threw the law to the four winds of
Heaven, took to boating and other idle-rich luxuries—kept a
beautiful yacht and wore two magnificent diamond rings of
which he was inordinately proud. The yacht was the spickest
and spannest thing in the southern hemisphere, and woe be-
tide anyone who ventured upon it with dirty boots. An
eastern temple was not more sacred; and the discovery of one
little fish scale on the decks was cause for serious remon-
strance with the suspected person. After living a somewhat
dilettante life, he suddenly blossomed out into a politician
coming into the Seventeenth Parliament in March, 1908. He
made a speech or two on agriculture, and he captivated Kids-
ton by his loud voice, hilarious laughter, and general geniality.
Hence he became Home Secretary in Kidston’s second Min-
istry, and then in Denham’s, reigning from 29th June, 1909
until 26th February, 1915. He, in that position, showed him-
self a genial, kindly soul with much capacity for bestowing
argesse upon the poor. Thus he came to be known as a
humane” Home Secretary because he never turned down
any swindle, however apparent, for fear of losing- his repu-
tation for being- “humane.” Everyone called him by his
Christian name in response to his own invitation—“ Call me
George. When he faced the Labour Government in iqic
he was simply a large, kindly, friendly jest, and his rising to
speak was the sign for unlimited banter and leg*-pulling. His
voice was nothing short of stupendous. It seemed to come
right from the very pit of his stomach. He emitted a deafen-
mg blast when antagonized, but always ended with a fat
chuckle and an apology to Mr Speaker for being “drawn off
his argument by honourable members opposite.” Generally
speaking, his speeches were a kind of oasis in a desert of
commonplace, and he never failed to make Labour laug-h
when asserting that he had laboured hard all his life and wts
sprung from the people. When the House had been having a
aull time, and George rose, everyone knew that he would be
supplied with two or three separate hearty laughs. Popular?


Yes, of course he was! Nothing would make him bear ani-
mosity. In fact, he’d ask his most offensive opponent to
come and have a drink, and as he put his glass to his lips,
would almost blind him by flashes from those two diamond
rings. Well, well, Parliaments are made up of funny people.
Here was a kindly, genial, happy-go-lucky soul returned Par-
liament after Parliament, and often without contest, largely
because he was impressive and rich and could laugh more
boisterously than any other human being in the State. One
could not quarrel with such a man —he was much too kind to
have a row with. Doubtless he attended well to the wants of
his constituents, for his riches enabled him to keep a lady sec-
retary —(and an active and industrious one at that). As Home
Secretary he had some Northern tours in the Otter , at
public expense, which are historical. In 1915, he simply hated
leaving office when Labour reached power. He was so com-
fortable at the Home Office, and he had been there so long,
that he had come to regard it as all his own. Died 19th
March, 1929.
Summary : Full of humane instincts; overflowing with the
milk of human kindness; so kind that he would not crush one
little fly. As a politician, had strong faith in himself and
called himself a “democrat.”
EDWARD GRANVILLE THEODORE
Here is another case in which a man who has worked
hard for his country has to wander through this cold world
without even the title of “Honourable” on account of the
terrible ukase against honours issued by his party. It is
well known that His Royal Highness the Duke of York was
anxious to utter those fateful words “Arise Sir William For-
gan Smith” when that politician was temporarily in charge
of the Bridge and one speculates what might have happened
had the boss been at home and a “bauble” as they call it been
dangled in front of him. We are all ambitious. Why not?
Who shall say he does not love the limelight and to bask
in the smile of Princes. And just contemplate the loss of
prestige to the fine populous electorate of Dailey and how
much more influence it would have had if represented by a
G.C.M.G., or even an ordinary everyday K.C.M.G.
Theodore came into the Eighteenth Parliament in 1909 and
first signed the Roll on 2nd November. He was in front by
several years of his faithful henchman and devoted admirer
William McCormack. What attracted one to the other it is
288
QUEENSLAND—


very hard to say, for Edward was the very antithesis of
William. They were both big men physically, and both
clever men in a different sense, but while Theodore was ab-
normally sphinx-like, McCormack resembled more nearly
the irrepressible but clever parrot who was proud of airing
his knowledge of a foreign tongue. Theodore was given the
credit of rigidly keeping his own counsel except in such mat-
ters as party organization. With head bent low, with a frown
on his brow, with a determined fixity of jaw, and with a
strong stride as if he intended to gain a fixed objective though
the Heavens fell, he gave one the impression of a man with
the cares of a wide universe on his shoulders instead of the
minor cares of a State. In no sense could he be said to be
a man with a keen sense of humour like his friend. Fre-
quently he laughed but there was something hollow about
it, as if a personal thought had just obtruded itself into his
mind and had obstructed his hilarity.
He was born at Port Adelaide, South Australia, 29th Decem-
ber, 1884, an d educated at Lefevres Peninsula public school.
He was therefore a mere kid when sent to Parliament by the
Electors of Woothakata. When he first put in an appearance
he was a crude but clever kid, and though his first speech
was full of the schoolboy’s platitudes, yet he developed rapidly.
He read with avidity, and acquired a very fine vocabulary by
reason of his student nature. The young man who cultivates
the dictionary freely, acquires the most knowledge. Theodore
scorned to ask his friend the meaning of a word. He first
looked it up for himself, and the knowledge stuck. He
succeeded Tom Ryan as Premier and Treasurer on 22nd
October, 1919, and he reigned until 22nd October, 1925. For
long his party respected him as a genius, but in the end his
autocratic instincts asserted themselves and he lost ground.
There was a memorable night in Caucus when his friends
turned and bit him, and when Charles Collins was elected
in his place as Leader. Then he returned to Caucus after a
retirement, a chastened Theodore. It was on that night no
doubt that he cast the die, deciding that he was tired of petty
local politics and that the National Parliament called for him
as a saviour. He resigned in order to contest the Herbert
Federal Seat against Dr Lewis Nott, and was terribly shocked
when he found himself sitting at the bottom of the poll with
no political job at all. Then in disgust he went South, and
ultimately found a refuge in the representation of the Federal
City Seat of Dailey. Now Dailey is a very vermilion seat,
and Edward Granville Theodore had become moderate, or


thought he had, after his hectic experiences in Queensland.
However, needs must when the devil drives. Dailey ac-
cepted him as a fire eater and a righter of the wrongs of the
oppressed, although he had acquired a fine house on the shores
of Port Jackson at Kirribilli Point, and Dailey had him when
he had once more mounted the ladder of fame and was Fed-
eral Treasurer. He temporarily retired from that position
after the issue of the Mungana-Chillagoe Royal Commission-
er’s Report. Well, well, there are ups and downs in life.
Perhaps in years gone by Edward Theodore fished on Kirri-
billi Point, but he never even had a bad dream about living
there amongst all the best people.
Summary : Clever: far-seeing: secretive: popular while in
power; said to be a rich man: with a mansion among the
blest. What more could an ultrademocrat want or expect?
THE HONOURABLE REGINALD MACDONNELL KING
A Nationalist of the Nationalists, not knowing the meaning
of the word “compromise” where political principles are con-
cerned. You could not change his political colour from “Blue”
to “Red” unless you permanently drugged him and made him
irresponsible. The eldest son of the most beloved and trusted
Public Servant who ever served in Queensland. Those of us
who remember Thomas Mulhall King, 1.5.0., feel no surprise
at the type of son he left behind him. R. M. King first took
his seat in the twenty-second Parliament as member for
Logan on 15th November, 1920, amd has represented that
electorate continuously to date of writing in 1931. It took
some pressure to induce him to enter Parliamentary life, and
if he had accepted the advice of his progenitor, he might still
have been leading the placid life in company with Stephens
Commentaries, the Law of Torts, the Sale of Goods Act, and
all those mentally soothing associates which are in such
marked contrast to the hurly-burly of politics.
The subject of our sketch was born on 9th April, 1869, and
learned his ABC at the South Brisbane State School. By
gaining a Grammar School Scholarship in 1882, when scholar-
ships could not be obtained on a 50 per cent pass basis, he
showed that he had been a studious youth. Attended the old
Boys’ Grammar School, from which so many of us have been
turned out, up to 1886, and obtained the Sydney Junior Uni-
versity Certificate. Passed the preliminary law examination
and was articled to A. G. Unmack. Admitted as a solicitor in
March, 1893, and has practised his profession with G. R. H.
290
QUEENSLAND—


Gill as partner and more recently with his son Steve also.
One of his strong points is Local Government law, and in
that respect he possibly vies with our old friend Mr Justice
Woolcock who specialized in the same subject. For eighteen
years he was a Councillor of the Coorparoo Shire Council and
occupied the position of Chairman on no less than nine occa-
sions. For many years he was Secretary and legal adviser to
the Local Authorities Association, but when, in May 1929, the
Country National party was successful at the polls, he took
office in the Moore Government as Secretary for Public In-
struction and Secretary for Public Works. Moreover, the
United Party elected him as Deputy-Leader, thus further
enhancing his influence both in the Party and the Legislature.
In private life and in his younger days, the subject of this
sketch has been an all-round sport. He has played in first-
class cricket, tennis, and football, and has rowed with the
Commercial Rowing Club. In modern times he has become a
devotee to that rich man’s game —golf, but if rumour does not
lie, it would be difficult to find a worse player. His favourite
sport has, however, always been Yachting. He can sail More-
ton Bay with bandaged eyes, and knows by smell the differ-
ence between a black and a red beacon.
R. M. King is not an exponent of elocution. He could never
impeach Warren Hastings as Edmund Burke did, but he is
a common-sense speaker with an everyday vocabulary, and he
sets a fine example of decorum in our Legislature, which, per-
haps, is of more real use than spectacular oratory. Like his
Leader, A. E. Moore, he has the saving grace of humour, and
can mostly see the jestful side of a situation.
Summary : A useful citizen: a sound lawyer; a creditable
legislator, and, like his father, a kindly friend.
WILLIAM McCORMACK
This is another case in which a politician might have carried
for the remainder of his life the title of “Honourable” had it
not been that the party to which he belonged banned titles.
Thus he came to and went from Parliament just plain Wil-
liam McCormack. He was mostly known as “Bill” amongst
his intimates, and amongst a few of his violent opponents as
“Bill Bad” by way of a joke. Born at St Lawrence, Queens-
land, in 1879, so that at date of writing (1930) he is fifty-one.
Miner by occupation, and just prior to coming to Parliament
was General Secretary of the Australian Workers’ Union,
Queensland. That in itself rather stamped him as a keen


man. They don’t exalt many mugs in the A.W.U. When
labour reached office in 1915, the student of politics might
have supposed that he would have been included in the Min-
istry, but a feeling was prevalent at the time that older hands
such as Bowman, Lennon, Coyne, Bill Hamilton and Huxham
had earned first turn. Thus it came about that he was rele-
gated to the Speakership in which office he was not happy,
for, as he expressed it himself “there was nothing in it.” Pos-
sibly he meant there was no scope in it, but as a solatium
there was £B3 6s. Bd. per month in it. He filled the office from
12th July, 1915, until 9th September, 1919, and then resigned
to join Theodore’s Ministry, first as Home Secretary, and then
as Secretary for Public Lands. Being unhappy in the Speak-
ership, he was only a success so far as firmness was con-
cerned. He was not a student of procedure and precedent, and
like other labour Speakers had an easy job on account of the
huge Government majority. In Parliament he was an out-
standing figure on account of his physical development, and
as he was endowed by nature with keen critical qualifications,
and was also a reader, he very soon made up for a certain
crudeness of speech by adding extensively to his vocabulary
and general knowledge. Not a pleasant speaker to listen to:
nevertheless he held the attention of the House. In private a
most inveterate and interesting talker with a keen sense of
humour. A student of, and great believer in the teachings
of Machiavelli. So he said himself. He worshipped for years
at the shrine of Theodore and was his shadow, and when
that politician gave rein to his ambitions and contested the
Federal Herbert seat against Dr Lewis Nott (and lost), some-
body had to succeed him. The party chose William Neal
Gillies in preference to McCormack who was greatly shocked
at their absence of perspicuity. In fact for days he was
amazed. Gillies was the more popular of the two, for he had
the habit of distributing largess, or rather great favours to
Government supporters at the country’s expense. But the
whirligig of time brought about its own revenges for both
McCormack and Forgan Smith overshadowed Gillies in the
Leadership and made him look small. McCormack once in
the Government and associated with big things, became a
devotee to golf—the recreation mostly of the idle rich, and
this brought him where he wanted most to be, amongst “the
people who count” as he expressed it himself. On the retire-
ment of Gillies to the Arbitration Court, he naturally stepped
up from the Deputy Leadership to the office of head serang.
Was he a popular leader? In some senses “yes,” and many
292
QUEENSLAND—


others “no.” The passing years had made him autocratic,
and if there is one thing his party does not appreciate it is
being browbeaten. He had absorbed a few economic facts,
that is to say he had begun to see that no politician can butt
his head against the universe without hurting his head, and
he told his party so. He made some discoveries too, the
most outstanding of which was that there are only 20 cwts.
in a ton of potatoes. He took his party to the Country in
May, 1929, not with the usual confidence, but with some con-
fidence. During the campaign he fell foul of the Telegraph
newspaper, and withdrew all Government Advertisements
from it. It was the worst tactical blunder of his life for he
was smitten hip and thigh, and lost his head and his capacity
for leadership. He lost the election badly—very badly indeed,
and judging by private expressions of opinion his party would
have crucified him if it had not been against the law. Then
he resigned the leadership and took a tour abroad. In
March, 1930, he resigned the Cairns seat, and said he was
going into business in Sydney “amongst the people who
count.” That's all about William.
Summary : A tall man with great capacity for chatter and
joking. A good organizer. Not much grip on himself if he
once got his tail down. Possibly will make good amongst
“the people who count.”
SIR EDWARD HENRY MACARTNEY, KT.
Politician, Solicitor, Company Director and generally speak-
ing, prominent and useful citizen; to the forefront as a patron
of sport, particularly Golf, and blessed with so much popular-
ity that quite a lot of people called him “Ned.” It was not a
fleeting popularity either. It had been earned, and it stuck.
As an active politician within the walls of Parliament House
there is no harm in saying that he was not the most pro-
nounced success since the day when Queensland gained its
freedom from the yoke of New South Wales. The reason?
Well, that’s simple. The really successful politician must be
a pachyderm. His outer covering must be thick and coarse,
and impenetrable. Macartney in politics was a sensitive man.
Many incidents occurred there which hurt his finer sense of
honour, and if there was one thing that characterized Edward
Henry, it was that he was an honourable, straightforward man
in the old-world sense. Born at Holywood, County Down,
Ireland, on January 24th, 1863. Educated at Eniskillem
Gracehill, near Ballymena and Dublin. Arrived in Australia


1883. Admitted as a solicitor in 1891 and since Hon. A. J.
Thynne’s death is the senior partner of Thynne and Macart-
ney. His two sons served in the Great War. He served in
the 13th, 14th, 15th, 16th, 18th, 19th, 20th, and 21st Parlia-
ments first as member for Toowong, then for Brisbane, and
later for Toowong again, and was Leader of the Opposition
from 13th July, 1915. Missed the 17th Parliament. He went
to England and lost his job through Kidston springing a
General Election on the country, and a candidate named Cot-
tell displaced him for a time, but he came back later on for
the same constituency, and stayed until the General Election
of 1920 when he voluntarily retired. A curious mixture was
Macartney—a keen lawyer, but as sensitive as an hysterical
woman. Immensely popular among his political friends and
in private life, but not among his political opponents because
of a certain bitterness of speech. His dislike of T. J. Ryan
was an obsession. He could not stand criticism well. He
seemed to claim the right to vigorously criticize, and when
opponents retaliated it made him really ill. He indulged in
very clever innuendo at times that damned him in the eyes
of opponents. He joined Denham’s Ministry in February,
1911, as Secretary for Public Lands, and stayed only until
December, 1912, for he could not stand John George Appel
with his large stomach, and his huge bluff, and his attitude
towards a loyal Public Servant —the Commissioner of Police,
Cahill. He was not a strong speaker as platform orators go,
but he was a keen critic. If his party asked for advice they
invariably got the truth from him. He never compromised
between truth and expediency, and that is a characteristic rare
enough, God knows, in these days. In many respects his
scrupulous honour was a positive handicap, and amounted to
Quixotism. The broad general statement is made here that
the too scrupulous Australian politician fails frequently. In
politics Macartney failed partially. Why, when he was Sec-
retary for Public Lands he would not charge a shilling cab
fare to the State, and as to pocketing a Government pencil, he
would as soon think of committing arson. In addition to
Ryan, McCormack as Speaker was a bete noire to him. More
than once, Macartney accused the latter of partizanship in the
Chair, and rather than withdraw the statement he suffered
the penalty of suspension for a day or two. That was his
nature; no compromise with the enemy. Tell what you con-
ceive to be the truth and stick to it.
Private member legislation has gone out of vogue. As
a private member Macartney once legislated on his own ac-
294
QUEENSLAND—


count. The writer remembers it with sorrow. He tried to
prevent little boys smoking. Ah! Edward, you should have
remembered that you were once a little boy yourself, and that
my Lady Nicotine is an attractive flapper. The fact that his
Juvenile Smoking Suppression Act was a failure in every de-
tail, just shows that preventive legislation will not alter human
nature. He should have known that such a law, properly
administered, would necessitate the attachment of a squad of
policemen to every little boy in the State of ten years and
upwards. In private life no one could hope for greater popu-
larity than Macartney. It seemed to be taken for granted
that he was a “safe” man and could always be trusted. Well,
it isn’t a bad reputation to have. Indeed it is one that the
average civilian, including politicians, never gains. Ergo,
Edward Henry may consider himself in a unique class.
After Moore swept the polls in May, 1929, he on nth July of
that year prevailed on Macartney to go to England for a term
as Agent-General, and there he represented the State with
much credit, and received a Knight Bachelorhood in June,
1929.
Summary : A keen public man : a trusted lawyer: a genial
friend. Can shoot and play golf and acts as a useful leaven
in the community.
ALFRED JAMES JONES
A tallish, heavy-bodied, heavy featured man who walks
with a slouch, and with round shoulders. His first appearance
in Parliament was on 20th September, 1904 when elected for
Burnett. Previously he had had a varied career —drove one
of Cobb and Coy’s coaches, so it is said, and engaged in min-
ing, off and on, though apparently not with a great amount
of success. Certainly he acquired an excellent working know-
ledge of the industry, and if he had been successful, prob-
ably one of the last things in life that he would have thought
of would be to join any political party. With money in his
pockets he could have passed as quite the best kind of mining
expert and company promoter. However, necessitas non
habet legem. Like most of us he found it necessary to seek
a means of livelihood more or less permanent, and he chose
politics. He found politics less permanent than he antici-
pated, for he lost Burnett and had to stand down for a while.
Then he tried Maryborough and won. Subsequently he lost
that seat too. He fell on his feet once more when appointed
on 15th February, 1917, to represent the labour Government


in the late Legislative Council as Secretary for Mines, and
later on when Fihelly went to captivate the Prince of Wales
as Agent-General (and failed), he won the city seat of Pad-
dington, and returned to the Legislative Assembly still hold-
ing the portfolio of Mines. He held that office until the down-
fall of the Labour Government in May, 1929, and much of
the time drew £1250 a year. Better than precarious mining,
isn’t it? Alf Jones is really a very good sort and highly popu-
lar in his party. He is kindly and genial, though heavy and
somewhat slow-thinking. He has the merit of having a stake
in the Country, for he is a man of large family and domestic-
ated habits, and in his heart of hearts recognizes the futility
of bringing about the millenium by a species of conjuring
trick. He is a loyal man both to his King and country and
his party, which is something greatly to his credit. He did
not scorn militarism as a secret tool of the capitalist, for one
of his sons served in the Great War with his approval. One
of his strangest characteristics is his optimism. Indeed he
christened himself with the soubriquet of “The Radiant Op-
timist.” His unbounded and limitless faith in mining specu-
lations is almost unique, and his Micawber-like hope of some-
thing “turning up” is pathetic. He would die happy if oil
could only be struck in Queensland, even if he had not a
shilling’s interest in the venture. His vision is bounded by
limitless oil-fields sending up gushers to fall like rain over
the land. Hope is his sheet anchor, but it is so often deferred
that it is a wonder he does not abandon optimism as an occu-
pation, and take to pessimism as a recreation. A State
Enterprise near his heart was the State arsenic mine at Jib-
benbar. He certainly produced arsenic—sometimes good, and
sometimes very, very bad. B. H. Corser bought some from
him for the purpose of destroying prickly pear, and when it
was applied the Pear uttered a loud laugh and asked for
more. The mine was ultimately closed, the dead loss being
considerable. Nevertheless, he contended that it had served
a good purpose, and prevented profiteering in pear poison.
He loved to play with the Chillagoe and Mungana mines, and
really persuaded himself that their acquisition was good busi-
ness for the State. In this respect he showed his unswerving
loyalty to his colleagues. Many statements, some vague, some
specific, have been made concerning the conduct of the Mun-
gana and Chillagoe business, but in all the political turmoil
surrounding this money-melting enterprise no one ever sug-
gested that the hands of Alfred James Jones were anything
but clean, though his enthusiasm for the cause waned percept-


ibly. It is not possible to acquit Jones of all blame in con-
nection with the state enterprises with which his Department
was associated. There was, for instance a shocking squander-
ing of public money in connection with a coal mine at Warra,
and other coal mining ventures which had his imprimatur,
were conducted extravagantly and without due regard to econ-
omy or the interests of the country, partly as the result of
his excessive optimism. There is room for optimistic men in
Queensland, but optimism run riot is a dangerous qualifica-
tion. Jones made a good mines administrator, but was in-
clined to take too much for granted, and to place undue faith
in human nature. It is often so with ingenuous and unsus-
picious men. It is a simple and every-day trick to betray their
trust and trade on their credulity.
Summary : A good citizen: honest and well meaning but
optimistic to a fault. As a politician, too trustful.
WILLIAM DRAYTON ARMSTRONG
Born on the Darling Downs, approximately about 1863. Son
of a Toowoomba medico and an only son amongst numerous
sisters. If anything in this world led to his undoing it was
that fact, for he had been taught to believe in his youth that
all divine and human institutions were expected to bow down
and worship him. That’s all right in the domestic circle when
one is a pretty, curly-haired little boy, but in this cold and
matter-of-fact world something more than domestic and self-
adulation is required in order to leave an impress upon one’s
surroundings. Armstrong came into the nth Parliament as
member for Lockyer in May 1893, and he sat through the
12th, 13th and 14th Parliaments. John O’Keefe booted him
out of the 15th Parliament, but he came back again to the
16th, 17th, 18th, 19th and 20th. Then he perished utterly,
being beaten by George Logan at the 1920 election. A strange
character was Armstrong. Judging by his very frequent mis-
pronunciation of words, it would seem as if his education had
been sadly neglected, but that did not distress him in the
least, for he substituted the very best quality of bluff and
by loudness of speech and “tall” talk would easily deceive an
unanalytical person. That’s where Armstrong slipped. He
thought no one was looking. If he had only remembered
Robert Burns’s apostrophe to a louse he might have been
quite a different character —
O wad some power the giftie gie us,
To see oursells as ithers see us;
It wad frae monie a blunder free us,
And foolish notion.


In early manhood he went jackerooing and was christened
by his employers Billy the Buck” for he was a great “knut”
'—“the pink of fashion and the mould of form.” Later in life
he acquired a small property on the Darling Downs and then
his pose as someone of importance was droll, his bombast pre-
posterous. It was at this stage that he became a “squatter.”
He bred a few cattle and posed as a pedigree stock breeder;
he grew some oranges and affected the knowledge of a large
orchardist; he kept a few sheep on his property, and that
made Willie the profoundest authority in Australia upon the
pure Merino. It was a great day when he came to Parliament
and could write M.L.A. after his name, and there he made
friends with his antithesis, C. J. Booker. They were never
apart; they batched together; they were just like twin
brothers, and yet the day came when at a busy hour in
George Street Booker threatened to “wring his neck.” That
hurt Armstrong more than having his neck wrung and they
made it up afterwards. Armstrong had many visions of reach-
ing Ministerial rank but they came to nothing. Ultimately he
attained office as Chairman of Committees in November, 1909,
and served until July, 1911. Then Joe Bell died, and he
claimed the reversion to the Speakership. On his first
day he filled the galleries with the fair sex who came to see
the King Crowned. Then he settled down to give decisions
with great frequency—these having been laboriously “pre-
pared” for him. He brought a fine horse down from Gatton,
and each morning rode up and down Queen Street, immacu-
lately clad. “Who is that?” asked the spellbound populace.
“Oh don’t you know —that is the Honourable William Dray-
ton Armstrong, Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of
Queensland.” He went to the races clad in light grey frock-
coat and tall grey hat —just like the Prince of Wales. He
was by no means popular with the Labour party when they
were in Opposition and when they attained power he was so
simple as to remark “I suppose they will not have the decency
to follow English precedent and re-elect me.” He was quite
accurate in his supposition. Australian politicians have not
yet acquired the habit of making expensive presents to their
political opponents. And so he left the Chair he loved so well,
and when McCormack became Speaker he started to give him
the benefit of his wide experience and impart to him that
profound knowledge of Parliamentary law and practice which
he assumed he had acquired. Then McCormack was unkind,
and brusquely told him that he could get along without any
coaching. With all his faults and peculiarities, Armstrong
298
QUEENSLAND—


had his good points. He was a kindly disposed man with
many excellent instincts which some of ns might well envy.
While he was Speaker he had many friends, and being des-
cended from gentlefolk he was distinguished by a certain
courtliness which brought dignity to the high office he held.
If in the execution of his duties it fell to his lot to entertain a
visitor of distinction, he knew the right thing to do and to
say. The same cannot be said of all or nearly all of his pre-
decessors.
Summary : A good fellow in private life. Not very popular
as Speaker because of his undisguised dislike of Labour in
politics.
WILLIAM HAMILTON
Born at Melbourne in 1857. A shearer, and an excellent
type of Australian native if only education had been more the
vogue in his younger days, and if his environment when a
youth had been less rugged, and the language of his associ-
ates a little more modified and less “blue.” Environment is
the rock which wrecks so many of our lives. As a young man
“Bill” was handsome enough to have “carried off” the respon-
sibilities and social obligations of a Duke, but his “education”
was elementary. Dukes ought never to say “this ’ere” and
“that there,” and “Bill” used those phrases ad nauseam. He
was a skilled shearer, but inclined to “agitate.” He had
“heard tell” of an institution known in the West as “the
Govment” which had something to do with a concern known
as “parlment,” but he only knew them as species of visionary
elements of authority. Whether they were run by means of
suction gas engines, or electricity, or horse-power was mere
speculation with “Bill.” There came a day, however, when
he learnt the power of “govment” and felt its long arm reach-
ing out to grab him. The Great Shearers’ Strike eventuated
in 1891, and “Bill” became entangled in the meshes and fell
foul of the law. It was before the Arbitration days, and the
deluded shearer started out to burn down woolsheds to en-
force higher wages. Bill was a martyr to a cause. He was a
really conscientious martyr, and he defied the law thinking
he was justified in the cause of the class to which he be-
longed. Griffith improvised an “army,” and ran in and con-
victed the leaders, and when it was all over Parliament
thanked the Law and Order Officers, following the practice as
Griffith said, of only mentioning “general officers commanding
divisions.” “Bill” with some companions reached St Helena.


Those who expressed sorrow had their terms shortened. Wil-
liam was obdurate. He was proud of his successful attempts
at defying the law in what he regarded as a good cause. He
looked upon himself as a victim of “the capitalistic system/'
and he refused to compromise his “honour.” In those days
there were only two labour members in Parliament. Some
time after the strike a political wave washed quite a lot into
the local Legislature, “Bill” among them. That was in 1899.
He was a popular and genial legislator, and with his limited
capacity studied the land laws, and was an authority, of sorts,
upon them. At all events he was a genuine labour man and
a hard grafter. Hamilton initiated legislation in the shape of
the Workers’ Accommodation Act, and for that alone should
be remembered by the party. When labour reached office in
1915 Hamilton resigned his Gregory seat and led the Council.
It was a hard job for an uneducated man, but he did it with
moderate success and was always popular. Then when Sir
Arthur Morgan died he succeeded him as President, and wore
a silk gown and lace bands. If his shearer friends of 1891
had seen him —well, they would have smiled. He declined to
accept the office of Lieutenant-Governor —wise man that he
was —knowing his limitations. It would have been tragic had
he been compelled to entertain the Prince of Wales at Govern-
ment House. One could hear him quite distinctly saying in
familiar tone “Prince, will yer ’ave one of these ’ere chops?”
Hamilton told an excellent story of himself. When President
he went on a visit of inspection with a party to St Helena.
The Chief Warder in conducting the party round was very
defiferential to “Mr. Hamilton.” Coming to a short flight of
steps he took the President by the arm, remarking—“ Mind
the steps, Mr Hamilton.” Then came the instant reply—
“ Mind the steps, be ; how often have I scrubbed the
steps.” There have been very many worse men in the
Queensland Parliament than Hamilton. He was a decent-
living, kindly man, with many good instincts. He died
towards the end of 1919, and was accorded a State Funeral
by a labour Government. If the labour movement has any
gratitude in its composition, and there is no reason why it
should not have, it should never forget Bill Hamilton as a
conscientious battler for its objectives when battling was
regarded by many as a crime. His breaches of the law are not
being justified in saying that, but let it not be forgotten that
it was a hard cruel game to fight such a cause as his in 1891
and that it required a brave man to fight it.
300
QUEENSLAND—


Summary : A kindly, good-natured soul; full of ardour for
his cause; never knowingly did another man an injury. Can
all of us say as much?
JAMES TOLMIE
Born at sea on board the Registan on 25th July, 1862.
Educated at the State School for boys at South Toowoomba;
entered the service of the Department of Public Instruction,
April, 1877, as a pupil teacher; passed through all its ranks,
graduating as head teacher of the 3rd Class and subsequently
of the 2nd Class. Left the Department, August 1894, becom-
ing editor with a half-share interest in the Darling Downs
Gazette until disposed of in 1922.
How fond the schoolmaster is of politics, to be sure. Look
round the seven Parliaments of Australia and you find them
insinuating themselves into the Legislatures in dozens. Some-
what dogmatic is the schoolmaster. The little boy would get
licked if he contradicted him, but when you reach Parliament,
everyone disagrees with and contradicts you. Perhaps it is
because the Dominie has been used to incessant, intermin-
able chatter, that he hungers for more chatter which he gets
in an Australian Parliament. A bulky man was Tolmie —
about sixteen stone, who ultimately reached the Legislature
from Toowoomba in May, 1899. (the Thirteenth Parliament).
Very soon he assumed the role of “the candid friend,” like
Alfred Cowley, and his vote was sometimes in doubt. If you
do not quite agree with the Government you can absent your-
self on occasions of important divisions, and thus you come to
be regarded as a sort of elusive, minus quantity. After stay-
ing for the 13th, 14th, and 15th Parliaments, he missed the
16th and 17th and came back to the 18th, 19th, and 20th. Then
he received from “The City of Toowoomba,” his conge. Be-
tween the thuds he acquired office, and he was just as proud of
it as the ever memorable William Kidston when Premier.
Like Kidston he carried a heavy walking-stick and George
Street was quite full when either of them passed down. He
was a “Major” during the Great War, in command of a Troop
Ship, and a very loyal Major too, and in civilian life a most
estimable and genial citizen with a heavy laugh and a large
appetite, and no other vices. No, we are wrong there. He
was a bachelor and that is a distinct vice. Had James Tolmie
been married and had seven sons as Sir Charles Powers of
the High Court had, and if each of them was of the same
bulk as James, just see how he would have helped to fill up
Queensland. It was Denham who gave him his first job


as Secretary for Agriculture in February, 1911. Afterwards he
had charge of the Lands Department. There he was honest
and industrious, and it is something these days to be both
honest and industrious. He propounded a scheme for pre-
oaring “ready made farms.” The land was to be fenced,
louse erected, bed made, fire set, and crops ready to reap
when the new settler was to drive up in a motor car with his
bride, feed the baby (if there was one) with an already pre-
pared bottle of warm lactogen, take possession, and live
happily and prosperously ever after. The scheme was utopian
and impracticable. If it could be carried out without beggar-
ing the State, it would be a beautiful and sublime accomplish-
ment which would earn a man a statue when he died, and
much blessing while he lived. We have tried to accomplish
a good many impossible things in Queensland, but no more
impossible scheme than this was ever hatched. It would
require the London Mint to finance it. Tolmie became, like
Macartney, Leader of the Opposition for a while. He was
elected on Bth September, 1915, and he invented an effective
scheme of criticism by distributing the work amongst alleged
specialists in particular subjects. This relieved him and
educated prospective leaders. It is a scheme which lends
variety to the work of Parliament and might well be extended.
It is said that James Tolmie lost ground in Toowoomba
through undue pride in his success. This may only be an
apocryphal story. Knowing him as one does, it is open to
much doubt, but even if he was proud, pride within limits is
an estimable quality. Apart from political successes he might
well be proud of his uncompromising loyalty to his King and
Country, and that was one of his distinguishing character-
istics. Like Macartney he was one of those scrupulously hon-
est men one meets only too infrequently. He did not sub-
scribe to the dictum that the Government was “fair game,” and
was the type of man who would almost have two gum bottles
on his office table one to be used on Government business
and one on his private affairs. He was a very keen and clever
electioneerer, and, while his popularity lasted, probably knew
the Toowoomba electoral roll off by heart, and could scent
an electoi al swindle a mile off. Toowoomba grew in indus-
trial importance and that was probably his downfall. While
he represented that picturesque city of red mud he did so
with credit to himself and no doubt with much benefit to
the city. The James Tolmies are few and far between. We
could do with quite a number of them in Parliament. They
not only lend avoirdupois weight to the Legislature, but they
302
QUEENSLAND—


bring in their train industry, respectability, loyalty, and quite
a number of other desirable qualifications.
That’s all about James Tolmie, schoolmaster and one-time
owner of the Darling Downs Gazette. We may never again see
his bulk in the Queensland Parliament, but Toowoomba could
with ease obtain a worse representative.
Summary : A good and loyal citizen: somewhat platitudin-
ous and inclined to dogmatism: a smile for everybody and
with a heavy laugh which shook his bulky frame.
WILLIAM NEAL GILLIES
A farmer —the most unintelligent person could mistake him
for nothing else, for he had that unmistakable ‘Toll” of the
farmer when walking. It is a characteristic acquired by all
persons who have been in the habit of following the plough,
and has been attributed to the heavy going on uneven land.
Born at Allynbrook, New South Wales, on 28th October,
1868, and educated at the Allynbrook public school. He en-
gaged in general farming and particularly sugar farming, on
the Northern rivers, and was President of the Sugar Defence
League there. Gillies in private life was a kindly, homely
man; a good citizen who set a good example: he abhorred
strong drink which was a virtue to his credit: he did not
smoke, which was not so much of a virtue: he would have
been a better man with a pipe which would have given him
much solace. Elected to Parliament in 1912, representing the
northern constituency of Eacham. That was in the 19th
Parliament, and he sat through the 20th, 21st, 22nd, and 23rd
Parliaments and could not be shifted. He became Chairman
of the Public Works Commission. He was in Ryan’s Gov-
ernment, without portfolio, in April 1918 and he joined Theo-
dore’s Government as Secretary for Agriculture and Stock, on
22nd October, 1919. The office suited him all down to the
ground, for he loved everything relating to the land. He
became Deputy Premier under Theodore, greatly to the an-
noyance of McCormack, and when Theodore retired from the
Premiership in February, 1925, to contest the Federal Herbert
seat (which he did not win), his party honoured him by
electing him Premier, which office he held until 27th October
1925, when he resigned and was appointed a member of the
Board of Trade and Arbitration at £166 13s. qd. per month. If
there is any farmer in Queensland who makes £166 13s. qd.
per month, will he please step forward. Now, the success of
William Neal Gillies arose entirely through his geniality


towards his political friends. Towards his political enemies
his attitude was entirely different. He was distinctly sus-
picious of their approaches, and, in parliament he was fre-
quently very bitter towards them. As a matter of fact Gillies
was a very nervy, irritable man who controlled himself only
so # far as his party friends were concerned. He was a slow-
thinking* man who found it difficult to make up his mind, and
it was invariably made up for him by the last man he spoke
to on the subject with which he was about to deal. A time
came when farmer Gillies, who just then was Minister for
Justice, had charge of two highly technical Bills —a Stamp
Act Amendment Bill and a Succession Duty Bill. The De-
partmental officer in the gallery had coached and coached
him. Every clause of each Bill had an explanatory memo
attached to it. He was asked to explain clause Bof the Stamp
Act Amendment Bill, and he dived for his despatch box and
explained in detail the operation of clause 22 of the Succession
Act Amendment Bill. The official in the gallery was in des-
pair. Messengers rushed in with hastily-scribbled memoranda.
All to no purpose. It was hopeless. And then half in anger,
half in mirth, his leader had to lift his colleague bodily out
of the mire, and fan him with a copy of his own annotated
Bill. But he was always conscientious, and always did his
best, and that is what many of us cannot say. It so happened
that he led the battalion when H.R.H. the Prince of Wales
paid us a visit. Oh memorable time! Farmer Gillies (conscien-
tious always, and striving to do the right thing) learnt to
dance a quadrille in anticipation of the Ball given in the newly
completed State Insurance Building. He was in the Royal
Set. He was in a real dress-suit and a white waistcoat, and
as he plodded his faithful and conscientious way through the
Regal set of Quadrilles, knowing no more of the business than
Dobin the plough horse, he waved his arms hither and
thither as if he took His Royal Highness for five acres of allu-
vial flats and he was sowing lucerne broadcast. Anyway he
did the honours on that occasion as well and conscientiously
as he knew how. He might have been offered a Knighthood.
If he was, no one ever heard of it, and he never flew to Wal-
langarra, like Fihelly, to say good-bye to u my friend the
Prince” and missed him. He died in a tragically sudden man-
ner on 9th February, 1928 at the comparatively early age of
sixty and was mourned by many admirers.
Summary : A conscientious politician of kindly disposition.
Always did his best. A hard grafter. A good friend: a some-
what bitter enemy.
304
QUEENSLAND—


THE HONOURABLE CHARLES TAYLOR
Born at Melbourne, Victoria, on 24th March, 1861, and
educated at the public school and Church of England School,
Ballarat. Other men who have reached prominence in Aus-
tralian public life have been associated with Ballarat. It
seems a good place to be born in and to live in apparently, for
it produces many men of fine physical proportions and intel-
lect above the average. Charles Taylor was fortunate in that
he started life at a period when hard work was the vogue if
one had any ambitions in life at all; when picture-shows had
not been invented; when racecourses came second to the race
for life, and before the days when young people thought it
was necessary to hire a motor car to cross the street. At an
early age he knew the value of work and what it led to, and
now at the age of sixty-nine he is still grafting hard and enjoy-
ing labour for labour’s sake. The last observation might con-
vey a wrong impression.. He is not a member of the Labour
Party. He is a staunch uncompromising Nationalist, but even
Nationalists “labour.” He is in the same category as W. H.
Barnes. You could not shift him from the fixed political prin-
ciples of a lifetime with two steam winches, and he would
sooner go out of Parliament with the flag flying than compro-
mise with his opinions. And talking of the “flag” reminds
one that he is another of us who lost a fine son in the great
holocaust of 1914-18. Regrets? Of course we have, but
the genuine Australian never forgets his origin and what he
owes to the great nation from which he sprung. The man
who holds cheap the little word “loyalty” loses that great
propulsive force which lifts him above the ruck and gives him
an ideal. Charles Taylor is of the type who pins his faith to
“The Flag.” His King and his Country’s Flag are two of
his earthly Gods, and he worships them with fervour and rev-
ence. When one has said that, it is quite easy to visualize
the man. There is a dignity and distinction about a man who
places his King and his Country’s Flag first, which renders
futile the combined idle sneers of the world. He came into
the Legislative Assembly as Member for Windsor, a Nation-
alist stronghold, on 28th May, 1918, and has sat through four
Parliaments already, and is well into his fifth. He was elected
Leader of the Opposition in 1924, but after a short career in
that thankless office, intimated that he did not wish to stand
for re-election and was succeeded by A. E. Moore. He tells
an excellent story of his boyhood days when attending a Bal-
larat school presided over by a diminutive but pugnacious


head master. In order to curb the ardour of naughty little
boys there was erected within the precincts an instrument
which came to be nicknamed “Fundamental.” It was a plain
table with one end scooped out so that the average boy might
fit into it. When “Fundamental” had been ordered as a pun-
ishment, the criminal was placed in the scooped out portion,
his arms stretched out towards the other end and securely
held by a junior master. Then the Head got to work at the
other end of the culprit with a cane. It was good so long as
there was no objection but one day a well-developed and vig-
orous mother resented the indignity proposed to be inflicted
on Johnny and a willing contest ensued between her and the
head master. She won, and from that day “Fundamental” was
abolished. Charles Taylor is a white-haired man now, but he
must have been one of those ultra good little boys born with
white hair, for he says he was never put on “Fundamental.”
Shortly after leaving school he became manager and traveller
for a large produce and seed business, and all his life since
he has been dealing in the same commodity. He arrived in
Queensland in 1895, and before coming to Parliament was
actively connected with Local Government. Elected an
Alderman to Windsor Council in 1910. Became Mayor in
1915 and retired from the Council in 1921. Another of his
useful public activities has been his connection with the Royal
National Agricultural and Industrial Association of Queens-
He was elected to the Council in 1921, was Vice-
President in 1925-26 and at date of writing (April 1931) is
still an active member. When the Moore Government came
into office in May 1929 he was nominated for and elected to
the distinguished position of Speaker. His short career in
that office up to 1930 marks him out as one of the few real
successes in the Chair. Rightly he has a very high ideal in
regard to the office of Speaker—an ideal not possessed by
many of his predecessors. He has studied the history of the
office, and he ever bears in mind the wonderful men who
have filled the Chair in the Mother of Parliaments. In ad-
dition to being a close student of procedure he lends a dignity
to the office which has not always been associated with it in
Queensland. Looking back one remembers with pleasure that
industrious student of procedure, Sir Alfred Cowley, whom
he more closely resembles than any other of his predecessors.
Parliament made a wise choice in selecting Charles Taylor as
its Presiding Officer.
Summary : A representative Australian who never forgets
306
QUEENSLAND—


what we owe to the Motherland. Belongs to the best type of
citizen. Industrious and painstaking in all his activities and
above all a loyalist.
JOHN MULLAN
Born in Dublin, Bth September, 1871, and came to Australia
at quite an early age. For a considerable time was in the
Post and Telegraph service and served in northern Queens-
land. A strong and consistent labour supporter. The labour
movement is the breath of life to him; so much so indeed that
he had no doubt whatever that if labour ever reached real
power in Queensland, the millennium would be within our
grasp. Labour did reach power in Queensland and the mil-
lennium is yet a distant vision and as nebulous as the Milky
Way. There seems some doubt as to whether the political
highway is the highroad to the millennium whatever party
is in power. Some people think it is the mainroad to that
benevolent asylum where lost souls repose. Speculation on
this subject is somewhat abstract. Opportunity came to
Mullan in 1908 to give rein to his political ambitions. He
seized it with both hands and came into the 17th Parliament
as one of the representatives for Charters Towers and he sat
during the 18th Parliament also. He was elected to the
National Senate at the General Elections of 1913 and 1914
and his counterfeit presentment appears in the Commonwealth
Parliamentary Handbook 1901-23. This is mentioned lest
anyone should dispute his claim to having been a Senator.
He was defeated at the General Election of 1917, but was not
long out of politics, for he came back to the local legislature
for Flinders, at the General Election of 1918. Politicians must
expect their ups and downs. It is a precarious business, and
the electors are fickle. But after all he was a fairly lucky
politician for he got into Theodore’s Ministry, without port-
folio, on 22nd October, 1919. On 12th November he got full
Cabinet rank, with the office of Attorney-General, and then
served right on in the same office through the Gillies and
McCormack Ministries until the cataclysm occurred in M°.y
1929, and the bottom fell out of the Universe.
It is always a pleasure to record the pluck and bravery of
young Australians during the Great War because there were
so many who had cold feet and sore knees. One of John
Mullan’s sons served his country and died for it, and the
writer of this sketch, having had a similar experience, honours
John Mullan as the father of a brave man and honours his son
for his pluck and Australian staunchness. If anyone objects


to that sentiment, come along- some morning and we will
argue it out. Whether it is wise or otherwise to have as
Attorney-General a layman, unlearned in the law, is a matter
open to argument. If a layman can introduce into a legal
department a few common-sense, business principles of which
that eminent profession stands so much in need, then indeed
it was a noble experiment to make John Mullan Attorney-
General. He was a man of undoubted common sense in his
department and when watching Lum handling his legal Bills,
he might, by the stranger, have been taken for an eminent
K.C. He knew the measures he handled, and one has watched
time out of number, many Ministers who did not know them
at all, or only half knew them. When Peter Macgregor tried
his hand at politics, and came into the 22nd Parliament as
member for Merthyr, it was more or less natural that, being
a leader of the Bar, he should scoff at a layman presuming to
hold down such an office. Consequently he never tired of
making reference to “the learned Attorney-General” with
palpable irony.
John Mullan speaks fluently and argumentatively when un-
disturbed, but if his feathers are ruffled his Irish blood shows
itself. Metaphorically he trails his coat on the ground inviting
his enemies to tread on it and he emphasizes his points with
emphatic gesticulations, turning round to his friends to invite
their approval and applause. Being of small stature with an
alarming shock head of black hair, and a jaunty, Tipperary
bombast, his fighting attitudes are fearsome, and although his
dead weight would not squash a pulex irritans, yet he shows
the fight of a kitten run wild. He pours upon his critics
malediction and curse, imprecation and execration, anathema,
fulmination, and proscription. He shows much mistrust of
his political foes, but he bears no malice, and outside the
House is quite popular with all members because of his nat-
ural courtesy. Fate was kind to John Mullan at the 1929
election. Three of his Ministerial friends lost their jobs, but
it would be difficult to deprive him of his. He represents a
principality in which it is very difficult to find the small
population.
Summary: A strong party man, quite uncompromising: in-
dustrious in office: learnt his job and performed his duties
with credit.
THE HONOURABLE GODFREY MORGAN
What a debt of gratitude Australia owes to its early Eng
lish, Scotch and Irish pioneers who sought their fortunes in
308
QUEENSLAND—


the southern hemisphere, surrounded by this continent s
great wide spaces and its limitless opportunities: and what
great chances they gave to a younger generation which grew
to manhood in the freest country on earth.
The subject of our sketch was born at Landsborough, Vic-
toria, on 29th July, 1875, and very proud indeed he is of being a
Victorian. Son of Godfrey Morgan who, at the age of sixteen,
sought a new home in Australia, who associated himself with
the Argus , subsequently carrying on his journalistic career
in association with various other newspapers until he eventu-
ally established the Donald Times , Godfrey junior opening
his eyes on this universe on the very day that the first issue
came out. Educated at Goodie’s College, Hawthorn, a.nd at
Hawthorn College, Victoria, and destined to in his
father’s footsteps and tread the journalistic path which has
led so many men to fame. At seventeen years of age, he was
reporter and manager of the Donald Times, and at the age of
twenty, its editor and proprietor, so that he may be considered
to have been a fairly precocious young man. Young men like
responsibilities, and there is no reason in life why they should
not have them if they have the ability to back them up as he
undoubtedly had. He organized and twice fibed the position
of President of the Victorian Country Newspapers’ Associa-
tion, and as the Association’s representative, took an active
part in the celebrations attendant on the^ opening of the Aus-
tralian Parliament by the present King in May, 1901.
He left Victoria in September, 1908, and threw in his lot
with those brave selectors who faced the prickly-pear problem
in south-western Queensland. There he battled hard
adverse odds, acquiring a knowledge of Queensland’s great
prickly-pear problem, possessed by few and excelled by none.
He is an acknowledged authority on cattle and the various
problems which confront the cattle industry, and is a keen
judge of a good horse and takes an interest in horse-racing.
It was only a year after he had arrived in Queensland that
he was asked to stand as a candidate for the electorate of
Murilla —a grazing and agricultural principality of about
22,000 square miles, and extending from north to south for a
distance of 275 miles. Being a fluent speaker with unlimited
confidence in himself, he headed the poll in his first campaign
by eighty-two votes. Since those days he has consolidated his
position, increasing his majority with each new Parliament,
and now, having served his adopted State for seven and a half
Parliaments and made his gold life-pass doubly secure, it
would take several charges of dynamite or lithofracture to


part him from the electorate of Murilla. He is a born fighter
in politics and bore a large share of the opposition burden dur-
ing the Labour regime which lasted for fourteen years. For
long, weary years he occupied a prominent position on the
front opposition bench and battled bravely against strong odds
for his party’s faith. There are both earnest and casual poli-
ticians; there are politicians who do the job for which they
were sent to Parliament, with a very clear conception of duty
and an earnest belief in their political faith; and there are
politicians who dawdle through their political careers and
wander down the by-ways and alleys of political economy
with charming disregard of the seriousness and importance of
the job. Godfrey Morgan belongs to the former class, and
while regarding his occupation seriously, never misses the
humorous side of his business. He has the faculty for strik-
ing the happy medium and, while a good party man, no one
could accuse him of being a bigot. He has, during his long
service in Parliament, acquired a knowledge of the political
game only equal to his stock of profound lore on the subject of
stud cattle and the friendly little cochineal and cactoblastis
with whom he is so intimate that they will feed out of his
hand.
After May, 1929, when A. E. Moore swept the polls, Godfrey
Morgan was a certainty for the new Ministry and he was given
the most hateful job of all—that of Secretary for Railways.
There he has done as well as could be expected under impos-
sible circumstances, and better than most men would do. His
name will in years to come, go down to history as the poli-
tician who conferred a boon upon Railway men —a Super-
annuation Fund, though they have not lived long enough yet
to appreciate the advantages of the scheme.
Taken all in all, Godfrey Morgan is above the average
among politicians. Fifty-seven years hard graft have not
bowed his shoulders. Much above the average stature, he is
as straight as an arrow, and as alert as a man half his age.
Summary : A politician with strong convictions and uncom-
promising views. A genial companion with a keen apprecia-
tion of a joke.
JAMES LARCOMBE
He was a product of North Queensland and, it is said, was
associated with the retail butchering industry before the poli-
tical bug inoculated him. Born at Rockhampton, 1884, Lar-
combe had always been a talker and it is understood that that
is one of the necessary qualifications of a member of Parlia-
310
QUEENSLAND—


ment. Nevertheless there are talkers and talkers —some good,
some indifferent and some incredibly bad from the point of
view of their knowledge of their mother tongue. Larcombe
was not one of the latter. He spoke rather good English;
never dropped or misplaced his aitches and was undoubtedly
fluent. He was a small man, of much self-possession and push,
and wore expansive collars which must have cost a fortune to
launder. Coming into the 19th Parliament on 2nd July, 1912, he
sat through the 20th, 21st, 22nd, 23rd, and 24th Parliaments.
Then at the General Election of May, 1929 he was bumped out
with two colleagues in the Ministry—Dunstan and Gledson. In
the Labour Government of Theodore he was without portfolio
from 9th September, 1919 until 22nd October, 1919. Secretary
for Public Works 22nd October, 1919 to 7th April, 1920, and
then, alas, he became Secretary for Railways and acted in
that capacity up to the day of his defeat. It is a difficult
office to fill under existing conditions. From the outbreak of
the War onwards it became an impossible office to gain credit
for. Cost of material and wages rose beyond all bounds and
made mincemeat of our National asset, but the meat would
not have been chopped quite so fine if politics had not ob-
truded themselves into management. Things would have
been bad but not quite so bad. We will leave it at that. This
is not an article on Railways. Larcombe had a bee in his
bonnet on the subject of “added value,” and he was cheer-
fully indifferent about railway deficits so long as the com-
munity was reaping a harvest of “added value.” The aver-
age member of the community understands the broad dis-
tinction between profit and loss but “added value” to him is
an enigma and a myth.
Larcombe lived in Parliament House. It was a nice quiet,
somnolent old establishment to live in and cheap—6s. a day.
There he had a suite of apartments and worked long hours
compiling with the aid of it is said three secretaries, convincing
statistics with which to slay his foes. He was a pamphleteer
also and during election times produced vast quantities of
fearsome literature with which to annihilate the enemy. He
would quote The Wealth of Nations and Progress and
Poverty by the square mile, and it was just as nauseating
and uninteresting to the House as if he had proposed to give to
each listening member a dose from that picturesque little blue
bottle that our mothers swore by. Adam Smith and Henry
George were admirable citizens. They have now been gath-
ered to their fathers, and they have left behind them certain
theories, some excellent, some cranky, which it is desirable


not to accept as inspired. We are all cranky on some sub-
ject but when James Larcombe quoted writers on economics,
he appeared to be absolutely hurt if anything- approaching
ridicule, or even mild argument was employed in rebuttal.
There is a type of man who seriously believes that cold type
lends veracity to almost any statement. James Larcombe ap-
peared to be one of them. Well, it does not. There is per-
fectly shocking mendacity to be found in type, and even the
author of these sketches expects those who read the accounts
of themselves as he has seen them, to use frequent pinches of
salt. He will not be hurt thereby, knowing full well that the
point of view of one man is not that of another and that what
is perfectly visible to one person is to another hidden behind
a veil of obscurity. One other weakness of our subject was
his fondness for poetry. From Omar Khayam to Bret Harte;
from Shakespeare to W. S. Gilbert’s Bah Ballads ; from Ten-
nyson or Longfellow to the Hymn of Hate; from Shelley to
Milne’s Nursery Rhymes, he loved them all. He knew them
all by heart and like Pat Leahy could fire ofif an appropriate
rhyme on the spur of the moment. Here let it be said that
poetry cuts no ice in Parliament. The average member of
Parliament has never heard of Milton’s Paradise Lost. Byron,
Keats, Cibber, Joseph Addison, Isaac Watts, Thomas Grey,
Burns, Poe, Pope and a thousand thousand others are mere
names, perchance names they have never heard of, whose
bearers might or might not have been wharflabourers or
sanitary contractors. So James Larcombe, in heaving beauti-
ful odes and sonnets and ballads and idylls and satirical
verse and epics at representatives of the people, was more or
less casting pearls before swine and wasting sweetness on the
desert air. And that’s all about James Larcombe.
Summary: A good citizen except that he was a bachelor.
Possessed the vice of being a non-smoker: Preferred ginger-
beer to rum, and tea to dry monopole. An earnest politician,
and a brave battler for labour’s cause.
WILLIAM JOHN VOWLES
Born at Enoggera, 22nd April, 1876. Physically rather nar-
row, and politically no broader if quite as broad. A native of
the State and a son of a state school teacher. William was
apprenticed to the law, and he practised in the little western
town of This was not calculated to widen his outlook.
You don’t require a very wide vision when dealing with wheat
and sheep cockies. When Joe Bell died in July, 1910, Vowles
312
QUEENSLAND—


succeeded him. It was a contrast, but life is full of them.
Entering the Eighteenth Parliament his role unassuming
and mild. He didn’t set anything on fire with his first
speech. Moderately fluent, with a nasal delivery, and a
peculiar sardonic expression, he was not what you would
call a pleasant speaker. Tolmie, when leading the Opposition,
gave him a lift and brought him to the front bench about 1918
as a major critic. Then Tolmie was passed out, and Vowles fol-
lowed him as Leader on 28th January, 1920. Next, Macartney
retired from politics, and there were ructions as to the Lead-
ership of the Opposition. Vowles in the meantime had joined
a distinctively country party, and W. H. Barnes led the
Nationalists. The most numerous was the country bunch, and
Vowles secured the extra £2OO as Leader. Disunion resulted
at a time when union could have made it very hot for labour,
which had only a very small majority in 1920. When the
Prince of Wales visited us, Vowles, being the Leader of a
political party, was given prominence. Prominence involved
the donning of a frock-coat and stove-pipe hat. They did
not seem to suit him; probably he had only read of such gar-
ments formerly, and his struggle to look happy was pathetic
in the extreme. At times William John adopted the innuendo
method of debate. It creates a horrible atmosphere and is
supremely unconvincing. In 1917 he charged the Government
with fraud in connection with the purchase of Wan do Vale
station. There he showed bad judgment, because while
rumour said there was suspicion, he had nothing in the shape
of tangible evidence to offer. An indignant labour Govern-
ment appointed a District Court Judge to inquire. The
Judge reported according to the evidence offered. There was
no alternative. Vowles produced no evidence of fraud, ergo
there was no fraud. Is that not logic according to Professor
Jevons ? Thereupon Vowles was formally censured by Par-
liament for making f ffalse accusations. It was said at the
time that expulsion was a just penalty for making unprovable
charges of fraud and there was a section of the Labour Party
which favoured it, but the suggestion was not acted upon.
Vowles’s stock fell visibly. His influence waned after Wando
Vale. The High Court of Parliament demands proof just
as other Courts demand it, and Vowles only produced rumour.
At this period one had to visualize Vowles as Premier of
Queensland. Well, it didn’t come off, so we will say nothing
about it. In the Refreshment Room and Billiard Room he
was quite agreeable and popular, and he had the reputation
313
OUR SEVENTH POLITICAL DECADE, 1920-1930


for looking well after the interests of his constituents. One
gets tired of using the word “genial,” and it is not much of a
compliment, either. Anybody can be genial. The art is
easily acquired. It is not like learning a language. Vowles
was washed off the slate at the General Election of 1926 by
Wilfred Adams Russell. He was angry but it can’t be helped.
That is a way electors have.
Summary : Popular among his political companions, some-
what microscopic in outlook; fluent but unconvincing. Would
never set anything on fire.
MYLES ALOYSIUS DERRICKS
An Australian who spent many of his younger days in
North Queensland. It does not follow that because a man is
named after a saint that he is a good man, but Myles was
quite a good man both in public and private life. One might
term him a good average citizen. It is regrettable to have to
say that public life had had the effect of souring him some-
what. Occasionally it has that effect when a man’s impatience
for preferment turns into bitterness. He came into the
Eighteenth Parliament as member for Bowen on 2nd Novem-
ber, 1909, at the same time as Theodore, but somehow or other
opportunity did not seem to wait upon him as it did upon the
then member for Woothakata, though if he had been given op-
portunity there is no reason why he should not have made just
as good as his leader. There was no reason in life why he could
not invent the same taxes, or perhaps new and better ones. He
was not diffident; he was a good, loyal member to his party;
an excellent fighter, and a fluent, agreeable speaker. For four
years he was in the very thick of the local political battles.
Then the Senate lured him, and he served two terms there,
being elected at the General Elections of 1913 and 1914. Then
he was defeated for the Senate, and had to come back to the
local Legislature on half screw, after being out in the cold
for some time. All this made him bitter and cynical, and a
orosecution by Denham, when Premier, for allegedly libelling
his firm, made him just a trifle more bitter. Thus he acquired
in his party and elsewhere a sort of unexpressed unpopularity.
In his early years he was a good Rugby footballer. This is
mentioned incidentally, for Rugby football and law-making
have no immediate connection. Nevertheless, there is no rea-
son why a footballer should not make a good law-maker, espe-
cially when it comes to a question of imposing penalties. In
politics, Myles seemed to be perpetually “off side.” He always
314
QUEENSLAND—


left his speeches until the end of the debate, and then he
usually said a little that antagonized his own side. Thus
when Caucus was filling a vacancy he never got anywhere.
Bertram, the Speaker, offered him a temporary Chairmanship,
which he declined. It was an honorary office. As an example
of what a good enemy he was to himself, see his speech in
Hansard of 29th September, 1925, when he explained to a
thrilled and surprised House why he had not been a success.
This only further antagonized his party and probably put
Myles's pot on for all time. He opposed Theodore in the
plebiscite for the Herbert Federal seat, and under all the cir-
cumstances he may be congratulated for having failed to win.
Theodore could afford to lose the seat as he did to Dr Nott,
but Myles could not. There was one act in his career of
which he was inordinately proud. He claimed credit for
having been the first politician in Australia to raise the banner
of anti-conscription during the progress of the Great War.
Listen to what he said of himself on 29th September, 1925,
when relating his woes to the House. “I have been very un-
happy here during the past five years, and I believe that
there has been a feeling against me owing to the fact that I
was the first man in Australia to oppose conscription/’ Don’t
believe a word of it, Myles. All your colleagues bar brave
old John Adamson were in the same boat. They all opposed
conscription as they had a right to, if their consciences so
directed. The time has gone by for discussing the merits or
demerits of conscription. Let us give one another credit for
conscientious beliefs arrived at very largely by force of our
environment at the hateful period of 1914-18. So many
years after the distressing holocaust, we can at all events
meet on a common ground and say with Benjamin
Franklin —“There never was a good war, or a bad peace.” At
all events, we had amongst us at the time sufficient truly
devoted Australians to go abroad and fight for their native
land and their women folk, and if need be to lay down their
lives for the good cause. Many of us suffered agonies through
the deaths of our dear boys, but we remembered the land from
which we sprung, and all that it had done for us and our
fathers. No one blames you, Myles, for your opinions. This
is a great free land, where, within reason, a man may pour
out his heart. No doubt you were a conscientious and earnest
anti-conscriptionist. You believed one thing and many of us,
with our boys fighting the great fight, believed another. We
do not judge anti-conscriptionists to-day. “Judge not and ye
shall not be judged”—but we believed at the time that the


great popular silent conscience of Australia was against “the
first man in Australia to oppose conscription,” and we believe
it now.
Summary : In private life a good chap, but disappointed so
far as his public career is concerned. A respectable and quiet-
living citizen who became obsessed with political grievances.
THE HONOURABLE HUBERT EBENEZER SIZER
An Englishman, born at that seat of learning, Cambridge,
7th August, 1893; so that, at date of writing, he is thirty-eight
years of age and, if fate so ordains, has many years of useful-
ness in front of him. Arrived in the Queensland Legislature
28th May, 1918, and has already sat through the 21st, 22nd,
23rd, and 24th Parliaments and part of the 25th, first for the
suburban constituency of Nundah, and then for the seaside
resort of Sandgate. There are not very many young men, even
in Australia, who reach the Legislature at twenty-five years of
age, and one is bound to assume that when they do, there must
be a germ of promise in them which intelligent electors have
not been slow to discover. The day has passed, fortunately,
when elderly, stodgy and conservative persons regarded youth
as an offence and the prominence of active-brained young men
as an intrusion. Over ten years in opposition is somewhat of
a trial to the ambitious man with ideas, but adversity is the
school in which we learn our most useful lessons, and in which
at times we develop characteristics which we ourselves did
not know were in embryo within us. It was so with H. E.
Sizer. He was compelled to cultivate patience, and incident-
ally he picked up a trick or two regarding tactics from Labour
politicians, for many Labour rulers in Queensland have cer-
tainly proved themselves clever tacticians. The time came,
1929 to wit, when tactics counted, and it is said that some of
the clever slogans which won for his party the 1929 election
were developed, if not originated, by him. Then after May,
1929, came the critical occasion when a new Government had
to be chosen by a new Premier. It may safely be said that
every member of the party was a candidate for office, and H.
E. Sizer won a deserved place as Secretary for Labour and
Industry, largely on account of two critical and able speeches
delivered during the session of 1928. The position of Secre-
tary for Labour and Industry in these days is a difficult and
strenuous one to fill. The world travels apace; our social and
industrial problems multiply and grow more complicated from
day to day, and it requires a clear-headed man and an indus-
316
QUEENSLAND—


trious one to cope with them and find solutions which con-
stitute the happy medium. Moreover, in order to be entirely
successful, there must be in the occupant of the office a happy
combination of the suaviter in modo and the fortiter in re.
H. E. Sizer is agreeable by instinct and firm when necessary.
To a body of industrialists he can say unpleasant things in
a happy manner, and he has the Kidstonian habit of asking
where the money is coming from. Even in these days of
wonders not even a politician can produce the contents of a
quart out of a pint pot, and it is the realization of this fact
which makes H. E. Sizer a somewhat unusual politician.
Nevertheless, it is not the road to popularity, and among
unthinking people is liable to create the impression that one
is hard, cold and unsympathetic. It is really not so with him,
but it is a fortunate circumstance that there are a few poli-
ticians who realize that in order to spend, we must earn, and
in order to earn, we must work. In quite juvenile days, the
subject of this sketch was associated with the press, which
gave him confidence in himself, and later on he served with the
Colonial Gas Association. It is always a pleasure to the writer
to mention the War Service of young men during the great
holocaust. The parents of brave sons have not much time for
shirkers and persons with housemaids’ knees. He enlisted
in August, 1914, and left Brisbane on the Omrah with the
original 9th Battalion, A.1.F., September, 1914. He was a
member of the advance landing party on Gallipoli, and re-
mained until just before the evacuation; invalided to England
and eventually discharged as medically unfit. Was a member
of the first raiding-party organized by Australians during the
War which successfully raided the “Twin Trenches” at Fort
Gaba Tepe, and he is mentioned in the official war history re
capture of Turkish guns during the landing.
H. E. Sizer is an industrious Minister with a wide grasp of
Labour legislation; has studied economic problems since be-
coming a Minister, with great assiduity; piloted through Par-
liament the Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Act of
1929, the Income (Unemployment Relief) Tax Bill of 1930, and
other measures of equal importance. Is ready in debate and
fearless in criticism, and can be regarded as a strong member
of his party, who has a difficult department to administer.
Summary: A good critic in opposition; ready in debate; a
vigorous fighter when roused, and with a capacity for going
far.


CHARLES JOSEPH BOOKER
A tough proposition. In his youth, about the age of
eighteen or nineteen, he was lost in the scrub of New Guinea
for a fortnight, and found in what was thought a dying con-
dition. But he didn’t die. The only thing that would kill
Booker was an axe, and he was so genial a person that there
is no record of his ever having been chased with one. The
son of a Maryborough butcher, and a native of the State.
Father killed the bullock and cut up the steak; Charlie, in
later life, ascended the social scale and grew bullocks, but
there is no evidence that he ever stood beside the block and
said —“Sorry, Madam, I have no rump, but I can let you have
a beautiful bit of topside.” At Woolooga, near Maryborough,
Charlie bred stud bulls and was jocosely called “The Bull
King.” He had various other properties and was the cham-
pion free railway pass traveller of the Queensland Parlia-
ment. Later on he acquired sheep interests, in addition to
being a director of Walker’s Ltd. In fact he had so many
irons in the fire that you might have thought he had come
straight from Pittsburgh and dealt in steel. He came into
the Eighteenth Parliament in 1909, and while ostensibly he
was a strong party man his excessive impulsiveness made him
an unstable and unreliable quantity. As a critic his light
shone brilliantly at times, but his criticism embraced both
political friends and foes. He was particularly addicted to
pulling his fellow man to pieces in private, forgetful of the
fact that even Charles Joseph Booker had faults, and was
open at times to very caustic criticism. Booker was a close
observer and quite an industrious student of physiology. In
a paddock full of pedigree poddy bulls he knew at a glance the
mother and father of each, and in the study of his fellow man
he was unique and mostly clever. “Take a good look at that
head, old man,” he would say. “Look at the shape of the
back of the skull.” Then tapping his forehead with a finger, he
would say in a deep, oracular whisper—“ Criminal, criminal —
not a doubt of it.” Impulsiveness, hot-headedness, temper
were his failings, but his accustomed geniality in private life
cleverly hid these defects. At times he showed himself in the
House an admirable and vigorous critic, but if his suscept-
ibilities were hurt by an interjection, woe betide the inter-
jector. He became enraged, and lost control over himself,
and then the Standing Orders could go to pot. It was idle for
the Speaker to cry “Order, order.” Booker would not hear
him, alleging that a certain physical defect that he had, was
318
QUEENSLAND—


more acute than it really was. More than once he was passed
out, for disorderly behaviour in refusing to obey the Chair.
But his troubles! He had the gold railway pass and just
went on a quiet tour of inspection of his properties until he
had cooled. There are strange affinities in this life. Booker
and Armstrong batched together when in town. No two men
could be more dissimilar. The former an intelligent, obser-
vant man of the world, though not highly cultivated; the lat-
ter an incessant talker of generalities and with only moderate
stability. But the day came when they fell out and when a
little crowd in George Street saw the short-tempered Booker
threatening to wring his friend’s neck. When labour grew
very strong, Booker grew very unhappy. He could not stand
the personalities which at times intervened, and after qualify-
ing for a life railway pass he left the Queensland Parliament
in disgust and took to associating with stud bulls only. Died
4th June, 1925.
Summary : Impulsive: hot-headed: good critic, a good friend
to those whom he liked. Temperamentally unfitted for a
politician. Too sensitive.
JAMES STOPFORD
Born Rockhampton, 22nd July, 1878. Educated Rockhamp-
ton State School. Every one called him “Stoppy” —his col-
leagues, members of the Opposition, and even the girls em-
ployed in the Refreshment Room. Shades of Mcllwraith, Grif-
fith and Sir Robert Herbert! A Minister of the Crown with
an alias, and that alias, “Stoppy,” of all aliases in the world.
With all and sundry he was ‘Tail fellow, well met,” popular
with all, the enemy of none. Success did not spoil him; he
was “Stoppy” where he came from, and “Stoppy” where he
came to, and one can visualize his tombstone engraved with
the one word “Stoppy.” The Twelfth Parliament saw him
first in 1915, when Tom Ryan swept the polls and defeated
six Ministers. He came from Mount Morgan, where the
Company had employed him as a miner, but it was quite
palpable that that was not his natural vocation. He could
talk, and talk really well, and hence had become a species
of oracle among his class. Not that he was exceptionally
fluent, but his vocabulary was good, and he talked with a
species of studied profundity which gave him the reputation
of being a sage. He knew his class inside out, and he was
ever brave enough to tell them a few home truths. Watch
“Stoppy” speaking, and you would soon understand his


command over his own people. But first of all let us say
that he personally was very proud of being “the ugliest—
man in Parliament.” He was supposed to have a remarkable
resemblance to Napoleon Bonaparte—of short, solid frame,
with Napoleon's whisp of hair hanging over his forehead,
and of sallow, coarse complexion. See him addressing a crowd
with chin resting on his chest in profound thought, with hand
raised level with his right shoulder, and expatiating in well-
chosen, solemn words on the woes of those who have else-
where been described as “the minor Princes of labour,” and
you would get the impression that he was an earnest humani-
tarian who had dedicated his self-sacrificing life to the right-
ing of the wrongs of his class. See him later on after he had
become Home Secretary in Theodore’s Ministry, about July,
1923, just the same genial personality but with the more
slapdash devil-may-care air of the man who knows some-
body else is paying for the motor cars and the hundred
and one other luxuries that develop as one goes through a
successful political career. He was the personification of
geniality; he put on no side; he was very approachable; in-
tensely convivial, and always lurid in his language. In
handling Bills as Home Secretary, this much may be said
of him, —he had always mastered his subject and required
practically no coaching from the Under Secretary’s gallery.
He could both make an interesting second reading speech
and handle the details excellently in Committee. Curiously
enough he was a nervous man but nevertheless a wonder-
ful mimic. The two characteristics do not often go together.
Probably one of. the most humorous men in a House which
is not conspicuous for its humour. During the surprising
election of May, 1929 his fate hung in the balance, he led
by one vote for days and told the story that, becoming
desperate, he went out and had a drink with his majority.
He had voted for himself. It is not often that a burglar
goes and reports himself to the Criminal Investigation De-
partment. Stoppy did. He burgled the Bar one night.
With the aid of a large pair of office scissors he, in company
with a friend, levered up a heavy window and helped them-
selves to numerous drinks after hours, but he came and told
the story of himself to the Controller and he paid for all he
took. He was a burglar with quite honest instincts and there
was nothing to do but forgive him. If Parliament consisted
entirely of “Stoppies” it would be a happy jovial institution—
320
QUEENSLAND—


somewhat too convivial and rapid perhaps —but still not
unattractive.
Summary : A genial soul, with much of the milk of human
kindness in his composition though as a matter of fact he
didn’t drink milk.
ANDREW LANG PETRIE
After the retirement of Philp, and until the end of the
session of 1925, he was “The Father of the House,” and then
he decided to retire from the representation of Toombul at the
age of sixty-eight. Whether Andrew had become tired, or
Toombul had wearied of the ancient name of Petrie, there is
no means of discovering, but taking all in all it seemed to the
observer quite a wise decision. The eldest son of John Petrie,
one time Mayor of Brisbane, and in his day a contractor of
note, and a grandson of the old blind man, whose namesake
he was, who for so many years lived on the corner opposite
the Bank of Australasia. Born in Brisbane on 25th June,
1854. Perhaps it was fitting that Andrew should come to
Parliament in May, 1893, and sit on some of the very good
furniture which his father had made for the Government of
the day. There are some men who adorn furniture and com-
fortably fill large, easy chairs. Andrew was one of them.
A tall man about 6ft. 2in. high with a big frame, a little un-
wieldy, a minute mind, and a big expanse of flat chin like
portion of a billiard table. As a matter of fact he had never
grown up, and was a voracious reader of “Answers” and “Tit
Bits” in the same sense that the little street urchin with
bare feet consumes that supreme rubbish. He laboriously
read the stuff page by page, and having a good memory for
material not worth remembering, he related it as his very own
to anyone who had the patience to listen to the deplorable bosh
that he had wasted his time in reading. In the House Andrew
at infrequent intervals made deplorable, childish speeches in-
terspersed with stupid jokes. On the annual discussion of the
vote for aboriginals he always told the same story, and
after about twenty years members had become so familiar with
it that all the laughing had to be done by himself. When about
forty he made quite a lot of money by lucky land specula-
tion, but the lure of “Tit Bits” did not allow him to concen-
trate on the job. Hence bit by bit he lost it, and later, in
conjunction with a son he started and kept going successfully
a monumental mason’s business which occasionally furnished


good-natured members with a quip. Among the womenfolk
Andrew was quite the thing. The silly little girls at the sea-
side giggled immensely at his enormous fund of poor jokes,
and thought Mr Petrie was the very funniest man they had
ever known. Among the Queensland Women’s Electoral
League he was also popular, for whatever could be said
against Andrew no one could say that he was not the very
embodiment of kindness and good nature. He would as a
matter of fact do anything for anybody, and having a tactful,
electioneering wife, one could well understand his popularity
among members of the League. Nevertheless, even they were
always waiting patiently for him to grow up, and they seemed
to grow impatient after waiting sixty-eight years. There are
few men who have entered the Queensland Parliament who
have had so placid a career. Everyone tolerated his weak-
ness; everyone liked him. One could not contemplate for
a moment that he should have an enemy. He was just as
well liked by the opposing party as by his own. A famous
joke of Andrew’s was to enter the House one afternoon,
carrying on a shutter, in conjunction with Donald Gunn, the
voluminous report of the Royal Commission on the Railway
Department by Michael Joseph Kirwan and Frank A. Cooper,
Ms.L.A. To make the event more spectacular they had erected
on the volume a small red flag. Of course Petrie never got
anywhere, though he would tell you in confidence that if he
had pushed his own barrow a bit harder, he could have had the
Speakership when W. D. Armstrong got it. Andrew Petrie in
the Speaker’s Chair is a shuddery thought. He did get office
as Whip of his party, and made a good Whip, though not
always as reliable as a Whip should be. He was not sufficiently
a trickster, and he took too much for granted. There were
times when his party might have been badly left in the lurch,
if some quicker thinking supporter had not whipped up the
Whip. Taken all in all, Andrew was the embodiment of kind-
ness and always popular. He died ist April, 1928.
Summary : A gentle, kindly, sympathetic man, fond of a joke,
even though a poor one, and with no enemies.
MICHAEL JOSEPH KIRWAN
No, he isn’t a Scotsman. He was born in the State of
Queensland, of good Irish parents, at Maryborough, 26th
April, 1873, and educated at Yengarie primary school. He is
truly a son of the people, and, although Mick would not
admit it for a moment, it was the somewhat impulsive stupid-
322
QUEENSLAND—


ity of the people when they indulged in the doubtful luxury
of a general strike in 1912, that brought him into Parliament
and caused him ultimately to get into the latest edition of
John’s Who's Who in Australia. When the Denham Gov-
ernment received its conge in 1912, Mick was the hero of the
hour, for he, a railway porter, won the metropolitan seat from
bluff old E. B. Forrest who at that time typified ‘‘Capital”
by representing the Colonial Sugar Refining Coy. in Brisbane.
He is a fluent speaker, with a voice so comprehensive that it
attracted the attention of the Prince of Wales. Moreover, in
the opinion of the head master of the state school at Gawler,
South Australia, he is the finest exponent of the English language
that that pedagogue has ever listened to. There is no record
whether the schoolmaster ever heard any other exponent of
the English language, but that is by the way. One of the out-
standing features of Michael is his hair. His black curls (alas
now turning grey) are the pride and joy of his life. He just
hates to be shorn, and when that event does take place, a
shadow is lifted off the Legislative Assembly comparable only
to the moon emerging from an eclipse. The word goes round
the House —“Mick’s had his hair cut,” and facetious questions
are asked across the floor such as, “Who paid for it, Mick?”
“Did you accept the lowest tender?” “How much a pound
did it realize?” and so on. He takes it all good naturedly, for
he is essentially good natured and kind. Before his first rise to
fame as Chairman of Committees under the Labour Govern-
ment in December, 1920, he attended at Parliament House
with commendable punctuality all the year round. Never
did a politician take himself so seriously. Armed with a
satchel made at, and supplied from the penal settlement at
St Helena, he attended Parliament House seven days a week
like the veriest junior clerk on 30s. a week. Known as “the
member for Parliament House,” he was there on the stroke
of nine, and some said he signed a “Time Book.” He spent
every Sunday and all Sunday there as well, and engaged in
a mysterious occupation of cutting out extracts from daily
papers which he laboriously pasted into volume after volume.
During the Great War Kirwan posed as an authority upon
“The Western Front,” and was tireless in his reference to it.
You would not look for vanity at such a source, but may we
say it’s there. Which of us would not be vain under such try-
ing circumstances. From a humble occupation, carrying lug-
gage and calling out the names of the trains, to be transported
suddenly to an upholstered seat in a Chamber covered with


velvet pile, and be called upon to make laws —well —it is
almost more than human flesh and blood can stand. “Look at
that/’ he says, throwing on the table a gilt-edged card of
invitation from the Chamber of Commerce to their annual
gathering. “When I was first elected there was not one of
them who would not have spat upon me; to-day they seek
me and want my advice, and assistance.” Mick, do you remem-
ber your Shakespeare which you learnt so industriously at the
primary school at Yengarie,
In peace there’s nothing so becomes a man
as modest stillness and humility.
Having reached the stage of being put in the picture gallery
of Chairmen of Committees in Parliament House, Brisbane,
he got into the Theodore Ministry, without portfolio on 14th
July, 1924. In the Gillies Ministry he attained full Cabinet
rank as Secretary for Public Works, on 26th February, 1925,
and how far he would have gone only the Good Lord knows,
had it not been that on nth May 1929 something happened in
Queensland. For days his fate hung in the balance, for his
majority disappeared, and appeared again, and vanished once
more, and at last it made one final supreme effort and the
figures went up showing that he still held the seat by 12
votes. Well, Mick, we were not sorry; you have become such
an institution in the Queensland Parliament that we would
miss sadly your kindly presence and your boisterous laugh.
May you rest on the cushioned benches for many years yet
and impress your weight on the laws of Queensland.
Summary : Abnormally kind and friendly. Has not an
enemy. Reached eminence largely by those qualifications.
Why not?
AUGUSTUS CECIL ELPHINSTONE
The subject of this sketch came into the 21st Parliament.
He defeated at the 1918 elections a very capable member of
the labour party —T. L. Jones. He took his seat on the 28th
May, 1918, as member for Oxley—a tall, clean-shaven,
pleasant-looking Englishman, with the cultivated manners of
an English public school boy and a silvery tongue with which
we were not very familiar and which seemed to provide some-
what of a contrast. The Government benches did not like
Elphinstone, partly because he won their beloved Oxley seat,
and partly because of his English voice and his undoubtedly
patronizing manner. There is a certain rugged independence
about us Australians which makes us resent patronage, and
324
QUEENSLAND—


therein Elphinstone misjudged his associates. His criticism
of the Government was so keen and biting that was not
long before the Government benches began to hurl “charges”
against him which were more or less visionary. His most
desperate crime appeared to be that in its earlier stages the
Darra cement works had not been a success under his man-
agement. This was the worst iniquity they could rake up, and
consequently every speech he made was punctuated with the
insanely reiterated phrase “what about Darra?” Well what
about it? Most of us have failed at something, and there was
nothing illegal, anyway, about the failure. Elphinstone, like
other clever men, antagonized not only labour, but sections
of his own party. They all saw his commanding ability
and outstanding personality, and it would almost seem
as if the greeneyed monster began to operate. You see every
politician thinks he is a prospective Premier —and really he
isn’t. Given certain circumstances Elphinstone was. There
is not a doubt about it. Except for one characteristic he was
cut out for a Leader. He was too impulsive in his statements
and not stable enough. Consequently the older members of
his party damned him with faint praise and hinted mysteri-
ously that “there is something about him which is not to be
trusted ” Innuendo experts made the most of this, and were
responsible for spreading belief in the hidden, occult, concealed
and suppressed “something.” It was not entirely illusion and
yet there was always the fear that he was trying to supplant
someone. A very able, a very fluent speaker was Elphinstone,
and he knew it. Fairly moderate in language, but forceful
in expression. Argument well balanced, and words well
chosen and with no ridiculous reiterations, but his vanity
and his absurd patronizing manner combined to kill him. He
was a man with considerable knowledge of the world, a close
observer, an earnest and concise reasoner, and he had the un-
usual faculty in a politician of getting down to first principles.
It was a pleasure to listen to this fluent, cultivated English-
man pulling to shreds some of the economic fallacies with
which he was confronted, and showing them up in their true
light. He had another failing, the desire for compromise.
There he made a mistake. In politics no good can come out of
Nazareth. It is an “all in” game, and the leader who desires
to compromise loses prestige. Elphinstone never learnt why
he never really “arrived” in politics. If he had sat back and
been patient; if he had suppressed his vanity; if he had
curbed his patronizing manner he could have been a great


leader of men. He, and he alone, was responsible for the
ruination of a fine political career for there was no one to
approach him in ability in the Queensland Parliament. The
Twenty-fourth Parliament terminated with Elphinstone at
war with his colleagues. Sometimes he wanted one thing,
sometimes another, and his terms were nearly always impos-
sible. At last he threw off allegiance entirely and stood as
a non-party candidate for Oxley at the 1929 election. There
he met his Waterloo, and the only man to be blamed was
Cecil Elphinstone. The writer was sorry, for he
amuses himself by forecasting political careers and his fore-
cast in this case was woefully at fault.
Summary : Clever, fluent, ambitious, vain, patronizing.
Could have been anything and ended by being nothing.
JOHN HUNTER
After a strenuous mercantile life in which he rose from the
humblest position to something quite big, John Hunter seemed
to catch” politics as other people “catch” the measles. As
a young man he had no particular advantages, but he worked
early and late in a humble capacity, and he had the advant-
age of being young before the days of the Pan Pacific Secre-
tariat and Industrial Arbitration Courts, and the “go slow”
and the “damn the boss” cult. Therefore he “went
quick,” and was thrifty, and from humble beginnings he
acquired a business of his own in Roma. As the years went
by the business and he expanded until Hunter was Roma and
Roma was Hunter, and he was even so loyal to the south-
western country town that made him that he christened
his only child “Roma.” Well, he “caught” politics in 1907,
and he came into the Sixteenth Parliament *in July of that
year as a labour member, being a contemporary of John
Adamson, and Donald Gunn, and William Lennon who be-
came Lieutenant-Governor. Hunter could consistently re-
present labour because he had laboured and knew the
aspirations and the hardships of the people who worked
with their hands. He worked hard in his party during years
of opposition. He had the land question at his fingers’ ends,
and the cause of the primary producer ever at heart. A pet
subject of his was the establishment of an Agricultural Bank,
and he rode his hobby to death until he saw his purpose
accomplished. Even then he was not satisfied, and was the
chief critic of the Act and its administrators. When the
first Labour Government was formed in 1915, the party was
326
QUEENSLAND —


wise enough to include some of the pioneers of the move-
ment. Hunter was one of them, and was allotted the port-
folio of Lands, where he was a steady capable administrator.
It soon came about that the labour Cabinet had formed itself
into two groups —the Premier’s (Ryan’s) section and the
Theodore section. Ryan maintained a Cabinet majority until
he went to Federal Politics, and his first lieutenant and
faithful friend was always John Hunter. The other section
was led by Theodore, who had no love for John Hunter
because nothing would budge him from the fixed principles
of a lifetime and he was not sufficiently pliable in the hands
of a somewhat autocratic politician who did not appreciate
obstacles. He was a cunning, far-seeing politician, and being
ever on the alert to counter treachery against Ryan, he
earned the hate and venom of the opposing section. In the
House his manner towards opponents made him unpopular,
and he was given somewhat to sneering and cynical laughter.
He rather got on the nerves of another cynic, Macartney,
and they each brought into politics a feeling towards one an-
other with which it is not desirable to associate the Legisla-
ture. When business called Ryan to England, Hunter was
his faithful watchdog and was ever on the alert to protect his
interests and to report intrigues against him which were for
ever being hatched. There was not only friendship but
genuine affection between these two men, and so much con-
fidence had Ryan (an R.C.) in his Protestant friend that
he appointed him guardian of his children should anything
happen to him while in England. It lightens the gloom of
politics and gives them temporarily a different complexion
when we find such genuine attachment between two men.
When Ryan retired from the Leadership the Theodore-Fihelly
section were glad to vote for Hunter as Agent-General. They
wanted him out of the way, and aspiring office holders of the
McCormack type also gave him their support. A vacancy
in the Cabinet had its chances. John Hunter’s foresight gave
to Queensland its wonderful National Park. Few of us know
the real wonders and beauties of this huge reserve. 47,000
acres on the southern coastal highlands, embracing the
famous Lamington Plateau, constitute a national possession
the value of which in the years to come cannot be estimated.
How fitting a tribute it would be to the far-sightedness of
John Hunter if on the most exalted point of this vast people’s
playground was erected a plain obelisk with the inscription:—
The vision of John Hunter made these wonderful woodlands and
dales and mountain crags the people’s property.


No sketch of Hunter's career would be complete without
reference to his consistent and persistent labours in the
cause of the returned soldier. No time was too long, no
trouble too great to be expended upon this one cause alone.
The repatriation activities of the State of Queensland were
set in motion by his efforts, and so long as he occupied Mini-
sterial office nothing was nearer his heart than this intricate
and sometimes thankless task.
On his return from the Agency-General he settled down in
Brisbane, and abandoned the political field in favour of a
quieter and more placid life, but at intervals he appears at
His Excellency the Governor’s Levee clad in correct court
dress —knee breeches, silk stockings, silver buckles and all.
Demos arise! The time has come! Put him to the death!
Summary : The best of citizens. When he put his hand to
the plough he never turned back. A worker from boyhood,
he will die a worker of the very best type.
DONALD GUNN
Born near Bombala, New South Wales, 19th February 1856.
The progeny of a squatter, and in his younger life so satur-
ated with information concerning pure merinos and cross-
breds that he grew up an acknowledged expert on sheep-
breeding and the wool industry generally. A product of the
old Brisbane Grammar School in Roma Street, somewhere
near the present railway gates. If in those days secondary
education was of the same type as it is to-day, then Donald
did not acquire an over supply, for it is very doubtful whether
he carried away with him the indicative present of “to love”
in either Latin or French. Nevertheless under the ever-
memorable Thomas Harlin, the first head master, he acquired
something even more valuable than a knowledge of Latin
and French. He learnt a code of ethics which one could wish
was the code of all public men. He learnt, and believed with
St John the divine, that “The truth shall make you free,” and
with Edmund Burke, he knew “That chastity of honour
which felt a stain like a wound.” What more can be said
of the character of a man than that? That such a man should
come to Parliament was a strange anomaly. But he did not
come willingly. He came in response to a patriotic call, and
because there were men outside who thought that a leaven
such as he could supply, was the direst need of the Legisla-
ture. He stayed in response to the same call, much longer
than he wanted to, for he was a perfect child of nature and
328
QUEENSLAND—


loved the scent of the eucalyptus, the smell of the sheep pens,
the cawing of the crows, the ironical laugh of the kookooburra
and the tinkling of the cow bell. He came into the 16th Parlia-
ment on 23rd July, 1907, and there he stayed until the end of
the 21st in 1920. Occasionally an abnormally optimistic
person opposed him, but it was futility run mad, for Donald
was loved on all sides and had as many labour as nationalist
friends. There was an unconcious humour about Donald
Gunn which lent to his personality a wonderful charm. We
are familiar with the people who prepare their humour. It
mostly falls flat. Donald’s was spontaneous and often had
for its origin the most trifling incident. It is a great accom-
plishment to be able to see the funny side of things as we go
through life and not to take this strange universe too seri-
ously. At times he was even frivolous. If the House sat
up to the Christmas Season he began to accumulate toys
for the children of his constituents, and more than once he
has been known to bring them into the House and make
weird noises with trumpets and whistles. There was an occa-
sion when he played a jest upon a late Clerk of the Assembly
who was given somewhat to somnolency. Observing him fast
asleep in his chair he quietly passed out of the House, and in
passing gave him a dose of water from a boy’s water squirt.
It was strongly reminiscent of the act of a much more eminent
Australian politician, Alfred Deakin, who, seeing the Clerk
of the House of Representatives—Sir George Jenkins —fast
asleep, put a tall silk hat on the top of his head at a rakish
angle. In the House he invariably was to be found in posses-
sion of a “Dilly Bag,” in which he carried about his papers.
Most other members had a more ornate leather “satchel”
made at the penal establishment of St Helena and supplied
free. Donald’s “Dilly Bag” was a perpetual joke. It gave
one the impression that he was an enthusiastic fisherman, and
that it was full of prawn or mullet bait of doubtful age.
Donald was one of two heroes who convulsed the House by
bringing in on a miniature double-handled shutter the famous
report of the Royal Commission on the Railway Department
by Michael Joseph Kirwan and Frank A. Cooper, surmount-
ing it with a little red flag which fluttered in the breeze.
When Donald Gunn retired from Parliament he wished to
visit South America, but before doing so had to secure from
the Commissioner of Police a certificate that he was of re-
spectable character and “had never been in gaol.” The very
notion of kindly Donald Gunn having at any period of his


existence been compelled to pick oakum and eat hominy is
so manifest a jest as to make one laugh in his sleep.
We want in Parliament the class to which Donald Gunn
belongs—we want them very badly. There are not many left,
alas, and they will soon be as extinct as the Dodo.
Summary : The name was a symbol for honour, and truth
and uprightness; for simplicity of life; for natural and spon-
taneous humour. Verily one of nature’s gentlemen.
THE HONOURABLE WILLIAM LENNON
Born in Dublin, 1849. Arrived in Melbourne with his parents
in January, 1855, so that at the time of writing (May,
I 93 I ) he has attained the fine old age of eighty-two years.
He entered the Victorian Mines Department in 1870, and
served there for four years. He then joined the Bank of Aus-
tralasia, and, having gone through the usual apprenticeship,
opened its branch in Townsville in January 1881. In 1886
mercantile pursuits attracted him, and he became manager in
Townsville for Burns, Philp & Co. In 1896 he engaged in
business on his own account in Townsville, but the fatal call
to politics attracted him in 1907, and he was elected to re-
present the northern constituency of Herbert in the cause of
Labour in that year, and continuously represented that con-
stituency until 1920. From the day he entered the local
legislature until he left it his career would appear to have been
one of perpetual contradictions. His general demeanour, the
tone of his speech, his deportment, in fact the tout ensemble,
would give one the instant impression that he had been born
to the purple and that his sympathies trended more towards
the silvertail branch of humanity than towards the hoi polloi.
However, labour adopted him as its very own, and accepted
as inevitable a somewhat haughty attitude and a distinctly
cultivated manner. William Lennon wearing the Order of
Knight Commander of the Most Distinguished Order of St
Michael and St George would have passed at a King’s Draw-
ing Room or among a gathering of distinguished diplomats.
Perhaps that was because he was a diplomat and quite a
distinguished looking, well-set-up man with a proud carriage
and genial mannerisms. Having been for a time Leader of
the Opposition he naturally was in the running for office when
labour gained power in 1915. Consequently he became
Secretary iov Agriculture and Stock in 1915, and held that
Office until 9th September, 1919. One does not gain much
experience of Agriculture in a Mines Department, a Bank,
330
QUEENSLAND—


or a mercantile firm. He may have known the difference
between a plough and a harrow by reading, but at all events
there is no record of his having misled a Governor of Queens-
land, as an eminent Queensland Federal politician did, by
telling him that arrowroot, growing on the banks of the
Logan River, was sugar cane. He applied himself with in-
dustry to his official duties, and acquired more than an
ephemeral knowledge of his job but he excited some hilarity
when he advocated the feeding of pigs with warm milk.
However, that is neither here nor there. It was a kindly and
friendly action towards the pigs, and doubtless he rose in
their estimation as one full of humanitarian instincts. Two
sons of William Lennon served with distinction in the Great
War, one of them gaining the Military Cross. In labour
circles, in order to keep right up to date and sufficiently
democratic, it is necessary that members should always
address one another by their Christian names. Indeed the
practice grows among all members in all Parliaments. One
always had considerable doubt whether the haughty William
Lennon was as appreciative as he might have been of being
addressed as “Bill” by all and sundry. In private life he was
a devotee to bowls and billiards. If he played bowls as well
as he played billiards he acquitted himself very well indeed.
Now the time came when William Lennon was exalted into
very high office indeed, having first used the Speakership as a
stepping stone. McCormack, after much strenuous effort
succeeded in abandoning the Speakership, in which office
he was unhappy, and getting into Theodore’s Ministry in
October, 1919. William Lennon thereupon was elected
Speaker 9th September, 1919, but resigned on 9th January,
1920, in order to assume the office of Lieutenant-Governor.
He also became President of the Legislative Council, in 1920,
until its abolition on 23rd March 1922.
The office of Lieutenant-Governor associated William Len-
non with an action which has become historic. Governor Sir
Hamilton John Goold-Adams had refused to pack the Legislat-
ive Council sufficiently full of labour supporters to enable them
to abolish it. During the interregnum caused by the Governor’s
departure and the arrival of Sir Matthew Nathan, William
Lennon held sway, and being a good labour supporter and
democrat, he had no such absurd compunctions as Sir Hamil-
ton John Goold-Adams. Metaphorically he took the bull by
both horns, and did the job completely and without the
necessity of pulling out his handkerchief to wipe his eyes.


On Theodore’s initiative he appointed enough labour sup-
porters; the Council was abolished and so was William Len-
non as President. Theodore created a salary for the office of
Lieutenant-Governor and named the tidy sum of fiooo per
annum. It had never at any stage of our history been done
before. The position of Lieutenant-Governor was an unpaid
one, except when the Governor was on leave or out of the
State. For nine years William Lennon drew £B3 6s. Bd. per
month as Lieutenant-Governor. Then when an earth tremor
was experienced in Queensland in May, 1929, and Arthur
Edward Moore swept the polls, the salary was abolished, and
later on the Lieutenant-Governor resigned, and Sir James
William Blair assumed the sinecure in his stead.
Summary : A good citizen: a kindly, somewhat haughty
man; sometimes testy; not suited to politics. Would have
shone as a Lord Chamberlain or as a member of the Corps
Diplomatique.
GEORGE POWELL BARNES
The subject of this sketch may be described as an early
pioneer who refuses to grow old and declines to give up
pioneering. Born on 20th September, 1856, at St Kilda,
Victoria, and married in 1879 Mary Cecelia, daughter of the
late T. F. Merry of Toowoomba. He is therefore approaching
his 75th year. See him walking up George Street to-day, and
you would say he was possessed of the arteries of a boy of
sixteen, for there are few of the blase young men of to-day
who would care to keep pace with him. He is energy per-
sonified and appears to be perpetually in a hurry. Possibly
if that had not been a natural characteristic he could never
have accomplished what he has done during his adult life.
Like his brother, W. H. Barnes, he is a man of rigidly regular
habits, and has been a life-long abstainer and advocate of the
cause of temperance. He was educated at the National
Schools of Toowoomba and Ipswich and subsequently at the
old Normal School in Adelaide Street, Brisbane. One might
almost associate romance with the business career of G. P.
Barnes. He commenced life as cashier with the late T. F.
Merry in Toowoomba, and on Mr Merry’s retirement from
business in 1868 he left Toowoomba for Ipswich. In 1870 we
find him in the service of Morgan Davies of Gympie, and
following on Davies’ business collapse, he entered the service
of Finney, Isles and Company in Brisbane. Resigned in 1873
to accept a position with the late David Clark of Warwick, and
332
QUEENSLAND —


that appears to have been more or less the turning-point of
his long career. In conjunction with William Lavers he pur-
chased David Clark’s business. In 1876 the partnership was
dissolved, and he accepted a junior partnership with T. F.
Merry who had re-opened business in Toowoomba. In 1878
he returned to Warwick in premises, Albert and Palmerin
Streets; subsequently being joined by his brother W. H.
Barnes and later by T. F. Merry. This was really the com-
mencement of the Limited Liability Company, now known
as “Barnes and Company, Ltd.” which controls businesses
at Warwick, Allora, Yangan, Roma Street, Brisbane; and
Commonwealth Flour Mills, Warwick and South Brisbane.
His business life synchronizes with the growth and develop-
ment of Warwick and the South Eastern Downs districts as
well as the south-western border trade. In the whole of
that wide area he has been a pioneer—possibly the most out-
standing pioneer—of closer settlement. It may truly be said
that no man in the State has a better realization of the
bravery and industry of early settlers —both men and women
—and the rustic conquerors of early days have no more kindly
or interested friend. G. P. Barnes was actively concerned in
the resumption for closer settlement purposes of such fine
estates as Glengallan, Canning Downs, Toolburra, North and
South Goomburra, Mary Vale and Talgai. If he had done
nothing else but urge this forward land policy, it would have
been a fine achievement. Following the construction of the
railway to Wallangarra he has always taken a live interest
in the agitation for all railways connected with Warwick.
He worked with the late Sir Arthur Morgan and others in
agitating for the South Western Border Railway to Thane,
Inglewood and Goondiwindi and he worked long and hard in
Parliament for extensions to Tallwood, Thallon, and Dir-
ranbandi; for the Munbilla, Kalbar and Mount Edward
extensions and the Warwick —Mary vale line. He aided in
passing the Inglewood, Texas, Dirranbandi Border extension
and the Via Recta of which he has always been a strong
advocate. Altogether 292 miles have been constructed and 122
miles passed and awaiting construction. In the interests of
the preservation of the Border trade he has ever been an
advocate of the extension of the Border Railway to Thargo-
mindah and thence to Tobermorry, and also of the north-
south line from Camooweal and the Killarney-Grafton pro-
posal.
With the late Sir Arthur Morgan he was instrumental in


securing as a National Park that area of land which includes
Mounts Cordeaux and Mitchell, and Cunningham’s Gap. He
also aided in opening a highway to the historic spot known as
Cunningham’s Gap and in the erection of a Memorial to the
discoverer of the Darling Downs. This spot, on account of
its historic importance and its scenic beauty, is destined to
become one of the popular tourist resorts of the State.
The Methodist Church of Queensland owns both G. P. and
W. H. Barnes as exceptionally active members, the former
having been continuously associated with it since 1884.
It is somewhat amazing how a man with so many business
interests can find the leisure for so much useful public work,
but as already indicated, he is a man of quite unusual energy.
The name of the local Warwick institutions with which he is
associated is legion. Civic affairs claimed his attention for
nine years and the Chamber of Commerce, Fire Brigade,
Technical College, Ambulance Brigade, Warwick School of
Arts, and V. P. Eastern Downs Society have all had the bene-
fit of his wide business experience and assistance. Taken all
in all G. P. Barnes is the type of pioneer and useful citizen
of whom Queensland can not have too many. We want
many thousands of such men —men of vision, energy, and
push with an unshakable belief in the possibilities of Queens-
land.
Summary: The very best type of enterprising citizen who
sets a fine example to younger men. Uses politics as a means
towards an end, but has no axe to grind.
JOHN ADAMSON
John Adamson was born in the ancient village of Tudhoe,
about six miles from the City of Durham, England, on rßth
February, 1857. As a boy he was educated at the public
schools of his native village, but at the age of ten. owing to
family circumstances, went to work in the shoemaking trade.
His desire for self improvement, however, was evidenced by
his attendance at night schools and his eagerness to read
books of all sorts. When about iqi years of age there came a
radical change in his life and he decided to study for the
Christian Ministry. He became a lay preacher under the
Rev. Henry Beckerstett Kendal, 8.A., and studied hard under
the direction of that reverend gentleman for about four years.
For some years he had also taken an active part in trades
union matters in connection with the railway men on the
334
QUEENSLAND—


North Eastern Railways, and was chairman of his district
committee in connection with a movement to obtain the re-
duction of the hours of the railwaymen to nine per day.
He first joined the ranks of the Amalgamated Society of Rail-
way Servants in the year 1877, and was a diligent student
of the literature of the trades union and co-operative move-
ment of that day.
In 1884 he married Miss Carrie Jones, and towards the end
of that year decided to migrate to Australia. He settled in
Queensland and was for sixteen years a Minister of the Primit-
ive Methodist Church. On the union of the Methodist
Churches, Mr Adamson served as a minister of the Methodist
Church of Australia for over six years, voluntarily resigning his
clerical position in 1904. During his twenty-two years in the
ministry of the Methodist Church he served in various parts of
the State —his first charge being Toowoomba. He then went to
Central Queensland and opened the first Primitive Methodist
Church in Mount Morgan in the early days of the gold rush.
From there he went to Georgetown, returning to Rock-
hampton and going later to Townsville and Cooktown. He
was then transferred to Barcaldine where he started a cir-
culating library among the shearers. On leaving Barcaldine
he served a term in Maryborough, and then went to Ipswich,
where he ministered with much acceptance for four years.
His final charge with the Methodist Church was in Boonah.
When he resigned his seat in the State Parliament in 1908,
he did supply-work for the Presbyterian Church in Gladstone,
Mackay and Charters Towers.
Adamson came into the 16th Parliament on 23rd July, 1907,
and he sat through the 16th, 17th, 18th, 19th and 20th Par-
liaments, first as Member for Maryborough, and then for
Rockhampton. His first speech in the Legislative Assembly
stamped the man indelibly, for predominant among its
characteristics was the element of intense earnestness and a
fervent desire to serve the cause of those who had had least
opportunity in the world. Moreover, one had not to search
for evidence that he was a man of much learning and his
aptness in applying his knowledge to current events shone
out conspicuously in almost every speech he made. He was
intensely impatient of humbug of any description, and being
impulsive and somewhat hot-headed, he was not always
tolerant of the views of others and hence not universally
popular. That is so with most men of the same temperament.
They set themselves an objective and in the rush to attain it


they annoy people, who would otherwise be their friends, by
bumping them out of the way.
Standing out far above all other traits of John Adamson
was his fervent loyalty to his King and Country. He would
sacrifice his best friend rather than give way an inch in his
love for the flag, his homage to his King and devotion to his
Country. Hence he was intensely proud that one of his own
flesh and blood should be a soldier of the King during the
great upheaval of 1914-18.
The story of John Adamson’s association with the Queens-
land political movement and his connection with T. J. Ryan’s
Government in 1915 has its tragic aspect. On Ist June, 1915,
he became the holder of that difficult portfolio —Secretary
for Railways. According to his lights, and having regard to
the newness of Labour in office, he did his very best, but in
1916 a problem of unusual magnitude presented itself to him.
There was a distinct cleavage in the political world on the
question of conscription, and Labour parties throughout
Australia made an issue of the question whether the young
and vigorous manhood of Australia should be compelled to
fight their country’s battles. Labour cast the die in favour of
non-compulsion , and there John Adamson joined issue with his
life-long associates. He was so obsessed with love of King
and Country that nothing else mattered, and at a memorable
meeting of the Labour Caucus in October 1916 he put his
views before the Party with a fervour that left no room for
doubt on which side he stood, and with Stephen Decatur he
cried aloud —
Our Country! In her intercourse with foreign nations, may she always
be in the right; but our Country, right or wrong.
Tears not only filled his eyes but they streamed down his
cheeks, and painfully affected the soft-hearted Tom Ryan
who had the greatest admiration for Adamson. Then the end
came —for rather than sacrifice one tittle of his life-long beliefs
he resigned from the Labour Ministry. Shortly after came
the end of the parliamentary career of a very earnest though
very impulsive politician of a type that not often enters the
Legislature.
Summary : Somewhat of a visionary, but an honest man: an
earnest man who was never ashamed to blazon forth from
the housetops his fervent belief in the Christian faith and his
own personal doctrines.
336
QUEENSLAND—


MRS IRENE LONGMAN
(The Only Woman)
Born at The Huon, Tasmania. Daughter of the late Reverend
J. M. Bayley. Educated in Sydney at the Girls’ High School,
and at “Redlands” North Sydney. Prior to marriage followed
the teaching profession at “Normanhurst,” Ashfield, Sydney,
and at Rockhampton Girls’ Grammar School.
The story has been told elsewhere, but it is worth repeat-
ing, how during the General Election campaign of 1929 one
A. H. Wright, Member for Bulimba, met McCormack in the
Parliamentary Refreshment Room and remarked with serene
confidence and a broad smile of self-complacency: —“I say,
Mac. you and I seem to be the only two people who are
not worrying.” “Oh,” said McCormack, “don’t make any
adjectival mistake; I am worrying, if you are not.” Old
campaigners know full well that the man who takes things
for granted and does not spread himself at election times is
liable to find himself far from the top of the list on polling
day. A. H. Wright was English, you know, and somewhat
after the style of Augustus Cecil Elphinstone, he was subject
to patronizing good Australians and just tolerating them as
inevitable encumbrances on the earth. When asked by the
writer how the election was going, he remarked with an in-
imitable and self-satisfied grin—‘Well, you know, I am only
being opposed by a woman.” And so it came about that one
little feeble woman, full to the brim of energy, overflowing
with sympathy for her sex; simple, non-aggressive, ladylike
to her finger-tips, just metaphorically took A. H. Wright by
the scruff of the neck and scrubbed the whole surface of the
large Bulimba electorate with him, wiping out a previous
majority of thousands, and converting it into a minority of
401. Perhaps if we told A. H. Wright how she did it he might
endeavour to imitate the process at the next general election,
but you could not imitate Mrs Irene Longman for she has a
manner entirely her own and it is understood has protected
it by letters patent.
Mrs Longman is the wife of Heber Longman, a scient-
ist of no mean repute, who is the Director of the Queens-
land Museum, and the sister of Garfield Bayley who was
Chairman of Committees of the House of Representatives
under the Bruce-Page Government. Another brother was
Member for Pittsworth in the local Parliament for some
years, so that politics seem to run in the blood of the Bayley


family. While Heber Longman engages in abstruse specula-
tions regarding Neanderthal, pre-Neanderthal, and Cro-
Magnon man; gathers from the seven seas specimens of
Ichthyosauri and burns midnight oil in an endeavour to learn
something concerning the origin and disappearance of the
Dodo, he encourages his wife to dabble in political economy
and take an active part in all those social movements designed
for the betterment of the conditions of women and children.
She takes a keen and practical interest in the scientific work
of her husband. Educational matters have naturally occupied
much of her attention and for many years she has been a well-
known personality in public welfare work in Queensland,
especially in the Creche and Kindergarten Association, the
Playground Association, and other children’s organizations.
She was President of the Queensland National Council of
Women for four years, and on retiring she was appointed
Honorary President, in appreciation of the work she had ac-
complished while occupying the presidential office. During
that time she represented several inter-State Conferences deal-
ing with matters of national importance. She is also Vice-
President of the Queensland branch of the Lyceum Club. Mrs
Longman is the first woman to cross the sacred threshold of
the Queensland Legislature, and if there are any more like her,
we want them badly. The House was palpably nervous when
she first took the Oath on 20th August, 1929, and so was she
when she moved the Address in Reply. There was much
speculation as to what effect her presence among seventy-one
men would have, and doubts were freely expressed as to the
wisdom of Parliament, after all, in so liberalizing the law as to
permit a woman to enter the Legislature. Nothing very dread-
ful has happened; neither revolution nor the millenium has
approached any nearer, and if her presence has caused ever so
slight a restraint, it has done no harm whatever. On the
contrary, it has done good. A retiring, modest speaker is Mrs
Longman, with just sufficient emphasis in her speech to make
it understood that she is nothing if not earnest in the cause
she represents. There is nothing aggressive about her, and
the mere man finds no difficulty whatever in getting a word
in edgeways now and again. The discovery of that fact ap-
pears to have relieved the anxieties of some members who
find Parliament a pleasing institution where they have “rights”
of speech and will be heard.
Representation by women in Parliament, though novel in
Queensland, is not altogether unknown in Australia, but the
338
QUEENSLAND—


innovation takes long to convert itself into a common-place.
The public are slow to acquire a habit. Here we are fortunate
in having as our first lady member one who is not aggressively
self-assertive, and who permits her co-members to say a few
words without incessantly interrupting them. Mrs Longman
is prepared, apparently, to be a listener, and a learner for a
while. In that attitude there is much wisdom, for Parliament
has for so long been the exclusive domain of men that the
presence of women requires to be “insinuated” by a gradual
process and not forcibly thrown at unoffending and shy men.
In the days to come no doubt we shall have more women
legislators just as we have more and more of the sex dis-
placing men in other spheres, and doubtless the world will
adjust itself to the new conditions, but whatever else may be
said, it cannot be contended that they are cheaper legislators
than men, for Mrs Longman, as far as one knows, has not yet
intimated that she is worth less than other representatives,
and draws her £SOO a year and postage allowance with the
equanimity characteristic of her sex. Indeed if lady members
had their rights they would have a “dress allowance as a
perquisite. # . .
Mrs Longman is a woman who is doing good work m this
community and in all she does there is an entire absence of
aggressiveness, dogmatism, and self-assertion. Like John the
Baptist she is a forerunner. We may yet see the Queensland
Legislature composed of seventy-two women.
Summary: A representative of her sex of the very best type;
sufficiently assertive, but not aggressive; a useful addition to
the Legislature who will be more appreciated when better
known.
CHARLES COLLINS
The subject of this sketch was born at Willey, Warwick-
shire, England on 25th September, 1867, and arrived in Mary-
borough, per ship Kapunda on 16th July 1883. In the Gieat
War he contributed a creditable son to the cause of Empire.
Having sprung from hard-working people having been a
very hard worker during the time he has been in this country,
there is nothing remarkable in the fact that he is a memoer
of the Labour Party in politics, and should be saturated with
labour ideals. It is not every member of a labour paity who
has worked hard with his hands and earned his living by the
real sweat of his brow. Charlie Collins has. We have at
different times and places known of metamorphoses such as
men climbing through a crack in the capitalistic hedge and
339
OUR SEVENTH POLITICAL DECADE, 1920-1930


adopting principles and methods which at one time they pro-
fessed so much to abhor. One could not imagine Collins doing
that. All his life he has been a real grafter, a man who has
known the seamy side of existence, a man who has worked
and many times failed to find work. Hence he may be des-
cribed as a true representative of labour, and because he is
so genuine a worker, and has at his tongue’s end the history
of labour’s struggles the world over, he at times is regarded
with suspicion by certain of his labour colleagues, and has
never got much beyond the rank and file, his only success
being membership of the Public Works Commission. A
miner and a prospector was “Charlie” before coming to Par-
liament —a man who had toured the vast spaces of Queens-
land per boot—not per motor car and a uniformed chauffeur
as some labour politicians have done. Hard and all as he
has worked he has never known success, unless it might be
termed success to be exalted from the prospector’s dish to the
Caucus room and Parliament itself. When he first arrived
in the Eighteenth Parliament on 2nd November, 1909, he
seemed unhappy in a white shirt and collar, for never before
had anything more aristocratic than a flannel shirt touched
his truly working-class skin; but like all the rest of his
party he soon accommodated himself to circumstances,
and a familiar joke in Parliament was that he was once
seen emerging from the Queensland Club in company
with a squatter of mighty wealth, and smoking an enor-
mous cigar. Certainly he resented the story, which may
be said to be absolutely apocryphal. A disappointed man is
Collins, because he has had the bitter experience that sobriety
and hard work are not always rewarded, and in his troubles
he has sought solace in books, and has absorbed all the
theoretical economics that have been written by all the
cranks, English and Foreign, that have ever lived. In the
writer’s experience he never knew a man with a more
voracious appetite for print, or one with a better memory for
what he had read. The pity is that he was not caught young,
and taught what to read, for sometimes he seems not to
separate the grain from the chaff, and hence becomes over-
loaded with crude theories. His speech is fluent, but some-
times extravagant, occasionally bitter, and he seems to forget
that the genuine wrongs of his boyhood’s days have vanished,
and that his class live as minor princes compared with their
condition in the days of his youth. Collins first represented
Burke, and then Bowen, and he is inordinately proud of hav-
340
QUEENSLAND—


ing a mining village named after him—Collinsville to wit.
His jealousy of anyone who dares to even mention Bowen m
Parliament is grotesque. He always seems to think there is
a sinister motive in the reference and an attempt to alienate
votes from him. Had it not been that Theodore got into
trouble with the squatters, and failed to raise money in Con-
don, great steel and iron works were intended to arise at the
Port of Bowen. Even the most ardent advocate of State
Enterprises now confesses that the Gods were good to us in
not finding the necessary capital. Collins is always an inter-
esting person to listen to in Parliament. He invariably puts
vim into a debate, and his occasional extravagances give food
for much thought and much laughter. Moreover he has a
quaint habit of repeating the end of a sentence at frequent
intervals. “I am not going to say that I agree with every-
thing this Government has done —this Government has done.
I know it is as good a Government as we can get under present
circumstances —under present circumstances, and it is a great
deal better than having a Government composed of the op-
position —composed of the opposition.” .
For just half an hour on a memorable occasion. Caucus
made “Charlie” Premier, after Theodore and his Government
had retired in a huff from the caucus room, and Charles
took it all with the seriousness of a Bishop. Charles Collins has
quixotic notions regarding taxation. He is entirely dissatisfied
with Queenslanders being the highest taxed community on
earth He simply craves to pile more burdens upon those
who are best able to bear it,” as his euphonious phrase runs.
“Why,” he is accustomed to exclaim dramatically We
haven’t begun to tax: we are only on the fringe, as it were,
of taxation. No man as far as I know has the right to have
more than he wants—more than he wants. Therefore 1
tax those who can bear it for the benefit of those who can t
bear it—who can’t bear it.” In spite of many extravagances
he is really not the fire eater he pretends to be. He is very
human and a good chap.
Summary: A kindly humanitarian with sympathetic tears
very near the surface. A true man of the people who has
overlooked the fact that the passing of years has made his
class aristocrats.
THE HONOURABLE SIR JAMES WILLIAM BLAIR, Kt.
There are grades of difficulty in character sketching. Some
men are more human than others. Of some, one can write


as of personal friends, knowing that what is written will be
taken in good part; of others one writes as of casual acquain-
tances, being doubtful whether they appreciate being sketched
at all, and not quite knowing how they will take personal
references; there is a third class that loves the limelight but
craves for advertisement and compliment in every line, and
are hostile when they do not get it. James W. Blair is un-
hesitatingly put in class one. He is just a human being,
unspoilt by success, and can look back upon periods of his life
when there were disappointments as well as triumphs. One
can fairly put him in the same category as the late Sir Arthur
Morgan, Kt. Queensland owns both of them as natives and
this State has nothing to be ashamed of when it can produce
men of such type —men with no particular early advantages;
not born with silver spoons in their mouths and yet who have
had within them the grit to win through to high places,
helped largely by kindly natures and friendly dispositions
towards their fellow men.
J. W. Blair owns Ipwich—the little city that tried to be
the Capital, and failed—as his birthplace. Failing to become
the metropolis, Ipswich did the next best thing—it produced
a good citizen, though when the little Jimmy was in his cradle,
even the Chief Bumble never contemplated for a moment
that he would become Deputy Governor of Queensland.
Having been born on 16th May 1871, he is now sixty years
of age. Son of Gordon Blair and educated at the State School
and Ipswich Grammar School. He read law under T. J.
Byrnes, a former Premier, and started to build up a practice
as barrister in Brisbane. In 1902 he was chosen as a candidate
for Parliament and topped the poll in Ipswich triumphantly.
J. W. Blair is a believer in slogans and showed it at the 1902
General Election. He placarded the city of Ipswich with
millions of little dodgers about an inch square, on which were
printed the mystic words “Give Jimmy a Vote.” The shops,
the hotels, the public offices, the private residences, even
the public conveniences, were disfigured with the little bits of
paper telling all and sundry to “Give Jimmy a Vote.” And
they did it. There was only one Jimmy on the voting papers
and they gave him a vote. It reminds one of the 1929 slogan
—“Change the Government”; or that of a Sydney dentist
named “Harte” who told the public millions of times a day to
“Take it to Heart,” with the consequence that his wrist grew
weary in the drawing of teeth. When one remembers that
James Blair first took his seat as a legislator on Bth July, 1902,
and that he was Attorney-General in Morgan’s Ministry on
342
QUEENSLAND—


17th September, 1903, at the age of thirty-two, one cannot help
being impressed with his luck. He followed on in Kidston’s
Ministry in 1906 and was also in Denham’s Ministry between
September, 1912, and June, 1915. He quarrelled with Kidston
who had promised him a Southern Supreme Court Judgeship
and only offered him a seat on the Northern Bench which
Blair declined with scorn. Later on, he took the Northern
Judgeship after being out of Parliament for a time, and then
gravitated to the Bench in the Central District, then to the
Southern Bench and ultimately the Chief Justiceship. As a
Minister he was supreme in his ability to disarm an opponent
by sheer geniality and tact. He was accustomed to declare
that there was ‘‘much wisdom in the hon. member’s sugges-
tion” and he “would give it the most careful consideration
during the recess,” and that was the end of that promise.
Two recollections of James W. Blair are his opening, with the
aid of a few jests, the first talkie picture show in Brisbane,
and his mirthful good-bye to a fair-haired flapper at a Govern-
ment House Garden Party. “Now mind,” she cried, “you
promised to get me a divorce when I want one,” and his
joking query “How could I forget it?” Shades of Sam. Grif-
fith and Pope A. Cooper with their frigid dignity!! Could
one imagine them allowing such familiarity? And yet the
changing times see no loss of dignity in such an incident.
It may be truly said that James W. Blair owes much of
his success to the friendly qualifications with which nature
endowed him. He is a born jester and lover of a joke and his
full-bottomed wig and Vermillion robe do not make him
sombre and sour. He is essentially human and a sympathetic
administrator of the law for he knows that in all walks of life
we have our foibles. He is Chancellor of the University of
Queensland and is much interested in the sporting side of
life. It is within the bounds of probability that at no far
distant date the example set in choosing an Australian
Governor-General may be followed by the States choosing
their own local Governors, and he is eminently fitted to
be our first choice in Queensland. And even then, there is
another step in the ladder of fame to mount. Why not James
W. Blair as Governor-General? The world is full of surprises.
Summary : A lucky politician to whom no one grudged his
good fortune. A universal favourite on whom the gods have
smiled.
343
OUR SEVENTH POLITICAL DECADE, 1920-1930




THE GOVERNORS OF QUEENSLAND




1. Sir George Ferguson Bowen.
2. Colonel Samuel Wensley Blackall.
3. The Most Noble The Marquis of Nor-
manby.
4. Mr William Wellington Cairns, C.M.G,
5. Sir Arthur Edward Kennedy
6. Sir Anthony Musgrave
6a. Sir Henry Arthur Blake (a Governor
who teas not wanted).
7. Sir Henry Wylie Norman.


8. Lord Lamington.
9. Sir Herbert Charles Chermside.
10. Lord Chelmsford.
11. Sir William Macgregor.
12. Sir Hamilton John Goold-Adams.
13. Sir Matthew Nathan,
14. Sir John Goodwin.


THE GOVERNORS OF QUEENSLAND
These sketches were originally published in the Brisbane Courier. They
are now republished by kind permission of R. Sanderson Taylor Esq.,
editor of that journal.
SIR GEORGE FERGUSON BOWEN
The first Governor of Queensland was the eldest son of the Reverend
Edward Bowen, Rector of Taughboyne, County Donegal, a beneficed
clergyman in the North of Ireland, and was born in that country in
1821. He was descended, however, from an old Pembrokeshire family
(ap Owen), and thus affords in his long career one of the many illus-
trations of Colonial Governors who have been of Irish birth and Celtic
race. He was educated at the Charter House and at Trinity College,
Oxford, where he obtained a scholarship in 1840, and graduated as
first class in classics in 1844. In the same year he was elected to a
fellowship of Brasenose College, and became a member of Lincoln’s
Inn. As he arrived in Queensland to represent the Crown in 1859
it will be observed that he was only thirty-eight years of age. It is
somewhat remarkable that so young a man should have achieved the
distinction of a Colonial Governorship. From 1847 to 1851 Sir George
held the post of President of the University of Corfu, and was
Chief Secretary to the Government of the lonian Island from 1854 to
1859. It was here he met the Countess Diamantina Roma, his future
wife, only surviving daughter of his Highness Count Candiano Roma,
G.C.M.G., then President of the Senate of the lonian Islands. Sir
George was a litterateur of no mean order, and, in addition to his
activities in the numerous spheres with which he was associated, he
found time to write A Handbook for Travellers in Greece —one of Mur-
ray’s Handbooks; Mount Athos , Thessaly, and Epirus, A Diary of a
Journey from Constantinople to Corfu, 1852, Ithaca in 1850 , and Imperial
Federation, 1886. With Sir George Imperial Federation was almost an
obsession. It has been said that he might claim to have been the first to
suggest an Imperial Federation —a “Pax Britannica” far transcending
what Pliny styled the “Immensa Romanae pacis majestas.”
Those of us who have read Despatches and Letters of the Right
Honourable Sir G. F. Bozven, edited by Stanley Lane-Poole, will
not have failed to notice his somewhat pedantic proclivities. In his
private letters to his friends his excursions into the Greek and Latin
tongues were of everyday occurrence, and he did not appear able
altogether to resist the same tendency in his official despatches. Never-
theless he was an adept at adjusting himself to his company for the
time being, and Sir George had the faculty of talking down or up to his
audiences as the case might require.
He became Captain-General and Governor-in-Chief of the new
Colony of Queensland in 1859, and his career in this State marked him


out as a man of exceptional talent and well fitted as the Sovereign s
representative in a Dominion then only in its swaddling clothes. Our
first Governor was not only a student of books but of men. In those
early days a strong man was needed to guide the destinies of the
young colony, and to exercise a restraining influence on the impulsive
and somewhat headstrong leading politicians of the period. Some
people have expressed a doubt whether our first Governor had quite
the right conception of constitutional Government, and whether he
did not apply the curb more as the head of a Crown Colony than as the
Governor of a Sovereign State. This is an entirely wrong conception
of Sir George Bowen. Constitutionally he was sound beyond all doubt,
but those were days when a Governor’s responsibilities were greater
than they are to-day—a period when foundations were being laid, and
precedents created, and when leading public men were new to the art
of self-government, and showed impatience upon being met with the
most justifiable restraint. To-day the same difficulties do not arise,
because we have a generation born and brought up to the requirements
of constitutionalism. It is true that a few misguided persons petitioned
for the recall of the Governor during the financial crisis of 1866; but he
was strongly supported by the Home authorities, and nothing came
of the petition.
The Colony of Queensland had the advantage of the services of its
first Governor up to January, 1868—a period of 8i years—when he
was transferred to New Zealand, and there had the responsibility of
helping to bring to a conclusion th£ Maori war. After long leave in
Great Britain between 1875 and 1876 he met troublous times on as-
sumption of office as Governor of Victoria, to which position he was
appointed in a highly complimentary despatch by the then Secretary of
State for the Colonies. During his term of office an unusually bitter
constitutional struggle took place between Sir James M'Culloch and Mr
(afterwards Sir Graham) Berry, and Sir George had the difficult task
of deciding between the contentions of these opposing leaders. Keith,
in his Responsible Government in the Dominions, reminds us that
when there is much contention between political factions the representa-
tive of the Crown will be accused of partizanship by one side or the
other, whatever course he decides to follow. On such occasions, there-
fore, the strong man is the one who acts upon his convictions, with
indifference to popular clamour, Press criticism, or political party bias.
It is true that the Governor incurred the odium of the then Legislative
Council and its Press supporters, but, whether his attitude was a
correct one or not, it is equally true that his course was approved by
such men as Earl Carnarvon, Mr Gladstone, Mr Childers, and Mr
W. E. Forster. When Sir George Bowen left Melbourne to assume
the Governorship of Mauritius in 1879 he had only partly lived down
his unpopularity among a certain section of the community, and an
effort, more or less successful, was made to give him a chilly send-off.
Those of us who know ever so little of the ins and outs of party
politics know quite well that such a movement could have no particular
significance. He remained at Mauritius until 1883, and was Governor
of Hong-kong until 1887, when he retired on pension after declining
an extension of his term.
Sir George Bowen’s first wife died in 1893, leaving four daughters
and one son. In 1896, at the age of seventy-six, he married Florence,
daughter of Dr T. Luby, Senior Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, and
widow of the Rev. H. White.


The names of Sir George Bowen and his charming first wife are
perpetuated in the geographical nomenclature of Queensland. He gave
his name to the beautiful Port of Bowen on our northern coast, while
the Diamantina River and the flourishing western town of Roma keep
alive the memory of his wife.
Our first Governor, if I may be permitted to quote from my Political
Historjq “may be considered one of the great Empire builders of a
great nation. He brought to our baby colony in 1859 a keen intellect
and mature experience, and he set a high standard in the conduct of
our public affairs.”
He died at Brighton, England, on February 21, 1899, in his 78th year,
and was buried in the family grave at Kensal Green Cemetery.
COLONEL SAMUEL WENSLEY BLACKALL
Our second Governor, Colonel Samuel Wensley Blackall, was a marked
contrast to his predecessor. He was not gifted with the aggressive
temperament of Governor Bowen, due largely to the fact that he had
passed the first vigour of youth, being sixty-one years of age when he
arrived here. Indeed, he was a distinctly mild-mannered man, and in
no respect suggested the military autocrat and fire-eater. He was the
son of Major Robert Blackall, of the Honourable East India Company’s
service, of Colamber Manor, County Longford. As in the case of Sir
George Bowen, he owned Ireland as his native land, being born in that
country on May 1, 1809. He took his degree at Trinity College,
Dublin. His military career was chiefly associated with the 85th Light
Infantry. Subsequently, he became Major of the Longford Militia,
and afterwards honorary Colonel in the Longford Militia and honorary
Colonel of the Leitrim Militia. Between the years 1847 and 1851 he
represented Longford in the House of Commons. He was Deputy
Lieutenant for Counties Longford and Leitrim; High Sheriff of Long-
ford in 1833, and for Tyrone in 1861. In 1851, or at the age of forty-two.
Colonel Blackall began his career as a Colonial Governor, being ap-
pointed Lieutenant-Governor of Dominica, which position he held until
1857. Lie was Governor of Sierra Leone between the years 1862 and
1865, from whence he was transferred to the position of Governor-in-
Chief of the West African Settlements, where he remained until 1867.
August 14, 1868, was the date of his arrival in Queensland, where a
political crisis awaited him. The Government of the day had been
defeated in the Legislative Assembly by 13 votes to n. Sir Maurice
O’Connell, the Lieutenant-Governor, declined to accept advice on the
Parliamentary situation pending the arrival of the new Governor, so
that, although his Excellency’s reception was all that could be desired,
the politicians had provided a sort of anti-climax for the tired traveller
when he arrived at Government House.
A perusal of our early Parliamentary records indicates that politics
in the 6o’s were strenuous and bitter, and, doubtless, both Bowen and
Blackall had anxious times in smoothing over difficulties and harmon-
izing conflicting interests. To-day we are quite as bitter and even
more strenuous, but the solution of crises is to be found in the
numerous Colonial precedents which have been established over the
past sixty-three years which, perhaps, have to some extent, afforded
welcome relief to the representatives of the Crown.
Colonel Blackall’s arrival on August 14 1869, was marked by much
enthusiasm. Indeed, we made more fuss in those days over such


events than we do to-day. The day was proclaimed a public holiday,
and the city was profusely decorated. The writer very well remembers,
as a little boy, viewing the procession, from an upstairs window in
Queen street, and, being struck with certain fearsome-looking naked
aboriginals, with war paint, spears, and boomerangs, who adorned one
of the triumphal arches. To-day our Governors arrive in a much less
ostentatious manner. The Commission issued to his Excellency was
of abnormal length, and contained one or two quaint phrases not to be
found in modern Commissions. For instance, we find this somewhat
strange sentence —“And further, know you that we, reposing special
trust and confidence in the prudence, courage, and loyalty of you, the
said Samuel Wensley Blackall, of our special grace, certain knowledge,
and mere motion, have thought fit to constitute and appoint, and by
these presents do constitute and appoint you to be our Governor and
Commander-in-Chief in and over our Colony of Queensland.” In the
Commission issued to Sir George Bowen he was appointed “Captain-
General and Governor-in-Chief.”
Colonel Blackall occupied his distinguished position for two years
and five months only, during which time he greatly endeared himself
to those wdth whom he came in contact. He was a kindly, soft-spoken,
unassuming gentleman, with the faculty of making friends and keeping
them. His short period of office, apart from the little preliminary
difficulty with which he was met, was marked by no crisis of any kind,
and his death on January 2, 1871, was a painful shock to the community.
The Courier of the day commented upon the fact that Governor
Blackall made of Queensland a real home from the day he landed,
and strenuously denied the allegiation that he made himself “too cheap”
among the people. In the words of that journal—“He made himself
in the best sense ‘all things to all men,’ and was equally happy at an
agricultural society’s annual meeting; a teetotal celebration, or a meeting
for some specific charitable object.” _ After his death he was described
as “the most popular man in Australia.”
Just as the sun had set on January 2 1871, Samuel Wensley Blackall
was laid to rest in the then new cemetery at Toowong at a spot chosen
by himself. His was the first burial which took place there. He knew
himself that his time had come, and his last wish was —“to be buried
in the highest part of the new cemetery and to have such a funeral as
all people, even the humblest, could follow if they wished to do so.”
A local poet of the period paid the following tribute to the departed
Governor —
Oh ! lay him gently down,
For the kindly spirit’s fled,
And the weary wheels of life have reached
The City of the Dead.
Oh ! lay him gently down,
For the genial rule is o’er,
And the fine old Irish gentleman
Has reached another shore.
Oh ! lay him gently down,
For there’s sorrow in the land,
And each one feels has passed from
Beneath the Father’s hand.
Let us plant unon his grave
A bright and spreading tree,
Where little birds may sing and play
And children gambol free.
350
QUEENSLAND—


Colonel Blackall married first in 1833 Georgina, daughter of Henry
Rowles, of London, and secondly in 1848, Kate, daughter of James
Bond. His second wife died in 1864, or seven years after her husband
arrived in Queensland. The central town and district of Blackall bear
our second Governor’s name, which is also associated with the Blackall
Range and our first State enterprise—the steamer Governor Blackall,
ordered by Charles Lilley, when Premier in 1870, against the wishes of
his intriguing and disloyal colleagues.
THE MARQUIS OF NORMANBY
The Most Noble George Augustus Constantine Phipps, G.C.8.,
G.C.M.G., Baron of Mulgrave and Viscount Normanby of Mulgrave,
in the County of York, and Baron Mulgrave, of New Ross, County
Wexford, Ireland, our third Governor, was the son of the first
marquis, and succeeded Colonel Blackall, Governor of Queensland
in 1871. He was born on July 23, 1819, and married, in August,
1844, Laura, daughter of Captain Robert Russell, R.N., and niece
of the Dowager Duchess of Cleveland. He entered the Scots Fusilier
Guards as ensign, and became lieutenant in 1838. He repre-
sented Scarborough in the House of Commons in j 847, but retired in
1851 on accepting office as Comptroller of the Queen’s Household. In
1853 he became Treasurer of the Household, and in 1858 Lieutenant-
Governor of Nova Scotia, which position he continued to hold till 1863,
when he succeeded to the peerage on the death of his father. He was
the mover of the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne in
the House of Lords in 1866. He held the office of Captain of her
Majesty’s Honourable Corps of Gentlemen at Arms between 1869 and
1871. Governor Normanby was the Crown representative in Queens-
land until 1874; assuming office as Governor of New Zealand in that
year and remaining there until 1878; he was then transferred to Vic-
toria, of which colony he remained Governor until 1884. He then
retired from the service, and resided in England. The Marchioness of
Normanby died on January 26, 1885. Lord Normanby had four sons.
The eldest, Constantine Charles Henry, Earl of Mulgrave, was vicar
of Worsley, Lancashire; the second was Lord Brook Phipps, R.N.; the
third Lord Henry George Russel Phipps, who married a Queensland
girl, Miss Norma Leith Hay, of Ipswich, and the fourth Lord Harvey
Lepel Phipps. There were three daughters, one of whom became the
wife of the third Earl of Ellesmere. The youngest, Constance May,
was lady-in-waiting to Queen Victoria.
The Marquis’s time of office in Queensland was marked by no un-
toward event. In fact, it was a peaceful reign, but he passed through
a somewhat trying experience in New Zealand.
It was in 1877 that Sir George Grey asked for a dissolution, having
taken office on the defeat of his predecessor, Major Atkinson, on a
vote of want of confidence. He in his turn would have been defeated
but for the casting vote of the Speaker. He claimed a dissolution from
the Governor on the ground that the House had been elected under the
auspices of his predecessor, but the Governor was not convinced that
there had been any great change of view by the constituencies, and,
moreover, no Supply had been granted for the year. Sir George Grey
then made the bold claim that the grant of a dissolution should rest
on Ministerial advice only, without regard to the grant of Supply, and
that the power to dissolve or refuse dissolution was not a Crown pre-


rogative. The Governor was emphatic that the Royal instructions left
him full discretion. In February, 1878, the Secretary of State endorsed
the Governor’s view of his rights and duties.
Colonial Governors faced with crises of this description have many
cares and anxieties. Certainly they are not numerous, and as time
progresses created precedents are valuable aids. This New Zealand
case might easily serve to clear the atmosphere for future representa-
tives of the Crown in any of the British Dominions.
The Marquis of Normanby had the unenviable experience during the
80’s of not being wanted as Governor of South Australia. At the
time referred to, Playford was Premier, and the case was quoted in
our local Parliament in 1888, when the proposed appointment of Sir
Henry Blake as Governor of Queensland was being discussed.
Lord Normanby may be justly described as a homely man —a typical
English gentleman—perhaps not a brilliant character, but a solid and
conscientious servant of the Crown, who wherever his duty called him
performed it with credit to himself and honour to his Sovereign. It
is natural that types of Governors should change with the times.
Change of type is not peculiar to Governors. If we look back over the
years we find both in Great Britain and the Dominions wonderful
changes of type in our politicians for instance. It is inevitable. The
march of time and altered circumstances evolute new types in all walks
of life. The social and political conditions of the day determine the
correct type of man to fill every niche in our public life.
The Marquis of Normanby died at Brunswick-terrace, Brighton,
England, on April 3, 1890, at the age of seventy-one years, and was
succeeded by his son, the Rev. Lord Mulgrave, vicar of Worsley, near
Manchester. His funeral took place in St Oswald’s Church, Lythe,
near Whitby.
His name is perpetuated in the Electorate of Normanby, and the
Laura River appears to have been named after the Marchioness.
MR WILLIAM WELLINGTON CAIRNS, C.M.G.
There is not a great deal to be said about our fourth Governor, who
arrived in Queensland on January 25, 1875, as Mr William Wellington
Cairns, C.M.G. He was the elder son of William Cairns, of Parkmount
and Rush Park, County Antrim, and Cultra, County Down, Ireland, by
his second wife, Matilda, daughter of Francis Beggs, of the Grange,
Malahide. He was half-brother to Lord Chancellor Cairns, and was
born in 1828. Between the years 1852 and 1862 he filled various posi-
tions in the Ceylon Civil Service, and occupied the office of Postmaster-
General there in 1864. He returned to England in 1866, and in the
following year was appointed Lieutenant-Governor of Malacca, St Kitts
in 1868, and of Honduras in 1870. He became Governor of Trinidad
in 1874, but gave way to that somewhat trying climate, and resigned
in a few weeks on account of ill-health. Nevertheless he accepted the
office of Governor of Queensland in 1875, and held it for slightly over
two years. He was then transferred to South Australia, but only re-
mained there from March to May, when he finally retired from the
colonial service on the ground of ill-health. He received the distinc-
tion of knighthood in 1887, long after his colonial career was com-
pleted. In 1878 Mr Cairns was honorary Commissioner for Queens-
land and South Australia at the Paris Exhibition. Governor Cairns
was a delicate man, and the frequent changes He made indicate that he
352
QUEENSLAND—


was hoping against hope for better health in a different climate. Those
who knew him best describe him as somewhat irritable, but he may
well be excused for that fault under the circumstances. He brought
with him to Queensland two young men as private secretary and aide-
de-camp respectively, and, being unmarried, he took them under his
wing as a father, and endeavoured to lead them along the narrow path
of righteousness. As a matter of fact he was nothing short of a
martinet to these youths. Except by special leave they were not al-
lowed to stay out after ten o’clock at night, and in other respects were
subject to the most rigid discipline.
The melancholy and gloomy appearance of Governor Cairns was
suggestive of hypochondria in an acute form. It was well known when
he was Governor of Queensland that the state of his health had obsessed
him. It was said that like all hypochondriacs he became in course of
time his own medical attendant, and that he consumed quantities of
potions and pills vast enough to sink a ship. None of them were of
any avail whatever. He was simply a born dyspeptic. It was an
entirely new internal outfit that he was in need of, and dosing and
drenching were futile remedies.
It is a hundred and three years since Governor Cairns was born, and
forty-three since he died. Is there any harm therefore in saying that
he was what we might well term an “Old World” pattern —stiff, starchy,
proud, dignified, haughty, and ruling his life by etiquette and punc-
tiliousness. His prototype is found to some extent in Mr Dombey in
Dickens’s Dombey & Son. He simply typified the period, but a Governor
Cairns to-day would be impossible. The world does not now produce
that kind of man.
Memory of one’s boyhood takes one back to the tall white belltopper,
without which the Governor was never really complete. He wore it
in his carriage; he wore it when he went shopping with his private
secretary, as he frequently did; he wore it before breakfast when
strolling in the Government House grounds, and it has been said that
he wore it w T hen he went to his bath. That white belltopper was
often to be seen in those far-off days down in Fortitude Valley. One
saw the hat in the distance, and then a little weak-framed man under
it, and then a brown paper parcel which contained “jam,” a commodity
that could be bought cheaper in Fortitude Valley than elsewhere. Ah,
well, we all have our little peculiarities. Frugality, if not carried to
extremes, is a virtue which we might with much benefit practice with
more frequency. Perhaps (who knows?) we would not apply it to
“jam” if we were Governor, but we might commit even worse faults
than that.
While in Queensland, Governor Cairns cultivated a very intimate
friendship with Albert V. Drury, then Clerk of the Executive Council,
and after retiring to England he sent that official £ 3OO, and insisted that
he should pay him a visit. Apparently, though frugal in most things, he
had very generous instincts at times. He died a bachelor on 7th July,
1888, at the age of sixty years. The flourishing northern seaport of
Cairns is named after him, and his name is also perpetuated in Cairns
Street, Kangaroo Point.
SIR ARTHUR EDWARD KENNEDY
Our fifth Governor was the son of Hugh Kennedy, of Cultra, County
Down, Ireland, his mother being Grace Dorothea, daughter of Thomas


Hughes. He was born in 1809; was educated at Trinity College, Dublin,
and entered the army as an ensign in 1827. He gained his lieutenancy
in 1832, and became captain in the 68th Light Infantry in 1840. He
retired from the Army in 1848. In 1846 he was a county inspector
under the Board of Works, and was a relief inspector during the Irish
famine, and strenuously exerted himself in opposition to the numerous
evictions of starving peasants which occurred in the South of Ireland,
and in mitigation of the dire distress which befell those unfortunate
people. At this period he served under Sir John Burgoyne. Subse-
quently, and until the office was abolished in 1851, he was a Poor
Law inspector. In 1852 he was appointed Governor of the Gam-
bier, but in under a year was transferred to Sierra Leone, and served
as Consul-General in the Sherborough country in 1854. From June,
to February, 1862, he was Governor of Western Australia,
and in the following year became Governor of Vancouver Island,
and then of the West African Settlements in November, 1867. It
was in the latter year that he was knighted. He also acted at Sierra
Leone as Judge in the Courts of Mixed Commission, and was actively
associated with work in connection with the abolition of the slave
trade. Sir Arthur Kennedy was appointed Governor of Hong Kong in
1872, where he stayed until 1877, when he was appointed Governor of
Queensland, which he reached on Wednesday, April n, 1877. He
was created C.B. in 1862 and G.C.M.G. in 1871. The office of Governor
of Queensland was held until 1883, when he resigned and left here
on May 2. He died at Aden on his way home on June 3, 1883, at the
age of seventy-four years. He was married in 1839 to Georgina Mildred,
daughter of Joseph Macartney, but was left a widower in 1874, He
had a_ daughter of the same name as her mother, who was a most
charming and cultivated woman and an excellent hostess. In Queensland
she presided over her father’s household with great success, and
acquired much popularity during his quiet and uneventful regime.
Another daughter married Admiral Clan William, who was in charge
of the detached squadron which conveyed their Royal Highnesses
Prince Edward and Prince George to Australia in 1881. He also had
a son, Captain Kennedy. The Governors of Queensland have mostly
been fortunate in the placidity of their reigns; in fact, Queensland has
not specialized to any extent in political crises, though we have had
at least two, the details of which are interesting, and are dealt with in
their chronological order. Sir Arthur Kennedy had the distinction of
being Governor of Queensland during the visit of the detached squad-
ron which conveyed their Royal Highnesses Prince Edward and Prince
George to Australia in 1881, the visit to Brisbane being paid between
August 16 and 20, 1881.
He would be a very immaculate man who would please every one,
and Governor Kennedy was no exception to the rule. In all com-
munities we find a few people with distorted visions; mental dyspeptics
who, if they cannot find any one else to quarrel with, quarrel with
themselves. Governors, like other people, are not exempt from the
necessity of treading warily lest they offend the susceptibilities of
cranks, and there were a few cranks in Queensland in 1881 who, to use
a colloquialism, had “got their knives” into the Governor. Our Gov-
ernor was a man who was highly appreciative of domestic comfort.
He had come to Queensland straight from Hong Kong, where he had
been accustomed to the silent and efficient service of Chinese domestics,
some of whom he brought to this colony to smooth out the creases in
his domestic path.
354
QUEENSLAND—


In the second session of 1879 a misguided legislator gave vent to his
bitterness by introducing a Bill to reduce the Governor’s salary from
£SOOO to £4OOO a year, as a protest against his employing Chinese ser-
vants, and in the words of my Political History he stupidly “compared
unassum^n ß’j kindly old Governor with the demoralizing
period of Charles 11. The House ordered the Bill to be read a second
time that day six months. There was no embargo upon the employ-
ment of domestic labour of this description in 1879, and the Governor
was not violating any law by choosing the class of labour which suited
his requirements best.
His Excellency was accustomed to drive in a very neat little trap
with yellow wheels, and the Chinese footman perched up behind seems
to have given offence to a small section of the community. In March,
1880, Sir Arthur left for a trip to the Old Country, leaving his Chinese
servants behind. This is how a local bard described his departure:—
You are going far away, far away from the regret
Of those who of that birthday ball cannot so well forget;
But we, your Chinese servants, will bewail you with our tears,
Although they say that on the “Kate” you met with feeble cheers.
Though Macrossan was not waiting, and old Palmer was up North,
Still, a guard of so-called honour, young Queensland furnished forth,
And their attitude was striking, and their figures were so good,
That larrikins remarked with care they surely were of wood.
With your title of vain knighthood, and your pension by and by,
You will likely leave us here alone, to linger and to die ;
For we may not seek the diggings, like our countrymen, to grow
Sweet potatoes, onions, pumpkins—cabbagee in endless row.
Still, you’re going far away, and we’ll wonder, you may bet,
If Joshua Peter will recall your policy, and get
Some Chinese servants shortly, to attend him at his meals,
And a yellow man to sit behind that trap with yellow wheels.
Those of us who remember Sir Arthur Kennedy best will appreciate
least this undeserved sneer, and will only remember him for his
urbanity. Whatever may be said to the contrary, he was not an un-
popular Governor. In fact he was what we know as a “sport.” He
and Miss Kennedy were devoted to horses and dogs. Miss Kennedy’s
snow-white hack, his Excellency’s quaint little cob, and the sharp-
snouted, shaggy-coated dogs from Hong Kong were familiar sights in
George street in the early eighties. One of the most spectacular
features of Government House during the reign of Sir Arthur Kennedy
was his private secretary, Captain Cornelius O’Callaghan, who special-
ized in vermillion socks and violets. He had built at Government
House a brushwood structure in which he cultivated violets imported
from all quarters of the globe. He was an elderly bachelor of fine mili-
tary appearance, and his method of delivering messages from the
Governor to Parliament was awe-inspiring, and showed that he had a
keep appreciation of dramatic effect. His walk was nothing less than
majestip, the click of his heels as he saluted Mr Speaker, electric, and
his retirement from the House, after duty done, solemn, stately, and
punctilious.
If Sir Arthur Kennedy never did anything else but sanction and
strongly support the administrative coup d’etat of MTlwraith in an-
nexing a large portion of New Guinea in 1883, he must of necessity
earn the gratitude of the Australian people. In writing to the Secre-
tary of State, Lord Derby, he says most emphatically: “I have only to
express my entire satisfaction with the action of my Government,
especially Sir Thomas MTlwraith, in the matter. I think his apprehen-
sion of New Guinea being annexed by another European Power was


reasonable, and his promptitude in adopting our only safeguard very
laudable. I have never heard any well-informed person doubt the great
disaster which the occupation of New Guinea by a European Power
would prove to Australia.” Those were the words of a statesman
upon which Sir Arthur’s reputation may well rest.
The district and electorate of Kennedy, and Kennedy-terrace,
Brisbane, were named after his Excellency.
SIR ANTHONY MUSGRAVE, G.C.M.G.
Sir Anthony Musgrave was the son of Anthony Musgrave, M.D.,
of Antigua. Antigua, i.e. “ancient,” was christened by its discoverer,
Columbus. It forms a Presidency of the Leeward Islands, and has an
area of only 100 square miles. Sir Anthony, then Mr Musgrave, was
private secretary, at the age of twenty-two, to Mr Mackintosh, when
Governor-in-Chief of the Leeward Islands, in 1850-51. He entered as a
student of the Inner Temple in 1851, having a strong inclination for the
Bar, but his studies were interrupted by his appointment as Treasury
Accountant in Antigua in 1852. After a short term of official duty Mr
Musgrave returned to England and resumed his legal studies, but in
1853 he was appointed Colonial Secretary of Antigua. In the same
year he married his first wife, he then being 26 years of age. In October,
iB6O, he was appointed Administrator of the Colony of Nevis, a small
but fertile island fifty square miles in area, included in the Presidency of
St Christopher of the Federal Colony of the Leeward Islands. In 1862
he became Lieutenant-Governor of St Vincent, which is also in the
West Indies, but is of far greater importance than St Nevis, and
forms part of the Crown Colony of the Wdndward Islands. New-
foundland was his next stepping-stone, to whose Government he was
appointed in 1864. In June, 1869, he assumed the Governorship of
British Columbia. He was Lieutenant-Governor of Natal in May, 1872,
and Governor of South Australia in June, 1873. The latter post he
held until January, 1877, when he assumed the Governorship of Jamaica,
which he held until 1883. In that year he was transferred to Queens-
land, arriving in Brisbane on October 6, 1883.
Sir Anthony Musgrave was born, it is believed, in Antigua, in 1828.
He married first Christiana Elizabeth, daughter of the Honourable Sir
William Byram, of Antigua, and she died in 1859. Secondly, he
married Jeannie Lucinda, daughter of David Dudley Field, of Gra-
mercy Park, New York. He was created C.M.G. in 1871, K.C.M.G. in
1875, and G.C.M.G. in 1885, and died at Brisbane on October 9, 1888, at
the age of sixty years. He was buried the following day, the site of the
grave being on the top of the principal slope of the Toowong Cemetery,
a little lower down and to the right of the last resting place of Gov-
ernor Blackall. Thus our principal cemetery holds the mortal remains
of two distinguished representatives of the Sovereign who died as it
were in harness and very far distant from their early associations.
The career of Sir Anthony Musgrave marks him out as a man of
much natural capacity. He started his responsible official life at an un-
usually early age. and the rapidity of his promotion shows that he was
well thought of in high places. Queensland was fortunate in securing the
services of a Governor with so wide an acquaintance with Dominion
government. The writer had the great privilege of spending a year of
his younger life as private secretary to this cultured gentleman, prior
to the arrival of his nephew from England. The young man who failed
356
QUEENSLAND—


to take full advantage of such an association would indeed lose a golden
opportunity. We are most of us largely imitative in our habits, and
it is a happy circumstance when fate throws us in contact with some-
thing worth imitating. Sir Anthony Musgrave was a man of acquisi-
tive nature; intensely industrious; conscientious to a fault; genial of
disposition, and possessed of a cultured and charming manner. If
one could not extract something worth acquiring from these qualities,
where, indeed, would one look for one’s education?
So modest and retiring a man as Sir Anthony was not one to
advertise his qualifications. Wo are not unfamiliar with persons who
are tireless in telling the world how clever they are; and the persistency
of their assertion leads them often to be taken at their own valuation.
There are few people aware of the fact that Sir Anthony was a very
close student of political economy and a writer on the subject. While
Governor of South Australia he produced, in 1875, his “Studies in
Political Economy,” and later on a thoughtful paper on “The Functions
of Money-Bimetalism.” He was a constant and welcome
to The Nineteenth Century on allied subjects, and his “Review of
Mr Mill’s Fundamental Propositions respecting Capital,” published in
one of the English periodicals, is a daring challenge of what up to that
time had been accepted as fundamental economic truths.
Sir Anthony’s second wife, who presided over the social side of
Government House, was a lady of great charm of manner, and high
educational qualifications, so that Government House at this period was
particularly well placed. Never before nor since has a more attractive
personality performed the onerous duties of hostess at the Vice-regal
residence.
It is regrettable that one has to record the occurrence Sir
Anthony’s term of office of a political crisis which had its origin in a
paltry incident. There was at the head of the Government in those
days, as Premier, an extremely masterful and self-assertive man in the
person of Sir Thomas MTlwraith. At that particular period the
Premier was the Government, and the Government was the Premier,
and woe betide the man, even if he were a Governor, who ventured to
cross swords with this haughty Scot. Shortly stated the story is as
follows. One Benjamin Kitt was convicted in 1888 at the Rockhampton
or Townsville Sessions of stealing two pairs of boots, valued at 405., and
was duly awarded the savage sentence of three years’ imprisonment. In
these days we would rightly regard such a sentence as harsh, and if we
had the power would reduce it to about one month for each pair of
boots. The Executive recommended Kitt’s release under Griffith’s
humane Offenders Probation Act. The Governor resented the right of
the Executive to exercise the Royal Prerogative apart from the approval
of the Sovereign’s representative, and twice declined the recommenda-
tion. Thereupon Sir Thomas MTlwraith precipitated a crisis by resign-
ing the Premiership on September 4, subsequently withdrawing his
resignation after the Governor had received authority from the Secre-
tary of State to release Kitt.
This incident being now forty-three years old, one feels justified in
offering a word or two of comment. One cannot but feel that if Sir
Thomas MTlwraith had been a little more tactful, no political crisis
could possibly have arisen over so paltry an incident. But the fact of the
matter was that MTlwraith antagonized the Governor by his selt-
assertiveness. He wanted to treat his Excellency as a rubber stamp,
or use him just as he would use his office boy, and it would appear as
357
OUR SEVENTH POLITICAL DECADE, 1920-1930


f^n' dvert t ntly ’ h A IS Excellenc y was forced temporarily into an un-
whirh e r ™l lt l. 0n ' i f m c atter A of 1 fact Lord Knutsford, in his despatch,
t i • f le to ° J ate for Sir Anthony Musgrave to read, told him that
ally he ,^: as n f ht > y et th at constitutionally he must in the
h L aCC T ept S h £ adv r lce l of his Ministers, even against his better
i•? , ' r ord Knutsford’s final summing up of the case was that
while the Governor had acted strictly within his directions, he would
have exercised a sounder _ judgment by subordinating his personal
to the advice of his Ministers. It is greatly to be regretted
that there is reason for the belief that this unhappy incident was at all
events partially the cause of the sudden collapse and death of a very
valuable representative of the Sovereign. It only remains to be added,
as m other cases, that the name “Musgrave” was perpetuated at one time
m a Queensland electorate of that name; that the handsome Government
steam yacht Lucinda, which for so long adorned the Brisbane river, took
the second n^ me l of the Governor’s second wife, and that the Lady
Musgrave Lodge keeps alive the memory of a very popular and cultured
SIR HENRY BLAKE K.C.M.G.
A GOVERNOR WHO WAS NOT WANTED
A useful purpose may be served here if we turn aside for a moment
and put on record some history quite unknown to the modern politician,
and yet of very considerable interest from the political point of view.
Atter the death of Sir Anthony Musgrave it naturally became neces-
snry o nominate a successor in the Governorship of Queensland, and an
incident arose in connection therewith which proves how tactful the
Go onial Office ever has been in its dealings with Dominion Govern-
ments, and how anxious it is not to antagonize even a section of a
community, or offend its susceptibilities. MTlwraith had come into
° j CG A n with John Murtagh Macrossan as first lieutenant,
and after Sir Anthony had died in October the question was raised in
arhament by W. H. Groom whether any action had been taken re-
garding the appointment of a new Governor. Apparently Groom’s
action was inspired, and followed upon a question of Isambert’s—
Have any steps been taken to cause the Government of Queensland
to be consulted with regard to the selection of a successor to the late
Govei Sir Anthony Musgrave?” To that question the official reply
was No Groom contended “that the Colony had a perfect right to
be consulted m regard to the appointment of a Governor. He claimed
that when the salary was raised from £3500 to £SOOO per annum it was
upon the distinct understanding that the Colony was a ‘first-class
colony, and entitled to receive a ‘first-class Governor.’ ” Further
Groom pointed out what had then recently occurred in South Aus-
tralia. It was rumoured that the Marquis of Normanby was to be
appointed Governor of the Colony, and Playford, the Premier, voicing
the wishes of the Legislative Assembly, cabled the Secretary of State
that the appointment of the Marquis would not be acceptable. It was
then explained by MTlwraith that his former answer of “No” was
technically accurate, but that the Government had cabled the Agent-
General to tell the Secretary of State that the appointment of “certain
persons ’ would be objectionable to the Colony. He declined to tell
the House “who those persons were,” as the communication was
confidential. He claimed that the Government were doing “a kind
action” in giving the Home Government that warning. He therefore
358
QUEENSLAND—


asked for “the name of the officer likely to be selected as Governor of
Queensland.’’ He did not claim the right to nominate, but the right to
know who would be nominated. The reply he received was that it
was not a proper thing to consult the Colonies before the appointment
was made, but that the Colony could be perfectly satisfied that the
result would be satisfactory. Then MTlwraith cabled the Agent-
General to urge that he be informed confidentially of the name of the
proposed Governor of Queensland. Apparently he had had a hint of
something which he did not care to disclose. The reply to that was that
it had been decided in previous cases that such officers must be selected
by the Secretary of State for the Sovereign’s approval, and must be
appointed and be responsible to the Crown only. Therefore it was
impossible for Colonial Ministers to share the responsibility of nomina-
ting the Governor or have a voice in his selection.
In the meantime M‘llwraith appears to have consulted the Leader
of the Opposition, Griffith, and in collaboration they sent the follow-
ing cable to the Agent-General for Queensland, which let the cat out
of the bag:—“Referring to your telegram of October 19, inform Sec-
retary of State for Colonies Blake’s appointment not acknowledged
to be satisfactory. Its announcement received with general astonish-
ment and indignation. His career should not have marked him out as
fit for governing a colony possessing responsible government. A
more unfortunate appointment could not have been made.”
When MTlwraith read that cable to Parliament he intimated that
there was another sentence in it, but unless the Leader of the Opposition
authorized him to read it he would not do so, and Griffith interjected:
‘‘Do not do so.” The historian naturally enough wants to find that
missing sentence, and a very great effort was made to do so. It may,
however, be safely said that it has not been preserved in Quensland.
Forty-three years after the event no great harm could have arisen
through its publication, however emphatic and severe it was, but as
it cannot be obtained locally, those of us who remember MTlwraith
will be justified in giving rein to our imaginations. MTlwraith claimed
that he was only trying to prevent the Home Government from mak-
ing a mistake, and Griffith showed his approval of the action of his
political opponent by saying, “You are at liberty to mention that I
approved of the cablegram.”
The appointee in question about whom all this trouble arose, and
concerning whom there was so much mystery that political leaders
spoke with bated breath, was Sir Henry Arthur Blake, G.C.M.G., who
was an honorary colonel of the Ceylon Mounted Rifles, District Grand
Master of the Ceylon Freemasons, member of the Royal Zoological
Society, and a Knight Justice of the Order of St John of Jerusalem.
He was born in Limerick on January 18, 1840, and was the son of Peter
Blake, County Inspector of Irish Constabulary. He married first, in
1862, Jeannie, daughter of Andrew Irwin, of Ballymore, Boyle, and,
secondly, in 1874, Edith, eldest daughter and co-heir of Ralf Bernal
Osborne, of Newton Anner, Clonmel. Sir Henry was a cadet in the
Irish Constabulary in 1859, a Resident Magistrate in 1876, a Special
Resident Magistrate in 1882, Governor of the Bahamas 1884-87, of
Newfoundland 1887-88, and of Queensland in 1888, but resigned without
entering upon the administration. He was Captain-General and Gov-
ernor-in-Chief of Jamaica in 1889-97, and at the request of the
Legislature and public bodies his term was extended in 1894, and again
in 1896. He was Governor of Hong Kong, 1897-1903, and of Ceylon,
1903-1907.


There is little more to be said about Sir Henry Arthur Blake
beyond referring persons interested in acquiring further information to
his small 200-page book entitled Pictures from Ireland, published
under the pen name of “Terrence M‘Grath,” and the sixth edition of
which was published in 1888. It is possible that some may see in that
little volume the secret of the hostility shown towards him by public
men in No opinion upon that point is expressed in this
article. A minor bit of history concerning this matter was unearthed
in the Parliamentary Library. On looking up the Suggestion Book
it was found that in the year 1889 Pictures from Ireland was sug-
gested as a suitable purchase by “Thomas MTlwraith,” and it looks as if
he wanted to justify his refusal to receive Blake as Governor, and was
desirous that members of Parliament should read that book. The
suggestion repeatedly made that the objection to Blake was on account
of some family connections living in Brisbane at the time is, in the
view of the writer, entirely erroneous. The Brisbane Observer of
November, 1888, published the following verses concerning “One of
the Blakes of Galway”:—
We always did think no small beer
Of Queensland in a small way,
But now we’re proud they’re sending here
One of the Blakes of Galway.
No common man from Severn’s side.
Or from the Firth of Solway;
Ah, no! a source of keener pride,
A genuine Blake from Galway.
A humble bobby! O ye gods !
They try to snub us alway ;
An ex-J.P. —but what’s the odds?
Ain’t he a Blake from Galway?
And so to other’s jibes and sneers
We’ll this unto you say:
Bother your blooming Lords and Peers,
We’ve got a Blake from Galway.
Sir Henry Blake, who died on February 23, 1918, was spoken of by
the London Times as “a brilliant Irishman whose qualities as an
administrator were recognized by all classes in Ireland,” adding that
during the closing years of his life he was a considerable influence in
local affairs. In politics he was a strong and hard-hitting Unionist,
but his opinions did not impair his popularity. In addition to pub-
lishing Pictures from Ireland he published a book on China, and was
a. very frequent contributor to the Times. He took an active interest
in the organization of Red Cross work in Ireland.
The Author is much indebted to the Sydney Bulletin of 24th Novem-
ber, 1888, for the following further information concerning Sir Henry
Blake—
Sir Henry Blake, nominated to the Governorship of Queensland, was
some twenty years ago an inspector of police in Ireland, with a salary
of a couple of hundred a year. He had no family influence to forward
his interest, but had the good luck to marry the eldest daughter of
Bernal Osborne, then a brilliant wit and well-known member of the
House of Commons. Although the Semitic Bernal had climbed the social
ladder himself by marrying Lady Osborne, of Newtown Aimer (?), a
wealthy heiress in her own right, he resented the visits of the poor
sub-inspector, and on returning after an absence would sneeringly
ask if “the policeman” was in the house. Blake was an attractive
fellow, with a great deal of dash, an expert at mesmerism and a clever
amateur actor. Miss Osborne had the choice of sharing his lot and
360
QUEENSLAND—


being disinherited. She married Sub-inspector Blake, and her younger
sister, the Duchess of St Albans, received a rental of £BOOO a year,
half of which was the right of the elder sister. Mrs Blake made
many sacrifices, lived in poverty and social ostracism, her mother’s
bitter hate pursuing her. Lady Osborne died about 1880, and in her
will disinherited the wife of the policeman. Mrs Blake again showed
her pluck by taking forcible possession of portion of the property,
and, with the aid of a pistol and cutlass, drove three caretakers out
of possession. The Duke and Duchess of St Albans (Mrs Blake’s
younger sister) became ashamed of legal proceedings which were
taken against her, and a sum of £SOOO was paid by the executors of
Lady Osborne to the ill-treated Mrs Blake. A family reconciliation
was arrived at, the sporting Duke liked the stern and much-injured
clever Irishman, and by rapid strides Blake became County Inspector,
Stipendiary Magistrate and then Divisional Magistrate. In the days
of their poverty, Blake and his wife trusted a good deal to help from
the “grey goose quill,” and the Irish sketches of the former are very
clever and pleasant reading. The Duke of St Albans had considerable
political influence with the Tories, and his brother-in-law was readily
advanced to the Governorship of the Bermudas and then of Newfound-
land. Mrs Blake is very clever and has been of great help to her
husband in his gubernatorial duties.
SIR HENRY WYLIE NORMAN
Our seventh Governor was the son of James Norman, and was born
in London on December 2, 1826. He entered the Bengal Army in
March, 1844, at the age of 18 years, and the surprisingly successful
military career which was his indicated not only that he was a man of
unusual military ability, but that he must have been a serious-minded
young man who realized very early that a steady application to his
chosen profession, as in all professions, is the road to success. It
would appear from his record that in whatever sphere he served he
gained the confidence of his superior officers. Those of us who have
read Holmes’ or Malleson’s History of the Indian Mutiny will have
noticed mention of Norman’s name right throughout that strenuous
and troublous time, and will wonder the less at his subsequent success.
Of very few military men indeed can it be said that they occupied suc-
cessively the positions of Adjutant, Brigade Major, Assistant Adjutant-
General, Deputy Adjutant-General, Acting Adjutant-General in
India, Assistant Military Secretary at the Horse Guards, Aide-de-
Camp to the Queen, and Military Secretary to the Government of
India. For seven years he was a Member of the Council of the
Viceroy of India, twice acting for several weeks as President of the
Council during the absence of the Viceroy. In addition Sir Henry was
a member of the Council of India in London; for five years Captain-
General and Governor-in-Chief of Jamaica, and was for 6\ years Gov-
ernor of this State from May 1, 1889, to December 31, 1895.
Sir Henry Norman served throughout the Punjab campaign, includ-
ing the action at Sodoolpore; the battles of Chilianwallah and Goojerat,
and pursuit of the Sikhs and Afghans. He was present in numerous
engagements during his six years’ service on the Pashawur Frontier;
he served throughout the Indian Mutiny campaigns, including the siege
of Delhi, the relief and capture of Lucknow, and many minor actions.
He also took part in the Southal campaign. Sir Henry wore with


pride three war medals and six clasps. Towards the close of his dis-
tinguished and honourable career, and while he was actually serving
in the capacity of Governor of Queensland, he was offered in 1893 one
of the Blue Ribbons of the Imperial Service —the Viceroyship of India.
At that period he was 67 years of age, and not in too good health.
The fatigues of his strenuous military career had made him look older
than he really was, and had made inroads' upon his constitution, but,
like the true soldier that he was, he obeyed his Sovereign’s command,
and immediately thereafter asked to be allowed to resign on account of
poor health and advancing years.
If one were asked to say which among all our Governors of the past
most endeared himself to the people generally, there would be no
possibility of making a mistake in the choice of General Sir Henry
Wylie Norman. For a soldier who had seen so much active service
his was an extraordinarily gentle nature. In some respects he was
almost feminine in his characteristics, and yet, when necessity com-
pelled, he could be stern and determined. An example of each of these
characteristics will do no harm and serve the better to portray the
man. On the occasion of a Government House ball a young matron
was accosted by Sir Henry in the supper room, and was asked if she
was getting all she wanted. “I am afraid, your Excellency,” was the
reply, “I am getting more than I am entitled to —I am taking some
bonbons for my little boys,” “My dear,” said the kindly old man, “I
used to do exactly the same thing for my little children.” On sub-
sequent occasions Sir Henry made quite sure that “the little boys” got
their bon-bons, and without knowing them, made them his protegees.
The other story shows the more serious side of his Excellency’s
character. A public school boy, indignant that he had not been chosen
to fill a vacant lieutenancy in the school cadets, enlisted the services of
his father (equally indignant) with the object of making a vigorous pro-
test to the Commander-in-Chief. The reply of Sir Henry Norman
was just what one might have expected from a soldier of his type.
It was full to the brim of good advice to the father in regard to
cultivating in his son the habit of strict obedience and submission to
authority. He reminded the father that the first duty of the soldier
was to obey, and that an army founded upon any other principle must
fall to pieces. If, therefore, the boy cadet never learnt the virtue of
submission to authority he could never become an effective soldier. It
is doubtful whether the advice was acceptable, but of its soundness
there could be no question.
The Norman period was productive of other good stories too. A
guest with weird ideas of the people’s “rights” wrote to his Excellency
a somewhat peremptory letter reminding him that he had been Gov-
ernor of Queensland for two years, and that it was quite time he (the
writer) was asked to dinner at Government House. It was during this
reign, too, that an evidence was given of the aphorism that “fact is
stranger than fiction.” A fancy dress ball was in progress at Govern-
ment House, and was attended by a well-known public servant dressed
immaculately as a Spanish cavalier. The calves of his legs were
alleged to be the admiration of the entire fair sex present, and so
they would have continued to be but for the fact that a young man
dressed as a jockey, and wearing spurs, inadvertently ripped open one
of the cavalier’s calves during one of the dances. It was a tragic mom-
ent when it was discovered that the Spanish Don had padded his legs
362
QUEENSLAND—


with bags of sawdust, and that his real legs resembled the lollie sticks
of our far-distant youth.
During his residence in Queensland the Governor cultivated active
habits of exercise. He was devoted to canoeing, and kept his trim
little craft at the foot of Ferry street, Kangaroo Point. Quite un-
ostentatiously he, whenever opportunity offered, wended his way to
Kangaroo Point via the Edward street ferry, and filled in the after-
noon on the river, returning to Government House in the same quiet
and unobstrusive manner.
Norman Park, Brisbane, bears his Excellency’s name.
In 1902 the General was promoted to the rank of Field-Marshal,
and after filling some minor posts in his old age, such as Governor of
Chelsea Hospital, he died in London on October 26, 1904, at the age of
78 years.
AN HISTORICAL PROBLEM
AN EPISODE IN THE HISTORY OF ANCIENT PERSIA
These verses, written by the late J. Brunton Stephens, were read
at a smoke concert given in honour of Sir Henry Wylie Norman, by
the officers of the Civil Service, in the Centennial Hall, Brisbane, on
October 3, 1893, on the occasion of his Excellency’s appointment as
Viceroy of India.
King - Ahasuerus in his palace at Shu Shan
Gave a feast unto his princes, Tarshish, Meres, Memucan,
And some others whose outlandish names it boots not to rehearse,
You will find them all in Esther, chapter first and fourteenth verse.
And when the feast was at its height, and jest and story flew,
And reverberant laughter shook the hangings, white and green and blue,
Ahasuerus hammered with his sceptre on the board,
And at the Royal signal silence promptly was restored.
“Great Lords, our Privy Councillors,” the mighty monarch said,
“The chiefest of our provinces is now without a head ;
Assyria is vacant; and we ask you, whom is he
Who worthiest Is to rule the roost in that great Satrapy?”
Then one named one ; another one ; till all had said their say;
But at each name the monarch shook his head and answered “Nay,
Ye only think,” he cried, “of high degree and princely birth ;
HEN-WY-NOR is the man for us whose claim is simply worth.”
“HEN-WY-NOR !” At the name there burst so joyful a hurroo
That the palace hangings swayed in curves of white and green and blue ;
And waving golden goblets, Tarshish, Meres, Memucan,
Etcetera, shouted, “Live the King: HEN-WY-NOR is the man!”
Now, HEN-WY-NOR was a modest chief, who ruled a scanty folk,
And his soul was filled with wonder when the news upon him broke.
(Which proves, if proof is wanted, that a man may be alert
And wide awake to everything except his own desert.)
The war worn hero fain had put the glittering prize aside,
But duty called with trumpet tone, and would not be denied ;
And at the old familiar sound his answering spirit leapt,
And his posts were straightway flying with the message “I accept.”
And his people, ah! his people. They were glad and they were sad;
They were proud and yet cast down ; the news was good, the news was
bad.
Each felt higher by a cubit, and yet lower by a head,
And they bragged of his promotion, mingling tears with what they said.
But were all sincerely sorrowed, Persian chroniclers agree
That the saddest of the mourners were the Civil Scribery,
A superior class of men, who these same chroniclers declare
Were the best of all good fellows in that land or anywhere.
Now the Scribery had a custom, quite peculiar to this folk,
To give departing friends an apotheosis of smoke ;
So they waited on the Satrap, and besought him to submit
To the process on such evening as His Altitude thought fit.


“ 'Tis small honour WE can render,” said the scribe who spoke their
views;
“We are poor, sir, devilish poor, with ten per centum oft our screws,
But we’d fain give you a pleasure to remember when you’re gone.”
And the kindly Satrap bowed his honoured head and said “I’m on.”
But when the deputation had departed there came near
A stealthy-footed chamberlain, who whispered in his ear,
“There’s a Farewell Ode included in the pleasure they prepare,”
And the hero of a hundred fights dropped back into his chair.
Yea, he whose eye had ever in fierce conflict brightest flowed,
He, who before had ne’er known fear, now quailed before the Ode.
And he cried: “Is there no outlet from this horrible abyss?
Chillianwallah, Delhi, Cujerat, were not a patch on this.
Yet stay,” for now a happy thought took shape within his brain.
“You cannot Farewell Ode a man who chooses to remain.”
Oh, blessed inspiration : The solution clear he saw,
And out he rushed and wired Ahasuerus, “I withdraw.”
Exit Farewell Ode, but synchronously with its exit came
A new problem into history that still preserves his fame,
For historians still dispute the question, each with some fresh lie,
Why HEN-WY-NOR slung Assyria, but WE know the reason why.
LORD LAMINGTON
The eighth Governor of Queensland was Charles Wallace Alexander
Cochrane Baillie, Baron Lamington, of Lamington, in the County of
Lanark. Lord Lamington was the only son of the first Baron and
Annabella, daughter of Andrew B. Drummond, of Cadlands, Hants.
He was educated at Christ Church, Oxford, where he was in the 4th
class of the Modern History School, and took the degree of B.A. in
1881. It is not given to many young men to start their public careers
as Private Secretary to the Prime Minister of Great Britain, and yet
that was the experience of the subject of this sketch, who was assistant
private secretary to the Marquis of Salisbury, in the years 1885 and
1886, at the early age of 25 years. In the latter year he was elected to
the House of Commons, and sat in the Conservative interest for North
St Pancras. He succeeded his father in the Barony of Lamington
in 1890, and in 1895 was appointed to the Governorship of Queensland
at the early age of 35 years, having been born on July 31, iB6O. Though
Lord Lamington had followed to a small extent in his politician father’s
footsteps, he did not remain long enough in the House of Commons to
take a high place in that august assemblage. He appears to have
inherited more commonsense than oratory, for which he was not con-
spicuous as Governor of Queensland, though he could speak at short
length with pleasing effect. There are very few examples to be found
in Queensland history of fluent Governors with a wide command of
language and the qualification of delivering extempore orations. His
juvenile appearance when he arrived to take over the representation of
the Sovereign in this State led an enthusiast, who was giving him a
hearty welcome as he drove up Queen Street, to shout at the top of
his voice, “That’s the man for us; we want young men for Queens-
land.” Lord Lamington celebrated his appointment to this State by
marrying in the same year the youngest daughter of Sir William Hozier,
and remained here as Governor until December 19, 1901, or some
months over the usual five-year period.
If heredity counts for anything, then Lord Lamington could not well
escape being a man of capacity, for his father, the first Baron, was a
prominent politician between 1841 and 1852, and indeed was one of
the most active members of the “Young England Party,” whereof
Disraeli was Chief and Lord John Manners the vates sacer. He was
364
QUEENSLAND—


popularly supposed to have been the original of “Buckhurst” in “Con-
ingsby,” and was himself poet, politician, novelist, historian, and
pamphleteer. Our Governor had running in his veins the blood of
two very ancient and famous Scottish families —Blair of Blair, and
Cochrane of Cochrane, from whom sprung the Earls of Dundonald.
The Lamington Barony was an off-shoot from this distinguished family,
the first Baron Lamington being the grandson of the sixth son of the
Bth Earl of Dundonald. Anyone who has read The Autobiography of a
Seaman, by Thomas, 10th Earl of Dundonald, will gain a fine impression
of the type of family to which our Governor belonged.
The period during which Lord Lamington reigned in Queensland
was not marked by any disturbance of the political atmosphere, and a
Governor, no matter what his capacity for dealing with such situations,
is to be congratulated upon escaping them. It is a disagreeable duty
to be compelled to act as arbiter between contending political parties,
for however scrupulous one may be in the desire to do the right thing
the interpretation of that wide term is so varied that it is quite impos-
sible to please all sections.
One could tell numberless good Government House stories were
it wise to do so. Here is one relating to the Lamington period. When
the Lady Grizel Gem Annabella Cochrane-Baillie was born a garden
party was given to celebrate the christening, and real heather was
imported to decorate the christening cake. During the afternoon guests
rushed the heather and swaggered on the lawn decorated with Scot-
land’s distinctive flower. Later on there were seen to be an abnormal
number of people carrying handkerchiefs palpably used to wrap up
something. Curiosity was aroused, and it was found that they had
been raiding the cake. It was promptly removed, but it puts a Gov-
ernor in a painfully invidious position to be compelled to put a chain
and padlock upon his child’s christening cake.
There are shallow-thinking people in the community who estimate
the success of a Governor by the pace set in social functions. This is,
indeed, a poor manner of arriving at the value to the community of the
Sovereign’s representative, though even in this respect Lord Laming-
ton well maintained the best traditions of Government House. His
Excellency is not merely the social head of the State (which of itself
has only a minor value); he is largely the intellectual head, who, by
patient study of local conditions, is often able to encourage, help, and
assist by wise advice and timely counsel the various sections of the
community, and has an infinite influence for good upon the young and
old alike. By his example he sets the moral tone of the people. In
all these respects, Lord Lamington may be regarded as a successful
Governor, though perhaps his natural reserve led him to be slightly
misinterpreted, but if occasion demanded, and the spirit moved him,
he could unbend and abandon much of the restraint which came
naturally to him. On the voyage out, for instance, he had no hesitation
in gaining experience in the stokehold, and drinking oatmeal water out
of a pannikin dipped into a bucket.
His Lordship was distinctly a sport, and devoted to outdoor exercise.
The old golf links at Chelmer were a source of much attraction to him,
and he was not unskilled in the polo field. As a cyclist, he was an
expert, and devoted much time to his bicycle.
The Governorship of Lord Lamington is marked by the fact that
during his term of office the Federation of the Australian States
became an accomplished fact. In this epoch-making period, he took a


keen interest, and, although only a temporary resident, was in the best
sense “a Big Australian.”
Lord Lamington, for sentimental reasons, if for no others, should
have a soft spot in his heart for Queensland, for it was in the city of
Brisbane that his son and heir was born. The name of our eighth
Governor is perpetuated by the Lamington Plateau, and the Lady
Lamington Hospital for Women is a lasting memorial to her Ladyship.
SIR HERBERT CHARLES CHERMSIDE
We had as our ninth Governor another military man who had had
a . somewhat varied career. Major-General Sir Herbert Charles Cherm-
side was born at Wilton, near Salisbury, on July 31, 1850, and was the
second son of the Rev. Seymour Chermside. He was educated at Eton,
and chose in 1868 that elite branch of the military forces, the Royal
Engineers, in which to carve out a career for himself. He became
a lieutenant in 1870; captain in 1882; major in 1883; lieutenant-colonel
in. 1.885, and colonel in 1887. During the Russo-Turkish War he was
military attache with the Turks, 1877-8, and gained a medal. In
1878-9 he assisted in the delimitation of the frontiers of Turkey, and
was military Vice-Consul in Anatolia, 1879-82. He served during the
Egyptian Expedition of 1882, being awarded medal and star. He
also served with the Egyptian army from 1883 to 1888, and in the Sudan
and Suakim expeditions of that period. From 1884 to 1886 he was
Governor-General of the Red Sea Littoral, and from 1886 to 1888
commanded the Egyptian Nile Frontier Force. In the action at Sarras
he was in command of the Egyptian Forces, and obtained the brevet of
colonel. From 1888 to 1889 he was British Consul in Kurdistan, and
from 1889 to 1896 military attache at Constantinople. On March 17,
1897, he was appointed British Military Commissioner and Commander
in Crete on the same day that autonomy was declared in the island.
Sir Herbert held the second class of the Medjidieh, and second class
Osmanieh. He was in command of the Curragh District between 1899-
1900, and commanded the Third Division in South Africa, being men-
tioned in despatches. In 1901 he again was in command of the Curragh
District, and was appointed Governor of Queensland in the same year,
arriving here in March, 1902, and leaving on October 10, 1904.
Those of us who like committing dates to memory should have no
difficulty whatever in remembering the Chermside period. All one
has to do is to repeat a few times the words “Chermside—lncome tax
—1902,” or “1902 —Income tax —Chermside,” or “Income tax —Cherm-
side—l9o2.” The main thing to remember is “Income tax,” which
luxury we first indulged in during the year of our Lord, 1902. Under
the Morgan Administration in 1904 the Governor’s salary was reduced
to £3OOO, though previous to that a Bill introduced by a private
member to reduce it to £2OOO was stopped by prorogation. The un-
happy Public Service suffered unusually heavy special retrenchment in
the same year. Sir Herbert Chermside expressed his willingness to
come under the operation of the Act with the understanding that he
should no longer be expected to entertain at Government House, and
he loyally stood by that arrangement, though there were ill-natured
people who suggested that it was an ingenious and economical pro-
position for the Governor, and that he gained more than he lost.
Nevertheless, his offer to share in the retrenchment of the period led
to complications. The offer was made without authority from the
366
QUEENSLAND—


British Government and it is more or less true that his action was the
cause of his retirement from the Governorship of Queensland.
Sir Herbert Chermside’s favourite recreations were hunting, shooting,
and fishing. Of the first and last he got practically none in Queens-
land, but he was afforded numerous opportunities of showing his skill
with a sporting gun, and usually acquitted himself with distinction.
His duck shooting expeditions on various parts of the Darling Downs
were numerous, and his respect for the close season law highly com-
mendable.
If it would not be lese-majesty to say so, the reign of Sir Herbert
Chermside in Queensland was somewhat humdrum. He did not seem
to have any special regard for the country over which he was called
upon to rule, and though he was not an unpopular Governor by any
means, he did not appear to make quite so many friends as some of his
predecessors and successors. Governors, like other people, vary in
their characteristics. Governor Chermside was a conscientious servant
of the Crown, but he never altogether shook off the military aspect of
his career. Hence when he came to perform exclusively civil functions
it appeared as if they were not nearly so congenial to him as purely
military duty. It is no reflection upon him to say that he was an in-
ferior public speaker, and slightly exclusive in his associations. He
made up for his paucity of language and limited vocabulary by indus-
trious application to books of reference, and delivered erudite written
speeches on varieties of subjects of which he had only a superficial
knowledge. An excellent story is told by a Brisbane pressman who
attended a meeting of the Royal Geographical Society over which Sir
Herbert presided. At the conclusion of the meeting he was forging to
the front, anxious to secure from the private secretary the Governor’s
notes, when he felt a pressure upon his arm. Looking round, he found
the genial Premier of the day towering above him. “Don’t bother,
Jones,” said Sir Hugh Nelson, “you will find it all in the Encyclopaedia
Britannica ,” and he did.
Another famous occasion was when Sir Herbert presided over the
annual meeting of the Acclimatization Society. After the report had
been duly read and adopted, he delivered with great solemnity, and with
no introduction, an address on the potato. It had no particular
relevancy, except a very remote one, to the occasion, but no doubt the
well-meaning Governor had in his mind that once upon a time some one
acclimatized the potato somewhere, so he took the opportunity of
delivering another Encyclopaedia Britannica oration, and chose as his
subject an almost entirely irrelevant matter. The occasion is well
remembered as one upon which the assembled audience had supreme
difficulty in suppressing its mirth. These stories must by no means
be accounted against the Governor. He laboriously did his best, and
nothing more can be expected of any of us. If some of us civilians
were put in command of a brigade, the probability is that we would not
do as well as Governor Chermside did as Governor. Very few of us
are gifted with eloquence, and fewer still are able to please everybody.
There appear to be quite a number of streets named after Governor
Chermside —four at least —at Newmarket, Highgate Hill, Hendra, and
Teneriffe.
Sir Herbert Chermside married, in 1889, Geraldine, daughter of the
late W. Frederick Webb, of Newstead Abbey, Notts. Lady Chermside
died in 1910. He died 25th September, 1929.


LORD CHELMSFORD
The successor to General Sir Herbert Chermside in the Governorship of
Queensland was a man of quite different type. The Right Honourable
Frederick John Napier Thesiger, G.C.M.G., third Baron Chelmsford,
was born in 1868, and educated at Winchester, and Magdalen College,
Oxford. Took his B.A. degree (first-class in law) in 1891; his M.A.
in 1894; was a Fellow of All Souls’ in 1892, and was called to the Bar
(Inner Temple) in 1893. He was a member of the London School
Board from 1901 to 1904, and a member of the London County Council
in 1904. In the same year he was appointed Governor of Queensland,
and arrived here on November 30, 1905, occupying that position until
May 27, 1909. He was then transferred as Governor of New South
Wales, and remained there until March, 1913. He was acting Gov-
ernor-General of Australia from December, 1909, to January, 1910. In
1916 he became Governor-General of India, and relinquished that dis-
tinguished post in the latter part of 1919, when he was succeeded by
that eminent scholar and jurist, Lord Reading (Sir Rufus Isaacs).
Thus two Governors of Queensland have been appointed to the Vice-
Royalty of India. The Great War, as many of us know to our cost,
was no respecter of persons, and during its progress the calamity befell
Lord and Lady Chelmsford of losing their eldest son and heir, the
Hon. Frederick Ivor Thesiger, Lieutenant in the Royal Artillery, who
was killed at the early age of twenty-one.
Lord Chelmsford’s reign in Queensland was marked by remarkable
geniality and friendliness with all classes. In the most democratic
manner he accommodated himself to the surrounding circumstances,
and amongst all classes his popularity was most pronounced. Un-
happily for him he was associated during his regime with one of those
political crises which are a never ending source of worry when they
arise. Kidston had a majority in the Assembly, but had met with a
severe setback bv a hostile Council. He claimed a dissolution from
the Governor within a comparatively short time of a general election,
his Excellency having previously refused a request to make nominations
to the Legislative Council. Lord Chelmsford refused the dissolution
and Kidston resigned. Whereupon Sir Robert Philp was sent for. He
formed his Ministry and was humiliated by a refusal of Supply. He
appealed to the Governor, who granted him a dissolution. Parlia-
ment, in an address to his Excellency, protested, but his Excellency
said, “By the exercise of the prerogative of dissolution the people
are asked to say what they wish done.” Kidston was horrified,
and it was this decision which called forth that somewhat doubtful
utterance —“The Czar has spoken; the Duma is dissolved.” We
are reminded here again of Professor Berriedale Keith’s dictum
that whichever way a Governor decides he will be regarded by some
as a partisan. This is not the place to discuss the soundness of his
Excellency’s decision. There are varying opinions upon it, but there is
only one opinion in regard to the absolute purity of his motive. He was
not the kind of man who would show wilful partisanship.
In appearance Lord Chelmsford was a man of distinction whom one
would pick out of a very big crowd as a pleasing person to look upon.
He was in the best sense a cultured man both in mind and body, and
in addition was an attractive and ready speaker. He did not strive
after oratory, but had that useful faculty of clothing his thoughts in
fluent and appropriate language. Such an asset, it need hardly be said,
368
QUEENSLAND—


is invaluable to one occupying a position so distinguished as that of
Governor. It takes a tactful and thoughtful man to accommodate
himself instanter to such wholly new surroundings as greet the King’s
representative on assuming office in a new country and amidst un-
familiar social conditions. Nevertheless Lord Chelmsford was always
equal to the task set him, and may be truthfully referred to as one
of the greatest successes among our line of fifteen Governors. One
reason for his success was his strong sense of humour —a characteristic
not too common in Vice-regal quarters.
We have never had a Governor in Queenland less assuming, nor
more modest, in addition to which his conscientiousness was a marked
characteristic. A good and authentic story is told of his scrupulous
recognition of Lent as a period for the exercise of self-denial. Though
devoted to tobacco, and the constant smoker of a big bent pipe, yet
when the Lenten season came round he absolutely abandoned the use
of tobacco, and never tasted the fragrant weed until the first day in
Advent. Those of us who are addicted to the use of tobacco will
recognize what this deprivation meant to his Excellency.
During his residence in Queensland the Governor associated himself
in a quite unusual degree with the interests of the people. There was a
remarkable absence on his part of any aloofness. No matter what the
company he was in he was cordial to all classes, and he had the
faculty of entirely suppressing that boredom which the Crown repre-
sentative must necessarily feel at times when performing minor func-
tions in which he has no particular interest. He was a Governor who
was fond of the open air, and was never happier than when the
restraints of office were lifted and he was enabled to indulge in golf and
other out-of-door exercise. It is interesting to note that the second
Baron Chelmsford, the Governor’s father, was one of the heroes of
Rorke’s Drift during the Zulu War.
Lord Chelmsford married the Hon. Frances Charlotte Guest,
daughter of the first Baron Winborne, and has one son and three
daughters living.
SIR WILLIAM MACGREGOR
In the history of Dominion Governorships there stands out in great
prominence the story of the life of Sir William MacGregor. “A great
Colonial Governor” the London Times described him as when the
time came for him to lay dawn his worldly task, and “a great Colonial
Governor” he will ever remain in the history of the British Dominions.
Of humble parentage —the son of an Aberdeen farmer —this was no
handicap to his career, for he pushed on from success to success until
he became universally recognized in official circles as one of the most
valued and reliable servants of the Crown. His great industry, his
student nature, his craving for knowledge, and his high minded pur-
poses were outstanding, and unhidden features of his many fine charac-
teristics. That he attained his numerous honours and exalted position
from humble beginnings, and without what is known as “pull” in
high quarters, is just the best testimony that could be produced of the
man’s innate worth, his tenacity of purpose, and solidity of character.
He was the typical Scot—canny, frugal, unassuming, far-sighted, and
determined. It seemed as if in his earlier years, as the result of good
home advice, which he absorbed, he had laid down a course for himself
from which nothing could turn him aside. Endowed with the faculties
of pertinacity and application, his strong will and unflinching devotion


r t • -i .
in his path, and give us an example
may carry a man. Most of us
ave the ability to do something in this world—the pity of it is that
so few of us try.
Sir WiHiam MacGregor was the eldest son of John MacGregor, of
herdeen. He was educated at Aberdeen and Glasgow, and was resident
surgeon and resident physician at the Glasgow Royal Infirmary, and
£ oya * Lunatic Asylum, Aberdeen. The London T imes says
a ike Cecil Rhodes he undertook his long Colonial career in order
to save his life. He occupied successively the position of Government
medical officer, Seychelles, 1873; surgeon Civil Hospital, Port Louis,
Mauritius 1874; chief medical officer, Fiji, 1875; acted as Receiver-
eneral, Administrator of the Government, High Commissioner, and
Consul-General for the Western Pacific. In 1888 he became Admin-
istrator of British New Guinea, and Lieutenant-Governor in 1895*
Governor of Lagos, 1899-1904; Governor of Newfoundland, 1904-9; Gov-
of Queensland, 1909-14. It was on September 4, 1888, that Sir
William proclaimed Queen Victoria’s Sovereignty over British New
Guinea, and he represented the West African Colonies and Protectorates
at the Coronation in 1902. He was a member of numerous scientific
societies, being a Fellow of the Royal Geographical Societies of
Gngland, Scotland, and Berlin, and of the Royal Anthropological Society
T. 1 , y V He h . eld t . he Albert Medal, 2nd class, and the Clarke Gold
Medal, for saving life at sea; he held the Founder’s Medal of the
Royal Geographical Society of England, and was awarded the Mary
Kingsley Medal in 1910. He was also a Knight of Grace of St John
of Jerusalem. There is much romance in his life-saving exploits. It
was in 1874 that he won the Albert and Clarke Medals in commemora-
tion of the part he took in the rescue of a party of Indian coolies who
were wrecked in the Syria, on a rock about twelve hours’ sail from Suva,
biji. It was he who organized the relief expedition, and himself
rescued the immigrants, clambering along the broken mast, and carry-
ing them one by one to safety on his back. One of the women had
fallen overboard, and with the captain of the ship and a police officer
who had gone to her help, was being swept out to sea. The doctor, who
was a man of tremendous physical strength, slid down a rope, and
with the woman’s hair in his teeth, and a man in each hand, dragged
them back to safety. With characteristic modesty he never mentioned
re ?? rt^ the par ! : h , e . took in this exploit. Those who knew Sir
William MacGregor in his later years would hardly credit him with
such feats.
As Administrator of New Guinea he was a pioneer and explorer
whose work will live for ever. His voluminous reports, all laboriously
written by himself, for he would trust no one but himself with the
technical details of which he wrote, were masterpieces, and showed in
every line the thorough nature of the man and his grip of detail. New
Guinea indeed afforded immense scope for more than one of his
favourite studies, and he was an encyclopaedia of knowledge in regard
to that mysterious land. His first report, dated 18th November, 1889,
in regard to his initial administrative visits of
inspections, and shows how conscientious and painstaking he was in
the performance of onerous and dangerous duties. In writing of
Sir Anthony Musgrave he speaks of the assistance received from him
and his “zeal and devotion to the Queen’s service.” Had such a thing
been possible, well might he have applied such words to himself. His
370
QUEENSLAND—


generous distribution of credit for assistance rendered shows the
unselfish man willing to submerge his own great services and
magnify the work of his subordinates. There is thrilling reading in
Sir William’s report of 15th October, 1890, in which he gives a detailed
account of his first expedition up the Fly River. His bravery,
his ceaseless tact when dealing with savage tribes, and his keen ob-
servation of interesting detail under difficult and trying circumstances,
mark him down as one of the greatest and most intrepid of modern
explorers—always alert; with the light of science ever looming large in
the vision of the philologer; keen on whatever he undertook; setting
himself a task and accomplishing it regardless of consequences to
himself; modesty predominating ever; suppressing self, and magnifying
the importance of the work of others —these are the characteristics of
the great man who lays foundations well and truly that others may
build thereon. The world grows really poorer when men like Dr
William MacGregor lay down their tasks.
When he became Governor of Queensland in 1909 he was no longer
a young man, being then sixty-two years of age, and the more serene at-
mosphere gave opportunity for his student nature to develop still
further. Here he was the savant pure and simple, and his great know-
ledge, which he freely imparted, was of infinite value in his new sur-
roundings. It is doubtful whether so erudite a man was not lost upon
Queensland, for his conversation was above the heads of most of his
associates, and it was only a privileged and super-intellectual few who
afforded that conversational scope which was so dear to him.
It was during Sir William’s term of office that the University of
Queensland was established. He was its first Chancellor than whom
it would be difficult to find a more fitting or accomphshed one.
Sir William MacGregor married in 1883 Mary, daughter of Mr R.
Cocks, and had one son and three daughters. He died on 3rd July,
1919, in Aberdeen, at the age of seventy-two years. The MacGregor
River in New Guinea bears his name, and MacGregor Junction on the
Selwyn-Cloncurry railway also perpetuates his memory.
SIR HAMILTON JOHN GOOLD-ADAMS
Another military man with an extensive career behind him filled the
position of Governor of Queensland in succession to Sir William Mac-
Gregor. Major-General Sir Hamilton John Goold-Adams was our
thirteenth Governor, and arrived here on 15th March, 1915* He was
born on June 27, 1858. In his younger days he had acquired valuable
experience at sea as an apprentice on a training ship but the romance
of the land seemed to appeal to him more than the romance of the sea
and being captivated, as many young and enterprising men are, by the
dangers of exploration and colonization, he abandoned the sea for the
army which he appeared to think would give him a wider scope. He
secured a commission in the Royal Scots Regiment in 1878 the age
of twenty. Becoming a captain in 1885, and major of the First Bat-
talion in 1895. He served with the Bechuanaland Expedition under
c; r Charles Warren in 1884-5, and commanded the field force against
the Matabele in 1893. For a short period he was Resident Com-
missioner of the Bechuanaland Protectorate, and served m bouth
Africa from 1899 to 1901. During the latter campaign he was men-
tioned in despatches. From 1901 to 1907 he was Lieutenant-Governor
of the Orange River Colony, having previously been Deputy Com-


J?| S^ ier °f that territory. From 1911 to 1914 he was High Com-
j• rr- 1. * e f s^and ot Cyprus, and during his occupancy of that
[n w I oi F e H succe s sfull y reconciled conflicting Greek and Turkish
interests, hor five and twenty years he served the Imperial Govern-
EL m f a J anety of capacities in the southern portion of Africa. The
eptns ot the mysterious continent swallowed him up and isolated him
p s n . ods ’ and on . one occasion his absence for an undue time
aused sufficient alarm for a search and relief party to be formed.
muc suffering and hardship he was discovered with only one
survmng white member of his party. In his younger days the craving
now e unknown seemed to obsess him, and he was ever prepared
o ake big risks and endure considerable hardship in order to extend
h!S knowledge °f the particular portion of the African continent to
wic uty called him. A dark period of his career was during the
Instonc siege of Mafekmg, when, in combination with his comrades, he
nobly upheld the prestige of the British Arms. With most people, Gov-
ernor 00 d-Adams was a man of considerable reserve of character, due
very likely, to the strenuous life he had lived, and a desire in later life
tor more peaceful surroundings than those to which he had been ac-
customed. Nevertheless, no one could justly say that he was unpopular.
cofn Yu however, de & rees cd popularity, and it is perfectly fair to
, y , a e id not belong to that category of Governors distinguished
by their universal geniality towards all classes alike. From the official
standpoint that does not make a man less of a success as a Governor,
though from the public point of view the hail-fellow-well-met man is the
most popular and the best remembered. The arrival in Queensland
°; *y e governor was practically coincident with the coming into power
01 the Labour Government in 1915.
There was a remarkable resemblance between Governor Goold-
r.lfh^ 5 aI R ?n° V n ri !i 0r K ChermS i de - - They were militar y men of the same
calibre. Both had been industrious workers during their militarv
careers, and doubtless from the soldier standpoint the distinction and
promotion which they attained was well deserved. Neither of them
were men who earned reward by virtue of social connections. They
had both been patient plodders in the military path, and such success
as had come to them was distinctly the reward of industry and faith-
U'l servl ce. As a rule the soldier is not gifted with eloquence or any
great natural gift of speech. In that respect they were much alike,
and perhaps one might say, without any great disrespect, were at a
disadvantage when presiding at the multiplicity of civil functions which
all to the lot of a Governor There is a great charm and fascination in
ie possession of first-hand knowledge. It impresses the public so
much more when one can make a vigorous, knowledgeable, extemporary
speech interspersed with apt quotation and humorous anecdote. Gov-
ernor Goold-Adams was a dignified military man of prepossessing
appearance. Some said that m certain matters he was autocratic If
he was, that is no reflection upon him. The military associations of a
lifetime have a tendency in the direction of austerity and rigoui All
of us are precisely what our early environment has made us. It must
be admitted, however, that the most successful and the most popular
of our Governors have been the all-round men who could adjust theim
selves easily to the varying circumstances of a Governor’s duties and
who have not lived their lives in a groove. Sir Hamilton Goold-Adams
married at the age of fifty-three Miss Elsie Riordan, daughter of Mr
Charles Riordan, of Montreal, and had two children, both of whom were
372
QUEENSLAND—


. i.l 1 •
on 27th January, 1920, intending
to settle down in England and indulge in the hobby of gentleman farm-
, contracted an illness between Durban and Capetown, and
died at the latter city on 12th April, 1920.
SIR MATTHEW NATHAN
T* 16 Brisbane said farewell in October, 1926, to his Excellency
the Right Honourable Sir Matthew Nathan, P.C., G.C.M.G., the
fourteenth Governor of the State of Queensland. As the constitutional
and social head of our evergrowing community it is almost superfluous
o say that he had been an undoubted success. It is a long cry irom the
days of bir George Ferguson Bowen in 1859 to Sir Matthew Nathan
in 1925- In 1859 the constitutional position of Colonial Governors
was in a crude and ill-defined condition. Sir George Bowen, with
little precedent to guide him, assumed the role of autocrat, and so
described himself; but the lapse of over half a century clarified the
position, and the King’s representative is to-day a strictly constitutional
vice-gerent, acting under definite and circumscribed instructions and
precedent, and casting upon his Ministers the entire responsibility for
their actions. Nevertheless, his Majesty’s representative in a self-
governing State, if he hopes for success, must be a tactful, well-in-
formed, and industrious man, identifying himself with the every-day
life of the making their interests his interests, and really
becoming, for the time being, one of themselves. In all these respects
Sir Matthew Nathan may justly claim to have fulfilled the functions
of an ideal Governor.
It is given to few men to have had so wide and varied an experience
as a servant of the Crown. Born on January 3, 1862, one of the seven
sons of the late John Nathan of London, Sir Matthew began
his career as senior Under Officer and Pollock Medallist at the Royal
Military Academy and obtained his commission in the Royal Engineers
on May 19, 1880, On completing the usual course at Chatham, he was
appointed to a Royal Engineer District in the Midlands. After a few
months there he was called up to the Fortifications Branch of the
War Office, to which he returned in the interval of foreign service
during the next seven years. This service was first of all at Sierra
Leone, where he designed the fortifications which were to convert the
harbour into a coaling station. He was in Egypt and the Sudan for a
year at the time of the first struggle with the Mahdi, when Gordon was
killed and an army was taken up the Nile by Lord Wolseley. For
six months of this time he was employed in the Bth Company Royal
Engineers, on the construction of a railway across the big bend of the
Is lie which forms the second cataract. Then two successive dry seasons
were spent by him in Sierra Leone in the construction of the defence
works he had designed, and upon which he employed 1700 work people.
Between 1887 and the end of 1890 he was in India designing, and in
some cases superintending, the erection of coast defences at Karachi,
Bombay, Rangoon, Calcutta, and land forts on the north-west frontier!
He visited other parts of India, including Madras, Mandalay, Simla!
etc.; in the same connection he took part in an expedition in the Lusha!
Hills, on the north-east frontier, and returned to England in the middle
of 1891.
For the best part of the following ten years he was at the War
Office, Whitehall, first of all in the Fortifications Branch, dealing with
373
OUR SEVENTH POLITICAL DECADE, 1920-1930


the questions of coast defence and designing batteries for the Isle of
Wight and other parts which it was considered in those days would
be liable to raiding attacks in the event of war with France and Russia.
The last part of this period he was Secretary to the Colonial Defence
Committee. In this he was a successor to Sir George Sydenham
Clark, who was afterwards Governor of Victoria. It was in this
capacity also that Sir Matthew Nathan attended, as the representative
of the War Office and of the Committee, the Conference of Premiers
on the occasion of the Diamond Jubilee in 1897, and addressed them on
the subject of defence. He also represented the same on
the first Committee that considered the question of cable communica-
tions in time of war. The Committee was sitting when the Fashoda
incident in the Sudan nearly brought about the long-expected war with
France.
In the autumn of 1889 Sir Matthew Nathan went back to Sierra
Leone to act for six or seven months for the Governor, Sir Frederick
Cardew, who went on leave, and in the following year he was appointed
Governor of the Gold Coast, where he remained for over four years,
with one short spell at home. It was a time of reorganization, the
native government having to be replaced in Ashanti and British ad-
ministration to be inaugurated in the Northern Territories north of
Ashanti. From the Gold Coast Sir Matthew Nathan was transferred to
succeed Sir Henry Blake in Hong Kong in 1904. The principal incidents
affecting that place in the 2,\ years that followed were the Russo-
Japanese war and some difficulties arising from the attempts of foreign
coal ships to violate neutrality; the commencement of the construction
of the line connecting Hong Kong with Canton, and the loan by the
Colonial Government to the Viceroy of the Two Hu to enable him to
repurchase the concession for the continuation of that line to Hangkow
in the north, which had passed into foreign hands.
From Hong Kong Sir Matthew Nathan was transferred to Natal,
where there had recently been difficulties due to the difference of
opinion between the Home and Local Ministers with regard to the
suppression of a Zulu rebellion. A revival of trouble occurred shortly
after the new Governor’s arrival, but it was suppressed without loss
of life and without further friction with the Natal Government. The
chief other interest of the Natal situation in the last years of the
decade was the meeting of the Convention that first of all came together
in Durban in 1908 to effect the union of the South African colonies.
A later meeting was held at Bloemfontein. Sir Matthew, who was
still a Major in the Royal Engineers, and a Lieutenant-Colonel in the
Army, became Honorary Colonel of the Durban Light Infantry.
From Natal Sir Matthew Nathan was recalled to England at the
commencement of 1910, after ten years in four Colonial Governments,
to serve for ten years in four Home Departments. The first was the
Post Office, where he was Secretary, first under Mr Sidney (now Lord)
Buxton, and then under Mr (now Sir) Herbert Samuel. The Office
were then preparing their arguments in connection with the taking
over the undertaking of the National Telephone Company. A system
of cheap cable messages suggested by the Secretary to the British
Post Office was adopted by foreign countries and by the Cable Com-
panies after conference in London, and a meeting with his French and
German colleagues in Paris. He was again a member of a Committee
on Cable communications in war, which on this occasion envisaged a
different enemy, and was a member of the Pacific Cable Board, with
374
QUEENSLAND—


Sir George Reid and Sir Timothy Coghlan as Australian colleagues.
From the Post Office Sir Matthew Nathan was appointed in 1911 to
the Board of Inland Revenue, where he served under the Chancellor
of the Exchequer, Mr Lloyd George, and he made the first proposals
for war taxation to the Chancellor.
He had, however, just before the war, been appointed by Mr Asquith
to be Under Secretary for Ireland. He was in Ireland during the
first year and a half of the war when the Nationalist Party were
gradually losing their power to Sinn Fein—a loss which culminated
with the rebellion of Easter, 1916, and a change in the Irish Govern-
ment. The rebellion was subsequently the subject of an inquiry by a
Commission under the presidency of Lord Hardinge. At the close of
this inquiry Sir Matthew Nathan reported for military duty, and was
employed on the defence of London. In November, 1916, he was
offered by Mr Arthur Henderson the Secretaryship of the Pensions
Department about to be formed, and he served in that Department
under Mr G. N. Barnes, of whom he always speaks with affection and
respect. After Mr Barnes had been succeeded by Mr John Hodge,
Sir Matthew temporarily, in September, 1918, followed Mr Barnes to
the War Cabinet Office, and was member and Secretary of a War
Cabinet Committee appointed to consider the question of women in
industry. After the report of that Committee had been presented, Sir
Matthew Nathan returned to the Ministry of Pensions as Chairman
of the Special Grants Committee. He was so employed when offered
by Lord Milner the Governorship of Queensland.
On accepting this appointment he resigned the Chairmanship of the
Association of Permanent Civil Servants at the Ministry of Pensions,
and the Treasurership of the Westminster Health Society. He is a
Vice-President of the Royal Sanitary Institute, and a member of the
Council of the Hakluyt Society for the publication of ancient travels.
He was also for some time President of the African Society, and is
a Fellow of the Geographical Society, a member of the Literary Society,
and of various military and other organizations and clubs. He is a
Justice of the Peace for the County of Somerset, in which county he
owns a small house in the village of West Coker, near Yeovil. Verily,
if there is anything in the term “Empire Builder,” here we have a
living example of such a man.
In Sir Matthew Nathan we lost a Governor of wide and liberal
culture, who during his full term of office never hesitated to pass
on from his vast storehouse of knowledge such information as might
be useful to those with whom he was associated for the time being.
Neither did he spare himself in his efforts to know the State and the
people of which he was the official head. He travelled continuously
throughout the vast spaces of Queensland, of whose geography he was
probably better informed than most travelled Queenslanders are. The
famous regiment to which Sir Matthew belonged—His Majesty’s Royal
Engineers—bears proudly as its motto the one single Latin word
Übique. During his residence in Queensland the Governor ever kept
that motto in mind, for in a literal sense he had been “everywhere,”
and knew the State from Cape York to Point Danger.
In the political sphere he left Queensland with the good will
and respect of politicians of every colour, and perhaps no greater
compliment than that could be paid to his tact and sound judgment.
The politician rightly scrutinizes very closely in these days the utter-
ances of the Governor of the State. There have been several instances


in Australia of Governors perhaps overstepping the mark and getting
slightly beyond the strict realm of gubernatorial utterances, with the
consequence that they have called down upon their heads the criticism
of the politician. In Sir Matthew Nathan we had a Governor who
strove to avoid contentious subjects, while the matter and manner of
his speech were frequently of a helpful and educative nature.
On the social side, Sir Matthew, though handicapped as he naturally
was at times by bachelordom, showed the cosmopolitan side of his
nature. During his residence in Queensland he ignored the barriers of
class. His friends were of all classes, and once inside his hospitable
domain there was a marked absence of restraint due to his wonderful
faculty of making his guests feel at home. Queensland parted with Sir
Matthew Nathan with many regrets, for he took a high place in the
list of Queensland’s Vice-regal representatives.
•
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL SIR THOMAS HERBERT JOHN
CHAPMAN GOODWIN, K.C.8., C.M.G., D. 5.0., F.R.C.S.
The subject of this sketch, popularly known as Sir John Goodwin,
appointed Governor of Queensland in February, 1927, arrived in this
State on 13th June, 1927. In announcing his appointment the London
7 imes remarked upon the fact of it being unusual to appoint a
Member of the Royal Army Medical Corps to the Governorship of a
State, but expressed the opinion that the choice was amply justified.
Sir John is the 15th Governor of Queensland, though one of them,
Sir Henry Blake, appointed in 1888, never assumed office. He was
born at Kandy, Ceylon, on the anniversary of the birthday of Queen
Victoria, 24th May, 1871; the son of Surgeon Major John Good-
win, Army Medical Staff, and Marian Agnes Power of Melbourne,
Australia. It is peculiarly appropriate that the link which connected
him with Australia on his mother’s side should, after an interval of
fifty-six years, be rewelded, and that he should make acquaintance, as
a distinguished Imperial Servant, with the Continent which one of
his parents owned as a birthplace. There is a sentiment attached to
such an incident which His Excellency would be the first to appreciate.
His education was gained at Newton College, Devon, and at St Mary’s
Hospital, London, and having obtained the degrees of M.R.C.S. Lon-
don, and L.R.C.P. England, in 1892, he followed in his father’s foot-
steps and entered the Army Medical Service in July, 1893. Served
in England for three years and, in 1896, went to India and was posted
to the Punjab. Served in North-west Frontier War of 1897, battle
of Shabkadr (awarded D. 5.0.) and as Staff-Surgeon in Mohmand
Field Force (medal and clasp). Married, in December 1897, Miss L. I.
Ronaldson. Returned to England in 1902 and was in medical charge
of the Royal Military Academy for four years. Proceeded to India in
1906, when he was appointed Surgical Specialist to the Western Com-
mand. Returned to England in 1911 and was posted to Devonport.
In 1912 carried out a camp of instruction on Salisbury Plain for some
months. Was under orders to take up an appointment at Simla,
India, when war broke out and he went to France with the Cavalry
Division. Was at Mons, retreat from Mons, battles of Marne and
Aisne, Ist and 2nd Ypres battles, Neuve Chapelle, Somme, etc. Served
in various appointments in France and Belgium until April, 1917,
when he was sent to U.S.A. with Mr Balfour’s Mission. Returned to
England in January, 1918, for work at War Office. Appointed Director-
376
QUEENSLAND—


General, Army Medical Services, in April, 1918, and served in that
capacity until July, 1923, when he retired. From 1918 to 1923 he
was Honorary Surgeon to His Majesty. After retirement he was
appointed a Justice of the Peace for Hertfordshire, a Member of
Council for West Herts hospital, Member of Council for King Edward’s
Sanatorium at Midhurst, and Organizing Adviser to the British Empire
Cancer Campaign. In February, 1927, was appointed Governor of
Queensland.
Sir John Goodwin is the author of various handbooks on medical
work in war time, and numerous articles in contemporary journals.
He holds the Degrees of F.R.C.S., London, Honorary F.R.C.S., Edin-
burgh, Honorary Fellowship, American College of Surgeons, M.A.
University of Michigan, U.S.A., Honorary D.Sc. Oxford, etc. He is a
Knight of Grace, Order of St John; Knight Commander of the Order
of the Bath; Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George;
Companion of the Distinguished Service Order; Commander, Legion
of Honour, France; Commander, Italian Order of the Crown; Com-
mander, Belgian Order of Leopold; Belgian Croix de Guerre; American
Distinguished Service Medal.
When one remembers that Sir John Goodwin in his early life had no
special advantages; that he was one of several sons, all of whom had
to be given a start in life on limited means, the foregoing is a fine
achievement, and one that could spoil many a man by the inculcation
of abnormal pride and undue vanity. But His Excellency is not a man
of that type. If anything he is over modest and to him has been
vouchsafed an answer to that wonderful prayer in the Book of Pro-
verbs :
Remove far from me vanity and lies; give me neither poverty nor
riches ; feed me with food convenient for me.
In all his activities, public or private, his one outstanding characteristic
is that of being a British Gentleman,” and only those who are familiar
with the type know all that those two words convey. In no other part
of the world is a similar type produced. It connotes all the finer
characteristics of humanity—the suppression of self, the absence of
vanity, consideration for others, instinctive courtesy to men and women
of all classes and at the same time a dignity which does not encourage
undue familiarity. You find those traits in the “British Gentleman”
alone. We look back down the long vista of seventy-one years and
we find happily, other Queensland Governors of the same type and
among them —Colonel Samuel Wensley Blackall—a man who was
described as “a kindly, soft-spoken, unassuming gentleman,” and it is
pleasing to think that history has repeated itself once more in Queens-
land.
Lovers of nature are Sir John and Lady Goodwin. The flowers,
the trees, the birds, and the minor fauna of this subtropical climate
make a strong appeal to their natural love for the beautiful. They
have travelled over the wide spaces of Queensland, they have cultivated
the people in every walk of life without distinction, and wherever
they go they are received in the true spirit of friendship and companion-
ship.
Tact, soundness of judgment, suppression of self, the exaltation of
duty to his King and Country above everything, have marked the
long official career of our Governor. He is an ideal “head” of the State,
377
OUR SEVENTH POLITICAL DECADE, 1920-1930


for he knows no political parties, and in association with politicians
is just as much at home with one side as the other.
In private life he delights in the recreation to be found in the
garden, and the big area of land surrounding Government House
clothed in its natural beauty with indigenous trees in which live the
bright-eyed little possums and the sad-faced koala of whom he is the
natural protector. He is a good shot with a sporting gun and a
devotee to the horse (not necessarily the racing horse) as one of the
most beautiful of creations amongst domestic animals. He and Lady
Goodwin take undisguised pleasure in the Royal National and other
Exhibitions and in mixing with the proud winners of prizes in agri-
cultural and industrial contests of every description.
The next Governor of Queensland will experience a trying time in
following Sir John Goodwin. People of all Classes have taken to him
by a species of instinct. In his presence one feels he is in a new
atmosphere of friendship and kindness but it is an atmosphere which
few men have the capacity for creating.
378
QUEENSLAND—


FINIS
We have now reached the end of our task. The objective was
deliberately chosen and the consummation has been reached,
but there yet remain a few words to be said.
When, some years prior to 1919, the author set himself
the objective of recording of Sixty Years of Political His-
tory, there were times when he felt inclined to abandon the
task as too big for him and to magnify the possible con-
sequences to undue proportions. Then came to his rescue the
element of personal pride and his remembrance of the injunc-
tion that —“No man, having put his hand to the plough, and
looking back, is fit for the Kingdom of God.”
The passing of the years since 1919 inclines one to an
altered outlook upon criticism. Every man should welcome
intelligent constructive criticism of his work, provided it is
criticism of the whole and not of an individual sentence or
small section of the work in which personal views have been
expressed. One has no time or regard for the idler who has
never tried his hand at big things and who is so prone to
destroy where he cannot construct. That type of person
one can afford to ignore.
We all have it within our power to do something useful in
this world, be it ever so little. We all have it within our
power to follow the advice given to his sons by the grand-
father of that great American, Edward Bok, —“Go out into
the world and see that you make it a little better than you
found it.” If we contribute ever so little to knowledge by
collecting and concentrating facts, extracting them from
ponderous volumes and focussing them into readable form,
a useful purpose has been served —the world has been made
“a little bettter”
If, in this volume, the susceptibilities of a few are offended,
the author regrets the fact sincerely. He never set out to
offend anyone, and anything he has written of individuals has
no personal feeling whatever attached to it. He has simply
written of them as he has seen them.


It would be idle to disguise the fact that the whole task has
been difficult; more difficult than the writing of Queens-
land Politics During Sixty Years because of the modernity
of many of the incidents written of, and the difficulty at times
of discovering that via media which would lead one neither to
extremes, inaccuracies, nor important omissions.
For what it is worth, here is the author’s last contribution
to literature. The time has arrived —if there is any time left
—for a little leisure.
380
QUEENSLAND—


INDEX




Abolition of government trading,
62
Abolition of Legislative Council,
72
Acts, session of 1919-20, 1; ses-
sion of 1920 fist), 5-6; session
of 1920 (2nd), 11-12; session of
1921, 14-15; session of 1922, 17;
session of 1923, 28-30; ses-
sion of 1924, 34-5; session of
1925, 40; session of 1926, 43;
session of 1927, 45-6; session of
1928, 51; session of 1929, 65;
session of 1930, 69-70
Adamson,, John, 335
Address in Reply, absence of, 8-9
Administration, Land Board, 185
Admirer of Machiavelli, 42
Age limit, no rigid, 64
Agent-General, a disappointed, 31
Agent-General, Fihelly becomes,
25; Hunter becomes, 10; Mac-
artney becomes, 293
Agricultural Bank, the, 213
Appel, Hon. J. G., 286
Apology, an, 58
Arbitration, Industrial Conciliation
Act, 61
Armstrong, Wm. D., 297
Arsenic Mine, State, 121
Assistance, State to cotton indus-
try, 61
Attendance of members, payment
by results, 14
Attitude, the Opposition, 66
Averaging of incomes, 62
Award, rural, 60
Axe, Brennan wields the, 37
Babinda State Hotel, 99-111
Banana Industry Protection Act of
1930, 210
Bank, the Agricultural, 213
Banks, Savings, 244
Baralaba State Coal Mine, 122
Barnes, G. P., 333
Barnes, Hon. W. H., 283
Basic wage, complete history of,
130 .
Beef cattle industry commission, 63
Bertram, William, 284
Bicameral versus unicameral sys-
tem, 72
Bird, the shy—capital, 7
Blackall, Colonel Samuel W.,
second governor, 349
Blair, Sir James W., 68, 342
Blake, Sir Henry, seventh gov-
ernor, 358
Bomb of 1920, 6
Bomb, Sizer’s, labour plebiscites,
52
Booker, C. J., 3 J B
Borrowed money and other things,
144 r
Bowen, Sir George F., first gov-
ernor, 347
Bowen State Coal Mine, 124
Boys and girls, work for, 63
Brennan bribery case, 18; sequel
to, 21
Brennan, Judge, 22
Brennan wields the axe, 37
Bribe, scorning a, 6
Bribery case, Brennan, 18; sequel
to, 21
Bureau of Economics, 63
Burnett, Upper and Callide Land
Settlement Bill, 182
Butcher’s Shops, State, 99, 101
Cairns, Mr William W., fourth
governor, 352
Campaign of 1929, 57
Campbell, Mr ex-Justice, J. L., 261
Cannery, State, 115
Carrying in a vote, 18
INDEX


Casting votes, 18, 23
Casualties, of 1920 election, 9 ;
of 1923 election, 26; of 1926
election, 41; of 1929 election,
57-8
Cattle, Beef, Industry Commission,
63
Cause of turn over in 1923, 26
‘‘Change the Government,” 57
Chef d’Oeuvre of the session of
1921, 16
Chelmsford, Lord, eleventh gov-
ernor, 368
Chermside, Sir Herbert C, tenth
governor, 366
Chicken that came home to roost,
30
Chillagoe-Mungana Royal Com-
mission, 261
Chillagoe State Smelters and Mun-
gana Mines, 43, 50, 120; re-
opening of, 61
Choosing a new government, 59
Coal Mines, State, 122-4
Cold Stores, State, 118
Collins, Chas., 340
Comic opera situation, 5
Commonwealth and States Finan-
cial Agreement Ratification Act
of 1927, 157
Compensation, workers’ basic wage
standard, 63
Compulsory loan, 11
Conciliation and Arbitration In-
dustrial Act, 61
Confidence, want of, motion re-
fused, 39
Confucius, wise old, 8
Conscriptionists’ pathos, 2-3
Contract versus day labour, 62
Conversion, Government Loan Act
of 1923, 149
Cooper, Sir Pope A., and an Exe-
cut’ve Minute, 5
Co-operative Associations, Primary
Producers’ Act of 1923, 203; of
1926. 204
Cotton Industry Act of 1923, 208
Cotton Industry, State assistance
to, 61
Council abolition, 16, 72
Council, Loan, 157, 160-1
Council referendum, 62
Country National Party, 258
Crisis of Ist August, 1922, 17
Crisis of 1927, 46
Curator, Public, the, 239
Dais, Lieut.-Governor tripping on,
5
Dancing saloon, Parliament House
as a, 259
Dawson Valley Irrigation Scheme,
224
Day labour versus contract, 62
Daylight sittings, 32
Deficits, accumulated, 145
Defection of members, 14
Delegation to England, 4
Destination of a vote, altering, 154
Disappointed Agent-General, 31
Diseases in Plants Act of 1930,
210
Dissolution bomb of 1920, 6
Domicile, consequence of chang-
ing, 3
Economics, Bureau of, 63
Economy, a measure of, 42
Education tests, 250
Eighteen-year-old voters, 2
Election disagreement, an, 248
Election of 1920, 8; casualties of,
9; of 1923, casualties of, 26; of
1926, casualties of, 41; of 1929;
casualties of, 57-8
Elphinstone, A. C, 325; an apology
to, 58
Enterprise, State, tabloids, 95
Espionage, secret, 20
Events, outstanding, 266
Ferricks, Myles A., 314
Fighting and voting age, 2
Fihelly, J. A., becomes Agent-
General, 25, 31
Financial Agreement, Common-
wealth and States, Ratification
Act of 1926, 157
Financial Relations, Common-
wealth and States, 157
Fish Supply, State, 112
Fool’s paradise, 55
Forde, F. M., and others, an elec-
tion disagreement, 248
Forty-four-hour week, 135
Franchise, extending the, 2
Franclr'se, local authority, 231
Frayed nerves, 66
Freak, a, and unique circum-
stances, 22


Freehold tenure, restoration of, Oi
Freehold versus leasehold, 188
Frozen Meat Trade, early poli-
ticians and the, 260
Fruit and Vegetables Act of 1927,
209
Fruit Marketing Organization Act
of 1923, 205; of 1925, 205
Gillies as leader, 38
Gillies Government, trouble for, 38
Gillies, Wm. N., 303
“Give Jimmy a Vote,” 56
“Give the Boy a Chance,” 57
Gledson, D. A., carried in to vote
18
Goodwin, Sir John, arrival of, 44;
fifteenth governor, 376
Goold-Adams, Sir Hamilton, J.,
death of, 13; thirteenth governor,
371
Government Insurance, 234
Government, new, in 1929, 59
Government Printing Office, 125
Governor, a new (Sir John Good-
win), 44
Grazing Districts Improvement
Act, 193
Gunn, Donald, 329
Hamilton Cold Stores, 117
Hamilton, Wm., 299
Herbert Plebiscite, 32
Herbert shock, the, 37
Homes, the people’s, 226
Hospital taxation, 63
Hotels, State, 99, in
Hunter, J. McE., 326; becomes
Agent-General, 10
Incomes, averaging of, 62
Increasing members’ salaries, 42
Industrial Conciliation and Arbi-
tration Act, 61
Industries Assistance Act, 64
Inkerman Irrigation Scheme, 224
Insurance Office, Queensland Gov-
ernment, 234
Irrigation, 223
Irvinebank Treatment Works,
State, 121
Isa, Mount, 67
Job monopolies, 63
Joke, the largest of all, 125
Jones, A. J., 295
Kennedy, Sir Arthur E., fifth
governor, 353
King, Hon. R. M., 290
King’s representative, a new, 68
Kirwan, M. J., 323
Labour plebiscites, Sizer’s bomb, 52
Labour’s success, 53
Lamington, Lord, ninth governor,
364
Land Acts, 1919-20, 181; 1922,
181; 1923, 181; 1924, 182; 1925,
183; 1927, 184; 1929, 189; 1930,
192
Land Administration Board, 185
Land Laws, our, since 1918, 177
Land Selectors, removal of restric-
tions, 63
Land Tax, reduction of, 62
Land Tenure, restoration of free-
hold, 61
Larcombe, Jas., 311
Law-giver, a beneficent, 29
Leader, Gillies as, 38
Leader, McCormack as, 42
Leader of the Opposition in 1929,
60
Leaderships, 31
Leasehold versus Freehold, 188
Legal Reform, 15
Legislative Council, abolition of, 72
Legislative Council, Lennon’s
nominees to, 3
Legislative Council Referendum,
62
Legislators, the ups and downs of,
163
Lennon, Hon. Wm., 330; resigna-
tion as Lieut.-Governor, 68
Lennon’s nominees to council, 3
Limelight, disappearance of, 44
Liquor Act Amendment Act, 3
Loan Council, 157, 160-1
Loan proposals, 151
Loans for workers’ dwellings, 63
Loans, new, 146
Loans Redemption and Conver-
sion Act of 1923, 149
Loans Subscription Bill, 11, 150
Local Authority, Franchise, 231
Local Government Franchise, 11
Longman, Mrs, 337
Macartney, Sir E. H., Kt. ; 293;
becomes agent-general, 295


Macgregor, Sir Wm., twelfth gov-
ernor, 369
Machiavelli, a student and admirer
of, 42
Main Roads Commission. 194
Main Roads, nationalization of, 61
Majority, vanished, 17
Mark Twain’s Verse, 57
McCormack as leader, 41, 42
McCormack, Wm., 291
McCormack’s potatoes, 55
Measure of Economy, a, 42
Meat Trade, early politicians and
the, 260
Members, payment for work done,
14; payment of, 163
Members’ salaries, increasing, 42
Members’ salaries reduced, 61
Ministers, new members become,
60
Ministers of the crown and their
salaries, 172
Money, borrowed, and other
things, 144
Monopolies, job, 63
Moore, Hon. A. E., 279
Morgan, Hon. Godfrey, 309
Moses McCormack striking the
rock, 55
Mount Isa, 67
Mount Morgan, re-opening, 64
Mount Morgan, subsidy to, 12-13
Mount Mulligan State Coal Mine,
124
Mullan, John, 307
Mungana-Chillagoe Royal Com-
mission, 261
Mungana Mines and Chillagoe
State Smelters, 43, 50
Musgrave, Sir Anthony, sixth gov-
ernor, 356
Nathan, Sir Matthew, 13; and the
proxy vote, 23; departure of, 42;
fourteenth governor, 373
National-Country party, 258
Nationalization of main roads, 61
Nerves frayed, 66
New government in 1929, 59
New King’s representative, 68
New members become ministers,
60
New premier for seven and a half
minutes, 33
New speaker, the, 67
Norman, Sir Henry W., eighth
governor, 361
Normanby, Marquis of, third gov-
ernor, 351
Opening speech, absence of, 8-9
Opera, comic situation, 5
Opposition, a combined, 32
Opposition attitude, 66
Opposition, leader of, in 1929, 60
Outstanding events, 266
Pairs, declining to grant, 17
Paradise of fools, 55
Parliament House as a dancing
saloon, 259
Parliaments, twe n t y-fi rs t, 1;
twenty-second, 11; twenty-third,
26; twenty-fourth, 41; twenty-
fifth, 59
Pathetic incident, a, 16
Payment by results, 14
Payment of members, the ups and
downs of legislators, 163
Paying back, £85,000,000, 31
People, representation of, its origin
and growth, 87
Peoples’ homes, 226
Peterson, J. C, leaves labour party,
: 4 .
Petitions, vanishing, 256
Petrie, A. L., 321
Philp delegation, 4
“Pinkerton” methods, 20
Placid session of 1923, 28
Plants, Diseases in, Act of 1929,
210
Plebiscite, the Herbert, 32
Plebiscites, labour, Sizer’s bomb,
52
Policy speech and performances,
1929, 60
Politicians, as I have seen them,
277
Pools, Primary Products Act of
1922, 201 ; 1923, 202; 1925, 203
“Poor persons” on £l2 a week, 273
Potatoes, 20 cwt. in a ton, 54
Precedents, two interesting, 8
Premier, new, for seven and a half
minutes, 33
Prickly-pear Land Act of 1923, 191
Prickly-pear Land Act Amend-
ment Act of 1930, 192
Prickly-pear, Royal Commission,
191


Primary Produce Experiment Sta-
tions Act of 1927, 209
Primary Produce Legislation of
1929, 209
Primary Producer, the, and what
was done for him, 197
Primary Producers’ Co-operative
Associations Act of 1923, 203;
1926, 204
Primary Producers’ Organization
Act of 1922, 198; 1923, 200;
1925, 200; 1926, 205; 1928, 207
Primary Products Pools Act of
1922, 201; 1923, 202; 1925, 203
Printing Office, government, 125
Produce Agency, State, 108
Profiteering prevention, 12
Prohibition, State Control, etc., 3
Promotion by merit, 64
Proxy vote, 22
Public Curator, the, 239
Railway employees, superannuation
for, 62
Railway refreshment rooms, State,
no
Railway strikes, 38, 46
Real, Mr Justice, at the bar, 16
Recess of 1920, 4; 1920-21, 12;
1925, 36; 1928-29, 55
Redistribution of seats, 62
Reduction of salaries of members,
61
Referendum, Legislative Council,
1, 62
Reform, legal, 15
Representation of the people: its
origin and growth, 87
“Repudiation” Bill, Land Act
Amendment, 3, 177
Resignation of Hon. Wm. Lennon,
68
Right to work, 63
Roads, main, Commission, 194
Roads, main, nationalization of, 61
“Root Hog, or Die,” McCormack’s
formula, 148
Rural award, 60
Salaries, increasing members’, 42
Salaries of members reduced, 61
Salaries of ministers, 172
Savings Bank Agreement, 12
Savings banks, 243
Sawmilling enterprise, State, 98,
118
Seats, redistribution of, 62
Selectors, land, removal of restric-
tions, 63
Sensation of 14th August 1922, 18
Sequel to the Brennan bribery case,
21
Session, a placid—l 923, 28
Session of 1928, close of the, 52
Sessions, 1919-20, 1-3; 1920, 5;
1921, 13; 1922, 16-7; 1923, 28;
1924, 3i; 1925, 38; 1926, 41;
1927, 44; 1928, 50; 1929, sg;5g;
1930, 69
Shock, the Herbert, 37
Shy bird, the, capital, 7
Silence, the virtue of, 253
Sittings, daylight, 32
Sizer, Hon. Hubert E., 316
Sizer’s bomb, labour plebiscites, 52
Slogans, 56
Smelters, Chillagoe, re-opening of,
61; State, 120
Smith, Wm. Forgan, 281
Soil Survey Act of 1929, 210
Speaker, new, 67
Speaker not presented for appro-
bation, 9
Speakership, the, 254
Speaker, the, in 1929, chosen by
the Premier, 60
Speech, opening, absence of, 8-9
Speech, policy, in 1929, and per-
formances, 60
State assistance to Cotton Indus-
try, 61
State Control, Liquor, 3
State enterprise tabloids, 95
Stations, State, 97, 106
Stopford, Jas., 319
Strikes, railway, 38, 46
Styx State Coal Mines, No. 1, 2
and 3, 123
Success, labour’s, 53
Superannuation for railway em-
ployees, 62
Tabloids, State enterprise, 95
Tax, land, reduction of, 62
Taxation, hospital, 63
Taylor, Hon. Charles, 304; chosen
as speaker, 60
Tenure of land, restoration of free-
hold, 61
Theodore, E. G., 288; and London
financiers, 4; London mission of,
4; return of, in 1920, 7; waning


influence of, 36; who should suc-
ceed, 37
Tolmie, James, 301
Tests, education, 250
Trading, government, abolition of,
62
Trawlers, State, 114
Trouble for the Gillies government,
38
Turn over, a, 26; cause of, 27
Unicameral versus bicameral sys-
tem, 72
Unification, a National move to-
wards, 85
Upper Burnett and Callide Land
Settlement Bill, 182
Upper house referendum, 1, 62
Ups and downs of legislators, pay-
ment of members, 163
Vanishing petitions, 256
Virtue of silence, 252
Vote, carrying in a, 18
Vote, destination of a, altering, 154
Vote, Give Jimmy a, 56
Voters, eighteen-years-old, 2
Votes, casting, 18, 23
Votes on account for the ensuing
year, 155
Vowles, W. J., 3 12
4
Wage, basic, complete history of,
ISO
Waning influence of Theodore, 30
Want of Confidence motion re-
fused, 39
Warra State Coal Mine, 122
Ways and Means Resolution, Land
Act Amendment Act of 1919-20,
181
Week, forty-four-hour, 135
Wise old Confucius, 8
Work and Production, 147
Work for boys and girls, 63
Work, right to, 63
Workers’ compensation, basic wage
standard, 63
Workers’ dwellings, loans for, 63




Halstead Printing Company Ltd.
Allen Street, Waterloo








