

Centennial International Crlnbition,
MELBOURNE, 1888.
QUEENSLAND: A SKETCH
H. COURTENAY LUCK, F.R.G.S.
(Issued under the Authority of the Queensland Commissioners.)
Cscrntilie Cnniratssioners:
JOHN FENWICK, Esq., J.P.
Thk Hon. THOMAS MACDONALD-PATERSON, M.L.C.
FRANCIS REID MURPHY, Esq., ML A.
feenitibe Commissioners; in (Qneenslanir;
F. M BAILEY, Esq., F.L.S.
C. W. de YIS, Esq., M.A.
JOHN FENWICK, Esq., J.P.
P. R. GORDON, Esq., J.P.
Hon. A. G. GREGORY, 0.M.G., M.L.C.
GEORGE GRIMES, Esq., J.P.
JOHN LITTLE, Esq., J.P.
JAMES TOLSON, Esq., J.P.
JSeeretarjr:
H. COURTENAY LUCK, F.R.G.S.
HJelbonrne:
KEMP AND BOYCE, PRINTERS, RUSSELL STREET.
MDCCCLXXXVIII.




Centcmmi! Intenraticrmrl ®xlnbitrotr :
MELBOURNE, 1888.
QUEENSLAND; A SKETCH
H. COURTENAY LUCK, F.R.G.S.
(Issued under the Authority of the Queensland Commissioners.)
(Hsfnrtibt Cflmmissjsioitcrs:
JOHN FENWICK, Esq., J.P.
The Honorable THOMAS MACDONALD-PATERSON, M.L.C.
FRANCIS REID MURPHY, Esq., M.L.A.
6.wutibf Commissionm hi :
F. M. BAILEY, Esq., F.L.S.
C. W. DE VIS, Esq., M.A.
JOHN FENWICK, Esq., J.P.
P. R. GORDON, Esq., J.P.
Hon. A. C. GREGORY, C.M.G., M.L.C.
GEORGE GRIMES, Esq.. J.P.
JOHN LITTLE, Esq., J.P.
JAMES TOLSON, Esq., J.P.
H. COURTENAY LUCK, F.R.G.S.




f -7 7
CONTENTS.
I. Introductory and General ... ... ... 5
11. Education ... ... ... ... 12
111. The Pastoral Industry ... ... ... ... 17
IV. The Minerals ... ... ... ... ••• 23
Y. Commerce and Industries ... ... ... 28
YI. The Sugar Industry ... ... ... ••• 81
VII. Agriculture and Horticulture ... ... ... 33
VIII. Flora and Fauna ... ... ... ... 41
IX. Immigration and Land Selection in Queensland ... 43
X. Barron Falls in Flood Time ... ... ... 48




QUEENSLAND; A SKETCH,
L—lntroductory and General.
In December, 1823, Surveyor-General Oxley, acting on the in-
formation of two castaways, first entered the magnificent river to
which he gave the name of the Brisbane. The foundation of
Queensland’s settlement may be dated from that day. It will
not be necessary in this short description to enter minutely into
the history of the early settlement of the colony, which for
many years remained an integral portion of that of New
South Wales. So little seems to have been thought of its
future importance that the authorities in 1825 established a
penal establishment at the mouth of the river, and it was not
until 1840 that the Act of Legislature was passed which abolished
transportation to Botany Bay, and that steps were taken to
remove this foul excrescence from these fair shores. The first
ship bringing free immigrants was the Artemisia, followed
quickly by the Fortitude, which was the earliest vessel bringing
settlers under Dr. Lang’s scheme, and the now populous Fortitude
Valley marks the spot which was chosen as the home of the first
free pioneers of Queensland.
The year 1859 is memorable as that in which the colony was
considered sufficiently important to be granted the inestimable
boon of self-government, and from this date commences its real
progress, to which the increase of population will afford us some
index.
According to the first official figures the population of Queens-
land in 1860 was 28,056. The estimated number on the 31st
December, 1887, was, in round figures, 367,000, of whom 215,000
were males, and 152,000 females.
The colony is situated between the parallels of 10 J 40'—29“
southern latitude, and 138“—153° 13' east longitude, and within
these limits contains an area of 668,224 square miles, with a
seaboard of about 2500 miles. On all sides of this immense area
are seen evidences of the energy and vitality of the people.
Vessels of all sizes swarm along the coast. Railways render easy


communication with the principal inland towns and bring inch
freights to the coast, and the traveller can now journey by rail
uninterruptedly from Brisbane to Sydney, Melbourne and
Adelaide. The whole colony is dotted with towns— centres of
energy—while the fruits of the indomitable industry of the
miner, the pastoralist and the agriculturist, are seen in all
directions.
Within the large area covered by the colony there is neces-
sarily a great diversity of climate. Speaking generally, the
rainy season throughout the colony occurs in the months of
January and February. In the tropical portion there is a well-
defined “ rainy season,” extending from January to March. In
the south the rains are more generally distributed over the year*
The winter is generally dry and bracing, more especially upon
the highland plains west of the coastal range ; indeed, for at
least eight months of the twelve the climate of Queensland is
most lively and exhilarating, and closely approaches that of
Madeira. The total rainfall in 1887 at Brisbane was 81 inches ;
at Cooktown. 75 inches; Warwick, 32 inches; Stanhorpe, 35
inches; Geraldton, 155 inches; Rockhampton, 45 inches; Norman-
ton, 37 inches ; and Townsville, 56 inches.
The mean shade temperature of Brisbane in 1887 ranged from
76° in January to 56° in June. The climate, on the whole, is
remarkably healthy, and as the manner of life among the people
is brought more in unison with its demands, is shown to be fully
as salubrious as that of any other portion of the Australian
continent. No part of the colony is unsuited to the European
constitution. In the inland plains more especially the climate
shows its effect in the physique of the people, and the hearty
manner in which athletic exercises are pursued by the younger
portion of the community is strong evidence of its invigorating
character.
The advance of Queensland is due in great measure firstly to its.
pastoral and latterly to its mineral resources. Running along the
eastern coast, and at a distance varying from 20 to 100 miles from
the sea, is the backbone, or great dividing range of mountains.
Between this range and the sea is found a belt of rich alluvial
soil, well watered by many fine streams, while undulating plains
stretch beyond the range westward. The coastal districts are
devoted almost entirely to agriculture and timber getting. Beyond,
the pastoralist and miner share, with the agriculturist, the produce
of the soil.
As the timber getter removed with his axe the giants of the
forest, clearing the dense scrub found in his way. he was closely
followed by the agriculturist, and sugar, maize, tobacco, cotton,,
took the place of the stately pine and noble cedar.


Another impetus was the discovery of gold in the
range districts, attracting thousands into the colony to better their
fortune, and to help forward its progress —which bearing in mind
its early history may be said to be almost unparalleled in British
Colonization.
Brisbane, the capital city, has now (1888) within its five mile
radius a population of 75,000, three times the number of the
inhabitants of the whole of Queensland at the date of its separa-
tion from New South Wales in 1859. The town is situated on
both banks of the river of the same name, and about 12 miles
from its mouth The chief public buildings, banks, newspaper
offices, and principal places of business have hitherto been situated
on the north side of the river, but recently separate municipal
government has been granted to South Brisbane, which bids
fair, ere long, to rival in importance its older sister on the
north.
On his first visit to the toTvn the stranger will probably be
struck with the substantial buildings which everywhere meet the
eye. The Queensland National Bank—a most imposing edifice of
freestone —will bear comparison with any institution of similar
nature in the old country ; while the offices of the Australian
Mutual Provident Society, the “ Courier” Buildings, and many
other edifices throughout the city bear witness to the commercial
enterprise of its business men, and the magnitude of their opera-
tions. The new Government offices, now nearly completed, add
another to the massive and elegant buildings of the city.
Sawmills, foundries, shipbuilding yards, and factories of all
kinds line the river banks, or are dotted about the city. The
wharfs scarcely accommodate the number of vessels of all countries
and of the largest sizes, which there discharge their cargoes in the
heart of Brisbane. The river is one of the best for commerce in
the Australian colonies. A commodious dry dock renders easy
repairs to all but the largest vessels.
Among the other important towns along the coast may be
mentioned -Rockhampton, on the Fitzroy River ; Maryborough
on the Mary • Townsville ; and Mackay, on the Pioneer. Bowen,
Cairns, Cooktown, Port Douglas, Bundaberg, Gladstone and
Normanton, are other seaport towns rendering easy access to the
inter ior, and which have an important future before them.
The most important inland towns are, Ipswich, one of the oldest
and more populous, situated on the Bremer river, 25 miles from
Brisbane ; Toowoomba, War-wick, which with other towns ave all
connected with the capital by rail; Gyrnpie, the first mining field,
with railway communication with Maryborough, and which will
shortly be connected in a similar manner with Brisbane ; Mount
Perry, the centre of the copper district, within a few miles by rail


•of Bundaberg ; Charters Towers, with railway outlet to Towns
ville; Herberton, the rich tin-and silver mining district, now
being connected by rail with Cairns, and many other towns, of
which want of space precludes mention here.
The Government of Queensland is vested in a Governor
(appointed by the Crown) and a Ministry chosen from the Legis-
lature, which consists of two Houses—the Legislative Council
and the Legislative Assembly. The former consists of members
nominated by the Governor for life; the latter is elective. The
franchise is framed almost on the basis of manhood suffrage,
every male of the full age of twenty-one years, and being of sound
mind, having a voice in the selection of members of the Assembly.
The colony is also represented in the Federal Council of Austral-
asia The executive business of the country is carried on by
seven responsible ministers, who preside over the various Govern-
ment departments.
The colony is divided into a number of divisions, each placed
under the control of an elected Divisional Board, consisting of
three or more members. These Boards levy rates and maintain
and control the public highways, bridges, ferries, wharfs, wells,
and other public works within their respective districts. An
endowment is paid by the Government to each Board in proportion
to the amount collected by rates. The wonderful progress of the
colony since the initiation of this system of local self-government
is the best evidence that can be offered as to its wisdom. The
large towns are all incorporated as municipal councils, having
duties similar to the Divisional Boards.
The administration of justice is in the hands of a Chief Justice,
three Puisne, and three District Court Judges. Besides these
Police Magistrates are appointed in every large town, while
Justices of the Peace are found throughout the colony. The
Gold Warden or Minerals Commissioner, who is also generally
a Police Magistrate, is the chief officer on each mineral field.
Bearing in mind the large extent of territory, and its scattered
population, crime cannot be said to be prevalent in Queensland,
although there are several penal stations, the most important
being St. Helena —an island in Moreton Bay.
Beformatories are located in various towns, and, thanks to the
system adopted for the reclamation of juvenile criminals, have
been successful in making numbers of lads good and useful mem-
bers of society.
The railway system of the colony is being rapidly extended ;
1865 miles are now open for traffic, wffiile a further 600 miles are
authorised or in course of constiuction. Communication is now
established between Brisbane and Charleville on the western line,
Wallangarra on the southern line, where the Queensland system


connects with that of New South Wales, and thus with those of
Victoria and South Australia. Various branch lines exist or are
being constructed, bringing the produce of their districts into the
towns. The precipitous coastal range was the great obstacle
with which the railway engineer had to contend in opening
communication with the interior. Steep gradients, sharp curves,
cuttings and tunnelings, had to be encountered, fearful gorges
spanned, but the difficulty was surmounted, and the result is a
triumph of engineering skill and enterprise. The line passes
through magnificent scenery, and reaches, near Toowoomba, a
height of 2,600 feet. The rolling stock used on the railways is
almost entirely made in the colony, either in the government
workshops or private establishments.
The other railway systems have been already mentioned The
beauties of the scenery through which many of the lines pass,"
and the wonderful resources which they tap, may be expected to
attract the tourist in search of new sights, as well as the
commercial man seeking to extend his business or invest his
capital.
While olfering no serious engineering difficulties the question
of the supply of water for Brisbane has engaged considerable
attention. It is now obtained from the Enoggera and Goldcreek
reservoirs, situated in a range of hills a few miles from the city.
In order to obviate any danger of drought, and to meet the rapid
increase in the population it is proposed to tap the head of the
Brisbane River.
No expense has been spared to render the water supply of,
Brisbane and other large towns thoroughly efficient. The recent
drought, from which all portions of the colony suffered, forced the
attention of the pastoralist to the importance of securing a
continuous water supply. In most cases shallow boring has
brought large stores of excellent water to the surface. Under
the supervision of the hydraulic department boring operations
in seaich of water have been carried on in various parts of the
colony.
At Blackall a 6 inch bore, carried to a depth of 1663 feet
yields 12000 gallons per hour; the temperature of the water
being 119° F and the pressure 63ft) to the square inch. If pipes
could be taken into the air, the water would rise to over 600 feet
from the surface, the formation passed through is Ocean mud,
the water being struck in the Sandstone at Barcaldineat a depth
of 645 feet, 7uoo gallons are yielded hourly, the temperature of
the water being 101° F., the formation being similar to the
Blackall bore. Another bore has also been made 21 miles from
Ba real dine, on the route of the Central Railway to the Thompson ;
these also being flowing bores.


The Telegraph ic system is rapidly extending, and by its means the
furthermost corner of the colony is now in quick communication
with the capital. The length of line now reaches 8,772 miles,,
with 15,677 miles of wire, worked from 293 stations. Queensland
is connected by telegraph with all the colonies, and by means of
the South Australian overland line, with the whole civilized
world. Ten words, exclusive of sender’s name and recipient’s
add ress, may be sent to any part of the colony for one shilling.
The Postal system is worked by 716 post and receiving offices,
and the routes cover 25,494 miles. The postage on inland letters
is two pence. One penny is charged on letters posted in Brisbane
or other towns, and addressed to the suburbs.
The development of ocean and coastal steam communication has
been rapid. The British India Steam Navigation Company’s line
runs direct between Brisbane and London, carrying monthly mails,
while intermediate boats, richly freighted with the products of the
colony, afford the merchant and shipper the means of transporting
their wares to the markets of the world. The coastal service is
supplied by vessels of the Australasian United Steam Navigation
Co., QS. S. Co., and W. Howard Smith Sons, besides many
smaller crafts owned by private firms.
Great improvements have been made within recent years in the
harbors and rivers of the colony, and the coast of Queensland is
now the best lighted in Australia. Rivers have been dredged,
and the largest steamships now ascend the Brisbane river, discharg-
ing their cargoes at the various wharfs of the city. Large sums
of money have been profitably expended in works designed to
render the navigation of Queensland waters more secure, and the
facilities thus rendered have borne fruit in the increased trade
which naturally followed. The tonnage of ships entering Queens-
land ports for the year 1860 was 84,000. The total inward tonnage
of 2147 vessels in 1887 was 1,642,024, and the total outward
tonnage of 2183 vessels was 1,631.956.
The press literature of the colony is large and varied. Each
town possesses one or more newspapers, some of high class, and
managed with ability and enterprise. No- is it only in this
branch of literature that Queensland can hold her own. In its
ranks are writers favorably known among literati, and whose
writings are highly appreciated not only in the colony but
elsewhere.
While athletic sports and games are well patronised, well
supported musical and scientific institutions evince the artistic
and intellectual aspirations of Queenslanders. Two excellent social
clubs flourish, while the Johnsonian Club, sacred to art,
literature and science, and resembling in character the London
Savage Club, to which it is affiliated, will bear the palm in


comparison with . any club of a similar character in the
colonies.
The various Friendly Societies, Good Templars, Rechabites.
Salvationists, Oddfellows, £c., have their organisations and
meeting-houses, while the Freemasons of all three constitutions
English, Scotch and Irish, are a numerous and powerful body.
The best companies perform in the theatres of Brisbane, and
attract large and appreciative audiences, while the high class
performances of the Brisbane IVlusical Union and Brisbane
Liedertafel till to excess the large hall of the Brisbane Exhibition.
Holidays are numerous, and are the occasion and opportunity
for all manner of picnics, racing and athletic sports, itc.
The Brisbane Carnival is the week in which the Exhibition of
the National Agricultural and Industrial Association of Queens-
land is held. This takes place in August, and is eagerly looked
forward to and attended by all classes of persons from every
portion of the colony, whilejbusiness is almost entirely suspended.
The trades societies are influential and well managed bodies,
and are well supported by the mechanic, artizan and laborer.
The business-like manner in which the Trades Congress was
conducted during the present year in Brisbane was warmly and
favorably commented upon.
Religious bodies have in Queensland no connection with the
State. The various denominations carry on their operations with
energy, tolerance and success, the ministers and laymen gladly
uniting to promote every charitable object.
The Dunwich Benevolent Asylum provides for the aged and
infirm poor, while the orphanages undertake the care and
education of a large number of children. Hospitals exist in
every town, and with other philanthropic institutions are well
supported by every class of the community.
By the popularity of the Volunteer system a considerable num-
ber of men have been enrolled in the various corps. The Queens-
land Scottish and the Queensland Irish especially are fine bodies of
men. The colony also owns two gunboats, torpedo and other
boats, and the Naval Brigade is an efficient and popular branch
of the service. The whole force is gathered together at Easter
for training in camp. During recent years greater attention has
been paid to the defence of the colony, and the results are apparent
in the increased smartness and military bearing of the men. Nor
is the Queensland youth forgotten in this respect. Cadet corps
are attached to the various Grammar schools, and are popular
with the boys, many of whom, later on, join the regular Defence
Force.
There is no idle class in Queensland. All are workers. Ihe
thrifty amongst them are generally the owners of the allotment on


which their house is built, or are saving in the Government
Savings Bank with the object of becoming their own landlords.
The working man manages his own friendly societies, most of
which are on a sound financial footing. All having a voice in the
affairs of the colony, take an intelligent interest in them. Many
of our relations in the old country would be pleasantly astonished
could they see the wide streets crowded with train, bus, or cab ;
the crowds of well dressed, orderly and comfortable-looking
artizans, with their wives and families ; the brilliant shops and
general appearance of independence and prosperity. Probably the
general mass of the people of Queensland are as happy and are
better paid, better fed, and better clothed than in any country
outside Australia. Long may Queensland remain thus pre-
eminent !
ll.—Education.
Queensland may well be proud of her educational system. One
of the first Acts passed by the Legislature, after separation from
New South Wales, provided for the primary education of the youth
of the colony —framed on the basis of the Irish National School
system. Under this Act schools were divided into two classes—
the vested and non-vested. The former were unsectarian in their
character, but the reading of the Scriptures formed part of their
syllabus, and while the enforcement of moral duties by selections
from the New Testament was permitted, the inculcation of any
denominational tenets was strictly and absolutely forbidden.
These schools were managed by a Government Board of Educa-
tion, under the presidency of a political minister. Ihe control of
expenditure, appointment of teachers, and general administration
of the Education Act was committed to this Board. The salaries
of the teachers were at first supplemented by school fees, but this
system was afterwards abolished, the teachers receiving increased
stipends from the revenue in lieu of fees. Education in Queens-
land became free.
The non-vested schools were established and controlled by the
Anglican and Roman Catholic Churches, who provided buildings
and teachers, whose salaries, however, together with books, were
provided by the State. Religious instruction was permitted in
these schools. Both vested and non-vested schools were subject
to Government inspection. This system continued in force until
1875, when the present system was instituted. The new Act
provided that State aid to all non-vested schools should cease in
1880, and since that date such schools have ceased to exist.


An Act of 1800 provided liberally for the establishment of
Grammar Schools, the Governor-in-Council being empowered to-
make a grant from the public revenue of twice the amount raised
by public subscription (such grant not exceeding £2000), for the
purpose of erecting buildings.
Where the public have subscribed £2OOO, and fees to the
amount of £5OO are guaranteed for three years, the Governor-in-
Council may authorise the expenditure of £lOOO per annum from
the general revenue, to defray the stipends of teachers and the
necessary school expenditure. A portion of this latter grant may
be reserved for providing scholarships or exhibitions at any
British or Australian University
With the approval of the Legislature, Grammar schools may
be permanently endowed with Grown land to the Aalue of
£2OOO. , , . . „ , ,
The Act of 1875 provides that State education in Queensland
should be FREE, SECULAR, and COMPULSORY.
The inhabitants of any locality requiring a State school, must,
before a school can be erected, raise amongst themselves a sum
equal to one-fifth of the estimated cost of erecting and furnishing:
the building. This amount must be paid to the credit of the-
Minister for Education, and application made to him for the
establishment of a school, the prayer being granted or refused by
the Governor in-Council as the circumstances of the case may
require. . . ...
The Act provides that for secular instruction tour hours daily
shall be set apart’; but, with the exception of infant schools, five-
hours secular instruction are given, under regulations issued by
the authority of the Governor-in-Council Religious instruction,
may. however, be given in the school buildings, but after school
hours, to children willing to receive it, but this permission is by
no means freely used, and but little success has attended the
privilege. Children look upon it as extra school work, and
absent themselves accordingly from an attendance which is
absolutely voluntary. School teachers are prohibited from acting
in any position approaching that of a minister of religion.
The third great principle of the Act. requiring compulsory
attendance, is honored more in the breach than the observance..
The clause can only be enforced in districts proclaimed by the
Governor-in-Council. and as no such proclamation has ever been,
made, this portion of the Act remains practically a dead letter.
Attention, however, has of late been earnestly drawn to the-
necessity of enforcing these provisions of the Act, and to preserve
the rising youth of the colony from ignorance, if not from crime,
it is to be hoped that the compulsory clause of the Act may be
no longer permitted to remain inoperative—a fruitful cause of


“ larrikinism.” The parent of every child between the ages of
six and twelve years is, by these clauses, compelled to cause such
child to attend a State school not less than sixty days in each
half-year. Any parent neglecting or refusing to comply with this
condition, except with valid excuse, is liable to a fine of 20s. for
the first offence, and £5 for the second or subsequent offence, or
in default, may be imprisoned for seven or thirty days respectively.
The onlv valid excuses permitted are, first, that the child is
being efficiently taught elsewhere ; second, sickness, fear of
infection, or some unavoidable cause; third, distance of over two
miles from school; fourth, that the child has been educated up
to the prescribed standard.
State schools are divided into two classes—State school proper
and Provisional schools. The former are those provided and main-
tained at the Government expense, as previously mentioned, and
are furnished with materials for school work—text-books,
apparatus for teaching and necessaries, the parents having to
furnish only the minor requisites. Such schools can be estab-
lished only on satisfying the Minister of Education that an attend-
ance of thirty children is probable. Should the attendance fall
below twenty-five, the school may be closed.
The syllabus includes instruction in reading, writing, arithmetic,
English grammar, geography, history, elementary mechanics,
object lessons, drill, and gymnastics, and vocal music ; girls being
taught domestic economy and needlework.
These branches of instruction are all efficiently taught, and the
diligent lad will find himself on quitting school fairly armed for
the battle of life, while his training will, if he be inclined to follow
up his education at one of the Grammar Schools, tit him for
entrance upon the curriculum there.
Where districts are but sparsely populated, or where occasions
warrant, Provisional schools are established, at which an average
attendance of not less than twelve children is necessary. A
teacher may have two oi more schools of this nature under his
charge, in which case the average attendance must not be less than
.six. For neglected children Provisional schools may be opened
in the evening or other suitable time, at which twelve is fixed as
the minimum average attendance.
Although the teachers in Provisional schools ax*e not classified
under the Education Act, the State defrays the cost of their
salaries, towards which, however, local contributions are expected
but seldom realised. The buildings have to be provided at the
expense of the district, and, when warranted, the Provisional
schools are transferred into State schools. At the end of l’>B7,
306 State and 221 Provisional schools were open in the colony,
-officered by 675 male and 796 female teachers.


The teachers may be classed as head, assistant, and pupil
teachers. Of head teachers there are 383 males and 130 females :
of assistants. 122 males, 282 females ; of pupil teachers, 170 males,
381 females. Their training is mainly carried on in the
colony, and for efficiency they will hear very strict com-
parison with any teaching staff.
The standard of education which teachers must reach is high,
and the rejected candidates ai’e every year sufficiently numerous
to indicate the severity and impartiality of the examination.
The incomes of head teachers vary from £4OO to £2OO per
annum, inclusive of fees and salary, rent being allowed to head
teachers where no residence is attached to the school. Female
head teachers receive somewhat less than these amounts. The
assistant teachers pay ranges from £lO2 to £250, and from £72
to £l5O, for males and females respectively ; while male pupil
teachers receive from £4O to £7O, and females £2O to £5O per
annum.
The scholars enrolled numbered, in 1887, 63,704, of whom
33,650 were boys, and 30,054 girls. The mean quarterly enrol-
ment was 25.961 boys and 23,457 girls, and average daily
attendance 19,155 boys, and 16,164 girls
Bearing in mind the large territory over which population is
scattered, these figures speak well for education in Queensland.
Besides the State Schools there are many private schools of
high character situated in towns throughout the colony. The
Roman Catholics, while sustaining many schools of their own
without pecuniary State aid, and in no way subject to the State,
voluntarily placed themselves under Government inspection, and
maintain a high standard of education amongst their youth.
Every year 120 scholarships are competed for in the State
Schools, of which ninety are for boys and thirty for girls These
scholarships entitle the winners to free education for three years
at any Queensland Grammar school. The candidates must be
under 14 years of age on the 31st of December in the year of
examination, and must for six months prior to examination have
been regular in their attendance either at a State school or one
under Government inspection, the latter provision enabling
pupils of Roman Catholic schools to compete. Candidates must
also have been pupils in the school for at least eighteen months.
Simultaneous examinations are held throughout the colony,
the subjects being those requisite for children of the fourth class.
The examinations being over, the papers are forwarded to the
Education Department, whose inspectors examine them 'and
adjudicate.
Examinations for three competitive exhibitions to Universities
are annually held, the professors of Sydney University preparing


and examining the papers. All students under nineteen years
of age are eligible as candidates, and the exhibition is worth
£IOO per annum for three years, the winner having to enter
upon his studies at some approved university, and continue
thereat as students for the whole term.
The number of youths who. having by their industry at the
State school passed by scholarship to the Grammar school, and
thence by exhibition to the University, and whose doings thereat
have gained them honorable distinction, is a gratifying proof of
the thoroughness of the Queensland educational system, and
does honor to the institutions in which they trained.
The Department of Public Instruction is under the control of
a Minister for. Education, under whom the permanent head is
the Under Secretary—at present Mr. J. G. Anderson, M.A., the
able former coadjutor of Mr. Randall M'Donnell, in his efforts in
placing the educational system of the early years in working-
order. Besides the Under Secretary there is a general inspector
and district inspectors, to each of whom a district is assigned.
Then come the school committees, who have charge of the school
premises, and who, while having no authority over the teachers,
are expected to take a lively interest in all that concerns the
attendance, discipline, and effectiveness of the school.
The total cost of State education in 1887 amounted to
£224,558, State schools costing £173,852, provisional schools
£16,084. Building and furnishing amounted to £36,824, and,
without taking the value of sites into consideration, school
property to the amount of £295,277 is held by the Depart-
ment. State education in 1887, including all charges, costs
£5 7s. 6-J-d. per child. The grammar schools were subsidised to the
extent of £lO,OOO. Exhibitions and scholarships cost £3,010,
technical education £6OO, museums £2,383, and orphanages
£18,788.
The wonderful progress of the colony since its separation from
New South Wales may well be a source of pride to Queensland,
but of nothing should she be prouder than of her noble
educational institutions, which, founded so well in the past, must
eventually place her foremost in the ranks of civilization. And
this sketch of Queensland education would be incomplete without
reference to the labors of Chief Justice Sir Charles Lilley, Sir
Arthur Palmer, Sir Samuel Griffith, and the late Hon. T. B.
Stephens, who, with many other public spirited men, have made
our primary and grammar schools the institutions they have
become.
During 1887, renewed efforts were made for the establishment
of a Queensland University, and at the present time there is every
prospect that this—the fitting cap of the Queensland educational


system —will before long become a successfully accomplished fact,
when it will no longer be necessary for our students to finish their
education at foreign institutions before taking that place in the
community to which their industry has entitled them.
lll.—The Pastoral Industry.
At the time of the separation of the colony from New South
Wales, in 1859, it was estimated that its live stock numbered
23,604 horses, 432,890 cattle, and 3,166,802 sheep. The progress
which has since been made in the pastoral industry of Queensland
will be shown in the following lines, the information in which
has been supplied by Mr. P. R. Gordon, the Chief Inspector of
Stock.
Of the total area of the colony, 427,838,080 acres, about seven
per cent, only, had on the 31st December, 1887, been alienated
from the Crown. A large proportion of the alienated, and the
greater portion of the unalienated lands are either held or are
available for pastoral purposes.
With the exception of portions of alienated lands on the coast,
and on the eastern edge of the Darling Downs, the stock are fed
almost entirely upon indigenous grasses.
The “ Mitchell Grass” (Astrebla elymoides) is especially a most
valuable fodder grass, and extends over a large area of country
available for settlement. Unlike ordinary grass, the stalks of the
Mitchell grass are perennial, and bud out afresh at each joint after
every shower of rain, and it has, therefore, received the suggestive
name of the “squatters standby.”
In the excepted portions lucerne (Medicago sativa) or the
Californian prairie grass (Bromusunioloides) are cultivated, chiefly
for the purpose of fattening store cattle and sheep for the metro-'
politan market. On some of the rich alluvial flats in the Moreton
district forty sheep to the acre have been fattened on these grasses
during favorable summer months.
In a colony of such a vast area as Queensland, the variations
in topographical features, geological formations, temperature and
climate, must necessarily be considerable. These conditions
exercise a potent influence on the pasture and on stock. The rank
natural vegetation along the coast watershed, and in the northern
latitudes, affords excellent pasturage for cattle and horses, but is
totally unsuited for sheep, while the salinous herbage in the
drier climate of the interior affords sheep pasture which is not
excelled and is scarcely equalled in any other country, and is also
admirably adapted for cattle, &c. A grazing farm of 20,000 acres.


if of good unimproved indigenous pasture will carry in average
seasons throughout the year 8000 sheep, or about 1 300 cattle.
Where the land is favorably situated for the conservation of
water, by the damming of natural watercourses or the excavation
of tanks, or where underground supplies can be tapped by sinking
or boring, the grazing capabilities of the country can be greatly
increased. In many districts supplies of underground water are
reached at a depth of from 25 to 40 feet, and raised for the use of
stock by inexpensive windmills. It is frequently the case in
Queensland, as in other colonies, that some of the best pasture
lands are long distances from rivers and watercourses, and are
therefore only available for occupation during wet seasons. Where
water is procured by sinking, such lands are made permanently
available.
The average clip of merino wool per sheep is from 6 lbs. to 8
lbs., and the wages of shearers from 3s. 6d. to 4s. per score. The
annual increase of lambs from a flock of breeding ewes ranges from
sixty to eighty, and under favourable circumstances, ninety per
cent. Good breeding ewes can be purchased, at the present time,
at 10s. ; and superior flock rams at from £2 to £3.
Where a grazing farm is situated so as to command a ready
market for fat stock, it may be worked to greater profit by pur-
chasing and fattening store stock instead of breeding. Store sheep
can be purchased after shearing at prices that will leave a fair
margin of profit when sold as fat, and the same remark will apply
to store cattle. Or it may be found more profitable to combine
breeding with the purchase and fattening of store stock.
Circumstances will determine the description of sheep most
suitable for particular localities. Thus on rich soils, with a good
average rainfall, a strong, heavy, lustrous description of combing
wool will give the best return ; while on thin soil, and on broken
or hilly country, a high-class fine clothing wool can be grown to
best advantage. If the land is convenient to railway communica-
tion, and other circumstances are favourable, the breeding of
crossbred sheep may be found more profitable than that of merinos.
A cross between the English Lincoln and the merino produces a
very valuable sheep, for which there is a great demand at the
present time for fattening on the cultivated grasses of the coast
and Darling Downs. This cross matures early, and realises,
when fat, 75 per cent, higher prices than the merino. The wool
is a beautiful long lustrous staple, much sought after by English
manufacturers, and commands at the present time as much per lb.
as a medium description of merino, while the fleece is considerably
heavier than the latter.
The lands immediately to the west of the main coast range,
and for a considerable distance inland, are admirably adapted to


the growth of fine merino wool, and here the highest quality of
combing merino wool is successfully grown. Further to the west-
ward, on the extensive plains in the interior, although the herbage
affords more nutritious pasturage, and the sheep, in consequence,
attain a greater weight of carcase, the more arid nature of the
climate is not so favourable to the secretion of the yolk, and, as a
consequence, the wool, although sound in staple and of vigorous
growth, is not so free and silky, and therefore not so well adapted
for combing purposes as that grown in the more easterly districts,
but constitutes a superior wool for clothing purposes.
Of each of the two varieties of sheep in the colony—merino
and coarse-wooled—there are several sub-varieties or classes.
The merinos may be classed as fine and medium clothing
wool, and fine, medium, and strong combing wool, the last named
being principally restricted to the richer pasturage and compara-
tively humid climate of the Downs country, immediately west of
main coast range. The number of sheep in the colony on 31st
December, 1887, was 12,927,000.
Probably in no other part of the world does the farmer’s live
stock enjoy such an immunity from disease as in Queensland.
Scab in sheep has never existed in this colony, foot rot may be
said to be unknown, and with the exception of a few sheep, kept
■on the coast watershed, fluke has no existence.
The few occasional cases of catarrhal fever have been promptly
stamped out by the destruction of the infected flock, the owners
being compensated from a fund accruing, under the “ Diseases in
Sheep Act,” from small annual contributions (five shillings per
1000 sheep) to cover the cost of inspection and prevention of disease.
In seasons of severe drought, when there is little nutrition in
grass or herbage, considerable losses have occurred in some portions
of the colony, from the presence of intestinal worms, but such
cases are unknown where feed is abundant, and in districts where
the herbage is of a saline nature.
Pleuro-pneumonia, which, on its first introduction—23 years
ago—occasioned considerable loss in cattle, has now, by acclima-
tization, assumed such a mild type that the losses from it are
trivial, more especially where inoculation has been resorted to.
Anthrax, splenic apoplexy (Cumberland disease) occasionally
appears, but its ravages are by no means serious, and are confined
to certain districts of limited extent.
A few cases of tuberculosis appear in the herds in the oast
districts, but the climate and system of grazing in the open air,
summer and winter, are evidently inimical to pulmonary diseases
in stock of all kinds.
The devastation of the pastures caused by the increase in the
jaumber of marsupials, led to the passing of an Act for their


destruction. Stockowners may assess themselves to a limited
extent, and the amount thus levied is subsidised by an equal
amount from the Government ; and from the fund thus accruing-
bonuses are paid for all scalps of marsupials presented. The pest
has by this means been considerably reduced. It is a matter for
regret that comparatively few skins have been preserved. The
variety of forms in which these skins can be utilised, leads to the
hope that some means will be adopted to prevent the loss of millions,
of valuable skins throughout the Australian colonies.
Horses.
The horses in the colony number 306 ; 000, and may be classed
as follows :—Saddle horses, 56 per cent,, light harness horses, 39
per cent., heavy draught, 4 per cent., and blood or thoroughbred
horses, 1 per cent. '1 here is a steady demand for good horses
within the colony. Heavy draughts command remunerative
prices for heavy dray work and sugar plantations, and there is a
constant demand for good weight-carrying saddle horses, for
Indian cavalry remounts.
The blood stock are bred principally for racing purposes,
although the sires in use for hack breeding are, as a rule, drawn
from thoroughbred studs. Prices range from £3O to £5OO.
Saddle horses range in price from £5 to £5O. They are
capable of great endurance, and stand 'from 14-2 to 15-3 hands
high.
Light-harness horses may be described as the produce of well-
bred, clean-legged sires, from active farm mares. But a superior
class of light-harness horse is now being raised by the use of
Cleveland bays, roadsters and Norfolk trotters, of which there
are some very superior imported animals in the colony. Prices-
range from £lO to £5O.
The heavy draught stock are principally composed of the
Clydesdale. Shire horse, and Suffolk punch breeds. Many first-
class sires have been imported at great expense. Prices for
working horses of this class vary from £25 to £6O, and for superior
sires up to £5OO.
Cattle.
By far the larger proportion of general herds of cattle are of
Durham or Shorthorn origin. About 2 per cent, are graded
Herefords, and a small proportion of Devons crosses.
There are a large number of superior stud pedigree herds of
Shorthorns, Herefords, and a few of Devons, Ayrshires, Alderney
and Brittany, and Aberdeen Angus polled. Some of the Shorthorns
and Herefords are of the most fashionable blood procurable. It
is the general impression that, on account of their superior hardi-


£
Hides
84,000
Skins
* •
17,080
Tallow
99,094
ness, Herefords and Devons are best adapted to the coast and
mountainous districts, although the Shorthorns thrive well in all
parts of the colony. Some valuable pedigree herds of Shorthorns
have been established far into the interior. All breeds of cattle
have, however, answered so well in Queensland that preference
for one herd over another would appear to be mere matter of
fancy.
The Aberdeen-Angus polled cattle afford abundant proof of
the favourable nature of the Queensland climate and pasturage.
Natives of a rigorous and moist climate, they thrive and fatten
'exceedingly well in the colony, with the thermometer frequently
reaching 100° F.
Of dairy breeds of cattle the Ayrshires are as yet the leading
breed, but there are now several small herds of the Channel Island
breeds. The native Durhams, however, when selected and bred
with that special object in view, have hitherto held their own as
-dairy cattle with any other variety.
The natural increase of cattle from a breeding herd ranges
from 60 to 90 per cent. ; the general average over the whole of
the colonies has been estimated by the Government statistical! of
New South Wales at 72 per cent.
In normal seasons the price of store cattle to 3 years old
averages about =£3 per head, and the price of fat cattle in the
metropolitan markets at the present time, is from £4 10s. to £6 ;
superior herd bulls, £lO to £ls, The number of cattle in the
-colony on the 31st December, 1887, was 4,474,000.
The value of exports connected with the pastoral industry may
be here given, amounting as follows for the year 1887 :
Fencing.
Wool (clean, 15,309,357 lbs) ... 1,060,712
„ (greasy, 32,273,575 lbs) ...1,307,999
The Crown Lands Act provides that grazing farms shall be
-enclosed with a fence within three years from the date of first
occupation.
Formerly sheep were shepherded in docks of from one to two
thousand in all the Australian colonies. This practice hasjbeen
abandoned for many years, and shepherding is now a rare excep-
tion to the general rule. The benefits of grazing sheep at large,
within fences, are many; among the principal of which may be
mentioned increased growth and quality of wool, saving in


wages, and a more healthy condition of the sheep. These, together
with the greater number of sheep carried per acre, are sufficient
to recoup the cost of fencing in a very few years.
The cost of fencing will vary with the description of fence
adopted and the quality of the timber available. The best
description of fence is wire with hardwood split or sawn posts.
For sheep five wires are sufficient. The cost of No. 8 wire delivered
in Brisbane is, at the present time, £l2 per ton. A ton of this
wire measures 11,4C0 yards, nearly miles. Smaller wire is
slightly dearer, but has the advantage of greater length per ton —
thus No. 9 is£l2 ss. per ton, of 13,600 yards (or 7| miles) ; and
No. 10, £l3 per ton, equal to 16,380 yards, or over 9* miles.
For cattle three wires—the centre one being of barbed wire
—are sufficient. Barbed wire, thick set, gives 4 cwt., and long-
set 3-|- cwt. per mile.
Subdivision fences of same material need not be so high as
boundary fences. With these the posts are usually a considerably
longer distance apart, the wires in the interspaces being kept in
place by battens, which, however, are not sunk in the ground. A
fair estimate of the cost of such subdivison fences, with timber
and railway carriage available, may be stated at from £l6 to £2l
per mile. Where the land is not open plain, cheap but efficient
rustic subdivision fences may be constructed by unskilled bush
labour.
The system of compulsory registration of brands of cattle and
horses, introduced in 1872, is the most complete yet adopted by
any other country or colony, both as a protection against theft and
for the recovery of stray or stolen stock. Each brand is restricted
to two letters and one numeral. The changes that can thus be
rung are almost unlimited, so that each owner in the colony is
allotted a distinct brand. A Brands Directory” is published
annually, containing the names and addresses of all brand owners,
in alphabetical and numerical order. A certain order of branding
being obligatory, the present owner of the animal is easily dis-
covered by the last brand imprinted in that order. The Brands
Directory may be seen in the Queensland Court.
The severe drought through which the colony recently passed
served at any rate to draw earnest attention to the importance of
securing a permanent supply of water; and, as mentioned in
earlier pages, efforts have been made to tap the immense natural
reservoirs of fresh water, which have been shown to exist beneath
the surface of our widely extending plains. The success which
has attended these operations, will, no doubt, lead to trials at
other places, and will tend greatly to lessen the disastrous effects
which the visitations of drought have had upon the pastoral
industry.


IV—The Minerals of Queensland.
For richness and variety of its mineral resources, Queensland
stands pre-eminent, and yet, probably, not a tithe of its wealth has
been discovered. Indeed, in a large measure, the great value of its
mineral deposits has induced waste, which improved appliances
and processes would have prevented, and which would have been
brought into operation had there been greater difficulty in extract-
ing *the treasures which the earth was so willing to yield in
abundance. But where the miner could make his “ pile” so easily
by the rude appliances available, it was useless to talk to him of
scientific methods. The formation of large companies, however,
gave an impetus to systematic mining, and care is now taken to
realise as far as practicable, the riches found beneath the surface.
In the following pages space will not permit of more than a
brief reference to a subject with which a volume might be filled.
An examination of the contents of the Queensland Mineral
Court will, however, give an idea of the wonderful resources of the
colony, and a more detailed notice than can here be given, will be
found in the Special Catalogue which the Commissioners have
published, descriptive of the mineral exhibits.
Coal.
The Ipswich district was the portion of the colony in which coal
for commercial purposes was first raised. It is, however, found
abundantly at Maryborough, Bowen, and other northern portions
of the colony, as well as on the Darling Downs. Mr. Tenison
Woods considers the coal resources of Queensland equal, if not
superior, to any other colony, and will raise her shores to be in the
end the grand coal emporium of the Southern hemisphere.”
Indeed the resources of Queensland as regards coal may be said
to be inexhaustible. The railways of the colony, and many of the
large ocean-going and coastal steamers now obtain their supplies
from the Queensland mines, and, with the increase of facilities for
transit and shipment, a great future may be predicted for coal
fields.
The upper strata of the coalfields in the neighbourhood of
Ipswich consists of a sandstone resting on shales, intersected by
thin bands of ironstone, of which some is sufficiently rich for
smelting, while the decomposed shales furnish an excellent clay
for pottery and brick. The coal from the lower beds furnishes
an excellent coke, largely used in the foundries.
The Burrum Field, connected by rail with Maryborough, its port
town, 18 miles distant, is about 100 square miles in extent, and


possesses several workable seams of coal, very free from inter-
vening veins of shale. The coal is fully equal to that of New-
castle, New South Wales, as regards hardness, quantity of
ashes and sulphur, and heatinq power.
The other discovered coal fields of the colony are being developed
and their proximity, in most cases, to seaport towns, will enable
them to contribute their quota of coal to the market. The
quantity of coal raised in 1887 was 238,813 tons, of the value of
£97,460.
Go d.
The year 1858 demonstrated thefactthat Queensland was hence-
forth to be considered a gold-producing country. The first rush
to the Canoona field, about 20 miles from Rockhampton, was due
to exaggerated rumours of immense wealth of gold deposits, and
ended most disastrously to those who were attracted by the
reports. Many miners, however, remained, and discovered other
goldfields in the vicinity, while Canoona is still also worked. Gold
mining in Queensland made but little progress until the year 1868.
Previous to that date but 119,384 ounces had been produced, in
value £451,039. Since that year 5,487,758 oz., of a value of
£19,173,958, have been yielded by Queensland mines. In 1887
the yield of gold in Queensland was 425,923 ounces.
Gympie, discovered in 1868 by a miner named Nash, occupies
a foremost place among Queensland goldfields. Operations are
here conducted on a large scale, and that a large area of gold-
bearing rock is still untouched in this field is shown by the fact
that mines of great depth are profitably worked. The returns of
gold from Gympie to the end of 1887 were 1,323,480 ounces,
valued at £4,632.177.
Several minor fields are established in the vicinity of Gympie,
such as Kilkivan, «fec., etc., but the gold-bearing ore, although rich
in go I d, being of a refractory nature, the progress of development
of the fields is slow.
The other fields of Southern Queensland are Eidswold, the
development of which gives promise of a brilliant future; those
situate in the neighbourhood of Warwick, and in which recently
the gold mining has been revived: and the Mount Perry District.
In Central Queensland the most notable goldfields are Rock-
hampton (in which the wonderful Mount Morgan is situated),
Port Curtis, Peak Downs, and Nebo.
In the Rockhampton district are (besides Mount Morgan)
Canoona, Queensland’s oldest field; Rosewood, Morinish, and
Crocodile Creek, from all which good stone is still raised.
Inclusive of Mount Morgan, these fields in 1887 yielded 85,305
ounces, valued at £349,750.


The richness of the Mount Morgan gold mine has become
almost proverbial In this the gold is found in a very pure and
exceedingly finely divided state. The erection of chlorination
works at the mine will enable the company to carry on then-
operations with but little waste. Mr. Jack, the Government
geologist, is of opinion that Mount Morgan was in former
geological ages a hot spring or geyser, the water of which held gold
in solution, which afterwards was precipitated and consolidated
with other mineral matter thrown up by this spring into a
ferruginous stone. There are, however, other theories as to its for-
mation, upon which it is not necessary here to speculate.
Gladstone is the seaport town of the Port Curtis area, compris-
ing the Calliope, Cania, Norton, Boyne, and Kroombit field.
Peak Downs and Nebo are smaller- goldfields in the central
districts. •
The total yield in 1887 of the fields in the Port Curtis district,
Cloncurry, Calliope, Clermont, Normanby, and small fields, which
in the returns of the Mines department are grouped together, was
14,499 ounces, valued at £40,746.
In Northern Queensland, the most noticeable goldfields are
Charters Towers, Bavenswood, Etheridge, Woolgar, Gilberton,
Hodgkinson, the Palmer, and the more lately discovered Croydon.
These fields excel in their richness and extent, and differ in
character from those of Southern Queensland, being barren
of fossils, and the rocks in the neighborhood of the veins are
granitic.
Charters Towers is 85 miles from the port of iownsville, its
outlet by rail. On this reef nearly 500 distinct reefs are proved
auriferous. Since its discovery, 1,611,977 ounces have been
raised to 31st December, 1887, of the value of £5,319,524, In
1887, the yield was 151,377 ounces, value £499,544.
Bavenswood is also connected by rail with Townsville, and the
ore is extremely rich in gold, although of a very refractory
nature, which makes it difficult to treat remuneratively. The
amount of gold raised in 1887 was 10,390 ounces, valued at
£35,326, and making a total to end of 1887 of 327,215 ounces,
value £1,112,531. .
The Etheridge is another goldfield, producing ore of great rich-
ness, and less' difficult to treat as that of Ba\ enswood. The
development of the field has hitherto been greatly retarded by
its distance from the coast and want of railway communication,
which latter will, it is expected, before very long be rectified.
The yield of the Etheridge, Woolgar, and Gilberton fields in
1887 was 21,036 ounces, valued at £63,108, and making a
total to 31st December, 1887, of 341,579 ounces, of a value of
£1,024,637.


Croydon, the most recently discovered goldfield, is situated
about 120 miles due east of Normanton. its seaport town, and
this town will ere long be connected to the field by rail. The
rich finds made since its discovery in 1885 have caused it to
become one of the largest and most important goldfields in
Northern Queensland. The total yield to end of 1887 has been
33,932 ounces, of a value of £90,763 This field is still in its
infancy, but its resources are rapidly being developed, and now
support a large and increasing population.
The Hodgkinson is situated about seventy miles from Cairns.
Thornborough is the head town. The output of gold to 31st
December, 1887, from this field and the Mulgrave, was 218,053
ounces, valued at £803,161, of which 2,400 ounces were yielded
in 1887.
The Palmer is the most extensive alluvial field in the colony,
and is in course of being connected by rail with Cooktown, 120
miles distant. To the end of 1887 1,272,172 ounces, valued at
£4,897,862, had been obtained from this field, the year 1887
having credit for 6,981 ounces.
Copper.
Copper occurs in its metallic state in various parts of Queens
land, but is principally met with in combination with sulphur.
Mount Perry is the most important source of this ore in the
Burnett district, other fields being the Normanby, Woolca,
Boolboonda, Edina, &c.
The mineral is also found at Port Downs, 250 miles from
Rockhampton.
Cloncurry, however, possesses the most important copper
deposits, rivalling in extent and richness the Lake Superior-
mines in North America. The ore is extremely rich, hut the
field is greatly handicapped by its position. The railway will,
however, be shortly constructed to Normanton, about 200 miles
distant, when convenience of transport and the extreme richness
of the deposits will enable them to be more remuneratively
worked.
The total output of copper ore up to end of 1887 reached
55,695 tons, valued at £1,932,999.
Tin was first found in 1872 near the boundaries of New South
Wales and Queensland, the township which sprung up being
named Stanthorpe. The large quantities of stream tin produced
for some time after its discovery, and the trifling expense of
working it, enabled many to realise fortunes.


The Herberton tin held is difficult of access owing to the
precipitous chain 'of mountains lying between it and the sea.
Railway communication is now, however, being established with
Cairns. On this field tin is found in reefs as well as in the
alluvial deposits. The minerals exhibited in the Queensland
Court by the Herberton local committee, and the trophy shown
by Messrs. J. Moffat and Co., are evidence of the great wealth of
this field. Tin is also found at Ravenswood, and on the Palmer
River, »tc.
60,876 tons of tin ore had been raised to the end of 1887, of a
value £3,297,485. In 1887 the output was 3,279 tons, valued at
£217.339.
Silver and Read.
Silver and lead are found at Ravenswood and at Herberton.
The Queensland ores are of great richness, and are found in
large quantities. Smelting works are erected at Ravenswood,
and their erection has given-an additional impetus to the mining*
industry.
At Herberton many mines are worked for silver bearing
galena, which is generally very rich in silver, and smelting
works are established on the field. Silver is also found at
Stanthorpe.
Among other minerals which exist in Queensland may be
mentioned antimony, found in the Burnett agd Thornborough
districts, and at Neardie ; Manganese, found in many places, and
in large deposits at Gladstone. Iron, plentiful in all parts of the
colony. Chromic iron, found at Ipswich ; Cobalt ore, at Kilkivan ;
Quicksilver at Kilkivan ; Bismuth, at Cloncurry ; Molybdamum,
at Stanthope and other places; Wolfram, at Stanthorpe and
Herberton; Plumbago, at Tiaro ; Marble and Limestone *in
many places, but chiefly at Warwick, Gladstone, Rockhampton,
Mackay, and various small islants off the coast ; Soda is found in
large tracks in the interior ; Building stones and Clays suitable
for Bricks and Pottery are found abundantly in many parts of
Queensland.
The gems of the colony comprise agates ; opals, which the
expert who officially reported upon gems exhibited at the Colonial
and Indian Exhibition in 1886, considered that “the Queensland
opals rivalled if not surpassed those of Hungary ” in their great
lustre, brilliancy, and colour, and which are found of large size;
while diamonds, rubies and sapphires have been found at Stan-
thorpe. Peaals are obtained from the pearl fisheries of vNortb
Queensland.
Mineral springs, both hot and cold, exist in Queensland. At
Helidon, is situated the spring from which the popular Helidon


Spa Water is produced. The temperature of the
spring is 73° F,
specific gravity
1 0076, while the
analysis gives the following
result :—
Bicarbonate Soda
321.36 grains per gallon.
5*
1 ’otash
2.34
5 5 5 5
55
Lithium
1.81
55 55
55
Calcium
... 10.65
5 5 5 5
55
Magnesium
1.82
5 5 5 »
55
Rubidium (traces
in
the spectroscope)
Chloride of Sodium
45 08 grains per gallon.
Silica
2 13
5 * 55
Ammonia and Iron
3 23
5? 55
291.42 „
Other boiling springs exist in various parts of the colony, notably
at the Etheridge, the Herberton district, &c., the spring at Wood-
leisli being used with considerable effect in rheumatic com-
plaints.
Y.—Commerce and Manufacturing Industries.
Banks.
A large number of banks are established in the colony, and have
branches in all the chief towns. The Bank of New South Wales,
the Union Bank, the Bank of Australasia, and the Australian
Joint Stock Bank, were the earliest to commence operations in
Queensland. The business of these and other institutions of a
similar nature has expanded proportionately with the rapid growth
of the colony, and is now conducted in buildings of vast magnitude.
Besides those above-mentioned, the following corporations carry
on operations within the colony, viz : —The Commercial Bank of
Sydney, Queensland National Bank, London Chartered Bank of
Australia, Mercantile Bank of Sydney, Commercial Bank of
Australasia, Royal Bank of Queensland, and, recently established,
the Bank of North Queensland, with headquarters at Townsville.
The vigour, thrift, and prosperity of the colony are well
exemplified in the returns showing the business of the Govern-
ment Savings Bank, which has 116 branches throughout the
colony, and in which the sum of £1,426,018 stood at the credit of
39,780 depositors on the 31st March, 1888.
The total imports for the year 1887 amounted to £5,821,611,
and the exports to £6,453,945.


Manufacturing Industries.
Queensland is essentially a country for the industrious ; the
idler meets with no encouragement. Men commencing life with
skill and energy as their only capital have found in the colony a
ready • market, and have become wealthy capitalists and large
employers of labour. The vast resources of the colony offered a
fair field for profitable investment, of which the man of means,
was not slow to avail himself.
First, perhaps, in importance amongst the Queensland indus-
tries may be mentioned the mechanical. Several large foundries-
and iron works are established throughout the colony. Com-
mencing with Brisbane, the oldest foundry in Queensland is that
now owned by the firm of Smith, Forrester and Co. Started
originally by a working man named Cameron, it gradually
increased in importance, and passing through the hands
various owners finally reached those of the present proprietors.
The firm now employs about 200 men, and includes a ship-
building branch.
Messrs. Sutton and Co.’s establishment turns out machinery
of all descriptions and steamers of moderate dimensions, and is
another example of what may be done in Queensland by energy
and perseverance, from small beginnings. Sugar mills and
railway rolling stock are also constructed by this firm. Other
large employers of skilled mechanical labor are Evans, Anderson
and Co., Harvey, Sargeant and Co., Shillito and Co. of Ipswich,,
and many other shops. In Ipswich, Toowoomba, Bundaberg,
Mackay and ToAvnsville, busy workshops are in operation, and
resound with the whirr of machinery and the hum of men. In
Maryborough the great firms of J. Walker and Co. and Tooth
and Co. turn out work which would be creditable to the great
shops of England. These factories are intended to meet the
special requirements of colonial industry.
Brass and copper foundries also exist, the chief establishment
being that of Messrs. J. Hipwood and Co. The galvanized iron
work of Messrs. W. Keith and Co. is so satisfactory that it is
displacing in a great measure the imported articles. Specimens
of this work may be seen in the Queensland Court.
Galvanized iron workers and plumbers have establishments in
every town, and carry on their operations successfully.
Saddlery and harness making is also an important industry.
Both the workmen and the work are of the best. Large establish-
ments, giving employment to a number of well paid hands, exist
in all the chief towns. Specimens of their handicraft may be
seen in the Queensland Court.


The bootmaking trade is extensive, and in this the estab-
lishment of Mr. James Hunter is remarkable for its vast-
ness, employing 450 hands, with an output stated to be about
60,000 per week, distributed not only in Queensland but in other
colonies.
Cabinet-making is well established, and the work turned out
would do credit to any city in the world. As may be seen by a
reference to the collection of timbers exhibited by the Commis-
sioners, and other exhibitors in tbe Queensland Court, the colony
possesses woods eminently suitable for all purposes, from that of
heavy railway work to that for the finest cabinet work, and
when the beauty of grain becomes better known their utility will
be availed of to a much greater extent.
The woods of the colony are described at length in the cata-
logue of the Commissioner’s exhibit, and need not be further
referred to here. Saw mills and the timber industry generally
gives employment to a large number throughout the colony.
The development of the coach building trades proves that the
refinements and luxuries of life are not absent from our social
condition. The earliest establishment was that now owned by
Mr. A. M‘Lean, whose business is now of a more mixed nature,
and includes the manufacture of agricultural implements, in
which his success is well known in Queensland. Messrs.
J. M‘Nab and Son are also w’ell known in the colony,
and jealously maintains his reputation for turning out
first-class work, of which specimens may be seen in the Queens-
land court There are other establishments throughout the
colony employing many hands, and although of a different
character, the Queensland Railway Carriage Company’s works are
too important to be omitted from this sketch. This company,
whose shops are situated at Nundah, employs a large number of
men, and turns out work unexcelled elsewhere. Other establish-
ments of similar character exist at Ipswich, ike , &c.
The potteries of the colonies are represented in the Queensland
Court by the Dinmore Brick and Tile Co., the Waterstown Brick
and Tile Co., the Queensland Brick and Tile Co., Messrs. James
Campbell and Sons, and other firms, producing articles in every
way equal to the imported.
The firm of F. W. Wilson and Co. is pre-eminent in the
manufacture of biscuits, and is an establishment of which Queens-
land may well be proud. Fruit preserving and the manufacture
of confectionery are successfully carried on, the principal h mses
being W. H. Russell and Co., Rankin and Morrow, T. Spilscury,
Dyason Bros., Peacock and Co., B Skinner (who also makes the
manufacture of soup and articles for invalids a speciality), and
other firms.


As a sugar-growing colony, it will be readily understood that
there is an extensive distillery business in Queensland, and brew-
ing also is a highly flourishing industry.
Ipswich has shown that the woollen manufacture can be profita
bly pursued in the colony, and the Queensland Woollen Manufac-
turing Company has. by the excellence of its cloth and variety of
patterns, secured a trade which good management is constantly
increasing.
It will be seen by the preceding brief remarks that the develop-
ment of manufacturing industry has so far been satisfactory.
With the increase of population, and to satisfy the demands of
that increase, the capitalist and laborer have found, and will con-
tinue to find, an enlarged and growing outlet for their wares.
The evidences of prosperity, the fruits of industry and persever-
ance, properly applied, are seen in all directions, in improved
buildings and many other ways, and in no country probably is
there a brighter future in store for the wealth producer than in
Queensland.
YL—The Sugar Industry.
Although the fact that sugar could be profitably grown in the
Australian colonies had been much earlier demonstrated, it was
not until the years 1847 to 1850 that any real attention was given
to its cultivation, and that cane was grown on the Brisbane River
and Moreton Bay lands. The first sugar was made in 1852, from
Queensland canes grown in the Botanical Gardens.
Public interest was now awakened, and in the following years
a decided impetus was given to the industry ; cuttings of many
varieties of cane were introduced by the Acclimatization Society,
and the smaller farmers experimented on its production. The
first Sugar Companies were formed in 1864 in Brisbane, Mary-
borough, and Mackay —the last named having since become the
sugar capital of Queensland.
The first official returns show that in 1867 there were six mills
at work, which produced 168 tons of sugar and 13,100 gallons of
molasses. The development of the industry was now rapid ;in
1872 operations were being conducted at 65 mills, crushing 5000
acres sugar cane, yielding 6,266 tons of sugar, and 357,614 gallons
molasses. Capitalists were not slow to see the vast sugar-producing
capabilities of the colony, and large sums were now invested in
the industry; the best methods of growing and manufacturing
became better understood, and the cultivation of sugar throve
for some years. It was, however, destined to receive a severe
check; a disease, locally misnamed “ rust,” attacked the cane,


causing fearful havoc. Tlie planters, however, fought a determined
fight against the enemy, and although a panic was created amongst
those who had capital in the occupation, and by foreclosing upon
the pioneers great hardship was caused, the planters, neverthe-
less, conquered the disease.
It was found that the annual varieties of a hardier nature, and
thinner in the cane, withstood the disease, the rust-stricken
cane was extinguished, and the hardier varieties substituted.
Economy became the order of the day. capitalists took heart in
the future of the industry, and it was shown that sugar growing
could be carried on as lucratively as ever.
From 1879 onwards investment in sugar lands, sugar mi'ls.
and sugar refineries, amounted almost to a mania. Suitable land
was taken up in all directions. Gigantic refineries and stu-
pendous mills were erected by companies with immense capitals.
The sugar centres developed into thriving towns, and a general
sense of wonderful and seemingly permanent prosperity prevailed.
But again troubles overtook the planter The labour difficulty
increased proportionately with the growth of the industry, and
following on two successive dry seasons the working expenses
were doubled or trebled, while the incoming returns were
decreased.
The physique of the imported “ Kanaka ” labourer deterio-
rated. The mortality on some of the plantations was great,
while high wages were paid to the white laborers who were
employed. Many of the pioneer planters, when the prosperity of the
industry was at its climax, sold out, realizing large fortunes.
Inexperienced men took their places, the price of sugar began to
fall, while the European market was swamped by the bounty fed
beet sugar of France and Germany.
Nevertheless the planters looked the matter boldly in the face,
and saw that cane sugar, of infinitely better quality, could be
produced as cheaply in Queensland as the inferior beet sugar in
Europe. Stricter economy was exercised in the management of
the estates, working expenses w-ere considerably reduced, more
cane was grown per acre, and better and less wasteful method of
manufacturing were adopted. Still the difficulty of obtaining
reliable labor increased, and the Legislature decreed that the
recruiting of labor from the South Sea Islands must cease in 1890.
While many think that sugar cannot be profitably and suc-
cessfully cultivated by white labor in the tropical zones, there are
others who*with equal confidence, maintain the contrary opinion,
and that the industry will become more permanently established
by more divided management by small farmers, who should dispose
of their cane to the mill owner. The Legislature, falling in with
this idea, and in order to allow the small farmer to become more


independent of the large mill-owner working with cheaper black
labor, while at the same time giving him greater interest in the
work, voted the sum of £50,000 for the erection of mills, worked
upon the co-operative principle, and under the management of
the farmers, subject to approved regulations.
Notwithstanding, however, all the troubles through which the
planter. has passed, the importance of the industry and the
output of sugar has steadily increased. In the year 1886-7 there
were 160 mills in operation, 36,104 acres of cane were crushed,
yielding 56,859 tons of sugar and 1,510,308 gallons of mollasses.
Ten Rum distilleries also depend on the plantations, and dis-
tilled 97,375 gallons of rum, for which a ready sale was found.
Sugar is successfully cultivated along the whole coastal district
of Queensland, from the New South Wales border to Cooktown—
-1300 miles. In the southern portion of the colony, small farmers,
with small mills, are generally scattered at intervals. In the
middle districts, gigantic refineries, with an underground system
of pipes, drawing the cane juicp from the small farmer, undertake
the manufacture of the sugar; while in the North the establish-
ment of immense mills, at an enormous expenditure of money, and
employing hundreds of laborers, has been the system adopted.
At Nerang Creek, entering the Pacific about 45 miles south of
Brisbane, the cultivation of sugar was early started, the fertile
alluvial soil well suiting the cane. Dairy farming, however, is
now taking the place of sugar in this locality, and the area of
land under cane decreases yearly. At Coomera River, a few miles
nearer the metropolis, the cultivation has been carried on with
much greater energy and success. The soil, once covered by dense
scrub, has, by the constant decay of the latter, become extremely
fertile, is friable and of great depth.
The subdivision of cane growing, and its manufacture among a
number of small farmers is prevalent in the Logan and Albert
Rivers district. The mills are none of large capability, and the
necessity of improved appliances if the industry is to be profitably
carried on, has only recently been seen. Many of the mills in
this district are proprietary, are owned by a company of four
to eight farmers, each of whom cuts and tops his own cane, and
has it crushed in turn. The work is done by the farmer, his wife,
sons and daughters, so that the outlay for manual labour is reduced
to a minimum, and with modern appliances for manufacture, a
greater profit would be secured both to the mill owner and to the
small farmer, who, having no mill of his own, has now to dispose
of his cane to the proprietary mills.
The proximity of this district to the capital, however, has
raised the value of sugar properties for other purposes, and
together with the development of the saw mill and timber


industries, brick fields, dairy farming, «fec., &c., is making the land
too valuable for sugar-growing purposes, which are gradually being
relinquished.
The next sugar district is that of the Pine River, then
Mooloolah and Maroochie, and the Buderum tableland, all to the
north of Brisbane, and worked by small farmers.
Maryborough is the chief town of the district next in order.
Here the sugar industry was early established. The sugar manu-
facture is carried on by Messrs. Oran and Co., at their immense
refinery, Yengarie, the juice of the cane being supplied by the
farmers, each of whom must have his own crushing machinery.
The refinery is fitted with the most modern appliances, and is
colossal in extent. The farmer has to cut, cart and crush his
own cane, while the juice previously charged with lime to prevent
acidity, is either conveyed to Yengarie in trucks, carts, or punts,
or by the network of underground pipes by means of power-
ful pumps. Pacific Islanders are employed in this district, but
occupation is also found for a large staff of ploughmen, mechanics,
and skilled white labour.
Proceeding northwards, the Burnett River is reached, witli
Bundaberg as its centre. Soil and climate are here admirably
adapted for sugar growing. Millaquin, the gigantic refinery, per-
forms duties similar to that at Yengarie, and is supplied with
juice in the same manner. In this district great progress has
been made in the industry, which is as flourishing as in any
portion of the colony.
Rockhampton, the centre of the next sugar-growing district, is
chiefly noticeable as being situated in a comparatively dry belt of
country. There is a mill at Yeppoon.
Mackay, the sugar metropolis, is situated in the tropical district
of the colony, and here the industry has attained its greatest
development. Immense sums of money have been expended in
the district, of which this town is the seaport, in the cultivation
of the cane and manufacture of sugar. Kvery modern appliance
is found in the mills, all of great capabilities, and situated upon
large private estates, and which require an immense area of cane
for their maintenance. The farmers also dispose of their crops to
these mills, which latter, however, rely primarily on the cane
grown upon the estate to which they are attached. On these
estates there are miles of railway and the modern powerful steam
ploughs, while at night the mil is are lighted by electricity to
enable the hundreds of laborers to feed the rollers with cane.
Notwithstanding the depression which existed, following on the
years of prosperity prior to I*B3, the confidence of those who have
invested their capital in sugar remains unabated, and the output
of sugar will continue to increase. It is in this district, as before


stated, that the central mill system under Government aid is first
tried; —an experiment watched with great interest by all classes of
the community.
The Burdekin River district, next engages attention. The
debris , washed down in the course of ages, from the immense
district drained by this river, has formed a high and dry level
delta, which the planter quickly discovered and utilised for the
successful growing of sugar cane—the soil being of great depth and
fertility, level, and easy to cultivate.
The supply of underground water, at little depth, being prac-
tically inexhaustible, irrigation has been adopted, for notwith-
standing its position within the tropics, the district is a dry one
the average rainfall being about 30 inches. The undulating
contour of much of the lands adapts it for the flow of water, which is
pumped into furrows between the canes by powerful engines
driving large centrifugal pumps. The results of irrigation are
most satisfactorily seen in the increased yield of sugar, and the
prospect of sugar growing in this district appears most cheering.
On the banks of the Herbert River sugar cane has been grown
for many years past. Unlike the district previously mentioned,
the tropical rains are here copious, the high mountain ranges,
approaching the coast and attracting the water-laden clouds from
the sea. On the Lower Herbert the soil is a rich vegetable
mould. The mills erected here are of immense capacity, and the
plantations have been managed with great energy and skill. The
Colonial Sugar Company has here (as at Mackay) a gigantic
establishment, miles of railway connect the mill with the farms,
and the mills at night are illuminated by means of electricity.
At the Johnstone River, and in the Cairns district, the rainfall
reaches its maximum intensity. The mountain range is here
close to the sea, and from its influence the district is one of
tropical luxuriance, and having soil unsurpassed for fertility, is
the delight of the botanist.
The town of Geraldton is the centre of the district, and
many mills, fitted with the best and most modern machinery, are
now in full operation. The idea that first-class sugars could not
be produced from cane in this district has been dissipated. The
cane, though luxuriant in growth, is extremely healthy, and the
yield of sugar per acre exceeds that of any other district of the
colony.
At Cairns also similar success has attended the establishment
of the sugar industry. At Hambledon especially the plantations
and mills will, in their perfection of machinery and arrange-
ments, compare favorably with any in the colony. Capital has
been most freely spent, and the cultivation of the cane on this
plantation has been attended with the most signal success.


At Port Douglas and the Bloomfield River, ifec., mills have 1
been erected, and the conditions under which sugar is produced
resemble those of the preceding districts.
The inexhaustible fertility of the tropical scrub soils of the
colony, the immense area available, freedom from drought, and
wonderful adaptability for the growth of the cane, point to the
probability of a grand future for the sugar industry of Queens-
land, and when the labor difficulty is overcome, as ere long it
must be, it may safely be predicted that that probability will
develop into a substantial realisation.
VII. —Agriculture and Horticulture.
The diversity of climate necessarily found over a large area o
the colony of Queensland, permits the growth within its borders
of plants of both temperate and tropical climes, and in the fol-
lowing lines it is proposed to glance very briefly at a few of the
more important agricultural crops which are produced with profit
to the grower, and also at others for which the Queensland
climate is most admirably adapted, but the cultivation of which
has not hitherto been attempted on any large scale.
The sugar and pastoral industries have been elsewhere referred
to at some length, and need not. therefore, be further treated of
here. The consideration of the climate is necessarily an important
factor in treating of the agricultural capabilities of the colony,,
and a glance of its general features is given in preceding pages.
The soil which best repays the labor and skill of the cultivator
is that found on the alluvial river flats, and which, before the-
advent of the settler, had been covered with dense “ scrub ” or
jungle. This land is necessarily in great demand, and by far the
greater portion has been alienated from the Crown, immense
areas, however, being in the hands of capitalists, who hold them
as a speculation, and do not attempt their cultivation.
These lands are amazingly fertile and productive, and are
eminently adapted for sugar cane, maize, sweet potatoes, English
potatoes, lucerne, tobacco, <kc., &c., all of which yield heavy
crops with a minimum of labor. This rich soil is often many
feet in depth, formed from that washed down from volcanic
hills and deposited on the flats, and supplemented by decay of
ages of subsequent vegetation.
The forest lands are of larger extent, but generally somewhat
inferior in quality of soil. Nevertheless, much of the more
lightly timbered land, having soils of volcanic origin, are wonder-


fully deep and fertile, and vary in color from black to dark
chocolate and red. These latter soils are admirably adapted for
cereals, lucerne, maize, grasses, &c., &c. There are other forest
lands of a sandy nature, which, though poor in quality, are often,
by their proximity to markets, rendered profitable both for grazing
and agricultural purposes, while the indigenous timber yields a
handsome return for labor, independent of the increased value
of the land from its being cleared.
Of the agricultural capabilities of the inland plains of the far
west very little experience has been obtained. They consist of
two descriptions of soil—a clay on which grows luxuriant and
fattening herbage, and a soil of a much inferior nature upon
which the useless grass termed spinifex grows.
The success which has attended the water boring operations of
the Hydraulic Department will, by encouraging irrigation upon
the first of the above soils, make much of this fertile land
available for the use of the agriculturist.
The other varieties of soil met with are those of the table
lands, Silurian Hills, Roma Sand, and Sandy Sea shore. The
first of these is wonderfully fertile, and is of a deep red or
chocolate color, and originally covered by thick scrub, whose
-decaying vegetation adds to the richness of the soil. At Roma
the sandy loam has been proved to be unsurpassed for the growth
of the vine, and latterly cereals of excellent quality have been
produced upon it. The third of the soils under considemtion is
perhaps the poorest found in the coasted districts, and consists of
a thin film of loam covering poor gravel, often with silurian rock
near the surface. This soil, however, trenched and manured,
grows fruit and ornamental trees luxuriantly, while in the flats
or gullies in their neighbourhood the soils are much used for
market gardening purposes. In the tropical portions of the
colony the sandy seashore soils will provide cocoanuts, pineapples,
and the mango, in great profusion, and several plantations for
the growth of these now exist.
The Darling Downs district to the west of Brisbane is the
centre of arable farming, and here the soil is of a volcanic
origin, black, chocolate, or red in color, and generally of a clayey
nature on the plains, but crumbling with the action of the sun
after rains. Here wheat, oats, barley, and rye are grown.
Sown from April to June, they are reaped from September to
November.
The “ rust ” fungus is the great trouble to the wheat grower
here, and so far no remedy has been discovered which will
-eradicate this pest. Experiments have been made with varieties
of wheat obtained from India, America and elsewhere, but
hitherto with but partial success.


For green crops lucerne is found most suitable, and this
thrives well on any of the deep rich soils, where also root
crops, such as turnips, mangolds and potatoes, produce heavy
yields.
In the coastal, scrub land districts, maize takes the place of
wheat, and yields enormous crops. Harvests of this crop vary
from 40 to 80 bushels to the acre, while the land on which it is
grown is often merely “ tickled with the hoe” —maize generally
being the first crop grown by the new settler—and in the Northern
districts two crops of it can be produced in one year.
The sweet potatoe is another most useful plant, either as food
for man or beast, botli root and tops contributing to its universal
use—the latter for table use being as good as spinach. In the
North two crops of this plant can be cultivated yearly, a yield of
from 8 to 20 tons of roots and an equal weight of tops, being
produced per acre.
Millet and Sorghum are also produced, but to a more limited
extent, and are used for seed and fodder, which they produce in
great quantity, while maturing in three to four months.
In the southern portions of the colony arrowroot grows readily
upon scrub lands, and also upon arable lands when well tilled.
Pure water is necessary for the manufacture of the farina, but the
machinery required is of a simple and inexpensive character.
Among the admirable series of pamphlets published by the
Lands Depai’tment, that on “ Arrowroot,” by Mr. Samuel Grimes,
one of the pioneers of this industry, affords an ample guide to the
growth and manufacture of this useful food.
Tobacco of capital quality grows in every part of the colony, but
requires considerable labour for picking and curing the leaves.
There is great demand for the leaf, which finds a ready sale. The
labour of children is much utilized in the growth of this article,
which is chiefly carried on by the German farmer. The same
remarks apply also to cotton, which grows easily and produces in
abundance.
Rice is another prolific crop more especially in the north—
where it is the product of excellent quality. Queensland has been
proved to be, in its soil and climate, admirably suited for the
growth of coffee —more especially on the scrub soil hills. The
cultivation of the tea plant has also been experimentally conducted
with success.
The Acclimatization Society of Brisbane has done much to
introduce and to disseminate information upon the cultivation of
many plants of economic value—and with the increase of popula-
tion and greater knowledge of the adaptability of the soil and
climate for the growth of these plants, the attention of our farmers
will, no doubt, be given to their profitable production.


The bee keeping industry has, withing the last few years, been
considerably extended in Queensland, and many of the establish-
ments devoted to it are conducted upon the most improved and
scientific methods. The Beekeepers’ Association of Brisbane
issues a monthly journal, and by papers and otherwise dissemin-
ates much useful knowledge as to the best systems, &c., adapted
to the colony. The eucalyptus forest affords a perennial harvest
for the bees, which need never be idle.
The Mulberry grows well in the colony, and being the staple
food for the silk worm, the production of silk on a profitable
scale is merely a question of time, as silk of best quality has
been produced and manufactured, although only on a small
scale.
Dairy farming is another most profitable source of employment,
and one which is constantly expanding. I'he price of butter is
high, and the demand far in excess of the supply. The dairyman
lias only recently realised the importance of the proper and
systematic conduct of the dairy, and many establishments are
now turning out butter of first-class quality all the year round,
and with the choice of fodder which the dairyman commands for
winter feed, he has every facility for the production of a superior
article, while by the continued addition to the population of the
towns he has the advantage of an ever-increasing market. Very
little has yet been done in the manufacture of cheese. There is
no doubt, however, that a profitable industry could be established
in this article.
Pigs are at present comparatively few in number, but breeding
has occupied considerable attention, and ere long we may expect
an immense increase, as suitable food is readily obtainable.
The extent of the capability of Queensland for horticultural
purposes is as yet unknown, but from what has actually been
accomplished in the acclimatization of the fruits, vegetables, and
flowers of both temperate and tropical climes, there would Seem
to be hardly any limit to its range.
Most of the annual temperate horticultural products can be
grown in the southern districts of the colony, and most success-
fully so in Darling Downs. There are seen all the fruits,
vegetables, and flowers, which are such favorites with the English
speaking people, as reminiscent of the old country, and with
irrigation, there is undoubtedly an immense field for their most
profitable growth.
Among fruits are found apple, pear, plum, peach, apricot, nec-
tarine medlar, mulberry, grape, fig, almond, quince, cherry,
chestnut, walnut, filbert, olive, passion fruit, granadilla, pome-
granate, persimmon, loquat, lemon, orange, lime and shaddock,
(tec. &c.


Viticulture is most successfully pursued in this region, and
wine making is an industry increasing yearly in importance,
which, with greater knowledge of the requirements of soil and
■climate, may be anticipated to rank as one of the foremost
sources of Queensland wealth.
All the British vegetables are successfully cultivated on the
Downs, and although in the neigbourhood of the towns market
gardening is almost monopolised by the Chinaman, it is merely a
question of time for the Australian gardener to find in it a
profitable and increasing source of income.
In flowers, Southern Queensland produces all the British
favorites in every variety, the rose especially attaining to great
perfection, but lilac, honeysuckle, holly, ivy, jasmine, pansies,
violets, chrysanthemums, and many of the others grow
luxuriantly.
In the sub-tropical portions and in the coastal districts the
banana, pine apple, mango, orange, lime, lemon, are at home;
while among vegetables the sweet potato, yams, and many others,
afford variety for the table.
In the more northern districts there is a large extent of
country in which all tropical fruits flourish to perfection, in-
cluding the banana, cocoanut and date palms, pine apple, mango.
Jack fruit, orange, custard apples, <kc.
Ginger, pepper, nutmegs, &c., are indigenous, and the climate
and soil are well suited for the growth of vanilla, cinnamon, all-
spice, <fec. Many of these are already acclimatised, but in this
region the cultivation of vegetables beyond sweet potatoes,
yams, &c., is very limited. The flowers of Northern Queensland
are gorgeous in their bloom and foliage. All plants which
require protection in the south grow here in the open, while
indigenous orchids are found in great variety.
For the agriculturist generally Queensland affords a field for
attaining ease, and possibly even affluence within a limited term.
The climate is genial and pleasant. The winter is sufficiently
cool to make his work enjoyable. He is not debarred from work
by frost or snow—flowers and fruits which elsewhere require the
lasshouse to bring to perfection grow here in profusion to
decorate and adorn his house. The settlement of a small
yeomanry is encouraged by all parties. The farmer on his own
freehold is thus his own master, subject to no landlord. The
facilities for educating his family enable him to bring them up
intelligently, while its increase gives him no anxiety for the
future. In short, Queensland may be described as very little
short of an earthly paradise for the farmer.


YllL—Fauna and Flora.
In a brief sketch of this nature it would be impossible to do
more than summarise the important nature of the Queensland
dora and fauna, and indeed a large portion of the colony is as
yet quite unexplored, both as regards the plant and the animal
world, and in the rich scrubs especially the botanist and timber
getter will find a rich harvest awaiting them.
The indigenous woods of Queensland are of great beauty,
utility, and variety. In the Commissioner's collection are shown
over 500 specimens, and did time and opportunity permit it
would be possible to largely supplement this list, which Mr. F.
M. Bailey, F.L.S., the Government botanist, and one of the Com-
missioners has. in the special catalogue published in connection
with the exhibit, described in a popular manner.
As the indigenous woods are better known, the variety of
purposes for which they can be utilized is more fully appreciated,
and they are brought more and more into use by the builder and
cabinet maker. The collection of woods shown at the Colonial
and Indian Exhibition in London tended greatly to this end, and
was much admired. It behoves the Legislature to adopt means
to prevent the waste of the vast heritage which the colony
possesses in her forests, and under the judicious regulations and
fostering care of a Department of Forestry, an inexhaustible source
of revenue will be found in this industry.
The barks of many of the Queensland trees and shrubs furnish
excellent tanning material, particularly those of the gums
Acacia. The fruits of many other trees contain oil in abundance,
while the foliage of many are rich in essential oils of delightful
fragrance and high medicinal virtue, similar properties being also
found in the barks of several trees and in many herbaceous
plants; and all of which are sought after by the druggist all over
the world.
Large numbers of the native plants yield excellent fibres,
whilst from others rich dyes of brilliant colour are obtained. The
bee keeper finds the Queensland flora well suited to his occupa-
tion, our trees flowering all the year round, aflording ample work
for the bee and profit for the master.
No country has richer pasture than Queensland. Three-fourths
of the grasses found in Australia occur in Queensland, and
among them are found mixed a large number of nutritious herbs
which in no small degree contribute to the excellence of the
pasture. In the Queensland Court will be found a collection of
some of the grasses of the colony, all of which are described in
Mr. F. M. Bailey’s catalogue of grasses.


Those in search of the beautiful in plant life, will find in the
undergrowth of ferns, in the gigantic trees festooned with
immense and superb climbers, and in the brilliant and showy
foliage of many of the Queensland trees, ample opportunity for
the gratification of the eye and brain.
Queensland presents a large field for the naturalist : in every
direction new forms are met with, affording pleasure by their
novelty. Most of the inhabitants of the animal world of Australia
are found in the colony, amongst them being, of course, the
kangaroo, wallaby, with their varieties, opossum, native bear,
wild cat, bandicoot, ant eater, platypus, dingo, beaver rat, flying
fox, &c. Many of these animals possess skins admirably adapted
to the use of the currier, but which are at present turned to little
or no account. None of the Queensland animals can be said to be
dangerous to man, although several often cause havoc in the
shepherd’s flock and in the poultry yard.
Among birds, about 600 varieties are found in Queensland, often
rich and gorgeous in plumage, curious in shape, and peculiar in
habit; birds of all sizes, from the gigantic cassowary and emu, to
the wren, some weird, some beautiful in note. Among them may
be noted the wedge-tailed eagle, falcon, hawks, kestrel, owl,
night jars, swifts, swallows, bee eater, king-fisher, diamond bird,
magpie, flycatchers, robins, lyrebird, wren, finches, crow, honey
eater, parrots and cockatoos, emu, cassowary, pigeon, bustard,
plover, curlew, swan, wild duck, and many others, of which space
forbids mention here.
As in other parts of Australia, reptiles are found, some of them
being dangerous to life. Amongst the largest is the carpet snake ;
a common species is the green snake, brown tree snake, &c. ;
amongst those of a venomous description are the black snake and
brown snake, and death adder. Alligators are met with in the
northern portions of the colony only. Large lizards, iguanuas,
ttc., are also seen.
The Queensland seas have as yet not been utilized to the extent
which the rich hauls which have occasionally been made would
cause one to expect. Fish of large size and most delicate in
flavour are found along the coast, and as means are adopted for
their proper transport to the towns, and for their disposal, they
will, no doubt, afford a profitable source of industry to the fisher-
man, and of nutritious food to the people.
The Dugong is found in the Queensland waters, the flesh of
which is cured and sold in various forms. Turtles are also
utilized for soup, &c., &c.
Speaking, generally, the riches the colony possesses in its
animals. &c., are but little developed—a state of things which time
will alter.


IX.—Land Selection in Queensland.
The following circular has been issued by the Public Lands
Department:—
The conditions under which country lands may be acquired for
settlement are substantially as follows :
Grazing Farms.— Surveyed areas of land being the resumed
portions of runs (large areas leased to Crown tenants for long
periods) are proclaimed open for selection over a great extent of
Queensland territory, within accessible distance of the eastern
seaboard on leases for a term of thirty years, in which intending*
settlers can obtain grazing farms of any area up to 20,000 acres,
at their option, at a minimum rent of three farthings an acre,
the rent generally ranging from three farthings to two pence.
This rent is subject to re-assessment by the Land Board after the
first ten years, and subsequently at intervals of five years, but
the rent cannot be increased at any re-assessment to more than
oD per cent, above that for the period immediately preceding.
The land must be continuously occupied either by the lessee or
by his agent or bailiff, and must be fenced in within three years
from the date of selection. These grazing farms cannot be made
freehold, but the leasehold may be sold, subdivided or mortgaged,
or, with the consent of the Land Board, sublet.
Agricultural Farms. —The freehold of agricultural farms
may be secured on terms which it is believed are more liberal
than those obtaining in any other British colony, under the
following conditions :
The best lands on lines of railway, near centres of population
and on navigable waters, are set apart and surveyed as farms,
with the necessary roads and I’eserves, the area of the farms
being from 20 to 1,280 acres. A transferable lease of the farm,
with right of purchase, is issued for a term of fifty years, at an
annual rent varying from threepence per acre to higher rates,
seldom exceeding one shilling, according to the quality and
sittuation of the land, its natural supply of water, &c. The
selector (who must be eighteen years of age at the time of
selection) must occupy the farm continuously either by himself or
his bailiff or agent, and must within five years fence in the land,
or expend an equivalent sum in other substantial improvements.
The rent is subject to periodical re-assessment, as in the case of
grazing farms.
Acquisition of Freehold.— The freehold of these farms may
be acquired at a price fixed when the land is thrown open for


selection, and being not less than twenty shillings per acre,
generally ranging from twenty to twenty-live or thirty shillings.
In order to secure the freehold there must be ten years’
personal and continuous bond fide residence by thejlessee or two
or more successive lessees, but any lessee may transfer to any
other person who is qualified to be a selector.
In effect, these farms are sold to bond fide selectors on credit,
the rent amounting to something like 2| per cent on the purchasing
price ; all rent paid during the period of personal residence being
counted as part payment of the purchase money.
The purchase of the freehold may be made at period of the lease
after ten years’ continuous residence, but if not made within
the first twelve years the price is subject to increase in proportion
to the increase of rent (if any).
Fifty Years’ Lease. —lf the lessee is indisposed to purchase,
he may continue to hold the land on lease for the whole period of
lifty years, the condition of occupation being performed by the
residence either of the lessee or his bailiff or agent.
Small Farm Freeholds at Two Shillings and Sixpence
Per Acre. —Small farm freeholds or homesteads may be secured
in five years in areas not exceeding 160 acres, or smaller areas if
desired, at two shillings and sixpence an acre, on a system of
deferred payments, extending over the period of five years, at the
rate of sixpence per acre per annum. _
Conditions to Secure Freehold of Homesteads. —The
selector must reside personally on the land during the five years,
and must make improvements on it before the end ofthefive years
of a total value equal to not less than ten shillings an acre. Thus,
on a farm of 160 acres there must be work done in fencing, clear-
ing, building, or otherwise, of not less than the total value of <£Bo,
by the end of the five years ; or, on an 80-acre farm, £4O ; on a
40-acre farm, £2O, &c.
When such work is done by the farmer himself there will thus
be no actual outlay of money. On the performance of these con-
ditions the selector may claim a grant of the land on payment of
the deed fee, amounting on a farm of 160 acres, to £1 10s. The
survey-fee on such area, 160 acres, amounts to £7 7s. 6d.; this
must also be paid, but may be paid in five equal annual instal-
ments of £1 9s. 6d. each; the fees on smaller areas are propor-
tionately less.
Free Gifts of Land : Land Orders, £2o.—Attention is
specially directed to what amounts to a free gift of agricultural
land in favor of persons of European extraction paying their own
passages or those of their families in full to Queensland from
Europe, the United States of America, or any British possession
other than the Australasian colonies. A wife, child, step-child,


Father... ... ...
20
Mother
20
Two children of eighteen years or over ...
40
Two children of twelve years or over
... 40
or grand-child is reckoned as one of the family. To persons thus
paying their passages in full, land-orders are issued of the value
of twenty pounds sterling (£2O) for each person of twelve years
and upwards, and of ten pounds (£10) for each child between the
age of twelve months and twelve years of age. These land-orders
are available to their full nominal value in payment of the rent
of agricultural or grazing farms held by the head of the family or
the person in respect to whose passage the land-order is issued,
and when used in agricultural areas they amount to a free gift of
land, as follows :
Single Land Obdek. —A single person, eighteen years of age,
holding one land order, value £2O, may select in any agricultural
area 160 acres of land. The annual rent of sixpence an acre
required to be paid for five years to secure the freehold amounts
to £2O, and the £2O land order, being available to its full
nominal value for this purpose, suffices for the payment of the
whole rent, and thus the fee-simple of the land as a free-
gift, except the amount of £8 17s. 6cl. to be paid for the survey
and deed-fees.
The head of a family, say of eight persons, counting seven
adults, including the father and mother, paying their passages in
full would receive land-orders as follows :
£
Two children between twelve months and twelve years ... 20
£l4O
Use of Land Obdeks : Rent. —ln such a case the head of a
family could obtain either one land-order of the value of one
hundred and forty pounds (£140), or separate land-orders, of an
equal aggregate amount, in respect of each person. In either
case the land-order or land-orders would be sufficient for the
payment of the rent of a farm or 1,120 acres for a period of five
years at sixpence* an acre a year.
The provisions of the Act relating to homesteads are intended
to assist in the settlement of men of small means. If a selector
desires to obtain a larger area than 160 acres, he must take up
the remainder at some place not adjoining the homestead, and
must perform the conditions of occupation of the other farm or
farms by an agent or bailiff.
* Agricultural land may be obained at threepence an acre, but for tillage-farms,
the better lands at about sixpence an acre are much to be preferred.


Separate Homesteads. —-In families where there are children
•of the age of eighteen years or over, a separate farm of 160 acres
may be taken up by each such person, so that each may secure
the freehold at the end of five years, as already described ; but it
must be remembered that the bond fide personal residence of the
selector (he., in the case supposed, the child) is required for five
years on each separate homestead, as well as an expenditure at
the rate of ten shillings per acre within that period.
Land Orders Pay Rent of Grazing Farms. —Land-orders are
also available to their full nominal value in payment of the rent
of grazing-farms.
For instance, the rent of a grazing-farm of 2,560 acres at
twopence (2d.)* an acre being £2l 6s. Bd., the land-order given
for a family counting as seven adults would pay the rent for
more than six years and a half.
Application for Land Orders. —Persons intending to proceed
from Great Britain to Queensland, and to pay their own passages
in full, are advised to make application to the Agent-General for
the Colony, No 1, Westminster Chambers, Victoria Street,
London, S.W., for land-orders; but it should be remembered
that these are not transferable, and can be of no use to anyone
who does not settle on the land and fulfil the conditions as
above described.
Full paying passengers from the United States of America, any
European State, or any British possession can obtain the land-
orders in the colony. All persons holding land-orders are desired,
on arrival at the principal port (Brisbane), to apply at once to the
Department of Agriculture, which is under the control of the
Minister for Lands ; or, if they arrive at any other Queensland
port, to the Immigration Officer or Land-Agent, from whom they
can obtain all necessary information to assist them in the selection
of land.
Village Settlement. —Special provision is made for the
settlement of little communities, so that the settlers may live
together for mutual protection and convenience, in townships on
freehold town allotments, with farms of eighty acres contiguous or
in close proximity to their residences.
Land of the best description is now being surveyed in the most
suitable localities for carrying out this village settlement, and land-
orders are available for taking up and paying for the land in these
townships. This scheme, it is believed, will be specially attractive
to persons paying their own passages in full, and coming to
Queensland from Europe and the United States of America.
*The rent may exceed this in some cases, and is often less.


Freeholds—Annual Payments of Sixpence an Acre
Secure Freeholds—-Improvements—Township Allotments
One Acre. —ln these agricultural townships the payments on
account of rent are the same as on the homesteads before des-
cribed—namely, five annual payments of sixpence an acre each,
to secure the freehold ; the conditions of continuous bond fide
personal residence and of improvements being as before stated ;
but one-fifth part of the required improvements on the farms may
be made on the town allotments, which contain an area of not
more than one acre. The townships, not exceeding two square
miles in area, will provide space for churches, schools, and other
requirements suitable for small communities of people, so that
mutual assistance and protection may be secured.
(Selectors must be British Subjects. —lt should be added
that a selector, if an alien, must become a British subject by
naturalisation (to which no obstacles are offered except in the case
of Asiatics) before he can acquire the freehold of his farm.
State Free Schools.— There is no State-church in Queens-
land, all denominations being placed on one common platform.
State schools are established in almost every part of the colony
where there are as many as thirty or forty children.
Trained Teachers —Primary and Grammar Schools.—Well
trained male and female teachers are appointed by the State, and
a good English education may be obtained in any of the State
schools free of any charge. Grammar schools are liberally
endowed by the Government, and scholarships are given annually,
by competitive examination, to pupils of the primary schools,
entitling them to three years’ free education in a Grammar school.
Three exhibitions, tenable for three years, are also annually
offered to students desirous of proceeding to any of the Univer-
sities of Australasia and Great Britain.
The Queensland Parliament has recently authorised the estab-
lishment of a Depai’tment of Agriculture and the appointment of
an Inspector in Agricultural Science.
HENRY JORDAN.
Department of Public Lands,
Brisbane, December, 1887.


IX—Barron Falls in Flood Time.
BY A. MESTON.
jVIy tirst description of these famous falls was written when the
river was down to its lowest level. The present article describes
the falls during the highest flood in the Barron for seven years.
Byron says that no picture can give us an idea of the ocean, and
no word painting can give a clear outline of the unimaginable
scene at the Barron Falls on the first three days of the present
year I find the blacks have two names for this tremendous
cataract—“ Biboohra” and « Kamerunga.” They appear to avoid
the locality, as during visits extending over four years I have not
seen a myall near the falls, nor the track of any on the gravel beds
of the river. lam not yet on terms of intimacy that would enable
me to learn any legends they may have regarding the falls, but
shall acquire that interesting information when my relations with
the dark sons of the forest are less “ strained ” than they have
l>een in the past. The actual height of the falls is now ascertained
to be about 600 ft., or 436 ft. higher than Niagara. From the
edge of the precipice the river falls 900 feet in half a mile. The
Herberton railway will pass right along the top, and the finest
view of the whole falls will be seen from the carriage windows.
That view in flood time will have no rival in the known world.
“ Stand back,” said the dying Raphael, as the first glories of
the world of spirits appeared to the parting soul, “ Stand back
until I sketch that heavenly scene !” And, standing by the Barron
Falls on the second day of the new year, I, too, felt disposed to say,
Stand back until I sketch that mighty picture, hung there on the
primal rocks among the everlasting mountains, like an immortal
replica by Raphaelistic Nature, from some divine original in the
picture gallery of God ! Before me was a torrent of water 300
yards wide and about 60ft. deep, rushing resistlessly along at the
rate of twenty miles an hour, tumbling in a solid wall suddenly
over the edge of the enormous precipice, launched clear out into
space, and descending for over 600 ft. into the “ waste wild anarchy
of chaos, dark and deep,” yawning abysmal in the depths below.
I look up the river, and see it come sweeping round the bend,
divided into three streams that rush together like wild horses as
they enter the straight in the dread finish of their last race. They
come with the sound of a tempestuous ocean dashing its surges


through dark passages in the caverned rocks. Weird Fancy
pictures them as the rivers that roll through the gloomy realms of
Pluto. Imagination hears the sorrowful wail of Acheron, the
lamentation of sad Cocytus, and the hoarse roaring of infernal
Phlegethon, “ whose waves of torrent fire inflame with rage."
They roll over the cliff, strike the first ledge of rock, and the water
is dashed into foam and mist, rolling billows of vapour projected
with terrific force in vast fantastic forms down the entrance of the
Titanic avenue of the river beneath', and clouds of spray float away
upwards for 1000 feet, and condense, and drip in showers of
emerald dew-drops from the trees on the slopes of the mountains.
The currents of air created by the cataract waved the branches
of trees hundreds of feet overhead, as if they were swaying in the
contending winds of a storm.
The thunder of the waters was awful. The rocks shook beneath
you like a mighty steamer trembling with the vibrations of the
screw. The very soul within you recoils appalled before the in-
conceivable grandeur of that tremendous scene. Those falls
stand alone among cataracts like Chimborazo among the moun-
tains.
Eternity itself is throned there on those dark rocks among the
wild whirlwind of waters, and speaks to you in solemn tones of
the Past, the Present, and the Evermore. You stand voiceless,
“ mute, motionless, aghast,” in that immortal Presence.
The human tongue has no utterance for the thoughts within
you. They are not dead those black rocks, those vast columns of
descending waters ! They tell you of
Vastness and Age and Memories of Eld,
Darkness and Desolation and dim Night.
Once only in each year do the flood waters of the tropic rains
sweep the total surface of the bed rock. The wear of that brief
period on the adamantine formation is imperceptible. How long,
therefore, has the river occupied in cutting down 1000 feet into
the solid rock 1 You must look back through the shadowy vista
of hundreds of thousands of years that bridge the period of time
intervening between us and the dim morning of the world ! The
Night of Time hides for ever the birthday of that cataract.
Empires have risen and fallen, barbarisms become civilizations,
races of men flourished and died, religions triumphed and disap-
peared into eternal oblivion, thousands of plants and animals
vanished for ever, the face of nature changed its aspect in the
long wear and waste of centuries, and still those waters rolled
down that precipice with a wail of lamentation over a dead Past,
Mke the voice of a lone spirit in the agony of unspeakable despair.
The gulf has a weird and fearful fascination. You feel a mad


impulse to leap out into vacancy —to launch out, as Lucifer did.
into the wide womb of uncreated Night, and disappear for ever
into that yawning chasm, from the vast depths of which rise the
sheeted columns of vapor—
White and sulphury,
Like foam from the roused ocean of deep hell,
Whose every wave breaks on a living shore.
At intervals there are deafening explosions, like the discharge
of enormous cannon, and the waves of spray roll out like cannon
smoke, and recoil upon themselves with the force of the impetus,
to be swallowed up in the downward driven current, and finally
swept into the abyss. Imagine some Titantic race battling with
the demons ! There is a rock fortress 600 ft. high, with huge cannon
projecting from a hundred embrasures, discharging a continuous
shower of projectiles, “ winged with red lightning and impetuous
rage,” into the ranks of the advancing foe ! Terrible beyond
conception is the diapason of that canonnade !
On the left of the main falls is the circular pool 200 ft. in depth,
whose sides slope inward from the top, with a narrow outlet not
20ft. wide at the bottom. Into this frightful cauldron poured a
vast body of water from the main river. It fell clear down, struck
the surface of the pool as if it were solid rock, dashed itself into
vapour, and threw a dense shower of spray far up the face of the
opposite rock, from whence it descended in a thousand little
rivulets of silver that sparkled like a flood of moonlight on the
dark surges of the midnight main. On the left came down a
torrent that poured itself out from the dense scrub overhead.
That, too, fell clear down on to the pool below in a sheet of
glorious spray. Aixmnd the face of the rocks grew
beautiful and tiny orchids and ferns, and innumerable little
plants looking serenely down with their green faces into the awful
maelstrom underneath, indescribably beautiful, amid the war
of wind and waters—
Resembling, mid the torture of the scene,
Hope watching Madness, with unalterable mien.
And gorgeous blue-winged butterflies emerged from the crevices
of the rocks, fluttered slowly down until the spray caught them,
and vanished like a flash of light into the vortex of remorseless
waters, like lost spirits drawn in where the firmament of the
Miltonian Hell spouted its cataracts of fire, until caught in the
descending flames and swept down into the Infinite Abyss, name-
less in dark oblivion there to dwell. From the still pools up the
river came magnificent blue and pink and scarlet lilies, with
superb fan-like green leaves attached. On one of them was a


splendid butterfly, floating along like the Indian Cupid in the
Nelumbo flower, down the swift current of the Sacred River.
Swift and painless death for all life once closed in the pitiless
embrace of that deadly surge, cleaving the azure with the rapidity
of light ! One step from where you now stand and you have
passed the confluence of the two infinitudes—eternity is before
you, and this world with all its madness is behind you ; your body
is dashed to atoms among those jagged and savage rocks; the
spectral winds play your death march on their .iEolian harp of
pines; the giant cannons fire in volleying thunder their last
salute ; the cataract wraps its white foam shroud around you ;
and the mighty mountains, thrown on the primary rocks, stand
there aloft in the majesty of eternal silence and immensity as your
everlasting monuments ! What was the pyramid-piled grave of
the Egyptian king compared to this ? A tomb here more worthy
of divine Cleora than the old Leucadian steep. This is the home
■of Poesy, first-born of the gods, and Romance, the parent of golden
dreams. Alas ! that the cold hand of science has dragged the
Naiad’s from the waters, and hurled the dryads and hamadryads
from the woods !
Twilight is descending, and I gaze once more into that awful
realm of swimming shadows and enormous shapes, with fearful
■chasms, rolling billows of foam, vast cloud-like vapours, descending
columns of yellow water like liquid tire, opalescent and irridescent,
fantastic rocks, scarred and rent by AEons of ages, towering moun-
tains, crowned by mournful pines, showers of spray and wandering
mist, mingled with the roar and rush and howl of immeasurable
waters, plunging in their death agonies into the “ fathomless and
thundering abyss,” in unutterable sublimity of unfettered chaos
and illimitable madness. Alas ! after all I have only proved how
impotent is language to give more than a vague and shadow out-
line of that mighty picture hung there on the sullen rocks among
the grand old mountains as a presentation picture to Australia
from the Art Gallery of the Eternal. —Brisbane Courier.


ft (763
MELBOURNE:
KEMP AND BOYCE, PRINTERS,.
RUSSELL STREET.




„
* • ’ .>
