

QUEENSLAND.
QUEENSLAND ABORIGINALS, i "i
PROPOSED SYSTEM
FOR THEIR
IMPROVEMENT AND PRESERVATION.
ADDRESSED TO
THE HONOURABLE HORACE TOZER,
Colonial Secretary of Queensland.
ARCHIBALD MESTON.
BRISBANE:
BY AUTHORITY: EDMUND GREGORY, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, WILLIAM STREET.
1895.




QU iiIENS _ AW
QUEENSLAND- ABORIGINALS.
PROPOSED SYSTEM
FOE THEIK
IMPROVEMENT AND PRESERVATION.
ADDRESSED TO
THE HONOURABLE HORACE TOZER,
Colonial Secretary of Queensland.
ARCHIBALD MESTON.
BRISBANE:
BY AUTHORITY : EDMUND GREGORY, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, WILLIAM STREET.
1895.




TO THE HONOURABLE HORACE TOZER, COLONIAL SECRETARY.
30 -Ur -~i
Brisbane, March, 1895.
To you, Sir, a friend of the aboriginals, I submit this carefully
considered plan for the improvement and preservinglrom extinction of
that unhappy race. My opinions are based on thirty-five years’
personal knowledge of their habits, customs, daily life, superstitions,
inner life, and general character.
Since a boy eight years of age I have mixed with many tribes—
tame and wild —over a vast area, particularly from the Bellengen River
to Princess Charlotte Bay, along 1,400 miles of our east coast, and
far West to the interior, becoming familiar with several dialects and
the use of all the weapons. My knowledge also includes the whole
existing literature on the subject, from Threlkeld’s “ Specimens of an
Australian Language,” in 1827, to the present time, besides official
and unofficial reports, despatches, and inquiries since 1805.
To assist those from whom the subject has hitherto received little
or no consideration, and to facilitate a general understanding, I have
given an introductory outline of previous work since the first
Australian settlement, an account of what is being done to-day by the
various colonies, and the condensed opinions of despatches and reports
of early Governors, officials, missionaries, and others who in the past
years were earnestly and unselfishly striving to solve this hitherto
apparently unsolvable problem.
All disputation and incentive thereto have been carefully avoided.
The day for disputation has gone by. There has always been infinitely
too much, serving only to obscure the actual trouble, and the pathway-
out of it, in clouds of conflicting opinions expressed usually in argu-
ments that started from no premises and came to no conclusions.
The “Boomed Race” theory is relegated to its deserved oblivion.
“ Let us not,” wrote Lord Gleuelg, when Secretary of State fjpr the
Colonies, “ cast upon Heaven a destruction wffiich is our own, and say
the aboriginals are doomed by Bivine Providence when the guilt lies
with ourselves.”
All too clear is the truth uttered by Lord John Russell, in one
of his despatches, that “ from first to last the line of contact of the
two races has been a red one, and the strong Caucasian has trodden
the naked nomad like mire into his own sod.”
To be just, we are bound to consider that the making of equitable
treaties, and preservation of the native races, was work of too vast a
magnitude for the handful of early settlers, and that the ordinary
process of pioneer colonisation made any satisfactory arrangement a
difficult problem. In fairness to the various Australian Governments,
including those of Queensland, we must remember that some of them
are less to be charged with want of a desire to do justice to the
aboriginals, than a helpless inability to discover how it could be done.
The Imperial Government was always unfortunately in the same
position, though the despatches from the various Secretaries of State
show consistent good intentions, and an earnest wish for some definite
arrangement, fair to the natives and honourable to the State.


In the report of the House of Commons Committee (pages 14 to
16), there appears one of several good reasons to expect some generous
assistance from the Imperial Government, even at this late hour , to
any colony earnestly initiating a comprehensive system for preserving
the aboriginal race.
In the early days of Australian colonies the natives were strong
in numbers, and the governing power was weak. I hat position is
reversed. Our Governments are strong, and the natives are few and
helpless. There is no longer a vestige of excuse for not according to
the future that justice so cruelly denied to the past.
It seems well to consider here our “ debtor account ” with the
aboriginals. Queensland has so far alienated about 10,000,000 acres
of freehold land, and leased about 300,000,000 acres for pastoral
occupation. Eor the first we have received about six and a-cjuartei
millions in cash, and for the leased land we receive £332,800 annual
rental. Since the year of separation, 1859, or even since 1842, we
have not expended £50,000 for the benefit of the aboriginals, and
have never since then, or before, paid them a single shilling in cash,
clothes, or food, for even one acre of land. And why ? Because they
were too weak to compel justice, and we were too unjust to accord it
without compulsion !
Had we found Queensland occupied by a race prepared to accept
even Id. an acre, our bill would already be about £1,300,000. At Is.
our liability would be £15,500,000. Had we paid at the rate received
by the Maoris our account would be still more formidable.
A civilisation which could contemplate this colonising transaction
with indifference, or without some desire for atonement, would not
possess so high a sense of justice as the barbarism it destroys.
There is very little palliation in the fact that the case is one of
many where
Evil is wrought by want of thought
As well as by want of heart.
At present in Queensland there are eight thousand imported
Polynesians (recruited mostly from bloodthirsty cannibal tribes),
guarded by inspectors, stringent special laws and regulations, pro-
vided with medical attendance, hospitals, missionaries, and churches ;
well fed, well clothed, and well housed, while our own aboriginals,
the people from whom we have forcibly taken this country, without
payment, are wandering homeless through our settlements, clotheo.
in rags and begging their food, perishing miserably from the vices
which' the white race has introduced, unnoticed and uncared for,
except at the distributing food stations started by Mr. Morehead,
when Premier, and continued and liberally extended by yourself. This
ought surely to be an intolerable spectacle for the Queensland people!
The work of atonement for some of the dreadful past lies before
us, the future honour of the nation dependent on how soon that
work is undertaken, and how earnestly and effectively it is performed.
A. MESTON.


PAST HISTORY.
♦
TASMANIA.
There was no systematic effort to improve the Tasmanian
aboriginals, nor any attempt, until too late, to preserve them from
destruction. The story of their contact with Europeans, and their
final extermination, is one of the dark pages in modern human history.
When white men landed there in 1803 to form the first penal settle-
ment, Tasmania was, occupied by natives whose numbers were
estimated from 5,000 to 15,000. Their habits were exactly the
same as those of Australian aboriginals, differing materially in their
weapons by not using the boomerang, woomera, or shield.
They lived the hunter’s life, and were a healthy, happy, intelligent
race. Buch was their condition when on the 3rd of May, 1804,
Lieutenant Moore gave his soldiers, of the 102nd, orders to fire on
several hundred innocent natives who were advancing in a semicircle
driving a mob of kangaroos into a narrow puss. Evidence taken
before the Aborigines Committee proved that at least fifty blacks
were shot. One eye witness, Edward White, said : “ The natives did
not attack the soldiers. The firing began about 11 o clock. There
were many natives slaughtered and wounded. They had no spears,
only wad dies, and they were on a hunting expedition.”
This was the first fatal collision between the English and the
Tasmanian natives. Thenceforth there was naturally in the heart of
the savage a deadly undying hatred of the new race. That hatred
deepened in succeeding years, as escaped convicts, and bushrangers,
and unscrupulous settlers, stole the children, outraged the women, and
slaughtered the men. Those who care to banquet on tales of the
horrid treatment of the Tasmanian natives are referred to the first
volume of the Rev. John West’s History, and Bonwick’s “Lost
Tasmanian Race.”
Tasmanian xtace. . v.
Colonel Arthur’s attempt to drive the whole of the tribes into a
corner, like a flock of sheep, and capture them, ended in catching two
old blackfellows. This was the notorious “ black war” of 1830. The
capture cost Tasmania £70,000.
Then one brave man, single-handed, accomplished the work in
which 4,000 armed men had failed. This man was George Agustus
Robinson, a friend of the blacks, the first Protector of the Aborigines.
He began his mission when the scattered remnants of the tribes were
burning with revenge, determined to perish to the last man rather
than submit to the invading race. Robinson spoke their language
and sympathised with their wrongs. He gained their confidence, and
they followed him to the settlements like a band of children.
In 1835 Governor Arthur, in a despatch to Lord Glenelg,
wrote : “ It was a great oversight that a treaty was not made with
the natives, tor the feeling of injustice which I am persuaded they
have always entertained, would have then had no existence.” The
opportunity for that treaty had gone for ever. The last survivors
were placed on Flinders Island within sight of the far-off blue hills
of their beloved native land.


Thirty-two years after the first white settler erected his home-
stead, the last Tasmanian left the shores of that land never to return
except for a brief visit. On the 22nd of January, 1835, Robinson
brought in the last party, one man, four women, and three boys. In
1838 he took twenty-two to Melbourne when he went there as
protector of aborigines. Two were hanged for murder, a few went
back to Flinders Island, and the others died in Victoria.
The final scene of that appalling drama closes with the death
of Lannay, the last man, in February, 1869, and Trooganeena
(“ Truganini ”) the last woman, in May, 1876.
The Tasmanian race was extinct!
A whole nation of people, with their customs, legends, and
language, were swept from the face of the earth.
Governor Arthur, who was no sentimentalist, in one of his
despatches, wrote—“ Undoubtedly the being reduced to the necessity
of driving a simple but warlike, and, as ii now appears , a noble-minded
race from their native hunting grounds, is a measure in itself so
distressing, that I am willing to make almost any prudent sacrifice
that may tend to compensate for the injuries that government is
unwillingly and unavoidably the instrument of inflicting.”
The eulogisms were deserved. In the last days of their liberty,
the last dajs of revenge for terrible and unspeakable wrongs, a few
scattered bands terrorised the whole of Tasmania. A handful of
primitive savages, armed only with wooden spears and nullas, defied
the whole police, military, and armed settlers on the island.
They were sincere and generous and unselfish in their friend-
ships, passionately patriotic in their love of country, nobly heroic in
their despair.
Such will be the verdict of posterity when, free from ignorance
and prejudice, Justice shall arrive calmly at the eternal truth.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
In the year 1820, on the recommendation of Governor Macquarie,
the British Government gave a grant of 10,000 acres at Port Mac-
quarie, in trust for the benefit of the aboriginals, and in 1824 the Rev.
L, E. Threlkeld, arrived under the auspices of the London Missionary
Society, and went to reside on the reserve as first missionary to the
Australian aboriginies. The history of that mission is told in Mr.
Threlkeld’s own letter of 15th August, 1857 :
“ Circumstances which no human power could control brought
the mission to a final termination on 31st December, 1841, when
the mission ceased, not from any want of support from the Govern-
ment, nor from any inclination on my part to retire from the work,
but solely from the sad fact that the aborigines themselves had then
almost become extinct, for I had actually outlived a very large
majority of the blacks, more especially of those with whom I had been
associated for seventeen years.” Australian philology is indebted to
Threlkeld for the first and ablest and completest work on an Australian
language, including several valuable publications from “ Specimens of
the Aboriginal Language, ” in 1827, to his “ Key to the Aboriginal
Language,” in 1850. In 1859, the year of his death, he was engaged
on an additional work. In 1892 the New South Wales Government
wisely published Threlkeld’s collected works in one volume.


The first grant of land to the aboriginals was given in 1815. It
was situated at George’s Head, near Sydney, and sixteen men with
their wives and families went there to reside. The Government gave
them clothes, agricultural implements, and seeds. This party was in
charge of the famous chief Bungaree. In the following year, 1816,
a school for native children was established at Paramatta. A large
number of blacks had been captured and brought into Sydney after a
battle with a detachment of the 46th Regiment, when many blacks
were shot. There was war everywhere between the two races. Even
as early as 1794 the Government schooner took a military guard to
the Hawkesbury to protect the convict settlers. It is easy enough to
recognise the difficulty of doing any good with the aboriginals in the
convict period when we know the class of white men who occupied the
country and treated the natives as wild animals. This was also seen
clearly'by Australian Governors and various impartial authorities of
that period.
The first attempt to induce the blacks to engage in some form of
agriculture was made by the Rev. Samuel Marsden in 1796 at
Paramatta. The site of that farm is still known as “ Black Town.”
In 1832 the Church of England Missionary Society opened the
station at Wellington Vale, in charge of Messrs. Handt and Watson.
It was abandoned in 1843.
In 1850 the Rev. William Ridley established a mission in theHamoi
district among the Kamilroi tribes.
The following was the Hew South Wales expenditure on
aboriginals for 1840 : —
Salary of Chief Protector ... ... ... £500
Pour assistant protectors ... ... .. 1,000
Allowances and donations ... ... ... 1,168
Salary of Threlkeld ... ... ... ... 150
Pour convict servants ... ... ... 36
Wellington Valley Mission ... ... ... 500
Port Philip Mission ... ... ... ... 600
Morton Bay Mission., ... ... ... 500
Provisions, clothes, blankets... ... ... 1,400 a
£5,854
In 1838 G. A. Robinson was appointed protector of aborigines at
Port Philip, with a salary of £5OO. This was the Robinson who
accomplished in Tasmania alone, and for nothing, the work in which
an army had failed.
Among the aboriginal stations started in Robinson’s time, in the
present territory of Victoria, was one at Bunting Dale, forty miles
from Geelong. It was liberally assisted by the Government, but
failed, according to Governor Gipps’ despatch, from three causes —
“being in the midst of four mutually hostile tribes, want of knowledge
of the language, and chiefly through the deadly influence of ungodly
Europeans.”
The Rev. Benjamin Hurst was then in charge of the-Wesleyan
Missionary Society’s Mission at Port Philip. In his report of 21st
October, 1842, he says: “Judging from present appearances it is
evident that by the time the missionary shall have acquired the
language so as to be able to preach the Gospel he will have no one to
preach to.”


Threlkeld’s Mission, Port Macquarie
... 2,145
German Mission, Morton Bay-
... 1,616
Port Philip Mission ...
... 4,538
Wellington Yale Mission ...
... 5,839
Port Philip Protectorate
... 25,191
Total cost of the Missions ...
... 17,792
Amount voted for 1894-5
... 11,300
We may judge of the sympathy the blacks received from some of
those who were supposed to protect them, w T hen we find the following
passage in a letter from Captain Foster Fyans, dated Geelong, 20th
September, 1840. He was then acting as a Crown Lands Commis-
sioner. The letter was written to Governor La Trobe. Fyans says :
“In my opinion the only plan to bring the natives to a fit and proper
state is to insist on the gentlemen in the country protecting their own
property, and to deal with such useless savages on the spot! ”
This Evans had been Commandant at Morton Bay from 1835 to
1.837.
From 1821 to the end of 1842 New South Wales expended a
total of £51,807 12s. 2d. on the aborigines. Included in that sum
is part of the following: —
QUEENSLAND.
From 1837 to 1843 the Eev. J. C. S. Handt conducted the first
aboriginal mission at Morton Bay, and in March, 1838, a band of
German Lutheran missionaries, sent out on the advice of Dr. Lang,
and at the expense of the Government, came to Morton Bay and
settled at German Station, six miles from the penal settlement on the
Brisbane Eiver. In the report of Lieutenant Gorman, dated Bth
February, 1841, he says: “The mission establishment consists of
11 men, 8 women, and 11 children. On their arrival here in 1838
they received from the Government 3 cows and calves, and their stock
now consists of 4 cows, 6 calves, and 1 bullock. They have 11 small
buildings, 15 acres of enclosed land, divided into gardens. The Eevs.
Schmidt and Eipper, the only two clergymen, have to labour the same
as the others. They have not been able to induce any of the blacks
to reside with them, though some assist for a few days now and then
in the gardens. They have, so far, had no influence on their morals or
habits. They have been nearly starving, and I issued 1,050 lb. of
flour from the stores. The Eev. Mr. Handt has been nearly four years
exerting himself without doing any good, and the missionaries are
much less likely to accomplish anything.”
By the Eev. Mr. Schmit’s report of 25th March, 1840, it appears
the blacks were robbing the gardens and were several times fired at by
the missionaries. Gorman, in a letter to the Colonial Secretary, said:
“ I regret very much that the missionaries fired on the blacks, as we
are on excellent terms with them for forty miles round.” The
missionaries inspired Ihe blacks with no fear, love, or respect, and not
one aboriginal was Christianised during the whole time the Mission
Station was occupied. It was hardly likely the Morton Bay wild blacks
of that period would have any reverence for white men whose physique
would bear no comparison with their own, and who worked hard for


mean food far inferior to that which the aboriginals obtained in
abundance without an effort. The mission ended in 1848. Up to
1842 it cost £1,516 14s. 2d.
In 1842 Dr. Folding, of Sydney, started a Catholic mission among
the aboriginals of Stradbroke Island. Five years afterwards, in 1847,
that mission was abandoned and the last priest removed, the record of
the station showing no useful result whatever. The last who remained
(Father Vicarrie) lived for the last six months in daily fear of being
killed. A second Catholic mission was started some years afterwards,
and ended with no results. The priests left and went to the Sandwich
Islands.
In 1873 the Rev. Mr. Fuller started a mission on Fraser’s Island,
lie tried another at Mackay and Hinchinbrook Island. One was
started on the Albert River, in 1867, by the veteran Hausmann, but
they all went the wav of the German Station and Stradbroke missions.
When Christopher Rolleston, the first Darling Downs Crown
Lands Commissioner, resided at Cambooya, from 1842 to 1848, he sent
a series of reports on the aboriginals to the Colonial Treasurer.
Dr. Simpson, the first Morton Bay Commissioner, also reported
in the same period. Both were allowed to issue small quantities of
provisions and clothes to friendly aboriginals, and this was done at
Cambooya on the Darling Downs, and Redbank on the Brisbane
River, .
In May of 1876 the Queensland Government appointed Bishop
Hale, A. C. Gregory, W. L. G. Drew, C. J. Graham, and W. Lands-
borough, as commissioners to inquire into and ameliorate the condition
of the aboriginals. There was then at Mackay a reserve of 10,000
acres, on which Mr. Bridgman, acting as Protector, had persuaded a
lot of blacks to reside. A school was erected, the children made satis-
factory progress, and many of the blacks were induced to work for
the settlers.
Bridgman was succeeded by J. Brooke. The reserve had then
been cancelled, thrown open for selection, and the vote of £5OO
suspended. In May, 1880, Brooke reported 300 blacks, most of
whom were at work trashing cane, clearing scrub, cutting firewood,
and hoeing crops. .
In September, 1878, the Premier (Hon. John Douglas), m
accordance with the proposals of the commissioners, in
committee for a grant of £1,(500, which was rejected without division,
and nearly without discussion. The commissioners having no funds,
their work was ended, and Drew formally resigned. The civilising
process begun at Bowen and lownsville also terminated, and the
sudden economy scattered the group of aboriginals under Thomas
Petrie’s care on Bribie Island.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Governor Grey, in a letter to Lord Stanley, dated Adelaide,
4th March, 1843, asked permission to introduce the system then two
vears in force in Western Australia, of granting a remission in the
purchase of land to the extent of £lB to anyone who has kept a native
woman in service for two years after the date of notice, and taught
her a competent knowledge and skill as a cook, house-servant, dress-
maker, laundress, or bonnet-maker. A similar remission to anyone
who has kept a native man for two years, and taught him to be


proficient in any agricultural work, and a concession of £36 to anyone
who instructs a native in some trade or handicraft so as to entitle him
to he treated as a journeyman. _ .
Lord Stanley expressed approval of the principle, and authorised
Grey to apply it “out of that portion of the land fund applicable to
the support and civilisation of the natives.”
Grey then wrote to say that nearly all the land funds had gone
to pay the colony’s debts, and that provision had been made by the
British Parliament for the relief of all classes who had suffered by the
bankruptcy of the colony, except the natives.
The estimates for the first quarter of 1813 show only £93 6s. Bd.
for the aboriginals
The “ Aborigines’ Protector ” for that year, M. Moorhouse,
reports remarkable success by the missionaries in their instruction of
native children.
The report for 18-14 shows a large amount of work done for the
farmers by the aboriginals of Encounter Bay, Lyndock Valley, and
Adelaide.
Governor Grey’s Government introduced a system of boarding-
schools, and in his home despatch of 10th April, 1844, Grey says •
“ There are now eighteen native children educated at this school,
voluntarily placed thereby their parents. Their conduct is extremely
satisfactory, and in all points relating to acquired knowledge they are
certainly on an equality with European children of the same age.”
Another school was opened with thirty more boarders. There were
also schools at Encounter Bay, Port Lincoln, and Walkerville, and the
Rev. Mr. Schurmann prepared and published his grammar and
vocabulary of the Port Lincoln dialect in that year, 1844.
The first mission at Adelaide began in 1838, under the Revs.
Schurmann and Teichelmann, who were sent out by the Lutheran
Society of Dresden.
In 1850 Archdeacon Hale, afterwards Bishop of Brisbane, began
the well-known Mission Station at Poonindie.
In 1858 the “ Aboriginal Friends’ Association ” of South Australia
appointed the Rev. Mr. Taplin missionary, and established a successful
station at Point Macleay, on Lake Alexandria. Mr. Taplin died
after more than twenty years of earnest work. The Moravian Church
sent Walder, Kuhn, Meissel, and Kramer to establish a mission
among the Cooper’s Creek blocks in 1865. In the same year four
missionaries, under the Rev. Mr. Homan, started the station at
Kopperamana, finally settling at the lake of that name in 1869.
Amount voted for 1894-5, £5,762.
WEST AUSTRALIA.
There is some very interesting official correspondence relating to
the natives in the early years of Western Australia, including one
remarkable despatch from Governor Hutt to Lord Glenelg, dated
at Perth on the 3rd May, 1839.
It is a long, exhaustive, and philosophical document.
In one part Hutt says : “ The aborigines are an anomalous but
most interesting race. They are active, hardy, daring, intelligent, and
faithful, impatient of restraint, utterly hateful of work, careless of
all European arts and comforts, the same now as when the colonists


landed ten years ago; totally free from the licentious course of most
savage people; uncontaminated, with some few exceptions, by the
vices of their invaders. Not the slightest vestige of any religious
sentiment or ceremony, and from childhood to the grave they
propitiate neither God nor devil. What is wanted in every country
like Western Australia is a Protector of the natives, a disinterested
and conscientious man with an earnest interest in the people and their
cause, to whom they could have recourse at all seasons, who should
stand as a mediator between them and the white people, and who
should be invested with the powers suggested in the report of the
Select Committee on Aboriginal Tribes.”
Attached to the despatch is the draft of a Bill to enable
magistrates to receive the evidence of aboriginals.
On the 29th of October, 1839, Lord John Eussell wrote to
Governor Hutt: “ I approve of the principle of this enactment, as it
is clearly right to enable the magistrates to take the evidence of a
native, though not upon oath. Ihe judge and jury can decide what
the evidence is worth. No sentence upon a native should be carried
into effect until the chief judge of the colony shall have the evidence
before him and confirmed the sentence. 1 trust that the recent
appointment of two protectors of aborigines for Western Australia
will be found not unproductive of beneficial results, and Her Majesty’s
Government will always be prepared to receive and consider any
plans you may submit for improving the condition of the natives.”
Charles Symmons and Peter Barrow were the two first protectors
referred to in the letter, the one to be stationed at Perth, and the
other at York. They were to act on carefully prepared and complete
printed instructions given by the Governor.
In 1840 the Perth Legislative Council passed “An Act to
Constitute the Island of Eottnest a Legal Prison ” for aboriginal
prisoners. (It is still used for that purpose.) On that island the
prisoners were encouraged to hunt and fish, and taught to cultivate
the soil and make gardens. This plan worked admirably. They raised
enough grain to support the establishment.
No other colony displayed so much consideration for the
aboriginals. It was the only one in which settlers were rewarded
for every male or female native kept two years in service and taught
some useful occupation. It started the first aboriginal boarding-schools,
and was the most liberal in appointing and assisting the Protectors.
And this, too, at a time when the population only numbered 2,500,
and the revenue of the colony was £9,000. Governor Hutt was
a very consistent and practical friend of the aboriginals, and his
friendship was emphatically endorsed by Lord John Eussell.
In 1849 the Eoman Catholic Church sent out to West Australia
ten priests, fourteen monks, and seven nuns, under the leadership
of Hr. Brady, to begin a comprehensive scheme of aboriginal
regeneration. They divided into three parties. The southern, after
great hardships, departed for Mauritius; the northern left for Port
Essington under Dr. Brady, and were lost on the voyage. The central
party, under Father Salvado afterwards Bishop of Norcia, settled
north-east of Perth, and established the most successful aboriginal
mission in West Australia. In 1850 the Eev. C. King, of the
Church of England, settled on the Swan Eiver and laboured for some
time with fair results.


WOKK OF 1895.
Australian estimates for 1894-5 —
£
New South Wales ...
... 11,800
South Australia
... 5,762
Victoria
... 5,600
West Australia
... 2,500
Queensland ...
... 2,000
In 1857 Mr. and Mrs. Camfield started a native school at King
George’s Sound under the care of Bishop Hale; hut after fifteen
years the school was closed for want of pupils, the blacks having nearly
died out.
(The latter sum exclusive of blankets.)
To-day in New South Wales the parliamentary vote for the
aborigines is expended under the direction of the “ Board for Protec-
tion of Aborigines,” consisting of eight members and a secretary.
Edmund Fosbery, Inspector-General of Police, is chairman, and Mr.
A. Berchelman secretary. The members’ services are gratuitous; the
secretary receives £9O per annum.
There are ninety-four aboriginal reserves, representing 23,900
acres. The amount expended last year, 1893, by the Board was
£15,253. The census for the year returns 7,255 aboriginals, of whom
1,614 are entirely supported by the Board. The total number of
children receiving instruction are 640, or 607 at schools, and thirty-
three privately. There are twelve schools exclusively used for
aboriginal children. Medical attendance and medicine for the year,
£822, extended over forty-three stations.
There are three mission stations in the colony—Cumeroogunga,
Warangesda, and Brewarrina, with a grand total of 114 full bloods
and 192 half-castes in December, 1893.
The Board, during the year, controlled no less than 134 distribut-
ing centres, where the blacks received rations, medicine, timber, tools,
roofing iron, seeds, hammers, forage, boats, fishing tackle, or clothing,
wherever any of these articles were required.
Much useful work is being done on many of the stations, and the
Board may well regard with satisfaction the results shown by their
report of 1893,
The blacks have built good substantial houses, fenced in the
reserves, planted fruit and vegetable gardens, and grown considerable
crops of maize, tobacco, sugar-cane, fruit, and vegetables.
Of one station the report says : “ They have cleared forty acres,
planted one-half with sugar-cane, and the rest with maize, vegetable, &c.
“ They all work well, and are in a fair way of making comfortable
houses for themselves.” One aboriginal is “an excellent farmer, and
his portion of the reserve can compare favourably with his white
neighbours’ places.” The blacks on Pelican Island, McLeay River, had
fifty-five acres under maize in 1893. Various reports prove that many
aboriginals on the stations have settled down quietly and contentedly
to farm and garden work. On others they spend part of their time in
hunting and fishing. Many aboriginals work on the cattle and sheep
stations.
“ The schools are inspected periodically by the district school
inspectors, and satisfactory reports are received of the progress made
by the pupils.”


The census for 1893 shows 150 deaths and 107 births, or a decrease
of forty-three full bloods. The deaths were fifty-seven less than the
average for the previous five years. The half-castes had 136 births
and sixty-two deaths, an increase of seventy-four.
In the report by the New South Wales Board for 1893 is the
following paragraph;—“ For purposes of comparison it may be
remarked that in the neighbouring colony of Victoria, where the total
number of aborigines is 732, the sum voted by Parliament for the
current year is £5,600, or £7 13s, per head, against an actual expendi-
ture of £15,253 14s. Id., or £2 2s. in New South Wales.”
** *******
Victoria has six mission stations and fourteen depots, all con-
trolled by the “ Board for the Protection of the Aborigines,” con-
sisting of eight members and the general inspector and secretary,
F. A.°Hagenauer. The Chief Secretary of Victoria is chairman. The
mission stations are Coranderrk, Condah, Ramahyuck, Bake Tyers,
Ebenezer, and Framlingham.
According to an Act of Parliament the half-castes have merged
into the general population, and 233 left the stations to make their
own living, the Board affording temporary assistance for those
requiring it. The managers of stations report highly satisfactory
progress in the moral and religious education of the children.
Excellent work is being done at the mission stations. Coranderrk
has 4,800 acres divided into twelve paddocks. The superintendent
reports: —“ About 16 acres were ploughed and sown with oats, from
which we obtained a good crop of hay. Four acres of wheat gave a
fair crop of hay. We also had 4 acres of potatoes. Our hop crop, as
usual, was very good, and we obtained the highest price in the
market, and the champion prize at the Royal Agricultural Show. VTe
have 89 acres, 6 calves, 127 heifers, 116 steers, 3 bulls, 10 working
bullocks, and 15 horses. ,
“ The able-bodied men are employed in farm work and the hop
garden, and in keeping the station in good repair. The women attend
to domestic duties, and make baskets for sale. The natives hunt for
game and fish on every opportunity.” .
On Lake Condah Station the natives were employed in clearing
and fencing, ploughing, hay-making, bark stripping, gardening, stock-
riding, and rabbiting.
Ramahyuck reports 15 tons of hay, 10 tons of potatoes, severa±
acres of carrots, mangolds, maize, peas, vegetables, and fruit.
Lake Hindmarsh, a reserve of 3,607 acres, reports 60 bags ot
wheat and 40 tons of hay. There are 600 sheep and 33 cattle and horses.
Lake Tyers has 4,200 acres, 175 cattle, and 190 sheep, 11 acres of
cultivation, and 3 acres of fruit trees.
*********
In South Australia the aboriginals are guarded by the Incorporated
Aborigines Friends Association, consisting of 4 officers and a com-
mittee of 22.
At the Point McLeay Mission Station there is an average
attendance of over 200 natives, of whom 78 are church members, and
70 children attend school. Apart from the natives own gardens there
are 22 acres of wheat, 5 of vines, 9 of peas, 3 of fruit trees, 2 ot
kitchen garden, and 48 of wattles.
The stock included 17 horses, 34 cattle, and 1,700 sheep.


The boys are taught farming and trades, and the girls sewing and
cooking. The association controls the reserves at Point McLeay,
1,700 acres at Loveday Bay, 1,900 acres on the Coorong, and two
other sections.
Public subscriptions are raised to cover the cost of the purely
religious operations on the reserves.
Monthly reports from the reserves and distribution stations are
sent to the Protector of Aborigines.
Among the white men employed on Point McLeay reserve are
the farm overseer and the instructor in boot-making.
Last report mentions 460 pairs of boots made during the year.
EEPOET OF HOUSE OF COMMONS COMMITTEE.
On the 20th of February, 1837, the House of Commons appointed
a committee to consider what measures ought to be adopted with
regard to the aboriginals on territory occupied as British settlements,
“in order to secure to them the due observance of justice and the
protection of their rights.”
The committee consisted of William Gladstone, Powell Buxton,
Sir E. Donkin, Sir George Grey, Colonel Thompson, and Messrs.
Hawes, Bagshaw, Holland, Pease, Baines, Johnston, Hindley, Plumtre,
and Wilson.
The minutes of evidence and the report of a committee in the
previous year were referred to the new committee.
Voluminous evidence was taken from witnesses representing all
the British colonies, and an elaborate report was prepared.
Eeferring to New South Wales the report says:—
“ The inhabitants of New Holland, in their original condition,
have been described by travellers as the most degraded of the human
race; but it is to be feared that intercourse with Europeans has cast
over their original debasement a yet deeper shade of wretchedness.
“These people,unoffending as they were towards us,have, as might
have been expected, suffered in an aggravated degree from the planting
amongst them of our penal settlements. In the formation of these
settlements it does not appear that the territorial rights of the natives
were considered, and very little care has since been taken to protect
them from the violence or the contamination of the dregs of our
countrymen.
“ The effects have consequently been dreadful beyond example,
both in the diminution of their numbers and in their demoralisation.
“ The case of these people has not been wholly overlooked at
home. In 1825 His Majesty issued instructions to the Governor to
the effect that they should be protected in the enjoyment of their
possessions, preserved from violence and injustice, and that measures
should be taken for their conversion to the Christian faith and their
advancement in civilisation. An allowance has been made to the
Church Missionary Society in their behalf, and efforts for their
amelioration have been made and attended with some degree of
utility ; but much as we rejoice in this act of justice we still must
express our conviction that if we are ever able to make atonement to
the remnant of this people it will require no slight attention and no
ordinary sacrifices on our part to compensate for the evil association
which we have inflicted ; but even hopelessness of making reparatiou
for what is past would not in any way lessen our obligation to stop,


as far as in us lies, the continuance of iniquity. ‘ The evil,’ said
Mr. Coates, ‘resulting from immoral intercourse between the Europeans
and the aborigines is so enormous that it appears to my mind a moral
obligation on the local Government to take any practicable measures
in order to put an end to it.’
“ The land has been taken from them without the assertion of
any other title than that of superior force, and by the commissions
under which the Australian colonies are governed, Her Majesty’s
sovereignty over the whole of Holland is asserted without
reserve
“ When it is remembered that unsettled land has been sold by
the Government of New South Wales, yielding in a single_ year
returns to the local Treasury exceeding £IOO,OOO, and that in the
recollection of many living men every part of this territory was the
undisputed property of the aborigines, it is demanding little indeed
on their behalf to require that no expenditure should be withheld
which can be incurred judiciously for the maintenance of missionaries,
who should be employed to instruct the tribes, and of Protectors,
whose duty it should be to defend them. With regard to the duties
of missionaries, your committee have no other suggestion to make
than that the choice of them, and the direction of their labours,
should be confided to the missionary societies in this kingdom. But
with regard to the office of Protector, there is greater room for specific
suggestions.
“ The duties of the Protectors of the aborigines in New Holland
should consist, first, in cultivating a personal knowledge of the
natives, and a personal intercourse with them; and with that view
these officers should be expected to acquire an adequate familiarity
with the native language. To facilitate the growth of confidence the
Protectors should be furnished with some means of making to the
tribes occasional presents of articles either of use or ornament, of
course abstaining from the gift of liquors. The Protectors should
ascertain what is that species of industry which is least foreign to the
habits and disposition of the objects of their care, and should be
provided with all the necessary means of supplying them with such
employment. Especially they should claim for the maintenance of
the aborigines such lands as may be necessary for their support. So
long as agriculture shall be distasteful to them, they be
provided with the means of pursuing the chase without molestation.
The education of the young will, of course, be amongst the foremost
of the cares of the missionaries; and the Protectors should render
every assistance in their power in advancing this all-important part of
any general scheme of improvement.
“This evil remains very similar in character, and not altogether unfit
to be compared with slavery in the amount of misery it produces. The
oppression of the natives of barbarous countries is a practice which
pleads no claim to indulgence; it is an evil of comparatively recent
origin, insidious and unhallowed in its growth ; it never has had
even the colour of sanction from the legislature of this country ; no
vested rights are associated with it, and we have not the poor excuse
that it contributes to any interest of the State. On the contrary, in
point of economy, of security of commerce, of reputation, it is a short-
sighted and disastrous policy. As far as it has prevailed it has been a
burthen on the Empire. It has thrown impediments in the way of


successful colonisation ; it has engendered wars in which great expenses
were necessarily incurred, and no reputation could be won ; and it has
banished from our confines, or exterminated, the natives who might
have been profitable workmen, good customers, and good neighbours.
These unhappy results have not flowed from any determination on the
part of the Government of this country to deal hardly with those who
are in a less advanced state of society; but they seem to have arisen
from ignorance, from the difficulty which distance interposes in check-
ing the cupidity and punishing the crimes of that adventurous class of
Europeans who lead the way in penetrating the territory of uncivilised
man, and from the system of dealing with the rights of the natives.
PROTECTION OF NATIVES TO DEVOLVE ON THE EXECUTIVE.
“ The protection of the aborigines should be considered as a duty
peculiarly belonging and appropriate to the Executive Government, as
administered either in this country by the Governors of the
respective colonies. This is not a trust which could conveniently be
confided to the local legislatures. In proportion as those bodies are
qualified for the right discharge of their proper functions, they will
be unfit for the performance of this office. Eor a local legislature, if
properly constituted, should partake largely in the interests, and
represent the feelings or the settled opinions of the great mass of the
people for whom they act. But the settlers in almost every colony,
having either disputes to adjust with the native tribes or claims to
urge against them, the representative body is virtually a party, and
therefore ought not to be the judge in such controversies. Or if the
members of the colonial legislature are not chosen by the people, but
selected by the Government, there is still a similar objection their
interference with regard to the aborigines. Possessing an invidious
elevation in which they are supported by no other title than that of
the preference of the Crown, they will endeavour to abate the
ill-will which follows on such superiority, by ministering to all
popular prejudices which do not directly invade the power and the
rights of the Government they serve. Whatever may be the legis-
lative system of any colony, we therefore advise that, as far as
possible, the aborigines be withdrawn from its control. lu the
formation of any new colonial constitution, or in the amendment of
any which now exist, we think that the initiative of all enactments
affecting the aborigines should be vested in the officer administering
the Government; that no such law should take effect until it had been
expressly sanctioned by the Queen, except in cases of evident and
extreme emergency ; that copies of all such laws should be communi-
cated to both Houses of Parliament with all convenient despatch; and
that the Governor of each colony should be invested by Her Majesty,
safar as the Royal prerogative should be adequate to the purpose,
with authority for the decision of all questions affecting the interests
of the native tribes. If the creation of such powers by the Crown
shall not appear practicable, then we conceive that they should be
created by legislative authority.”
* * * * * *
Referring to Penn’s treaties with the Indians, the appendix
states * ——
“We may now estimate the sacrifices of William Penn. If his
quit-rents amounted to £SOO per annum, he must have sold 1,000,000


acres o£ land, for which, according to the terms of sale, he must have
received £20,000. To this add the £6,000 now mentioned, and he
must have spent £26,000 upon the province—in presents to the
Indians, in repurchases of the land from these, in the maintenance of
Government and Governor, and in other public matters, a sum not
much short of £IOO,OOO in these days
“ It was at this time (1682) when he first entered personally
into that lasting friendship with the Indians which ever afterwards
continued between them, and for .the space of more than seventy years
was never interrupted; or so long as the Quakers, to whom even long
after his death they always continued to show the greatest regard,
retained power in the Government sufficient to influence a friendly
and just conduct towards them, and to prevent or redress such
misunderstandings and grievances as occasionally happened between
them, and any of the inhabitants of the province, &c. A firm peace
was now, therefore, reciprocally concluded between William Penn and
the Indians, and both parties mutually promised to live together as
brethern, without doing the least injury to each other. This was
solemnly ratified by the usual token of a chain of friendship and
covenant indelible, never to be broken, so long as the sun and moon
endure
“It is worthy of notice that at the first settling of Pennsylvania,
William Penn took great care to do justice to the Indians, and bought
his land off them to their satisfaction, and settled a trade with them ;
so that whereas the Indians were destructive to other colonies they
were helpful to Pennsylvania, and to this day they love to hear the
name of William Penn.”
On the 23rd April, 1701, Penn, as Governor of Pennsylvania,
made a treaty at Philadelphia with Indian chiefs representing the Six
Nations.
In that treaty are the following passages :
“ That the said kings and chiefs (each for himself and his people
engaging) shall at no time hurt, injure, or defraud, or suffer v to be
hurt, injured, or defrauded by any of their Indians, any inhabitant or
inhabitants of the said province, either their persons or estates. And
that the said William Penn, his heirs and successors, shall not suffer
to be done or committed, by any of the subjects of England within the
said province, any act of hostility or violence, wrong or injury, to or
against any of the said Indians, but shall on both sides, at all times,
readily do justice, and perform all acts and offices of friendship and
goodwill, to oblige each other to a lasting peace, as aforesaid. .
“ That, for the prevention of abuses that are too frequently put
upon the said Indians in trade, the said William Penn, his heirs and
successors, shall not suffer or permit any person to trade or converse
with any of the said Indians but such as shall be first allowed and
approved by an instrument under the hand and seal of him, the said
William Penn, or his heirs or successors, or their lieutenants; and
that the said Indians shall suffer no person whatsoever to buy or sell,
or have commerce with any of them, the said Indians, but such as shall
first be approved as aforesaid.”


BRIEF EXTRACTS FROM DESPATCHES AND REPORTS.
Sir George Murray.
18th February, ] 838.
“The conversion of the aborigines of New Holland to Christianity,
and the introduction of civilisation among them, is regarded by His
Majesty’s Government as an object of so much importance that there
is no probability of any undertaking which holds out a fair prospect
of success being allowed to languish for want of additional pecuniary
aid.”
Coates to Lord Glenelg.
31st October, 1838.
“ The progress of civilisation operates disastrously on the
aborigines by exhausting their food supplies, and drawing them into
baneful contact with the colonial population. The claims of this
wretched people on the British Government for the adoption of every
practicable means for their moral and social melioration rest on the
strongest grounds of humanity and justice.”
Lord Russell to Governor Gipps.
25th August, 1840.
“ Two sources of mischief mar the most benevolent designs, the
one arising from the inaptitude of the natives to change their
desultory habits and learn those of settled industry; the other from
the constant inroads of Europeans, to rob, corrupt, and destroy them.
Nothing can be more laborious, dangerous, or painful than for
missionaries to take up a post among a race of suspicious, ignorant,
and indolent savages, and defend their cause and their existence
against violent, armed, and rapacious Europeans.”
Lord Russell to Governor Gipps.
11th August, 1841.
“ I approve of the plan which you propose for the formation of a
fixed station for each assistant Protector of Aborigines, and agree
with you that the training of the children is the only way in which
the aborigines may be civilised.”
Governor Gipps to Lord Russell.
7th April, 1841.
“ I have on several occasions, and particularly in November last,
in answer to an address presented to me at Wellington Valley,
endeavoured to persuade the New South "Wales settlers to look to the
blacks for a supply of labour.”
Lord Stanley to Governor Gipps.
sth October, 1841.
“ I cannot divest myself of the apprehension that the fault in
most cases lies with the colonists rather than with the natives. It
was natural that conduct so harsh and intemperate as that of the
Messrs. Mackay should be signally visited on them, and probably also
on wholly unoffending persons, by a race of uninstructed and ignorant
savages. The case of Mr. Docker affords a most satisfactory instance
of natives entering into permanent service with white men, and
working steadily for wages.”


Report by Select Committee of House of Commons.
July, 1834.
“It might be presumed that the natives of any land have an
incontrovertible right to their own lands ; it is a plain and sacred right
which appears not to have been understood. Europeans have entered
their borders uninvited, and when there have not only acted as if they
were the undoubted lords of the soil, but have punished the natives as
aggressors if they have evinced a disposition to live in their own
country. If the Australian aborigines have been found upon their
own property they have been hunted as thieves and robbers; driven
back into the interior as if they were dogs or kangaroos.”
Judge Willis at Melbourne.
September, 1841.
“ I am not aware of any express enactment or treaty subjecting
the aborigines of this colony to the English colonial law, and I have
shown that they cannot be considered as foreigners in a kingdom
which is their own. I desire to see their state improved—to see them
freed from error —to see the duties of humanity amply and practically
fulfilled —to see all due protection extended to this unhappy race —the
protection of their rights by laws adapted to their capacity and suited
to their wants —the protection of all equal and all powerful justice.”
Commissioner J. Lambie to Colonial Secretary.
Maneroo, 14th January, 1842.
“At the stations on the coast many of the natives are employed
in sheep-washing, hoeing maize, and reaping, and three boats’ crews
of eighteen were employed in Einlay’s whale fishery at Twofold Bay
on the same terms as the whites. They lived in huts, slept in beds,
used cooking utensils, and made flour into bread; but when the
fishing was over they all went back to their tribes in the bush.”
C. J. Latrobe to Colonial Secretary.
Melbourne, sth January, 1842.
“ If the aboriginal race is to be preserved, or their civil and
religious improvement made permanent, they must be cut off by some
means or other from all intercourse with Europeans except those
placed among them for their benefit.”
Governor Gipps to Lord Stanley.
4th January, 1843.
“ I can scarcely think that any projects for the amelioration of
the native race can be successful if not founded on the principle of
separating them entirely from intercourse with white men.”
Protector G. A. Robinson’s Report.
11th December, 1841.
“ The aborigines are capable of being instructed, and if their
condition be not improved the fault cannot be attributed to them, for
I have found them intelligent, possessing intellect and capacity of no
ordinary description, and in this respect fully equal to a large
majority of the peasantry of civilised communities.”


Lord Stanley to Goveenoe Gipps.
20th December, 1842.
“ At present there seems to be an apparent want of feeling among
the settlers where the natives are concerned, which is much to be
lamented. Outrages of the most atrocious description, involving con-
siderable loss of life, are spoken of in these papers with an indif-
ference and lightness which to those at a distance is very shocking.
It is indispensable to the protection of the natives that this evidence
should be received in courts of law, and I shall consider the means by
which this can be effected in the safest and most satisfactory manner.”
Lieutenant Sadliee.
Lieutenant Sadlier, before the committee in 1833, said : “We
claim the Australian aborigines as our subjects, amenable to our laws,
and as our subjects they ought to be protected. We deprive them of
their lands and means of subsistence, and in justice ought to remunerate
them. As a question of humanity nothifig can be more dreadful to
contemplate or more disgraceful to a Christian and civilised nation
than the wholesale destruction going on for the last fifty years, and
must continue to the end unless some plan is devised to prevent it.”
Goveenoe Gipps to Loed Stanley.
4th January, 1843.
“The Bunting Dale Wesleyan Mission failed chiefly owing to
what Mr. Hurst called the ‘deadly influence of ungodly Europeans.’ ”
Peotectoe Robinson.
14th December, 1842.
“ There are in general at this station (Mount Rouse) from 400 to
500 natives, and this number might be trebled. For industry they
are inferior to none, and only judicious management is necessary to
make them a useful community. They are not wanting in knowledge
or disposition for acquiring knowledge; all that is necessary is method,
capacity, and decision on the part of the agents employed.”
H. P. Dana, Commandant op fiest Native Police.
Melbourne, 16th June, 1843.
“It is my firm belief that if a large body were raised, with
competent white officers, and placed under martial law, it would do
more to civilise them than any other system yet tried. An Australian
native can do anything as well as any white man when made to do it,
and feels that he must.’ ’
Repoet of Januaey, 1844.
“At Encounter Bay the blacks have reaped 100 acres of wheat,
oats, and barley; at Adelaide from fifty to sixty acres, and they cut
200 acres for Mr. Emmett at Lyndock Valley. They also collected
five tons of Mimosa bark.”
Goveenoe Hutt to The Maequis of Noemanby.
Perth, 11th February, 1840.
“ Captain Grey, so long as he holds the appointment of Resident,
will amply supply the place of a Protector, and even without him the
aborigines of those southern districts, from having been well treated


and admirably managed from the commencement of our intercourse
with them, have hitherto shown themselves so tractable and obedient,
and on such good terms with the white people, as scarcely to need one.”
Loud Stanley to Guveenoe Hutt.
“ On 30th October, 1841, Lord Stanley wrote to Governor Ilutt,
of West Australia, approving of aboriginal reserves, and suggesting
that if they became very valuable they might be sold, and the proceeds
vested in the Government and Protector for the benefit of the
aborigines, some of it to be expended in buying small areas for the
blacks, to be owned and cultivated by them among the white settlers,”
Goveenoe Hutt to Loed Russell.
10th July, 1841.
“I have availed myself of this hint to issue a public notice
offering a remission in the purchase of lands to the amount of £lB to
anyone who shall produce satisfactory evidence of a native having been
in his employ for two years, and that he has acquired a competent
knowledge and skill in the usual farming operations ; a remission in
the purchase of land to the extent of £36 to anyone who can show
that he has instructed a native in any trade, calling, or handicraft of
such a nature as is usually brought under the system of apprenticeship.’*
Ridley, in 1856.
“It has been shown,” said the Rev. Wm. Ridley, in 1856, “ from
their songs and cherished traditions, that they possess qualities in
which civilised men glory—such as the power of inventing tragic and
sarcastic fiction, the thirst for religious mystery, the stoical contempt
of pain, and reverence for departed friends and ancestors.
“It may even be affirmed, with some reason, that they have handed
down with reverential care, through many generations, a fragment of
primeval revelation. In order to account for their apparent contra-
dictions we must resort to the supposition of an ancient civilisation
from which this race has fallen, but of which they have retained some
memorials.
“ A very large book might be filled with cases in which Australian
aboriginals have exercised the nobler qualities of man as faithful
servants and true friends of Europeans. In no branch of the human
family can there be found more convincing proofs of gratitude and
affection. Many blacks have clung to white friends through danger
and distress with unalterable attachment. Many lost men, women,
and children have been saved by aboriginal trackers, many a colonist
rescued from floods by aboriginal swimmers, and many a snake-bitten
white man been saved by a native sucking the poison from the
wound.”
Loed Russell to Goteenoe Gipps.
The following despatch from Lord John Russell to Sir George
Gipps, dated 21st December, 1839, is a concise expression of the
honourable and humane intentions of the various Secretaries of State
towards the Australian aboriginals :
“ You cannot overrate the solicitude of Her Majesty’s Government
on the subject of the aborigines of New Holland. It is impossible to
contemplate the condition and the prospects of that unfortunate race
without the deepest commiseration. I am well aware of the many
difficulties which oppose themselves to the effectual protection of those


people, and especially of those which must originate from the
exasperation of the settlers on account of aggressions on their
property, which arc not the less irritating because they are nothing
else than the natural results of the pernicious examples held out to
the aborigines, and of the many wrongs of which they have been the
victims. Still it is impossible that the Government should forget that
the original aggression was our own, and that we have never yet
performed the sacred duty of making any systematic or considerable
attempt to impart to the aborigines the blessings of Christianity or a
knowledge of the arts and advantages of civilised life.
“ You may calculate with the utmost confidence on the cordial
support of Ministers of the Crown in every well-directed effort for
securing to the aboriginal race of New Holland protection against
injustice, and the enjoyment of every social advantage which our
superior wealth and knowledge at once confer on us the power, and
impose on us the duty, of imparting to them. For this purpose you
will use every effort to afford instruction to their children and young
men. You will seek out persons whose humanity leads them to be
kind to the native races, and you will take means to reward the
missionaries who may engage in this good work.”
TOTAL RESULTS.
And now, in 1895, after seventy years of scattered missionary
efforts, isolated individual benevolences, and numberless good inten-
tions of philanthropic statesmen, we are left to say, with Hr. Yon
Martms on the American Indians, that “ the present and future of
this race of men, wandering homeless in their native land, is a
monstrous and tragical drama, such as no fiction of the poet ever yet
presented to our contemplation. A whole race of men are wasting
away before our eyes, and apparently no power of princes, philosophy,
or Christianity, can arrest their proudly gloomy progress towards a
certain and utter destruction.”
The whole aboriginal population of Victoria, once numbering
many thousands, is now reduced to 700. All the once numerous and
powerful tribes of New South Wales are represented by 7,000
survivors.
When Morton Bay was first occupied by white men, the native
tribes on the present Queensland territory numbered at least 200,000,
now represented probably by 80,000, rapidly diminishing. So far,
therefore, no agency employed on behalf of the aboriginals has done
anything tangible to arrest their progress towards ultimate annihilation,
and it has become customary to allude to them as a “ doomed race,”
and regard the prospect of their extinction with indifference.
We shall put aside the “doomed race” theory as the shameful
subterfuge in which strong races have endeavoured to take refuge
from their crimes on the weak. In America, William Penn and the
early settlers made treaties with the Indians, purchased their lands,
and respected their territories. Treaties of various kinds, not always
respected, have continued to the present. The Indians were a warlike
race, and made some kind of terms compulsory.
Treaties were made with the Maories, and to-day New Zealand
Governments have to purchase native lands at approved prices. The
Maories also were a warlike race, and they, too, enforced terms with
the conqueror.


In Australia there have been no treaties, and no terms with the
aboriginals, from the landing of Governor Phillip to the present time.
No compensation whatever has ever been given to them for lands
occupied and game destroyed. Their exclusive right to any land or
game has never even been recognised. They have been treated as
trespassers instead of the original owners of the soil—a race whose
title deeds of occupation were old when Britain was occupied by
tribes of painted cannibals, and the modern British race had neither a
habitation nor a name. Their sacred rights have not been recognised,
because they were too disunited and too weak to enforce recognition.
The historian and the philosopher * now mourn over the lost
Tasmanian race, and speak with sadness and horror of the extinction
of a whole nation of people in a brief period of forty years.
But the five Australian colonies are repeating the same tragedy,
and the edge of the shameful cloud that must ever hang over
Tasmania is already appearing on the Australian horizon.
No one can read the history of New Zealand, from 1823 to the
first serious trouble at Kororareka, without seeing clearly that every
acre of land would have been taken from the Maories without con-
sulting them, and without payment, had they not been sufficiently
united and warlike to demand some reasonable terms. Writing of
the Maori troubles in 1845, William Brown, M.L.C., said; “Part of
the evil arose from the ill-advised measures of Sir George Gipps, and
the recklessness with which he carried through the Council of New
South Wales the first Land Claims Bill, basing it, contrary to-the
instructions and sentiments of the Marquis of Normanby, upon the
unjust and false assertion that the New Zealanders were wandering
savages who had no right to the soil of their own country. This Act
may certainly be termed the first and fatal step in our management of
New Zealand.”
When the whites arrived in Australia, the whole territory was in
possession of natives, divided into hundreds of tribes, each restricted
to its owm clearly defined area. The early settlers were ignorant of
their language, laws, and customs. Unconsciously they were continu-
ously grossly violating laws that were sacred to the aboriginals.
Among themselves no native could even walk on to the land of
another tribe without special permission and a satisfactory reason.
Protector Robinson’s report of December, 1843, says a party of
immigrants forming a station under the mountains were ordered by
the natives to leave. “It was their country and the water belonged
to them, and if it was taken away they could not go on to other
country for they would be killed.”
The white men came and shot game and trespassed anywhere
without permission. When a white man took up land or a station he
expected the blacks of that locality to move back into other territory,
unconscious that this would be an unpardonable violation of tribal
laws, and involve immediate deadly warfare with the adjoining tribes.
Rarely had any white men attempted to learn a dialect or understand
the customs of this peculiar people, and those who did had no power
to direct the course of events.
So wars began between the two races, and have continued with
little intermission to the present time.
The country of the aboriginals has been taken by force, and
themselves driven off as trespassers.


THE FUTURE.
Turning our back upon the gloomy past we shall try what ray o£
hope lights the darkness of the future.
Queensland may yet settle that problem of caring for and pre-
serving the native race in a manner to the eternal honour of herself
and our common humanity.
So far all efforts to improve or preserve the aboriginals have
been made under conditions certain to end in failure, and they have
usually been directed by men destitute of the absolutely essential
qualifications.
Nearly the whole of the early missionaries were men fresh from
the old countries, with only their sincerity and good intentions as a
recommendation. They started with the fixed delusive idea that the
race was to be saved by religion only, and that the aboriginal mind
was a soil on which the seeds of religious dogmas could be sown
broadcast and bear much fruit. They the fact that the
Australian native is primitive man of the Stone Age, separated
from the men who came to instruct him by many thousand years of
cumulative civilisation ; that the pupil was the base, and the teacher
the apex, of a pyramid that has been building since savage man made
the first stone implement far back in the long-forgotten unrecorded
morning of the human race. The attempt to civilise the aboriginal
in a year, or in ten years, or in the lifetime of one generation, meant
a hopeless effort to pass him by some magical transformation through
all the stages that have occupied civilised man for countless ages.
In all cases the attempt was a disheartening failure. It could
hardly have been anything else. It was not because the aboriginals
lacked intuition, the perceptive faculties, and general intelligence, for
in all these qualities their average was equal to or above that of the
average of civilised races. But a race who had no form of worship,
no idols, and no gods, could hardly be expected to at once comprehend
a religion whose theological niceties and doctrines have divided some
of the greatest thinkers of the human race for nearly 2,000 years.
And in teaching Christianity to a wild race it would be well to
remember what proportion of men worthy to be called Christians are
to be found even among professedly Christian nations. And the
early missionaries were fighting a heroic but desperate battle in the
midst of the surrounding scoundrelism of their own race, including
men depraved by crime or brutalised by the lash, and whom the
aboriginals regarded with contempt or disgust.
An old native said to Threlkeld, at Port Macquarie, in 1834:
“ Before whitefellow come here, blackfellow all good. Plenty bad white-
fellow come here; now plenty bad blackfellow. First time you make em
good whitefellow, then you come make ’em good blackfellow.”
And Threlkeld admitted that the argument was unanswerable. It
was also somewhat hard for missionaries to deliver the sublime message
of “ Peace on earth, goodwill to men,” to the blacks at the Mission
Station while white men were shooting other blacks for killing a few
sheep or hunting cattle on the adjoining runs.
Threlkeld, in seventeen years, and the ten Morton Bay
missionaries in twelve years, failed to make one satisfactory convert.
Better success waited on others who worked under more favourable
conditions ; but all the missions so far among adult blacks have


ensured no permanent results. Noble work has been done among the
children, for there the missionary had a clear field and virgin soil. In
that case they moved the young savage forward one stage of civilisa-
tion. The next generation would move forward another stage, and
the third or fourth would settle in the agricultural stage, useful to
themselves and mankind.
Hut to effect this gradual transition there must be certain
essentials, chief of which is complete isolation of their social life from
contact icith the white races. AH the wisest of the early writers
and statesmen recognised this necessity, and yet no Grovernment
established the conditions.
The reserves were either created in settled districts or in
localities where settlement soon followed and absorbed them. And
none of the reserves possessed the necessary conditions.
They must provide for hunting, fishing, and agriculture. The
hunter of the Stone Age, accustomed to a wild free Imnter’s life,
cannot be suddenly transformed into an industrious farmer. He can
only be very gradually reconciled to any form of labour. Since the
earliest settlement the blacks have done a great deal of useful work
with farmers, timber-getters, and squatters. Hundreds were employed
every harvest on the east coast rivers of New South Wales. But
the adult blacks, fresh from the forest, will only work under special
encouragement, at labour not requiring prolonged effort or much
restraint. Their occupation must be varied ; a little work, a little
hunting, a little amusement. The children would grow up accustomed
to more regular employment, and the next generation would work as
steadily as the white race, if necessary. The third generation of
North American Indians settled quietly down to agriculture. In
parts of Canada the Indians from the Reserves to-day take off all the
hop crop for the white farmers.
In three or four years there could be hundreds of Queensland
aboriginals available to do work for which we now import Papuans.
They could take off crops of cane, cotton, tea, coffee, &c , and then
return to their reserves and their families. Por that purpose the
young generation now growing up could be trained in a few f years.
Surely no sane person will apply to our own aboriginals the objections
entertained against imported Papuan labour ! The reserves could soon
be made self-supporting. The women would take kindly to the grow-
ing of fruit and vegetables, and there is much agricultural work for
which they and the men are specially adapted.
TRACKERS.
Attached to the reserves should be a training station for trackers.
Unless this is done the race of Australian trackers will soon be extinct.
They could be trained there for all the colonies, and all the colonies
might contribute something towards the cost.
There are practically no trackers obtainable now on the Austra-
lian coast from Adelaide to Townsville. The old tribes, once famous
for their marvellous eyesight, have vanished or lost the gift; The eye
loses its power, like the muscles, unless kept in perpetual practice.
Hundreds of lives of white men, women, and children have been saved
by the native trackers within the last sixty years. Hundreds of
criminals have been captured, and many otherwise undiscoverable
crimes been detected by these matchless lynx-eyed detectives.


THE RESERVES.
It would be well to begin with two reserves, one in South and one
in Northern Queensland, both on the sea coast. The exact locality
required is available in both territories. These reserves contain a
considerable area of rich soil for cultivation, some good pasture land,
abundance of timber, an extensive hunting field, and command an
unlimited supply of fish. They are so situated that no white settle-
ment can ever interfere. State nurseries on a large scale could be
established on these reserves, and all the work be done by the aboriginals
under competent white instructors.
Cocoanut plantations would be formed on the sea coast of each
reserve, and maize, bananas, yams, potatoes, sweet potatoes, and many
nutritious vegetables planted at once to effect the earliest possible
economy in the food supply. Beef should come from cattle killed on
the reserve, as every part of the beasts could be used. Pish would be
supplied by parties constantly employed fishing with nets and boats.
Pish preserving could be made a profitable industry.
The question of clothing, cooking, &c., &c., would be included in
the details of management. The present generation of old and middle-
aged men and women would be allowed to live in their own primitive
camps made by themselves ; the young men in huts made of dressed
slabs or sawn timber, with roofs of bark or shingles.
The village would be laid out in regular order, with streets and
squares, special sanitary arrangement, and water supply. Each
married couple would have their own allotment of land, and culti-
vate their own vegetables and fruit. The single people would culti-
vate and share the proceeds of their lauds in common. Habits of
cleanliness and industry would be taught regularly, and enforced when
necessary. A number of carefully chosen middle-aged aboriginals
would be appointed as special constables, and entrusted with all police
duties.
The first Australian Protector, Gr. A. Robinson, tried this police
experiment, with highly satisfactory results, in Victoria in 1839,
and on Plinders Island with the Tasmania survivors in 1837. No
white visitors would be allowed on the reserves, under any circum-
stances, except with an order from the Government, the Protector, or
a police magistrate, the object of the visit to be clearly defined.
Ministers of any Christian churches to be welcome at all times, their
teaching to be restricted to the moral ethics of Christianity, the one
common platform on which all sects can meet in comparative amity.
The aboriginals should be encouraged to make their own weapons,
to practise their use, to preserve their language, and maintain all their
own laws and customs which do not interfere with the harmonious
management of the community.
There must be regular periods for work, play, idleness, and
sleep. The whole community must be governed by'a fixed code of
laws, sternly enforced at all hazards when necessary, Any men or
women of peculiarly discordant disposition would require isolation or
entire removal, for the sake of all the others.
The young men would be taught agriculture, horsemanship,
blacksmithing, carpentry, and other trades. When a couple married
they would receive half an acre of land exclusively for themselves, to
be fenced if necessary, and the house erected by the community.


The amusements would include cricket, football, running and
jumping, swimming, and practice with native weapons.
The girls would be taught to sew, make their own clothes, cook,
wash, and keep house. Both sexes would be taught reading, writing,
and singing. The youths training as trackers would be taken out
regularly over all kinds of country, in all weathers, and trained by
skilled trackers. The best performers would receive small prizes, to
be awarded by their own instructors. Suitable small prizes would be
given to those who had the best cultivated garden.
The reserves can be made not only self-supporting if wisely
managed, but to yield a profit available for extended operation. In
Victoria the Coranderrk Mission Station in one year grew a hop crop
worth £1,140, leaving a clear profit of £983. One or two stations
still have a revenue in excess of expenses, though operating on a very
small and imperfect plan.
The first condition is to feed the aboriginals. The food supply
was the primary and principal problem with all Australian races.
Until an aboriginal is well fed he is not in a condition for improve-
ment of any kind. This applies equally to civilised men.
The old men and women in certain localities may prefer to live
the rest of their lives where they are. In that case the Protector
would see that they were supplied with food under the direction of
some local and reliable friend of the blacks. He would also carefully
select gentlemen willing to act as honorary Protectors in different
parts of the colony, to report the state of the local aboriginals and the
treatment of those in the employment of whites. He would also
inquire into all offences by or on the aboriginals, and defend, or
arrange for their defence, when prosecuted.
To start the reserves, he will collect from 203 to 400 strong
healthy aboriginals, of both sexes, in the first twelve months. In five
years there might be from 3,000 to 5,000 of all ages assembled, all
properly organised, well fed, self-supporting, progressive, and con-
tented. At the end of three years there should be 500 men ready
for the cane, cotton, coffee, or other crop season on any part of the
coast. They would return to their houses at the close of the season.
That they can be managed so as to do this work successfully I have
no doubt whatever.
They would receive so much of the wages for themselves, and the
balance ’would go to the general fund of the settlement, for the
reserves would actually be “ Native Settlements,” under a system of
local government adapted to the aboriginal character.
It may be said that the natives could be most easily preserved by
leaving them undisturbed on their native hunting grounds ; but as the
conditions of colonisation preclude all possibility of anything of the
kind, we must accept some practical alternative and make the best of
it. Pate has willed that the Australian aboriginal be forced into a
changed environment, and we are bound by the calls of justice and
humanity to assist him, by all available means, to adapt himself to
that new environment, so as to save him perishing from the face of
the earth, bequeathing to us with his dying breath the dreadful
responsibility of his annihilation.


A NATIVE EEGIMENT.
The boys would all receive a course o£ physical drill, and the
picked men be formed into a native volunteer regiment, subjected to
regular exercise, and trained as sharp-shooters. This would answer a
double purpose, by adding a novel, healthy, and congenial interest and
excitement to their lives, and creating a defence body of men who, in
case of necessity, would be found unexcelled as scouts and warriors,
particularly in any form of guerilla warfare.
If properly trained and accustomed to our weapons, they would
face danger and death as bravely as any white men. If aboriginals
with wooden weapons run from white men with rifles, it is well to
remember that white men without rifles would run fast enough from
aboriginals armed with spears and nullas. It is not necessary here to
mention scores of cases in which the wild blacks displayed remarkable
valour. Sturt’s journal supplies a few cases.
Trained as swordsmen they would probably make some of the
finest in the world.
PEOTECTOES.
All measures for the benefit of the aboriginals must depend for
success on the men who apply them. The first Aboriginal Protectors
in Australia were those appointed by Lord Glenelg, in a despatch to
Governor Gipps, dated 31st January, 1838. It began: “In sending
you a copy of the last report of the Select Committee of the House of
Commons on aborigines, I have the honour to communicate to you
that Her Majesty’s Government have directed the protection and
civilisation of the native tribes. With that view it has been resolved
to appoint at once a small number of persons qualified to fill the office
of Protectors, to consist at first of one Protector and four assistant
Protectors. I propose to confer the office of Chief Protector on
Mr. Eobinson, who, you are no doubt aware, has for some time past
been in charge of the aboriginal establishment at Flinders Island, and
who has shown himself eminently qualified for such an office.”
Eobinson was accordingly appointed at £5OO per annum, and
stationed at Port Philip. The four assistants were Sievwright,
Dredge, Parker, and Thomas, at £250 each. These four gentlemen
were sent from England, and allowed £lOO each for outfit and
passage. Lord Glenelg added the following instructions for the
Protectors:—“ Each assistant Protector should attach himself as
closely and constantly as possible to the tribe who may be found in
the district for which he may be appointed; attending them, if
practicable, in their movements from one place to another until they
can be induced to assume more settled habits of life, and endeavour
to conciliate their respect and confidence and to make them feel that
he is their friend.
“He must watch over the rights and interests of the natives*
protect them as far as he can by his personal exertions and influence
from any encroachments on their property, and from acts of cruelty,
oppression, or injustice, and faithfully represent their wants, wishes,
or grievances through the Chief Protector to the Government of the
colony.
“ For this purpose it will be desirable to invest each Protector
with the powers of a magistrate.


“I£ the natives can be induced, in any considerable numbers, to
locate themselves in a particular place, it will be the object of the
Protector to teach and encourage them to engage in the cultivation
of their ground, in building suitable habitations for themselves,
and in whatever else may conduce to their civilisation and social
improvement.
“ The education and instruction of the children as early and as
extensively as it may be practicable, is to be regarded as a matter of
primary importance.
“ The assistant Protector should promote to the utmost extent of
his ability and opportunity the moral and religious improvement of
the natives, and prepare them for the reception of teachers who
could instruct them in the principles of Christianity.
“It is desirable that the Protector should as soon as possible learn
the language of the natives, so as to be able to freely and familiarly
converse with them. He must take charge of, and be accountable for,
any provisions or clothing placed under his care for distribution
among the natives.”
In the following year, 1829, Governor Hutt appointed Charles
Symons and Peter Barrow as the first Protectors in Western Australia,
and the instructions he gave them are much the same as should be
issued to Protectors in Queensland to-day.
In selecting G. A. Robinson for Chief Protector in New South
Wales, Lord Glenelg certainly made a wise appointment. Robinson
had accomplished in Tasmania a work in which 4,000 armed men had
ignominiously failed. He was placed in charge of the last Tasmanians
on Flinders Island, and exercised a mighty influence on the general
improvement of those unhappy survivors. Had a sufficient and
suitable area of the mainland been granted for an aboriginal reserve,
the tribes collected there, properly guarded and provided for, and
such men as Robinson placed in charge, there would have been to-day
a prosperous native settlement, and Tasmania saved from contributing
one of the “ bloodiest pictures in the Book of Time.”
Robinson began work at Port Philip in 1838 under a fatal
environment. It was the year in which the twenty-eight peaceful blacks
were massacred by white men on Hangar’s Station on Myall Creek a
ghastly crime for which seven men were hanged in Sydney in
December. It was the year when eight of Faithfull’s men, out of
eighteen, were killed by the blacks on the overland trip to Port
Philip, between the Lachlan and the Murrumbidgee. It was a year
of deadly warfare between the two races. All the stations were
worked by convict shepherds, stockmen, and hut-keepers, and their
attitude towards the aboriginals was expressed by the men who were
hanged for the Myall Creek atrocity. They told the Sydney gaoler,
Henry Keek, that—“ They were not aware that in destroying the
aboriginals they were violating the law, as the practice was so common
everywhere.” In fact, the blacks were not treated as human beings,
being hunted and shot like wild animals.
The New South Wales Governor’s despatches to Lords Glenelg,
Stanley, and Russell, for many years, are filled with frightful atrocities
between blacks and whites.


Robinson did all that was possible under the circumstances. The
progress of pastoral occupation, and the method by which it was
conducted, effectually prevented any improvement of the natives.
The squatter selected a run and expected the local tribe to at once
move somewhere else so as not to disturb his stock. As the tribe had
nowhere to go they preferred to risk facing the whites in front to an
attempt to dispossess the tribes in the rear. So they killed the sheep
and cattle, and their punishment was extermination. The official
reports of Robinson and the assistant Protectors make frequent
references to unprovoked outrage on the blacks by the convict servants
of the squatters. One constant cause of deadly collisions is
indicated by the reference in Governor Gipps’ despatches to the
“necessity for wives being sent from England for the shepherds and
stockmen.”
So Robinson and his assistants could only report and protest,
appeal for extended powers, and fight heroically in a battle against
overwhelming odds.
It is absolutely essential that the Queensland Protector, and
those in charge of the proposed reserves, shall possess a knowledge of
aboriginal character and customs, and the qualities necessary to
inspire the aboriginals with confidence and respect. Without these
attributes they are powerless to accomplish any good whatever. A
competent Protector will be careful to select specially qualified
subordinates.
No appointment should be made, under any circumstances,
without his approval, for he is responsible for success or failure. All
men in charge of aboriginals should also possess a naturally kind
disposition and great firmness and decision of character. They should
also be men of strong physique, for physical power appeals to
Australian aboriginals as to all other savage races. Robinson was
right in saying—“No small or weak man should ever be placed in
charge of Australian aboriginals.”
The first work of the Protector is to ascertain the number of
aboriginals in the settled districts. All those in the vicinity of towns
and centres of settlement are the first who ought to be removed. No
aboriginals should ever be allowed to wander about the townships.
The wild tribes, whose hunting grounds are still their own, may be
advantageously left alone until encroaching settlement imperatively
demands their removal to the reserves.
The Protector would make a very careful selection of those com-
posing the first parties intended to start work on the settlement, and
then gradually bring in others from time to time.
SYSTEM CONDENSED.
Creation of large reserves on or near the sea coast.
(For these there are suitable localities available.)
Establishing “ Aboriginal Settlements.”
Complete isolation of the settlements from contact with the white
races.
Local government adapted to aboriginal character.
Agriculture, horticulture, and various trades for the men.


Housework, gardening, net and basket making, &c., &c., for the
women.
Schools for teaching plain reading, writing, and singing.
Training station for trackers.
Young men trained as volunteer sharp-shooters.
Manufacture of all kinds of native weapons and utensils.
Preservation of language, songs, and weapons.
Systematic arrangement of daily life.
Instruction of children in moral ethics of Christianity.
Regular hours for work, idleness, hunting, and amusement.
First work of settlements to produce their own food supply.
No Europeans allowed on reserve except those in charge.
Order maintained and laws enforced by aboriginal constables under
authority of the superintendent.
All authority vested in the Protector.
Protector responsible to the Government, and to report the progress
of the settlements, and the condition of outside aboriginals,
annually or bi-annually to the Colonial Secretary.
Grown men to be available yearly for work now done by imported
Papuans, in parties of not less than fifty on each plantation,
under their own responsible guardian.
These men to be paid at a fixed rate of wages, and return to reserves
immediately the crop season is over.
Men available for pearl-shell, bdche-de-mer, or dugong fisheries, on
clearly defined fair terms ; engagements not to extend over four
or six months at a time.
Men also available for planting and caring for State forests and
various other Government service for which they are suitable.
At the end of all engagements the men must return to the reserves,
which would at all times be regarded as their permanent home.
No women to leave the reserves except under exceptional circum-
stances, to be specified in the regulations.
This is a brief outline of the proposed system. All details are a
question for the management and regulations.
COMPETENT OPINIONS ON THE ABORIGINALS.
The following reliable verdicts on the Australian aboriginals, in
their wild state, will serve to dispel some of the persistent ignorance
with which they have been regarded by the civilised races :
Of the Morton Bay blacks in 1840 Dr. Lang wrote in his
“ Cooksland ” —“ They are tall, strong, athletic, able-bodied men.
The natives of Morton Bay are remarkably athletic
and well proportioned, and far more of them are over 5 feet 8 than
under. Their height would average 5 feet 10.”
Leichardt, in his letter to Lynd in 1843, wrote—“ The Morton
Bay blacks are a fine race of men, tall and well made, and their bodies
individually, as well as the groups which they formed, would have
delighted the eye of an artist. Their average height is about 6 feet.”
In a lecture at Sydney he said—“ The Morton Bay blacks are fine,
well-made men, and so are the coast blacks of the Alligator River.”
Sir Thomas Mitchell in 1846 wrote —“ His movements in walking
were more graceful than can be imagined by any who have only seen
those of the draped and shod human animal. The deeply set yet


flexible spine, the taper form of the limbs, the fulness yet perfect
elasticity of the glutei muscles, the hollowness of the back and
symmetrical balance of the upper part of the torso, ornamented as it
was like a piece of fine carving, with raised scarifications most taste-
fully placed; such were some of the characteristics of this perfect
piece of work. Compared with it, the civilised animal, when considered
merely in the light of a specimen in natural history, how inferior!
In vain might we look among thousands for such teeth, such digestive
powers; for such organs of sight, hearing, smelling, tasting, feeling;
for such powers of running, climbing, or walking; for such full
enjoyment, for all that Nature provides for her children of the woods.
Such health and exemption from disease, such intensity of existence,
must be far beyond the enjoyments of civilised men, with all that art
can do for them.” He saw splendid men, many over 6 feet, on the
Maranoa, Warrego, Claude, and Belyando.
Of the Darling Downs blacks in 1827 the botanist Allan
Cunningham, in his journal of that year,'writes —“ These three natives
were young men of the ordinary stature of the aborigines of Morton
Bay —namely, 6 feet —and appeared very athletic active persons of
unusually muscular limb, and with bodies (much scarified) in
exceedingly good case.”
In 1825, Major Lockyer, in the diary of his trip up the Brisbane
Eiver, writes —“ The natives are naked, stout, clean-skinned, well-
made people. . . . The natives are a fine people.”
Of the blacks at Port Bowen in 1843, Lieutenant Jukes, of
H.M.S. “ Fly,” wrote —“Stout, stalwart, broad-shouldered fellows,
and fat withal.” At Cape Melville—“ Tall well-limbed, upright men,
short curly hair, teeth perfect.”
Of the Amity Point blacks in 1836, Backhouse, the Quaker,
wrote —“Tall, fine-personed people, compared with the Sydney blacks.”
Of the Cape Direction tribes, Jukes, of H.M.S. “ Fly,” wrote—
“ Tall, well-made men, high, square foreheads.”
Of the Cape Cleveland blacks, Jukes wrote, on 30th March, 1843
—“Well-made, active men, with good faces, erect, free, and grace-
ful.” At the Burdekin he saw “tall, athletic men,bold and confident;
one a handsome man, with a Nubian-like face.”
Uniacke, of Oxley’s party, in 1823, wrote of the Bribie Island
women —“ Tall, straight, well-formed women, far superior in beauty to
the men; in fact, to any natives of this country I have ever seen, two
of them as handsome as any white women.”
Stuart Russell, writing of the Boyne blacks of 1843—“ Fine
stately, well-formed race, some of both sexes good-looking, and many
of the men 6 feet high.”
Surgeon P. Cunningham, in 1826, wrote in his “Two Years in
New South Wales” —“ A stately, healthy, race, easily civilised.”
W. O. Hodgkinson, describing the Mulligan River blacks in 1876,
wrote in his diary —“ Natives friendly, polite, and hospitable. Tall,
robust men in good condition.”
Flinders, at Point Parker, on the Gulf, in 1802 saw “ some very
big men, two of them 6 feet 3 inches.”
Sir George Grey (then Captain Grey) wrote —“ They are as apt
and intelligent as any other race of men I am acquainted with.
They are subject to the same affections, appetites, and passions as
other men.”


Flinders, in 1802, said the blacks of Keppel Bay were “ fine men,
and very friendly.”
Warburton, the explorer, referring to his blackboy Charlie,
wrote in his journal—“To the energy and courage of this untutored
native may be attributed the salvation of the whole party.” He
describes some of the tribes he saw as “ fine athletic men.”
Describing the average of the tribes he had seen, Eyre, the
explorer, wrote —“ Well-built, muscular men, average height sto 6
feet, men with fine, round, <leep chests, indicating great bodily
strength, remarkably erect and upright in their carriage, with much
natural grace and dignity of demeanour. The eye is generally large,
black, and expressive, with the eye-lashes long. When met for the
first time in his native wilds there is frequently a fearless intrepidity
of manner, and ingenuous openness of look, and a propriety of
behaviour, about the aboriginal inhabitant of Australia which makes
his appearance peculiarly prepossessing.”
On the Bogan, in 1836, Mitchell saw “ strong, healthy, muscular,
men, one of them 6 feet 4 inches. Their skill and intelligence made
the white men appear stupid. The youngest was the handsomest
‘ gin ’ I ever saw, and she was so far from black that the red colour
was very apparent in her cheeks.”
At Port Essington, in 1848, McGillivray saw natives, “ many of
whom were far above the average European in intelligence.”
Stokes, of the “ Beagle,” describing Victoria River blacks in
1889, wrote —“ I could not help comparing the bold, fearless manner
in which they came towards us —their fine manly bearing, head erect,
no crouching or quailing of the eye —with the miserable objects I had
seen at Sydney. 1 now beheld man in his wild state ; and, reader,
rest assured there is nothing can equal such a sight. Before me stood
two of the aboriginal inhabitants of Australia who had never until
then encountered the blighting look of a European.”
In 1837, Backhouse describes the natives of Perth, West Australia,
as “ a fine race.”
Mrs. Macarthur, describing the Sydney tribes in 1792, wrote:
“ A singular race, brave and warlike, utterly ignorant of the arts.”
Of South Australian tribes in 1879 J. D. Woods wrote: “ Their
carriage is erect, and the gait marked with a grace and elegance
characteristic of the race. . . If the natives of this continent, or
even a portion of it, had been as united as the Maories, a different
tale would have been told. Colonising the country would not have
been an easy task, and if it had become necessary to deprive them of
their lands by conquest, or to gain them by purchase, their heroism
and acuteness would have invested them with an interest and import-
ance which would have forced their natural claims no less than those
pertaining to science upon the attention of the superior race, and of
those by whom they are governed.”
Edward Stephens, writing of the early South Australian tribes
(Royal Society of lS T ew South Wales, vol. for 1889) : “ One can no
more judge of the aboriginals from the samples collected at the
mission stations than the grand national characteristics of the
English race could be understood from the patients of a casualty
hospital or the inmates of a lazar house. . . Drunkenness and
debauchery spread like their own bush fires, and it was not until tribe
after tribe became extinct that intelligent men awoke to the fact that


an interesting people had perished, and that most of their traditions
had perished with them. . , In the early days the aboriginals
were chaste in their lives, and conjugal infidelity was almost, if not
altogether, unknown.”
Charles Sturt, the explorer from 1828 to 1846, gives many
complimentary references to the aboriginals : “ This tribe numbered
forty-eight, and all were handsome, well-made men. . . Some of the
men were very good-looking and well made, but I think the natives of
the Darling generally are so. . . Both the Darling natives were fine
men, and one was a good-looking fellow, with sinews like ropes. . .
A fine, handsome young man, about eighteen years of age, exceedingly
prepossessing in appearance. . . . There was a polish about these
natives, a freedom and grace that would have befitted a drawing-room.”
McDouall Stuart, the explorer from 1858 to 1862, saw many
“ tall, well-made women. . . Tall, stout, robust men. , . Tall,
stout, well-made men, with long, heavy spears. . . A fine race of
men, tall, stout, and muscular. . . Olie fat, stout, fellow, and one
tall thin man 7 feet high. . . Tall, muscular, well-made men. . .
Two of the three were young, tall, powerful, well-made, and good-
looking men, as fine specimens of the native as I have ever seen. . .
One of them surprised me by giving a Masonic sign, repeated by his
two sons. The first was a tall, powerful, well-made fellow, upwards
of 6 feet.”
Count De Strzelecki, in his work on “New South “Wales ” in
1845, wrote: “ Amid the wrecks of schemes, efforts, and attempts to
Christianise, civilise, utilise, and preserve the aboriginal race, there
remains yet to be adopted one measure worthy of the liberality of the
British Government, to listen and attend to the last wishes of the
departed, and to the voices of the remaining few. They may say,
‘ Leave us to our habits and customs; do not embitter the days Which
are in store for us by constraining us to obey yours. Nor reproach
us with an apathy to that civilisation which is not destined for us,
and if you can still be generous to the conquered, relieve the hunger
which drives us in despair to slaughter your flocks and the men who
guard them. _ Our fields and forests, which once furnished us with
abundance of vegetable and animal food, now yield us no more, for
they and their produce are yours. You prosper on our native soil,
and we are starving.’
“Placed by the Creator in perfect harmony with the whole
economy of nature, in his allotted dwelling and destiny, the Australian
native is seen procuring for himself all that he wants, regulating all
his social affairs and securing all the worldly happiness and enjoyment
of which his condition is capable.”
The Bev. D. Mackillop, S.J., writing of the Daly Biver tribes
(Boyal Soc. of S.A., vol. 17) :—“ We have gained at last the complete
confidence of these tribes. They are bright enough, and take kindly
to agriculture. If reasonably assisted, even if left unmolested with
sufficient territory, we could reproduce on the Daly Biver those
‘Beductions’ which a recent writer, Henry George, says, ‘to their
eternal honour the Jesuits instituted and so long maintained in
Paraguay.’
“ But the odds are ten to one against us, just —to put it kindly—
because the Anglo-Saxon race is what it is.’ Proud in its present
superiority, that race will remember the lessons of history only


when an invading people shall have meted out to it the justice it has
shown to the helpless aboriginal. With the teeming millions o£ Asia
at our door, who shall say there is no day of retribution for
Australia ? ”
W. G. Stretton, Northern Territory magistrate, writes in the
same volume concerning the Gulf tribes, and says ; —“ The young
men, if trained early, are splendid horsemen. They are very athletic,
and at all sports are far beyond ordinary Europeans.”
Protector Robinson was quite correct in saying “No other savage
race has been so grossly maligned and cruelly misrepresented.”
Sir George Grey gives a highly complimentary description of the
aboriginals, as the result of extensive experience. Sturt, the explorer,
is equally flattering ; and among other competent friendly authorities
and writers are Taplin, Bishop Hale, Binney, Foster, Hr. Hammond,
Threlkeld, Moorhouse, Hagenauer, Holden, Matthews, Gribble,
Howitt, Worsnop, Dr. Frazer, Eev. Wm. Ridley, Dawson, Sadlier,
John Roper, and J. B. Mann of Leichardt’s second expedition.
ABOEIGINAL MISSIONS.
First “ native farm ” at Parramatta, 1796.
First aboriginal reserve at George’s Head, 1815.
Macquarie’s “ Native Institution,” Parramatta, 1815.
Threlkeld’s mission to Port Macquarie, 1824.
Wellington Yale Station started, 1832,
Rev. Handt’s mission to Morton Bay, 1837.
Mission on Tarra River, George and Mary Langhorne, 1837,
Lutheran mission to Morton Bay, 1838.
Robinson appointed Protector, Port Philip, 1838.
First mission at Adelaide (Lutheran), 1838.
Wesleyan mission near Geelong, 1838.
Catholic mission to Stradbroke Island, 1842.
Catholic mission to Port Essington, 1847.
Catholic mission to West Australia, 1849.
Hale’s mission to Poonindie, 1850.
Ridley’s mission on the Namoi, 1850.
King’s mission to Swan River, 1850.
Moravian mission to Lake Bogo, 1850.
Mission to Yelta, on Murray, 1854.
Mr. and Mrs. Camfield, King George’s Sound, 1857.
Bogo mission resumed, 1858.
Taplin’s mission, Lake Alexandrina, 1859.
Mission Station, Eamahyuck, 1862.
Mission to Lake Tyers, 1862.
Moravian mission to Cooper’s Creek, 1865.
Moravian mission to Lake Condah, 1866.
Moravian mission to Lake Kopperamanna, 1865 and 1869.
Fuller’s mission to Fraser’s Island, 1873.
Mission to the Finke River, 1877.
Gribble’s mission to Jerilderie, 1880.
Presbyterian mission to Batavia River (Queensland), 1892.
By Authority : Edmund Gregory, Government Printer, William street.


MLIO
ms's 5
M COlcf




