

(Qucmitaml Prominent <Saa*tte
EXTRAORDINARY.
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY.
[Registered at the General Post Office, Brisbane, for Transmission by Post as a Newspaper.]
Chief Secretary?s Department,
Brisbane, 27th November, 1917.
TO THE PUBLIC OF QUEENSLAND,?
I deem it my duty on behalf of the Government of Queensland, a sovereign
State of the Commonwealth of Australia, to inform you that ? Hansard ? No. 37,
containing a report of the proceedings of the Legislative Assembly of this State on
the 22nd instant, has been denied transmission through the Post Office by the Federal
Government.
Further, on the 23rd instant, the Queensland Government Printer received the
following memorandum from the Censor
Commonwealth Military Forces.
Ist Military District.
No. S.B. 7706.
Censor?s Office, G.P.G.,
Brisbane, 23rd November, 1917.
MEMORANDUM from the Censor to The Government Printer, Brisbane.
Take notice that I, the undersigned, being duly authorised in that behalf by the
Deputy Chief Censor, do hereby forbid you, as Printer and Publisher of Parliamentary
Debates of the Legislative Council and the Legislative Assembly of Queensland, to
print or publish in contravention of the War Precautions Regulations, 1915, any
matter being or purporting to be a report of a debate in the Legislative Assembly of
Queensland on the 22nd day of November, 1917, on the question of Military Censor-
ship, without the permission of an Officer of the Censorship Staff.
(Signed) J, J. STABLE, Captain,
Censor, Ist Military District.
NATIONAL UFSRAKV
OK AUSTRALIA
[No. 213.
TUESDAY, 27th NOVEMBER, 1917.
Vol. CIX.]


Government Printing Office,
Brisbane, 24th November, 1917.
Proposed Censorship of ? Hansard
Sir, ?I am in receipt of yonr memorandum of yesterday. I must express my
complete surprise at its contents.
It is apparent that you are unaware of the opinion expressed by the present
Federal Attorney-General that the Censor has no power to censor the Official Report
of the Parliamentary Debates of any of the States. For your guidance, I refer you to
* Commonwealth Parliamentary Debates, 1914-15-16, p. 8763, where this opinion is
referred to. You will observe that the Federal Attorney-General considered that the
censorship of speeches is under the control of the Speaker exclusively.
You are reminded that in September, 1916, the Censor was obliged to withdraw
his claim to censor the Official Report of a certain speech delivered in the Queensland
Legislative Assembly by Mr. Charles Collins, M.L.A.
In any case, the Official Report of the debate referred to in your Memorandum
had been printed and published before I received your Memorandum.
I suggest that the proper course for you to take in the circumstances is to apply
immediately to the proper Court for an injunction to restrain the further publication
of the Report complained of, and so test the validity of the claim set out in your
Memorandum. As far as lam concerned, I will do everything in my power to facilitate
the hearing of such an application.
Yours faithfully.
(Signed) A. J. CUMMING,
Captain J. J. Stable, Government Printer.
Censor, Ist Military District
G.P.0., Brisbane.
No reply was received by the Government Printer, but late last night the
Military Authorities made a raid on the Queensland Government Printing Office, and
seized some thousands of copies of ? Hansard.?
This morning 1 wrote to the Prime Minister, as follows ;
Chief Secretary?s Office,
Brisbane, 27th November, 1917.
Urgent.
Sib, ?On behalf of my. Government, I desire to know whether you are aware
that the Federal Postal Authorities in Queensland have failed to transmit copies of
? Hansard? No. 37 containing the report of a debate on ?Military Censorship,? and
that last night (Monday the 26th instant) the Military Authorities raided the
Queensland Government Printing Office, and seized some thousands of copies of the
same ? Hansard? intended for distribution to the public of Queensland,
In view of the opinion which you expressed in Commonwealth Parliamentary
Debates 1914-15-16, that the Censor had no power to censor the official report of the
Parliamentary Debates of any of the States, and that you considered that the censorship
of speeches was under the control of the Speaker exclusively, I cannot think that the
The opinion of the Prime Minister and Attorney-General of the Commonwealth is as
follows
?Mr. Speaker is alone responsible for any censoring that may be done in
connection with the reports of speeches delivered in this House, and the Speaker of
the Queensland Legislative Assembly has a similar responsibility. I know of no other
authority who can interfere.?


above action was taken under your direction ; but if such action was taken under your
instructions or under instruction from any member of your Government, I desire on
behalf of my Government to protest against such an invasion of the rights of a sovereign
State.
Further, I request that you, as Prime Minister of the Commonwealth, will at
once give instructions to the Postal Authorities in Queensland to transmit those copies
of Queensland ?Hansard? No. 37 in their possession, and that the Military Authorities
shall forthwith restore to the Government Printer those copies of ? Hansard? taken
away last night from the Queensland Government Printing Office by the Military
Authorities.
I am sure you must realise the great necessity of avoiding anything in the nature
of displays of military force which may inflame the public mind at a time when feeling
is already running high.
Thanking you in anticipation lor the courtesy of an immediate reply.
I have the honour to be,
Your most obedient servant,
(Signed) T. J. RYAN,
Premier.
To this letter I have not yet received a reply.
My Government will take the necessary steps with the legal means at its
disposal to inform the public on the matter, and in the meantime may I express the
hope that all citizens will respect the law and maintain the strictest order.
T. J. RYAN,
Premier of Queensland.
Printed and Published by Anihont James Gumming, Government Printer, Brisbane.


0 /v f dG
n : C> - ? ?;? ; ? - ; ? - :???? ; r. \ ... ? ; . ,
\
,
? . ?
?
? . .
?
-
I ? ?
- .
