

QUERIES
RESPECTING
THE HUMAN RACE,
TO BE ADDRESSED TO TRAVELLERS AND OTHERS.
DRAWN UP BY A COMMITTEE OF THE
BRITISH ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE,
APPOINTED IN 1839.
Copies of these Queries may be had on application to Richard and John
E. Taylor, Red Lion Court, Fleet Street; John Phillips, Esq., York ;
and the Geographical Society, 21, Regent Street.
Answers to all or any of the preceding Queries are earnestly solicited,
and they may be addressed as above, or to J. E. Gray, Esq., British
Museum; Dr. Prichard, Bristol; or Dr, Hodgkin, 9, Lower Brook
Street, London.
LONDON;
PRINTED BY RICHARD AND JOHN E. TAYLOR,
RED LION COURT, FLEET STREET.
1841.




QUERIES
RESPECTING
THE HUMAN RACE,
TO BE ADDRESSED TO TRAVELLERS AND OTHERS.
Drawn up by a Committee of the British Association for the Advance-
ment of Science, appointed in 1839.
A.T the meeting of the British Association held at Birmingham,
Dr. Prichard read a paper “On the Extinction of some varieties
of the Human Race.” He pointed out instances in which
this extinction had already taken place to a great extent, and
showed that many races now existing are likely, at no distant
period, to be annihilated. He pointed out the irretrievable
loss which science must sustain, if so large a portion of the hu-
man race, counting by tribes instead of individuals, is suffered
to perish, before many interesting questions of a psychological,
physiological and philological character, as well as many histo-
rical facts in relation to them, have been investigated. Whence
he argued that science, as well as humanity, is interested in the
efforts which are made to rescue them, and to preserve from
oblivion many important details connected with them.
At the suggestion of the Natural Historical Section, to which
Dr. Prichard’s paper was read, the Association voted the sum of
£5 to be expended in printing a set of queries to be addressed
to those who may travel or reside in parts of the globe inhabited
by the threatened races. A Committee was likewise appointed
by the same Section to prepare a list of such questions. The
following pages, to which the attention of travellers and others
is earnestly invited, have, in consequence, been produced. It is
right to observe, that whilst these questions have been in pre-
paration, the Ethnographical Society of Paris has printed a 1 set
of questions on the same subject for the use of travellers. It has
been gratifying to perceive the general similarity between the
questions proposed by the French savans who compose that So-
ciety, and those which had been already prepared by the Com-
mittee 5 but the Committee is bound to acknowledge the assist


ance which, in the completion of its task, it has derived from
the comprehensive character and general arrangement of the
Ethnographical Society’s list. The following queries might
have been considerably extended, and much might have been
added to explain the reasons and motives on which some of
them are founded. Such additions would, however, have in-
conveniently extended these pages, and, in part, have defeated
their object. The Committee has only further to express its
desire that the Association may continue its support to the in-
teresting subject of Ethnography, and that their fellow-mem-
bers will aid in bringing these queries under the notice of those
who may have it in their power to obtain replies. Britain, in
her extensive colonial possessions and commerce, and in the
number and intelligence of her naval officers, possesses unrivalled
facilities for the elucidation of the whole subject; and it would
be a stain on her character, as well as a loss to humanity, were
she to allow herself to be left behind by other nations in this
inquiry.
It will be desirable, before giving direct answers to the ques-
tions proposed in the following list, that the traveller should
offer, in his own terms, a description of the particular group of
human beings, which he may have in view in drawing up his
list of answers, seeing that the replies, however accurate and
replete with useful information, may fail in some particulars to
give a complete idea of the people to whom they relate.
Physical Characters.
1. State the general stature of the people, and confirm this
by some actual measurements. Measurement may be applied
to absolute height, and also to proportions, to be referred to in
subsequent queries. The weight of individuals, when ascer-
tainable, and extreme cases, as well as the average, will be in-
teresting. What may be the relative differences in stature and
dimensions, between males and females ?
2. Is there any prevailing disproportion between different
parts of the body ? as, for example, in the size of the head, the
deficient or excessive development of upper or lower extremi-
ties.
3. What is the prevailing complexion ? This should be ac-
curately defined, if possible, by illustrative and intelligent ex-
ample, such as by comparison with those whose colour is well
known. The colour of the hair should be stated, and its cha-
racter, whether fine or coarse, straight, curled, or woolly. r lhe
colour and character of the eyes should likewise be described.
Is there, independently of want of cleanliness, any perceptible
peculiarity of odour ?


4. The head is so important as distinctive of race, that particu -
lar attention must be paid to it. Is it round or elongated in
either direction, and what is the shape of the face, broad, oval,
lozenge-shaped, or of any other marked form ? It will contri-
bute to facilitate the understanding of other descriptions, to
have sketches of several typical specimens. A profile, and also
a front view should be given. In the profile, particularly notice
the height and angle of the forehead, the situation of the meatus
auditorius, and the form of the posterior part of the head. It
will also be desirable to depict the external ear, so as to convey
the form and proportion of its several parts. The form of the
head may be minutely and accurately described by employing
the divisions and terms introduced by craniologists, and the
corresponding development of moral and intellectual character
should in conjunction be faithfully stated. So much of the
neck should be given with the profile as to show the setting on
of the head. The advance or recession of the chin, and the
character of the lips and nose, may likewise be given in profile.
The front view should exhibit the width of forehead, temples,
and cheek-bones, the direction of the eyes, and the width between
them : the dimensions of the mouth. When skulls can be col-
lected or examined, it would be desirable to give a view in an-
other direction, which may even be done, though with less ac-
curacy, from the living subject. It should be taken by looking
down upon the head from above, so as to give an idea of the
contour of the forehead, and the width of the skull across from
one parietal protuberance to the other.
5. State whether the bones of the skull are thick, thin, heavy,
or light. Is it common to find the frontal bone divided by a mid-
dle suture or not ? Note the form of the outer orbitar process,
which sometimes forms part of a broad scalene triangle, with
the vertex downwards. How are the frontal sinuses developed ?
Observe whether the ossa triquetra are frequent, or otherwise ;
whether there be frequent separation of the upper part of the
os occipitis; the relative situation of the foramen magnum. In
regard to the bones of the face, notice the position of the ossa
nasi and unguis ; the former sometimes meet nearly or quite
on the same plane, whilst, in others, they meet at an angle.
The former character is strongly marked in many African
skulls. State the form of the jaw bone, shape of the chin, and
observe the angle of the jaw, the position and character of the
teeth, and their mode of wear; and if they have any practice
of modifying their form or appearance, let this be stated. The
malar bones have already been noticed, but they may require
a more minute description.


6. When the opportunity can be found, observe the number
of lumbar vertebrae, since an additional one is said to be com-
mon in some tribes.
7. Give the length of the sternum as compared with the
whole trunk; and also some idea of the relative proportion
between the chest and the abdomen.
8. What is the character of the pelvis in both sexes, and
what is the form of the foot ?
9. The form of the scapula will also deserve attention, more
especially as regards its breadth and strength; and the strength
or weakness of the clavicle should be noticed in connection
with it.
10. The internal organs, and blood-vessels will with greater
difficulty be subjected to examination ; but it may be well here
to remark, that varieties in these may prevail locally in connec-
tion with race.
N.B.—Peculiarities may exist, which cannot be anticipated in
queries, but which the observer will do well to notice amongst
his answers to anatomical questions.
11. Where a district obviously possesses two or more varieties
of the human race, note the typical characters of each in their
most distinct form, and indicate to what known groups or fami-
lies they may belong: give some idea of the proportion of each,
and state the result of their intermixture on physical and moral
character. When it can be ascertained, state how long inter-
mixture has existed, and of which the physical characters tend
to predominate. It is to be observed, that this question does
not so much refer to the numerical strength or political ascend-
ency of any of the types, but to the greater or less physical
resemblance which the offspring may bear to the parents, and
what are the characters which they may appear to derive from
each: whether there is a marked difference arising from the father
or the mother belonging to one of the types in preference to an-
other ; also whether the mixed form resulting from such inter-
marriage is known to possess a permanent character, or after
a certain number of generations to incline to one or other of its
component types.
12. Any observation connected with these intermarriages,
relating to health, longevity, physical and intellectual character,
will be particularly interesting, as bringing light on a field
hitherto but little systematically investigated. Even when the
people appear to be nearly or quite free from intermixture,
their habits, in respect of intermarriage within larger or smaller
circles, and the corresponding physical characters of the peo-
ple, will be very interesting.


Language.
13. Do the natives speak a language already known to phi-
lologists, and if so, state what it is; and notice whether it ex-
hibit any dialectic peculiarities, as well as the modifications of
pronunciation and accentuation which it may offer. State also
the extent to which this dialect may be used, if limits can be
ascertained.
14. If the language be little if at all known, endeavour to
obtain a vocabulary as extensive as circumstances will allow,
and at least consisting of the numerals, the most common and
important substantives *, the pronouns in all persons and num-
bers, adjectives expressive of the commonest qualities, and, if
possible, a few verbs varied in time and person. The vocabu-
lary should be tested by the interrogation of different natives,
and more than one person should be engaged in taking it down
from their mouths, to avoid, as far as may be, errors arising
from peculiarities of utterance or defect of hearing. It is like-
wise of importance that the system of orthography be duly in-
dicated and strictly adhered to.
15. Endeavour to take down some piece of native composition,
such as the ordinary phrases employed in conversation, and any
other piece of prose which may be attainable ; and specimens
of metrical composition if such exist. Though these would be
of comparatively little use without translation, yet independently
of this some importance is to be attached to the metrical compo-
sitions if they have a national character and are widely diffused ;
and, in this case, it might be possible to express some of their
airs in musical characters. A specimen of known composition
translated into their language, may also be given, such as the
first chapter of Genesis, the fifteenth chapter of Luke’s Gospel,
and the Lord’s Prayer.
16. Endeavour to ascertain whether the language is exten-
sively spoken or understood, and whether there are different
languages spoken by men having similar physical characters
obviously connecting them as a race, or if differing somewhat
in this respect, inhabiting a particular geographical tract.
When such groups are said to possess different languages,
endeavour, as far as possible, to ascertain their number, the
sources whence each is dei'ived, and the languages to which it
is allied; and also the circumstances, geographical or political,
which may account for these distinctions.
[For further information connected with the investigation
of languages, reference is made to a short essay on this subject
read to the Philological Society of London.]
* The names of mountains, lakes, rivers, islands, &c.


Individual and Family Life.
1 7• Are there any ceremonies connected with the birth of a
child ? Is there any difference whether the child be male or
female ?
18. Does infanticide occur to any considerable extent, and
if it does, to what causes is it to be referred, want of affection,
deficient subsistence, or superstition ?
19. Are children exposed, and from what causes, whether
superstition, want of subsistence or other difficulties, or from
deformity, general infirmity, or other causes of aversion ?
20. What is the practice as to dressing and cradling children,
and are there any circumstances connected with it calculated
to modify their form; for example, to compress the forehead,
as amongst the western Americans; to flatten the occiput,
as amongst most Americans, by the flat straight board to which
the child is attached; to occasion the lateral distortion of the
head, by allowing it to remain too long in one position on the
hand of the nurse, as amongst the inhabitants of the South
Seas ?
21. Are there any methods adopted, by which other parts of
the body may be affected, such as the turning in of the toes,
as amongst the North Americans; the modification of the whole
foot, as amongst the Chinese ?
22. How are the children educated, what are they taught,
and are any methods adopted to modify their character, such
as to implant courage, impatience of control, endurance of
pain and privation, or, on the contrary, submission, and to
what authorities, cowardice, artifice ?
23. Is there anything remarkable amongst the sports and
amusements of children, or in their infantile songs or tales ?
24. At what age does puberty take place ?
25. What is the ordinary size of families, and are there any
large ones ?
26. Are births of more than one child common ? What is
the proportion of the sexes at birth and among adults ?
27. Are the children easily reared ?
28. Is there any remarkable deficiency or perfection in any
of the senses ? It is stated, that in some races sight is re-
markably keen, both for near and distant objects.
29. To what age do the females continue to bear children ?
and for what period are they in the habit of suckling them ?
30. What is the menstrual period, and what the time of
utero-gestation ?
31. Are there any ceremonies connected with any particular
period of life ?


32. Is chastity cultivated, or is it remarkably defective, and
are there any classes amongst the people of either sex by whom
it is remarkably cultivated, or the reverse, either generally or
on particular occasions ?
33. Are there any superstitions connected with this subject ?
34. What are the ceremonies and practices connected with
marriage ?
35. Is polygamy permitted and practised, and to what
extent ?
36. Is divorce tolerated, or frequent?
37. How are widows treated ?
38. What is the prevailing food of the people ? Is it chiefly
animal or vegetable, and whence is it derived in the two king-
doms ? Do they crust to what the bounty of nature provides,
or have they means of modifying or controlling production,
either in thecultivation of vegetables, or the rearing of animals ?
Describe their modes of cooking, and state the kinds of condi-
ment which may be employed. Do they reject any kinds of
aliment from scruple, or an idea of uncleanness ? Have they
in use any kind of fermented or other form of exhilarating
liquor, and, if so, how is it obtained ? What number of meals
do they make? and what is their capacity for temporary or sus-
tained exertion ?
39. Describe the kind of dress worn by the people, and the
materials employed in its formation. What are the differences
in the usages of the sexes in this respect ? Are there special
dresses used for great occasions ? and, if so, describe these, and
their modes of ornament. Does any practice of tattooing,
piercing, or otherwise modifying the person for the sake of
ornament, prevail amongst the people ? N.B. Such modifica-
tions not to be blended with other modifications used as signs
of mourning, &c.
40. Have the people any prevailing characteristic or remark-
able modes of amusement, such as dances and games exhibiting
agility, strength or skill ?
41. Are games of chance known to the people, and is there a
strong passion for them ?
42. Do the people appear to be long- or short-lived ? If any
cases of extreme old age can be ascertained, please to state
them. Such cases may sometimes be successfully ascertained
by reference to known events, as the previous visits of Euro-
peans to the country. Is there a marked difference between
the sexes in respect of longevity ?
43. What is the general treatment of the sick ? Are they
cared for, or neglected ? Are any diseases dreaded as conta-
gious, and flow are such treated ? Is there any medical treat-


ment adopted ? Are there any superstitious or magical prac-
tices connected with the treatment of the sick ? What are the
most prevailing forms of disease, whence derived, and to what
extent ? Is there any endemic affection, such as goitre, pelagra,
plica, or the like ? With what circumstances, situations, and
habits do they appear to be connected, and to what are they
referred by the people themselves ?
44. Where there are inferior animals associated with man,
do they exhibit any corresponding liability to, or exemption
from disease ?
45. Do entozoa prevail, and of what kind ?
46. What is the method adopted for the disposal of the dead ?
Is it generally adhered to, or subject to variation ?
47. Are any implements, articles of clothing, or food, depo-
sited with the dead ?
48. Is there any subsequent visitation of the dead, whether
they are disposed of separately, or in conjunction with other
bodies ?
49. What is the received idea respecting a future state ?
Does this bear the character of transmigration, invisible ex-
istence about their accustomed haunts, or removal to a distant
abode ?
Buildings and Monuments.
50. What are the kinds of habitations in use among the
people ? Are they permanent or fixed ? Do they consist of a
single apartment, or of several ? Are the dwellings collected
into villages or towns, or are they scattered, and nearly or quite
single ? If the former, describe any arrangement of them in
streets or otherwise which may be employed.
51. Have any monuments been raised by the present inha-
bitants or their predecessors, and more especially such as relate
to religion or war ? State their character, materials, and con-
struction. If they are still in use amongst the people, state
this object, even if they should be of the simplest construction,
and be little more than mounds or tumuli. If these monu-
ments are no longer in use, collect, as far as possible, the ideas
and traditions of the natives regarding them, and, if possible,
have them examined by excavation or otherwise, taking care to
deface and disturb them as little as possible.
52. In these researches be on the look out for the remains
of the skeletons of man or other animals, and, if discovered, let
them be preserved for comparison with those still in existence.
Works of Art.
53. Let works of art, in metal, bone, or other materials, be


likewise sought and preserved, and their similarity to, or differ-
ence from implements at present in use amongst the people of
the district, or elsewhere, be noted.
54. When a people display their ingenuity by the extent or
variety of their works of art, it will not only be desirable to de-
scribe what these are, but also the materials of which they are
constructed, the modes in which these materials are obtained,
the preparation which they undergo when any is required, and
the instruments by which they are wrought. Such particulars
will not only throw light on the character and origin of the
people, but will, directly or indirectly, influence the commercial
relations which may be profitably entered into when commerce
alone is looked to. When colonization is contemplated, the
facts contained in the replies to these queries will point out the
mutual advantages which might be obtained by preserving, in-
stead of annihilating, the aboriginal population.
Domestic Animals.
Are there any domestic animals in the possession of the
people ? Of what species are they ? Whence do they appear
to have been derived, and to what variety do they belong ?
Have they degenerated or become otherwise modified? To
what uses are they applied ?
Government and Laws.
55. What is the form of government? Does it assume a
monarchical or democratic character, or does it rest with the
priests ?
56. Are the chiefs, whether of limited or absolute power,
elective or hereditary ?
57. Is there any division of clans or castes ?
58. What are the privileges enjoyed by or withheld from
these ?
59. What care is taken to keep them distinct, and with what
effect on the physical and moral character of each ?
60. What laws exist among the people ? How are they
preserved ? Are they generally known, or confided to the me-
mory of a chosen set of persons ? What are their opinions and
regulations in reference to property, and especially the occu-
pation and possession of the soil ? Does the practice of hiring
labourers exist among them ?
61. Have they any knowledge or tradition of a legislator, to
whom the formation of laws is ascribed ?
62. Do they rescind, add to, or modify their laws? and
how ?
63. Are they careful in the observance of them ?


64. What are their modes of enforcing obedience, and of
proving and punishing delinquency ?
65. How are judges constituted ? Do their trials take place
at stated periods, and in public ?
66. How do they keep prisoners in custody, and treat
them ?
67* What are the crimes taken cognizance of by the laws ?
Is there gradation or commutation of punishment ?
Geography and Statistics.
68. Briefly state the geographical limits and character of the
region inhabited by the people to whom the replies relate.
69. State approximatively the number of inhabitants. As this
is an important, but very difficult question, it may not be amiss
point out the modes in which the numbers may be ascer-
tained. The people themselves may state their number with
more or less accuracy, but it should be known whether they
refer to all ranks and ages, or merely comprehend adult males,
who may be mustered for war, or other general purpose re-
quiring their combination. In this case state the apparent
proportion between adult males and other members of families.
The number of habitations in a particular settlement may be
counted, and some idea of the average numbers of a family
be given. Where the people inhabit the water-side, the num-
ber and dimensions of their craft may be taken, and some idea
of the proportion between the number of these and of the indi-
viduals belonging to them, may he formed. In drawing con-
clusions from observations of this kind, it will be necessary to
have due regard to the different degrees of density or rarity in
which, from various causes, population may be placed.
70- Has the number of inhabitants sensibly varied, and
within what period ?
71. If it have diminished, state the causes; such as sick-
ness, starvation, war, and emigration. When these causes re-
quire explanation, please to give it. If the inhabitants are on
the increase, is this the result of the easy and favourable cir-
cumstances of the people causing an excess of births over
deaths; or is it to be assigned to any cause tending to bring
accessions from other quarters ? State whether such cause?
are of long standing, or recent.
72. Is the population generally living in a manner to which
they have been long accustomed, or have new relations with
other people, and consequently new customs and practices, been
introduced ?
73. If the people, being uncivilized, have come under the in-
fluence of the civilized, state to what people the latter belong,


how they are regarded, and what is the kind of influence they
are producing*. State the points of their good influence, it'any,
and those of an opposite character, as the introduction of dis-
eases, vices, wars, want of independence, &c. ... ..
74. Is there any tendency to the union of races ? how is it
exhibited, and to what extent ?
Social Relations.
75. What kind of relationship, by written treaty or other-
wise,’subsists between the nation and other nations, civilized or
not ? Have they any intercourse by sea with other countries .
Do any of them understand any European language? Or are
there interpreters, by whom they can communicate with them .
76. Are they peaceable, or addicted to war ? Have they
any forms of declaring war, or making peace ? What is their
mode of warfare, either by sea or land ? their weapons and
strategy ? What do they do with the slam, and with prisoners.
Have they any mode of commemorating victories by monuments,
hieroglyphics, or preservation of individual trophies, and ot
what kind ? Have they any national poems, sagas, or tradi-
tions respecting their origin and history ? Where Europeans
have introduced fire-arms, ascertain the modes of warfare which
have given place to them. . . , , .
State whatever particulars respecting their origin and history
are derived, either from traditions among themselves or irom
other sources.
Religion, Superstitions, Sfc.
77. Are the people addicted to religious observances, 01
generally regardless of them ? . c . .
78. Do they adopt the idea of one great and presiding bpm ,
or are they polytheists ? ~ ,
79. If polytheism exist, what are the names, attributes, ana
fables connected with their deities, and what are th |.ni°des in
which devotion is paid to each ? Are any parts of the body
held sacred, or the reverse ? Do they offer sacrifices, and are
they of an expiatory character, or mere gifts •
80. Have they any sacred days or periods fixed or move-
able feasts, or religious ceremonies of any kind, or any form of
thanksgiving or other observance connected with seasons
81. Have they any order of priests, and if so, are they here-
ditary, elective, or determined by any particular circumstance ?
82! Is the religion of the people similar to that of any other
people, neighbouring or remote ? If different, are they widely
* This question will comprise the existence of missions-the success or the
want of it from causes connected with missionaries themselves or others.


so, or dependent on particular modifications, and of what
kind ?
83. In what light do they regard the religion and deities of
neighbouring tribes ?
. 84 * tl« ere any idea of an inferior order of spirits and ima-
ginary beings, such as ghosts, fairies, brownies, and goblins:
and how are they described ?
. 85 • Have they any notions of magic, witchcraft, or second
sight ?
86. What ideas are entertained respecting the heavenly bodies ?
Have they any distinction of stars, or constellations ? and if
so, what names do they give them, and what do these names
signify ?
87. Are they in any manner observed with reference to the
division of the year, and how ?
88. If time is not divided by observations of those bodies,
what other mode is adopted ? and do observances connected
with them rest with the priests or chiefs ?
89. When the traveller, by personal acquaintance with the
language, or by means of competent assistance from interpret-
ers, can freely converse with the people, it will be desirable
that he should form some idea of their amount of intelligence,
their tone of mind with regard to social relations, as respects
freedom, independence, or subserviency, and their recognition
of moral obligations, and any other psychological character
which observation may detect; and more especially such as
may contribute to an estimation of the probable results of efforts
to develope and improve the character.
Printed by Richard and John E. Taylor, Red Lion Court, Fleet Street.


