





. ■ *,
•
, 1 .
.. * . ■
- . % **
i
•
'■
•
H * 0 *
f
. » *
'
, ■ » ♦
. .* %
• •
’ , *.• ’•
* , t •
,
\. •
*
■ . * . il?’'
.* * » .
* >
.
•
* % « *«•’*■
• • * • *
. t t • « . ■ -V
*4
ft
* « *
■ ’■
*
• v* % ** » * • *
% • ■ ■ II • <
v * . * ,* *
//*• *v
t . •*.
•
♦ «. •
• •
•
• • , ■
. . ■*" •
• ># .*
*
•
• *
* *
* * * •
. ‘A - • *
«
♦
♦
. •
,;
- * »
»
• *
<
. • *
* '
V . . • ■ .
*'
■
>
#
*
*• *
»
,* ♦ •
♦ ♦
•
1 » • •*
r i* * . >
• * 1 J» . *
* * * • §
•
♦
t
% m * • «
• *
t * t" •
•
. •
• • M
. • * f
. * •
/
* * •
t
• •
• ' *
. • •
• * * *
* * .' ♦* . *
- • *
• * •
•1
. >
% •
•
. * •
» * * * *




Questions of the Day:
f I Series op H>apei^s
ON
THE REVISED NEW TESTAMENT,
MODERN OBJECTIONS TO CHRISTIANITY,
EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT,
PAROCHIAL MISSIONS,
SYMPATHY AS A POWER IN CHURCH WORK
F£EAD AT A (giliE (sOMPEI^ENGE
AT
October sth, 6th, and ;th, 1881.
dlv tl,te y :
GIBBS, SHALLARD, & CO., 70 PITT STREET NORTH
MDCCCLXXXII.




INSCRIBED
WITH MUCH RESPECT
By the Clergy of the Diocese
THE RIGHT REVEREND MESAC THOMAS, D.D.,
Lord Bishop of Goulburn,
IN GRATEFUL ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF THE
KINDNESS AND AFFECTION HE HAS EVER SHOWN
TO THOSE OVER WHOM
The Great Head of the Church
HAS MADE HIM OVERSEER.




INTRODUCTION.
The following Papers were read at a series of meetings of the Bishop and
Clergy of the Diocese of Goulburn, held on the mornings of the days of the
meeting of the Diocesan Synod.
They were not written with a view to publication, but for the opening
out of subjects of discussion amongst those who were assembled.
The reader of each paper was confined to fifteen minutes. This will
explain the succinct nature of the same.
The meetings were of a very interesting nature, and at their conclusion a
desire was expressed that the Papers should be printed : hence their appearance
before the general public.
The subjects dealt with are of momentous importance, and may be rightly
called “ Questions of the Day,” embodying, as they do, subjects that agitate
the minds of men, and are, as they should be, matters of reverent inquiry and
discussion.
As such they are now sent forth, with the hope that they will tend to the
elucidation and defence of Divine Truth. May the Great Head of the Church
vouchsafe His blessing !


'
■
9
.


CONTENTS.
i. THE REVISED VERSION OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.
By the Rev. G. M. D’Arcy Irvine, M.A., Incumbent
of North Goulburn ... ... ... ... ... ... 9
2. THE REVISED NEW TESTAMENT. By the Rev. J. M.
Ware, Incumbent of Young ... ... ... ... 19
3. MODERN OBJECTIONS TO CHRISTIANITY. By the Rev.
Canon Scott, M.A. , Incumbent of Bungendore ... 25
4. MODERN OBJECTIONS TO CHRISTIANITY. By the Rev.
C. Kingsmill, A.K.C.L., Incumbent of Gunning ...
5. EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT. By the Rev. S. B. Holt
Incumbent of Cootamundra ... ... ... ... 41
6. EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT. By the Rev. A. D. Faunce,
Incumbent of Yass ... ... ... ... ... ... 49
7. PAROCHIAL MISSIONS. By the Rev. Canon Soares,
Incumbent of West Goulburn 55
8. SYMPATHY AS A POWER IN CHURCH WORK. By the
Rev. W. Cocks, Incumbent of Murrumburrah ... .., 67


■
nil/. I.• I i ■; . , .


The Revised Version of the New
Testament,
BY THE
REV. G. M. D’ARCY IRVINE, M.A.,
INCUMBEN 7 OF ST. NICHOLAS' CHURCH ,
NORTH GOULBURN.


1 have to acknowledge my indebtedness for some points and
suggestions to the Dean of Peterborough, and also to Dr.
Alexander Roberts, who was a member of the New Testament
Company, and whose “ Companion” will be found of great value in
comparing the Revised Translation with the Authorized Version.
G. M. D. I.
St. Nicholas' Parsonage, Oct. 29, 1881.


THE
Revised Version of the New Testament
The Revised Version of the New Testament is the most accurate
and scholarly rendering of the Greek Testament that exists in any
language. The merit of this Version lies in the fact that it is the
first and only attempt to make, out of 1,760 manuscripts, as exact
and accurate a transcript of the original, in the English language,
as can be furnished. “What has hitherto been the exclusive
possession of scholars and divines—namely, the true appreciation
of the mind and thought of St. Paul—becomes now, for the first
time, the common property of all who understand the English
language, and can follow a train of reasoning.” Ido not propose
in this paper to give a history of the Greek Text on which the
Revised Version is founded, nor in any way to refer to the history
of the Version itself. I desire only to glance this morning at some
of the departures from the Authorized Version, which will be found
in the Revised Translation. I have read that the changes amount
on the whole to 36,191. “ They are all to be traced to one or other of
two causes —either to a change of the Greek text, which it was found
necessary to adopt, or to a change of translation, which stricter
fidelity to the original seemed to require.” For all practical
purposes, however, the New Testament remains as it was. No
Scriptural truths—no Christian doctrines we have been accustomed
to hold, are in any way affected the foundation of the faith once
for all delivered to the saints still remains unshaken. The omission
of verses which are found in the Authorized Version soon strikes
the reader of the Revised Version. The celebrated passage,
1 John v. 7,8, has been struck out, the evidence against its genuine-
ness being said to be overwhelming. “ Every critic of note rejects
the words as an interpolation.” It would appear that none of the
Fathers quote the passage, and that it is not found in the Uncial
manuscripts or in any of the ancient versions. “ The omission,”
says Dr. Roberts, “ is one of the most indubitable results of textual
criticism.” Another omission is the explanation in the Authorized
Version (St. John v. 3,4) with regard to the troubling of the water


in the pool of Bethesda. And the profession of faith exacted
from the Ethiopian eunuch previous to his baptism (Acts viii. 37)
is also omitted in the Revised Version. There are other
omissions, but that of the doxology at the end of the Lord’s
Prayer, in St. Matt. vi. 13, is the most remarkable. It seems to
have been quite unknown to the early Fathers of the Church,
and that the only way of accounting for it is, that “ it probably
crept into the text from the margin.”
The reading in 1 Cor. viii. 7, is important; “ Howbeit
in all men there is not that' knowledge, but some being used
until now to the idol,* eat as of a thing sacrificed to an idol,
and their conscience being weak is defiled,” instead of “ with
conscience of the idol.” Conybeare and Howson’s rendering of
this passage is : “ On the contrary, there are some who still have
a conscientious fear of the idol,t and think the meat an idolatrous
sacrifice, so that if they eat it, their conscience being weak is
defiled.” Other instances of revision in the text are, St. Matt,
vi. 1.: “Take heed that you do not your righteousness (rrjv
SiKaioavvtiv ) before men,” instead of “ alms.”
1 Tim. iii. 16 : “He who was manifested in the flesh,
( og t(j)av(pd)dr] ev vapid) instead of “ God was manifested,” &c.
(ofoc tcpavEpwOri). The meaning here depending upon the pres-
ence or absence of a line in the middle of the O. None of the
very ancient versions have the line in the middle, which would
make it 0foc? God. But the doctrine of the passage is taught
in several other parts of the New Testament. St. Mark xvi. 17,
18 ; St. John i. 14; Ephes. iii. 5, 6 ; 1 John i. 2 j 1 Peter iii. 18,
all teaching the same truth. So that we can afford to part with
Qtog here.
I would respectfully differ from the Dean of Peterborough
in reference to St. John i. 18, at least as regards the reading
povoytvijg Qeog. The Dean says : “ The Revisers unquestion-
ably exercised a sound judgment in not adopting in the text of
John i. 18 the reading povoyevr)g Ofog , strongly as it is supported
by ancient authorities.” I think that what the Revisers put in the
margin—viz.: “ Many very ancient authorities read ‘ God only
begotten,' ” would have fully justified them in adopting that reading.
In Rom. v. 1, the Revisers have adopted t\u)pev instead of
e\opev. It is true the subjunctive has the support of the most
important versions and many of the Fathers. “ But the inter-
change,” says Dr. Perowne, “of long and short vowels is so
common in all languages, is so readily made in pronunciation,
and hence would creep so easily into MSS., even without
* Ttvtc T V avvri6iiae(t)g aprL tov dScoXov. —( Revised Text).
f Ttvte St ry avveicr/au tov eiSaiXov ea>g apn , —( Textus Receptus).


supposing dictation to a scribe, that it is not difficult to account
for the variation, and the greater number of copies would, in such
a case, prove nothing.” The blessings of which St. Paul speaks
are present, not future. He seems not to be exhorting, but to be
expressing the actual and present privileges of those who are
justified. “We have access into this grace wherein we stand,”
(verse 2); “ being reconciled ” (/caraAAayivrfc), “ we rejoice in
God through our Lord Jesus Christ” ev r q Oef),
&c.), I think the reading in Heb. iv. 2, of avyKeKpapevovg,
instead of avyKtKpapivog, “ which is the commonly received
reading, and the one adopted by Tischendorf,” weakens the pass-
age. The Revisers render it: “ But the word of hearing did not
profit them, because they were not united by faith with them that
heard,” where “ with them that heard” must mean the spies who
reported what they had heard of the richness of the land. As, how-
ever, we know that there is ancient authority for avyKEKpapevog,
I would prefer this reading inasmuch as to my mind, the sense
would then be better : “ The report which they heard did not’
profit them, because it met no belief in the hearers.”
From the revision of the text, let us glance at some of the
new renderings.
In the Authorized Version (St. Luke iii. 23) we read, “ Jesus
Himself began to be about thirty years of age.” Whatever may
be the differences of opinion with regard to the meaning of the
Greek here, the Revised Version gives a more satisfactory render-
ing—“ And Jesus Himself, when He began (to teach), was about
thirty years of age.” In St. Luke xvi. 8, the Revisers have, “And
his lord commended the unrighteous steward ” (/cal eiryvtaev 6
Kvpiog rbv oiKovopov Trig aSnclag, &c.). The rendering of the
Authorized Version, “The Lord commended the unjust steward,”
may be more accurate, but it has given frequently a false impres-
sion, many readers imagining that “ the Lord ” means the Lord
Jesus Christ. The Revised Version, “ his lord,” furnishes at
once a clue to the proper meaning of the parable. And in the
9th verse (chap, xvi.) we have an interesting and very necessary
alteration in the translation—“ Make to yourselves friends by
means of the mammon of unrighteousness (t/c row papwva rijg
aSiKiag ), that when it shall fail (iva brav i/cA/Vy), they (the
friends you have made) may receive you into the eternal taber-
nacles” (elg rag ahuviovg one t]vag). In St. John x. 14, 15, the
Authorized Version destroys the sense, but the Revised transla-
tion brings it out : “lam the good Shepherd, and I know mine
own, and mine own know me, even as the Father knoweth me,
and I know the Father ; and 1 lay down my life for the sheep.”
In St. John x. 16, the Revised Version runs—“ They shall
become one flock {p(a rrotpvn) one shepherd.” “Instead of the


narrowness of a fold, there shall be the wide-spreading freedom of
a flock, with one shepherd caring for them all.”
In St. John vii. xy, clearer light is thrown upon the words of
our Lord in the Revised Version, by bringing out the exact
meaning of the word “ will ” in the Greek, and with such meaning
an important principle in Theology : —“ If any man willeth to do
His will (lav rig diXy to OiXppa avrov tt oitlv) he shall know of
the teaching {rnpl Trig Sisa\rig) whether it be of God, or whether
I speak from myself.”
“ Let any one,” says the Dean of Peterborough, “read atten-
tively from the 12th to the 21st verse inclusive of the sth chapter
of the Epistle to the Romans, comparing the Revised Version
with that of 1611, or with any previous version, and he will be
grateful for the assistance he receives from the former.”
That is an important alteration in Rom. viii. 20, 21 ; “ For
the creation was subjected to vanity, not of its own will but by
reason of Him who subjected it {tov vtt ), in hope that
the creation itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption into the liberty of the glory of the children of God
(etc rrjv iXevOepiav Trig tmv tzkvixjv tov Qeov —into the
freedom which belongs to the glorification of the sons of God).
By tov must be meant God. Everywhere in Scrip-
ture God is represented as permitting His creatures to be subject
to the temporary reign of evil. This mystery will be solved by-
and-bye; but here, and in other places (as in 1 Cor. xv. 25, &c.),
the Apostle tells us to wait .patiently for its solution—good will
ultimately triumph over evil.
That is a valuable alteration in 1 Cor. iv., 4 : “I know
nothing against myself” (ovSev yap epavrty crvvoiSa). The
Authorized Version has it—“ I know nothing by myself, yet am I
not fyerSby justified ; but he that judgeth me is the Lord.” Many
have understood this passage as meaning that St. Paul could know
nothing, unless he was taught by God the Holy Ghost. However
true this may be, the Apostle is not treating upon such a subject.
He is speaking of ministerial responsibility, and that he was not
conscious of any failure in duty, but that after all it was only the
omniscient God to whom all hearts are open, and no secrets hid,
who could truly judge and justify him. r Cor. ix. 5 : “ Have
we no right to lead about a wife that is a believer ?” instead of
“ Have we not power to lead about a sister, a wife 1” (“ pp ovk
t\optv asiX(f)riv yvvaiKa Tnpiayeiv ;”) “lead about” —
carry with me on my journeys. 1 Cor. xi. 10 : “ For this cause
ought the woman to have a sign of authority on her head, because
of the angels,” instead of, “ For this cause ought the woman to
have power on her head because of the angels.” (See Gen. xxiv.
65-)


The word “Judgment” is everywhere in the Revised Version
substituted for “ damnation” in the A. V. (icpipa, condemnation,
sentence). i Cor. xi. 29 : “ For he that eateth and drinketh,
eateth and drinketh judgment unto himself, if he discern not the
body.” The majority of MSS. omit avafyiog, “unworthily,”
and Kvp'iov. I would prefer rendering the passage thus : “He
who eats and drinks, not duly judging of (or discerning) the body,
eats and drinks judgment against himself, if he discern not the
body ” (/ur) diatcpiviov to awpa), if he does not distinguish be-
tween the eucharistic elements and a common meal.
Philippians ii. 6 : “ Who being in the form of God counted
it not a prize to be on an equality with God, but emptied him-
self” (ov\ apiraypbv byyjcraTo). If apiraypoghe, as I believe it
to be, the act of seizing, apiraypa being the thing seized, then the
following would undoubtedly be the more accurate rendering ;
“ He thought not equality with God a thing to be seized upon”—
i.e., though essentially, even while on earth, He was in the form of
God, yet he did not think fit to claim his equality with God,
until He had accomplished His mission.
Phil. iii. 20, 21: “For our citizenship ( iroXirevpa ) is in
heaven, from whence (it; ov) also we wait for a Saviour, the
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall fashion anew the body of our
humiliation, that it may be conformed to the body of His glory.”
HoXn-tu/ua means the tenor of life , not citizenship, and virap\H
is more than iar'i ; might it not then be rendered “ For my life
abides in Heaven, from whence also I look for a Saviour, the Lord
Jesus Christ?”
1 Tim, vi. 10 : “ For the love of money is a root of all kinds
of evil” (p[%a yap 7 ravrwv twv kukCjv ian (piXapyvpia). The
A. V. has it, “ The love of money is the root of all evil.” This is
scarcely true, but that “ the love of money is a root of all kinds
of evil,” is lamentably true,
2 Tim. iii. 16 : “ Every Scripture inspired by God is also
profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, for instruction,
which is in righteousness.” (See “ Moses and Modern Science,”
by James Elliot, page 7.)
1 Tim. ii. 15 : “She shall be saved through the child-bear-
ing.” Connect this passage with St. Matt. i. 21 : “ And she shall
bring forth a son, and thou shall call His name JESUS, for it is
He that shall save His people from their sins.”
Titus ii, 13: “Looking for the blessed hope and appearing
(iTTifyavtiav) of the glory of our great God and Saviour Jesus
Christ.” This passage of itself affords incontestable evidence of
the essential Deity of Jesus Christ.
Heb. iv. 8 : “ For if Joshua had given them rest, then would
he (David) not afterwards have spoken of another day.” The


Authorized Version uses here the Greek form of Joshua —viz.,
Jesus, “If Jesus had given them rest.” The ordinary reader has
often’been perplexed by the use of the Greek form in this place,
and in Acts vii. 45.
Of the change in the Lord’s Prayer of “ lead us not into temp-
tation,” into “ bring us not into temptation,” I have only to say
that many will regard it as quite unnecessary. The other altera-
tion of “ deliver us from evil,” into “ deliver us from the evil one ”
is of greater consequence, and goes far to show that the person-
ality of the Tempter may be a fact after all. The majority, too, of
Greek scholars hold that the translation “ from the evil one ”is
the more accurate rendering. Moreover, in all the instances in
the New Testament in which 7 rovrjpog is used in the oblique
cases, with any ambiguity of meaning, such as St. Matt. v. 37-39 ;
vi. 13; St. John xvii. 15; 2 Thess. iii. 3; 1 John v. 19, the
Revisers give the masculine or personal rendering, and not, as
in the Authorized Version, the neuter.
In 1 Cor. xiii. 1-13, the Greek word aydnri, which is rendered
in the Authorized Version “Charity,” has been altered by the
Revisers into “Love,” for the sake of uniformity in the translation.
Very many, indeed, much regret the present substitution, but I
cannot help here agreeing heartily with the Dean of Peterborough,
whose words are well worthy of deep consideration: “No
thoughtful reader can doubt that, in writing that glowing passage
in the First Epistle to the Corinthians, St. Paul had something
more than an abstract virtue before his eyes. The living, concrete
form, the Incarnate Love, inspired his words. How important,
then,' to bring this before an English reader, to suggest, at least,
by the subtle association of the rendering, that as God Himself
is Love, so the love which is here held up to us as the perfect
pattern of our life is no ideal abstraction, but a love which became
incarnate in Him who is the perfect image of God.”
The last reference I shall make will be to the rendering
in the Apocalypse (Rev. iv. 6 ; v. 6 ; vi. 6 ; vii. 11 ; xiv. 3 ; xv.
7 • xix. 4) of “ living creatures,” instead of “ beasts,” as it is
in'the Authorized Version. It has often jarred upon many an ear
to hear the ministering spirits of God styled “ beasts.” The
kingdom of God and of Christ is never represented under the
image of a “ beast,” but a tyrannical, idolatrous system is, and so
in Rev. xiii. x, and xiv. 9, the Revisers have correctly rendered
Oriplov “ beast.” “ I saw a beast coming out of the sea having
ten horns and seven heads, and on his horns ten diadems, and
upon his heads names of blasphemy.” I have read some critiques
and lectures upon the Revised Version, but the Bishop of Mel-
bourne’s lecture, delivered at Sandhurst, I regard as particularly
striking. Although I cannot quite follow the Bishop in some of
the conclusions at which he has himself arrived, I nevertheless


feel that his Lordship’s lecture upon the Revised Version (from
which, however, I have not at all quoted in this paper) is a mas-
terly production, and well deserving the respectful consideration
of every competent critic and thoughtful student of the New
Testament. We rejoice to know that the publication of the
Revised Version, and all the lectures and articles that have passed
through the Press thereon, have created a thirst for the Water of
Life, and have given an impetus to the study of Holy Scripture,
and that at a time when infidelity would make the most of false
renderings and incorrect translations of the Word of Life. It may
be a long time yet before the Revised Version can legally be used
in the public services of the Church, and we can sympathize with
those whose only literature has been the venerable and familiar
English of the Authorized Version. Grey heads have bent over
it—hard, toil-stained hands have turned over its pages—dim, aged
eyes have dropped upon it tears of holy joy for twenty generations.
Many veteran saints of God will, with difficulty, sacrifice at the
shrine of scholarship the well-known and glowing words which
are entangled, as it were, in their heart of hearts. Nevertheless
we cannot but entertain the hope that the New Version will, ere
long, be “ appointed to be read in Churches.” But whether this
will be the case or not —whether the Authorized Version will
continue to be read in churches or not —the Revised Version
will, we may be sure, furnish its best commentary, and its clearest
and most authoritative elucidation.


(-. J ■: .3 . ■■■’•■ >. ,1 *' '
.
..
'
w
■ ' ■ to .
■■■
■
* *


- -
THE
REVISED NEW TESTAMENT,
BY THE
REV. J. MAITLAND WARE,
INCUMBENT OF ST. JOHN'S CHURCH ,
YOUNG.




The Revised New Testament
For a bush parson to put forth anything like a criticism on a
work undertaken and carried out by those learned Christian men,
to whose scholarship and piety he is under such deep obligations
for their aid to him in his efforts both to apprehend and “ rightly
to divide the word of truth,” would be an unwarrantable pre-
sumption. But for a bush parson, now among the seniors of the
Diocese to which he belongs,—both in years and in bush minis-
trations—to put forth his views as to the practical utilization of
the finished work of that saintly and scholarly company of New
Testament Revisers, is a different thing. And when this is
done, as it is now, with a sincere hope that his views may be
not only criticised, but amended by his brethren for the benefit of
his people and himself; it is, I trust, consistent with the object
of our present gathering, on which may the Holy Ghost, the
Comforter, bestow a special blessing.
The first thing which struck me as I began to compare our
daily lessons taken from the New Testament, in that Version
which is “appointed to be read in Churches,” with the same lessons
in the Revised Version, as wellasin the Textus Receptus of the Greek
Version, was, that the alterations were unnecessarily numerous, so
far as the meaning of the inspired writers, as addressed to the
mind of the ordinary English reader, is concerned. I have since
read that there are some 30,000 alterations, and I think that the
question for us to consider is, whether the bulk —I will not say
even the larger portion, but whether the bulk, of these alterations
are sufficiently emendations to justify any Church action, with a
view to the substitution of the Revised for the Authorized Version
of the New Testament in our Liturgy. In other words, whether
the Revised Version expresses the truths of Holy Writ in a tongue
“better understanded of the people” than the Authorized Version,
or not. I hope, my Reverend Brethren, that you will understand
plainly the issue which I wish to bring before your minds as it
appears to mine. It is not whether the weeks and months and years
of toil, or rather of loving labour, of that holy company have been
wasted ; and it is not whether each individual Christian of every


English-speaking community is not its debtor; on these points
there can be no doubt, but it is whether we, presbyters of the Church
of England, ought to exert ourselves towards the substitution of the
Revised Version for the Authorized in our churches and schools
—that is, in our public worship. I own I am inclined to
think that we ought not, and I am confident that any such
exertion on our part would be in vain. And this, chiefly, from the
difficulty which first impressed me, in the multitude of alterations,
which, although they may show to the grammarian a more
accurately scholar-like translation, yet do not more accurately
convey the sense to those who are accustomed to the vulgar
tongue —to that vernacular English which we have, I had almost
said derived from, but which we have certainly been brought up
on out of the Bible.
To illustrate my argument, I will ask your patience only while I
go through the alterations in the two lessons for the day on which I
received Archdeacon Pownalbs welcome circular, and commenced
this paper. They were 2 Cor. iv. and the former part of St. Mark xi.
ver. Ito ver. 27. In these two lessons from the New
Testament, I find fifteen and thirty-two alterations respectively
not including such as are already in the margin of our Reference
Bibles ; that is, I find forty-seven alterations in forty-five verses.
Now what is the nature of these alterations, which amount, in two
portions of Scripture, taken I may say at random, to more than
one in each verse? It would ill become a gathering such as ours
to attempt to find fault with those alterations which are taken
from various MSS., differing from the Textus Receptus; for,
judging by myself, I think that it would be a very rare exception,
such as would only tend to prove the rule, if a clergyman of an
Australian Diocese could be found able to decipher an old Greek
MS. But what we have to do with is this, whether it would be
worth while, for the sake of a more literal translation, to sacrifice
what I will venture to call a more idiomatic translation, seeing
that our English idiom may be said to spring from, and be rooted
in, our English Bible. To continue my argument from the
passages chosen. In the former (2 Corinth, iv ), we have such
alterations as this, “ even as we obtained mercy,” for “as we have
received mercy f and we have a few pronouns and articles put in
and left out; but the only important alterations are the use of the
verb “ veil” instead of “hide” as the translation of KaXvTrreiv
(of the improvement in which change I do not think much), and
the undoubted emendation “ are perishing” instead of “ are lost”
in the 3rd verse. We have “ the Gospel of the glory of Christ,”
instead of the “ glorious Gospel of Christ,” and the word “dawn”
instead of “ shine” in the 4th verse. The gain of the former I
think balanced by the loss in the latter to the mind of “ him that
occupieth the place of the unlearned.” We have a change in the


casting of the sentence, rather than of the translation, in ver. 6, and
in the 7th verse an alteration, which, to my ears, conveys far less of
vmp(soM than that which it is intended to supersede “the exceeding
greatness of the powerf instead of “ the excellency of the power.
Then, in the following verses, we find “ pressed” instead of
“ troubledf “straitened ” instead of “ distressed“pursued ”
instead of “ persecutedf “ smitten down” instead of “ cast down,
“ manifested ” for “ made manifest,” “ wherefore ” instead of “ for
which cause ,” “is decaying” instead of “perish,” “for the moment”
instead of “ but for a moment ,” only one of which (the last but
one—“ is decaying” instead of “perish ”) seems to me an emen-
dation sufficiently valuable to justify the sacrifice of the familiar
sounds. And when we turn to the other portion of Scripture
named (St. Mark xi. 1-27), we find much the same thing—altera-
tions, many of which are questionably emendations in conveying
the sense of the original to the minds of the people. Of these
I may specify “ they draw nigh” instead of “ they came nigh ,
“straightway as ye enter” instead of “as soon as ye enter,
“he will send him back hither" instead of “he will send
him hither,” the introduction of the word “ back” certainly
conveying to ordinary English ears the notion that the
animal had been previously sent to its owner. “It being
now eventide ” is made to replace “now the eventide was
come.” “Robbers ” is a better translation than “thieves;” but
query is not a thief a robber, and a robber a thief I Of course
there are many invaluable alterations, which are, undeniably,
emendations, and which all Christians must feel to be truly helpful
towards knowing what is the mind of the Spirit, notably the
bringing out, as the actual words of the Apostle instead of as the
fancy of the individual expositor, the origin of the name “ father”
in the Epistle, to which we listened yesterday, just before we
celebrated the outward sign of the highest of all family ties in the
Holy Communion. But as to the question whether it is our duty
to work together for the introduction of the Revised Version, so
as to make it the Authorized Version, I cannot express my
opinion more concisely than in the words of the leader in a late
Melbourne Church Messenger, that “ the translators, by their some-
what pedantic servility to the exact grammatical value of the
tenses and prepositions, have impaired the rhythm and dignity,
and I would add, the homeliness and familiarity, of the transla-
tion.” That it is a boon to the Church no one can deny. I would
even call it the gift of the Holy Ghost to both pastors and flocks in
the nineteenth century; for not only must it be a help {if used) to
the former, in their preparation for “ rightly dividing the word of
truth,” but its cheapness and easiness of access will enable the latter
to prove our teaching, and to see that we are addressing to them,
not our own private opinions and speculations, but the deliberately


pronounced decisions of some of the deepest and most reverend
scholars of the Anglo-Saxon race. But if the question is put,
whether the introduction of the Revised Version into the Liturgy
of the Church of England would conduce to the preservation of
the “ unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace,” the answer, to
my mind, must be distinctly in the negative. For it seems to me
that while the intrinsic truths contained in the words of the
Apostles and Evangelists are confirmed, to the individual mind by
the oneness of the Revised yersion with that with which from our
childhood we have been familiar, that very long familiarity with the
dear old words would make our tongues halt, and stumble, and trip,
as we either read or quoted the new. “No man having drunk old
wine straightway desireth new, for he saith the old is better,” and
the Revised Version leaves out even the “ straightway ,” on which
Archbishop Trench so delightfully expatiates. The great danger
of an immediate, or even a speedy change, seems to me, that in
the better knowledge of the yj oufifia (the letter), we should lose
much of the heartiness of the spirit. May God help us by His
Spirit to “ read, mark, learn, inwardly digest,” and reproduce to
those who look to us for food, those Holy Scriptures which He
has “ caused to be written for our learning” in the Authorized, and
now, thanks be to Him, in the Revised Version, that “ by patience
and comfort of His holy word, we may embrace and ever hold
fast the blessed hope of everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.” Amen.


Modern Objections to Christianity.,
KY THE
REV. CANON SCOTT, M.A.,
INCUMBENT OF ST. PHILIP'S CHURCH , BUNGENDORE,
AND ST. THOMAS’ CHURCH , MOLONGLO.




Modem Objections to Christianity.
Of all the attacks that have been made at various times on Chris-
tian truth, those made in these days in the name of science are
probably the most formidable, and for this reason. Ihe conclu-
sions of science are supposed to be demonstrated, and are
therefore regarded as unquestionably true ; whilst the Christian
must admit that, however confident he may be of the truth of his
religious convictions, yet he cannot prove their truth ; he can
only show that they are probably true, and that the degree of their
probability is such as to justify him in adopting them as the
guiding principles of his life. The scientific infidel argues in this
way : You Christians believe that your doctrines are true, and
show that there is great probability that they are so. We, on the
other hand, prove the truth of our conclusions. I hose conclu-
sions are directly opposed to your doctrines. Probabilities must
give way to demonstration ; therefore, if you are honest and
reasonable men, you must admit that your old-fashioned theories
are wrong. Now there is great force in this argument, and I for
one, if it could be proved by a truly scientific demonstration that
any one of my beliefs was false, should be compelled to give up
that belief, however dear it might be—however seemingly necessary
to my happiness.
The demonstrations of true science, like every other good
and perfect gift, are from God, and no seeming voice from Heaven
can overthrow them. It is useless, then, to say to the man of
science, “Your theories are opposed to God’s word, therefore they
must be false.” It is cowardly and faithless to say, “ I dare not
listen to such impious attacks on revealed truth.” Ihe ordinary
Christian may take this course. He may say, “I am not compe-
tent to discuss these questions ; I leave them to wiser men, and am
content to hold fast the faith of my fathers.” But the minister of
the Gospel must take a bolder course. He must meet the
scientific infidel on his own ground —must challenge him to pro-
duce his proofs—and then he will find that no single thing has
ever yet been demonstrated by any science which upsets a single
doctrine of the Gospel—which contradicts a single statement of


the Bible when rightly interpreted. Look at the conclusions of
Astronomy. That science was supposed at one time to contradict
the Bible, and for such silly reasons as these : It is written in one
of the Psalms, “ He hath made the round world so sure that
it cannot be moved,” whereas we know that the earth
is in constant motion. Another Psalm says of the Sun “It goeth
from the uttermost part of the Heaven and runneth about unto
the end of it again whereas we know that the Sun does not go
round the Earth, but the Earth round the Sun. The weakness
of such objections is hardly worth pointing out, seeing that with
all our knowledge of Astronomy, we still speak of the Sun as
“ rising ” and “ setting,” though we know that it does nothing of
the kind. So with Geology; that science proves that the whole
time of creation extended over many thousands, perhaps millions
of years, whereas it is said in Genesis to have lasted only six days.
But can any reasonable man suppose that God’s creation day—
even before the Sun was made —must have been of the same
length as one of our days. We cannot say how long a creation
day may have been ; but we can say that God’s seventh day (his
day of rest, during which no single act of creation has been done)
has already lasted many thousands of our years, and may last many
thousands of years more. In these cases then, true science and
the Bible, reasonably interpreted, are in no way opposed to one
another. But there is an apparent contradiction between Geology
and Genesis. Some declare that the order of creation of living
things given in Genesis is opposed to geological truth. They
take the English Bible, which is not an accurate translation of
the original Hebrew—they put their own incorrect interpretations
on that English version, and then declare that Geology and
Genesis do not agree ; but those who have a profound knowledge
both of Geology and of the Hebrew text of the Bible find no such
contradiction. In fact, the history of the creation given in
Genesis is not a weak point, which the Christian must avoid looking
into, lest his faith should be shaken. On the contrary, I believe
it to be one of the strongest, perhaps the very strongest, evidence
of the inspiration of that Book. It is one of the triumphs of
modern science to have traced the visible universe from its first
chaotic nebulous state, through its several stages —the gradual
drawing together of its particles by their mutual gravitation, pro-
ducing light and heat before the Sun and Stars had become
distinct bodies. The separation of the constituents of the stars
and planets into their liquid masses by “ space ” —(the “ Rakia ”
of Genesis —wrongly translated “ firmament;”) the separation of
land and water ; the gradual development, first of vegetable, then
of animal life, and the final appearance of man upon the earth.
But where was all this science when Genesis was written ? Who
could have constructed such a succession of events by mere


guessing ? Who, for instance would have placed the creation of
light long before that of the Sun, the apparent source of light.
The only possible way of accounting for the wonderful accuracy
of the account of the Creation given in Genesis, is to believe
that the writer of that book was taught the truth by divine
inspiration. It may have been, it probably was, taught him in
six distinct visions, corresponding to the six days of Creation ;
but, however, that may be, we can boldly take our stand on the
truth of Genesis. We need not shrink from the subject as many
good Christians do. We need not say, as many of feeble
faith have said, and as I once used to say myself, that the
Bible was intended to teach only moral and religious truths,
and that its writers were not inspired in regard to scientific
truths, which can be read in God’s great book of Nature ; for now
we find that the writer of Genesis was inspired to declare scientific
truths, which it has taken so many thousands of years for man to
discover, by the aid of his much boasted science. I repeat, then,
that true science is not opposed to revelation.
But some may say, is not the modern theory of evolution, so
commonly believed in by men of science, opposed to the Bible?
That theory, or rather the many theories included under the name
of evolution, are indeed opposed to the Bible record of the creation
of man and animals—at least they appear to be so for the most
part —though I believe there are some Evolutionists who hold a
theory reconcilable with the Bible. But what does that matter ?
What has a mere theory—a mere clever conjecture as to how all
living things might possibly have arrived at their present state—
a conjecture unsupported by evidence—a theory contradicted
rather than supported by all observed facts, by all history, by all
experience- -what has such a theory to do with science ? The
hypothesis of Darwin may account for many phenomena, but
there are innumerably more that it does not and cannot account
for; and, therefore, if its supporters were true inductive
philosophers they would abandon it. Sir Isaac Newton’s theory
of light accounted for many of its phenomena, but not for all, and
what followed? True men of science abandoned that theory and
adopted the undulatory theory which accounts for them all. In
the same way, I doubt not, the time will come when the scientific
world will have abandoned the guesses of Darwin and others, and
adopted the only theory which explains everything —the theory
revealed by God to the writer of Genesis.
Let us now pass on to a later period in the Bible history, that
of the great flood in the time of Noah. Free-thought lecturers, as
they call themselves, will tell you that there is not water enough
in the oceans to cover all the mountains in the world ; and that
an ark of the dimensions given in the Bible could not have con-
tained all the kinds of animals in the world, with their food for


so long a time, and therefore the history of the flood cannot be
true. But they forget that the sinful race of man only occupied a
small portion —probably a low-lying portion —of the earth at that
time ; and that, as God’s object was to destroy mankind, it is un-
reasonable to suppose that the flood extended to the uninhabited
parts of the world ; that it was only necessary therefore to pre-
serve in the Ark such living things as inhabited that country, and
were useful to mankind ; and that the Ark was fully large enough
for that purpose. And if our opponents, in their dread of the
supernatural, argue that sueh a flood, proceeding from rain alone,
is incredible, what objection can there be to the supposition that
one of those depressions of part of the earth’s surface, which have
so often happened, occurred at that time, and that thus, as the Bible
tells us, “ the fountains of the great deep were broken up,” and the
waters of the ocean poured in upon the doomed land ? Thus
geological science can say nothing against the history of the flood
as reasonably interpreted, though it does protest against the old
assumption that the flood extended over all the world, and that
fossil shells and remains of marine animals on the tops of moun-
tains are a proof that it did so extend.
I shall say but little respecting the objections made by men
of science against everything miraculous in the Scriptures. I say
“ men of science” because science itself has nothing to say on the
subject. The power of spirit over matter, of mind over body, and
the nature and origin of vital force, are at present, and probably
always will be, beyond the reach of physical science. The
theories of modern Spiritists, however absurd and mischievous,
have done this good—they have opened men’s eyes to the
reality of immaterial forces ; of the human will exercising a strange
and unaccountable influence over objects, both animate and
inanimate. The experiments of pretenders to healing powers
have shown how the belief of a patient can produce, in some
cases, a real change in his bodily state, and have in a great
measure removed the difficulty which many have felt in believing
in the truth of miracles. For now the most determined advocate
for the necessity of God’s working according to observed analogies,
must admit the possibility of God’s imparting to certain persons
in an intensified form those powers which ordinary persons
possess to a limited extent, and especially to Him who was a par-
taker of the divine nature ; of whom John the Baptist said, “ God
giveth not the Spirit by measure unto Him.”
Science has done wonders in this century, but it has thrown
no light whatever on what are called spiritual questions; it has
proved nothing and disproved nothing. It has failed to answer
the question, “ What is the origin of life ?” and as one of its
most successful followers (Tyndall) honestly admits, there are
problems which it never has solved and probably never will


be able to solve. We may then safely meet the scientific sceptic
on his own ground; we may discuss God’s mode of working as
freely as he discusses it. But we must beware of assuming too
much; we must not expect our adversaries to believe all that we
believe; to attach to the Scriptures all the authority that we
attach to them ; or to accept all the theories that we deduce from
them. We must not state as necessary truths opinions on which
we ourselves are divided. I mean with reference to such
questions as the nature and extent of the Atonement—the
doctrine of Predestination —the impossibility of repentance
beyond the grave, and the eternity of punishment. Much harm
has been done by Christians insisting on their own views on such
questions. Thus I have heard moral and intelligent unbelievers
declare that it was impossible to believe in Christianity, because
it represented God as creating millions of human beings who
could not possibly escape the doom of eternal torments; that
they would rather have no Cod at all than one who could be so
unjust and cruel. We must be careful, too, not to use inaccurate
language, which may be laid hold of and used against us to our
own confusion. For instance, I have heard preachers, in stating
the doctrine of the Atonement, declare that Christ died “ instead
of us.” The sceptic says, what death did he die? the death of
the body or of the spirit ? 01 the body surely. Then, if He died
“instead” of me, I have not to die the death of the body ; yet
nothing can be more certain than that I have to die that death.
Thus the whole statement is upset by the use of the inaccurate
word “ instead,” which is not so used in Scripture.
Again, we must not pretend to know too much. We are not
bound to explain everything. We may say to the man of science,
“ There are many things in physical science which you cannot
explain ; how much more must you expect to find many things in
theological science which we cannot explain ?” If, then, we enter on
the enemy’s country and fight him on his own ground, as we may
fairly do, we must be watchful and guarded lest we give him any
unnecessary advantage over us.
In these few remarks I have limited myself to the objections
made to Christianity in the name of Natural Science. There are
other objections, made on moral and metaphysical grounds, which
I leave to others who may be more competent to meet them.
I will conclude with the eloquent words of the Bishop of
Melbourne: —“ Let thought go forth on her glorious path of
discovery; let science tell us all she can of the wonders of God’s
works in earth and heaven ; neither, we know full well, can tell
us anything which shall shake our faith in Christ. Is not this, my
reverend brethren, the language of all our hearts : 1 1 know whom
I have believed ; Him I love and serve; Him will I preach and
strive to glorify while strength remains to me ; and when I can do


no more, on Him will I rest and lean till my change come!’ And
then at length, when the task is finished, and the burden of sin
and toil has been laid down, there await us beyond these shadows
the eternal home and the brotherhood of the best and greatest
who have gone before ; and, above all, the enrapturing vision,
never to be lost again, of ‘ Him who loved us, and gave Himself
for us.’”


Modern Objections to Christianity,
BY THE
REV. C. KINGSMILL, A.K.C.L.,
INCUMBENT OF ST. EDMUND'S CHURCH ,
GUNNING.


?, i


Modern Objections to Christianity.
It is a happy commencement to a paper upon modern scepticism
that vve have authority from the most honoured names in
Christendom for saying that the Christian position has never been
stronger than now.
Our attitude, then, so far from being one of consternation and
alarm, is one of thankfulness and confidence—thankfulness that
unexpected witnesses have come forth in these latter days to testify
to the truth, and confidence that there can be no real discrepancy
between the works of God and the word of God. If an answer
cannot be given at a moment to every new infidel attack, wait.
Copernicus once replied in memorable words to a great
difficulty. “ If,” said a contemporary astronomer to Copernicus,
“ if the world were constructed as you say, Venus would have phases
like the moon. She has none ! what do you say to that ?” The
answer of Copernicus was a fine example of quiet confidence and
patient faith. He said : “ I have no reply to make, but God will
be so good as to permit an answer to this difficulty.” Soon after
Galileo invented the telescope, and the phases of Venus were
discovered. At the present moment “ God has been so good” as to
summon a great army of unlocked for witnesses from the depths
of the sea and the ends of the earth to the side of truth. If at
any future time science should raise new difficulties, God will be
so good as to raise up men and facts to answer them.
It is one of the marks of our time that men will doubt every-
thing in Heaven above and in the earth beneath, except their own
infallibility. Thinking non-scientific men have usually assumed
that when a great scientific leader opposed to Christianity has
announced a discovery, or proclaimed a truth, he has done so
after cautious investigation, and upon the true principles of
induction. Our faith in some of the leaders of science has been
rudely shaken of late. The time seems to have come when
Christian men should be warned that even leaders of scientific
thought opposed to Christianity are capable of making great
mistakes, and arriving at hasty conclusions.
Some years ago there was a great commotion about a discovery
hostile to Christianity. There was found in the valley of the Somme


a jaw-bone, which, after examination, was pronounced by a great
antiquary and scientist to belong to an inferior race of human
beings, and the antiquity of man as opposed to Scripture was
apparently proved and loudly proclaimed. Soon afterwards this
famous jaw-bone was traced to a neighbouring cemetery; some
workmen who dug it up confessed the fraud, and the whole proved
to be a huge imposition.
The members of the Geological Society were deceived in a
similar manner. Specimens of Roman pottery were sent, taken
from a bed which assumed to date back as far as the days of Nero.
Soon after it was proved that these relics were nothing more
ancient than modern “ brown pigs’' and flower-pots. The silt bed
from which they were taken proved to be very modern indeed, as
it contained fragments of the famous T.W. tobacco pipes, familiar
to all who have ever passed a tobacconists shop in the streets of
modern London. In language it has been the same; the most
determined unbelief in the Holy Scriptures is often found joined
to the blindest credulity in the writings of men.
Volney furiously denied the inspiration or even the authen-
ticity of the Pentateuch, yet he appeals with the utmost confidence
to Sanchoniathon, a Phoenician historian, who lived before the
siege of Troy ! Hengstenberg has shown that the writings so
appealed to are worthless fabrications.
Gesenius, a most learned Hebraist and Philologist, hesitated to
acknowledge the Mosaic authorship of the Pentateuch. A French
Marquis fabricated an inscription, and Gesenius declared this to
be a most valuable contribution to the history of Gnosticism, and
actually wrote a pamphlet “De inscriptione nuper in Cyrenaica
reperta.” As the eyes of Europe were upon him, the discovery of
this imposture gave Gesenius such a shock that his health was
seriously impaired.
Modern scepticism lays much of its unbelief in the Bibleat
the door of Geology. Christian men ought clearly to understand
that this science is in a state of flux. A traveller once visiting a
Hindoo Temple saw lying prostrate upon the ground, disfigured,
dishonoured, and mutilated, more than a dozen heathen deities.
Upon asking what had befallen these unhappy gods, he learnt
that they had disappointed their votaries; they were of no use —
they were disgraced one after another—and there they were.
The same thing has been repeated in Geology ; one theory
after another has been advocated, abandoned, and then flung
aside as useless.
When I was arguing once with an intellectual unbeliever, he
said: “You know what geologists say.” “Geologists! which of
them?” “ Sir Ch. Lyell.” “When?” “ Oh, in 1850.” Turning
to the opinion of the same geologist ten years later, I found that
he flatly contradicted his former opinion.


If I am asked to abandon Genesis for Geology, it is but
fair to ask—What phase of the science have you arrived at ? My
book never changes. Yours rises and falls upon every wave of
modern thought. Let us glance for a few moments at some things
which ought to make us very cautious about receiving so-called
conclusions of geologists. The entire fabric rests upon the
assumption that the strata are evidences ofasuccession of creations,
or rather a succession of mechanical geogonies, each of which
required a vast cycle of time for its formation. But in demanding
these enormous periods, they appear to assume that nothing more
than ordinary influences were at work to produce these results.
But suppose there was another atmosphere, another mixture of
heat and damp, another proportion of oxygen and hydrogen, these
vast periods would be unnecessary.
I have seen with my own eyes rapid formations in Nature,
for which an ordinary geologist, if unacquainted with the facts,
would claim some immense period. Amongst the mountains of
the Buitenzorg Residency, in the island of Java, at a tea and rice
estate, I saw two strange looking hills of lime formation rising in
the midst of paddy fields. They were constantly destroyed by
blasting, and the materials carried away for building purposes;
yet they were as constantly renewed with the most astonishing
rapidity again.
Wagner mentions that upon the coast of Messina there is a
formation of sandstone going on with incredible rapidity. The
sand is mixed with mergel, a substance containing iron. The
formation is so rapid that mill-stones have been taken after thirty
years from the first sediment. I submit that if these formations
were shown to a modern geologist, he would probably demand
for their formation a period fifty times greater than it really took.
The most extravagant periods are demanded for the coal measures,
but geologists agree in one thing (the only thing in which they do
agree) that such calculations are not to be trusted. Goppert made
experiments in which he saw vegetables turned into coal in one year
and nine months. He saw cloth exposed to water exhalation
turned into shining black coal. He recalls these facts for the
benefit of those who insist upon these vast periods.
In the year 1881 it takes so much time to deposit so many
cubic feet of mud and sediment in the Mississippi. All things
being equal, how long did it require to make the Delta in Egypt 1
A very simple sum. But this is just the point. All things may
have been quite dijfferent ; the volume of water, the force of the
wind, heat, atmosphere, etc., etc.
The calculation that the river Niagara has taken 35,000 years
to wear away the ledge of rock between Lewiston and the “ Falls
is a good illustration. This calculation assumes that the ledge was
always in its present hardened state. But it was once as soft as


mortar, and, as another writer says, “ the process of excavating the
Niagara Channel did not occupy the old ocean as many hours as
Lyell demands years for the job.”
Such calculations are most untrustworthy. If, as Wagner
says, the strata, layer after layer, enwrapped the globe like
the leaves of an onion all would be much clearer; but they
do not. It is well known that the Silurian and Devonian strata
thrust themselves up where geologists least expect them, and
where some geologists would like least to find them. Every day
it becomes more clearly'proved that very little has been proved.
It has been lately whispered that the demand for these incalculable
periods really came from the Shasters and Pooranahs of the
Hindoo mythology !
Modern scepticism lays much of its unbelief at the door of
Evolution. Christian men must understand that the concessions
of those who belong to this school are almost fatal to their theories.
Some are almost amusing. Nature, they contend, can do nothing
by leaps and starts. The great rhythmical march from the
ascidian to the man proceeds, part passu , with unbroken con-
tinuity. We listen in awe and silence, when behold we suddenly
see them and their theories leaping over gulfs and chasms quite
frightful to look upon. Absence of fossil man—missing links
spontaneous generation never proved—sterility of hybrids—they
jump across these tremendous chasms, apparently quite forgetting
the rhythmical march from the molecule to the man.
Again, conscience, that “ Candle of the Lord,” with its solemn
voice, and its mysterious power of arraigning man before its own
tribunal—can a man’s conscience ever come by the uprising
evolution of Lamark or by natural selection evolution of Darwin ?
If any man thinks it can, I would ask him to take in one hand
Butler’s second Dissertation and in the other Darwin’s chapter on
Conscience. Compare the massive thought, the reverent spirit,
and the convincing arguments of the one, with the weak, shifting,
illogical, hesitating reasons of the other—sometimes almost
begging the question. Can the human voice be developed by
natural selection 1 Pritchard, of Oxford, and other philosophers
say it is impossible. The mighty aspirations of man’s
heart —the very longings' which, in spite of his fallen state, are
still crying within him—the mysteries of his moral being—the
cries which issue from his poor, dissatisfied, empty heart—have
not been evolved through a struggle for existence. These things
are accounted for in the Word of God, and no where else
besides.
Many modern leaders, &c., have forsaken the true principles
of their owm philosophy. What shall we say to theories about
prayer. Here is a man who mocks at its efficacy to call down
rain from heaven—derides its attempt to stay the march of plague,


pestilence, famine, and national disaster. You, say, of course, you
have not theorised about this matter ; you have tried. He replies
“I have not, and do not intend to do so.” This is bad
experimental philosophy. What would Bacon have said to such
a man !
But there is a tremendous power put into the hands of every
minister of the Gospel, if he will avail himself of Let him ask
the unbeliever, in a kind Christian tone of spirit, this : “ You
profess to believe in these things. Have they given satisfaction
to your conscience or peace to your own heart!” and watch the
face of the unbeliever. I may speak here with a little authority.
My own faith was sorely shaken at twenty-one years of age by a
wretched book, “ Vestiges of Creation.” I found false beliefs
about as unsatisfying as the east wind to a hungry man. The
supreme proof of the truth of God is in the glad response of the
soul herself to the teaching of God’s Spirit. Meantime, as regards
all phases of unbelief, “ in quietness and in confidence shall be
our strength.” The needle of controversy, agitated by a thousand
influences, seems now quivering all round the compass of thought
and opinion. Let us testify to men that, until it points to Christ,
they can find no rest unto their souls.
At a clerical meeting in London, where gloomy fears were
freely expressed as to the future of the Church and the safety of
the faith, an aged clergyman rose and said, “ Brethren, I have
news for you.” They asked what it was, and he replied, “1 he
Lord God omnipotent reigneth.”


.
■
'


Everlasting Punishment,
BY THE
REV. S. B. HOLT,
INCUMBENT OF CHRIST CHURCH ,
COOTAMUNDRA.




Everlasting Punishment
The time allotted me being so short, I shall confine myself to the
teaching of Holy Scriptures on the above subject, not considering
that of the Church Catholic, or of our own portion of it; and not
trying to show how the views I shall express harmonize with our
own reason, or with the attributes of Almighty God.
In dealing with this subject, I shall try to answer these three
questions : Whither does the human soul go at death ? Are
there any good influences at work there to bring into a state of
grace those who have here died without Christ 1 And will all to
be condemned at the Day of Judgment have to endure a punish-
ment that is endless 1 ?
I. Whither does the human soul go at death ? The common
answer would be : those of believers to heaven, and those of
unbelievers to hell. But this, while true of their ultimate , is not
true of their immediate , destination. Our Blessed Lord tells us
that “ No man hath ascended into heaven, but He that descended
out of heaven and if by “ hell ”is meant the place to which the
wicked will be finally consigned, I do not know that one lost
human soul has yet gone thither.
The Word of God says that, when men die, they go to Hades.
It also speaks of some in Gehenna and of others in Paradise. That
Paradise is not heaven we infer, among other things, from this :
that to the thief on the cross our Lord said, “ To-day shalt thou
be with me in Paradiseand yet, three days after, He said to
Mary Magdalene, “ Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended
unto the Father.” Our inference from the teaching of Holy
Scriptures is that, in the one general receptacle ot Hades, are two
great divisions—Gehenna and Paradise. And from a statement
in Josephus it would appear as if the New Testament were on this
point expressing the common belief of that time. This statement
I give on the authority of Canon Farrar, who, in the article
“Hell,” in “Smith’s Dictionary of the Bible,” says: “ This was
the belief of the Jews after the exile, who gave to the places the
names of Paradise and Gehenna.”


To Hades all bygone generations, including our Blessed Lord
(Acts ii 31) have gone; and thither all succeeding ones, except
those who will be alive at the Second Advent, will go, and there
abide until the setting up of the great white throne. That any
will pass away, between death and the judgment day, into “ pain-
less non-existence,” is not taught in Holy Scriptures, but is con-
tradicted by those passages of which, —“ we must all be made
manifest before the judgment seat of Christ,” and those which
speak of the inhabitants of Tyre and Sidon, Sodom and Gomorrah,
appearing before the judgment bar, —may be taken as types.
11. Are there in Hades any good influences at work to bring
into a state of grace those who have here died without Christ ?
Not a few eminent men think there are. On what passages in the
Bible do they rely ? The Bishop of Melbourne, in his Lecture
on the Revised Version of the New Testament, says : “There is
very scant reference in Holy Scripture to the state between death
and judgment.” He adds that, saving the parable of the rich
man and Lazarus—on which, because it is “ filled with Jewish
imagery,” he does not rely—“ there is only one other passage in
the New Testament which can be said to refer directly and
specifically to the state of souls between death and judgment.”
Truly a very small basis on which to build up hopes of such
momentous issues ! The passage is 1 St. Peter, iii. 18, which, in
the Revised Version—from which my various quotations are
given—reads thus : “ Being put to death in the flesh, but quick-
ened in the spirit; in which also He went and preached unto the
spirits in prison.” On the supposition which Bishop Wordsworth,
the late Dean Alford, and Prebendary Thorold, in the S P.C.K.
Commentary, uphold, that that which our Lord preached was the
Gospel, let us, in connection with any hopes which we may
cherish, remember that the passage thus interpreted merely tells
what our Lord did o?ice only, says nothing as to the motive which
prompted Him, and gives not the slightest hint as to the result.
Canon Farrar in his “ Eternal Hope,” and Mr. Cox in his
“ Salvator Mundi,” refer to many other passages. They both
adduce those which speak of God’s love, and his unwillingness
that any should perish—of our Blessed Lord’s having died for all
men—and of the foretold extent of his mediatorial dominion.
Most thankfully do we recognize all this. But we cannot shut our
eyes to the fact that there is another side to even this question.
Canon Farrar, in the last page of his book, says : “ It is, indeed,
true, that universal redemption does not necessarily imply universal
salvation .” And the Bishop of Melbourne, speaking in another
part of his lecture about King Agrippa’s reply to St. Paul, says :
“ Many preachers will be disappointed at the loss of a favourite
text, but ... I think the subject presented by the New
Version, viz., the hardening power of sin and the curse of


worldly pride ... far more useful.” Yes, “ the hardening
power of sin “Ye will not come unto me ;” “ How often would
I have gathered you . . . but ye would not.’’
Another group of passages which they rely upon, consists
of those which speak of the “ Gehenna of fire.” This they say is
“ geonian fire,” which is not punitive, but the symbol of a purifying
and vivifying correction carried on both before and after the Day
of Judgment. What the mercy of God in Christ Jesus has failed
to do here, seonian fire will be able to do hereafter ! It may be so,
but the only approach I find to such teaching in the Holy
Scriptures is in what the rich man in torment asked on behalf of
his five brethren. The symbolical Book of the Revelation ascribes
no such effect to fire; for the 16th chapter says:—“And men
were scorched tenth great heat; and they blasphemed the name of
the God . . . and they repented not to give Him glory ” (v. 9).
“ They gnawed their tongues for pain . . . and they repented
not” (v. 11).
But supposing there are gracious influences at work, will they
lead to the removal of any from Gehenna to Paradise dieting the
time that men continue in Hades I On some parts of this subject I
speak with a faltering tongue, but to the above question I con-
fidently say no. 1 St. Peter iii. 18 says nothing as to the result of
Christ’s preaching; 1 St. Peter iv. 6, is too uncertain to be
pressed into this part of the subject; but the parable of the rich
man and Lazarus is clear on this point, that “ Between us and
you there is a great gulf fixed, that they which would pass from
hence to you may not be able, and that none may cross over from
hence to us.” And again ;—“ We must all be made manifest be-
fore the judgment-seat of Christ, that each one may receive the
things done in the body." “In the body ” (during this life, for
there is no body in Hades), therefore the idea of such amend-
ment in Hades as will alter the judgment based on an earthly life
is ignored.
HI. Will all to be condemned at the Day of Judgment
have to endure endless punishment ? 1 hat some will have, is
clearly taught in Holy Scriptures. In the 20th chapter of the
Revelation we read :—“ The Devil that deceived them was cast
into the lake of fire and brimstone, where are also the beast and
the false prophet, and they shall be tormented day and night unto
the ages of the ages.” Of some human beings a similar doom is
foretold; for in the 14th chapter we read: —“If any man
worshippeth the beast and his image ... he also shall drink of
the wine of the wrath of God which is prepared unmixed . . .
and the smoke of their torment goeth up unto ages of ages, and
they have no rest day and night.” Then, too, there are those who
sin against the Holy Ghost (St. Matthew xii. 32), For those
three classes there seems no hope of an ending of punishment.


But what of those who have not the mark of the beast, and
have not blasphemed the Holy Ghost ? In the fullest description
of the last things, only one passage speaks on this theme : —“ If
any man was not found within the Book of Life, he was cast into
the lake of fire.” Not a word as to the duration of their punish-
ment. But what of all those passages which contain the words
aiwv and cumvioq ? Not absolute certainty as to duration. Mr.
Cox and others are wrong when they say that these words never
indicate endlessness. - We are told, for instance, that “ the things
which are seen are temporal ; but the things which are not seen
are eternal.” The words have two meanings—agelong and
endless ; and after much reading and thought on the subject, I
cannot think that they mean “ endless” in the great majority of
places where they refer to punishment.
Other passages show that the degree of punishment will vary.
I quote from two sermons by the Bishop of Lincoln : —“ On the
Duration and Degrees of Future Rewards and Punishments.”
Before doing so, honesty requires me to say that he believes
punishment to be endless. He says : —“ That the future punish-
ments of wicked men will vary greatly in degree is certain from the
words of our future Judge . . . He warns us that to ‘whom much
is given, of him shall much be required.’ And he says to the
Apostles ‘ whosoever shall not receive you, it shall be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah’ . . . And again . . . He says
—‘ That servant which knew his Lord’s will, and prepared not
himself .. . shall be beaten with many stripes; but he that
knew not , and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be
beaten with few stripes.’ ” In another place the Bishop says
“ As there is an infinite variety of decrees of demerit in this world,
so will there be an infinite variety of degrees of retribution in the
life to come.”
When the few stripes have been received, what then ? And
wherein will the more tolerable treatment of Sodom and Gomorrah
appear ? Will all such ultimately be restored to the favour of God
and share in the lot of the blessed? Relying on two passages,
Mr. Cox says they will. The first is this—“ And these shall go
away into eternal punishment ; but the righteous into eternal life.”
He says that “ the word here rendered ‘ punishment ’ (icdXaaig)
is a very peculiar one. In its primary use ... it means ‘pruning,’
i.e., pruning bushes and trees in order that they may bring forth
more fruit. When it is used figuratively ... it means corrective
discipline, discipline by which character is pruned and made more
fruitful in good works.” (“ Salvator Mundi,” p. 140). A sentence
from one of the most unsatisfactory parts of that unsatisfactory
and even unreliable book! koXcutiq is found only twice in the
New Testament. The other passage reads, “perfect love casteth
out fear, because fear hath punishments That is, by anticipating


punishment it has it even now. The verb KoXa%o/ucu is also used
twice. In one place (2 Peter ii. 9) the meaning is indecisive.
But there is no uncertainty about the other—“ And they, when
they had further threatened them, let them go, finding nothing
how they might punish them, because of the people.” Were the
Jewish Rulers anxious to improve SS. Peter and John, or to put
them to pain ?
The other passage on which Mr. Cox relies is S, Mark ix.
49 : —“ For every one must be salted with fire.” On which the
“ Speaker’s Commentary ” says that it is “ confessedly one of the
most difficult passages in the gospel.” I can only say that all
thought of its being a corrective work is blocked by the solemn
words in the preceding verse, “where their worm dieth not, and
the fire is not quenched.”
If we can find no place which says that any of those con-
demned at the judgment will be afterwards restored to God’s
favour, but if yet there will be “an infinite variety of degrees of
retribution f what will become of those who have neither sinned
against the Holy Ghost, nor received the mark of the beast ? An
ending of their existence, after a longer or shorter period of
punishment in the “ lake of fire.” I have read much in defence
of the idea that cnroXXvu) and its derivatives, when used of the
future lot of the wicked, does not mean an ending of being, but
“a state of sin and wretchedness.” But the word not seldom does
most properly mean destruction. And the same is true of tad'ieiv
and its derivatives, &c. If of all those who die out of grace in
this life it must be said that their punishment will never come to
an end, then may we truly say—Blessed is the womb that has
never given forth fruit, and blessed are those heathen to whom the
Gospel has not been preached.




Everlasting Punishment,
BY THE
REV. A. D. FAUNCE,
INCUMBENT OF ST. CLEMENTS CHURCH,
Y ASS.




Everlasting Punishment.
Virgil tells us that when Hmeas wished to descend into Hades
to find the shade of his father Anchises, and asked counsel of the
Sibyl, she said: —“ Facilis descensus Averni, noctes atque dies
patet atri janua Ditis ; sed revocare gradum superasque evadere
ad auras, hoc opus, hie labor est,” —and further he was told that
on a certain tree in an adjacent wood there was a golden bough,
which he must find, break off, and take with him, in order to pro-
cure admission, and ensure a safe return.
Let us imitate him in this, and before we descend into the
dark domain of eschatology, pluck a branch from the tree of life,
even the Word of God, such as we may find in the Gospel of St.
Matt. xxv. 46, where we are told our Lord said—“ 1 hese shall go
away into everlasting punishment.” Taking this in our hands,
“ holding fast the form of sound words,” we may safely go into
this terrible doctrine of the last things, and again emerge into the
light of heaven ; not as some who, omitting this precaution, have
lost themselves in a labyrinth of speculation, and an outerdark-
ness of unbelief.
We may ask in the first place what is the literal meaning of
these words— £ig koXaaiv atwvtov ? As regards aivunog, no
doubt cuwv means an age, and the expression tig rbv alivva
= for ever, and while some lexicographers say aldoviog is only “age
lasting,” others say it means enduring for ever —everlasting,
eternal, KoXacriv is derived from koXum or koXci^iv —to chastise,
punish, or correct, and is rightly rendered punishment. • So much
for the Greek.
As regards the English, the meaning of everlasting is self-evi-
dent, and the word eternal, which is the general rendering of
aiwvtog in the R. N. T, may be better explained by going to its
derivation in the Latin.
Dr. Smith, in his Dictionary, gives the primary meaning as
“ age-lasting” as aiwviog —lasting for a long time; and the
secondary as everlasting and eternal, used by Cicero, speaking of
“ Deus beatus et aeternus.” On the meaning of punishment we
need not dwell.


We may now ask in the second place,—What meaning are
these words intended to convey in the Scriptures'?
It is interesting to turn to the Septuagint, where in Genesis
xxi. 33, we read Qebg cumvioq which is a rendering of the Hebrew
rh)]} 7N el 61am, translated in the A. V. “ the everlasting God,”
identical with Rom. xvi. 26, where we have T ov duoviov Qeov
“ of the everlasting God,” and Hebrews ix. 14, where we have
did TrvivfxaToq diwv'iov “ through the Eternal Spirit.”
The remarks of Gesenius, who was not very orthodox, on
the meaning of thus rendered duovioc and everlasting are
very interesting.
In his Heb. Lex. he says the primary meaning is “ What is
hidden,” specially hidden time, long, the beginning or end of
which is either uncertain or undefined, eternity, perpetuity.
Then he says, “ The true notion of eternity is found in this word
in those passages which speak of the immortal nature of God
who is called “the eternal God,” and in Psalm xc. 2,
where we read '"inx sbijny
“ From everlasting
to everlasting Thou art God.”
We may now pass from the Old Testament to the New,
where we find the word diwvioc in about 60 passages, the
meaning of which we cannot easily mistake. In the Gospels we
read as follows : —“ To be cast into everlasting fire.” “ Depart
from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire.” “ What shall Ido that
I may have eternal life.” “ Shall inherit everlasting life.” “ Well
of water springing up into everlasting life.” “In danger of eternal
damnation.” “ Should not perish, but have eternal life.” “He
that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life.” “ Gathereth
fruit unto life eternal.” “ Thou hast the words of eternal life.”
“ That he should give eternal life.” “ This is life eternal.”
Acts: “ Unworthy of everlasting life.” “As many as were
ordained to eternal life.”
Rotnans ; “ Grace reigns through righteousness unto eternal
life.” “ The end, everlasting life.” “ Gift of God, eternal life.”
“ The everlasting God.”
2 Cor. : “ Far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.”
“Things that are not seen eternal —eternal in the heavens.”
Galatians vi. 8 : “Of the Spirit reap life everlasting.”
2 Thess. i. 9 : “ Punished with everlasting destruction.”
1 Tim. vi. 12 : “ Lay hold on eternal life,”
Tit. i. 2 : “ In hope of eternal life.”
Heb. v. 9 : “ Author of eternal salvation.” vi. 2 : “ Eternal
judgment.” ix. 12: “ Eternal redemption.” ix, 14: “Through
the Eternal Spirit.”


2 Pet. i. ii : “The everlasting kingdom of our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ.”
i Joh?i v. 20 : “ This is the true God and eternal life.”
Jude vii.: “ Suffering the vengeance of eternal fire.”
Gleaning from these passages the meaning conveyed by the
word aiwviog thus used, we may reasonably infer the endless
duration of the future state in either case.
We may now briefly consider the untenability of any other
view. As regards Canon Farrar’s work on this subject
generally quoted, its very title tells us there is no comfort in it.
“ Eternal hope,” as a reviewer in the Guardian, well said, means
hope that has no fruition. “ Hope deferred maketh the heart
sick,” and we want no more of that in the next world. I must
say, that, though interesting, his book of sermons did a great deal
more to establish me in my own faith than in that belief it
promulgated. Crude, sensational, lacking in dignity, and full of
special pleading and hair splitting, it was well that he apologized
in the introduction for its publication. I much prefer, with Dr.
Pusey, to rest on the efficiency of Christ’s atonement and the
comprehensiveness of God’s love for the salvation of many ; than
like Dr. Farrar to try and elaborate another gospel which might
be more successful than the first.
The Hades of the lost would make but a poor reformatory.
“ Exiled from the means of grace,” and doomed to companionship
“ with the spirits of ill, who, in that dark kingdom of the nether
world, with eyes that cannot weep, for ever trail their unhallowed
wings what hope would there be of good. The unforgiven are
in danger of eternal sin, and as eternal sin would bring eternal punish-
ment, and sin accumulating would make punishment accumulate,
how could they be ever freed from hell. And if they were not saved
in this life, they would enter upon the next state with so many
more disadvantages than they had on entering this, that, humanly
speaking, the chances would be a million to one against their
salvation.
Put alongside of these difficulties the tremendous earnestness
of our Lord in endeavouring to bring about man’s redemption
here (which surely would not have been manifested if a few years’
punishment or a mere delay of salvation were the only question),
and I think we must conclude that He knew the state of the lost
was final and irremediable.
It may seem charitable, and we naturally indulge a hope that
all, even the Devil and his angels will be saved at the last, and as
some one has written, be received into the bosom of the
Universal Parent; but Scripture maintains an appalling silence on
the subject, and therefore we dare not teach it.




Parochial Missions,
BY THE
REV. CANON SOARES,
INCUMBENT OF WEST GOULBURN.


«•


Parochial Missions.
It will be generally admitted that men are apt to get into a
perfunctory way of discharging the duties of their calling, and by
degrees come to imagine there is no other way in which their work
can be done. In worldly pursuits, however, those who only work
in a groove frequently find themselves left behind in the race for
that after which worldly men aspire. Can it, then, be wondered
at if, in sacred pursuits, the same thing occasionally happens, and
those who are fearful of taking a single step off the beaten path
find themselves outrun by persons more quick to adapt themselves
to circumstances ?
A better system on the whole than the Church of England
affords to meet the requirements of men of high culture and refine-
ment, and of the illiterate poor and degraded, cannot well be
conceived. Based upon the teachings of Scripture and the prac-
tice of the Primitive Church, it is built up upon the lines of long
experience; and while where necessary due restraints are imposed,
a large amount of liberty is enjoyed by her ministers in the dis-
charge of their sacred functions. Whether they have always
availed themselves of that liberty is questionable. Had they done
so Methodism, as something extraneous to the Church, would
probably have no existence; but, rid of many of its most objection-
able features, would have proved a most useful leaven. The
Evangelization Society of modern days, under a distinctly Church
name and Church organization, would have been a tower of
strength to the Church, instead of weakening the bonds of Church
membership. Of the “ Salvation Army ” and its vagaries we
should never have heard. Infidelity would not have reared its
head in our midst with such unblushing effrontery, while even
scepticism would have been confined to the comparatively few;
and instead of there being, as some one has computed, 144 sects
or denominations of Christians in Great Britain alone, the Church
might have retained almost all of those within her own fold.
We are not accountable for the faults, short-sightedness, or
possible derelictions of duty of our forefathers, but we are doubly
guilty if we do not learn a lesson from their failures, and gather
wisdom from the history of the past. That the Church of England


of our day is doing this there can be no doubt, though still, as the
nation itself is not particularly fond of innovations—and when it
adopts any change, is more wont to improve on the newly-intro-
duced schemes of others than to devise fresh methods for itself —
so, as a Church, highly conservative in its character, we are
perhaps more ready to borrow our ideas from those who have
been quicker to discern an existing want or the means of supply-
ing it, than to perceive for ourselves where and in what way our
greater influence may be advantageously employed. We are
never, however, mere servile copyists; but when we do adopt any
scheme we conceive may be for the spiritual good of our
people, we carry it out in a way of our own, and with a degree of
success which others seldom manage to secure. By way of illus-
tration, I need only refer to the Church’s method of bringing
about a revival of religion, in any place where a Laodicean state
is found to prevail, by what are now known as “Parochial Mis-
sions ” To these Parochial Missions, and the manner of
conducting them, I have been requested to draw your attention
this morning, and, apologizing for the preceding introductory
remarks, I will now confine myself to their consideration.
I must first speak of their origin. A few years ago Parochial
Missions were unknown. They had their origin in the effort made
to supply a want. A want which had always existed, but which
the increase of life and spirituality in the Church caused to be
more felt. That the Church was never more alive to a sense of
the greatness of her mission than in the days in which our lot is
cast will hardly be disputed. Among the clergy there are com-
paratively few, who enter it merely as a profession, but, believing
themselves “ inwardly moved by the Holy Spirit,” and “ truly
called according to the will of our Lord Jesus Christ,” are “re-
solved never to cease their labour, their care and diligence, until
they have done all that lieth in them, according to their bounden
duty, to bring all such as are committed to their charge into that
agreement in the faith and knowledge of God, and to that ripeness
and perfectness in Christ, that there be no place left, either for
error in religion or for viciousness of life.” Yet, in spite of all
their labours, how difficult, how impossible do they find it to
influence all for their good? Which of us has not experienced
this ? Among our parishioners we find some who will not listen
to godly counsel and advice at all; others who will listen readily
enough if you go to them, but in spite of many invitations on your
part, and many promises even on theirs, you cannot get them to
attend the House of God, or to avail themselves of any of the
means of grace provided for them. And of those who are regular
attendants on public ordinances, too many are like the worshippers
in Ezekiel’s day, “They come as the people cometh, they hear thy
words but will not do them ; thou art unto them as a very lovely


song of one that hath a pleasant voice, and can play well on an
instrument, for they hear thy words but they do them not.” You
are continually lamenting that as far as these too are concerned,
you are labouring in vain, and spending your strength for nought,
and again and again you ask, what can be done to rouse them out
of their spiritual lethargy? You feel that the quickening influence of
the Holy Spirit is wanted, is wanted in Pentecostal abundance, in
Pentecostal efficacy. And what you have thus felt has been felt
by others, who have wisely concluded that to be obtained it must
be sought, as it was sought by the early disciples, by all continu-
ing with one accord in prayer and supplication : by all the faithful
in the parish uniting to seek continuously for this blessing, until
at a fitting time, after every exertion has been made to gather the
people together as one man, “ the old, old story ” may be again
sounded in their ears by the lips of one specially qualified for the
work, while prayer is still continued to be made that the word
may not be spoken in vain. Now this method of infusing
spiritual life into a congregation is a great improvement on the
plan of getting up “ revivals,” as they are termed in some of the
Non-conformist communions. It is thoroughly scriptural in its de-
sign and execution, and has accordingly proved eminently suc-
cessful.
Let us now examine the subject more in detail. And here I
must remark that my ideas have been largely gathered from an
admirable treatise by the Rev. A. W. Thorold, M.A.,* who was one
of the joint secretaries in the Diocese of London, for the Lent
Missions of 1874.
The question being settled that it is desirable to hold amission
in any particular parish, the date of the same must be determined
with due reference to the convenience of the mission preacher;
the most favourable season of the year; the time when the pastoral,
agricultural, or other employments of the people will not hinder
them from attending ; the age of the moon—dark nights being
specially inconvenient for persons coming from a distance ; and
the time required to make due preparation. With reference to this
last point, from three to six months is not considered any too
long. The first step in preparing the minds of the people for the
mission may well be a public announcement from the pulpit, in a
sermon bearing upon the subject; and this should be followed by
the immediate circulation in every household for private and family
use of a prayer for the special outpouring of the Holy Spirit. As the
time approaches, frequent meetings of church-workers and com-
municants should be arranged for intercessory prayer, and also for
supplying more exact information about the mission, which will
* Now Bishop of Rochester


easily and conveniently filter through them to the parishioners
generally. Tracts on thei subject should also be left at every
house by such of these as can volunteer their services, and no
pains should be spared to thoroughly advertise the proposed
arrangements.
A convenient period for the duration of the Mission
Services has usually been found to be from eight to ten days,
including two Sundays ; though as it sometimes happens that just
when a mission is beginning to tell, the time appointed for it is
over, and the net filled with fishes is in imminent risk of not being
drawn to land, no hard and fast rule should be allowed to
interfere with the steady prosecuting of the mission so long as may
seem desirable.
The mission itself, as a rule, should begin on the Saturday
afternoon, when the mission preacher should be introduced to the
churchworkers and communicants, specially invited to meet him,
and when, in an address explanatory of the object and method of
the mission, he will seek their cordial co-operation and constant
prayers. On the two Sundays, at the commencement and conclu-
sion of the Mission divine service is best held at the usual hours
and in the usual way. It will not be inappropriate, however, to have
an early communion on the first Sunday, and a celebration also
on the second Sunday at the usual morning service.
The services during the week will, generally speaking, be
most conveniently conducted in the evening, and in the Church ;
and while the law enjoins the use of liturgical forms, it is at the
discretion of the Ordinary to permit a selection from them. The
liturgical portion of the service, conducted by the incumbent of
the parish, should be short; the object of the mission being
rather to teach people the blessedness of prayer than to invite
them to a protracted worship. It should commence and be
followed by a hymn specially printed for the occasion, or selected
from the hymn book published by the Christian Knowledge
Society for mission services, which has been generally approved of.
Then comes the sermon, the preacher being careful to make
the people feel that he has a message to them from God, also that
stern as may be his warnings, bold his rebukes, and faithful his
appeals, he has come to them on an errand of love from the God
of love and with love would win them.
The sermon ended (not without a kindly and pressing but
not too urgent an invitation to the people to confer privately with
the preacher, if they feel he can aid them in their search for God),
what some persons consider the most important part of the
mission work has yet to be undertaken—the after meeting. This
as a rule, will be best conducted in the adjoining school-room,
seeing that some will come there whom nothing would induce
to show their faces in a church, and also, because there is there


scope for much greater freedom of speech and gesture and move-
ment, and expression of all kinds Thereyou may walk up and down
amongst the people as you press on them the Saviour’s gracious
offers of love and mercy ; and there some will be content to
remain to be spoken to privately who would never go into a
vestry or ask for an interview in the house. As to the best way
of conducting these meetings, experienced men considerably
differ, but they more or less merge into these three —the prayer
meeting proper, the prayer meeting accompanied with personal
conference and intercession with individuals while it is going on,
and the prayer meeting combined with simple and careful
instruction on a regular plan. 1 apprehend the last of, these will
generally be found the most suitable ; though in the first, there is
the advantage of directness of aim in prayer for the Holy Spirit,
and the conviction which rushes into the devout heart that He
will assuredly be given ; and the second has this recommendation
that it was more or less the plan adopted by the prince of
missioners, Mr. Robt. Aitken. All cannot, however, do as he did
with advantage. The third method is thus spoken of by Mr.
Thorold. He says, “It is more strictly than either of the other
two supplemental to the service previously held in church, in
pursuing the continuity of the subject already handled there,
though, if possible, in simpler and more abrupt language ; and
yet is equally useful to those who have not been in church at all.
Roughly described, it may be called an instruction meeting. The
ideas justifying it is, that as it is God’s word that gives life, we
cannot use it too confidently or too frequently when it is life that
we are asking for. The method of it is, that of the most simple
and elementary teaching possible on one of a series of topics
carried on through the week, and forming a consistent whole.
The instruction itself is broken up into three or four, or even five
short portions, as in the judgment of the preacher, the people
seem able to bear it. Varied with occasional hymns, some of
which are sung by the people kneeling, it is solemnized by
frequent prayers bearing immediately on the topic before them, in
which the mission preacher, as the thought occurs to him from
time to time, invites to follow him aloud, those whose special case
he pleads. The pathos, the awful and touching solemnity of
some of these sadly, slowly, humbly, weepingly repeated
sentences in a crowded room of several hundred people, awed
into silence by the manifest presence of God, it is quite impossible
to describe.”
The service concluded, it is to be hoped, especially on the
later days of the mission, that some, it may be many, will remain
to seek a personal interview with the missioner, or those who may
assist him in leading wanderers back into the fold, and resolving
the doubts of .those who continue but half convinced. And this


may well be regarded as a special reaping time, the Lord Himself
placing, as it were, the sheaves into His servants’ hands. Others,
however, will seek a more private interview with the missioner, in
the vestry or in the house ; but, wherever these interviews may be
held, it is the personal heart work effected at such seasons in
which the very essence of an efficiently conducted mission lies.
Such, then, will be the character of the week-day services,
though on the Saturday evening it may be well to dispense with
the service in the church, and to hold a meeting in the school-
room only for working men ; while I would suggest that, on some
afternoon during the week, a special meeting may very profitably
be held for mothers ; and as the'lambs of the flock should in no
wise be overlooked, special services for their benefit may most
conveniently be conducted on' each Sunday afternoon by some
well qualified person, should the mission preacher feel unequal to
this extra amount of labour.
One thing throughout the mission must never be forgotten.
I mean the need that exists for unceasing prayer. This has been
more than hinted at already, but cannot be too often or too
strongly insisted on. While agencies are being employed, the
blessing must come from God, and must be sought for with
unwearied diligence in His own appointed way, and to this end
an early morning prayer meeting of church-workers and others
may well be held daily, at which the mission preacher may or may
not be present.
And now we may suppose the last sermon has been preached,
the last after-meeting has been held, the mission is over. Still
one thing remains to be done : to thank God for the blessing
which, faithfully sought, has been in greater or lesser degree,
effectually obtained. This may be suitably done in a meeting
held on the day succeeding the mission, before the mission
preacher leaves, on which occasion all who have aided in the
work, and especially all who have received a blessing, will be sure
to attend, and then, may-be, even while in the act of praising God
for the gift conferred, to them that have shall yet more be given.
The missioner’s work is now done, and he returns to his
own home, feeling well repaid for all his labour, and deeply sen-
sible of God’s abounding goodness in making him the instrument
of blessing many, and of helping a brother clergyman in his
arduous undertaking. And here I would remind you that this is
all he has done ; he has but helped a fellow-labourer on whom
the chief burden lies. It cannot be too urgently pressed, or too
distinctly recognized, that practically the responsibility of the
mission, from first to last, rests with the incumbent, though the
actual conducting of it is left to another. It is he who conceives
the purpose of having it at all. He is responsible for the selec-
tion of the preacher, and for all arrangements connected with


the mission. He has taken an active part in all the services and
meetings that have been, held, without trenching upon the special
duties of the mission preacher; and now that he has gone, it
remains for him to supplement all that has been done by increased
pastoral zeal and diligence. It will be for him to seek out candi-
dates for confirmation, to form fresh Bible classes, and to find
work for those who feel they can now no longer be idlers.
To newly-awakened souls special help will have to be afforded.
Those who have been gathered in will have to be narrowly watched
and protected from temptation. It will be for him to satisfy the
deep desire of the souls brought near to God for teaching and
sympathy, lest, failing to find it at the hands of their own pastor,
with a keen sense of disappointment and even injury, they rapidly
drift away into other communions. Complete as his own
parochial system may heretofore have seemed to be, the mission
will hardly fail to have revealed many a gap that needs filling,
many a link that needs riveting, many a wide gulf that needs
bridging over, and to all these things his attention must be given.
But one thing he may depend upon : grace shall be given him
equal to his day, and no greater burden shall be laid upon him
than he is able to bear.
And now, having considered the subject generally, it will be
profitable to enquire whether, in view of the great benefits likely
to result from the successful conduct of Parochial Missions, the
difficulties to be overcome in this diocese, and the consequent
danger of failure are so great, that it would be inexpedient to
attempt them.
Peculiar as our position may be, and many as are the
difficulties we may have to encounter, I believe, in several of our
parishes at least, missions might be conducted with the most
beneficial results. The plan of procedure would, no doubt, have
to be modified to suit varying circumstances; but, except in dis-
tricts without any considerable townships or centres, in which the
people could be conveniently gathered together, I doubt not much
good might be effected. Heretofore we have been, and to a
large extent still are, engaged in pioneering work ; but still in
many places not only are our churches, parsonages, and schools
built, but the machinery for the proper management of the parish
is in good working order. Services are conducted with almost
the frequency and regularity observable at home, and all that is
really wanted is Life , spiritual Life. I may be allowed to say
that in my travelling through the diocese I felt this most pain-
fully. Earnest Christians I often met with, attentive hearers I
almost everywhere found, but the spiritual tone—however favour-
ably it may contrast with the spiritual tone of the Australian com-
munity generally—l felt was low, and I believe the feeling was
thoroughly shared by most of my clerical brethren, and by many


of our more earnest church-workers, who would hail with joy and
gladly co-operate in any effort to bring home Christ’s gospel to
the godless and ignorant; to vitalize formal profession into
spiritual religion ; and to stir up real Christians into more self-
denying activity, and a closer communion with God. Let us just
glance at some of our chief difficulties, and the possible means of
overcoming them.
There is, in the first place, the difficulty of obtaining suitable
mission preachers; for all good men are not equally qualified for
this special kind of work, and perhaps those most suitable in our
own or other dioceses may not see their way to undertake it. The
mission preacher should be one who, with a ready utterance, an ear-
nest spirit, an impressive manner, and a loving, sympathetic disposi-
tion, should, at the very outset, get a thorough grasp of the congre-
gation, and make them feel that he comes to them with a message
from God —a message from a God of infinite purity and holiness,
who cannot clear the guilty, but who has, in infinite mercy, purchased
salvation for them at an unspeakable cost, and now urges it upon
their acceptance “ without money and without price.” He should
come to them as an unsparing denouncer of all sin, of formalism, of
hypocrisy, of lukewarmness, and indecision ; yet, at the same time
as a herald of mercy in the fulness of the blessing of the gospel
of peace, speaking home to their inmost souls “with thoughts that
breathe and words that burn.” He should, moreover, be a man
to whom men will not only be forced to attend while he stands
before them in the pulpit, but one whom they would fain follow
when he comes out of it ; one whom they may regard as a spiritual
physician, who can probe their wounds and help them to make a
skilful diagnosis of their spiritual maladies, and suggest the specific
remedy for their soul’s diseases. Now such, unquestionably, are
not always easily to be found ; but, my brethren, if we want them,
let us not doubt that God will raise them up for us, and if they
come short in some apparently needful qualifications, God will
abundantly compensate for the seeming deficiency in some other
way. If in answer to our prayers He provide the instrument,
He will not fail Himself to use it.
But the question may be asked,' “ How is the preacher,
qualified though he may be, to leave his own parochial work ?”
I would simply reply, How has this difficulty been overcome
elsewhere, as in Sydney and Melbourne ? Or, again, How have
the clergy here assembled contrived to leave their parishes simul-
taneously in order to attend the Synod ? So small a difficulty I
would confidently trust the Lord will enable us to overcome. But
a difficulty of a more serious character remains to be considered,
arising out of the large extent of our parishes, comprising often
two or three townships and a widely-scattered people. To reach
every individual may not be possible; but still the mission may


be made to preserve its parochial character, and to extend its
influence to even the remotest parts, by the principal effort being
made in the largest centre, and then supplemented by minor or
less prolonged efforts in other important places. Where care has
been taken to arouse the parish beforehand to a need of increased
spiritual vitality, experience teaches that persons will come from
far to attend the mission services, and we must never forget that
each individual who receives a blessing will be made a blessing to
those around him.
We have, my brethren, just cause to be thankful, if not proud,
of the position which our diocese holds among the dioceses of
Australia, and for the rapid progress which it has made in many
respects under wise supervision and fostering care. When we
think of the large increase in the number of our clergy—of the
number and character of our churches, parsonages, and school-
houses—and of the large sums that have been raised since first as
a diocese we came into existence, and of all the good that has
been done by the setting up of this extensive machinery, we may
indeed lift up our hearts in gratitude to the Giver of all good.
Still, let us not fail to see that much of our work has been
pi eparatory; that we have been engaged in laying a foundation
for a spiritual edifice, the walls of which have, as it were, been
carried as yet to no great height, and let us now raise our scaffold-
ing, bring fresh material to build, call upon the great Architect to
send us skilful labourers to help us in our work, and never cease
our efforts until all our people, as lively stones, are built up an
holy temple in the Lord.


♦
*
.
*
i i i' : 1 ||
•
'
■
'
■
'
.
■
i
.


Sympathy
As a Power in Church Work,
BY THE
REV. W. COCKS,
INCUMBENT OF ST. PAUL’S CHURCH, MURRUMBURRAH.




Sympathy as a Power in Church Work
My Lord and Brethren —When I received our Archdeacon’s
letter, enquiring if I would read a paper at these Conferences, I
was at first dazed at the thought of entering upon the subjects he
suggested; but after considering the matter—that we are all
engaged in the same work—that we are giving our lives to the
work —that if, having devoted our lives to it, our great object, in
dependence on our Lord and Master, should be to discard other
notions, and make our work as effective as we can I felt that, as
I was to receive the benefits of your sentiments, anxieties, and
experiences, I would give mine; and as I have found it so neces-
sary to cultivate sympathy- -prayerful, earnest, watchful sympathy
—I proposed to bring before you the simple, yet forceful, ques-
tion : “ Sympathy as a Power in Church Work ” I shall
base all my observations on our Master’s own plan, and on consi-
derations of the world we live in as His field and ours.
Our Blessed Lord had to do with sinful human nature, to
bring man back to God. He prepared Himself (as we have of
necessity been prepared) by temptation, that He might sympathize
with the tempted. The first forty days of His ministry were
occupied in learning sympathy with sinners a sympathy that can
only be acquired by actual experience. His life was accompanied
by suffering, that He might sympathize with the suffering, o that
the apostle expresses it in that marvellous passage, “ the Captain
of our salvation was mad & perfect through suffering. If I had not
met with such an awakening and astounding sentence m Holy
Writ, I could not have dared to utter it—the Son of God made
perfect through His suffering as Son of Man, as one like me.
Again, He seeks opportunities of associating Himself in the daily
work of His followers and disciples; He establishes confidence
by reference to their characters and occupations ; of Nathaniel,
“ Behold an Israelite, indeed, in whom there is no guile ; to the
woman at the well, by showing He was aware of her history;
to Nicodemus, “ Art thou a master in Israel, and knowest
not these things ?” Thus did He lead them by His allusions to


take an interest in what He had to impart to them. And what can
I say about the intense concern He showed to acquaint Himself
with, and to help in, the various phases of social and domestic life,
which, beautiful as they all were, burst into full brightness in the
sublime incident of the children. In canonizing those little ones
who had been discarded by the disciples, what would not have
been the feelings excited in the hearts of the parents, and of
every parent, as our Blessed Lord uttered the sentence which no
man or woman can even now read without emotion —“ Suffer the
little children to come unto Me, for of such is the Kingdom of
Heaven?” In canonizing the souls of those little ones, our Lord
draws the eyes and hopes of all parents up to their resting-place
above, and as it was a power for our Lord, so it is to us, in our
family visitations or in our pulpit instructions. Perhaps the chil-
dren in their simplicity were shy at approaching Him, or to them
it was of little moment. Children in their innocence have not the
knowledge of the care and love that surrounds them ; they do not
know how deep an interest, how warm an affection, how keen a
sympathy, they attract from those who are older; they do not
know how we delight to cause them happiness, nor are they con-
scious of the pleasure they afford us ; but the older spectators,
especially the relatives, knew. And what a power did our Lord
derive from this sympathy in that household, and in the heart of
every mature attendant at that assemblage ! Would it not smooth
and help Him in His future work and intercourse with them all ?
From this scene I turn to the other basis —our observations
in the world around us. We find that people are influenced by
human nature more generally than by human reason, of which
human nature seems to absorb so. small a part. You find this in
the government of yourselves, of your families, and of the world at
large. If reason were all, if to convince ourselves what is right
were all, we should have no difficulty in the matter ; but human na-
ture comes in with the obliquities and irregularities of human will.
She sends out those skirmishers of hers, the impulses, which the devil
knows .so well how to handle ; the outposts of human will are taken,
and human reason lies prostrate and vanquished. In the government
of your families human reason would propose the same straight
course or line of action towards each and all, but this would prove
as complete a failure as would be the practice of a physician who
adopted the same treatment for every malady, in every constitu-
tion, without reference to temperament. He must study
pathology as well as physics. As parents, we cannot help knowing
that some of our children have peculiar tendencies and tempera-
ments. We cannot rule these out of them by human reason.
’Tis only as we feel that silent sympathy, and enter into their weak-
nesses and peculiarities, and study and follow and trace these,
until we can by prayer (which will always intensify and establish


our sympathy for the object of our prayers) and by the blessing of
God, train ourselves into a course of treatment which will appear
in our well-considered and measured counsels, in our conduct
towards them, even by the tone and accent of our voice (not
as a fitful thing, but as an earnest and anxious purpose), and
so bring them to feel with us, to become helpers with us, until
they strive and strive to overcome their own ways and adopt our
wishes.
You find too, in the government of the world, that human
reason must defer to human nature. Our most successful
politicians, those who have effected most good, have been
generally stigmatized as men of expediency. You might as well
expect a mariner to succeed, who, before he set sail, took a chart
and drew an imperative course for his ship from port to ’port,
without reference to winds or currents, as for a statesman to
succeed who does not watch times, circumstances, and the varia-
tions of the national sentiment. If politics could have been regu-
lated by human reason, we might have had an universal code, as
applicable to every race, every country, every condition. God
Himself does not order the world on what puny man might con-
sider according to reason. Man would probably have devised a
scheme or a world in which all men should be equal—equal gifts,
equal opportunities, equal fortunes. God has ordered otherwise,
and if human reason were to attempt to make all men equal in
wealth or power, God’s plan would shatter the arrangementto pieces,
and we should commence a period of greater disturbance than
heretofore. Communism is based on human reason, and has utterly
failed. Robert Owen, the mistaken philanthropist, who preserved
his integrity to his death, spent his immense means in following
out this idea ; he chose a favourable settlement, discoursed equality
and independence among his followers, selected an area of the
most promising fertility, which is now of great value; it was
apportioned and regulated by logic and mathematics, his ethics
were unimpeachable ; but he left God and human nature out, his
scheme proved an utter failure, and those who returned to their
home and their struggles were regarded as deluded dupes—they
had been misled by human reason. Gambetta, the great Re-
publican Pope, he who proclaimed “ Liberty, Equality, and
Fraternity,” is now living in more than royal sumptuousness and
magnificence in Paris; he has ratted from human reason to
human nature. I verily believe that Queen Victoria’s touching
message to Mrs. Garfield, and the sympathy of the British Court
with American sorrow, has been more powerful to cement peace
with the two nations than all the ambassadors, treaties, or negotia-
tions that have been at work since American independence. Her
Majesty’s sympathy has been a power, like all good deeds ; “it
blesseth him that gives and him that takes it has intensified our


love for our sovereign, and has added a buttress to the throne of
England. —
“ How far that little candle throws its beams ;
So shines a good deed in a naughty world.’
The Bible does not impose on us the explanation of the
mysteries of creation and of nature, to satisfy human reason ; but
it does emphatically insist on our practice of sympathy. The
Bible deals with the yearnings of the human heart, with man’s
everlasting hopes and the wants of human kind ; it attempts
to satisfy, and it requires that we should by its truths attempt to
satisfy them. Although our blessed Lord was with His Father be-
fore all worlds ; although He was- with Him when He fashioned
the spheres, and (in whatever condition) flung them into space ;
although He might have sent His knowledge flashing through the
world, and by a few sentences have dazzled and informed mankind
by giving us the key of creation,which man had been ever searching
after, or by unveiling the mysteries of science, He was mute on these
things, they were not to His purpose. He abnegated Himself,
although He might have spoken with unquestionable authority.
He hardly used even an illustration from the elements; He illus-
trated chiefly from the works of nature ; He used grass and corn-
fields, the birds of the air and the beasts of the fields as reminders
of our duties and conditions, and lest these should not be avail-
able, He directs us to ourselves. He used the eye, the ear, the
hand,and our bodilyorganstoremindusof our dutiesandconditions.
When, as an exception, He illustrated by the action of an element
of nature, there was beautiful consistency in it, and His wisdom and
reticence are the more striking, as the operation is never likely to
be explained, although eighteen centuries of discoveries have
intervened, “ The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest
the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh nor whither
it goeth ; so is he that is born of the Spirit.” And this illustration
also affords me an example of the weakness of human reason, and
the power of sympathy in treating of that most precious and com-
forting doctrine —the office and necessity of the Holy Spirit. The
Bible speaks of Him as a person. We cannot explain the mystery
of the Trinity, and it is useless to attempt it, to satisfy human
reason ; just as the Bible never appeals to thought to satisfy it,
we must adopt the language of the Bible, and we can use
sympathy as a power in a doctrine which can only be fully felt by
actual experience—by the witness of the Holy Spirit with our own.
We cannot explain the external truth, but we may use very strong
reason for the inward influence —“ Hereby know we that we
dwell in Him, and He in us, because He hath given us of His
Spirit.” We may further appeal to the palpable effects of this
blessed dispensation, as exhibited at and after the day of Pente-
cost, as exhibited in the spread of Christianity by the agency of


such weak instruments, as being borne out by the universal testi-
mony of every believer, as the strength to which all believers
look, and on which they rely, and if we make the point of our
advocacy the teaching of Scripture, backed by our own experi-
ence ; by the need we feel of some power stronger than our own,
by the strivings of the Holy Spirit within us, rebuking us,
strengthening us, bringing Christ very near to us, so that He is
manifested to our hearts in very deed. If we dwell more on these
things, and care less about external explanation, we may be the
means of influencing others to place themselves under this gracious
bequest of our Lord until they find “ If any man will do His will,
he shall know of the doctrine.”
Whence comes the force of the Psalms? Why is it that
Psalmists have exerted such a power over the devotions of God’s
people for so many generations ? Is it not because of their in-
tense personality and feeling? It is / and thou all through.
“ Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death / will
fear no evil, for Thou art with me.” “ Every day will 1 bless
Thee, and / will praise Thy name for ever and ever.” Whence
the power of the xc. Psalm, “ The funeral hymn of the world.”
Is it not that Moses’ history and condition are vocal from end to
end. That he who had not had a house to dwell in for forty years
could in immediate prospect of his death exclaim in thankful re-
collection
generations”
I do not undervalue intelligence, nor should we fail to culti-
vate acquaintance with the literature and discoveries of the age in
which we live ; but we need not make too great an anxiety of
them. We shall generally find that infidelity arises more from a
love of sin than a love of truth. We must not be dismayed if we
cannot answer every enquiry ; we are not called upon to do so.
Science is yet in its infancy ; it has not yet attained to demonstra-
tion, nor are scientific men agreed as to their several theories—
there are disputes among themselves as there are in every depart-
ment of mind. When science is determined it will be time for us
to use it for our purpose. Young sciences, like young people, are
apt to be dogmatic and pugnacious ; we may wait awhile and
God will preserve His own truth, and make the crooked places
plain. Meanwhile we cannot do wrong in pursuing our course of
sympathetic action, and in urging the necessity of Christ-like
disposition and conduct. Our Lord did not spend much time in
reasoning with His hearers to induce them to follow Him. He
told them simply, “ Except ye be converted, and become as little
children, ye cannot enter the kingdom of heaven.” A man to
enter the kingdom of heaven must become as a child in love and
humility; but our Lord does not require a child to become
as a man in reason to enter. Observation will teach us that as


religions are coldly explained away for the satisfaction of reason,
they lose their force in this life, and are barren as to the life to
come.
As time is failing me, I must close this paper by reference to
very practical matters of detail. We have an interest in every
man, woman, and child in our respective parishes. Casual inter-
views afford us frequent opportunities. If we see a man in the
distance walking towards us our first thought should be, Can I do
anything for him ? Our next thought, Can he do anything for us
in our work ? His surroundings pass before us, and before we
meet him we are generally prepared with some subject of joint
interest and advantage. In this way it is our duty and care to
make ourselves acquainted (not in the spirit of the meddler and
busybody ) with the various anxieties or successes, callings and
occupations, of the men of our parishes, who are necessarily
mixing in the outer world; and it is our wisdom to refer to any
subject that concerns them on the bright side, which is generally
more likely to be right than the dark one. If rain has been sent,
we may speak of that in grateful terms ; if rain be needed, we may
point to hopeful prospects. Similarly, we may treat the market
prices of wool or stock, or produce. The same course must be
pursued in our house-to-house visitations. Before we enter a
dwelling we can generally observe something in which the house-
hold takes an interest—a garden, animals, &c. We should run
our minds over the circumstances of the family—the father’s
welfare, the mother’s cares. We should have an acquaintance
with the number, the ages, the engagements of the children, their
progress at school, their prospects in life; so that we may at once
enter on our conversation about something that will beguile
attention from the parent or parents until we can introduce our
immediate and important mission. All this may and must be
done with cheerfultiess , or we shall miss our mark. Were you to
enter a house, and see a pretty, blue-eyed child, but with a pimple
on her nose, sitting on her mother’s lap, if you were to remark,
“What pretty blue eyes!” you would secure the mother’s sympathy;
but if you said, “What a pimple that child has on its nose !” you
might as well take to the door at once —your visit would be a
failure; yet both remarks would be equally true. This may
appear a very homely illustration ; but it is capable of wide appli-
cation, and it is true to human nature. No class is more sensitive
to respect than the poor. The manner, the tone of voice, the
subjects we speak upon, all these are helps or hindrances to our
work, and, as it is much pleasanter to please, we lose our satisfac-
tion, and fail in our object, if we do not cultivate and watch over
this as one great aid in our ministerial labour.
An error fatal to our parochial usefulness may easily be made
in our attentions to the various classes in our districts. The


leisured and the wealthy may be glad of our society, and we may
be tempted to spend too much of our time with them. They
may enjoy our company, but they do not forget our duties to those
of a humbler circle, and they are sometimes watchful over us in
this respect; at all events, the poor do not fail to notice it He
who devotes too much of his time and society to the rich is
commonly despised by them, and he loses the sympathy of his
poorer parishioners. In spite of the evil there is around us, the
verdict of the world (I do not mean the opinion of exceptional
individuals) is generally the right one, and the prevailing senti-
ments are those of justice and sympathy.
My Lord and Brethren,—l have not attempted to give you a
clever paper ; but trust I have said something that may be practical
and suggestive. If I have occupied your time fruitlessly, you
must forgive me.






