

Literature Primers
QUESTIONS and EXERCISES
ON
ENGLISH COMPOSITION
PROF. NICHOL LL.D.
AND
W S. M'CORMICK M.A.




QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES
ON
ENGLISH COMPOSITION
BY
J. NICHOL, M.A. OXON, LL.D.,
LATE PROFESSOR OF ENGLISH LITERATURE IN THE
UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW
AND
W. s. M'CORMICK, M.A.,
LECTURER ON ENGLISH LITERATURE IN QUEEN MARGARET
COLLEGE, GLASGOW
[ 7he right of translation and reproduction is reserved. ]
LonDon
MACMILLAN AND CO.
AND NEW YORK
1890




PREFATORY NOTE.
Only a few words seem called for to introduce the
following Questions. Their publication may help to
satisfy a want which has been felt by teachers in their
use of the Primer of English Composition. To add to
its convenience as an aid to the employment of its
predecessor, the present Manual is arranged under
the same heads; so that, while it is impossible to make
page correspond to page, part answers to part and
chapter to chapter. Thus arranged, the questions
are designed to exemplify and elucidate the rules
which, owing to the requirements of space, had been
in the Primer stated perhaps too concisely. These
questions—largely drawn from Papers set on the
subject to the classes of English Literature in the
University of Glasgow during the last twenty-seven
years—are of various degrees of difficulty, beginning
with comparatively simple points of Grammar, and
afterwards dealing with some of the more controverted
delicacies of Taste. This variety, suitable to a text
book meant for Colleges as well as Schools, appears
even in some of the earlier pages; but the questions
requiring more experience, reading, or thought, are
marked by asterisks, so that they may be passed over


or postponed by less advanced pupils. The questions
are for the most part intended to be answered at
home: a few, as those on Punctuation, in the class.
The sentences for correction are derived from very
various sources. A large number are to be found
in the works of standard authors, among whom
grammarians, lexicographers, and philologists con-
tribute their full share. Others are selected from
current literature, from speeches, periodicals, and the
Press. We have to acknowledge obligations to the
older writers—as Lord Kames, Blair, Campbell, and
Barron on style, and to Roget and Grahame on syn-
onyms —rather than to more recent school-book
makers, who have drawn, not always with • lavish
recognition, on the stores of their predecessors.
Quotations already in the Primer of Composition
are, as a rule, avoided, as also those previously given
by such compilers as Skeat, Morris, Abbot, Hodgson,
and Lavender; but we cannot guarantee that this
volume may not reproduce a few of their more obvious
examples.
One difficulty which attended the construction of
the previous Manual has again had to be faced in the
construction of the present. In writing English, the
same cause often produces somewhat different effects,
and the errors due to it therefore fall to be considered
under different heads. For example, if the excessive
use of words of foreign origin results in positive
obscurity, it violates the rules given in Part 111. of
the Primer , that prescribe perspicuity and precision;
if the preponderance of Latinized words, without
causing actual obscurity, makes the composition
6
ENGLISH COMPOSITION EXERCISES.


pompous or affected, it is a violation of good taste, to
be dealt with under Part IV. Similarly, a very long
sentence may be obscure; or it may be clear enough,
but lumbering or awkward: a mixed or strained
metaphor may result in nonsense, in vulgarity, or
in mere incongruity.
Another difficulty arises from the fact that several
errors are often combined in a single quotation. In
such cases our rule has been to make the classifica-
tion depend on the dominant, i.e. the most obtrusive
or the most important, error. But this overlapping or
multiplication of offences may be best illustrated from
the designedly extensive section where miscellaneous
examples are given, exhibiting errors falling under
various heads. The more difficult of those examples,
with the questions on Prosody and most of the
Themes for Essays suggested towards the close, are
intended for comparatively advanced students.
Most of the blunders and inelegancies shortly
exposed in these pages have been fully discussed in
more extended treatises : bur task has been to illustrate
them by fresh instances, instances selected frequently
because of some absurdity which cannot fail to arrest
the attention of the least experienced. The difficulty
therefore consists rather in correcting than in detecting
the errors; and few of the questions can be ade-
quately answered without rewriting or rearranging
the passages in which these errors occur.
It frequently requires some ingenuity to reconvey in
good English the meaning dimly presented under an
ostentatious haze, or the sense intended by a half-
understood Latinism; but, at the present day, readers
7
PREFA TOR V NO TE.


and writers alike recognize that a mixed metaphor or
a string of long-winded words is an indictable offence.
Other transgressions against good taste are less
commonly recognized. Two of these, conspicuously
prevalent, it seems, even in a Primer, desirable to
expose.
The first is the half learning on parade that
displays itself in a multitude of more or less inapt,
generally stale, and frequently absurd Quotations or
Allusions. Allusive Pedantry is the dominant
literary vice of a time when erudition, or the show
of it, is more common than original thought; and if the
malady is not arrested in its alarming growth, it
will become the rule for no good writer to refer to
anything that another has said.
The second is the revival in our country of the fanati-
cism which possessed the Germans who, toward the
close of the eighteenth century, wished to tear from
their vocabulary all words of alien growth and to create
in Dresden and Berlin an aboriginal nomenclature for
the personages of the Greek and Roman pantheon.
Similarly, “ antiquam exquirite matrem ” is the motto
of one of the worst written books that have during
the last twenty years professed to be composed in
our language. Plain words are the best for plain
things. Erdkunde may pass for Geography, Vorgefiihl
is perhaps better than Presentiment, Steamboat is
certainly preferable to Pyroscaphe, a Thief to a
Kleptomaniac; but Anatomy is ridiculed by ‘ Cutting-
up,’ Zergliedemngswissenschaft is a cumbrous equiva-
lent for Dissection, ‘Fore-words’ does not properly
represent a Preface, nor do Length and Breadth
8
ENGLISH COMPOSITION EXERCISES.


convey the same ideas as Latitude and Longitude.
The English language, which excels the Saxon
tongue as the English race has outstripped the mere
Teutonic, is travestied and belittled by the Anglo-
Saxon Mania. The whole history of our race has
been an almost unique blending of various elements,
and to ignore any of those elements would be to
belie that history. The early Christianization of our
island which brought in the first stock of Latin words,
the Conquest which introduced the second, the
Crusades of the middle age, and the Commerce of
later times, have been like arms, linking us to
wider worlds of thought and action, and to amputate
any one of them would be treason to the speech of
Chaucer, of Shakespeare, and of Bacon.
9
PREFA TOR V NO TE.




CONTENTS.
PAGE
PART I. Introductory.
Chapter I. Definitions, Synthesis of Sentences, - 13
~ 2. Punctuation, - 15
~ 3. The General Laws of Style, - - - 20
PART 11. Accuracy of Style.
Chapter I. Correct Grammar, 22
~ 2. Purity in the Use of Words, - - - 29
~ 3. Propriety in the Use of Words, - - 37
PART 111. Clearness or Perspicuity.
Chapter I. Simplicity and Directness, - - - 46
~ 2. Brevity, 50
~ 3. Precision, Ambiguity in Words, - - 57
~ 4. Arrangement, 59
PART IV. Strength and Grace of Style.
Chapter 1. Choice of Words and Phrases, - ■ 64
~ 2. Number of Words, - - - - 81
„ 3. Order of Words, 84
PART V. Prosody, 90
PART VI. Miscellaneous Question Papers, - 93
PART VII. Themes for Essays, 107
PART VIII. Passages for Translation or Para-
phrase, 114




QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES ON
ENGLISH COMPOSITION.
PART I.
INTRODUCTORY.
CHAPTER I.
DEFINITIONS. SYNTHESIS OF SENTENCES.
1. Distinguish between: —(a) simple,compound,and
complex sentences ; ( b ) clauses and phrases.
2. Give some of the rules for the introduction of
subordinate clauses and modifying phrases.
3. What is meant by saying that a simple assertion
is the back bone of every sentence ?
4. What is the practical utility of the analysis and
synthesis of sentences ?
5. Distinguish between a loose sentence,a period,
and a paragraph.
6. Analyze the following:—
(1) “ All down the lonely coast of Lyonnesse,
Each with a beacon star upon his head,
And with a wild sea-light about his feet,
He saw them—headland after headland flame
Far on into the rich heart of the west.”


(2) “ But me, not destined such delights to share,
My prime of life in wandering spent and care;
Impelled with steps unceasing to pursue
Some fleeting good that mocks me with the view;
That, like the circle bounding earth and skies,
Allures from far, yet, as I follow, flies;
My fortune leads to traverse realms alone,
And find no spot of all the world my own.”
7. Combine each of the following groups into a
single sentence: —
(1) Man is a rational animal.
Man is endowed with the highest capacity for
happiness.
Man sometimes mistakes his best interests.
Man sometimes pursues trifles with all his energies.
Man considers trifles as the principal object of
desire in this fleeting world.
(2) The sepoy’s profession gives him precedency to
civilians.
The sepoy has precedency in general estimation.
The sepoy has precedency in the estimation of
his caste.
The sepoy’s pay raises him in station.
The sepoy’s pay raises him in enjoyment.
The sepoy’s pay raises him far above his brethren
The sepoy has left his brethren behind him
in his native village.
(3) The Arminianism of the archbishop was violent.
His attachment to ceremonies was childish.
His veneration for altars was superstitious.
His veneration for painted windows was super-
stitious.
His veneration for vestments was superstitious.
His zeal for the constitution was bigoted.
His zeal for the privileges of his order was
bigoted.


His opinions as to the celibacy of the clergy
were bigoted.
His violence had excited disgust.
His childishness had excited disgust.
His superstition had excited disgust.
His bigotry had excited disgust.
The disgust was felt by a large party.
The large party of his antagonists were hostile
to Rome.
The large party of his antagonists were becoming
every day more hostile.
The large party of his antagonists were inclined
to the doctrines of Geneva.
The large party of his antagonists were inclined
to the discipline of Geneva,
CHAPTER II.
PUNCTUATION.
i. Punctuate and arrange in sentences: —
(i) “I know a considerable market-town in which
there was a club of fat men that did not come together
as you may well suppose to entertain one another with
sprightliness and wit but to keep one another in
countenance the room where the club met was some-
thing of the largest and had two entrances the one by
a door of a moderate size and the other by a pair of
folding doors if a candidate for this corpulent club
could make his entrance through the first he was
looked upon as unqualified but if he stuck in the
passage and could not force his way through it the
folding doors were immediately thrown open for his
reception and he was saluted as a brother I have
heard that this club though it consisted but of fifteen
persons weighed above three tons in opposition to
this society there sprung up another composed of


scarecrows and skeletons who being very meagre and
envious did all they could to thwart the designs of
their bulky brethren till at length they worked them
out of the favour of the people and consequently out of
the magistracy these factions tore the corporation in
pieces for several years till at length they came to this
accommodation that the two bailiffs of the town should
be annually chosen out of the two clubs by which
means the principal magistrates are at this day coupled
like rabbits one fat and one lean.”
(2) “Our good Colonel was not of the tyrannous
but of the loving order of fathers and having fixed his
whole heart upon this darling youth his son was
punished as I suppose such worldly and selfish love
ought to be punished so Mr Honeyman says at least
in his pulpit by a hundred little mortifications dis-
appointments and secret wounds which stung not the
less severely though never mentioned by their victim
sometimes he would have a company of such gentle-
men as Messrs Warrington Honeyman and Pendennis
when haply a literary conversation would ensue after
dinner and the merits of our present poets and writers
would be discussed with the claret he heard opinions
that amazed and bewildered him he heard that Byron
was no great poet though a very clever man he heard
that there had been a wicked persecution against Mr
Pope’s memory and fame and that it was time to
reinstate him that his favourite Dr Johnson talked
admirably but did not write English that young Keats
was a genius to be estimated in future days with young
Raphael and that a young gentleman of Cambridge
who had lately published two volumes of verses might
take rank with the greatest poets of all Doctor John-
son not write English Lord Byron not one of the
greatest poets of the world Sir Walter a poet of the
second order Mr Pope attacked for inferiority and
want of imagination Mr Keats and this young Mr
Tennyson of Cambridge the chief of modern poetic


literature what were these new dicta which Mr War-
rington delivered with a puff of tobacco smoke to
which Mr Honeyman blandly assented and Clive
listened with pleasure such opinions were not of the
Colonel’s time he tried in vain to construe OEnone
and to make sense of Lamia Ulysses he could under-
stand but what were these prodigious laudations
bestowed on it and that reverence for Wordsworth
what did it mean had he not written Peter Bell and
been turned into deserved ridicule by all the reviews
was that dreary excursion to be compared to Gold-
smith’s traveller or Doctor Johnson’s imitation of the
tenth satire of Juvenal if the young men told the
truth .where had been the truth in his own young
days and in what ignorance had our forefathers been
brought up Mr Addison was only an elegant essayist
and shallow trifler you will be sneering at Shakespeare
next he said and was silenced though not better
pleased when-his youthful guests told him that
Doctor Goldsmith sneered at him too that Doctor
Johnson did not understand him and that Congreve
in his own day and afterwards was considered to be in
some points Shakespeare’s superior what do you think
a man’s criticism is worth sir cries Mr Warrington
who says those lines of Mr Congreve about a church
how reverend is the face of yon tall pile whose ancient
pillars rear their marble heads to bear aloft its vast
and ponderous roof by its own weight made steadfast
and immovable looking tranquillity it strikes an awe
and terror on my aching sight etcetera what do you
think of a critic who says those lines are finer than
anything Shakespeare ever wrote ”
(3) “ From Helicon’s harmonious springs
A thousand rills their mazy progress take
The laughing flowers that round them blow
Drink life and fragrance as they flow
Now the rich stream of music winds along


Deep majestic smooth and strong
Through verdant vales and Ceres’ golden reign
Now rolling down the steep amain
Headlong impetuous see it pour
The rocks and nodding groves rebellow to the roar ”
(4) “ O myriads of immortal spirits O powers
Matchless but with th’ Almighty and that strife
Was not inglorious though th’ event was dire
As this place testifies and this dire change
Hateful to utter but what power of mind
Foreseeing or presaging from the depth
Of knowledge past or present could have fear’d
How such united force of gods how such
As stood like these could ever know repulse
For who can yet believe though after loss
That all those puissant legions whose exile
Hath emptied Heaven shall fail to re-ascend
Self-rais’d and re-possess their native seat
For me be witness all the host of Heav’n
If counsels different or danger shunn’d
By me have lost our hopes but he who reigns
Monarch in Heaven till then as one secure
Sat on his throne upheld by old repute
Consent or custom and his regal state
Put forth at full but still his strength conceal’d
Which tempted our attempt and wrought our fall
Henceforth his might we know and know our own
So as not either to provoke or dread
New war provok’t our better part remains
To work in close design by fraud or guile
What force effected not that he no less
At length from us may find who overcomes
By force hath overcome but half his foe ”
2. Give the rules relating to the use of the follow-
ing points etc. : —the colon, semi-colon, comma; the
parenthesis, the dash; capitals, italics.


3. Refer to and illustrate the confusion that some-
times arises from the misuse or omission of points;
and remove the ambiguity in the following sentences
( a) by punctuation, and (b) by reconstruction :
(1) “ The prisoner said the witness was a convicted
thief.”.
(2) “The music is incidental to the service where
the young Princess is brought to King Henry and is
divided into two sections.”
(3) “This led me to suspect as much as a pene-
trating friend told me.”
(4) “ He spoke of Solomon the son of David who
built the Temple of Jerusalem.”
(5) “He then confessed with tears the blame was
wholly mine.”
(6) “So Mr. Honeyman says at least in his pulpit.”
(7) “ Political economists whose methods are purely
empirical are here liable to error.”
4. Distinguish carefully a parenthetical from a de-
pendent clause; and improve the following sentences
(a) by altering the punctuation, and (i>) by altering
the construction :
(1) “ The date, I cannot now remember it exactly,
was, I think, 1837.”
(2) “This liberty of the poet, like all true liberty, it
is not merely unbridled license but has laws of its own,
might seem to some destructive of the unity requisite
to a work of art”
(3) “ Now that I have tried to explain the true end
of art, and I would here repeat that such theories are
of merely subjective value, let us turn to the more
practical side of the question.”
(4) “ The mistake, and we must remember it is one
of the head and not of the heart, that Shelley made
was to fancy that the world could go on without
forms.”


(5) “ Plato affirms, and history both sacred and
profane will bear him out, that the truly just man not
only may be, but must be misunderstood.”
*5. “ The best constructed sentences owe least to
punctuation.” Examine this.
*6. Examine and criticize the subjoined paragraph,
as illustrating the rule that a sentence should rely for
its clearness on as few points as possible :
“ The affinities, the unity, of the visible and the in-
visible, of earth and heaven, of all things whatever,
with each other, through the consciousness, the person,
of God the Spirit, who was at every moment of
infinite time, in every atom of matter, at every point
of infinite space, ay ! was every thing in turn: that
doctrine —/’ antica jilosofia Italiana —was in all its
vigour there, a hardy growth out of the very heart of
nature, interpreting itself to congenial minds with all
the fulness of primitive utterance. A big thought!
yet suggesting, perhaps, from the first, in still, small,
immediately practical, voice, some possible modifica-
tion of, a freer way of taking, certain moral precepts :
say 1 a primitive morality, congruous with those larger
primitive ideas, the larger survey, the earlier, more
liberal air.”
CHAPTER III.
STYLE.
1. Define Style, and examine the statement that it
varies, and ought to vary, with the occasion.
*2. “The style should adapt itself to the theme.”
Refer to the different modes in which a didactic, a
descriptive, a narrative, and a persuasive writer should
handle his subject.
*3. “Le style c’est I’homme.” How far is the
character of an author displayed in his writing ?


*4. “Style should not be too prominent.” Refer
to some writers whose characteristic style is open to
the charge of mannerism.
5. What is the standard of Style?
*6. “ Good grammar is sound logic.” “ Good
grammar is established usage.” Examine the two
views represented by those two assertions.
*7. Give examples of phrases in which strictly
grammatical construction has given way to common
usage. What is meant by an idiom ?
*B. Horace says that custom is the “ jus et norma
loquendi.” How far is this true?
9. What is meant by saying that the writers to whom
we appeal as presenting models of style should be
national ?


PART II.
ACCURACY OF STYLE.
CHAPTER I.
CORRECT GRAMMAR.
A. —Errors in the Use of Single Words or
Forms.
1. Give the rules for the correct use of ‘shall’ and
of ‘ will’ What is the ground of the variation of the
rule in the first, the second, and the third person ?
2. Distinguish between the possessive and the
genitive case, and between the subjunctive and the
potential mood.
3. How are we to distinguish between an adjective
and an adverb when both have the same form ?
4. Examine and give illustrations of the distinction
between :—May and can ; could and would; might,
should, and ought; these and those; who and which.
5. Correct the following sentences: —
(1) “We can derive considerable elation from wit-
nessing the manifestations of power.”
(2) “His knees smote one against another.”
(3) “ I am neither an ascetic in theory or practice.”
(4) “He has had experience as footman, gardener,
and butler, for either of which places I can confi-
dently recommend him.”
(5) “In this department he has more extensive
knowledge than any one living.”
(6) “To persuade them who are entering the world
that all are vicious is not to awaken judgment.”
(7) “ Of all other politicians he is perhaps the least
reliable.”


(8) “ Antiquated words and forms were used differ-
ently from now.”
( 9) “ The methods of the poet and philosopher are,
therefore, essentially different.”
(10) “Shaftesbury’s arrangement, as shall be after-
wards shown, is uncommonly beautiful.”
(n) “Our execution will be found always inferior
to our taste and judgment. But the more correct the
latter shall be made by culture, the greater the chance
will be that the former will be less imperfect.”
(12) “By strength I mean such a disposition of
the several members as shall give every word and every
member their due weight and force.”
(13) “ We remember seeing Canning when we were
a boy.”
(rq) “When you have studied this question, you
shall agree with me.”
(rs) “ Of this influential body Halifax became one
of its most weighty members.”
(r 6) “It is difficult in some cases to distinguish
between an interrogative and exclamatory sentence.”
(17) “A masterly genius will, by himself, compose
in such a manner as shall be agreeable to the most
material rules of criticism.”
(18) “Why have you journeyed so far, if your lot is
no better and not even as good as when you started ? ”
(19) “And the reason seems to be given by some
words in our Bible, which though they may not be
the exact rendering of the original in that place, yet
in themselves they explain the connection of culture
with conduct very well.”
6. Correct or justify the following sentences :
(1) “On either side the river lie
Long fields of barley and of rye.”
(2) “ No doubt but ye are the people, and wisdom
shall die with you."


(3) “A great part of history’s business is to record
those details.”
(4) “ Pilate marvelled if he were already dead.”
(5) “ I stood in Venice on the Bridge of Sighs,
A palace and a prison on each hand.”
(6) “ They took up arms to try and drive the
Romans out of the country.”
(7) “ He also shall not leave thee either corn, wine
or oil, or the increase of thy kine, or flocks of sheep.”
(8) “ It was the Cardinal’s policy, who was at this
time the King’s chief adviser.”
7. Explain the difference in meaning between the
sentences in each of the following groups :
(1) “The pale green and white dresses were most
admired.”
“ The pale green and the white dresses were
most admired.”
(2) “ A little study is requisite.”
“ Little study is requisite.”
(3) “ Do you say that he will not return?”
“ Do you say that he should not return ? ”
“ Do you say that he shall not return ? ”
“ Do you say that he may not return ? ”
(4) “ He may go if he likes.”
“ He can go if he likes.”
(5) “ This involved a like reduction in the secre-
tary and treasurer’s salary.”
“ This involved a like reduction in the secre-
tary’s and the treasurer’s salary.”
“ This involved a like reduction in the secre-
tary’s and in the treasurer’s salary.”
B.— False Concords, i.e., Wrong Genders,
Numbers, Cases, and Tenses.
1. Refer to some of the obvious causes of the most
common errors in Concord.


2. Under what circumstances may a singular verb
follow two or more nominatives ?
3. “Characterize the collective nouns which are
properly followed by a singular, and those which are
properly followed by a plural verb. Why is “ army ”
singular, and “ mob ” plural ?
4. What is meant by the “historical present”?
State and explain its correct use.
*5. Suggest an explanation of the fact that in Greek
a neuter plural is followed by a singular verb.
6. When is “if” properly followed by the indica-
tive, and when by the subjunctive, mood ?
7. “ Explain carefully, with illustrations, the accurate
use of;— (a) the auxiliary “do ”; (I/) the double
negative; (c) “ and ” with the relative ; {d) “ but that ” ;
(e) “ none ” ; (f) “ which ” and “ that.”
*B. Examine, and give examples of, the use of the
Double Negative (a) in Greek, ( b ) in Latin, (c) in old
English, ( d ) in recent English.
g. Correct the following sentences ;
(r) “ Had my father continued in that situation, I
must have marched off to have been one of the little
underlings about a farmhouse.”
(2) “ It was on this occasion that the leather-seller
Cleon first comes prominently forward.”
(3) “ A man may lay claim to these qualities ; but
the hour when he should exert them would test his
sincerity.”
(4) “ He hoped that money should have been given
him.”
(5) “ He had lost an arm while he was in Spain with
Wellesley.”
(6) “ Theysupposinghirato have been in thecountry
went a day’s journey.”
(7) “ Valencia is one of the most delightful cities
which is to be found in Europe.”
(8) “ I did not speak yesterday as I wished to have
done.”


(9) “ No one would write a book unless he thinks it
will be read.”
(10) “ We must remember it is their circumstances,
not they, who are to blame.”
(n) “ One or other are wrong.”
(12) “This theory involves certain contradictory
conclusions, and which are not at first sight readily
seen.”
(r 3) “ The head masters, from he of Harrow down-
ward, agreed on this point”
(r 4) “ A general cry arose, ‘to the Bastille.’ Armed
crowds gather round the fortress. . . . Thither
with incessant cries . . . the multitude of Paris
gathered. Before them stood the enormous mass. . .
For hours they stand face to face—De Launay . . .
staunch for no surrender, the mob outside roaring for
admittance. . . . They were driven back by a storm of
grape shot. . . . They seized De Launay, and dragged
him back from the magazine. . . . The Bastille
prisoners were paraded through the streets. The old
Governor is taken as prisoner to the Hotel de Ville.
But in spite of the efforts of the officers he was torn to
pieces by the way.”
(t 5) “Each of the sexes should keep within its proper
bounds, and content themselves with the advantage of
their particular districts.”
(16) “The oars are dipping in the water, which was
shimmering beneath the moon; it has warned us to
make haste home.”
(17) “ Party spirit rages as it too generally does in
Dublin at this time, and was attended by party duels, in
superseding which there is undoubtedly some im-
provement.”
(18) “ Swift but a few months before was willing to
have hazarded all the horrors of a civil war.”
(19) “The work of national ruin was pretty effec-
tively carried on by the ministers, but more effectually
by the paper-money makers than they.”


(zo) “ William of Orange has exercised a powerful
influence on the history of his century. ”
(21) “ England was a great maritime power and has
traded with all the world.”
(22) “ In proportion as either of these qualities are
awanting, the language is awanting.”
(23) “ Sully bought one of the finest Spanish horses
that ever was seen.”
(24) “Of his prose we might say much that was
favourable.”
(25) “ The Duke of Wellington is not one of those
who interfere with matters over which he has no con-
trol.”
(26) “ These kind of statements, only to be made
by such whose experience guarantees their accuracy,
occur everywhere throughout the work.”
(27) “ Of these mistakes none are very serious.”
(28) “In no part of its career have the United
States been so successful as in literature.”
(29) “It is not fit for such as us to sit with the
rulers of the land.”
(30) “The innovations of Chaucer and his less
illustrious successors did not, however, take firm hold
on the language, or emasculate the vigour which it
derived from ‘ Piers Plowman ’, Wicliffe, and the
admirable translation of the Bible by the ripe scholars
of the time of James the First, and is still maintained
in the speech of the uneducated peasantry.”
(31) “ But the coinage of anglicised words of Latin
origin is still too abundant, and either overload the
language by their superfluity or enfeeble it by dilution
and by distinctions without differences.”
(32) “Failing, as others have, to reconcile poetry
and metaphysics, he succeeds better in speculations
inspired by the revelations of lens and laboratory.”
(33) “Such an argument has not, and never will,
convince any unprejudiced mind.”
(34) “We then came upon a stream, which after


we had followed about quarter of a mile down, led us
into a fertile plain.”
10. Correct or justify the following, giving your
reasons :
(1) “The civil government was then very submis-
sive, and heretics almost unknown.”
(2) “ A few hours of intercourse is enough for form-
ing a judgment on the case.”
(3) “It was a question which neither party were
contending.”
(4) “ This woman, with her twelve children, were
notorious thieves.”
(5) “ Mankind is appointed to live in a future state.”
(6) “ The number of those who had to pay 6
millions, were not more than 2,000, and mostly poor.”
(7) “The other party is by no means inferior in
the felicities of their style.”
(8) “ Neither men nor money were wanting for
the service,”
(g) “ Much depends on a pupil’s composing fre-
quently.”
(10) “ This sentence of the bishop’s is itself ungram-
matical.”
- (11) “ The army whom its chief had abandoned pur-
sued their miserable march.”
(12) “Large installations of electricity introduce
fresh risks. There is danger to property if quantity
is very great, even though potential be low. There is
danger to life if potential be high.”
(13) “The young writer of the interesting, but
slender study of a great subject tells us that he had
been lent by Mr. Tindal Harris a manuscript copy of
the English Life of De Marsay.”
(14) “He was under the feet of the evil spirits, who
seemed to be given power to deal with him as they
pleased.”


(15) “ Given an escape of gas, and the theatre might
have been set on fire.”
(16) “I shall have great pleasure in accepting your
kind invitation.”
(17) “I should like very much to have seen him.”
(18) “We now come to one of the causes of ship-
wreck which has never been duly considered.”
CHAPTER II.
PURITY IN THE USE OF WORDS.
1. Distinguish between Purity, Perspicuity, and
Precision. How does “ purity ”of language differ
from “ purism ” ?
2. Define “ obsolete.” How does it differ from
“ old ”?
3. When is the use of archaic words permissible ?
Why are they more frequent in poetry than in prose ?
*4. “Multa renascentur quae jam cecidere, cadentque
Quae nunc sunt in honore vocabula.”
On what conditions is the revival of words justi-
fiable ?
5. State and illustrate the legitimate and the
illegitimate use of so-called “ slang ’’ expressions.
6. Discriminate (a) between Barbarism, Pedantry,
and Impropriety; (b) between Provincialism, Vulgar-
ism, and Idiom.
7. By what principle should we be guided in our
adoption or employment of foreign words or phrases ?
8. “Technical terms should be used only in
scientific, professional, or didactic treatises.” Are
there any exceptions to this rule ?
*9. “The masters of our literature rarely coin
words.” Comment on this.


io. Give your opinion on the use in standard
English of the italicized words in the following
sentences: —
A —Obsolete Words, or Words Used in an
Obsolete Sense
(1) “The King repented him of provoking such
dangerous enemies.”
(2) “ The Queen whom it highly imported that the
two monarchs should be at peace essayed mediation.”
(3) “ Shrewd is the time this morning.”
(4) “He had as liefltl it alone.”
(5) “ Elizabeth’s object was to amuse Mary; but
the latter was not deceived.”
(6) “ Consult what Quintilian has delivered in the
ninth book of his institutions.”
(7) “ The character of Sir Roger de Coverley
discovers more genius than the critique on Milton.”
(8) “ Han-seemed they wended to the West,”
(9) “ I was much beholden to thee."
(10) “ After they had done on their diverse gear they
went to truck with the strange folk .”
B—So-called ‘Slang’ Expressions.
(1) “I am afraid of being ploughed. , and have
resolved to scratch .”
(2) “ He is a second artful dodger."
(3) “That’s a sweet thing in costumes.”
(4) “ She was awfully intense."
(5) “The Burne Jones was too utterly utter."
(6) “He has always cast a loving eye on his own
advancement.”
(7) “This last month he has been cramming up for
his little go.”
(8) “There were four sons, every one uglier than
the other three."
(9) “He made a flukey hit, and scored three.”


(io) “He puts on the haw-haw of a regular
masher, but in vain.”
(n) “ His hedging was blown upon, so he hooked it.”
(12) “His little game was found to be a plant, and
ended in smoke.”
(13) “The books are sort of united by Prince
Arthur appearing in each. . . Instead of twelve
books which Spenser intended to write, only six are
extant, which is quite plenty.”
(14) “An Irishman is that patriotic, that he would
rather be hanged in Ireland than die a natural death
anywhere else.”
(15) “Justinian was great for reorganizing the
Empire.”
(16) “The Jew accepts the invitation, and while
he is at supper Lorenzo and Jessica slope.”
(17) “I calculate he has got the go-by.”
(18) “This book is the very ticket.”
(19) “The poor man is next door to an idiot.”
(20) “ The whole business was rather fishy.”
(21) “He never could stand chaff, and cut up rough.”
(22) “When they talk shop I always shut them up.”
(23) “If you had been in such a funk as I, you
would have skedaddled.”
(24) “ This is a time when the people of England
ought to take stock.”
(25) “My fellow-traveller was a cute party?
(26) “ Did you spot that false quantity? ”
(27) “To put the matter in home-spun, Mr. M.
and his friends hope to square the church and sell the
society.”
(28) “ The country refuses to be governed by a back-
stairs policy, now that better advisers are io the fore.”
(29) “Those of them that are supposed to know
something of the mind of Prince B. tell us that now
is the time to go in and win.”
(30) “We have no doubt the man who would palm
off an empty mine for a sudnging sum to an innocent


Britisher , would excite an enthusiasm before which
justice would not have the ghost of a chance.”
(31) “He said figs would be a drug, and he is in
the swim.”
(32) “They were a heavy and phlegmatic lot.”
(33) “ A find was made by the explorers.”
(34) “My brother sculp's and I warble.”
(35) “ I hope the visitors will do the handsome
thing at the stalls.”
(36) “ The woman told us, she could eat a hundred
boarders, but could only sleep fifty.”
(37) “Whether the Angle assimilated the Briton or
the Briton assimilated the Angle, there was some
‘ Anglo ’ element in the business.”
(38) “ He has up all the tips and wrinkles on the
subject, and is dead sure of pulling through.”
C— Technical or Pedantic Terms.
(1) “This aspect of the question has been
thoroughly ventilated!'
(2) “ He will not grow to mental maturity, for his
potentiality will remain a dead letter.”
(3) “The encyclopedic text-books of scientists and
educationalists are not illaudible attempts to convey
multum in parvo.”
(4) “ His invertebrate placidity was phenomenal.”
(5) “ Notions co-ordinated in the whole of comprehen-
sion are, in respect of the discriminating characters,
different without any similarity.”
(6) “Allegory is not a fit theme for fictive art.”
(7) “ In studying the soul-engrossing actuality of
life, Cousin was observational and generalizing rather
than analytic and discriminating.”
(8) “There is much perturbation of mind anent
the state of affairs.”
(9) “ The traffic was congested by the interest of the
window.”


(ro) “In Shakespeare the subjective and objective
are concordant, and often synchronous."
(n) “ This conjecture suggests a new departure in
the integration of ideas.”
(12) “The probability of the creditors being re-
couped depends on the solvability of the debtors.”
(13) “Those now in the Grosvenor are hardly to be
differentiated from hundreds of other drawings by the
same prolific artist.”
(14) “The ladies of the club, in the line of the
Socialism now in vogue, tried the experiment last night
of bringing the upper and lower strata into contact.”
(15) “A speculative philosophy consequently must
be a chain of mutually sub-relating counterparts."
(16) “By this distinction we find ourselves polarized
into two factions.”
(17) “In this piece his power was exploited."
(18) “From M. Laffitte the Anglo-Comtist School
received its doctrinal exequator.
(19) “The zenithalfirmament, as we returned, was
a deep blue, the western sky a fiery crimson.”
D—Foreign Terms.
(1) “Distinguish the style periodique from the
style coupe."
(2) “ Malgre his protestations, he did not come off
sans reproche.”
(3) “ I wish to deal tenderly with the susceptibilities
and respect the amour propre of my confrere."
(4) “Bacon prosecuted some of his quondam friends.”
(5) “These reformers have suddenly shifted their
venue, and it is easy to see the raison d'etre of the
change— cela va sans direl'
(6) “ His style is a pot-pourri of all languages.”
(7) “ Her manner of writing was suggestive and
in time.”
B


(8) “ The museum of the beaux arts was crammed
with bric-a-brac and objects of vertu."
(9) “ Sidney was the beau ideal preux chevalier
of the Elizabethan age.”
(10) “Her manner and conversation alike were
charmingly naive.”
(n) “Apart from detail, the tout ensemble of the
Eiffel tower is imposing.”
(12) “He was quite au fait in the mise-en-sdne.”
(13) “The exhibition comprises some Japanese
curios”
(14) “The critical study of the Scriptures will, for
the future, be, to this extent, less of a terra incognita,
except to professional divines.”
(15) “All this required much finesse and delicatesse”
(16) “The gardens were void of simplicity and ele-
gance, and exhibited much that was glaring and bizarre.”
(17) “The effect of his compliments was marred
by an evident arrilre pens'ee of regret for an estrange-
ment of which he himself had been the cause.”
(18) “Can you prefer the adoration of a relative
beauty to the cultus of the true beauty?”
(19) “What teacher could ever so save us from
that bondage to which we are all prone, . . .
the bondage of . . . das Gemeine.”
E—Coined or Affected Terms.
(1) “ The post-prandial talk of Rogers was
characterized by an acerbity at singular variance
with the even tenour of his verse.”
(2) “ Penology , like philanthropy, has been de-
veloped into a science.”
(3) “It is hard to conserve our impression of
the poet beside this analyzation of the man.”
(4) “He was interviewed on the causes of the
unsuccessfulness of his mission.”
(5) “The proofs of his unwisdom and impractic-
ality were irrefragable.”


(6) “ The catalogue contained sixty-five reproduc-
tions of humorous exhibits''
(7) “ The operativeswcre for the most part inebriates.”
(8) “ These writers represent the most pronounced
section of the impressionist school.”
(9) “ He is an individual eaten up by egoism."
(10) “The cortige was worthy of his ambassadorial
rank.”
(n) “Such a devagation into Harcourtism is
dangerous to one not to the manner born.”
(12) “ Onward through the immense vastitudes which
the Almighty has sprinkled with suns and world-
systems, our being is linked with worlds rising above
worlds; while, at the same time, it is protended to
the age-distant periods of their unswerving circum-
volvings.”
(13) “ How honour-worthy are those who, surveying
the relations of civil life, devote their genius to the
ingrafting of these thought-growths in the minds of
men.”
(14) “ Her life-work was a part of world-history."
(15) “This band of enthusiastic disestablishers and
permissivites have thus been compelled to strike out
of their programme all mention of their cherished
views.”
(16) “ Dr. H.’s liber alio nist friends are taking a
note of these utterances.”
(17) “A training of which the aim is an all-round
well-informedness is destitute of all the chief elements
of education.”
(18) “Switzerland is a tri-lingual country.”
(19) “ But in this matter legislation was not entirely
privative."
(20) “The outcome of all these oratorial displays
will make little impression on this work-a-day world.”
(21) “His ignorance of Chaucer is measurable;
his ignorance of Shakespeare is immeasurable, colossal,
pyramidal, unimaginable.”


(22) “ The sculpture galleries at the Royal Academy
contain each year an increasingly large number of works
evidencing individuality and talent.”
(23) “Browning attempted not only to give the
emotive iridescence of the poetic afflatus, but also at the
same time to suggest the accompanying inrush of
clustering thoughts.”
(24) “Such superfluity of words is disgustful to every
reader of correct taste.”
(25) “ His tender-hearied-ness was equalled only by
his wrong-headed-ness.”
(26) “ Twenty-five eventual centuries have left these
victories unequalled.”
(27) “Let us turn to Lord R ’s reasons for
cold-shouldering Scotch Home Rule.”
(28) “Might not one compose for oneself a very
respectable creed by simply collecting all the known
truths, all the clear indubitabilities, within one’s reach.”
(29) “ RacySaxonmonosyllables, close to us as touch
and sight, he will intermix readily with those long,
savoursome Latin words, rich in second intention.”
(30) “The model restores the then aspect of the city
and castle.”
(31) “ Poetry admits of greater latitude with respect
to new-compounding words.”
(32) “Walking, as prose does, on terra firma, and
not merely poised on ascending and descending wings,
it can push its way through the thick and miscellany
of things .”
(33) “If i s as the doyen of British politics that he
will be toasted on Monday. As such men of all shades
of party may panegyrize him with an easy conscience.”
(34) “ I hope none of my correspondents will
measure my regard for them by the frequency, or
rather seldonuy, of my epistles.”


CHAPTER III.
PROPRIETY IN THE USE OF WORDS.
A.—Wrong Sequences of Particles.
Correct the following sentences :
(1) “We should ask at the sister sciences.”
(2) “ Concrete words present a more vivid picture
before the mind.”
(3) “Shakespeare treated on the whole of human
nature, but Ben Jonson treated only with that particu-
lar part connected with his own time.”
(4) “.To explain and illustrate upon the foregoing
paragraph we must first of all look back upon the
change the language underwent.”
(5) “ Language grows coeval to the changes and
advances in a nation.”
(6) “ I have heard how some critics have been paci-
fied with a supper.”
(7) “ Man was ordered to till the earth with the
sweat of his brow.”
(8) “ The use of the word clever is an advantage
over its present meaning.”
(9) “Read Chaucer with no other aid but the
notes.”
(10) “We may seek among the Fates and Furies for
the source of this conception.”
(11) “I have seldom or ever seen him fail in his
duty.”
(12) “ The only other part of speech which partakes
of the weakness remarked in conjunctions is preposi-
tions.”
( x 3) “The orator’s speech was characterized with
eloquence, and during its delivery the audience were
breathless in attention.”
(14) “The selection only retains such that are
worthy.”


(15) “ The Danish is probably from the same root
with the Saxon.”
(16) “I will doubtless find some person at whom to
make these inquiries.”
(17) “ Scarcely had Richard taken up the cross than
his admirers afforded a very notable specimen of the
mischievous inequality of chivalrous ethics.”
(18) “ The better papers are singularly free of
blemishes, even of composition.”
(19) “ This is the new number to a very useful series
of Primers.”
(20) “ The Czar’s resistance of the Pope’s overtures
was successful.”
(21) “An objection more plausible may be formed
against criticism.”
(22) “Addison has reduced the Pleasures of the
Imagination under three heads.”
(23) “ For his special theological tenets I had no
sympathy.”
(24) “ Its judgments on the relations between man
and man are corollaries from its primary truth.”
(25) “No doubt the reason why he was so dis-
satisfied was, because they were absent.”
(26) “In one way this added, in another, it de-
tracted from his reputation.”
(27) “The army divided the spoil between them.”
(28) “If the question is considered only in this
point of view, its full difficulty is not realized.”
(29) “This proposal was one with which all agreed
and not a single dissent was expressed.”
(30) “ These men had quite a different ideal of the
duties of society than that now prevalent.”
(31) “In supporting and encouraging musical
studies James V. was equally ardent as his royal
predecessor.”


B.— Synonyms.
* i. “ Synonyms are like gradually receding circles,
first coincident, then intersecting, finally in mere con-
tact.” Explain and illustrate what is meant by this.
2. Comment on the assertion of Dr. Blair:—“The
great source of a loose style is the injudicious use of
synonymous terms.”
3. Why is the difficulty of discriminating between
so-called synonyms greater in the English than in any
other modern European language?
*4. Are there any real Synonyms— t.e. words con-
veying precisely the same meaning—in the English
language? If so, mention some of them, and explain
their occurrence.
5. Explain the (*) arrangement of Synonyms under
the following heads; — (a) Generic and Specific; (b)
Active and Passive; (c) Expressing different Degrees
of Intensity; (d) Positive and Negative; and distin-
guish carefully between the following related terms: —
(a) Answer, Reply; Courage, Bravery; Audacity,
Temerity; Custom, Habit, Manner; Analogy, Parallel;
Fear, Terror, Fright; List, Catalogue; Negligence,
Neglect; Cause, Occasion; Praise, Applause; Dis-
position, Temper, Humour; Expect, Hope; Give,
Grant; Gain, Win ; Have, Possess; Ridicule, Deride;
Try, Attempt, Endeavour; Ancient, Antique; Recent,
Modern ; Clear, Distinct; Whole, Entire, Complete;
High, Tall; New, Novel; Strong, Robust.
(b) Ability, Capacity; Consent, Assent, Comply,
1 The ground of this classification suggested by Mr. F. G.
Grahame, in his able work on the subject, will be apparent to
every teacher. It is illustrated in the subjoined lists. Observe
that in distinguishing between the related terms the pupil or
student must not be satisfied with merely giving definitions from
a dictionary. The words must be carefully compared, and their
proper use exemplified by sentences containing them, or by con-
trasting them severally with their respective opposites. Each
head will be found to supply material for more than one exercise.


Concur; Example, Instance; Faith, Belief, Opinion;
Intellect, Understanding; Proposal, Proposition; Re-
pentance, Contrition; Value,Worth; Persevere,Persist;
Trust, Credit; Awkward, Clumsy; Efficient, Effective;
Expert, Experienced; Impracticable, Impossible; Un-
avoidable, Inevitable ; Peaceable, Peaceful; Reason-
able, Rational; Sociable, Social; Vacant, Empty.
(c) Compunction, Remorse; Intention, Purpose;
Persuade, Convince; Slander, Calumny ; Temperance,
Abstinence ; Alter, Change ; Confuse, Confound;
Enlarge, Increase; Excite, Incite; Prompt, Instigate;
Lament, Deplore; Overcome, Conquer; Remember,
Recollect; Hear, Listen ; See, Look; Should, Ought;
Surprise, Astonish; Understand, Comprehend ; Con-
demn, Contemn; Scarce, Rare.
(d) Bankrupt, Insolvent; Disabled, Unable; Free-
dom, Liberty; Bold, Fearless; Patient, Invalid;
Simulate, Dissimulate, Dissemble; Cruel, Heartless ;
Different, Unlike; Doubt, Uncertainty, Dubiety;
Guiltless, Innocent; Perpetual, Incessant; Permit,
Allow.
6. Similarly note the various shades of difference in
meaning between the following pairs or among the
members of the following groups of words:—
Anger, Rage; Respect, Esteem; Compose, Com-
pound ; Mingle, Mix; Rise, Soar; I doubt, I fear;
King, Emperor; Greatness, Magnitude; Retrieve,
Recover; Guard, Preserve; Escape, Elude, Evade,
Avoid; Honest, Sincere, Frank; Frailty, Fault, Foible ;
Small, Slight, Little; Handsome, Pretty, Beautiful;
Contest, Conflict; Accede, Acquiesce; Austerity,
Rigour, Severity ; Era, Epoch ; Oral, Verbal; Obser-
vance, Observation; Veracity, Truth ; Truism, Plati-
tude ; Attribute, Impute; Withdraw, Retract; Com-
mentary, Illustration ; Avenge, Revenge; Conciliate,
Reconcile; Authentic, Genuine; Union, Unity; Copy,
Imitate; Equivocal, Ambiguous; Subtle, Acute; Con


temptation, Meditation; Pleasure, Happiness; Wisdom,
Prudence; Hate, Detest, Abhor; Concise, Brief;
Proud, Haughty, Vain, Conceited; Modest, Bashful,
Shy, Reserved; Idiotic, Mad, Insane; Satirical, Ironi-
cal, Sarcastic, Cynical; Impertinence, Insolence,
Rudeness; Coerce, Compel, Control; Separate, Divide,
Distinguish ; Abbreviate, Abridge; Comic, Absurd.
* 7. Robertson tells us that “When one of the old
Scottish kings was making an inquiry into the tenure
by which his nobles held their lands, they started up
and drew their swords. l ßy these said they we
acquired our lands, and with these we will defend
them.’ ” How does this expression illustrate the pro-
per use of the prepositions ‘by ’ and ‘ with.’ Similarly
discriminate the right uses of‘only’ and ‘alone’; ‘be-
tween,’ ‘ among’; ‘ while,’ ‘ during,’ ‘ throughout ’; ‘at,’
‘ in,’ ‘ beside ’; ‘ away,’ ‘ off.’
*B. Refer to serious confusions of thought due to the
vague or ambiguous use of the following words and
phrases:—False, Untrue; ‘ Right ’ and ‘ Wrong ’ views;
Religion; Infidel; Nature is the rule of life; Education;
Law; Authority; Liberty; Civilization; The Voice
of the People.
*9. Illustrate the limits to the rule, that in the
exact use of words we should be guided by their
etymology.
xo. Point out the words wrongly employed in the
following sentences, and substitute others accurately
conveying the meaning intended :
(1) “For want of interrogating facts we fall into
absurdities.”
(2) “ I could not do the exercise as I was engaged in
learning for the examination.”
(3) “ He won’t do more than he can help.”
(4) “By his knowledge that perfection was only
accomplished by zeal allied to industry, he attained his
predomination among the writers of his age.”


(5) “Some may doubt that his partiality has carried
him too far.”
(6) “This is effected by a small alteration in the
arrangement.”
(7) “By this mean they will judge what to choose.”
(8) “ I propose to endeavour the entertainment of
my countrymen.”
(9) “We cannot read a page of Virgil without per-
ceiving what has fascinated the world, and without
concurring in the fascination."
(10) “The difficulty which has arisen would have
been denounced as an impossibility had any one been
disposed to indulge in the prophetical delineation of it
six years ago.”
(n) “ His object was to form subordinary alliances
with the native princes.”
(12) “ The evidence to be collected from Herbert is
precarious.”
(13) “Some historians tell us that no fruit grows
originally among us.”
(14) “It is curious to observe the various substitutes
for paper before its invention.”
(15) “ Though he professed to hold this theory, he
never demeaned himself so far as to put it into practice.”
{l6) “ Herein Mr. M. makes use of the same inac-
curacy as Mr. G.”
(17) “The Asiatics at no time relished anything but
what was full of ornament, and splendid in a degree
that we should denominate gaudy.”
(18) “It is a scientific vocabulary, containing not
less than 30,000 words.” •
(19) “ Sidney schemed a pastoral romance in
English.”
(20) “ It remains still an undecided point whether
nature or art confer most towards excelling in writing
and discourse.”
(21) “When we name criticizing, prejudices may
perhaps arise of the same kind with those which I
mentioned before with respect to rhetoric.”


(22) “Criticize and correct the following pieces of
grammar and style.”
(23) “ From those facts we may derive a prognosti-
cation.”
(24) “ There is no newspaper in which the precise
platform here adopted is taken up.”
(25) “ I hope he will tell you a bit of the sad cir-
cumstances.”
(26) “A race-horse is looked upon with pleasure;
but it is the war-horse ‘ whose neck is clothed with
thunder ’ that carries grandeur in its idea.”
(27) “Precision signifies retrenching superfluities.”
(28) “It was in this situation of affairs that Sir Arthur
Wellesley (who shall hereafter be called Wellington)
landed at Lisbon.”
(29) “ For my own part I doubt the application of
the Danish rule to the English language.”
(30) “ Two great sins of omission and one of com-
mission have been committed.”
(31) “ This arises from the number of nomad tribes
which pervade every part of the territory.”
(32) “It is unnecessary to have recourse to the
complex mechanism of double elections.”
(33) “ Our middle class (we beheld something of this
kind in the 13th century) has an amazing love of
cumbrous Latin words.”
(34) “ By this we have another proof of his insatiable
activity.”
(35) “ This opinion is natural to one of the feminine
persuasion.”
(36) “We cannot but see that, carried to so great
a pitch, this habit of reserve must inevitably have
rendered the development of such invaluable qualities
as charity and sympathy almost impossible.”
(37) “A few days later a shopman moving a metal
show-case was done to death; in his shoe a projecting
nail pierced the stocking, and thus helped on his
fate,”


(38) “By these incursions the Celts made them-
selves hated worse than ever.”
(39) “ Mr. L. will to-morrow be revealed as member
for the constituency.”
(40) “ Does it deteriorate from Milton’s peculiar
greatness that he could not have given us the concep-
tion of Falstaff?”
(41) “It stands unsurpassed for its beautiful blend-
ing of the grand, the tender, the humorous, the
grotesque, the awful, and the horrible, pervaded by a
strong undercurrent of wit and common sense.”
(42) “The centaur is angelic in form and beauty
from the middle upwards,'but with beastly extremities.”
C.— Ambiguous, Careless, and Absurd Sentences.
Improve the following, substituting other sentences
expressing accurately the meaning intended to be
conveyed by the writer :
(1) “Prisoner at the bar, God has given you health
and strength, instead of which you go about stealing
ducks.”
(2) “Mr. B. thought that their primary duty should
be to ask what was reasonable and fair, and accept
as much less as they possibly could.”
(3) “ Would that man could be removed to another
sphere of usefulness ! ”
(4) “ I then related a case in which this operation
had succeeded in the brute creation; since which time
I have had an opportunity of performing it upon the
human family.”
(5) “So I promised to say nothing which I hoped
would conciliate them.”
(6) “ Over and above the mission going on in this
house a whole family lives underground.”
(7) “ Here we find the battered copper vessels, old
brooms, cdbwebs, apple parings, and the like which


the Flemish painters scatter so freely about their
interiors.”
(8) “He rode to the village and on his arrival there
turned his horse into a stable.”
(9) “ A furrier requests ladies to bring to him their
skins which he promises shall be converted into muffs
and boas.”
(10) “ She looked at her own neat white stockings
and thought how glad she would be to cover their
poor feet with the same.”
(r r) “ Chaucer has been divided into three parts.”
(12) “He had no doubt that notable woman’s gift
of steering off the rocks and shoals of conversation.”
(13) “ When did you tell him you were to arrive?”
(14) “He is as likely to make a name for himself
as his brothers have done.”
(15) “ He cannot help his language being anything
but pointed.”
(16) “He had no suspicion that his end was near,
while he sang and jested with his courtiers, or per-
haps these last hours had been spent in a different
way.”
(17) “Is it not a national disgrace that England of
the past, which supplied Europe with her best horses,
should now be dependent upon Continental countries
for her useful supplies ? ”


PART III.
CLEARNESS OR PERSPICUITY.
CHAPTER I.
SIMPLICITY AND DIRECTNESS.
1. Under what modifications may we accept the
rule that the simplest language is the best ?
2. On what conditions is the importation of foreign
words justifiable ?
3. “ A nation which trades with all the world must
borrow words for all the world’s products.” Comment
on this.
* 4. Show that the application of old or common
terms to new or rare ideas or things is apt to result in
obscurity.
5. What are the main causes of obscurity or
ambiguity in English composition ? Why are they so
numerous ?
*6. “In a good writer a large vocabulary is an aid to
clearness; in a careless writer it is a source of
obscurity.” Account for and illustrate the amount of
truth in this statement.
*7. Distinguish between the kinds of obscurity which
result from inexperience, and those more properly
ascribed to affectation.
8. Criticize, and reproduce in a more natural form
the following sentences: —
(1) “ If every author introduced words from other tongues, the
knowledge of our language would be proportionately circum-
scribed and no writer would wish to communicate his thoughts
by a vehicle so multifarious and evanescent.”
(2) “The teacher needs to quicken the mental alertness by
artificial means when there is a dormancy of mere indolence.


He has to waken his pupil from the state significantly named
indifference, the state where different impressions fail to be
recognized as distinct.”
(3) “If the day of poetry were in the ascendant I should say that
a sweet volume might be culled out of their productions : but, as
it is, they must be left to the dispersion of their first birth and
perhaps the only recognition of them to be found in this brief
notice by an old friend who has to mourn them, nearly all
amongst the lost from his earlier affections.”
(4) “ The moral sense is that natural affection or anticipating
fancy which makes the sense of right and wrong. . . . Self-
examination is a man’s dividing himself into two parties,
becoming a self-dialogist, entering into partnership with himself
and practically forming within himself the dual number.”
(5) “Critical efforts to limit art apriori by anticipations regard-
ing the natural incapacity of material with which this or that artist
works, as the sculptor with solid form, or the prose-writer with
the ordinary language of men, are always liable to be discredited
by the facts of artistic production ; and while prose is actually
found to be a coloured thing with Bacon, picturesque with Livy
and Carlyle, musical with Cicero and Newman, mystical and
intimate with Plato and Michelet and Sir Thomas Browne,
exalted or florid it may be, with Milton and Taylor, it will be
useless to protest that it can be nothing at all, except something
very tamely and narrowly confined to mainly practical ends—a
kind of ‘good round-hand’; as useless as the protest that
poetry might not touch prosaic subjects as with Wordsworth, or
an abstruse matter as with Browning, or treat contemporary life
nobly as with Tennyson.”
*9. Give the substance of the following in simpler
and clearer terms:—
(1) “Forty years ago the popular art of Gibson swayed to
exaggeration in the direction of what was ideal and classic : in
the decay of this school came Mr. Boehm with his unflinching
realism, and the pendulum flew back to lively presentments of
the modern coat and trousers : . . the weight never swings back
without some result from the last preceding pressure.”
(2) The dilettante would doubtless ill requite his regard and
have a painful sense of his rawness, the crudity of his critical appre-
hension, and the zeal of his conduct and demeanour in general.
It is indeed the crudity of his critical perception joined to an
invincible native rectitude that prevents him from seeing any
peril from dilettantism, with which however his acquaintance is
extremely slight, and focusses his reprehension upon the pitfalls
of Philistinism which on the other hand yawn around him and


from which in his inward parts he cherishes the conviction that
he has been saved so as by fire. ”
(3) “ As, in the case of an individual, a temporary malevolence
of atmospheric conditions, or of other conditions of nature out
of himself, may depress his mental energy and actually lessen the
worth of all that he thinks and says while the adverse conjunction
lasts ; so may there not be cosmical conditions, conditions of total
nature outside of Humanity, tremors telluric and even blasts
sidereal along the earth’s orbit, or.along the mightier path in
which our whole system is voyaging, of a kind sometimes to
cause epidemics which sweep through the life of the globe, and
seem like admonitions that the globe itself might be replunged
into the fell Adamite state whence it emerged to support man,
and, at other times, without any such glaring stroke of decima-
tion and death, to lead with equal certainty to weaknesses and
untoward intellectual variations?”
* 10. Note the affected phrases and needless allusions
which merely serve to confuse the following sentences;
and express the meaning, in each instance intended to
be conveyed, in simpler and more appropriate terms: —
(1) “Lord D. can hardly but admit that the Egyptian plough
alone is one that, having put his hand to it, he cannot turn back
from—at all events for a time that cannot at present be cal-
culated.”
(2) “ His works, it may be, exhibit no perfect crystal of artistic
form, but each is a menstruum saturated with form in solution.
He fears to lose the instinctive in any process of elaboration,
the vital in anything which looks like mechanism.”
(3) “This rather startling proof that in Khartoum all did not go
as merry as a marriage bell or as peacefully as an orthodox
honeymoon has no charms even for Mr. A., capable as he is of
surveying mankind from China to Peru, and willing as he doubt-
less is to repeat the sublime egotism of the elder Pitt, and to
declare that only one man can save the nation, and that is
himself.”
(4) “The writer should look askant at words that come from
the Latin ; they are too often traps for the unwary ; although the
Lady of the even trench and the bristling mound is indeed a high
and mighty Queen, when seated on her own throne.”
(5) “From the Ladies’Gallery these splendid visions of the
sublimity of millinery were viewed with unutterable longing.
Even the sterner masculine mind was moved with twinges of
temptation towards predatory feats when so useless an accumula-
tion of wealth was displayed near at hand as a mere matter of
personal adornment. The younger of the two Princes was
robed in white satin, the elder in purple; and the turban of each


gave every promise of being ‘ a joy for ever ’ by making
good its title to be considered ‘ a thing of beauty.’ ”
(6) “ Among the pills of good advice that used to be concealed
in the delectable jam of the Latin grammar, and so conveyed to the
mind in childhood’s happy hour of discipline, a prominent place
was given to the great truth that the best sauce is hunger.
Tempora mutantur, and with them have changed the thoughts
that breathe and words that burn in copy-book headlines and
exercise-books, and which, according to an eminent politician,
play the part of ethical beacons amid the distractions of adminis-
tration and the emergencies of party conflict. In these days, at
all events, when confirming the feeble knees is evidently so
desirable in politics and public life, there might be invented a
worse headline or passage for translation into Latin, by way of
inspiring or warning the embryo Democratic statesman, than such
a declaration as ‘ The best stiffening is knowledge.’”
(7) “ The cat of the Transvaal was let out of the bag last night.
Why it should have been kept tied up so long we do not know;
but one may presume at all events that it had to be freed at last.
For the last few days it has been rumoured that peace was to be
made at, or near about, any price.”
(8) “A large rhythm sustains the verse, similar in nature to the
movement of a calmly musical period of prose, but at best the
music of the lines is a measurable music ; under the verse there
lies no living heart of music, with curious pulsation, and rhythm,
which is a miracle of the blood. The carefully executed lyrics
of Juan and Fedalma are written with an accurate knowledge of
what song is, and how it differs from speech. The author was
acquainted with the precise position of the vocal organs in sing-
ing ; the pity is she could not sing. The little modelled verses
are masks taken from the dead faces of infantile lyrics that once
lived and breathed.”
(9) “ Lord S.’s efforts to help a lame dog over a stile are worthy
of the respect of the Tory party. If the contest of Friday next
should result in the return of Jvlr. W., it would be unfair to
refuse a good share of the credit to the yeoman services of ‘ the
senior member.’ Ministers, as a rule, are content if their
‘ echoes roll from soul to soul ’ until they reach the western sea-
port ; but Lord S. figures not only as the President of the
Board of Trade, but as a representative of Liverpool, and in
both respects he may be regarded as the ‘big brother’ from
whom Mr. W. would naturally look for aid in the time of trouble. ”
(to) “ Should it prove to be the case that the negotiations with
the Boers end in the virtual restoration of independence to the
Transvaal, it may prove to be one of those stones of concession
which manage to kill at one and the same time two birds of
difficulty.”


(I i) “Many and celebrated as our great Scotchmen have been,
it would be difficult to find another name—especially the name
of a poet —wherewith to conjure to greater popular results.”
(12) “The noble leader of this side of the House had ventured
to humbly ask for information, and I think we may fairly com-
plain that when we have asked for bread we have been treated in
an unscriptural manner, and been given a stone.”
CHAPTER II.
BREVITY.
r. Mention or illustrate some of the exceptions to
the rule that the best composition expresses most
ideas in fewest words.
2. Distinguish carefully between ;
(1) Tautology, Pleonasm, and Repetition.
(2) Laconic, Curt, and Terse, as applied to style.
*3. “ Verbosity is cured not by a small but by a
large vocabulary.” “ Fox said—l never want a word,
but Pitt never wants the word.” Show how the habit
of precision in writing is conducive to Brevity.
4. Give an example of a sentence obscure because
of its length, and reconstruct it
5. Adduce instances of nouns or verbs that frequent
usage permits to go in pairs. l
6. Clearly indicate the distinction between the un-
grammatical and the rhetorical use of the Double
Negative. When is the latter appropriate ?
* 7. In what circumstances does an allusion or quota-
tion conduce to Brevity?
8. Under what conditions are such caveats or cir-
cumlocutions as “we may add that,” “it may be
remarked that,” “ as seems to me,” etc., permissible ?
9. When is the repetition of words or ideas justifiable
or desirable ?
1 Note thq.t the love of alliteration, as in ‘ ‘meddle and muddle, ”
or of terminal consonance, as in “ plunder and blunder,” often
suggests or confirms this use.


io. Excise the unnecessary words in the following
sentences :
(1) “A superfluity of unnecessary words is altogether
improper.”
(2) “Spelling reform would be a great boon to the
language at large.”
(3) “A nation and its language go hand in hand
inseparably bound up together.”
(4) “ Her Majesty the Queen has been compelled to
give her assent to the worst possible form of govern-
ment that at this moment exists.”
(5) “We passed under the umbrageous shade of the
forest.” ■
(6) “ His speech was eloquent, but his remarks were
confined only to one solitary aspect of the question.”
(7) “There were very few passengers who escaped
without serious injury.”
(8) “ In the great region of the comic in particular it
may be questioned whether prose has not the wider
range, and the more searching, furious, and door-
breaking license.”
(9) “On this plan we should have to say that, while
both our novelists are masterly artists, the art of
Dickens is the wider in its range as to object and
circumstance.”
(10) “If I am not mistaken, the year 1848 will have
to be referred back to for several generations to come
as an epoch commencing much in European history.”
(11) “In the ancient Greek world it was the men who
were called Sophists who took fees for their teaching;
the philosopher Socrates had his bread otherwise.”
(12) “He had lost an opportunity which never again
returned; for at that period of the youthful adolescence
of the country they were totally exempt from all taxes.”
(13) “Hence the universal testimony which the
nations of the earth have conspired to give to some
few works of genius.”


(14) “Mr. L. and I are both agreed upon this
point.”
*n. Simplify and condense the following;—
(1) “Nowitis admitted—we haveneverdenied—thatthepolicy
which we have pursued during the last five or six years, a policy
which, we maintain, has saved Europe and England from war,
has caused an expenditure which has been in excess of the nor-
mal expenditure of the country and to which we intend to recur.”
(2) “But if they think that in order to do their best for their
party they must endeavour to win more than one seat, it seems
impossible, for the reasons given above, that Mr. G. should
be asked to be one of their candidates, or that he should accept
the offer if made : unless, indeed, between the present time and
the next dissolution some new issue between the parties should
arise which should throw the county franchise question into the
shade, and should make Liberal electors work hard for the best
candidates they could get without reference to their peculiar
opinions on the virtues and claims of the agricultural labourer.”
(3) “We do not propose to revert to questions that were suffici-
ently discussed three weeks ago, and as to which the result of the
election set its seal to the accuracy of our views ; but while the
memory of the contest is fresh in our readers’ minds it may be as
well to invite attention to a state of things which may be described
as handicapping, somewhat heavily, any champion who assumes
the defence of the Established Church in Argyllshire.”
(4) “ Still, we cannot but regret that the hope that this incom-
patibility would not be considered so positive as to forbid his
holding office has been thwarted.”
(5) “There are but few amongst us who think, or at least
allow they think, that India is of so little value to us that we
need not put out our whole strength for its defence.”
(6) “If for example we never mutter this word ‘improbability ’
in reading Keats’ Endymion , or Spenser’s Faerie Queene, simply
because we know that we are in a world of fantastic conditions,
then, so far as we admit that Prose may make similar excursions
into the realms of pure imagination, our attachment to probability
of incident must in prose fiction also be permitted to grow weak.”
(7) “With respect to one of the lectures—the third—it might
even be obliging if the reader were to remember specially that it
was prepared for an Edinburgh audience.”
(8) “One may certainly agree with Goethe when he says that the
predominance of the humorous spirit in the literature of any
period is a sign of approaching decrepitude ; and I do not know
but that at present when comic literature appears to be in
ascendancy among us, and when even our men of greatest talent


find it necessary to wear the cap and bells, it might be well to
bear that observation of the German sage in mind.”
(9) “ Although scepticism is, as a rule, a virtue to be practised
in regard to news received from Afghanistan, it would probably
be carrying it to excess not to believe that on the 2nd inst. a
battle was fought 30 miles east of Herat between forces repre-
senting Ayoub Khan and Abdurrahman, that after a severe
conflict victory declared itself on the side of the Ameer.”
(10) “This statement does not explain the grounds on which
those who have signed it are of opinion that such an inroad as
they would approve might be made without injustice on the rights
now enjoyed by owners of tithes under an Act of Parliament
which has for more than half a century been accepted as a final
settlement of a very difficult question.
(11) “It is hard to discover proof that the claim to inspira-
tion which is made for them, and which they would not, per-
haps, claim for themselves, is one that cannot be denied.”
*l2. Reconstruct and simplify .the following sen-
tences :
(1) “ Now, if the fabric of the mind or temper appeared to us,
such as it really is ; if we saw it impossible to remove hence any
one good or orderly affection, or to introduce any ill or disorderly
one, without drawing on, in some degree, that dissolute state
which, at its height, is confessed to be so miserable ; it would
then, undoubtedly, be confessed, that since no ill, immoral, or
unjust action can be committed, without either a new inroad and
breach on the temper and passions, or a further advancing of
that execution already done: whoever did ill, or acted in pre-
judice to his integrity, good nature, or worth, would, of necessity,
act with greater cruelty towards himself, than he who scrupled
not to swallow what was poisonous, or, who, with his own hands,
should voluntarily mangle or wound his outward form or con-
stitution, natural limbs or body.”
(2) “ If the peculiar regions of Prose —not those into which it
may penetrate, or into which, perhaps, it willjiv/ penetrate, but
those which were first assigned over to it, and where its rule is
least disputed—are the regions of the comic, and the historically
complex, the didactic, and the immediately practical; while
Verse retains a certain superior, though not exclusive, mastery in
the realms of the sublime, the elemental or ideal, and the highly
impassioned ; then British Society, when it lost, if it did lose,
those peculiarities of sustained ideality of conception, of faith in
things metaphysical, and of resoluteness in impassioned aims,
which had formerly borne it up to the poetic pitch, and fell into
a comparative flat of complicated and bustling activity, with
Whiggism and Toryism regulating the currents, did, at least, by


that very change, present a state of things favourable to the in-
crease of Prose Literature as regards relative quantity, and also
to the use of new and special prose forms.”
(3) “ Yorick was this parson’s name, and what is very remark-
able in it (as appears from a most ancient account of the family,
wrote upon strong vellum, and nowin perfect preservation) it had
been exactly so spelt for near, —I was within an ace of saying
nine hundred years;—but I would not shake my credit in telling
an improbable truth, however indisputable in itselfand there-
fore I shall content myself with only saying—it had been exactly
so spelt, for I do not know how long; which is more than I would
venture to say of one half of the best surnames in the kingdom ;
which in a course of years have generally undergone as many
chops and changes as their owners. ”
13. Under what circumstances and within what
limitations is obscurity justifiable? Distinguish be-
tween obscurity and vagueness.
* 14. “ The obscurity of metaphysical writers is for
the most part owing to the indistinctness of their own
conceptions.” How far is this true?
* 15. Refer to instances of obscurity due:— (a) to the
grandeur, remoteness, or subtlety of the subject; (/>)
to the writer’s over-estimate or under-estimate of the
intelligence of his readers ; (c) to extreme caution or
reserve on the part of the writer.
16. What special licenses in respect of obscurity
are permissible in satiric and dramatic writing ?
17. Show how the element of vagueness adds to
the sublimity of the following passages:—
(1) “In thoughts from the visions of the night, when
deep sleep falleth upon men, fear came upon me, and
trembling, which made all my bones to shake. Then
a spirit passed before my face; the hair of my flesh
stood up; it stood still; but I could not discern the
form thereof; an image was before mine eyes ; there
was silence; and I heard a voice, ‘ Shall mortal man
be more just than God ?
(2) ' “Yet from those flames
No light but rather darkness visible,
Served only to discover sights of woe.”


(3) “ His stature reached the sky.”
(4) “ The other shape,
If shape it might be called, that shape had none
Distinguishable in member, joint, or limb,
Or substance might be called, that shadow seemed,
For each seemed either; black it stood as night . . .
. . . What seemed his head,
The likeness of a kingly crown had on.”
* 18. Refer to authors whose writings are frequently
obscure from over-brevity, and give examples from
their works.
19. Amplify the following sentences, so as to re-
move ambiguity, absurdity, or impropriety:—
(1) “The infirmary was never so full, which I was
at a loss to account for.”
(2) “A figure is a form of speech differing from the
common.”
(3) “The historian has no other labour than of
gathering facts and explaining.”
(4) “ I do not intend to help you because you are
my enemy.”
(5) “ Silence has its excuses, when it only breaks the
rule to be abusive.”
(6) “ In what we read and what we hear we always
seek for something in one respect or other new, which
we did not know or at least attend to before.”
(7) “ The Italian hath doubtless more sweetness, the
Spanish more majesty, the German perhaps more
bluster; but none of them is in this respect so various
as the English and can equal it in all the qualities.”
(8) “ The result of his investigation appears to be,
that the position of idealist and materialist is un-
tenable.”
(9) “ There are many things which we every day
see others unable to perform, and yet can hardly
allow to be difficult.”


(ro) “As sentences should be cleared of redundant
words, so also of members.”
(n) “Dr. Johnson sat in his easy-chair, and drank
tea, and dictated to the literary world, and for fifty
years he kept his position.”
(12) “ The subscriber having had the good fortune to
commence his career as a grocer the same year as
Her Most Gracious Majesty, he has determined to
make his jubilee year a successful one in the way of
doing business.”
(13) “One report is that the Pretender is dead,
another is that he is alive; for my part I believe
neither.”
(14) “He extracted several corns from my feet,
without pain, along with a member of my family,
which have not since returned.”
(15) “When the connection in thought is very distant
the copulative appears absurd, and when very close,
superfluous.”
(16) “ Having had much experience on this subject,
the reader may rely on the truth of the following
observations.”
(17) “On attempting to extract the ball, the patient
rapidly began to sink.”
(18) “Students are requested to sign a requisition
to Mr. S. at present lying in the reading-room.”
(19) “The belief is growing that Russia will on
no provocation hazard a rupture.”
(20) “He was heir to half a plum, as the citizens
call
(21) “We feel a superior satisfaction in surveying
the life of animals than that of vegetables.”
(22) “ Not only every author known to fame, but
hundreds whose names have scarcely survived them-
selves, have been or will be carefully read, and every
just occurrence, every happy use, every forcible ex-
ample of each word accepted for introduction into the
dictionarv.”


(23) “ She united the great body of the people in
her and their interests.”
(24) “At this meeting he said publicans detested
drunkards as much as teetotalers.”
(25) “ Quixote was not more unlike Sancho than
these two friends.”
(26) “ Tickets, one shilling; children half-price, may
be had at the office.”
CHAPTER III.
PRECISION-AMBIGUITY IN WORDS.
*i. “ The words which a man uses to express his
ideas may be faulty in three respects. They may
either not express that idea which the author intends,
but some other which only resembles it; or they may
express his idea, but not quite fully; or they may ex-
press it together with something more than he intends.
Precision stands opposed to all these three faults, but
chiefly to the last.” Comment on this.
*2. Distinguish carefully between Perspicuity and
Precision, and refer to writers whose style is clear but
not precise.
3. “ The mind can clearly view only one subject at
a time. Feeble writers are always going about it and
about it; but never just hit the thing. The image as
they set it before you is always seen double, and no
double image is distinct.” Illustrate this statement by
examples.
4. Re-write the following sentences, removing am-
biguities :
(t) “ I have been so much pleased with your re-
markable countenance, that I venture to apply to you
again.”
(2) “My brethren, we are met here for no earthly
purpose.”


(3) “ This warehouse is perfectly unapproachable.”
(4) “ Wanted, a boy for cutting up.”
(5) “Wanted, a servant for sale, and a man to
turn in wood.”
(6) “He sent his daughter to this school and pro-
mised her masters to help her with her home lessons.”
(7) “ Men look with an evil eye upon the good that
is in others; and think that their reputation obscures
them, and their commendable virtues stand in their
light, and therefore they do what they can to cast a
cloud over them that the bright shining of their virtues
may not obscure them.”
(8) “He told his friend that his brother was sur-
prised that he had given so small a contribution, for
he was a very rich man, in spite of his recent losses
and the bad state of trade, compared with himself.”
(9) “Any dog found without his master, who, on
being asked his name, refuses to give it, will be shot.”
(10) “The old Pictish tongue died out before the
spread of Christianity.”
(11) “ Mankind never employed so many figures of
speech as when they had hardly any words for express-
ing their meaning.”
(12) “I have six children, and I never saw one of
them.”
(13) “I am not bound to receive any messenger
that you send.”
(14) “ All discourse addressed to the understanding
seldom permits much inversion.”
(15) “Lidas promised his father never to abandon
his friends.”
(16) “Every man cannot distinguish between
pedantry and poetry; every man therefore is not fit to
innovate.”
(17) “TRe manuscript contains only one religious
poem by Henryson.”
(18) “Of the poem no other copy is known to
afford any various readings.”


CHAPTER IV.
ARRANGEMENT.
1. Show how the lack of inflection in English words
increases the difficulty of attaining precision in expres-
sion, and of giving ideas their due emphasis.
2. Briefly state and illustrate the rules regarding the
arrangement of adverbs, of relatives, and of relative
clauses in an English sentence.
3. Give- examples of sentences in which inversion
is an aid to clearness.
4. Remove the inaccuracies, ambiguities or absurd
ities in the following sentences, either by re-arrangement
or by altering the form of expression:—
(r) “Many a student has been compelled to reluc-
tantly sit here for months.”
(2) “Imagination only creates what fancy decor-
ates.”
(3) “ The heavens are not open to the faithful only
at intervals.”
(4) “Thoughts are only criminal when they are
chosen and then continued.”
(5) “He not only offered me money, but, what was
of greater value, advice.”
(6) “ I never remember to have heard of such a
case.”
(7) “At night they objected to work as much as
the rest of us.”
(8) “The colon may be properly applied in the
three following cases.”
(9) “ The horse ran away with a gig, threw out the
driver and cut a severe gash in one of his hind legs.”
(10) “ Any person found sticking bills on this
church door will be prosecuted according to law,
or any other nuisance.”
(11) “Instances of books belonging to students


deposited on this bannister having gone astray, all
who do so are requested to note the fact.”
(12) “ The dissenters might not have counted Lord
Eldon among the members of the Church of England
on the score of his exceedingly scant attendance on
her public services.”
(13) “The Turkish bath is peculiarly adapted for
invalids of ample cubic space and highly ventilated.’’
(14) “Toulouse is a large town containing 60,000
inhabitants built entirely of brick.”
(15) “ Wanted a mahogany child’s chair.”
(16) “In the proceedings of the High Court (1878)
an instance is reported in which the conviction for
murder of a subordinate court was on appeal set
aside.”
(17) “This kind of wit was very much in vogue
among our countrymen, about an age or two ago, who
did not practise it for any oblique reason but purely
for the sake of being witty.”
(18) “We nowhere meet with a more glorious
and pleasing show in nature than what appears in the
heavens at the rising and setting of the sun which
is wholly made up of those different stains of light
which show themselves in clouds of a different situa-
tion.”
(19) “ Please excuse my absence yesterday, as I
was consulting a doctor for insomnia during the class
hour.”
(20) “ Hence he considered marriage with a
modern political economist as very dangerous.”
(21) “Wolsey left at his death many buildings
which he had begun in an unfinished state.”
(22) “ The pretended confession of the Secretary
was only collusion to allay the jealousies of the King’s
favouring popery, which still hung upon him, notwith-
standing his writing on the Revelation, and affecting
to enter on all occasions into controversy, asserting in
particular that the Pope was Anti-Christ.”


(23) “ In Glasgow three time guns were fired not
one of which was ever heard in many parts of the city.”
(24) “From a habit of saving time and paper,
which they acquired at the University, many write in
so diminutive a manner that they can hardly read what
they have written.”
(25) “ The following verses were written by a young
man who has long since lain in his grave for his own
amusement.”
(26) “ It is made clear from Mr. Walpole’s Life of
Lord John Russell that the Parliament elected in
January, 1835, did not contain g majority of members
prepared to eject Sir Robert Peel from the office
which he had just assumed by a vote of no-
confidence.”
(27) “ Lost an umbrella belonging to a gentleman
with a curiously carved ivory head.”
(28) “ Few people learn anything that is worth
learning easily.”
(29) “John Keats, the second of four children,
like Chaucer and Spenser, was a Londoner.”
(30) “The minister and kirk-session of Alloway
desire to acknowledge the receipt of £2 from W.
M . Esq., being the sum paid by trespasser in
pursuit of game on Newark estate for the poor of the
parish.”
5. What is meant by the unity of a sentence?
Illustrate the confusion or clumsiness arising from
changing the nominative or the construction, from
multiplying parentheses, or from the too frequent in-
troduction of qualifying clauses.
6. Reconstruct the following sentences so as to
express their meaning more clearly and effectively :
(1) “Let him know that I shall be over in Spring,
and that by all means he sells the horses.”
(2) “ I have, notwithstanding this discouragement,
attempted a dictionary of the English language, which,


while it was employed in the cultivation of every
species of literature, has itself been hitherto neglected.”
(3) “ Others which I considered as useful or know
to be proper, though I could not at present support
them by authorities, I have suffered to stand on my
own attestation, claiming the same privilege as my
predecessors of being credited without proof.”
(4) “ But I confess myself attached to them as to
the other historical institutions of my country, and
that it appears to me that the worst thing that can be
done with them is to abolish them.”
(5) “ Circumstances having thus changed, and
having been compelled to leave his family and
friends, he settled for a time in Germany.”
(6) “And this prevents their attending enough to
what is in the Bible, and makes them battle for what
is not in the Bible, but they have put it there.”
(7) “After his vessel being forced on from the
island of Prota, and seeing no other way out of the
difficulties, Sir John Duckworth took advantage of the
first fair wind to retrace his steps through the Sea of
Marmora.”
7. Recast the following, giving in simpler language
what you conceive to be the meaning of the author:—
(1) “ True, also, it maybe questioned whether—seeing that an
exact and complete knowledge of the past, and especially of the
distant past, is impossible, and it is always only the past as per-
ceived and shaped by his own spirit, and as represented by his
own present mode of thinking, that any historian can give us—
that which is valuable and permanent in any history is not more
the meaning than the materials ; in other words, either the poetic
significance with which the materials are invested by a mind see-
ing them in that haze which already generalizes them for the
imagination and blots out the particular, or the philosophic
bearing on universal life which the mind can the more easily
detect in theip for a similar reason.”
(2) “ For in personal intercourse reserve has a positive side,
and its positive side is an influence of great power, though in
the present day it is very economically used, the fashion being,
as this author says, to assume that everything that can be ex-
pressed ought to be expressed ; and, we may add, that a great


deal which cannot be expressed ought to be more or less violently
expelled or extruded upon the world from minds in which it was
rather a pervading influence than a conscious idea.”
(3) “ The unusual notes struck by William Blake, in any case
appealing but to one class and a small one, were fated to remain
unheard, even by the student of poetry, until the process of
regeneration had run its course, and, we may say, the Poetic
Revival gone to seed again ; seeing that the virtues of simplicity
and directness the new poets began by bringing once more into
the foreground are those least practised now.”
8. Which are the leading defects in style exhibited
in the two following sentences? Reconstruct them,
and re-arrange some of the clauses :
“Now I think it very much amiss, that a man cannot go quietly
through a town, and let it alone, when it does not meddle with him,
but that he must be turning about and drawing his pen at every
kennel he crosses over, merely o’ my conscience, for the sake of
drawing it: because, if we may judge from what has been wrote of
these things, by all who have wrote and galloped, or who
have galloped and wrote, which is a different way still;
or who, for more expedition than the rest, have wrote gallop-
ing, which is the way I do at present —from the great Addison
who did it with his satchel of school books hanging at his back
and galling his beast’s crupper at every stroke, there is not a
galloper of us all who might not have gone on ambling quietly in
his own ground (in case he had any) and have wrote all he had
to write, dry shod, as well as not. For my own part, as heaven
is my judge, and to which I shall ever make my last appeal—l
know no more of Calais (except the little my barber told me of
it, as he was whetting his razor) than I do this moment of Grand
Cairo; for it was dusky in the evening when I landed, and dark
as pitch in the morning when I set out, and yet by merely know-
ing w'hat is what, and by drawing this from that in one part of
the town, and by spelling and putting this and that together in
another, I would lay any travelling odds, that I this moment
write a chapter upon Calais as long as my arm; and with so
distinct and satisfactory a detail of every item which is worth a
stranger’s curiosity in the town, that you would take me for the
town clerk of Calais itself—and where, sir, would be the wonder?
was not Democritus, who laughed ten times more than I, town
clerk of Abdera? and was not (I forget his name) who had more
discretion than us both, town clerk of Ephesus ? —it should be
penned moreover, sir, with so much knowledge and good sense,
and truth and precision.”


PART IV.
STRENGTH AND GRACE OF STYLE.
CHAPTER I.
THE CHOICE OF WORDS AND PHRASES.
A. PLAIN WORDS.
1. “ When it is possible to use Saxon words, no
others should be employed.” Refer to, and illustrate,
some of the exceptions to this rule.
2. Criticize the following :
(1) “The English language is what it is in great
measure because it is much more than Anglo-Saxon.”
(2) “To revert to the language of our semi-bar-
barous ancestors is as if we should discard modern
apparel to resume the skin cloaks of the rudest age.”
3. Show that the English language is in great
measure indebted for its euphony to the variety of
sources from which its vocabulary is drawn.
4. “The most concrete terms are the most
effective.” Illustrate this rule, and state any excep-
tions that occur to you.
5. Express the full meaning of the following in
words mainly of Anglo-Saxon origin
(I) “ Although Chaucer had indubitably studied the produc-
tions of those celebrated authors, anterior to this felicitous inter-
view, it appears probable that these excursions gave him a
revived appreciation of their compositions and extended his
familiarity with the Italian fables. His foreign expeditions
enabled him to cultivate the Provencal languages with the
greatest success, and induced him to polish the asperity and
enrich the sterility of his native versification with more
harmonious cadences and a more copious and variegated
phraseology.”


(2) “ The proverbial oracles of our parsimonious ancestors have
informed us, that the fatal waste of fortune is by small expenses,
by the profusion of sums too little singly to alarm our caution,
and which we never suffer ourselves to consider together. Of
the same kind is the prodigality of life; he that hopes to look
back hereafter with satisfaction upon past years, must learn to
know the present value of single minutes, and endeavour to let
no particle of time fall useless to the ground.
(3) “Concerning Anthropoids. —Anthropoid infants resemble
human infants exceedingly; puberty generally introduces
considerable divergence; finally animal peculiarities, including
especially, diminutive crania, largely developed occipito-parietal
crests, facial regions prognathously developed, etcetera, in-
variably predominate.”
{4) “The ceremonial was the occasion of considerable felicita-
tion, and invitations to participate in the nuptial festivities were
extended to numerous operatives in the surrounding localities.”
(5) “ The prime and sole initiation of beneficence is that due
reverence for the August Ruler of all things celestial and terres-
trial which by the sapient grace of the sacred Spirit illumines
our mental opacity, and directs our course into regions more
glorious than the Elysian plains of the poets.”
(6) “Whoever was acquainted with him was certain to be
solicited for small pecuniary contributions, which the frequency
of the request made in time considerable; and he was therefore
quickly shunned by those who were become sufficiently familiar
to be acquainted with his necessities; but his rambling manner
of life, and constant appearance at establishments of public resort,
invariably procured him a new succession of friends, whose kind-
ness had not been exhausted by repeated requests; so that he
was seldom absolutely without resources, but had in his utmost
exigencies this comfort, that he always imagined himself sure of
speedy relief. It was observed, that he always requested favours
of this description without the least submission or apparent con-
sciousness of dependence, and that he did not appear to regard a
compliance with his request as an obligation that deserved any
extraordinary acknowledgements ; but a refusal was resented by
him as an affront, or complained of as an injury; nor did he
readily reconcile himself with those that either denied to lend, or
gave him subsequently any intimation that they expected to be
repaid. He was occasionally as far compassionated by those who
were cognizant of both his merit and his distresses, that they
received him into their families; but they presently discovered
him to be a very incommodious inmate ; for being always accus-
tomed to an irregular manner of life, he was unable to confine
himself to any stated hours, or pay any regard to the regulations
of a family, but would prolong his conversation till midnight,
C


without considering that business might require his friend’s appli-
cation in the morning ; and when he had persuaded himself to
retire to bed, was not, without equal difficulty, aroused to dinner :
it was therefore impossible to render him any distinction without
the entire subversion of all economy, a kind of establishment
which, wherever he peregrinated, he always appeared ambitious
to overthrow. It must therefore be acknowledged, in justification
of mankind, that it was not always by the negligence or coldness
of his friends that Savage was distressed, but because it was in
reality very difficult to preserve him for more than a brief period in
a condition of ease. To supply his pecuniary requirements was an
impracticable attempt; for no sooner did he discover himself
master of a sum sufficient to liberate him from solicitude for a
day than he became profuse and luxurious.”
*6. Express the following in more varied, yet natural,
language;—
(1) “ Short words on Speech-Craft. Sir, —I see that a shrewd
man whose name is Bames has writ a book on the speech-craft
of our tongue, in the which book he has laid on his head a new
task, to wit, to show forth all this lore in words of sheer home
growth. Now I dare say this is a thing which must need great
wit to do, and for aught 1 know he has done it right well. But
though it may take a shrewd man to do this, yet I do not think
it fit work for a wise man, and with your leave I will tell why.
Our tongue, which we speak and write, is not a poor one but a
rich one, and its wealth is of long words as well as short, and of
words brought from far as well as of words born in our own folk.
Now to cast off half this good store of wealth and make no use
of it seems to me not the deed of a wise man nor a thing of
praise, if it be not by way of sport to show that such a thing can
be done for a while if a man have a mind to it; just as a man
may write, if he will take some small pains for that end, all in
quite short words, like as I now write these lines to you. But
you must look right long ere you find a man who will choose to
write in this way all his days ; I am sure that man will not be I.
So I think a wise man who would show forth fair speech in our
tongue will not shun long words, nor yet the words that have
come to us from France and the lands far off, but will use all our
wealth of words with wit and skill; not as a fool doth, who
spends his breath in great words of which he knows not the sense
and weight. That the fool knows not how to use them is no
cause to let the wise man from his right and just use.”
(2) “ A great shout followed on his words, and he sat down
again. But Fox of Upton came forth and said :
• “ O aldermen, we have yeasaid the fellowship of the valiant
men who have come to us from out of the waste; but this we


have done, not because we have known them, but because we
have seen clearly that they will be of much avail to us in our war-
fare. Now, therefore, if the tall chieftain who sitteth beside thee
were to do us to wit what he is, and whence he and his are come,
it were well, and fain were we thereof; but if he listeth not to
tell us, that also were well.”
(3) “ People began to gather about these chapmen at once when
they fell to opening their bales and their packs, and unloading
their wains. ... So presently they fell to chaffer: for the
carles brought them little bags of the river-borne gold, so that
the weights and scales were at work; others had with them
scrolls and tallies to tell the number of the beasts which they had
to sell, and the chapmen gave them wares therefor without be-
holding the beasts ; for they wotted that the Dalesmen lied not
in chaffer.”
(4) “Then the eager young men and the hunters, and those who
knew the mountain best drew together about the hearth and
. . . said that they \Vho were fain of the hunting of the elk
would have no likelier lime' than that day for a year to come.
Short was the rede betwixt them, for they said they would go to
the work at once and make the most of the short winter daylight.
So they went each to his place and some to their fathers’ houses
to fetch each man his gear. ... So Face-of-god did on his
hauberk over his kirtle, and over it he cast his foul-weather ward,
so that none might see it; . . . therewithal he took his
skids and went forth of the hall to the gate of the Burg; whereto
gathered the whole company of twenty-three, and Goldmane the
twenty-fourth. And each man there had his skids and his bow
and quiver, and whatso weapon seemed good to him. So they
went out-a-gates, and clomb the cliff.”
7. Contrast the style of the two following. letters,
and rewrite the first in the manner of the second, the
second in the manner of the first.
(1)
Dear Fanny,
I am afraid I shall not pass in my examination ; Miss
C. says she thinks I shall. I shall be glad when the Serpentine
is frozen over, for we shall have such fun ; I wish you did not
live so far away, then you could come and share in the game.
Father cannot spare Willie, so I have as much as I can do to
teach him to cipher nicely. lam now sitting by the school fire,
so I assure you lam very warm. Father and mother are very
well. I hope to see you on Christmas Day. Winter is coming ;
don’t it make you shiver to think of? Shall you ever come to
smoky old London again ? It is not so bad, after all, with its


bustle and business and noise. If you see Ellen J. will you
kindly get her address for me. I must now conclude, as I am
soon going to my reading class ; so good bye.
From Your Affectionate Friend,
M.
(2)
My Dear Parents,
The anticipation of our Christmas vacation abounds in
peculiar delights. Not only that its “festivities,” its social
gatherings, and its lively amusements crown the old year with
happiness and mirth, but that I come a guest commended to
your hospitable love by the performance of all you bade me
remember when I left you in the glad season of sun and flowers.
And time has fled fleetly since reluctant my departing step
crossed the threshold of that home whose indulgences and
endearments their temporary loss has taught me to value more
and more. Yet that restraint is salutary, and that self-reliance is,
as easily learnt as it is laudable, the propriety of my conduct and
the readiness of my services shall ere long aptly illustrate. It is
with confidence I promise that the close of every year shall find
me advancing in your regard by constantly observing the precepts
of my excellent tutors and the example of my excellent parents.
We break up on Thursday, the nth of December instant, and
my impatience of the short delay will assure my dear parents
of the filial sentiments of
Theirs very sincerely,
N.
P.S. —We shall reassemble on the 19th of January. Mr. and
Mrs. P. present their respectful compliments. 1
8. When are Quotations and Allusions properly, and
when improperly, introduced ? In what kinds of
composition are they most frequently admissible ?
*9. “A Quotation has a limited term of life.”
Refer to trite quotations apt to disfigure the style of
inferior writers.
* 10. Examine and illustrate the statement that a
quotation, like a trope, is admissible only when it is, in
effect, a condensed argument.
*ll. “Quotations well employed quicken the
thought or stir the emotion of the reader; misused,
1 We are indebted to the publishers for permission to reprint
those letters from the late Mr. Matthew Arnold’s “Reports
on Elementary Schools,” pp. 131-133.


they merely display the erudition or the ignorance of
the writer.” Criticize and illustrate this assertion.
*l2. Compare and contrast the first and second with
the third of the following passages— (a) as to their
general style ; ( b ) with special reference to the use of
quotation and allusion.
(1) “How would Christianity have affected him? in what
measure would it have changed him ? . . . What would he
have said to the Sermon on the Mount, to the twenty-sixth
chapter of St. Matthew ? What would have become of his
notions of the sxitiabilis superstitio , of the ‘obstinacy of the
Christians’? Vain question! Yet the greatest charm of
Marcus Aurelius is that he makes us ask it. We see him wise,
just, self-governed, tender, thankful, blameless ; yet, with all this,
agitated, stretching out his arms for something beyond, —
tendentemque maims ripae ulterioris amors. ”
(2) “ I speak not the language of party. I feel above the level of
party. I speak as I have ever endeavoured to speak on behalf
of the unenfranchised, the almost voiceless millions of my
countrymen. Their claim is just and it is constitutional. It will
be heard, and it cannot be rejected. To the outward eye
monarchs and parliaments seem to rule with an absolute and
unquestioned sway; but—and I quote the words which one of
our old Puritan poets has left for us—
‘ There is on earth a yet auguster thing,
Veiled though it be, than Parliament or King.’
That auguster thing is the tribunal which God has set up in the
consciences of men. It is before that tribunal that lam now
permitted humbly to plead, and there is something in my heart —
a small but an exultant voice—which tells me that I shall not
plead in vain.”
(3) “ Thinking of those her days of youth, and comparing them
with the present, which, though groaning under the accumulating
cumbrousness of scholastic apparatus, lack the vitality and bloom
of real erudition, I seem to hear the genius of the past say, that
to fulfil our generation work under the conditions, and with the
vastly increased advantages of the new time, we need a revival of
the ancient love of learning for its own sake, the ancient estima-
tion of it as poor Scotia’s fittest dowry for her children, not for-
getting the lifting up of our hearts to the rich inheritance in the
deathless clime, which so captivated the finest spirits of our
fathers, who saw it only ‘ under the opening eyelids of the morn. ’ ”
*l3. Define “ Affectation.” To what extent, and in
what forms, is it found in the writings of the following


authors ? Bacon, Sir Thomas Browne, Sterne, Words-
worth, Lamb, Carlyle, Browning, Matthew Arnold.
14. State distinctly what is meant by the following
terms and expressions:—bombast; fustian; rhodo-
montade; allusive pedantry.
15. What is meant by the expressions “ fine-writing "
and a “ florid style ” ? Show that they may be legiti-
mately applied to sentences in which the individual
words are simple.
*l6. “ There are silences in nature more impressive
than her storms.” Contrast the force of a reserved
with the weakness of an effusive style.
*l7. Distinguish between sentimentalism and senti-
ment, and give examples of the manner of each.
18. Criticize the style of the following passages, and
express their meaning more effectively ;
(1) “ She then went out to water the thirsty flowers, which
turned up their faces to be washed with the silent delight which
was their thanks.”
(2) “ Seventy years have elapsed since then ; but is it, or needs
it be different now ? No ; a thousand times No ! The old city
is there still, hacked by the pickaxe, and scathed by fires, and
maltreated, perhaps more than was necessary, by so-called
improvements, but destined to resist the pickaxe, and fires, and
improvements, till the picturesque ceases from the earth and the
Castle has a Russian garrison. . . . Chalmers came from
Anster village, and Glasgow and St. Andrews had him first;
but Edinburgh had the honour of his old white head—which, oh,
that never I can see again 1 Wilson, the magnificent, had his
dwelling here ; here he chanted his prose-poetry, and shook, so
savage, his yellow mane.”
(3) “Hardly had she been able to lisp the primary accents of
infancy when a French bonne was procured for her.”
(4) “A Liberal programme of seven folio pages in length which
does not include that point of Liberal principle seems to me rather
like the play of Hamlet with the part of the Prince of Denmark
omitted.”
(5) “ So faras this country is concerned, we need be under no
apprehension that it will visit our shores. Its wave may never
reach the Russian frontiers ; and if it should, it ought to be
beaten back at the barriers raised by Germany and Austria. Even
should these not avail, it would still have a large portion of
Europe to traverse, and the ‘ silver streak ’ would have td be
70
ENGLISH COMPOSITION EXERCISES, [pt. iv.


crossed before it could attack us. We are not forgetting that
though the wave of the disease could hardly reach us,, there are
other means by which it might be imported.”
(6) “The inevitable in the finance of Turkey has been long
delayed, but it has come at last. Yesterday, there was a
“writing on the wall” of the London Stock Exchange that
caused an immediate panic. It was a telegram sent by the
Director-General of the Ottoman Bank announcing the receipt by
him of a decree' authorising the payment of the coupons partly in
cash and partly in 5 per cent, bonds.”
(7) “ A Chamber of eldest sons, claiming to impose their will
on the nation because their ancestors stole something or killed
somebody centuries ago, cannot be long endured. Happily, the
Beers have now dug a pit into which they themselves have fallen.
Salisbury’s blunder is the people’s opportunity. Let us strike the
iron while it is hot.”
(8) “EversineethePsalmistlonged for the wings ofa dove, there
has been an irrepressible craving in the human breast for aerial
locomotion. Nay, even prior to the Psalmist the desire must have
existed. We find evidence of it in the history of the ingenious
Daedalus, who, among his many inventions, fitted himself and
his son Icarus with a pair of serviceable wings. Icarus, it is
true, came to grief by means of his, but rather through his own
foolish ambition than through any defect in his father’s mech-
anism. Like too many other people, he would fly too high,
until he singed his wings in the heat of the sun, fell ignominiously
into the sea, and thereby created the first record of baptism by
immersion.”
(9) “ This country has not yet confessed to the soft impeach-
ment. . . . They have been so often accused of giving the
cheek to the Gallic smiter that Lord G’s. final snub to him on
Saturday may be reckoned a feather in his cap.”
(10) “ Like the voice of a mother calling to her lost child, the
familiar accents of Christmas time fall upon the ears of a some-
what bewildered and wondering world. . . . Why not for one
day treat these hard, confusing, saddening riddles of existence as
the little ones do a conundrum too difficult to find out ? . . .
The banquet hall of life, with its hangings of gold and blue and
white by day, and its curtains of spangled velvet by night, is
common to all; so are the manifold pictures on the great book
of existence, so are mother’s love and home affections, and play
and sleep, and dreams and dawn.”
{11) “That beautiful July day, as we went on board at
Liverpool, the sun was blooming, like a flower of light, in the
bright blue skies, and the soft balmy air was laden ‘with the
briny kisses of the great sweet mother.’ . , . Then sten-
torian lungs shouted ‘ all for the shore,’ and departing friends


and relatives swarmed down the steep wooden wall of the vessel.
. . . . As night came on, we seemed to realize the fact that
here, in our huge iron-hearted home, we were alone on the wide
world of waters —the same living restless waters whereon Christ
had walked, and whose waves he had bidden ‘ Peace, be still.’ ”
(12) “In the common walks of life, with what delightful
emotions does the youthful mind look forward to some anticipated
scene of festivity ! Imagination is busy sketching rose-tinted
pictures of joy. In fancy, the voluptuous votary of fashion sees
herself amid the festive throng, ‘the observed of all observers.’
Her graceful form, arrayed in snowy robes, is whirling through
the mazes of the joyous dance ; her eye is brightest, her step is
lightest in the gay assembly. In such delicious fancies time
quickly glides by, and the welcome hour arrives for her entrance
into the Elysian world, of which she has had such bright dreams.
How fairy-like does everything appear to her enchanted vision !
Each new scene is more charming than the last. But after a
while she'finds that beneath this goodly exterior, all is vanity ;
the flattery which once charmed her soul, now grates harshly
upon the ear ; the ball-room has lost its charms ; and with
wasted health and embittered heart, she turns away with the
conviction that -earthly pleasures cannot satisfy the longings of
the soul.”
(13) “The fairest of Mays was smiling upon France. On
battle-fields that last year’s rain of blood had fertilised, the green
promise of harvest covered the soil from which dead faces had
looked piteously up to heaven; and the beneficent goddess,
kindest Ceres, moved in bounty across the land that war had
desolated, hiding with vine-leaf and corn-stalk the broad track of
ruin that had been left where German feet had marched on Paris.
As fair efface as in the days when she was Queen of Nations,
France hid the fetters that the Teuton had clasped on her wrists,
and the vulture of civil war that tore her bosom, beneath a robe
of green and wreaths of flowers.—lt was one of the brightest
days of early May, and Nature had still the freshness of spring,
but was all glowing and flushed with the approach of summer ;
and the sky above was unclouded, and the earth all sunny and
smiling.”
B.— Figurative Language.
I founded on Resemblance.
1. Discriminate carefully between Simile, Metaphor,
Personification, Allegory, Parable and Fable.
2. Give instances of physical terms applied to
mental states and vice versd.


3. To what purposes is metaphorical languages
most appropriately applied ?
*4. “All words are tropes.” “ A metaphor lurks in
every expression of our thought” Examine and
illustrate these statements.
5. State the ground of exception to mixed meta-
phors. How far does the objection apply to a rapid
succession of metaphors ?
6. Discriminate between mixed metaphors, properly
so called, and the application of figurative adjectives
to terms that have lost their originally metaphorical
force.
*7. Illustrate some of the disadvantages of crowding
figures together, or of drawing out consequences from
them.
8. How far is it true that the language of early
times abounds more in figurative terms than that of
later times ?
9. Turn the following Metaphors into Similes :
(1) “ Cunning is the ape of wisdom.”
(2) “ Mountains, on whose barren breast
'The labouring clouds do often rest.”
(3) “ Unfathomable sea whose waves are years.”
(4) “ Thou hast brought a vine out of Egypt.”
(5) . • • •. “ Twilight grey ’
Had in her sober livery all things clad.”
(6) “ Sleep that knits up the ravell’d sleeve of care,
The birth of each day’s life, sore labour’s
bath,
Balm of hurt minds, great Nature’s second
course,
Chief nourisher in life’s feast.”
(7) “ To husband out life’s taper to its close
And keep the flame from wasting by repose.”
(8) “ Arethusa arose from her couch of snows
Shepherding her bright fountains.”


(g) “ But yonder comes the powerful King of day,
Rejoicing in the East.”
(10) “I warmed both hands before the fire of life,
It sinks, and I am ready to depart.”
10. Criticize, and extend into Simile, Ruskin’s
description of a wave breaking against the rocks ;
“ One moment, a flint cave, —the next, a marble
pillar,—the next, a fading cloud.”
n. Turn the following Similes into Metaphors :
(1) “ Men fear death as children fear to go into the
dark; and as that natural fear in children is increased
with tales, so is the other.”
(2) “Fortune has somewhat of the nature of a
woman, that, if she be too much wooed, she is further
off.”
(3) “As the flower is gnawed by frost, so every
human heart is gnawed by faithlessness.”
(4) “ The quality of mercy is not strained,
It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven
Upon the place beneath.”
(5) “ Thy soul was like a star, and dwelt apart;
Thou hadst a voice whose sound was like the
sea.”
(6) “ How far that little candle throws his beams 1
So shines a good deed in a naughty world.”
12. Expose the absurdity of the following mixed,
confused, or incongruous metaphors, and express
the same sense in consistent terms: —
(1) “The rattle of firearms is looming in the dis-
tance.”
(2) “ The harvest season is now drawing near, and
it is time to unleash the dormant sickle.”
(3) “ That which lies beneath the surface only the
future can adequately explore.”


(4) “ He unravelled all these obscurities, and with
his penetrating illustrations threw light on all these
unparalleled complications.”
(5) “ But while he (Chaucer) extracted the kernel
from the literature of France and Italy, he so breathed
into it the spirit of his own genius, that it shone with
a new lustre that far surpassed its former light; and in
the new setting which he gave it, it gained more than
the old setting lost; if some of the old metal remained,
it received a new stamp and a fresh polish, and the
addition of that which gave it the true genuine ring of
worth.”
(6) “ Wit often seizes its prey'with a leonine grip;
yet sometimes it has to wander far in search of an
appropriate soil—in vain do its seedlets fall upon
minds without a sense of humour.”
(7) “ He talked of eight measures as more or less
likely to succeed, of which at least a half might be as
dead as door nails now for any chance they .have of
living. He may put forth the tender leaves of hope
with the prospect of blossom following as regards at
least one Scotch measure—the Education Bill; but
the other of the twins, the Endowed Schools Bill, does
not look thriving.”
(8) “In a great campaign, ruin’s ploughshare passes
over the proudest cities, and the humblest hamlet
sends its fiery smoke heavenward.”
(g) “We had hoped that our contemporary was
giving evidence of a return to fair play: but this week
we observe he goes back to his wallowing in the mire
of bigotry and confusion of ideas in which he evidently
delights to wriggle.”
(10) “But alas all this golden time there did exist
a cloud which grew and gathered, as one may say,
behind the sinister shoulder of Fate, which took the
maleficent delight of letting it swim like a baleful star
into the lover’s ken, cooling and destroying his
love.”


(n) “Sterne had a somewhat unclerical if not
cracked reputation.”
(12) “He flung aside the mask and showed the
cloven foot.”
(13) “The curses of Mr. A. B. like chickens will
come home to roost against him.”
(14) “ Chaucer could clothe his shafts with delicate
wit and poetic imagery to a degree unsurpassed.”
(15) “ Shakspeare’s verse was forged on the anvil of
Marlowe’s brain.”
(16) “ And then the hearts
Of all his people shall revolt from him
And kiss the lips of unacquainted change
And pick strong matter of revolt and wrath
Out of the bloody fingers’ ends of John.”
(17) “Then let the peebles on the hungry beach
Fillip the stars; then let the mutinous winds
Strike the proud cedars ’gainst the fiery sun.”
(r 8) “The Gospel trumpet which Paul planted and
Apollos watered has been, bearing good fruit in our
midst.”
(19) “The majority skim over the thoughts of the
few, and after they have chewed them and taken most
of the flower away leave us the husks.”
(20) “The storm of the civil wars had swept over
England, and but a few of the stately trees remained
to rear their wrinkled brows above the ruin.”
(21) “In his satire his arrow is stretched to the
utmost and drawn to the head.”
(22) “He re-lights the torch of poetry at the foun-
tain head.”
(23) “The'love of glory seems to be a spring im-
planted by Nature to give motion to all the latent
powers of the soul.”
(24) “ Allow me to inform you, my lord, that if you
do away with the feather bonnet you will make your


self unpopular in Scotland. You must not iread upon
the nationality of our country’s toes.”
(25) “ It sketched the growth of the tongue spoken
in this country from its root in the poem of ‘ Beowulf,’
up to the fruit which it has borne in modern times.”
(26) “To one so gifted in the prodigality of Heaven
can we approach in any other attitude than that of
prostration ? ”
(27) “ The drama in that degenerate age was sunk
to the highest pitch of grossness.”
(28) “All the ancient sources were ransacked in
the most beautiful manner.”
(29) “By the following year it was evident to all
that the Corporation had saddled themselves with a
white elephant.”
(30) “ The bone of contention is still rampant
among us.”
13. Indicate the justification of the metaphors in
the following expressions;—lmperious sea; gates of
death; eating cares; altum mare; sea of troubles;
pallida mors; morning of life; merciful clime; fleecy
winter; tottering state; shallow fears; reasoning in a
circle; Athens, the eye of Greece; the dying day;
winged words; blind affection; grovelling superstition;
heavy sorrow.
14. Criticize, and re-write without figures of speech,
the following sentences:—
(1) “As the history of Friedrich in this Ciistrin epoch, and
indeed in all epochs and part, is still little other than a whirlpool
of simmering confusions, dust mainly, and sibylline paper-shreds,
in the pages of poor Dryasdust, perhaps we cannot do better
than snatch a shred or two (of the partly legible kind, or capable
of being made legible) out of that hideous caldron; pin them
down to their proper dates ; and try if the reader can, by such
means, catch a glimpse of the thing with his own eyes.”
(2) “ Discarding the heavy guns, fired at long intervals, as lumber-
ing, the writers of the Saturday Revi:w and its tribe discharge
weekly volleys of slinging rifle balls and smashing round shot
from their light twelve-pounders often with tremendous effect.
Within a year or two there has come upon our tables a flood of


cheaper periodicals, and riding on the highest crest of the wave,
the rich maize-coloured Cornkill, which numbers its readers by
the 100,000, and supplies for a solitary silver shilling a monthly
crop of heavy golden grain reaped from the finest brain soils in
the land.”
(3) As long as the well-compacted structure of our church
and state, the sanctuary, the holy of holies of that ancient law,
defended by reverence, defended by power, a fortress at once and
a temple, shall stand inviolate on the brow of the British Zion ;
as long as the British monarchy, not more limited than fenced by
the orders of the State, shall, like the proud Keep of Windsor,
rising in majesty of proportion, and girt with the double belt of
its kindred and coeval towers, as long as this awful structure shall
oversee and guard the subjected land, so long the mounds and
dykes of the low flat Bedford level will have nothing to fear from
all the pickaxes of all the levellers of France.”
(4) “ The clouds were now tumbling up out of the sea, and
slanting athwart the stars pretty thickly, and the water was full
of shadows, amid which the moonshine fell down in lines like
slender cascades of molten silver, touching the black troubled
surface here and there with points of brilliance as sparkling as
the flash of diamonds, while the breaking waves glittered like the
star-dust in the sky, as their foam crossed the path of these
beams. ”
B.— Figurative Language.
11., 111., IV.— Figures founded on Association,
Contrast, etc.
1. Carefully distinguish between . Autonomasia,
Synecdoche, and Metonymy ; and explain the service
rendered to style by each.
2. What is meant by saying that Autonomasia is the
opposite of Personification ?
*3. Give instances of the illegitimate use of figures
founded on association.
4. To what does Antithesis owe its force? Give
instances of its use and of its abuse.
5. Refer to'writers in prose and in verse notable
from their excessive use of Antithesis.
6. Distinguish between the following pairs:—Hyper-
bole, Bombast : Irony, Innuendo: Euphemism,
Euphuism.


*7. “ The age of Elizabeth superabounded in
metaphor; the age of Anne revelled in antithesis ;
the age of Victoria is overburdened by quotation.”
Illustrate this by reference to some of the representa-
tive works of each of the periods referred to.
8. Distinguish between Interrogation, Exclamation,
and Apostrophe ; and give examples of each.
9. What are the limits to the use of Aposiopesis,
Prolepsis, and Catalepsis.
10. Criticize the following, naming the figures of
speech employed;—
(1) “They recovered hope when they saw the blue
bonnets approaching.”
(2) “A stupid moment motionless she stood.”
(3) “ A cry that shivered to the tingling stars.”
(4) “Smoothing the raven down of darkness till it
smiled.”
(5) “ I am of ladies most deject and wretched,
That sucked the honey of his music vows.”
(6) “Adam, the goodliest man of men since born.”
(7) “ Put out the light, and then put out thy light.”
(8) “ He set the glittering terror on his brow.”
(9) “ Declamation roared, while passion slept.”
(to) “Shades of the Dead! have I not heard your
voices
Rise on the night roaring breath of the gale!”
(11) “Earth felt the wound; and Nature from her seat
Sighing through all her works gave sounds of
woe.”
(12) “Impious sons their mangled fathers wound."
(13) “ Aut conjurato descendens Dacus ab Istro.”
(14) “ Music's golden tongue
Flattered to tears this aged man and poor.”


(15) “ Love seldom haunts the breast where Learn-
ing lies,
And Venus sets e’er Mercury can rise.”
(16) “O heavens! die two months ago, and not
forgotten yet? then there’s hope a great man’s memory
may outlive his life half a year; but, by ’r lady, he
must build churches then.”
(17) “ Me miserable ! which way shall I fly
Infinite wrath, and infinite despair ?
Which way I fly is Hell, myself am Hell,
And in the lowest depth, a lower deep
Still threatening to devour me, opens wide,
To which the Hell I suffer seems a Heaven.”
(18) “Strange! that the three greatest adversaries
of Napoleon have all ended miserably. Castlereagh cut
his own throat; Louis XVIII. rotted on his throne ;
and Professor Saalfeld is still a professor in Gottingen.”
(19) “He stood upon the dizzy cliff.”
(20) “It is evidently the work of a facile pen.”
(21) “From the gloom of the tunnel we emerged
to the glad sun.”
(22) “The cup that cheers but not inebriates.”
(23) “ But let my due feet never fail
To walk the studious cloisters’ pale.”
(24) “He would have been a Catiline, but for his
cant.”
(25) “The voice comes deepest from the sepulchre,
and a great name hath its root in the dead body.”
(26) “ Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing.”
(27) “The glory of the priesthood and the shame
Stemmed the wild torrent of a barbarous age.”
(28) “ I do the most that friendship can,
I hate the viceroy, love the man.”
(29) “That star that at your birth shone out so bright,
It stained the duller sun’s meridian light.


(30) “ Victrix causa diis placuit, sed victa Catoni.”
(31) “A universe of death ! which God by curse
Created evil—for evil only good ;
Where all life dies, death lives ; and nature
breeds
Perverse, all monstrous, all prodigious things.”
(32) “So easy still it proves in factious times
With public zeal to cancel private crimes.”
(33) “ After I had resided at college for seven years,
my father died, and left me —his blessing.”
(34) “ Hunting for figures is inviia Minerva."
(35) “ One thing, and one thing only, could make
Charles dangerous—a violent death.”
CHAPTER II.
NUMBER OF WORDS.
t. “ Brevity is the soul of wit” Examine and
illustrate this, and refer to exceptions.
2. Discriminate between verbosity and verbiage.
3. What is meant by an epithet, as distinct from an
adjective i Why are epithets, as a rule, more fre-
quently admissible in speaking than in writing ? .
4. Reduce the number of words in the following
sentences :
(1) “I could quote from the same author hundreds of examples
of similar errors ; but were there this only to be found in a work
which was composed of matter which was read in the way of
lectures by a professor of law to students in the University of
Oxford, even this one ought to be sufficient to convince you of
the importance of attending to the precepts which I have given
you relative to this part of our subject.”
(2) “ If the most forcible denunciation of the foreign policy of
the Government and the promise of inquiry into the demand for
an Irish Parliament cannot turn out a Tory in the one case, and
actually put in a Tory in the other, it would obviously be well
to do without one of them, and there can be no doubt as to
which that is.”


(3) “We see Mr. Thackeray stretching his hand through the
intervening century, and grasping the hand of Fielding, as of the
man in that time whom he could on the whole like best. ”
(4) Circumstances lent themselves greatly to further the con-
spirators’ treacherous plans, the execution of which was rendered
more easy by the fact that the king was compelled to sojourn in
the Abbey of Blackfriars which was the only convenient place in
the town for him to reside in, for unfortunately there was no
accommodation for his guards and the officers of his household in
the Abbey, on account of which they had to seek quarters among
the citizens and leave the king unprotected.”
(5) “One fact more is enough to discredit this theory; it is
that Buddhism, at the time when it was dominant, never in the
slightest interfered with caste in the countries where it happened
still to exist; and not only did it not do so—it was it which in
all probability imported caste into countries where it did not yet
exist.”
5. Break up the following into shorter sentences,
also reducing the number of words.
(1) “ Lest therefore so noble a creature as man should be shut
up incurably under a worse evil by an easy mistake in that ordi-
nance which God gave him to remedy a less evil, reaping to
himself sorrow while he went to rid away solitariness, it cannot
avoid to be concluded that if the woman be naturally so of dis-
position as will not help to remove but help to increase that
same God-forbidden loneliness which in time draws on with it a
general discomfort and dejection of mind not beseeming either
Christian profession or moral conversation, unprofitable and
dangerous to the commonwealth; when the household estate, out
of which must flourish forth the vigour and spirit of all public
enterprises, is so ill-contented and procured at home and cannot
be supported, such a marriage can be no marriage whereto the
most honest end is wanting.”
(2) “As the greatest brunt of the danger was diverted by these
poor people in his night-marches on foot, with so much pain and
torment that he often thought that he paid too dear a price for
his life before he fell into the hands of persons of better quality
and places of more conveniency, so he owed very much to the
diligence and fidelity of some ecclesiastical persons of the Romish
persuasion, especially to those of the order of St. Bennet, which
was the reason that he expressed more favours after his restora-
tion to that order than to any other, and granted them some
extraordinary privileges about the service of the queen, not con-
cealing the reason why he did so, which ought to have satisfied
all men that his majesty’s indulgence towards all of that pro-
fession by restraining the severity and rigour of the laws which


had been formerly made against them had its rise from a
fountain of princely justice and gratitude and of royal bounty
and clemency.”
' (3)
ship have relieved from restraint and reserve, is liable when left
to itself to so many inequalities, and which as it becomes rapid,
so often diverges into separate and collateral branches in which
it is dissipated and lost, being kept within its channel by a simple
limitation of this kind which practice renders easy and familiar,
flows along in one full stream and becomes smoother and clearer
and deeper as it flows.”
(4) “ But their brave efforts were futile, for the strong men
easily burst in, even though one of the women courageously put
her arm through the staple in place of the bar which had been so
treacherously removed, lor what is the strength of flesh and bone
compared to that of iron, and, however brave and strong the
heart which prompted Catherine Douglas to do that noble
action, her arm being but weak was quickly shattered, and the
murderers crushed triumphantly in, knocking down and tramp-
ling under foot such of the ladies as came in their way, and one
of them even turning aside from his search for James to attack
the unhappy Queen who stood, her heart dying within her at
sight of these bloodthirsty men who seemed so intent on taking
the life of him she loved so well.”
6. In what species of composition is repetition or
iteration defensible. Show the propriety of its use in
the following:—
(1) “ Though fallen on evil days,
On evil days though fallen, and evil tongues.”
(2) “ They shall perish, but thou shall endure; yea,
all of them shall wax old like a garment; as a vesture
shall thou change them, and they shall be changed;
but thou art the same; and thy years shall have no
end.”
(3) “ Busk thee, busk thee, my bonny, bonny bride,
Busk thee, busk thee, my winsome marrow.”
(4) “ No, my good lord : banish Peto, banish Bar-
dolph, banish Poins ; but for sweet Jack Falstaff, kind
Jack Falstaff, true Jack Falstaff, valiant Jack Falstaff,
and therefore more valiant, being, as he is, old
Jack Falstaff, banish not him thy Harry’s company,


banish not him thy Harry’s company ; banish plump
Jack, and banish all the world.”
(5) “ Was I deceived, or did a sable cloud
Turn forth its silver lining on the night?
I did not err, there does a sable cloud
Turn forth its silver lining on the night."
(6) “ Pol. My honourable lord, I will most humbly
take my leave of you.
Ham. You cannot, sir, take from me anything that
I will more willingly part withal: except my life,
except my life, except my life.”
CHAPTER III.
ORDER OF WORDS.
i. State and illustrate some of the rules conducive to
the Unity of English sentences. When is Inversion
justifiable ?
*2. Compare the following expressions of the same
idea, and further illustrate the difficulty of transferring
to English the full force of Latin inversions :
“Tantam mansuetudinem, tam inusitatam inaudi-
tamque clementiam, tantumque in summa potestate
rerum omnium modum, tacitus nullo modo praeterire
possum.”
“It is impossible for me to pass over in silence
such remarkable mildness, such singular and unheard
of clemency, and such unusual moderation, in the
exercise of supreme power.”
3. Distinguish between a Loose Sentence and a
Period, and refer to the main advantages and dis-
advantages of each mode of construction.
4. “ Short sentences give animation to style." How
far is this true ?
5. Criticize and, if necessary, improve the following
sentences; —


(x) “ It is not to the superficial observer that these
nice qualities are evident.”
(а) “ The men whom you are so anxious to discover
I have already got information of.”
(3) “Very touching are the reminiscences of the
sweet singer whose short life-story it is our purpose to
ten.”
(4) “ May the happy message be applied to us, in
all the virtue, strength, and comfort of it.”
(5) “ This agreement of mankind is not confined to
taste solely.”
(б) “It is absurd to think of judging these poets by
precepts which they did not attend to.”
(7) “ Shall the narrow-minded children of earth . . .
dare to treat as visionary objects which they have
never made themselves acquainted with.”
(8) “ Its speedily rising into open defiance of the
constituted authorities was only the natural conse-
quence of the irresolution with which it was at first
dealt with.”
(9) “ I found in Past and Present strokes of de-
scriptive power unequalled in my experience, and
thrills of electric splendour which carried me enthusi-
astically on.”
(10) “It is evident that Brahmanism, in order not. to
die of exhaustion, was condemned to violate constantly
its own peculiar principles, while Buddhism, on the
contrary, in order to spread wider, had only to practise
its.”
6. Indicate and correct defects in the construction
of the following sentences, which result from extending
them beyond their natural close :
(1) In this uneasy state, both of his public and private life,
Cicero was oppressed by a new and cruel affliction, the death of
his beloved daughter Tullia, which happened soon after her
divorce from Dolabella, whose manners and humours were
entirely disagreeable to her.
(2) The usual acceptation takes profit and pleasure for two
different things ; and not only calls the followers or votaries of


them by the several names of busy and idle men, but distinguishes
the faculties of the mind that are conversant about them, calling
the operations of the first, wisdom, and of the other, wit, which
is a Saxon word used to express what the Spaniards and Italians
call ingenio, and the French esprit, both from the Latin ; though
I think wit more particularly signifies that of poetry.
(3) “ But now we must admit the shortcomings, the fallacies,
the defects, as no less essential in forming a sound judgment as
to. whether the seer and artist were so united in him as to justify
the claim first put in by himself and afterward maintained by
his sect to a place beside the few great poets who exalt men’s
minds, and give a right direction and safe outlet to their passions
through the imagination, while insensibly helping them toward
balance of character and serenity of judgment by stimulating
their sense of proportion, form, and the nice adjustment of
means to ends.”
(4) “ Let us now consider the nature of an art creation, and
some of the methods by which the poet effects his end ; and also
contrast to some extent these with other artistic methods—such
as those of painting and sculpture ; merely premising here that
each art (as, indeed, every other agency) has its special powers
and its peculiar sphere, within which it will find its highest
development; whereas, if it invade another sphere and en-
deavour to usurp other methods than its own, then it abandons
and loses its own special powers, as is often the case in, for
instance, allegorical painting, picturesque poetry, and perhaps
also in the uses to which music is put, both on the stage and in
the church.”
*7. “ Climax is to the emotional what a Sorites in
logic is to the intellectual part of our nature.” Explain
this statement.
8. Illustrate the legitimate and the excessive use of
Climax and of Anti-Climax.
9. Carefully distinguish between Anti-Climax and
Antithesis.
10. Criticize the following :
(x) “Persuasion tips his tongue whene’er he talks,
And he has chambers in the King’s Bench
Walks.”
(2) “Under Indian palm-groves, amid Australian
gum-trees, in the shadow of African mimosas, and
beneath Canadian pines, our goods are sold at a
profit.”


(3) “ William Shakespeare was the sun among the
lesser lights of English poetry, and a native of Strat-
ford-on-Avon.”
(4) “She wrote a briefletter, naming the dastardly
threat, but expressing her fearless trust in the shelter-
ing care of her God, and in the generous sympathy
and protection of the men of Maybole.”
(5) “The statue of Diogenes is a most striking one,
and almost a perfect likeness of the late Mr. Potter.”
(6) “ The poem is unsurpassed in grandeur by any
in our language and is written in blank verse.”
n. Show the force gained by inversion in the
following passages:—
(1) “Alone, alone, all, all alone,
Alone on.a wide, wide sea !
And never a saint took pity on
My soul in agony.”
(2) “ Sweet are the uses of adversity.”
(3) “ Then rose from sea to sky the wild farewell,
Then shrieked the timid and stood still the
brave.”
(4) “ The Border slogan rent the sky,
A Home! a Gordon was the cry,
Loud were the clanging blows;
Advanced, forced back, now low, now high,
The pennon sunk and rose,
As bends the bark’s mast in the gale,
When rent are rigging, shrouds, and sail,
It wavered ’mid the foes.”
*l2. Is the expression, the “prosody of prose” de-
fensible ? How does the rhythm of the following
passages differ from that of verse 1 Indicate some of
the conditions on which their beauty depends.
(i) “Of law, there can be no less acknowledged
than that her seat is the bosom of God, her voice the
harmony of the world. All things in heaven and


earth do her homage; the very least as feeling her
care, and the greatest as not exempted from her
power: both angels and men, and creatures of what
condition soever, though each in different sort and
manner, yet all with uniform consent, admiring her as
the mother of their peace and joy.”
(2) “ O eloquent, just, and mighty Death! whom
none could advise, thou hast persuaded; what none
hath dared, thou hast done; and whom all the world
hath flattered, thou only hast cast out and despised;
thou hast drawn together all the far-stretched great-
ness, all the pride, cruelty, and ambition of man,
and covered it all over with these two narrow words,
Hie facet”
(3) “I cannot praise a fugitive and cloistered virtue,
unexercised and unbreathed, that never sallies out and
sees her adversary, but slinks out of the race where
that immortal garland is to be run for, not without
dust and heat.”
(4) “It is now sixteen or seventeen years since I
saw the queen of France, then the dauphiness, at
Versailles: and surely never lighted on this orb,
which she hardly seemed to touch, a more delightful
vision. I saw her just above the horizon, decorating
and cheering the elevated sphere she just began to
move in; glittering like the morning star; full of life,
and splendor, and joy. Oh ! what a revolution ! and
what a heart must I have, to contemplate without
emotion, that elevation and that fall.”
(5) “ There are no fields of amaranth on this side of
the grave: there are no voices, O Rhodopb, that are
not soon mute, however tuneful: there is no name,
with whatever emphasis of passionate love repeated,
of which the echo is not faint at last.”
(6) “ If, two thousand years ago, we had been per-
mitted to watch the slow settling of the slime of those
turbid rivers into the polluted sea, and the gaining
upon its deep and fresh waters of the lifeless, impas


sable, unvoyageable plain, how little could we have
understood the purpose with which those islands were
shaped out of the void, and the torpid waters enclosed
with their desolate walls of sand ! How little could
we have known, any more than of what now seems to
us most distressful, dark, and objectless, the glorious
aim which was then in the mind of Him in whose
hand are all the corners of the earth! how little
imagined that in the laws which were stretching forth
the gloomy margins of those fruitless banks, and feed-
ing the bitter grass among their shallows, there was
indeed a preparation, and the only preparation possible,
for the founding of a city which was to be set like a
golden clasp on the girdle of the earth, to write her
history on the white scrolls of the sea surges, and to
word it in their thunder, and to gather and give forth,
in world-wide pulsation, the glory of the West and of
the East, from the burning heart of her Fortitude and
Splendour.”


PART V.
PROSODY.
i. Distinguish between Tone, Quantity, Accent,
Emphasis, Pause, Caesura, Rhyme and Rhythm.
*2. State your view of the relation of the laws of
Versification to those of Music.
3. Refer to and illustrate the leading rules of
English versification; how do they differ from those
that regulated Greek and Latin verse ?
4. Define : —a syllable, a foot, a line, a couplet, and
a stanza, giving examples of the last three.
5. Adduce instances of assonantal, consonantal and
medial rhyme, and of bad or defective rhymes.
*6. Examine the statement that double and triple
rhymes are proper only in humorous or comic verse.
*7. Illustrate the difference between literal and
suggestive Onomatopoeia.
*B. Give instances in which the choice of words and
their arrangement have been made to imitate or
suggest: —
(a) audible sounds,
(b) quick or slow motion,
{c) size,
(1d) difficulty and ease,
( e ) various moods of mind.
9. Illustrate the use of Alliteration in English verse,
and refer to some writers who employ it to excess.
10. On what principle is it that a freer use of
figurative language, more numerous archaic forms, and
more frequent inversions are permitted in poetry than
in prose ?
11. Refer to other characteristics of poetic diction.


is. Indicate the nature and limits of rhetorical and
poetic license.
13. Explain and illustrate the following terras ;
lambic and Trochaic Metres; Dactyl, Anapaest, and
Amphibrach.
*l4. “The measure of Classic (Latin and Greek)
verse is regulated by quantity and affected by accent :
the measure of English verse is regulated by accent
and affected by quantity.” Explain and illustrate this.
■*■ls. Refer to some of the difficulties in the way of
adopting classic metres in our language.
16. What are the metres indicated by the following
titles :—Rhyme Royal or the Chaucerian Heptastich,
The Spenserian Stanza, Ottava Rima ? Show their
relation to each other.
17. Give examples of the favourite measures of
Pope, of Scott, and of Burns.
*lB. Illustrate the latitude in the disposition of the
Pause and of the Accents assumed by writers of blank
verse.
19. Scan the following verses and name the
measures in which they are written :
(1) “I the heir of all the ages in the foremost files of
time.”
(2) “ Half a league, half a league, half a league onward
Into the valley of death rode the six hundred.”
(3) “ The battle hurtles on the plains,
Earth feels new scythes upon her,
We reap our brothers for the wains,
And call the harvest —honour.”
(4) “ We look before and after
And pine for what is not.”
(5) “Thee, the voice the dance obey,
Tempered to thy warbled lay.”
(6) “ Take her up tenderly,
Lift her with care.”
9 1
PROSODY.
PT. V.]


(7) “ The black bands came over
The Alps and the snow.”
(8) “ Send but a song over sea for us,
Heart of their hearts who are free ;
Heart of their singer can be for us,
More than our singing can be.”
*2O. Quote or refer to passages from well-known
writers in verse in which the following poetic licenses
are abused :— (a) the use of adjectives for nouns ; (b)
the employment of archaic words ; (c) the omission of
pronouns or connectives ; ( d) other contractions.
21. Restore the following to their metrical forms:—
(r) “ The silent man need never care a feather for
all the world, the man is altogether hidden beneath the
silent tongue.”
(2) “ When the tree is shaken by the wind there’s
not a bough or leaf can fall, but heed is taken of its
falling by One that sees and governs all.”
(3) “ That philosophy which bids us smile at care
must be true, since whether mortals cry or laugh, they
must bear what happens.”
(4) “ The parting year is mild, and the odour of the
falling spray sweet; more rudely fleet life passes on,
and its closing day is balmless.”
(5) “ I have tottered on to my ninth decade, and
now no soft arm bends to steady my steps ; she, who
once led me where she would, is gone, so Death shall
find me ready when he calls me.”
22. “It is much easier to write well in a regular
than in an irregular measure.” Give the reason of
this.


PART VI.
MISCELLANEOUS QUESTION
PAPERS.
[N.B. —In the following Exercises, examples of false
construction, vulgarism, impropriety, obscurity, need-
less caveat, double negative, injudicious inversion,
mixed or absurd metaphor, stale quotation, “fine
writing,” and other violations of sense or taste are
given, without being ranged, as in the preceding pages,
under distinct heads. Where the examples are very
numerous the exercise may be divided.]
Exercise I.
Point out and correct the errors in the following :
(1) “In our University, there is a great disproportion between
the teachers and taught.”
(2) “ No less than six men were engaged in this work.”
(3) “ I intended to have written, but I had not time to.”
(4) ‘ ‘ Mazzini may have been said to have done more for the'
unity of Italy than any living man (1865).”
(5) “ Mr. A. presents his compliments to Mr. B. I have got
a hat which is not his ; if he have got a hat which is not yours,
no doubt they are the missing one.”
(6) “He has to guard against possible fraud by cumbrous
machinery, the protection against which is most expensive. ”
(7) “ Her hand was so severely injured that unless she has the
forefinger amputated she will entirely lose the use of it.”
(8) “ I am happy to hear it was his horse and not he who fell
in the combat. "
(9) “ Mr. J., Mr. 1., Mr. C. and myself were out for a day’s
ramble.”
(10) “It had been my intention to have collected the remnants
of Keats’s compositions.”
(11) “ Horace trembling for the life of Virgil is an interesting
moment in the history of poetry and friendship.”


(12) “Scarcely was breakfast over than the message was
brought. ”
(13) “ Women of forty are more cherished and as advantage-
ously married as chits of sixteen. "
(14) “ Ornate and grotesque music have common faults.”
(15) “ He quite forgets in his love for the naif old painter that
he is painting him.”
(16) “The great difference lies between the labourer who
moves to Yorkshire and he who moves to Canada.”
(17) “The poems of Chatterton and Ossian are veiled in
mystery.”
Exercise 11.
Criticize and rewrite the following sentences, noting
the figures of speech, or improprieties of expression:—
. (1) “Immersed in the politics of Europe, and moulding the
destinies of nations, was very different from either guiding his
spindle or directing the loom, and must have exerted a cor-
responding different influence on their intellectual powers.”
(2) “ In stooping down to drink, the weight of the cart forced
the mare’s head just into the water, and before she could be re-
leased was drowned.”
(3) “ Probably the tenant-farmers who have already got their
rents fixed, have no lively sense of favours to come to urge them
to the greasing of palms which have already toiled for them.”
(4) “ At Monmouth he makes the acquaintance of the book-
seller’s two very pretty daughters, of whom his highness observes,
as Lyell or Murchison would of lumps of nickel, they were the
most perfect specimens of innocent girls I ever met with.”
(5) “ The name of Flaxman is among the most distinguished
of British sculptors.”
(6) “Amen said Yeo ; and many a honest voice joined in that
honest compact and kept it too like men.”
(7) “ Close as we stood to the choir, it was well-nigh impos-
sible to distinguish the separate voices; each blended into one
another with such perfect harmony.”
(8) “These are the sterile battles over those defunct and mori-
bund bodies.”
(9) “ The unnatural marriage was divorced in the same year.”
(10) “ I kindled a seed of future troubles.”
(u) “ They did reject him of course, but his speech remains
as a warning for all who may adopt another course. ”
(12) “ The idea which underlies most of his plays is a struggle
of virtue assailed by external or inward temptations.”


(13) “ Undoubtedly one of the very first aims of all inventors
is to reduce trained mechanical labour to as near the absolute
zero point as possible. But possibly the whole of Sir W. T. ’s
inventions cannot claim that characteristic.”
(14) “ During the recess you will conlinue<p gather that prac-
tical knowledge and experience which form the solid basis of
legislative aptitude.”
Exercise 111.
Rewrite the following sentences, removing the
blemishes due to pompous or incongruous expres-
sions :
(1) “During this week Dalgetty has been very much to the
front, groaning under the load of unreal theological tests, bursting
with the mission of extra-muralism, gnashing his teeth at the State
church, and in general acting as the spokesman of the fads and
follies of the ragged regiments of intellectual conceits and social
discontents which he really represents. The good industrious
creature must not be too severely blamed for acting in this fashion.
He has his patrons to please, and his bread and butter to win.”
(2) “ There is no reason to believe that when Prince B. is no
longer working in the ‘ roaring loom of time,’ he will seem less
than he does now. Generations which look back on him will see
him, as we see him, towering from the sword hilt upwards over
all his contemporaries. . . . C.’s part in the work was such
that we can safely assert that had he not been there Italy would
have attained to her unity in a very different way, much later,
and at a greater cost. ”
(3) “ There was no registrar in Zuvendis, where, if fond
memory does not beguile us, the ceremony was performed.”
(4) “It will not be impertinent nor unnatural to the present
discourse to set down in this place the present temper and con-
stitution of both Houses of Parliament and of the court itself, that
it may be the less wondered at that so prodigious an alteration
should be made in so short a time, and the crown fallen so low,
that it could neither support itself nor its own majesty nor those
who would appear faithful to it.”
(5) “It seems the chief Liberal whip was for once not equal to
the occasion and none of his bright particular stars would consent
to shine on the audience. . . . We cannot rejoice in a star of
the first magnitude, nor of the second, nor, perhaps, even of the
third : but if it is so much as an asteroid let us be thankful and
make ready our eyes for the unaccustomed effulgence, used as
they are only to the farthing-candle lights of our own more
homely products.”


Exercise IV.
Simplify and re-arrange the following;—
(1) “A sensible augmentation of the post-horse duty collected
in Scotland, took .place immediately after the publication of the
Lady of the Lake; and from that year to the present time the
stream of proud gazers on the picturesque scenery described by
the ‘Wizard of the North’ has gone on increasing till it may
almost be said that for everything Scotch, including the grouse
and black-cock of our Highland hills and morasses, there is
something like a mania, even on the part of persons not usually
given to sentiment.”
(2) “Are there any compensating respects in which in the same
business Prose has the advantage of Verse? . . . What can
Verse do in the business of narrative fiction which Prose cannot
do, or has not been found to do so easily ? . . . Verse em-
balms and conserves the contained meaning, whatever may be its
intrinsic merit. When, however, a writer who has attained the
art of verse by following a constitutional tendency to it . . .
does take the trouble of throwing a fictitious narrative into the
form of verse, it is almost obvious that he sets out with a pre-
determination that the matter shall be of a rich or serious kind,
about the very best in its order that he is able to produce.”
(3) “ My ancestors on the father’s side were Tories and Cava-
liers, who fled from the tyranny of Cromwell and settled in
Barbadoes. For several generations, himself included, they
were clergymen.”
(4) “There are many places scattered over the world that are
hallowed ground in the eyes of Englishmen; but the most sacred
of all would be the spot (could we only know it) where our
forefathers dwelt in common with the Hindoos!”
(5) “In Milton’s time flourished Sir Thomas Browne, whose
mantle long afterwards fell on Dr. Johnson, and who has there-
fore much to answer for as regards the corruption of English
prose.”
(6) “ The ministry of 1757 was based upon all the high and
all the low parts of our nature. Something of the like kind may
be remarked in 1873 as 1° the men who keep the English printing
press at work.”
(7) “When we go a little lower down, we alight upon the
penny-a-liner. He scorns to abuse or revile his foes, much more
to rate or miscall them,'so long as he can vituperate them. Mr.
Justice Keogh in 1872 was accused by many Irish pens of having
vituperated the Galway clergy, but never of having sinned with
the four other verbs in italics.”
(8) “The knowledge of English is a point well worth recom-
mending to those who are to fill our pulpits.”


Exercise V.
Correct the errors in the use of words, phrases, and
figures, exhibited in the following:—
(1) “Let the excellence ofhis manner discover its propriety and
artifice to good judges, never let it push itself forward to inter-
cept the view ofhis principal object.”
(2) “This merit is to be obtained by studying criticism.”
(3) “ He who examines the meaning of words will introduce
clearness among his ideas.”
(4) “The infinitive approaches the nature of a substantive
noun.”
(5) “The members participate the vivacity of short sentences. ”
(5) “We gain perspicuity by accommodation to the order of
nature.”
(7) “It is our interest to fortify ourselves against innovations
into which we are certainly prone to deviate.”
(8) “No one will affirm but that the language of Chaucer
seems not yet to have attained its manhood, but there is a
glorious future in store for her.”
(9) “ Many reputations are cut up if not blasted by persons of
unchallengeable respectability who condescend to perform in the
drama of life that most enjoyable of characters, the social
scandalmonger, or, as it ought to be called, the moral vivisector.”
(10) “ The most superficial student knows better than to decry
the state of British literature to-day with its state during any
anterior period. It does not need a profound knowledge of
ancient history to demonstrate that the condition of ruined
empires in the matter of literature has no parallel with the
literature of to-day in any country, much less in Britain.”
(11) “I have reflected on the question whether A meant to'
injure B, and concluded he had no idea of such a thing.”
(12) “ However this may be, it would be well for the liberals
to 1 tak’ tent in time * and be prepared. Unless they do so, they
will inevitably reap the whirlwind, and their mouths will be filled
with but the ashes of Dead Sea fruit.”
Exercise VI.
Rewrite the subjoined sentences, strengthening
them by the omission of caveats, trite quotations,
indirect assertions, and vulgarisms.
(1) “ The Russian assault at Plevna, for which great prepara-
tions had been made, appears to have been attended with heavy
losses on both sides; but Ihe assailants have gained an important
advantage in taking three redoubts. But the decisive attack has
D


yet to take place. At the same time what has happened must
be very embarrassing to the Turks. ... If Plevna is evacuated
and the tide of war rolls in the direction of Sofia the ostensible
hesitation of the Servian Government will at once be abandoned.
. . . The ostensible merit of the contrivance of arbitration was
that it was a remedy co-extensive with the evil, for every
quarrel must it was supposed admit of judicial settlement
instead of solution by force.”
(2) “If Henrietta Maria sinned against a code of morals whose
day of ascendency was at hand, we may be sure that this code
would to her have been as absolutely unintelligible as the
political standpoint of the tele routes for whom she is said to
have invented the name.”
(3) “ The constituency has returned to its first love. The fact
that the Home Rulers were slightly happier with the one than
with “t’other dear charmer” does not prove that the policy of
trying to win the backing of this faction is more pleasing to
Liberals than to Conservatives, and so far as that is concerned
the candidates may be said to have started fair at the polling
booths.”
(4) “ Mr. B. has obviously been embarrassed by the fact that
he was compelled to keep his best wine to the last. There is no
doubt, however, as to either the body or the bouquet of yester-
day’s beverage. Mr. B. felt himself placed on the defensive
by the Manchester speeches, and he in consequence performed
the act known in the slang of athleticism as striking out straight
from the shoulder.”
Exercise VII.
Correct the inaccuracies or inelegancies in the
following sentences: —
(1) “I never remember to have felt an event more deeply than
his death.”
(2) “ That she was a somnambulist I know, as I have seen
her under its influence.”
(3) “ All the parts of speech do not undergo a change of
form. ”
(4) “If we look within the rough outside, we shall be richly
rewarded by its perusal.”
(5) “ Nobody ever put so much of themselves into their work.”
(6) “The Lord Chancellor’s infirm eyesight has not percep-
tibly increased if it has not in some measure diminished.”
(7) “Few precise rules can be given which will hold without
exception in all cases; but much must be left to the judgment
of the writer.”


(8) “ In all beauty simplex nmnditiis is a capital quality.”
(9) “His sermons are of tlie order represented by the adjective
excellent, and his pulpit exhibitions at once impress the mind.”
(10) “There is as much difference between comprehending a
thought clothed in Cicero’s language, and that of an ordinary
writer, as between seeing an object by the light of a taper and
the light of the sun.”
(11) “ His bravery under this painful operation and the forti-
tude he had shown in heading the last charge in the recent action,
though he was wounded at the time and had been unable to use
his right arm, and was the only officer left of his regiment, out
of twenty who were alive the day before, inspired every one with
admiration.”
(12) “I must confess after having surveyed the antiquities about
Naples and Rome, I cannot but think that our admiration of
them does not so much arise out of their greatness as uncommon-
ness.”
(13) “Such a Minister of Education, should he be appointed,
would not need to wander in the bewildering mazes of etymology,
where he would be almost as certain to lose his way as his pre-
decessors have done, hut might marshall the literary words of
our language into a compact army without enquiring into the
pedigree of every soldier in the ranks. It is these generals and
commanders of the noble army that fights all the battles of
civilization with pens for sword, and thoughts for cannon-balls,
and that ought not to be encumbered with the ragged rabble of
camp-followers who pollute the wholesome air with their crazy
shibboleths and make use of base slang, of no more literary
value than the hissing of geese or the lowing of cattle.”
Exercise VIII.
the following farrago, and express all that
is conveyed by it in a few English sentences. If you
can, adduce other examples of the misuse of a
smattering of languages.
“Du lieber Gott 1 Das ist ein Fund 1 a hymn by Columba,
by a veritable Celt, in the veritable island of lona. That is the
best ep/Muov that a good God has sent in my way since I left
Gottingen. And, in the third place, will you allow me to
interpolate myself into your rhetorical em'Scifis by reading ”
“ A Gaelic oran gaoil unmutilated and unadorned is apt to sin
against the r b Tplirov."
“ Nt; top kip a 1 Here’s another of the same lean brood 1 (a
Scotch student) for all the world like a potato that has grown up
tall and thin and white in a dark cellar.” “Per Baccho 1 as we


used to say in Naples—in the name of all that is genial and jolly,
there comes my friend Hilarius.” “Had Homer been a Scot,
no doubt he would have made a sea SidSij/w. of it ” (a fern).
“ Kcti SUaid ye liraffev, as we used to say at Christ-church ;
served him right.” “ Perish Connell 1 and so perish every
man ‘ Sans roiaOrd ye pffoi,’ as Homer says. as Plato
says. Andiamo —let us go 1 Exeunt all towards the inn.”
“ Well, gentlemen, ifmaaov rd rrori)pia, as we used to say at
Balliol—trim up your glasses!” “The trans-Grampian Celt
. . . moves in an atmosphere the very reverse of that
which favoured the light blood of the merry Greek.” “Tf
ye\d!s; why do you laugh.” “I stood with the xoXvo\oiffj3os
hum of the shimmering waters of Loch Migdale behind me.”
Exercise IX.
Criticize the following, naming the figures of speech,
and pointing out where they are and where they are
not justified. [N.B. —Neither in this or in the following
exercise are all the passages adduced for censure.]
(1) “ Man to himself
Is a large prospect raised above the level
Of his own creeping thoughts.”
(2) “ The world spirit is a good swimmer, he snaps
his finger at laws.”
(3) “ Mr. Calhoun cannot let go the apron-string of
the past.”
(4) " I am not I if there be such an I,
Or those eyes shut that make thee answer I.”
(5) “ Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,
And therefore I forbid my tears.”
(6) “ O so light a foot
Will ne’er wearnout the everlasting flint.”
(7) “ New occasions teach new duties; Time makes
ancient good uncouth ;
They must upward still and onward, who
would keep abreast of truth.


Lo, before us, gleam her camp-fires; we our-
selves must pilgrims be—
Launch our ‘ Mayflower,’ and steer boldly
through the desperate winter sea,
Nor attempt the Future’s portal with the Past’s
blood-rusted key.”
(8) “ This my hand will rather
The multitudinous seas incarnadine,
Making the green one red.”
(9) “Sir Henry Savil said once that he thought
poets the best writers—next to them that writ prose.”
(10) “I am not sure that it is true, for it has not yet
been contradicted by her Majesty’s Government.”
Exercise X.
Point out and name the figures of speech or the
rhetorical forms in the following, and state where they
are used with consistency and propriety and where
they are tasteless or forced.
(1) “The Lord is my song, he is become my sal-
vation.”
(2) “ Why-leap ye, ye high hills.”
(3) “ Like flame within the naked hand
His body bore his burning heart.”
(4) “ Craterus loves the king, but Hephestion loves
Alexander.”
(5) “He was condemned, and passing into the hands
of the master of the high works was in due course sus-
pended.”
(6) “ Nothing is there to come, and nothing past,
But an eternal Now does always last.”
(7) “1 will now take two well known legends in early
English history, and attempt to dissect them and to
trace their several elements to their respective sources.


In both cases we shall find a certain kernel of truth,
round which a whole tissue of romance has been
woven.”
(8) “ The lately-fledged Liberal Association desires
to air its pinions in as lofty a flight as was attempted
two years ago, when it got Lord to attend a
meeting.”
(9) “ Toiling up the steeps of a late civilization ;
nearing the summit now, and hoping soon to go down
into the happy and genial valley below : shall the icy
chilling breath of suspicion and jealousy come from
us ? ”
(10) “ He drew the tail of his claw-hammer coat
temptingly along the platform, but his shillelagh is,
after all, only his tongue.”
(n) “ Experience to fools is like a stem lantern, it-
only lights the past.”
(12) “ O conspiracy !
Shamest thou to show thy dangerous brow by
night,
When evils are most free ? ”
(13) “ Certainly it is heaven upon earth to have a
man’s mind move in charity, rest in providence, and
turn upon the poles of truth.”
Exercise XL
between the parts played by Fancy and
by Imagination in the following quotations :
(1) “ Bring the rathe primrose that forsaken dies,
The tufted crow-toe, and pale jessamine,
The white pink* and the pansy freaked with jet,
The glowing violet,
The musk-rose, and the well attired woodbine,
With cowslips wan that hang the pensive head,
And every flower that sad embroidery wears.”


(2) “ O Proserpina,
For the flowers now, that, frighted, thou let’st
fall
From Dis’s waggon ! daffodils,
That come before the swallow dares, and take
The winds of March with beauty; violets dim.
But sweeter than the lids of J uno’s eyes
Or Cytherea’s breath ; pale primroses,
That die unmarried, ere they can behold
Bright Phoebus in his strength.”
(3) “ There is pansies, that’s for thoughts.”
(4) “ Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky,
And fan our people cold.”
(5) “ Who is she that looketh forth as the morning;
fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an
army with banners ? ”
(6) “Clad in the beauty of a thousand stars.”
(7) “ Hoary-headed frosts
Fall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose.”
(8) “ The rude sea grew civil at her song
And certain stars shot madly from their spheres
To hear the sea maid’s music.”
(9) “ If you do love old men, if your sweet sway
Allow obedience, if you yourselves are old,
Make it your cause.”
(10) “ I tax not you, you elements, with unkindness;
I never gave you kingdom, called you
children.”
(n) “ What, have his daughters brought him to this
pass ? ”
(12) “ Her feet beneath her petticoat,
Like little mice, stole in and out.”
(13) “ Life, like a dome of many-coloured glass,
Stains the white radiance of Eternity.”


Exercise XII.
*on what depends the force of the Satire, Wit, or
Humour in the following passages? Under which
head does each fall?
(1) “Sir, I admit your general rule,
That every poet is a fool:
But, you yourself may serve to show it,
That every fool is not a poet,”
(2) “In all this bulk there’s nothing lost in Og,
For every inch that is not fool is rogue.”
(3) “Blest paper-credit! last and best supply
That lends corruption lighter wings to fly.”
(4) “My lord, you are so little accustomed to receive
any marks of respect or esteem from the public, that if
in the following lines a compliment or expression of'
applause should escape me I fear you would consider
it a mockery of your established character, and, per-
haps, an insult to your understanding. . . . You
have done good by stealth. The rest is upon record.”
(5) “Wit, like tierce claret, when’t begins to pall,
Neglected lies and’s of no use at all;
But in its full perfection of decay
Turns vinegar, and comes again in play.”
(6) “You beat your pate and fancy wit will come :
Knock as you please, there’s nobody at home.”
(7) “ By the Lord, I knew ye as well as he that made
ye. Why, hear you, my masters ; was it for me to kill
the heir-apparent ? should I turn upon the true prince ?
why, thou knowest I am as valiant as Hercules: but
beware instinct; the lien will not touch the true prince.”
(8) “Good morrow, fool,” quoth I. “ No, sir,” quoth
he,
“Call me not fool till heaven hath sent me fortune ” :
And then he drew a dial from his poke,


And, looking on it with lack-lustre eye,
Says very wisely, “ It is ten o’clock :
Thus we may see,” quoth he, “how the world wags :
’Tis but an hour ago since it was nine,
And after one hour more ’twill be eleven :
And so, from hour to hour, we ripe and ripe.
And then, from hour to hour, we rot and rot;
And thereby hangs a tale.”
(9) “ I will roar you as gently as any sucking dove :
I will roar you, an’t were any nightingale.”
(10) “I do remember him at Clement’s Inn like a
man made after supper of a cheese-paring: when a’ was
naked, he was, for all the world, like a forked radish,
with a head fantastically carved upon it with a knife;
a’was so forlorn, that his dimensions to any thick
sight were invincible : a’ was the very genius of
famine.”
(11) “No wher so busy a man as he ther nas;
And yet he semed besier than he was."
(12) “ Oh, I sink, I sink (cried Panurge in a storm).
Oh to be but once again on dry ground; never mind
how or on what condition: oh, if I was but on firm
land, with somebody kicking me.”
(13) “A young man claimed to be exempt from con-
scription, because he was the only son of a widowed
mother —who supported him.”
(14) “ Accept a miracle instead of wit,
See two dull lines by Stanhope’s pencil writ.”
(15) “It would be very ungrateful in me to desire
to leave your ladyship : because as why, I should never
get so good a place.”
(16) “A poniard decked her girdle as the sign
She was a sultan’s bride—thank heaven, not
mine.”


(ly) “We are apt to be kinder to the brutes that
love us than to the women that love us. Is it because
the brutes are dumb ? ”
(18) “But Satan now is wiser than before
And tempts by making rich, not making poor.”
(ig) “ Wise Peter sees the world’s respect for gold,
And therefore hopes this nation may be sold.”
(20) “ Heine, when dying, said to his wife, “ Marie,
I hope you will marry again.” “Why? Heinrich.”
“ That one man may regret my death.”
(21) “ Bright like the sun her eyes the gazers strike,
And like the sun they shine on all alike.”
(22) “ Don Jose and the Donna Inez led
For some time an unhappy sort of life ;
Wishing each other not divorced but dead,
They lived respectably as man and wife.”
(23) “What makes all doctrines plain and clear?
About two hundred pounds a year.
And that which was proved true before
Prove false again ? Two hundred more.”
(24) “I never read the books I review, lest the
reading should prejudice my judgment.”
(25) “ It is harder to cleanse the Theatre than the
Augean stables; for, in this case, the oxen are in the
stalls.”
(26) “ Our worst misfortunes are those which never
befall us.”
(27) “When Bishop Berkeley said ‘there was no
matter,’
And proved it—’twas no matter what he
said.”


PART VII.
THEMES FOR ESSAYS.
A. —General Themes.
1. A description of a scene in nature.
2. An estimate of some great historical character.
3. What is your favourite worli of fiction ? Give
reasons for your choice.
4. Write a letter, as to a friend, giving a short
account of a journey, real or imaginary, by land or
sea.
5. A letter to a friend recounting an imaginary
interview with some eminent person and recording
your supposed impressions of his conversation and
character.
6. Write the letter of an applicant for a situation and
the answer of the patron or employer.
7. Write two letters, one in answer to the other;
the one in homely English, the other in a Latinized
style.
8. An imaginary dialogue between a student of
Natural Science and a student of Language and Litera-
ture ; each maintaining the superior utility and interest
of his favourite pursuit.
9. A short address in the character of a candidate
for election to Parliament, rejected by one constituency
and applying to another.
10. An imaginary State Paper from a Russian
Minister demanding the extradition or surrender of a
Nihilist, and the English Minister’s reply.
ir. In what respects should the teaching of a Uni-
versity differ from that of a School ?


i 2. The advantages and disadvantages of public
school education compared with that received from a
private tutor at home.
B. —Grammar and Style.
1. “ Illogical grammar is an unstable convention.”
Examine the relation of Logic and Grammar.
2. Comment on the statement that “No man can
of his own will add one word to a language or take
one away.”
3. Discuss the tendencies of syntax in the present
day and the new influences brought to bear on it.
Quote phrases and words that are struggling to be
recognized as correct English.
4. “To parse an English sentence you must first
understand it: to understand a Latin sentence you
must first parse it.” Explain and illustrate this.
5. “ Modern English is the least inflected and the
most composite of all languages.” Refer to some of
the gains and losses incident to these characteristics.
6. Briefly compare our language with any other with
which you are acquainted. What are its advantages
and disadvantages in regard to clearness, strength, and
grace as compared with any other widely extended
language.
7. Refer to the present prospects of the English
language. To what dangers is it chiefly exposed ?
8. “ The language of a country is its moral baro-
meter.” Show how the changes that have passed over
the meanings of some words throw a light on the
tendencies of the national mind.
9. The relationship of language to character,
(a) in nations,
(1 b) in individuals.
10. “He who writes badly thinks badly.” Com-
ment on this.


ii. Examine the following statements :
(a) Consider the thoughts deeply and the words
will take care of themselves.
( b ) “We may spoil our style by paying too much
attention to it.”
, 12. “Etymology is not always a safe guide to the
meanings of words.” Explain this remark, and illus-
trate it by examples.
13. In what circumstances can it be maintained
that gesture is more emphatic than speech.
14. “ The best style is the most forcible.” How far
is this true ?
15. Recount the chief causes of feebleness in
writing.
16. “Metaphors, antitheses and quotations have in-
jured more than they have adorned the style of our
writers.” Criticize this.
17. “A French family settled in England and edited
the English language.” What does our language owe
to its Latin and Romance elements ?
18. Estimate the impress made on English style
by our intercourse with France, Germany, and
America.
19. Gibbon has been charged with having in his
autobiography forgotten the difference between him-
self and the Roman Empire. With what reservations
may the terras ‘ pompous ’ or 1 florid ’ be applied to the
styles of Gibbon and of Johnson?
20. What schools of deliberately artificial writing
have at any time become fashionable or obtained
currency in our country ? Refer to some of the lead-
ing authors whose works illustrate those fashions, and
to some of the historical causes that introduced or
favoured them.
21. Indicate the leading faults in the styles of the
following novelists : —Dickens, Trollope, Ouida.
22. Refer to authors whose style answers to any
one of the following epithets:—Diffuse, obscure,
109
pt. vn.] TtIEMES FOR ESSAYS.


elliptical, florid, pedantic, antithetical, affected, col-
loquial.
23. “No epithet should be used, which does not
express something not expressed in the context, not
so implied in it as to be immediately deducible.” On
what principles does this rule rest, and with what
reservations may it be accepted?
24. “ Perhaps it is when the Imagination flies the
lowest, that we see the hues of her plumage.” Com-
ment on this.
2 5- “ The infallible test of a blameless style is its
untranslateableness in words of the same language,
without injury to the meaning.” Examine this.
C. —Oratory and Other Forms.
1. Refer to the requisites of a writer compared with
those of a speaker, and to the main differences between
spoken and written composition.
2. Distinguish carefully between Oratory, Rhetoric,
Declamation, and Eloquence.
3. Briefly compare the qualifications of an Historian,
an Orator, a Poet, and a Critic.
4. Account for the fact that few great orators have
been even considerable writers.
5. “ The Essayist cannot be too terse, nor the Orator
too diffuse.” Criticize this.
6. Illustrate the use and the abuse of Aphorisms.
7. Illustrate the use and the abuse of Quotations.
8. Refer to and criticize examples of the stationary
and the narrative form of Descriptive writing.
9. The advantages and disadvantages of the Dia-
logue in the exposition of argument.
10. “ In science, on the other hand, in history so
far as it conforms to scientific rule, we have a literary
domain where the imagination may be thought to be
always an intruder.”
“ A great historian requires only a lesser amount of
imagination than a great poet.”


Strike the balance between those views.
11. When and how far is appeal to emotion per-
missible in scientific treatises.
12. “ The artist may be known by what he omits.”
How far is it true that the approach to perfection of
a writer’s style may be measured by the number of his
exclusions and rejections ?
13. “Thucydides and Demosthenes lay it down as
a rule, never to say what they have reason to suppose
would occur to the auditor and reader, in consequence
of anything said before; knowing that every one is
more pleased, and more easily led by us, when we
bring forward his thoughts indirectly and imperceptibly,
than when we elbow them and outstrip them with our
own.” Discuss this.
D.—Taste, Poetics, Criticism.
1. “ Poeta nascitur, Orator fit.” With what limita-
tions may this be accepted as true?
2. Wherein, apart from versification, consists the
main difference between prose and poetry ? Give a
list of the chief English prose works which are essen-
tially poetical.
3. Carefully illustrate the distinction between Fancy
and Imagination, Wit and Humour.
4. Distinguish carefully between Epic and Narrative,
Ballad and Lyric Poetry, illustrating your distinction
by reference to a representative example of each class.
5. Compare as Epic Poems :—The Iliad; The
Paradise Lost; The Divina Commedia. How
far is the last entitled to the name?
6. Show that the following are not Epic Poems :
The Canterbury Tales ; The Faery Queen; The Idylls
of the King.
7. “ Rhyme in English is, if not inconsistent with
the sublime, at least very unfavourable to it.” On
what grounds may this be maintained ?


8. “ Balance is to prose what regular Rhythm is to
poetry.” How far is it true that an overstraining after
either shackles thought ?
9. Give instances of writers whose style is strong,
though diffuse.
10. “ Critics are men who have failed in Literature
and Art.” What may be said for this sarcasm ?
11. “ Time overthrows the illusions of opinion, but
establishes the decisions of Nature.” What light is
thrown on this by the fluctuations of opinion in the
history of English criticism ?
12. “A genius for any of the fine arts always sup-
poses Taste.” Examine this.
E.— Miscellaneous Themes and Questions for
Advanced Students.
1. The Relation of Theory to Practice in writing.
2. “In the lower kinds of composition style is the
vesture, in the higher it is the tissue of thought.”
Explain and illustrate.
3. Discriminate between : —Talent, Genius, Origin-
ality.
4. Discriminate between: —Learning, Education,
Culture, Scholarship.
5. Discriminate between Plagiarism and Eclec-
ticism, referring to well-known or representative
examples of each.
6. Refer to some of the limits to the use of Allegory
in prose or verse. Why is allegory inapplicable to the
plastic arts ?
7. What do you understand by Hyper-criticism?
Illustrate your answer by,references.
8. Examine the statement that Truth, Order, and
Freedom are the main canons or tests of Beauty.
9. Is there any fixed standard of Taste ?
10. What are the main elements of Sublimity as
distinguished from Beauty ?
112
ENGLISH COMPOSITION EXERCISES, [pt. vii.


11. Comment on De Qulncey’s opposition between
“the Literature of Power and the Literature of Facts.”
12. Distinguish between Art generally and Fine
Art. How far do Art collections have any civilizing
effect ?
13. “A weight of learning is seldom worn lightly:
it is indeed apt to mar the grace of style.” Define
Pedantry, and refer to its influence in various periods
of the history of literature.
14. “ Nothing great was ever done with ease.”
“Nothing great was ever done with great effort”
What light is thrown by literature on the amount of
truth in each of those two statements ?
15. “ Übicunque ars ostentatur, veritas abesse
videatur.” • Comment.
16. How far is popularity a test of literary excel-
lence ?
17. The advantages and disadvantages of general
culture as compared with those of concentrated study.
18. “ Eminent posts make great men greater and
little men less.” —La Bruy'ere.
19. “ Only great men have any business with great
faults.”— Rochefoucauld.
20. “ A complete education teaches us to aim at
knowing a little of everything and everything of some-
thing.”
21. “The obscurity of the sophist is not like a mist
which dims the appearance of things, but like a
coloured glass which disguises them.” Examine and
illustrate.
22. “ Poetry is a criticism of life.” Discuss the
relation of Art to Morality.
23. Can it be fairly maintained that the pursuit of
literature as a profession has tended to its deteriora-
tion ?
24. On what grounds has it been alleged that a
copious Memory is rarely found along with a fertile
Imagination ?
11 3
ft. vii.] THEMES FOR ESSAYS.


PART VIII.
PASSAGES FOR TRANSLATION OR
PARAPHRASE.
1. Render the following into idiomatic English
Prose: —
“ When to the sessions of sweet silent thought
I summon up remembrance of things past,
I sigh-the lack of many a thing I sought,
And with old woes new wail my dear time’s, waste :
Then can I drown an eye, unused to flow,
For precious friends hid in death’s dateless night,
And weep afresh love’s long since cancell’d woe,
And moan the expense of many a vanish’d sight;
Then can I grieve at grievances foregone,
And heavily from woe to woe tell o’er
The sad account of fore-bemoaned moan,
Which I now pay as if not paid before.
But, if the while I think on thee, dear friend,
All losses are restor’d, and sorrows end.”
2. Give the exact sense of the following in
modern English:—
“ What need we any spur but our own cause
To prick us to redress? what other bond,
Than secret Romans that have spoke the word,
And will not palter? and what other oath,
Than honesty to honesty engaged,
That this shall be or we will fall for it ?
Swear priests, and cowards, and men cautelous,
Old feeble carrions and such suffering souls
That welcome wrongs ; unto bad causes swear
Such creatures as men doubt: but do not stain
The even virtue of our enterprise
Nor the insuppressive metal of our spirits
To think, that, or our cause, or our performance
Did need an oath. ”


3. Rewrite the following passages in prose, replacing
peculiar or antiquated phrases by equivalents in the
idiom of the present day.
(1) “ There is a division,
Although as yet the face of it be covered
With mutual cunning, ’twixt Albany and Cornwall
Who have—as who have not, that their great stars
Throned and set high ?—servants, who seem no less,
Which are to France, the spies and speculations
Intelligent of our state : what hath been seen
Either in snuffs and packings of the dukes,
Or the hard rein which both of them have borne
Against the old kind king: or something deeper
Whereof perchance these are but furnishings : ”
(2) “ Bravely the figure of this harpy hast thou
Perform’d, my Ariel; a grace it had, devouring ;
Of my instruction hast thou nothing bated
In what thou hadst to say : so, with good life
And observation strange, my meaner ministers
Their several kinds have done. My high charms work,
And these mine enemies are all knit up
In their distractions ; they now are in my power;
And in these fits I leave them, while I visit
Young Ferdinand, whom they suppose is drown’d,
And his and mine loved darling. ”
(3) “ Begin then, sisters of the sacred well,
That from beneath the seat of Jove doth spring;
Begin, and somewhat loudly sweep the string :
Hence with denial vain, and coy excuse,
So may some gentle Muse
With lucky words favour my destin’d urn ;
And as he passes turn,
And bid fair peace be to my sable shroud.
For we were nurst upon the self same hill,
Fed the same flock by fountain, shade, and rill.
Together both, ere the high lawns appear’d
Under the opening eyelids of the Morn,
We drove afield; and both together heard
What time the gray-fly winds her sultry’ hom,
Batt’ning our flocks with the fresh dews of night,
Oft till the star that rose at ev’ning, bright,


Toward Heav’n’s descent had slop’d his westering wheel.
Meanwhile the rural ditties were not mute,
Temper’d to th’ oaten flute ;
Rough Satyrs danc’d, and Fauns with clov’n heel
From the glad sound would not be absent long,
And old Damoetas lov’d to hear our song.”
4. Convey the full meaning of the following in
ordinary English prose :
(1) “ Him the Almighty Power
Hurl’d headlong flaming from th’ ethereal sky
With hideous ruin and combustion down
To bottomless perdition, there to dwell
In adamantine chains and penal fire,
Who durst defy th’ Omnipotent to arms.
Nine times the space that measures day and night
To mortal men, he with his horrid crew
Lay vanquishf, rolling in the fiery gulf,
Confounded though immortal : but his doom
Reserv’d him to more wrath ; for now the thought
Both of lost happiness and lasting pain
Torments him : round he throws his baleful eyes,
That witness’d huge affliction and dismay
Mixed with obdurate pride and stedfast hate:
At once as far as angels ken he views
The dismal situation waste and wild ;
A dungeon horrible on all sides round
As one great furnace flam’d. ”
(2) “ He above the rest
In shape and gesture proudly eminent
Stood like a tow’r ; his form had yet not lost,
All her original brightness, nor appear’d
Less than Arch-angel ruin’d, and th’ excess
Of glory obscur’d : as when the sun new-ris’n
Looks through the horizontal misty air,
Shorn of his beams ; or from behind the moon
In dim eclipse disastrous twilight sheds
On half the nations, and with fear of change
Perplexes monarehs. Darken’d so, yet shone
Above them all th’ Arch-angel: but his face
Deep scars of thunder had intrench’d, and care
Sat on his faded cheek, but under brows
Of dauntless courage, and considerate pride
Waiting revenge : cruel his eye, but cast


Signs of remorse and passion, to behold
The fellows of his crime, the followers rather,
Far other once beheld in bliss, condemn’d
For ever now to have their lot in pain,
Millions of spirits for his fault amerc’d
Of heav’n, and from eternal splendours flung
For his revolt, yet faithful how they stood,
Their glory wither’d : as when heaven’s fire
Hath scath’d the forest oaks or mountain pines,
With singed top their stately growth, though bare.
Stands on the blasted heath.”
5. Give in ordinary prose the full force of the
subjoined :
(1) 11 He scarce had finisht when such murmur fill’d
Th’ assembly, as when hollow rocks retain
The sound of blust’ring winds, which all night long
Had roused the sea, now with hoarse cadence lull
Sea-faring men o’er-watcht, whose bark by chance
Or pinnace anchors in a craggy bay
After the tempest : such applause was heard
As Mammon ended, and his sentence pleas’d,
Advising peace : for such another field
They dreaded worse than Hell: so much the fear
Of thunder and the sw’ord of Michael
Wrought still within them ; and no less desire
To found this nether empire, which might rise
liy policy, and long process of time
In emulation opposite to Heav’n.”
(2) ” Our purer essence then will overcome
Their noxious vapour ; or inured not feel;
Or changed at length, and to the place conformed
In temper and in nature, will receive
Familiar the fierce heat, and void of pain ;
This honour will grow mild, this darkness light;
Besides what hope the never ending flight
Of future days may bring, what chance, what change
Worth waiting, since our present lot appears
For happy though but ill, for ill not worst.”
6. Translate into ordinary idiomatic English prose :
“ In climes beyond the solar road
Where shaggy forms o’er ice-built mountains roam,
The Muse has broke the twilight gloom
To cheer the shivering native’s dull abode.


And oft, beneath the odorous shade
Of Chili’s boundless forests laid,
She deigns to hear the savage youth repeat
In loose numbers wildly sweet
Their feather-cinctured chiefs and dusky loves.
Her track, where’er the goddess roves,
Glory pursue, and generous shame,
The unconquerable Mind and Freedom’s holy flame.
Woods that wave o’er Delphi’s steep,
Isles that crown the Aegean deep,
Fields that cool Ilissus laves,
Or where Mteander’s amber waves
In lingering lab’rinths creep.
How do your tuneful echoes languish,
Mute, but to the voice of anguish !
Where each old poetic mountain
Inspiration breathed around ;
Every shade and hallowed fountain
Murmured deep a solemn sound :
Till the sad Nine in Greece’s evil hour
Left their Parnassus for the Latian plains.”
7. Re-write each of the following passages in modern
idiomatic English prose :
(1) “Neither hath learning an influence and operation only
upon civil merit and moral virtue, and the arts or temperature
of peace and peaceable government; but likewise it hath no less
power and efficacy in enablement towards martial and military
virtue and prowess ; as may be notably represented in the
examples of Alexander the Great and Cresar the Dictator, men-
tioned before, but now in fit place to be resumed ; of whose
virtues and acts in war there needs no note or recital, having
been the wonders of time in that kind ; but of their affections
towards learning, and perfections in learning, it is pertinent to
say somewhat.”
(2) “They who to States and Governors of the Common-
wealth direct their speech, High Court of Parliament, or want-
ing such access in a private condition, write that which they
foresee may advance the public good, I suppose them, as at the
beginning of no'mean endeavour, not a little altered and moved
inwardly in their minds : some with doubt of what will be the
success, others with fear of what will be the censure; some with
hope, others with confidence of what they have to speak. And
me perhaps each of these dispositions, as the subject was
118
ENGLISH COMPOSITION EXERCISES, [pt.vui.


whereon I entered, may have at other times variously affected ;
and likely might in these foremost expressions now also disclose
which of them swayed most, but that the very attempt of this
address thus made, and the thought of whom it hath recourse to,
hath got the power within me to a passion, far more welcome
than incidental to a Preface. Which though I stay not to con-
fess ere any ask, I shall be blameless if it be no other than the
joy and gratulation which it brings to all who wish and promote
their Country’s liberty; whereof this whole Discourse proposed
will be a certain testimony, if not a Trophy. For this is not
the liberty which we can hope, that no grievance ever should
arise in the Commonwealth; that let no man in this World
expect; but when complaints are freely heard, deeply con-
sidered, and speedily reformed, then is the utmost bound of
civil liberty attained, that wise men look for. To which if I
now manifest by the very sound of this which I shall utter that
we are already in good part arrived, and yet from such a steep
disadvantage of tyranny and superstition grounded into our
principles as was beyond the manhood of a Roman recovery, it
will be attributed first, as is most due, to the strong assistance of
God our deliverer, next to your faithful guidance and undaunted
wisdom, Lords and Commons of England.”
(3) ** We must not think to make a staple commodity of all
the knowledge in the Land, to mark and licence it like our
broad cloth and our wool packs. What is it but a servitude
like that imposed by the Philistines, not to be allowed the
sharpening of our own axes and coulters, but we must repair
from all quarters to twenty licensing forges. Had any one
written and divulged erroneous things and scandalous to honest
life, misusing and forfeiting the esteem had of his reason among
men, if after conviction this only censure were adjudged him,
that he should never henceforth write but what were first exam-
ined by an appointed officer, whose hand should be annexed to
pass his credit for him that now he might be safely read, it
could not be apprehended less than a disgraceful punishment.
Whence to include the whole Nation, and those that never yet
thus offended, under such a diffident and suspectful prohibition,
may plainly be understood what a disparagement it is.”
(4) “ For if we be sure we are in the right, and do not hold
the truth guiltily, which becomes not, if we ourselves condemn
not our own weak and frivolous teaching, and the people for an
untaught and irreligious gadding rout, what can be more fair
than when a man judicious, learned, and of a conscience, for
aught we know, as good as theirs that taught us what we know,
shall not privily trom house to house, which is more dangerous,
but openly by writing publish to the world what his opinion is,
what his reasons, and wherefore that which is now thought can-
119
it. viii.] PASSAGES FOR TRANSLATION.


not be sound ? Christ urged it as wherewith to justify himself,
that he preached in public ; yet writing is more public than
preaching, and more easy to refutation, if need be, there being
so many whose business and profession merely it is, to be the
champions of Truth; which if they neglect, what can be imputed
but their sloth, or inability ? ”
(5) “ To come within the narrowness of Household Govern-
ment, observation will shew us many deep Counsellors of State
and Judges do demean themselves incorruptly in the settled
course of affairs, and many worthy Preachers upright in their
Lives, powerful in their Audience; but look upon either of
these Men where they are left to their own disciplining at home,
and you shall soon perceive, for all their single knowledge and
uprightness, how deficient they are in the regulating of their
own Family; not only in what may concern the virtuous and
decent composure of their minds in their several places, but that
which is of a lower and easier performance, the right possessing
of the outward Vessel, their Body, in Health or Sickness, Rest
or Labour, Diet or Abstinence, whereby to render it more
pliant to the Soul, and useful to the Commonwealth : when if
men were but as good to discipline themselves, as some are to
tutor their Horses and Hawks, it could not be so gross in most
households.”
(6) “Thomas Wotton, of Bocton, Malherbe, Esquire, son
and heir of the said Sir Edward, and the father of our Sir
Henry, that occasions this relation, was born in the year of
Christ 1521. He was a gentleman excellently educated, and
studious in all the liberal arts; in the knowledge whereof he
attained unto great perfection; who, though he had (besides
those abilities, a very noble and plentiful estate, and the ancient
interest of his predecessors) many invitations from Queen Eliza-
beth to change his country recreations and retirement for a
court, offering him a knighthood, (she was then with him at his
Bocton-Hall), and that to be but as an earnest of some more
honourable and more profitable employment under her ; yet he
humbly refused both, being a man of great modesty, of a most
plain and single heart, of an ancient freedom, and integrity of
mind: —a commendation which Sir Henry Wotton took occasion
often to remember with great gladness, and thankfully to boast
himself the son of such a father ; from whom indeed he derived
that noble ingenuity that was always practised by himself, and
which he ever both commended and cherished in others.”
(7) “And he'was most happy in his wife’s unforced compli-
ance with his acts of charity, whom he made his almoner, and
paid constantly into her hand a tenth penny of what money he
received for tithe, and gave her power to dispose that to the
poor of his parish, and with it a power to dispose of a tenth part
120
ENGLISH COMPOSITION EXERCISES, [n . vm.


of the corn that came yearly into his barn : which trust she did
most faithfully perform, and would often offer to him an account
of her stewardship, and as often beg an enlargement of his
bounty, for she rejoiced in the employment; and this was
usually laid out by her in blankets and shoes for some such poor
people as she knew to stand in most need of them. 'This as to
her charity.—And for his own, he set no limits to it, nor did
ever turn his face from any that he saw in want, but would
relieve them : especially his poor neighbours ; to the meanest of
whose houses would he go, and inform himself of their wants,
and relieve them cheerfully, if they were in distress; and would
always praise God, as much for being willing, as for being able
to do it. And when he was advised by a friend to be more
frugal, because he might have children, his answer was, ‘He
would not see the danger of want so far off; but being the
Scripture does so commend charity, as to tell us that charity is
the top of Christian virtues, the covering of sins, the fulfilling of
the law, the life of faith ; and that charity hath a promise of the
blessings of this life, and of a reward in that life which is to
come; being these and more excellent things are in Scripture
spoken of thee, O charity, and that, being all my tithes and
Church-dues are a dcodate from thee, Omy God; make me, O
my God, so far to trust thy promise, as to return them back to
thee ; and by thy grace I will do so, in distributing them to any
of thy poor members that are in distress, or do but bear the
image of Jesus my master.’ ”
(8) “We have now overtaken Dr. Sanderson at Boothby
parish, where he hoped to have enjoyed himself, though in a
poor, yet in a quiet and desired privacy; but it proved other-
wise ; for all the corners of the nation were filled with Covenan-
ters, confusion, committee men, and soldiers, serving each other
to their several ends, of revenge, or power, or profit; and these
committee-men and soldiers were most of them so possessed with
this Covenant, that they became like those that were infected
with that dreadful plague of Athens ; the plague of which plague
was, that they by it became maliciously restless to get into com-
pany, and to joy (so the historian saith) when they had infected
others, even those of their most beloved or nearest friends or
relations: and though there might be some of these Covenanters
that were beguiled, and meant well, yet such were the generality
of them, and temper of the times, that you may be sure Dr.
Sanderson, who though quiet and harmless, yet an eminent
dissenter from them, could not live peaceably ; nor did he ; for
the soldiers would appear, and visibly disturb him in the church
when he read prayers, pretending to advise him how God was to
be served most acceptably: which he not approving, but con-
tinuing to observe order and decent behaviour in reading the
121
pr. vin.] PASSAGES FOR TRANSLATION.


church-service, they forced his book from him, and tore it,
expecting extemporary prayers.”
(9) “ But I told you before they would give him no money,
but with a condition he should cut off the Heads of whom
they pleased, how faithfully soever they had served him : and if
he would have sacrificed all his Friends to their Ambition, yet
they would have found other excuses for denying him Subsidies;
for they were resolved to take from him the Sovereign Power to
themselves, which they could never do without taking great care
that he should have no money at all. In the next place they put
into the Remonstrance as faults of them whose Counsel the King
followed, all those things which since the beginning of the King’s
Reign were by them misliked, whether faults or not, and whereof
they were not able to judge for want of knowledge of the Causes
and Motives that induced the King to do them, and were known
only to the King himself, and such of his Privy Council as he
revealed them to.”
(to) “ That which was above, or equal to, all this, was, that
by his majesty’s enacting those two bills he had upon the matter
approved the circumstances of their passage, which had
been by direct violence and force of arms; in which case
he ought not to have confirmed the most politic or the
mOst pious constitutions. Male posita est lex quae tiimnltuarie
posita est, was one of those positions of Aristotle’s which
hath never been since contradicted; and was an advantage
that, being well managed and stoutly insisted upon, would,
in spite of all their machinations, (which were not yet firmly and
solidly formed,) have brought them to a temper of being treated
with. But I have some cause to believe that even this argument,
which was unanswerable for the rejecting the bill, was applied
for confirming it; and an opinion that the violence and force
used in procuring it rendered it absolutely invalid and void made
the confirmation of it less considered, as not being of strength to
make that Act good which was in itself null. And I doubt this
logic had an influence upon other Acts of no less moment than
these : but it was an erroneous and unskilful suggestion ; for an
Act of Parliament, what circumstances soever concurred in the
contriving and framing it, will be always of too great reputation
to be avoided, or to be declared void, by the sole authority of
any private persons on the single power of the King himself.
And though the wisdom, sobriety, and power of a future
Parliament, (if. God shall ever bless the kingdom with another
regularly constituted,) may find cause to declare this or that Act
of Parliament void, yet there will be the same temper requisite
to such a declaration as would serve to repeal it. And it may be
then, many men, who abhorred the thing when it was done for
the manner of doing it, will be of the civilian’s opinion, fieri non
122
ENGLISH COMPOSITION EXERCISES, [pr. vm.


dehmt , factum valet , and never consent to the altering of that
which they would never have consented to the establishing :
neither will that single precedent of the judges in the case of King
Henry the Seventh, when they declared the Act ofattainder to be
void by the accession of the crown, (though if be had in truth been
the person upon whom the crown had lineally and rightfully
descended, it was good law,) find, or make, the judges of another
nge parallel to them till the king hath as strong a sword in his
hand, and the people as much at his devotion and disposal; and
then the making and declaring law will be of equal facility,
though, it may be, not of equal justice.”
(11) “When the English fleet came to the mouth of the hay
of Santa Cruz, and the general saw in what posture the Spaniard
lay, he thought it impossible to bring off any of the galleons ;
however, he resolved to burn them, (which was by many thought
to be equally impossible,) and sent Captain Stayner with a
squadron of the best ships to fall upon the galleons ; which he
did very resolutely; whilst other frigates entertained the forts,
and lesser breast-works, with continual broadsides to hinder them
firing. Then the general coming up with the whole fleet, after
full four hours’ fight, they drove the Spaniards from their ships,
and possessed them; yet found that their work was not done;
and that it was not only impossible to carry away the ships, which
they had taken, but that the wind that had brought them into the
bay, and enabled them to conquer the enemy, would not serve to
carry them out again ; so that they lay exposed to all the cannon
from the shore ; which thundered upon them. However, they
resolved to do what was in their power; and so, discharging
their broadsides upon the forts and land, where they did great
execution, they set fire to every ship, galleons, and others, and
burned every one of them ; which they had no sooner done, hut
it happened the wind turned, and carried the whole fleet without
loss of one ship out of the bay, and put them safe to sea again.”
(12) “It was towards the end of the year 1633, when the
king returned from Scotland, having left it to the care of some
of the bishops there to provide such a Liturgy, and such a hook
of Canons, as might best suit the nature and humour of the belter
sort of the people; to which the rest would easily submit; and
that, as fast as they made them ready, they should transmit them
to the archbishop of Canterbury, to whose assistance the king
joined the bishop of London, and Doctor Wren, who by that
time was become bishop of Norwich (a man of a severe, sour
nature, but very learned, and particularly versed in the old
liturgies of the Greek and Latin churches); and after his majesty
should be this way certified of what was so sent, he would
recommend and enjoin the practice and use of both to that his
native kingdom.”
123
rr. vm. 1 PASSAGES POP TRANSLATION.


8. Compare the prose style of the seventeenth cen-
tury, as exhibited in the preceding passages, with that
of the present time, carefully noting changes in the
use of words, phrases, and constructions.
9. Convert into Addisonian English (in dialogue or
other form) the following passage from Carlyle :
“ Talent for literature, tliou hast such a talent 1 Be slow to
believe it. To speak or to write, Nature did not peremptorily
cr J er thee, but to work she did. And know this, there never
was a talent even for real literature, not to speak of talents lost
in doing sham literature, but was primarily a talent for something
better of the silent kind. Of literature, in all ways, be shy rather
than otherwise at present. Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do,
do it with the hand of a man, not of a phantom; be that thy
unnoticed blessedness and exceeding great reward. Thy words
let them be few and well-ordered. Love silence rather than
speech in these tragic days, when for very speaking the voice of
man has fallen inarticulate to man, and hearts in this loud
babbling sit dark and dumb towards each other. Witty, above
all, oh be not witty: none of us is bound to be witty under
penalties, but to be wise and true we all are under the terriblest
penalties.
END.
PRINTED BY ROBERT MACLEIIOSE, UNIVERSITY PRESS, GLASGOW.


Messrs. MACMILLAN AND CO.’S PUBLICATIONS.
A HISTORY OF ENGLISH LITERATURE IN FOUR
VOLUMES. Crown Bvo.
EARLY ENGLISH LITERATURE. By Stopfokd Bkooke,
M.A. [ln preparation ,
ELIZABETHAN LITERATURE. By George Saintsbury.
7s. 6d.
EIGHTEENTH CENTURY LITERATURE. By EDMUND
Gossii. 7s. 6d.
THE MODERN PERIOD. By Prof. E. Dowden. ‘ [lnprep, .
MR. J. R. GREEN’S " SHORT HISTORY OF THE
ENGLISH PEOPLE,” WITH ANALYSIS.
A SHORT HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH PEOPLE. By
John Richard Green, M.A., LL.D. With Maps,
Genealogical Tables, and Chronological Annals. 150th Thou-
sand. Crown B\'o.
*«* In Four Parts, Part 1.—670-1265. Part 11.— 1204-1553. Part lII.
1540-1689. Part 1V.—1660-1873.
The corresponding portion of Mr. Tail’s Analysis being bound up with
each. The price of each part is 3s.
A PRIMER OF ART. With Illustrations, By John Collier,
iBmo. is.
A PRIMER OF PIANOFORTE PLAYING. By Franklin
Taylor, Edited by Sir George Grove. iBmo. is.
HOUSEHOLD MANAGEMENT AND COOKERY. With an
Appendix of Recipes used by the Teachers of the National
School of Cookery. By W. B. Tegetmeier. Compiled at-
the request of the School Board for London. iBmo, is.
FIRST LESSONS ON HEALTH. By J. BERNERS, lBmo. is,
FIRST LESSONS IN BOOK-KEEPING. By J. Thornton.
New Edition. Crown Bvo. ss. 6d. Key, 10s. 6d,
The object of this volume is to make the theory of Book-keeping sufficiently
plain for even children to understand it.
MACMILLAN’S GEOGRAPHICAL SERIES.
Edited by Archibald Geikie, F.R.S., Director-General of the Geological
Survey of the United Kingdom.
THE TEACHING OF GEOGRAPHY. A Practical Handbook
for the use of Teachers, By Archibald Geikie, F.R.S. as.
GEOGRAPHY OF THE BRITISH ISLES. By Archibald
Geikie, F.R.S. iBmo. is.
THE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL ATLAS. With 24 Maps in
Colours, specially designed to illustrate all Elementary Text-books of
Geography. By John Bartholomew, F.R.G.S- 410. is.
AN ELEMENTARY CLASS-BOOK OF GENERAL GEO-
GRAPHY. By Hugh Robert Mill, D.Sc, Edin. Crown Bvo. 3s. 6d.
A GEOGRAPHY OF EUROPE. By James Sime, M.A.
[ln the press.
MAPS AND MAP MAKING. By W. Elderton. Crown Bvo.
[ln the press.
GEOGRAPHY OF INDIA. By H. F. Blandford, F.G.S.
[Just ready.
MACMILLAN AND CO., LONDON.


HISTORY AND LITERATURE PRIMERS.
iBmo. is. each.
EDITED BY JOHN RICHARD GREEN.
ENGLISH GRAMMAR. By R. Morris, LL.D.
ENGLISH GRAMMAR EXERCISES. By R. Morris, LL.D.,
and H. C. Bowen, M.A.
EXERCISES ON MORRIS’S PRIMER OF ENGLISH
GRAMMAR. By J. Wetiierell, M.A.
ENGLISH COMPOSITION. By Prof. Nichol.
ENGLISH LITERATURE. By Stopford Brooke, M.A.
SHAKSPERE. By Prof. DOWDEN.
CHILDREN’S TREASURY OF LYRICAL POETRY. By F.
T. Palgrave. In Two Parts, each is.
GREEK LITERATURE. By Prof. Jebb. Litt.D.
HOMER. By the Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone.
PHILOLOGY. By J. Peile, M.A.
GEOGRAPHY. By Sir George Grove, D.C.L. Maps.
CLASSICAL GEOGRAPHY. By H. F. Tozer, M.A.
GREEK ANTIQUITIES. By J. P. MAHAFFY, M.A.
ROMAN ANTIQUITIES. By Prof. Wilkins.
EUROPE. By E. A. Freeman, D.C.L.
GREECE. By C. A. Fyffe, M.A. With Maps.
ROME. By M. Creighton, M.A. With Maps.
FRANCE. By. C. M. Yonge. With Maps.
ROMAN LITERATURE. By Prof. A. S. Wilkins.
QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES ON ENGLISH' COMPOST
TION. By Professor Nichol and W. S. M’Cormick, M.A.
Others to follow ,
SCIENCE PRIMERS.
UNDER THE JOINT EDITORSHIP OF
Profs. HUXLEY, ROSCOE, and BALFOUR STEWART.
iBmo. Illustrated, is. each.
INTRODUCTORY PRIMER. By Professor Huxley, F.R.S.
CHEMISTRY. By Sir Henry E. Roscoe, F.R.S. With
Questions.
PHYSICS. By Balfour STEWART, F.R.S. With Questions.
PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY. By Archibald Geikie, F.R.S.
With Questions.
GEOLOGY. By Archibald Geikie, F.R.S.
PHYSIOLOGY. By Professor M. Foster, M.D., F.R.S.
ASTRONOMY. By J. N. Lockyer, F.R.S.
BOTANY. By Sir J. D. Hooker, K.C.5.1., F.R.S.
LOGIC. By W. Stanley Jevons, F.R.S.
POLITICAL ECONOMY. By W. Stanley Jevons, F.R.S.
Others to follow.
MACMILLAN AND CO., LONDON.




