

QUESTIONS AND FORMULA
TO BE USED AT THE
LICENSING OF PROBATIONERS
And the
ORDINATION AND ADMISSION
OF
DEACONS, ELDERS, AND MINISTERS
RESPECTIVELY,
AND RELATIVE DOCUMENTS.




QUESTIONS AND FORMULA
lo BE USED AT THE LICENSING OF PROBATIONERS AND THE ORDINATION
and Admission of Deacons, Elders, and Ministers respectively ,
and Relative Documents.
Deliverance of the Synod of Eastern Australia Anent the Follow-
ing Questions and Formula.
Sydney, Uth November, 1857.
Walt the view of imparting uniformity, permanence, and authority to the
practice of this Church, the Synod appoint that the following Questions and
Formula he used at the licensing of probationers, and the ordination and admis-
sion oi deacons, elders, and ministers respectively#
The Synod appoint the following a committee to get the above Questions
Formula, and relative documents printed, so that they may be sent down to Pres
thfcTcrk r ‘ or C °" r,S f ° r * he “ Buid ““ WiiSSC and
No. 1.
QUESTIONS to be used at the ordination and admission of elders,
AND DEACONS, RESPECTIVELY.
“1. Do you believe the Scriptures of the Old and New Testa-
manners 0 ? W ° r<l ° f G ° d ’ and the onl y rule of faith and
“2. Do you sincerely own and declare the Confession of Faith,
approven by General Assemblies of the Church of Scotland, to be
the confession of your faith; and do you own the doctrine therein
contained to be the true doctrine, which you will constantly adhere
“3. Do you own and acknowledge the Presbyterian Church
government of this Church, by Kirk-Sessions, Presbyteries, Provin-
c'. synods, and General Assemblies, to be the only government of
this Churcn; and do you engage to submit thereto, concur there-
with, and not to endeavour, directly or indirectly, the prejudice or
subversion thereof ?


« 4 Do you believe that the Lord Jesus Christ, as King and
T 4 the Church has therein appointed a government mth
f IbLch officers distinct from, and not subordinate in its
own province to, civil government, and that
‘pi* o ™ »f the rt
principles embodied in the Claim, Declaration, and Frotes‘ adopted
L the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland in. 1842 irthe
Protest of Ministers and Elders, Commissioners from. Presbyteries
the General Assembly, read in presence of the Royal Commas
• ii *1 Qr-i, Mav 1843 and in the Protest read in tne by
of^Australia 8 Established Church of Scotland,
, i rwi O/vf nVipp 1846 as declaring the views which are sai ■
°. n t, | Word of God, and the standards of this Church, with
turned by the « d “ of the Church of Christ, and
Her ouly Head, and to bis Word as her
only standard ?ro m ; se uniform ; ty of worship and of the
administration of all public ordinances, within this Church, as tne
Td: 1 ;"?"' *“ Ei f thSr°ai°-^
an°d”SS;, a t"oVsr;ge’ aVthTduSthereof r
No. 2.
Questions to be put to Probationers before they are Licensed to
questions xu Preach the Gospel.
l Do you believe the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments
to'be the Word of God, and the only rule of faith and manners.
9 Do you sincerely own and believe the whole doctrine of the
ConWorof Faiti approven by £ £
Church Testaments ; and do you own the
vised in this thatt£ said
I„ o crnr-“hip!rd' n l’ci a pHne;‘and « are


province to, civil government, and that the civil magistrate does not
possess jurisdiction or authoritative control over the regulation of
the affairs of Christ’s Church ; and do you approve of the general
principles embodied in the Claim, Declaration, and Protest, adopted
by the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland in 1842, and
in the Protest of ministers and elders, commissioners from Presby-
teries to the General Assembly, read in presence of the royal
commissioner on the 18th May, 1843, and in the Protest read in the
Synod of Australia, in connection with the Established Church of
Scotland, on the 10th October, 1846, as declaring the views which
are sanctioned by the Word of God and the standards of this
Church, with respect to the spirituality and freedom of the Church
of Christ, and her subjection to Him as her only Head, and to his
Word as her only standard ?
5. Do you promise that, through the grace of God, you will
firmly and constantly adhere to, and in your station, to the utmost
of your power, assert, maintain, and defend the said doctrine, wor-
ship, and discipline, and the government of this Church by Kirk-
Sessions, Presbyteries, Provincial Synods, and General Assemblies ?
G. Do you promise that in your practice you will conform yourself
to the said worship, and submit yourself to the said discipline and
government of this Church, and not endeavour, directly or indi-
rectly, the prejudice or subversion of the same ?
i . Do you promise that you shall follow no divisive courses from
the doctrine, worship, discipline, and government of this Church ?
8. Do you renounce all doctrines, tenets, and opinions whatsoever,
contrary to, or inconsistent with, the said doctrine, worship, disci-
pline, and government of this Church ?
9. Do you promise that you shall subject yourself to the several
judicatories of this Church ? Are you willing to subscribe to those
things ?
No. 3.
Questions to be put to Probationers before Ordination (and also
to a Minister already Ordained, at his Admission to a Pastoral
Charge).
1. Do you believe the Scriptures of the Old and New Testa-
ments to he the Word of God, and the only rule of faith and
manners ?
2. Do you sincerely own and believe the whole doctrine contained
in the Confession of Faith, approven by General Assemblies of the
Church of Scotland, and commonly called the Westminster Confes-
sion of Faith, to be founded upon the Word of God—and do you


acknowledge the same as the confession of your faith; and will you
firmly and constantly adhere thereto, and to the utmost of your
power assert, maintain, and defend the same, and the purity of
Worship as presently practised in this Church?
3. Do you disown all Popish, Arian, Socinian, Arminian, Erastian,
and other doctrines, tenets, and opinions whatsoever, contrary to,
and inconsistent with, the foresaid Confession of Faith ?
4. Are you persuaded that the Presbyterian government' and
discipline of this Church are founded upon the Word of God, and
agreeable thereto, —and do you promise to submit to the said
government and discipline, and to concur with the same, and not to
endeavour, directly or indirectly, the prejudice or subversion thereof;
but to the utmost of your power, in your station, to maintain, sup-
port, and defend the said discipline and Presbyterian government,
by Kirk-Sessions, Presbyteries, Provincial Synods and General
Assemblies ?
5. Do you believe that the Lord Jesus Christ, as King and Head
of the Church, has therein appointed a government in the hands of
Church-officers, distinct from, and not subordinate in its own pro-
vince to, civil government, and that the civil magistrate does not
possess jurisdiction or authoritative control over the regulation o
the affairs of Christ’s Church ; and do you approve of the general
principles embodied in the Claim, Declaration, and Protest, adopted
by the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland in 1542 in the
Protest of Ministers and Elders, Commissioners from Presbyteries
to the General Assembly, read in presence of the Royal Commis-
sioner on the 18th May, 1843, and in the Protest read in the Synod
of Australia in connection with the Established Church of Scotland,
on the 10th October, 1846, as declaring the views which are sanctioned
by the Word of God, and the standards of this Church, with respect
to the spirituality and freedom of the Church of Christ, and her
subjection to Him as her only Head, and to his Word as her only
standard ?
6. Do you promise to submit yourself willingly and humbly, in
the spirit of meekness, unto the admonitions of the brethren of this
Presbytery, and to be subject to them, and all other Presbyteries,
and superior judicatories of this Church, where Godin his providence
shall cast your lotand that, according to your power, you shall
maintain the unity and peace of this Church against error and schism,
notwithstanding of whatsoever trouble or persecution may arise, and
that you shall follow no divisive courses from the doctrine, worship,
discipline, and government of this Church ?


7. Are not zeal for the honor of God, love to Jesus Christ, and
desire of saving souls, your great motives and chief inducements to
enter into the function of the holy ministry, and not worldly designs
tincl. interests ?
8. Have you used any undue methods, either by yourself or others
in procuring this call ? *
9. Do you engage, in the strength and grace of Jesus Christ, our
Loi;d and Master, to rule well your own family, to live a holy and
circumspect life, and faithfully, diligently and cheerfully to dis-
charge all the parts of the ministerial woik, to the edification ot the
body of Christ ? _ .
10. Do you accept of, and close with, the call to be pastor of this
congregation, and promise, through grace, to_ perform all the duties
of a faithful minister of the Gospel among this people ?
No. 4.
FORMULA.
To BE SUBSCRIBED BY PROBATIONERS BEFORE RECEIVING LICENSE, AND BY
all Office-Bearers at the time of their Admission.
I } do hereby declai e, that I do sincerely own and
believe the whole doctrine contained in the Confession of Faith,
approven by General Assemblies of the Church of Scotland to be
the truths of God ; and I do own the same as the confession of my
faith, as likewise I do own the purity of worship presently authorised
and practised in the Presbyterian Church of Eastern Australia, and
also the Presbyterian government and discipline thereof—which
doctrine, worship, and Church government I am persuaded are
founded on the Word of God, and agreeable thereto: I also
approve of the general principles respecting the jurisdiction. ot
the Church, and her subjection to Christ as her only Head, which
are contained in the Claim of Right, and in the 1 rotests re-
ferred to in the questions already put to me, and I promise
that through the grace of God, I shall firmly and constantly
adhere to the same, and to the utmost of my power shall, m my
station, assert, maintain, and defend the said doctrine, worship,
discipline, and government of this Church, by Kirk-Sessions,
Presbyteries, Provincial Synods, and General Assemblies, together
with the liberty and exclusive jurisdiction thereof,—and that
I shall, in my practice, conform myself to the said worship, and
submit to the said discipline, government, and exclusive juris-
diction, and not endeavour, directly or indirectly, the prejudice
or subversion of the same; and I promise that I shall follow no


divisive courses from the doctrine, worship, discipline, government,
and exclusive jurisdiction of this Church, renouncing' all doctrines,
tenets, and opinions whatsoever, contrary to, or inconsistent with,
the said doctrine, worship, discipline, government, or jurisdiction
of the same.
DOCUMENTS REFERRED TO IN THE PRECEDING QUESTIONS AND FORMULA.
No. 1.
CLAIM, DECLARATION, AND PROTEST, BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE CHURCH
OF SCOTLAND.
The General Assembly of the Church of Scotland, taking into consideration
the solemn circumstances in which, in the inscrutable providence oi God, this
Church is now placed, and that, notwithstanding the securities for the govern-
ment thereof by General Assemblies, Synods, Presbyteries, and Kirk-Sessions, and
for the liberties, government, jurisdiction, discipline, rights, and privileges of
the same, provided by the statutes of the realm, by the constitution of this
country, -as unalterably settled by the Treaty of Union, and by the oath in-
violably to maintain and preserve the same,’’ required to be taken by eacn
sovereign at accession, as a condition precedent to the exercise of the royal
authority—which securities might well seem, and had long been thought, to
place the said liberties, government, jurisdiction, discipline, rights, and privileges
of this Church beyond the reach of danger or invasion—these have been of late
assailed by the very Court to which the Church was authorised to look, for
assistance and protection, to an extent that threatens their entire subversion,
with all the grievous calamities to this Church and nation which would inevitably
flow therefrom, did, and hereby do, solemnly and in reliance on the grace and
power of the Most High, resolve and agree on the following Claim, Declaration,
and Protest: That is to say :
Whereas it is an essential doctrine of this Church, and a fundamental prin-
ciple in its constitution, as set forth in the Confession of Faith thereof, in
accordance with the word and law of the most holy God, that '‘there is no other
Head of the Church, but the Lord Jesus Christ j” 1 and that while “ God, the
supreme Lord and King of all the world, hath ordained civil magistrates to be,
under him, over the people, for his own glory and the public good, and., to this
end, hath armed them with the power of the sword;’.’ 2 and while “it is the
duty of people to pray for magistrates, to honor their persons, to pay them
tribute and other dues, to obey their lawful commands, and to be subject to their
authority for conscience’ sake,’’ “ from which ecclesiastical persons are not
exempted ;” 3 and while the magistrate hath authority, ana it is his duty, in the
exercise of that power which alone is committed to him, namely, “ the power
of the sword,” or civil rule, as distinct from the “power of the keys,” or spiritual
authority, expressly denied to him, to take order for the preservation of purity,
peace, and unity in the Church, yet “ The Lord Jesus, as King and Head of his
Church, hath therein appointed a government in the hand of Church officers
1 Ch. 25 sec. 6. 2 Ch. 23, sec, X. 3 Ch, 23, sec. 4.


distinct from the civil magistrate;”! which government is ministerial, not
lordly, and to be exercised in consonance with the laws ot Christ, and with tne
liberties of his people :
And whereas, according to the said Confession, and to the other standards
of the Church, and agreeably to the Word of God, this government of the
Church, thus appointed by the Lord Jesus, in the hand of Church officers, dis-
tinct from the civil magistrate or supreme power of the State, and flowing
directly from the Head of the Church to the office-bearers thereof, to the exclu-
sion of the civil magistrate, comprehends, as the objects of it, the preaching o,
the Word, administration of the sacraments, correction of manners, the admis-
sion of the office-bearers of the Church to their offices, their suspension and
deprivation therefrom, the infliction and removal of Church censures, and,
generally, the whole “power of the keys,” which, by the said Confession, is
declared, in conformity with scripture, to have been committed toChuich
officers, and which, as well as the preaching 6f the Word, and the administration
of the sacraments, it is likewise thereby declared, that the civil magistrate
may not assume to himself 3 —
And whereas this j urisdiction and government, since it regards only spiritual
condition, rights, and privileges, doth not interfere with the jurisdiction of secular
tribunals, whose determinations as to all temporalities conferred by the State
upon the Church, and as to all civil consequences attached by law to the deci-
sions of Church courts in matters spiritual, this church hath ever admitted, and
doth admit, to be exclusive and ultimate, as she hath ever given and inculcated
implicit obedience thereto :
And whereas the above-mentioned essential doctrine and fundamental
principle in the constitution of the Church, and the government exclusive
jurisdiction flowing therefrom, founded on God s Word, and set forth in the
Confession of Faith and other standards of this Church have been diverse
and repeated Acts of Parliament, recognized, ratified, and confirmed—inasmuch
’First, The said Confession itself, containing the doctrine and principles above
set forth, was “ratified and established, and voted and. approvcn as the public
and avowed Confession of this Church,” by the fifth act of the second session
of the first Parliament of King William and Queen Mary, entituled, ‘Act ratifying
the Confession of Faith, and settling Presbyterian Church Government: to
which act the said Confession is annexed, and with it incorporated m the statute
law of this kingdom.
Second, By an act passed in the first Parliament of King James VI., entituled,
“Of admission of ministers; of laic patronages,”s it is enacted and declared,
“ That the examination and admission of ministers within this realm be only m
the power of the Kirk, now openly and publicly professed within the same and,
while the “ presentation of laic patronages” was thereby “ reserved to the just
and ancient patrons,” it was provided, that if the presentee of a patron should
be refused to be admitted by the inferior ecclesiastical authorities, it should be
lawful for the patron “ to appeal to the General Assembly of the whole realm,
by whom the cause being decided, shall take end as they discern and declare.
1 Ch. 30, sec. 1. 2 Ch. 30, sec. 2. 3 Ch. 23, sec. 3.
4 1690, c, 5. ,5, 1567, c. 7.


Third, By an act passed in the same first Parliament, and renewed in the
sixth Parliament of the said King James VI, entituled, “ Anent the jurisdiction
of the Kirk,”i the said Kirk is declared to have jurisdiction “ in the preaching of
the true word of Jesus Christ, correction of manners, and administration of the
holy sacraments;’ '2 and it is further declared, “that there be no other jurisdic-
tion ecclesiastical acknowledged within this realm, other than that which is and
shall be within the same Kith, or that flows therefrom, concerning the premises
which act, and that last before mentioned, were ratified and approven by
another act passed in the year 1581, entituled, “Ratification of the liberty of
the true Kirk of God and religion, with confirmation of the laws and acts made
to that effect of before ;’’3 which other act and all the separate acts therein
recited, were again revived, ratified, and confirmed, by an act of the twelfth
Parliament of the said King James VI, entituled, “ Ratification of the liberty of
the true Kirk,” &c. G which said act (having been repealed in 1662) was re-
vived, renewed, and confirmed, by the before-mentioned statute of King
William and Queen Mary.s
Fourth, The said act of the twelfth Parliament of King James VI. ratified
and approved the General Assemblies, Provincial Synods, Presbyteries, and Kirk-
Sessions, “ appointed by the Kirk, ”6 and “the whole jurisdiction and discipline
of the same Kirk;’’ cassed and annulled “all and whatsoever acts, laws, and
statutes, made at any time before the day and date thereof, against the liberty of
the true Kirk, jurisdiction and discipline thereof, as the same is used and
exercised within this realmappointed presentations to benefices to be
directed to Presbyteries, “ with full power to give collation thereupon, and to
put order to all matters and causes ecclesiastical within their bounds, according
to the discipline of the Kirk, providing the foresaid Presbyteries be bound and
astricted to receive and admit whatsoever qualified minister, presented by his
majesty or laic patrons” (the effect of which proviso and of the reservation in
the Act of the first Parliament of King James VI., above mentioned,'’ is herein-
after more fully adverted to); and farther declared that the jurisdiction of
the Sovereign and his courts, as set forth in a previous acts to extend over all
persons his subjects, and “in all matters,” should “ noways be prejudicial nor
dei’ogate anything to the privilege that God has given to the spiritual office-
bearers of the Kirk, concerning heads of religion, matters of heresy, excommunica-
tion, collation, or deprivation of ministers, or any such like essential censures,
grounded and having warrant of the Word of God;” by which enactment, decla-
ration, and acknowledgment, the State recognised and established as a funda-
mental principle of the constitution of the kingdom, that the jurisdiction of the
Church in these matters was “ given by God” to the office-bearers thereof, and
was exclusive and free from coercion by any tribunals holding power or autho-
rity from the State or supreme civil magistrate.
Fifth, The Parliament holden by King Charles 11.,9 immediately on his
restoration to the throne, while it repealed the above recited act of the twelfth
Parliament of King James and other relative actsjo at the same time acknow-
ledged the supreme and exclusive nature of the jurisdiction thereby recognised
to be in the Church, describing the said acts, as acts “by which the sole and
only power and jurisdiction within this Church doth stand in the Church, and in
the general, provincial, and presbyterial assemblies, and kirk-sessions, and as
acts “ which may be interpreted to have given any Church power, jurisdiction,
1 1567. cl 2 (fol. edit). 2 1579, c. 69, 3 1581, c. 99. 4 1592, c. 116. 5 1690, c. 5.
6 1592, c. 116. 7 1567, c. 7. 8 1584, c. 129, 9 1662, c. 1. 10 1592, c. 116.


or government to the office-bearers of the Church, their respective meetings,
other than that which acknowledged a dependence upon, and subordination to
the sovereign power of the king, as supreme.’’
Sixth, The aforesaid act of King William and Queen Maryi—on the narrative
that their majesties and the estates of Parliament conceived “ it to be their
bounden duty, after the great deliverance that God hath lately wrought for this
Church and kingdom, in the first place, to settle and secure therein the true
Protestant religion, according to the truth of God’s Word, as it hath of a long
time been professed within this land; as also the government of Christ’s Church
within this nation, agreeable to the Word of God; and most conducive to true
piety and godliness, and the establishing of peace and tranquillity within this
realm,” —besides ratifying and establishing as aforesaid the Confession of Faith,
did also “establish, ratify, and confirm the Presbyterian Church government and
discipline ; that is to say, the government of the Church by kirk-sessions,
presbyteries, provincial synods, und general assemblies, ratified and established by
the 116 act of James VI., parliament 12, anno 1592, entituled, ‘ Ratification of the
liberty of the true Kirk,’ &c.,2 and thereafter received by the general consent of
this nation, to be the only government of Christ's Church within this kingdom and
revived and confirmed the said act of King James VI.
And whereas, not only was tho exclusive and ultimate jurisdiction of the
Church courts, in the government of the Church, and especially in the particular
matters, spiritual and ecclesiastical, above mentioned, recognised, ratified, and
confirmed —thus necessarily implying the denial of power on the part of any
secular tribunal, holding its authority from the sovereign, to review the sentences
of the Church courts in regard to such matters, or coerce them in the exercise
of such jurisdiction; —but all such power, and all claim on the part of the sove-
reign to be considered supreme governor over the subjects of this kingdom of
Scotland, in causes ecclesiastical and spiritual, as he is in causes civil and temporal,
was, after a long-continued struggle, finally and expressly repudiated and cast out
of the constitution of Scotland, as inconsistent with the Presbyterian Church govern-
ment, established at the Revolution, and thereafter unalterably secured by tho
Treaty of Uuion with England; by the constitution of which latter kingdom,
differing in this respect from that of Scotland, the sovereign is recognised to be
supreme governor, “ as well in all spiritual and ecclesiastical things and causes as
temporal .” Thus: —
First, The General Assembly having, in the year 1582, proceeded to inflict
the censures of the Church upon Robert Montgomery, minister of Stirling,
for seeking to force himself, under a presentation from the king, into the
archbishopric of Glasgow, contrary to an act of the General Assembly dis-
charging the office of Prelatic bishop in the Church, and for appealing to the
secular tribunals against the infliction of Church censures by the Church
courts, and seeking to have these suspended and interdicted—and having
deposed and excommunicated him, notwithstanding of an interdict pronounced
by the privy council of Scotland, the then supreme secular court of the king-
dom —and having at the same time declared it to be part of the subsisting
discipline of the Church, that any ministers thereof who “should seek any
way by the civil power to exempt and withdraw themselves from the juris-
diction of the Kirk, or procure, obtain, or use any letters or charges,
&c., to impair, hurt, or stay the said jurisdiction, discipline, &c., or to
make any appellation from the General Assembly to stop the discipline or
1 1690, c. 5. 2 1592, c. 116.


■. f (.v,„ ecclesiastical policy or jurisdiction granted by God’s Word to the
the said Kirk,” were liable to the highest censures of
the Church —although their sentence of excommunication was deckred by
oue of the acts of Parliament of the year 1584, commonly called lie ‘‘Black
Acts ”to be void, yet ultimately the king and privy council atom'doned their
Interference Montgomery submitted to the Church courts, and the statute
Sle twelfth Parliament of King James VI., already mentioned, cassed and
annulled “all and whatsoever acts, laws, and statutes made at any time before
the dav and date thereof, against the liberty of the true Kirk, jurisdiction,
and discipline thereof, as the same is used and exercised within this realme ; since
which enactment no similar interference with the discipline and censure
the Church was ever attempted till the year 1841. „ »
Second It having been declared by another of the Black Acts afore-
<sqid 2°entituled “An act confirming the king’s majesty’s royal power oyer
all the estates and subjects within this realm,” that “ his highness, his heirs,
successors by themselves and their councils, are, and in time to come, shall
he iMdves competent to all persons his highness’ subjects, of whatsoever
L § „ ree function, or condition that ever they be of, spiritual or tem-
wH®’ wherein they or any of them shall be apprehended, sum-
or charged to answer to such things as shall be enquired of them by
moned, or cnargeu ” by the said before-mentioned act
wrrvnnded and having warrant of the Word ot uoa. .
g Srf It having been enacted, on the establishment of Prelacy m 1612 4
tha?every ml3r,at his admission, should swear obedience to the sove-
Shm as “The only lawful supreme governor of this realm as well in matters
spiritual and ecclesiastical as in things temporal,’’ the enactment to this effect
was iepealed on the restoration of Presbyterian Church government.
Fourth A like acknowledgment, that the sovereign was the only supi’cme
’ (• Viv.frrlom over all persons, and in all causes, 6 having been
oT thT second establishment of Prelacy, consequent on the restoration of
Charles II required as part of the ordinary oath of allegiance, and
Svfng ten also’inscrted into the “ Test Oath, ”7 so tg^ucaUyattjmgedto
* ca =
said Kin"^Charles 11. (1669), 8 entituled, “Act asserting his majesty s supremacy
over alTpersons and in all causes ecclesiastical,” whereby it was “enacted,
asserted, and declared, that his majesty has the
macy over all persons, and in all causes ecclesiastical ] mthin this kingdom,
the estates of this kingdom, at the era of re dress
siras ■■ s £ :x^mt V nc Z
sistent 1 with the establishment of Church government now desired, and
ought to be abrogated.’’ , n 7
Vim’.lT ilftVi 6, t Estates, 1689,c. 18.


Fifth, In compliance with this claim, an act was immediately thereafter
passed, i of which the tenor follows: “ Our sovereign lord aud lady the King
and Queen’s Majesties, taking into their consideration, that by the second
article of the Grievances, presented to their Majesties by the estates of this
kingdom, it is declared that the first act of the second Parliament of King
Charles the Second, entituled, ‘ Act asserting his Majesty’s supremacy over
all persons and in all causes ecclesiastical,’ is inconsistent with the establish-
ment of the Church government now desired, and ought to be abrogate :
Therefore their majesties, with advice and consent of the estates of Parlia-
ment do hereby abrogate, rescind, and annul the foresaid act, and declare the
same in the whole heads, articles, and clauses thereof, to be of no force or
effect in all time coming.” In accordance also therewith, the oath of allegiance
above-mentioned, requiring an acknowledgment of the king’s sovereignty “ in
all causes,”2 was done away, and that substituted which is now in use, simply
requiring a promise to be “ faithful, and bear true allegiance’’ to the sovereign;
and all preceding laws and acts of Parliament were rescinded, “in so far as
they impose any other oaths of allegiance and supremacy, declarations and
tests, excepting the oath de fideli.” By the which enactments, any claim on
the part of the sovereigns of Scotland to be supreme rulers in spiritual and
ecclesiastical as well as in temporal and civil causes, or to possess any power,
by themselves or their judges holding commission from them, to exercise
jurisdiction in matters or causes spiritual and ecclesiastical, was repudiated and
excluded from the constitution, as inconsistent with the Presbyterian Church
government then established, and secured under the statutes then and subse-
quently passed, “ to continue without any alteration, to the people of this
land, in all succeeding generations.” 3
And whereas divers civil rights and privileges were, by various statutes of
the Parliament of Scotland, prior to the Union with England, secured to this
Church, and certain civil consequences attached to the sentences of the courts
thereof, which were further directed to be aided and made effectual by all magis-
trates, judges, and officers of the law; and in particular
It was, by an act of the twelfth Parliament of King James VI., * enacted,
“ that all and whatsoever sentences of deprivation, cither pronounced already,
or that happens to be pronounced hereafter by the Presbytery, Synodal, or
General Assemblies, against any parson or vicar within their jurisdiction, pro-
vided since his highness’ coronation, is, and shall bo repute in all judgments,
a just cause to seclude the person before provided, and then deprived from all
profits, commodities, rents, and duties of the said parsonage and vicarage, or
benefice of cure ; and that, either by way of action, exception, or reply , and
that the said sentence of deprivation shall be a sufficient cause to make the
said benefice to vaike thereby
As also, by the fifth act of the first Parliament of King William and Queen
Mary, s it was enacted, “ that whatsoever minister being convened before the
said general meeting, and representatives of the Presbyterian ministers or
elders, or the visitors to be appointed by them, shall either prove contumacious
for not appearing, or be found guilty, and shall be therefore censured, whether
by suspension or deposition, they shall, ipso facto, be suspended from or
deprived of their stipends and benefices
As also, by an act passed in the fourth session of the first Parliament of
1 1690, c. 1. 2 1689, c. 2. 3 1706, c. 6.
4 1592, c. 117. 5 1690, c. 5,


King William and Queen Mary,l entituled, an “Act for settling the peace and
quiet of the Church,’’ it was provided that no minister should bo admitted,
unless he owned the Presbyterian Church government, as settled by the last
recited act, “ to be the only government of this Church;” “and that he will
submit thereto, and concur therewith, and never endeavour, directly or indi-
rectly, the prejudice or subversion thereofand it was statute or ordained,
“ that the lords of their Majesties’ Privy Council, and all other magistrates,
judges, and officers of justice, give all due assistance for making the sentences
and censures of the Church, and judicatories thereof, to be obeyed, or other-
wise effectual, as accords
As also, by an act passed in the fifth session of the aforesaid Parliaments
entituled, an “ Act against intrudiug into churches without a legal call and
admission thereto,’’ on the narrative, “ that ministers and preachers, their in-
truding themselves into vacant churches, possessing of manses and benefices,
and exercising any part of the ministerial function in parishes, without a legal
call and admission to the said churches, is an high contempt of the law, and
of a dangerous consequence, tending to perpetual schismsuch intrusion
without an orderly call from the heritors and elders —the right of presentation
by patrous being at this time abolished, —and “legal admission from the
presbytery,” was prohibited under certain penalties; and the lords of the
Privy Council were recommended to remove all who had so intruded, and “ to
take some effectual course for stopping and hindering those ministers who are,
or shall be hereafter deposed by the judicatories of the present established
Church, from preaching or exercising any act of their ministerial function
which” (the said statute declares) “ they cannot do after they are deposed,
without a high contempt of the authority of the Church, and of the laws of
the kingdom establishing the same.”
And Whereas, at the Union between the two kingdoms, the Parliament of
Scotland, being determined that the “ true Protestant religion,” as then pro-
fessed, “ with the worship, discipline, and government of this Church, should be
effectually and unalterably secured,’’ did, in their act appointing commissioners
to treat with commissioners from the Parliament of as to an union of
the kingdoms, provide, ‘ ‘ That the said commissioners shall not treat of or con-
cerning any alteration of the worship, discipline, and government of the Church
of this kingdom, as now by law established and did, by another act, com-
monly called the Act of Security, 4 and entituled, “ Act for securing the Protes-
tant religion and Presbyterian Church government,” “ establish and confirm
the said true Protestant religion, and the worship, discipline, and government of
this Church, to continue without any alteration to the people of this land in all
succeeding generationsand did “ for ever confirm the fifth act of the first
Parliament of King William and Queen Mary,s entituled, ‘Act ratifying the
Confession of Faith, and settling Presbyterian Church government,’ and the
whole other acts of Parliament relating thereto and did “expressly provide
and declare, That the foresaid true Protestant religion, contained in the above
mentioned Confession of Faith, with the form and purity of worship presently
in use within this Church, and its Presbyterian Church government and disci-
pline,—that is to say, the government of the Church by kirk-sessions, presby-
teries, provincial synods, and general assemblies, all established by the foresaid
acts of Parliament, pursuant to the Claim of Right, shall remain and continue
unalterable; and that the said Presbyterian Government shall be the only
1 1693, c. 22. 2 1695, c. 22. 3 1705, c. 4. 4 1706, c. 6. 5 1690, c. 5.


Government of the Church within the kingdom of Scotlandand farther, “ for
the greater security of the same,” did, inter alia, enact, “ That after the decease
of her present Majesty, the Sovereign succeeding to her in the Royal Government
of the Kingdom of Great Britain, shall, in all time coming, at his or her acces-
sion to the Crown, swear and subscribe, That they shall inviolably maintain and
preserve the foresaid settlement of the true Protestant religion, with the govern-
ment, worship, discipline, right and privileges of this Church, as above established
by the laws of this kingdom, in prosecution of the Claim of Rightwhich said
Act of Security, “ with the establishment therein contained,” it was specially
thereby enacted, “ should be held and observed in all time coming, as a funda-
mental and essential condition of any treaty or union to be concluded betwixt
the two kingdoms, without any alteration thereof, or derogation thereto, in any sort,
for ever. It being farther thereby provided, that “ the said act and settle-
ment therein contained shall be inserted and repeated in any act of Parliament
that shall pass, for agreeing and concluding the foresaid treaty or union betwixt
the two kingdoms ; and that the same shall be therein expressly declared to be
a fundamental and essential condition of the said treaty of union in all time
coming.” In terms of which enactment, this Act of Security was inserted in
the Treaty of Union between the two kingdoms, as a fundamental condition
thereof, and was also inserted in the acti of the Parliament of Scotland, ratifying
and approving of the said Treaty, and likewise in the corresponding act of the
Parliament of England, entituled, “An act 2 for a union of the two kingdoms of
England and Scotland
And whereas, at the date of the said Treaty of Union, the right of patrons
to present to churches stood abolished by statute, after the following manner,
viz: By the act of King V illiam and Queen Mary,3 herein before-mentioned,
the act of James VI., 4 also herein before-mentioned, then standing totally
repealed, was omy revived, subject to the express exception of “that part of it
relating to patronages, ’ which consequently remained repealed and unrestored
and “ which, the act 1690, c. 5, farther bore, “is hereafter to be taken into
consideration. rhe part of the said act thus left repealed and unrevived, was
the pro vision, that presbyteries “be bound and astricted to receive whatsoever
qualified minister presented by his majesty or laic patrons,” a provision which,
while it subsisted, was held to leave the Church free to proceed in the collation
of ministers ‘ according to the discipline of the Kirkand non-compliance
with which implied only a forfeiture of the fruits of the particular benefice, which
it did by virtue ot the immediately succeeding statute 5 whereby it was enacted
that “ in case the presbytery refuses to admit any qualified minister presented to
them by the patron, it shall be lawful to the patron to retain the whole fruits of
the benefice in Ins own hands.” This subject having accordingly been thereafter
taken into consideration in the same session of Parliament, was definitely settled
by an act, 6 entitled, “ Act concerning patronages,” whereby the right of pre-
sentation by patrons was “ annulled and made void,” and a right was vested in
the heritors and elders of the respective parishes “to name and propose the
person to the whole congregation, to be approven or disapproven by them,” the
disapproves giving in their reasons “ to the effect the affair may be cognosced
upon by the presbytery of the bounds, at whose judgment, and by whose deter-
mination (as is declared by the said act), “ the calling and entry of a particular
minister is to be ordered and concluded
1 1706, c. 7. 2 5 Anne, c. 8. 3 moo c 5
4 1592, c. 116. 5 1592, c. 117. 6 1690,' c. 23,


And Whereas the said act last mentioned, formed part of the settlement of
the Presbyterian Church government effected at the Revolution, and was one
of the “acts relating thereto,” and to the statute 1690, c. 5, specially con-
firmed and secured by the Act of Security and Treaty of Union; yet notwith-
standing thereof, and of the said Treaty, the Parliament of Glreat Britain, by
an act passed in the 10th of Queen Aimed repealed the said act in so for as
relates to the presentation of ministers by heritors and others therein men
tioned,” and restored to patrons the right of presentation, and enacted that
presbyteries should be “ obliged to receive and admit in the same manner, such
qualified person or persons, minister or ministers, as shal le presen e -
respective patrons, as the persons or ministers presented befoie ema mg
this act ought to have been admitted.’’
And whereas, while this Church protested against the passing of the above-
mentioned act of Queen Anne, as “ contrary to the constitution of the Church,
so well secured by the late Treaty of Union, and solemnly ratified by acts of
Parliament in both kingdoms,” and for more than seventy years thereafter,
uninterruptedly sought for its repeal, she at the same time maintained, and
practically exercised, without question or challenge from any quarter, the juris-
diction of her courts to determine ultimately and exclusively, under what
circumstances they would admit candidates into the office of the 10 y minis ry,
or constitute the pastoral relationship between minister and people, and, gene-
rally, “to order and conclude the entry of particular ministers.’
And whereas, in particular, this Church required, as necessary to the ad-
mission of a minister to the charge of souls, that he should ave receive
call from the people over whom he was to be appointed, and di no
or permit any one so to be admitted till such call had been sus ame y
Church Courts, and did, before and subsequent to the passing of the said act ot
Queen Anne, declare it to be a fundamental principle of the ur ’
forth in her authorized standards, and particularly in the Secon oo
cipline, 2 repeated by the Act of Assembly in 1638, that no pastor, be intruded
upon any congregation contrary to the will of the people .
And whereas, in especial, this fundamental principle was, by the 14th act
of the General Assembly 1736,3 re-declared, and directed to be attended to in
the settlement of vacant parishes, but having been after some time, disregarded
in the administration of the Church, it was once more re-declared by the General
Assembly 1834,4 who established certain specific provisions and regulations for
carrying it into effect in time to come :
And whereas, by a judgment pronounced by the House of Lords, in 1839,5
it was for the first time, declared to be i legal to refuse to take on trial, and to
reject the presentee of a patron (although a layman, an mere y a can i e
for admission to the office of the ministry), in consideration of this fundamental
principle of the Church, and in respect of the dissent of the congregation ; to the
authority of which judgment, so far as disposing of civil interests, this Church
implicitiv bowed, by at once abandoning all claim to the jusdevolutem-to the
benefice,” for any pastor to be settled by her, and to all other civil ugh
privilege which might otherwise have been competent to the Church or
1 m „ 19 2 Ch 1 sec 5 3 Act of Assembly, 1736, c. 14.
I MKA, HW».. 9 ' ' * Auch.eiaider toe, >»39.


courts ; and anxiously desirous, at the same time, of avoiding collision with the
civil courts, she so far suspended the operation of the above-mentioned act of
Assembly, as to direct all cases, in which dissents should be lodged by a majo-
rity of the congregation, to be reported to the General Assembly, in the hope
that a way might be opened up to her for reconciling with the civil rights
declared by the House of Lords, adherence to the above-mentioned fundamental
principle, which she could not violate or abandon by admitting to the holy office
of the ministry, a party not having, in her conscientious judgment, a legitimate
call thereto, or by intruding a pastor on a reclaiming congregation contrary to
their will; and farther, addressed herself to the Government and the Legislature
for such an alteration of the law (as for the first time now interpreted), touching
the temporalities belonging to the Church (which alone she held the decision of
the House of Lords to be capable of affecting or regulating), as might prevent a
separation between the cure of souls and the benefice thereto attached :
And whereas, although during the century which elapsed after the passing
of the said act of Queen Anne, presbyteries, repeatedly rejected the presentees
of patrons on grounds undoubtedly ultra vires of the presbyteries, as having
reference to the title of the patron or the validity of competing presentations, and
which were held by the Court of Session to bo contrary to law, and admitted
others to the pastoral office in the parishes presented to, who had no presentation
or legal title to the benefice, the said court, even in such cases, never attempted
or pretended to direct or coerce the Church courts, in the exercise of their
functions in regard to the collation of ministers or other matters acknowledged
by the State to have been conferred on the Church, not by the State, but by God
himself. On the contrary, they limited their decrees to the regulation and dis-
posal of the temporalities which were derived from the State, and which, as tho
proper subjects of “ actions civil,” were within the province assigned to the Court
of Session by the Constitution, refusing to interfere with the peculiar functions
and exclusive jurisdiction of the Courts of the Church: Thus, —
In the case of Auchtermuchty, l where the presbytery had wrongfully ad-
mitted another than the patron’s presentee, the court found, “ That the right
to a stipend is a civil right; and therefore, that the court have power to cog-
nosce and determine upon the legality of the admission of ministers, in hunc
effectum, whether the person admitted shall have right to the stipend or not
and simply decided that the patron was entitled to retain the stipend in his
own hands.
So also, the same course was followed in the cases of Culross, Lanark, and
Forbes ;2 in reference to one of which (that of Lanark) the government of the
country, on behalf of the crown, in which the patronage was vested, recog-
nized the retention of stipend by the patron, as the only competent remedy
for a wrongful refusal to admit his presentee; the Secretary ot State having,
in a letter to the Lord Advocate of Scotland (January 17, 1752), signified the
pleasure of his Majesty, “ directing and ordering his lordship to do everything
necessary and competent by law, for asserting and taking benefit in the present
case, of the said right and privilege of patrons by the law of Scotland, to
retain the fruits of the benefice in their own hands till their presentee be
admitted.”
1 Moncrieff v. Maxton, Feb. 15, 1735.
2 Cochran v. Stoddart, June 26,1751. Dick v. Carmichael, March 2, 1753. Furbes v.
Mac William, February, 1762.


So farther, in the before-mentioned case of Culross, 1 the Court refused,
“as incompetent,” a bill of advocation presented to them by the patron for
the purpose of staying the admission by the presbytery of another than his
likewise, in the case of Dunse,2 the court would not interfere in regard
to a conclusion to prohibit the presbytery “ to moderate in a call at large or
settle any other man,” because “that was interfering with the power of ordi-
nation or internal policy of the Church, with which the Lords thought they
cluded to have the presbytery ordained to proceed to the presentee’s set e-
ment, as well as to have the validity of the presentation and the right to the
stipend declared, the court limited their decree to the civil matters ot the
presentation and stipend.
And whebeas, pending the efforts of the Church to accomplish the desired
•alteration of the law, the Court of Session—a tribunal instituted by special act
of Parliament for the specific and limited purpose of “ doing and administration
of justice in all civil actions; -*4 with judges appointed simply •to Bit and decide
upon all actions civil,” 6—not confining themselves to the determination of
“civil actions,”-to the withholding of civil consequences from sentences of the
Church courts which, in their judgment, were not warranted by the statutes
recognising the jurisdiction of these courts-to the enforcing of the provision of
the act 1592 c. 117, for retention of the fruits of the benefice m case of wrongfu
refusal to admit a presentee, or the giving of other civil redress for any civil
injury held by them to have been wrongfully sustained in consequence thereof-
havejin numerous and repeated instances, stepped beyond the province allotted
to them by the constitution, and within which alone their decisions can be held
to declare the law. or to have the force of law, deciding not only actions civil,
buf‘‘causes and ecclesiastical”-and that, too, even where these had
no connection with the exercise of the right of patronage-and have evaded the
jurisdiction and encroached upon the spiritual privileges, of the courts of this
Church, in violation of the constitution of the country in defiance of the
statutes above-mentioned, and in contempt of the laws of this kingdom . ,
instance, terdic pres b y teries of the Church from admitting to a pastoral
charge 6 when about to be done irrespective of the civil benefice attached
thereto, or even where there was no benefice, no right of patronage, no stipend,
no manse or glebe, and no place of worship, or any patrimonial right, connected
TssJdng a decrees requiring and ordaining a Church court to take on trial,
and admit to the office of the holy ministry in a particuxiar elrarge a probatiorier
or unordained candidate for the ministry, and. to intrude him
gation, contrary to the will of the people; both in this and m the cases first me
tioned invading the church's exclusive jurisdiction m the admission ot mmiste ,
the nreachin" of the Word, and administration of sacraments, recognized by
sttute to hafe been “ given by God” directly to the church, and to be beyond
the limits of the secular jurisdiction.
1 Cochran, Nov, 19, 1748.
2 Hay v. Presbytery of Dunse, February 26, 1749.
3 Lord Dundas v. Presbytery of Shetland, May 15, 1/95. „
4 1537, c. 36. 5 1532, c. 1. 6 Ist Lethendy Case.
7 Stewarton Case. 8 Marnoch Case.


By prohibiting the communicants l of the Church from intimating their dissent
from a call proposed to be given to a candidate for the ministry to become their
pastor.
.By granting interdict against the establishment of additional ministers to
meet the wants of an increasing as uninterruptedly practised from
the Reformation to this day; against constituting a new kirk-session in a parish,
to exercise discipline; and against innovating on its existing state, “as regards
pastoral superintendence, its kirk-session, and jurisdiction and discipline thereto
belonging.”
By interdicting the preaching of the Gospel and administration of ordinances, 3
throughout a whole district, by any minister of the Church under authority of
the Church courts; thus assuming to themselves the regulation of the “ preach-
ing of the Word’’ and “administration of the sacraments,” and at the same
time invading the privilege, common to all the subjects of the realm, of having
freedom to worship God according to their consciences, and under the
guidance of the ministers of the communion to which they belong.
By holding the members of inferior Church judicatories liable in damages 4
for refusing to break their ordination vows and oaths (sworn by them in com-
pliance with the requirements of the statutes of the realm, and, in particular, of
the Act of Security embodied in the Treaty of Union), by disobeying and setting
at defiance the sentences, in matters spiritual and ecclesiastical, of their superior
Church judicatories; to which, by the constitution of the Church and country,
they are in such matters subordinate and subject, and v.hich, by their said vows
and oaths, they stand pledged to obey.
By interdicting the execution of the sentence of a Church judicatory prohibiting
a minister from preaching or administering ordinances within a particular parish, 3
pending the discussion of a cause in the Church courts as to the validity of his
settlement therein.
By interdicting the General Assembly and inferior Church judicatories from
inflicting Church censures ; as in one case where interdict was granted against
the pronouncing of sentence of deposition upon a minister found guilty of theft,
by a judgment acquiesced in by himself ; 6 in another, where a presbytery was
interdicted from proceeding in the trial of a minister accused of fraud and
swindlingand in a third, where a presbytery was interdicted from proceeding
with a libel against a licentiate for drunkenness, obscenity, and profane swearing. 3
By suspending Church censures, 9 inflicted by the Church judicatories in the
exercise of discipline (which, by special statute, all “judges and officers of
justice” are ordered “to give due assistance” for making “to be obeyed or
otherwise effectual”), and so reponing ministers suspended from their office to
the power of preaching and administering ordinances ; thus assuming to them-
selves the “ power of the keys.”
By interdicting the execution of a sentence of deposition from the office of the
holy ministry, pronounced by the General Assembly of the Church ;10 thereby
also usurping the “ power of the keys,” and supporting deposed ministers in the
exercise of ministerial functions—which is declared by special statute to be a
“ high contempt of the authority of the Church, and of the laws of the kingdom
•establishing the same.”
By assuming to judge of the right of individuals elected members of the
1 Daviot Case. 2 Stewarton Case. 3 Strathbogie Cases. 4 2d Auchterarder Case.
5 Culsalmond Case. 6 Cambusnethan Case. 7 Stranraer Case, 8 4th Lethendy Case
9 Ist and 2nd Strathbogie Cases. 10 3d Strathbogie Case.


General Assembly to sit therein,! and interdicting them from taking their seats ;
thus interfering with the constitution of the supreme court of the Church, and
violating her freedom in the holding of General Assemblies, secured to her by
statute. , „ _ . .
By, in the greater number of instances above referred to, requiring the
inferior judicatories of the Church to disobey the sentences, in matters spiritual
and ecclesiastical, of the superior judicatories, to which by the constitution in
Church and State, they are subordinate and subject, and which, in compliance
with the provisions of the statutes of the realm, their members have solemnly
sworn to obey ; thus subverting “ the government of the Church by Kirk-Sessions,
Presbyteries, Provincial Synods, and General Assemblies,” settled by statute and
the Treaty of Union as “ the only government of the Church within the kingdom
of Scotland.” ......
By all which acts the said Court of Session, apparently not adverting to the
oath taken by the Sovereign, from whom they hold their commissions, have
exercised powers not conferred upon them by the constitution, but by it excluded
from the province of any secular tribunal; have invaded the jurisdiction of the
courts of the Church ; have subverted its government; have illegally, attempted
to coerce Church courts in the exercise of their purely spiritual functions; have
usurped the “ power of the keys”—have wrongfully acclaimed, as the subjects
of their civil jurisdiction, to be regulated by their decrees, ordination of laymen,
to the office of the holy ministry, admission to the cure of souls, Church censures,
the preaching of the Word, and the administration of the sacraments; and have
employed the means entrusted to them for enforcing submission to their lawful
authority in compelling submission to that which they have usurped—m opposi-
tion to the doctrines of God’s Word set forth in the Confession of Faith as ratified
by statute —in violation of the constitution —in breach of the Treaty of Union,
and in disregard of divers express enactments of the Legislature.
And whereas further encroachments are threatened on the government and
discipline of the Church as by law in actions now depending before
the said court, in which it is sought to have sentences, of deposition from the
office of the holy ministry reduced and set aside, 3 and minorities of inferior judi-
catories authorized to take on trial, and admit to the office of the holy ministry, in
disregard of, and in opposition to, the authority of the judicatories of which they
are members, and of the superior judicatories to which they are subordinate and
subject:
And whereas the government and discipline of Christ’s Church cannot be
carried on according to his laws and the constitution of his Church, subject to the
exercise, by any secular tribunal, of such powers as have been assumed by the said
Court of Session:
And whereas this Church, highly valuing, as she has ever done, her con-
nection, on the terms contained in the statutes herein before recited, with the
State and her possession of the temporal benefits thereby secured to her for
the advantage of the people, must, nevertheless, even at the risk and hazard of
the loss of that connection and of these public benefits deeply as she would
deplore and deprecate such a result for herself and the nation persevere m
maintaining her liberties as a Church of Christ, and in carrying on the govern-
-2 4th Strathbogie Case. 3 3rdAuchterarder Case. 3rd Lethendy Case.


went thereof on her own constitutional principles, and must refuse to intrude
ministers on her congregations, to obey the unlawful coercion attempted to be
enforced against her in the exercise of her spiritual functions and jurisdiction, or
to consent that her people be deprived of their rightful liberties:
THEREFORE the General Assembly, while, as above set forth, they fully
recognise the absolute jurisdiction of the civil courts in relation to all matters
whatsoever of a civil nature, and especially in relation to all the temporalities
conferred by the State upon the Church, and the civil consequences attached by
law to the decisions, in matters spiritual, of the Church Courts, DO, in name and
on hehalf of this Church, and of the nation and people of Scotland, and under
the sanction of the several statutes, and the Treaty of Union, herein before recited,
claim, as of right, that she shall freely possess and enjoy her liberties, govern-
ment, discipline, rights, and privileges, according to law, especially for the defence
of the spiritual liberties of her people, and that she shall be protected therein from
the foresaid unconstitutional and illegal encroachments of the said Court of
Session, and her people secured in their Christian and constitutional rights and
liberties.
And they declare that they cannot, in accordance with the Word of God, the,
authorized and ratified standards of this Church, and the dictates of their con-
sciences, intrude ministers on reclaiming congregations, or carry on the govern-
ment of Christ’s Church, subject to the coercion attempted by the Court of Session
as above set iorth ; and that, at the risk and hazard of suffering the loss of the
secular benefits conferred by the State, and the public advantages of an Establish-
ment, they must, as by God’s grace they will, refuse so to do ; for, highly as they
estimate these, they cannot put them in competition.with the inalienable liberties
of a Church of Christ, which, alike by their duty and allegiance to their Head
and King, and by their ordination vows they are bound to maintain, “ notwith-
standing whatsoever trouble or persecution may arise.”
And they protest, that all and whatsoever Acts of the Parliament of Great
Britain, passed without the consent of this Church and nation, in alteration of, or
derogation to, the aforesaid government, discipline, right, and privileges of this
Church (which were not allowed to be treated of by the Commissioners for settling
the terms of the union betiveen the two kingdoms, but were secured by antecedent
stipulation, provided to be inserted, and inserted, in the Treaty of Union, as an
unalterable and fundamental condition thereof, and so reserved from the cognizance
and power of the federal legislature created by the said Treaty); as also, all and
whatsoever sentences of courts in contravention of the same government, discipline,
right, and privileges, are, and shall be, in themselves void and null, and of no
legal force or effect; and that, while they will accord full submission to all such
Acts and sentences, in so far—though in so far' only—as these may regard civil
rights and privileges, whatever may be their opinion of the justice or legality of
the same, their said submission shall not be deemed an acquiesence therein, but
that it shall be free to the members of this Church, or their successors, at any time
hereafter when there shall be a prospect of obtaining justice, to claim the restitution
of all such civil rights and privileges, and temporal benefits and endowments, as
for the present they may be compelled to yield up, in order to preserve to their
office-bearers the free exercise of their spiritual government and discipline, and to
their people the liberties, of which respectively it has been attempted, so contrary to
law and justice, to deprive them.


And, finally, the General Assembly call the Christian people of this king-
dom, and all the Churches of the Reformation throughout the world, who
hold the great doctrine of the sole Headship of the Lord Jesus over his Church,
to witness, that it is for their adherence to that doctrine, as set forth in their
Confession of Faith, and ratified by the laws of this kingdom, and for the main-
tenance by them of the jurisdiction of the office-bearers, and the freedom and
privileges of the members of the Church, from that doctrine flowing, that this
Church is subjected to hardship, and that the rights so sacredly pledged and
secured to her are put in peril; and they especially invite all the office-bearers
and members of this Church, who are willing to suffer for their allegiance to
their adorable King and Head, to stand by the Church, and by each other, in
defence of the doctrine Aforesaid, and of the liberties and privileges, whether of
office-bearers or people, which rest upon it; and to unite in supplication to
Almighty God, that he would be pleased to turn the hearts of the rulers of this
kingdom, to keep unbroken the faith pledged to this Church in former days, by
statutes and solemn treaty, and the obligations come under to God himself
to preserve and maintain the government and discipline of this Church in ac-
cordance with his Word; or otherwise, that he would give strength to this
Church—office-bearers and people—to endure resignedly the loss of the tem-
poral benefits of an Establishment, and the personal sufferings and sacrifices to
which they may be called, and would also inspire them with zeal and. energy to
promote the advancement of his Son’s kingdom, in whatever condition it may
be his will to place them; and that, in his own good time, he would restore to
them these benefits, the fruits of the struggles and sufferings of their fathers in
times past in the same cause; and thereafter give them grace to employ them
more effectually than hitherto they have done for the manifestation of his glory.
No. 11.
PROTEST BY THE COMMISSIONERS TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY READ IN PRE-
SENCE OF THE ROYAL COMMISSIONER, 18TH MaY, 1543.
We the undersigned ministers and elders, chosen as commissioners to the
General Assembly of the Church of Scotland, indicted to meet this day, but pre-
cluded from holding the said Assembly by reason of the circumstances hereinafter
set forth, in consequence of which a Free Assembly of the Church of Scotland, in
accordance with the laws and constitution of the said Church, cannot at this time
beholden, — .
Considering that the Legislature, by their rejection of the Claim of Right
adopted by the last General Assembly of the said Church, and their refusal to give
redress and protection against the jurisdiction assumed, and the coercion of late
repeatedly attempted to be exercised over the courts of the Church in matters
spiritual by the civil courts, have recognised and fixed the conditions of the Church
Establishment, as henceforward to subsist in Scotland, to be such as these have
been pronounced and declared by the said civil courts in their several recent deci-
sions, in regard to matters spiritual and ecclesiastical, whereby it has been held,
inter alia — , , , ,
Ist, That the courts of the Church by law established, and members thereof,
are liable to be coerced by the civil courts in the exercise of their spiritual


functions; and in particular, in the admission to the office of the holy ministry
and the constitution of the pastoral relation, and that they are subject to be
compelled to intrude ministers on reclaiming congregations in opposition to the
fundamental principles of the Church, and their views of the Word of God
and to the liberties of Christ’s people.
2d, That the said civil courts have power to interfere with and interdict the
preaching of the gospel and administration of ordinances as authorized and
enjoined by the Church courts of the Establishment.
3d, That the said civil courts have power to suspend spiritual censures pro-
nounce y e lurch courts of the Establishment against ministers and pro-
bationers of the Church, and to interdict their execution as to spiritual effects,
functions and privileges.
n? at 1116I 116 Said CIVII courts have power to reduce and set aside the sentences
ot the Church courts of the Establishment, deposing ministers from the office
of the holy ministry and depriving probationers of their license to preach the
gospel, with reference to the spiritual status, functions, and privileges of such
ministers and probationers restoring them to the spiritual office and status,
oi which the Church courts had deprived them.,
sth, That the said civil courts have power to determine on the right to sit as
members of the supreme and other judicatories of the Church by law established,
and to issue interdicts against sitting and voting therein, irrespective of the
judgment and determination of the said judicatories.
6th That the said civil courts have power to supersede the majority of a
Church court of the establishment, in regard to the exercise of its spiritual
functions as a Church court, and to authorise the minority to exercise the said
theySS °PP° sl^on cour t itself, and to the superior judicatories of
7th, That the said civil courts have power to stay processes of discipline
pending before courts of the Church by law established, and to interdict such
courts from proceeding therein.
Bth, That no pastor of a congregation can be admitted into the Church courts
of the Establishment, and allowed to rule, as well as to teach, agreeably to the
institution of the office by the Head of the Church, nor to sit in any of the judi-
catories of the Church, inferior or supreme, and that no additional provision can
rb,, l^ 6 !!! 01 ' v, 16 ® xe £ cis ? of s P lr,tual discipline among the members of the
thou £ h not affecting any patrimonial interests; and no alteration intro-
duced in the state of pastoral superintendence and spiritual discipline in any
parish without the sanction of a civil court. * y
All which jurisdiction and power on the part of the said civil courts severally
above specified, whatever proceeding may have given occasion to its exercise, is,
n our opmion in itself inconsistent with Christian liberty,—and with the
authority which the Head of the Church hath conferred on the Church alone.
’’ considering that a General Assembly, composed, in accordance
with the laws and fundamental principles of the Church, in part of commissioners
themselves admitted without the sanction of the civil court, or chosen by Presby-
teries composed m part of members not having that sanction, cannot be constituted
as an Assembly of the Establishment without disregarding the law and the legal
conditions of the same as now fixed and declared;
And further considering that such commissioners as aforesaid would, as members
of an Assembly of the Establishment, be liable to be interdicted from exercising
their functions; and to be subjected to civil coercion at the instance of any indivi-
dual having interest who might apply to the civil courts for that purpose;


And considering further, that civil coercion has already been in divers instances
applied for and used, whereby certain commissioners, returned to the Assembly this
day appointed to have been liolden, have been interdicted from claiming their seats
and from sitting and voting therein, and certain Presbyteries have been, by inter-
dicts directed against their members, prevented from freely choosing commissioners
to the said Assembly, whereby the freedom of such Assembly, and the liberty of
election thereto, has been forcibly obstructed and taken away;
And further, considering that, in these circumstances, a Free Assembly of the
Church of Scotland, by law established, cannot at this time be liolden, and that
an Assembly in accordance with the fundamental principles of the Church, cannot
be constituted in connection with the State without violating the conditions which
must now, since the rejection by the Legislature of the Church s Claim of Right,
be held to be the conditions of the Establishment.
And considering that, while heretofore as members of Church judicatories ratified
by law and recognised by the constitution of the kingdom, we held ourselves
entitled and bound to exercise and maintain the jurisdiction vested in these judi-
catories with the sanction of the constitution, notwithstanding the decrees as to
matters spiritual and ecclesiastical, of the civil courts, because we could not see
that the State had required submission thereto as a condition of the Establishment,
but, on the contrary, were satisfied that the State, by the acts of the Parliament of
Scotland, for ever and unalterably secured to this nation by the Treaty of Union,
had repudiated any power in the civil courts to pronounce such decrees, we are now
constrained to acknowledge it to be the mind and will of the State, as recently
declared, that such submission should and does form a condition of the Establish-
ment, and of the possession of the benefits thereof; and that as we cannot, without
committing what we believe to be sin—in opposition to God’s law in disregard
of the honor and authority of Christ’s crown, and in violation of our own solemn
vows, comply with this condition, we cannot in conscience continue connected
with, and retain the benefits of, any establishment to which such condition is
attached. _ .
We therefore, the ministers and elders aforesaid, on this, the first occasion
since the rejection by the Legislature of the Church’s Claim of Right, when the
commissioners chosen from throughout the bounds of the Church to the Geneia
Assembly appointed to have been this day holden, are convened together, do
protest, that the conditions aforesaid, while we deem them contrary to and
subversive of the settlement of Church government effected at the Revolution,
and solemnly guaranteed by the Act of Security and Treaty of Union, are also
at variance with God’s Word, in opposition to the doctrines and fundamental
principles of the Church of Scotland, inconsistent with the freedom essential to
the right constitution of a Church of Christ, and incompatible with the gov ern-
ment which He, as the Head of his Church, hath therein appointed distinct from
the civil magistrate. _ _ . . ,
And we further protest, that any Assembly constituted in submission to the
conditions now declared to be law, and under the civil coercion which has been
brought to bear on the election of commissioners to the Assembly this day
appointed to have been holden, and on the commissioners chosen theieto, is not
and shall not be deemed a free and lawful Assembly of the Church of Scotland,
according to the original and fundamental principles thereof, and that the Claim,
Declaration, and Protest, of the General Assembly which convened at Edinburgh,
in May, 1842, as the act of a lawful and free assembly of the said Chureh, sha 1
be holden, as setting forth the true constitution of the said Church, and that tie
said claim, along with the laws of the Church now subsisting, shall in nowise e


affected by whatsoever acts and proceedings of any Assembly constituted under
the conditions now declared to be the law, and in submission to the coercion now
imposed on the Establishment.
And, finally, while firmly asserting the right and duty of the civil magistrate to
maintain and support an establishment of religion in accordance with God’s Word,
and reserving to ourselves and our successors to strive by all lawful means, as oppor-
tunity shall, in God’s good providence, be offered to secure the performance of this
duty agreeably to the Scriptures, and in implement of the statutes of the kingdom of
Scotland, and the obligations of the Treaty of Union as understood by us and our
ancestors, but acknowledging that we do not hold ourselves at liberty to retain
the benefits of the Establishment while we cannot comply with the conditions now
to he deemed thereto attached —we .protest, that in the circumstances in which we
are placed, it is and shall be lawful for us, and such other commissioners chosen
to the Assembly appointed to have been this day holden, as may concur with us, to
withdraw to a separate place of meeting, for the purpose of taking steps for our-
selves and all who adhere to us—maintaining with us the Confession of Faith and
standards of the Church of Scotland, as heretofore understood —for separating in
an orderly way, from the Establishment; and thereupon adopting such measures as
may he competent to us, in humble dependence on God’s grace and the aid of the
Holy Spirit, for the advancement of His glory; the extension of the Gospel of our
Lord and Saviour, and the administration of the affairs of Christ’s house, according
to His holy Word ; and we do now for the purpose foresaid withdraw accordingly,
humbly and solemnly acknowledging the hand of the Lord in the things which
have come upon us, because of our manifold sins, and the sins of this Church and
nation; but, at the same time, with an assured conviction, that we are not re-
sponsible for any consequences that may follow from this our enforced separation from
an Establishment which we loved and prized —through interference with con-
science, the dishonour done to Christ’s crown, and the rejection of His sole and
supreme authority as King in His Church.
No. 111.
PROTEST READ IN THE SYNOD OF AUSTRALIA, IN CONNECTION WITH THE
ESTABLISHED CHURCH OF SCOTLAND, ON THE 10TH OCTOBER, 1846.
We, the undersigned ministers and elders, members of the Synod of Australia
in connection with the Established Church of Scotland;
Considering ' that the Synod, having resolved to remain in its present con-
nection with the Established Church of Scotland, and to retain its present desig-
nation unchanged, does thereby declare its approval of the submission of the said
Church to the encroachments of the Civil power on her spiritual independence
and the liberties of her constitution, and thus concurs in the renunciation of the
doctrine of Christ’s sole and sovereign Headship, which that submission involves;
And Further, Considering that, in virtue of the connection with the
Established Church of Scotland which the Synod has resolved to maintain, —
asserted as that connection is, not only in the designation of the Synod, but also
by the bond of Union entered into by the ministers and elders who united in
forming the said Synod, wherein it is set forth, that they engaged, in every part
of their future conduct towards each other to act in strict conformity to the laws
of Christ, and of the Scottish Church, declared anew their adherence to the doc-
trines of the Confession of Faith, and promised that in the exercise of discipline
they should follow the laws of that Church, so far as applicable in this colony,—the
unscriptural principles on which the government of the Established Church of


Scotland is now administered, according to which the civil courts are invested
with power to coerce the judicatories and individual members of that church in the
exercise of their spiritual functions and duties, and otherwise to interfere authori-
tatively in spiritual matters, and Presbyteries are authorised and empowered to disre-
gard and overbear the voice of the people in the formation of the pastoral relation,
are virtually adopted by the Synod; and the government and discipline of the
Colonial Presbyterian Church under its superintendence are liable to be subjected
to the operation of those principles.
We, therefore, the ministers and elders aforesaid, do protest, that the
Synod, by its concurrence in the renunciation of the doctrine of Christ’s Headship
as aforesaid, has placed itself in a position at variance with the word of God, and
with the standards of the Church of Scotland in their true and original import, and
incompatible with the discharge of its great duty as a witness to Christ.
And we Protest further, that, by the adoption of the principles afore-
said, the constitution of the Synod has been so changed, that the government of
the church cannot be conducted in accordance with it, without violating the
laws of God, dishonoring the Great King and Head of the Church, and invading
the rights of the Christian people.
And Finally, while we reserve any right, we, or any of us, or of such as
may adhere to us, possess to the whole, or any portion of the property, held
in behalf of the Synod of Australia in connexion with the Established Church
of Scotland, we Protest that, the Synod occupying such a position, and having
adopted such principles, it is, and shall be lawful for us, and such other ministers
and elders as may concur with us, to withdraw from the Synod, and take such
steps as may he competent to us and necessary for dispensing the ordinances of
the Gospel, and administering the affairs of the Church in this land, agreeably to
the mind of Christ, and to the standards and constitution of our Church ; and we
do now withdraw accordingly.
No. IV.
Bond of Union above referred to.
We, Ministers and Elders, whose names are undersigned, uniting ourselves
together in the Synod of Australia, in connection with the Established Church of
Scotland, do bind and oblige ourselves to pass over and bury in oblivion, all
matters which, in time past, have been the subject of mutual complaint and
accusation, and engage, in every part of our future conduct towards each other, to
act in strict conformity to the laws of Christ and of the Scottish Church. Me
declare anew our adherence to the Doctrines of the Confession of Eaith, and to the
other Standards and Formularies of the Established Church of Scotland, and
promise that, in the Exercise of Discipline, we shall follow the laws of that Church,
so far as applicable in this colony; and, whatever may he our individual opinions,
will, so long as we are members of the Court, submit ourselves to the judgments
and determinations of the majority of our number, regularly met, and sitting in
Presbyteries and Synod.
Given under our hand, at Sydney, on this fifth day of October, 1840.




