

Quick March: The Story of England's Great War: A Book for Australian Boys and Girls








OUR WAR PUBLICATIONS
THE STORY OF BELGIUM
FROM PROSPERITY TO DESOLATION; MURDER, RAPINE AND RUIN
A Description of the Wonderful Ancient Towns and Cities of Belgium, and the
Destruction wrought in them bv the German Troops; also an account of the
Barbarities, Murders, Mutilations, and other Atrocities of which the German officers
and men have been proved to be guilty.
25 ILLUSTRATIONS. PRICE 1/6.
THE ROLL OF HONOR
List of Officers and Men in the New South Wales Section of First Division
Australian Imperial Force : also contains History of the Rise of Germany's Military
Despotism, What Caused the War, etc., etc.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
GENERAL SIR lAN HAMILTON'S DESPATCH
Official Story of the Landing and Attack by Our Combined Forces at the Dardanelles.
Splendid Illustrations. Also contains Australia's Roll of Honor, Killed and Wounded
in the First Eighteen Casualty Lists.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
"QUICK MARCH''
THE STORY OF ENGLAND'S GREAT WAR
A BOOK FOR AUSTRALIAN BOYS AND GIRLS
1. Why Australia is Helping.
2. The Great Sea Fight between H.M.A.S. "Sydney"' and the German Cruiser
' Emden." With Colored Picture.
3. The Landing in the Dardanelles.
Many Illustrations. A Splendid Book for Young People.
BOUND IN CLOTH WITH STIFF COVER. PRICE 2/-
READY SHORTLY: "HEROES ALL "
STORIES OF AUSTRALIANS GALLANT DEEDS AT THE DARDANELLES.
Illustrated by Harry Julius and Sydney Ure Smith.
This Book will contain the story of the winning of the V.C. by Lance-Corporal
Jacka, and many other thrilling deeds by Our Boys which have been rewarded with
special medals, Names in Despatches, etc.
PRICE 1/6. ORDER NOW.
TURNER & SONS, Publishers, 9 Bligh Street, Sydney
Queensland : 7 7 Queen Street, BRISBANE
And at MELBOURNE (Victoria) and ADELAIDE (South Australia)
Letters containing Cash should be addressed to Box 1778 G.P.0., Sydney, or Box 661 G.P.0., Melbourne


OUR POST CARD SERIES
No. 1. —ARMY AND NAVY. Set of Six, printed in three colors.
1. H.M.A.S. "Sydney." 4. To Constantinople: "Britannia's Call.'"
2. M.M.A.S. Melbourne." 5. The Bugle Calls Our Boys to Arms.
3. H.M.A.S. " Australia." 6. Australia's Salute to the Flag.
PRICE 6d. THE SET.
No. 2. OUR PATRIOTIC SET. In three colors.
1. " The Cripple Alliance." 4. "John Bull and Young Australia.'"
2. " The Kaiser's Peculiar Way." 5. " Enlisting for the Front."
3. "To Constantinople." 6. "The Youngest Recruit."
PRICE 6d. THE SET.
No. 3. THE REMEMBER BELGIUM" VIEWS of German "Culture."
1. The King of Belgium. 4. Cloisters, Liege —now a German Stable
2. Interior of Barcy Church. 5. Sanctuary of Cathedral Wrecked.
3. View of Louvain after Ger- 6. Remains of Dinant Bridge.
mans Left.
PRICE 6d. THE SET.
OTHER PUBLICATIONS
THE AUSTRALIAN MOTOR MANUAL
Guide to Motor Cars, Motor Cycles, Motor Boats, and all Motor Accessories.
A Complete Directory of Firms in the Motor Industry in New South Wales.
PUBLISHED ANNUALLY PRICE 1/-
DIRECTORY OF MANUFACTURERS
OF AUSTRALIA
(INTERSTATE)
Complete List of Manufacturing Firms in each of the Australian States, with Index
of Articles manufactured in Australia, Customs Tariff, etc. This book gives, first,,
the Name of the Article Manufactured, and then the Names of all Firms engaged
in its manufacture, subdivided into States.
PUBLISHED ANNUALLY PRICE 10/6.
TURNER & SONS, Publishers, 9 Bligh Street, Sydney
Qyeensland : 77 Qyeen Street, BRISBANE
And at MELBOURNE (Victoria) and ADELAIDE (South Australia)
Letters containing Cash should be addressed to Box 1778 G.P.0., Sydney, or Box 661 G.P.0., Melbourne




■ f
j
■4tm , * ;; -**- '"^^■^'•■ 1 *§^^P^ f^--C"; '^
' ;j( : . ->,: ■" -
L, jaagL- ;^-H
The finish of the fight between H.M.A.S, "Sydney " and the German Cruiser " Emden


"QUICK MARCH"
THE STORY OF ENGLAND'S GREAT WAR
A BOOK FOR AUSTRALIAN BOYS AND GIRLS
C. E. SUTTON TURNER
Author of
" The Story of Belgium" The Rise of Germany's Military Despotism,"
Etc.
I. WHY AUSTRALIA HELPS THE EMPIRE
11. THE " SYDNEY " EMDEN " FIGHT
111. THE LANDING IN THE DARDANELLES
Illustrated
THE NET PROCEEDS FROM SALE OF THIS BOOK
WILL BE DONATED TO THE RED CROSS FUND FOR
WOUNDED SOLDIERS
Copyright —All Rights Reserved
PUBLISHED BY
TURNER & SONS MELBOURNE


"WE THAT BELONG''
Is it ships ? or horses ? or men ?
Is it food? or gnns? or gold?
lake it, Mother and then
We will send it over again
We are paying a debt to-day that dates from the days of old,
Lest Huns should harry the land, and England be bought and sold;
Steady and staunch as steel, wise in a world gone wrong,
We follow close at your heel, Mother, for WE BELONG!
The earth may be drenched in blood,
And weary, and sick with pain,
And men be stamped in the mud.
And Death sweep down like a flood
We are fighting with you to-day for no material gain,
Lest Dishonour rule the world, and the Mad Barbarian reign;
Beady with guns and gold, be the battle short or long,
Ihe same as in days of old, Mother, f or WE BELONG!
We learned to walk at your knee;
Shall we forsake your need ?
Whatever the issue be,
We are ready, oversea;
Proud, and trebly proud to be part of the Bulldog Breed
Gold and guns shall be sent, horses and men shall bleed.
Food and the ships are here, and a grim and goodly throng,
And the way of the War is clear, Mother, for WE BELONG!
CULLEN GOULDSBURY,
(In the London "Observer").


1. Why Australia Helps the Empire
IT must be a surprise to many boys and girls in Australia to see father and
brothers in the uniform of a soldier, and to know that they are going away
to fight in a great war. How is it, they will ask, that a happy country like
Australia, so far distant from where all the fighting is taking place, is yet
sending so many brave men to help England in this dreadful struggle? It is even
possible that some of those who read this book may have to go when they grow
older. So it is right that they should know why so many countries are fight-
ing against each other, and why our dear Australia is sending her brave sons
to take their part, and assist Great Britain and those who are fighting with
her against the foe.
You know Australia is part of the great British Empire, so that Britain's
enemies are also our enemies, and her friends are our friends. We are united
by many links; their King is our King, and we have many relations still living
in England, Scotland, Ireland and Wales whom we regard as cousins, and for
whom we have a strong brotherly love.
But we of the British race have more to unite us than this. Our history
tells how dearly we have loved Liberty and Freedom, and have protected the
weak from the injustice of the strong; how we have suffered, fought and died
so that all might be free and none might be slaves. And there are yet other
things we love besides our freedom, and which has helped to make of the
British people a great nation, great that is in the noblest meaning of that
QUICK MARCH '
n ~n
The Story of England s Great War
A Book for Australian Boys and Girls


word. We love justice and honor, truthfulness, mercy and loving kindness.
And we love courage, and brave hearts which would scorn to do a wrong.
Whatever is noblest and best in the world that we say is British, meaning it
is a part of that high ideal of life which all British people should strive to
attain. Every boy and girl in Australia can claim these good things, because
they, too, are part of the great British race, and have their share in her tradi-
tions and history. And it is just for all this we are fighting to-day, because we
believe in truthfulness, honor and justice, and always keep our pledged word
to protect the weak against the brutality of the strong.
And now to tell the story of how this tremendous war began, and why
Australia is taking part in it, and putting forth all her strength to help defeat
the enemy of our race.
An Austrian Prince and Princess were visiting a part of their kingdom
which was not very orderly, because the people did not want to belong to
Austria, but would rather have been united to another nation called Servia. At
the capital city of this province, called Serajevo, a mad boy who was only 17
years of age shot at the Prince and Princess and killed them both. Instead of
punishing this boy, together with those who helped him to commit the crime,
the Austrian Government determined to punish the people of Servia, just
because the boy who fired the shots was a Servian. This was regarded as
being very unjust, as indeed it was, so Servia appealed to Russia to pro-
tect her people against the threatened Invasion. Russia agreed to do this, and
began to gather an army, when Germany interfered and declared that war with
Austria would also mean war with her. Then Russia called on France to
assist her, and the quarrel began to widen.
Now in all this turmoil Great Britain stood apart, helping neither side,
and only wanting to prevent war and keep the nations at peace. But this was
found impossible, because Germany did not wait a moment, but sent out her
armies, one against Russia and another against France.
Now there was a small and very quiet little country called Belgium
situated between Germany and France, with both of whom she had always
tried to live upon good terms. Belgium was a weak nation, having a popula-
tion of only 7,500,000, against Germany's 65,000,000, and France's 40,000,000.
And because she was so small in comparison with these huge countries, a
treaty or agreement had been signed declaring that in the event of war between
these two nations, neither side would invade Belgium or try to pass through
her territory to reach the other. This treaty was signed by Great Britain,


' . • . -, t#~
.. . -■ :
France, Germany, Austria, and Russia, and it should have been sufficient to
protect Belgium had Germany been an honorable nation, and kept the pledge
of security she had signed. But directly war broke out Germany forgot every
promise she had made, and invaded Belgium with an immense army. Not satis-
fied with this, her soldiers murdered innocent people, women and children.
They destroyed the churches and cathedrals, doing as much damage every-
where as was possible, and committing other and worse crimes even than
these. It was this brutal attack upon little Belgium which brought England
An attack under cover cf the Guns. The Graphic.
into the war. AVe had promised and agreed that Belgium should he fiee, and
the promise had to he kept. Germany had signed the treaty also, and we had
a right to expect her to keep the agreement. When that promise was broken
Britain declared war upon Germany, and said she would never rest or know
peace again until every German had been driven out of Belgium.
And because England is right in thus protecting the weak, and keeping
her pledged word, every part of the great British Empire is helping by send-


jug men and money to fight the foe. And Australia is sending thousands of her
best and bravest men, and will never give in until the enemv is utterly
dfifsstod. |
there is one great difference in the armies of Great Britain and Ger-
many. In the British Empire, of which Australia is a part, only those who
vo unteer become soldiers and go to the war. But in Germany and Austria
every man is compelled to be a soldier, and forced to go to the war whether
he wants to go or not. And we now know that for 50 years Germany has been
ge ing ready for this war by drilling every man as he grew up into
manhood, and keeping him drilled even after he married and had
children of his own. Also Germany has been making thousands of big
guns and millions of tons of shells in readiness for this great struggle. No
other country m Europe was prepared, neither France, nor Russia, nor Great
ritain. And it is because of this that Germany has been able to put such
huge armies in the field without any waiting, invade Belgium and France, and
strike such terrible blows so quickly, and now is holding back all the armies we
can send because she was ready and we were not. But everybody despises
Germany because she has broken her promises, has slaughtered and murdered
innocent people in Belgium, and also has been guilty of even worse atrocities
ian the most uncivilised and barbarous people would commit.
But our great British Empire is now hastening to have as many soldiers
as Germany, and that is why Australia is helping, that is why the brave men
you know, your father and your brothers, and their friends, are becoming
soldiers, and going away in big ships to where the fighting is. I will tell
you now about some of this fighting.


The Story of
the Sydney and the German Cruiser " Emden
WHEN the war began Germany had a large number of ships of war sail-
ing about the world, and one of these was called the "Emden," which
was the name of the town where she was built.
Now this "Emden" was a very strong ship carrying ten 4-inch guns,
eight 5-pounders, four machine guns and two submerged torpedo tubes, and
could travel 25 knots an hour. Directly the war began she started capturing
our unarmed ships, merchant-vessels carrying cargo only, with perhaps a few
passengers. We tried for several months to capture her, but the ocean is a
very big place where ships can pass and leave no trace. And though we
searched every likely port, and sent warships to those seas where she was likely
to be, we never could find her. But still our vessels disappeared, and we knew
she was at work, sinking and capturing them. One day, however, we had news
of her, just as she was going to do some further damage.
In the Pacific Ocean, not very far from Australia, there is a little group
of islands one of which is called Cocos Island, and another Keeling Island.
Cocos is a "Wireless Station," where they pick up and send on wireless mes-
sages, and is therefore a very important place for us to possess. If you look
for it on the map you will find it lies near the Malay Settlement, south-west of
Java, about midway between Perth (Australia) and Colombo. It is a very
lonely place, and but few ships ever call there.
Now it appears that the "Emden" determined to destroy this Wireless
Station, knowing how valuable it was to our forces, and for this purpose she
boldly steamed up and fired a gun at the station, signalling at the same time
that no more messages were to be sent by the wireless operator. But this man
had been selected for his work because he was very brave, and therefore he
paid no attention to this message, but immediately sent out a wireless call
for help, saying "Strange Warship at Cocos."


Now it so happened that a large number of our Australian soldiers were
being carried to Colombo in ships we call transports, but as these vessels are
not armed, and do not carry guns, they are escorted or convoyed by other
ships well armed, whose business it is to protect them. And when this call
for help came across the water it was heard by the Captain of the Squadron, and
he immediately gave an order that the ship "Sydney" should sail away, and
see what the trouble was.
Now this "Sydney" is our very own ship. She was built with Aus-
tralian money, is called by the name of the first city of Australia, and is largely
manned by Australian boys, none of them over 23 years of age, and many as
young as 18. It was more a training ship than an actual cruiser, but still she
could fight, as now you will see. She carried eight 6-inch guns, in shields,
four 3-pounders and two 21-inch torpedo tubes, and had on board 390 officers
and men. She cost £450,000 to build, was classed as a light cruiser, and could
travel 26 knots an hour. Directly the order came that this ship was to leave
the transports and go to help the people at Cocos all the boys gave a great cheer,
and hurried to their stations, and duties. They did not know how big the ship
was that they were going to fight, but they had confidence in their Captain
and officers, and all they wanted was to be given the chance of showing the sort
of fighters they were. The following is taken from a letter written by one of
the officers to his father in Australia, and is one of the best descriptions of this
fight yet given:—
"On November 9th we were steaming about 50 miles to the eastward of
the Cocos Islands, heading for Colombo, when at 7 a.m. we took in a very in-
terrupted wireless message from the Cocos Wireless Station, ' Strange warship
off entrance." The "Melbourne" as senior officer, ordered us to
raise steam for full speed and go and investigate.
"At 9.15 a.m. the tops of the cocoanut trees of Keeling Island were
sighted. At 9.20 we sighted the 'Emden,' or rather the tops of the funnels, 12
or 15 miles away. At 9.40 a.m. she opened fire at a very big range, and shortly
after that we started in on her. Throughout the action I was constantly en-
gaged running backwards and forwards between the ammunition hoist and the
forecastle gun, or between the hoist and No. 1 starboard or No. 1 port gun.
Once I heard a crash and looking aft saw that a shell had hit near No. 2
starboard gun, but owing to the screen being in the way, I did not know it had
practically knocked out the whole of that gun's crew. Not seeing any flame
or smoke rising (we cope with the smallest fire immediately) I went on with
my job. This required continual attention. The men are splendid


i |
i !
'' -dr &
§ fir'".
«£% * - **" ", ; ..
£ _ as :: - ■
at loading drill, but to practice supply of ammunition is almost
impossible in peace time. To have a big supply stacked on the
upper deck is far too dangerous a proceeding in action. And what with
getting an even distribution of projectiles and cartridges between the two guns,
getting the safety caps off, with fiddly pins and things to take out, attending
to missfires, cheering up the one or two who seemed to be 'pulling dry,' you
can imagine I had little time to be thinking much about the ' Emden.' I noticed
once or twice when going to the forecastle gun that we seemed to be in the
thick of it. There was a lot of ' Wheee-oo Wheee-00. Wheee-oo,' and the 'But-
A 155 M M. Gun being towed ashore on a lighter at Sedd-Ul Bahr. -Illustrated War News.
but-but' of the shells striking the water beyond, and as the range was pretty
big, this is quite possible, since the angle of descent would be pretty steep.
Coming aft, I heard a shot graze the top of the shield of No. 1 starboard. A
petty officer now came up limping from aft, and said that he had just carried
an officer below (he was not dangerously hit) and that the after control position
had been knocked right out, and everyone wounded (they were marvellously
lucky). I told him if he was really able to carry on to go aft at No. 2 starboard
and see there was no fire, and if there was that any charges about were to be
thrown overboard at once. He was very game and limped away aft. He got


aft to find a very bad cordite fire just starting. He with others got this put
out. I later noticed some smoke rising aft, and ran aft to find that it was just
the remains of what they had put out, but found two men, one with a badly
wounded foot, sitting on the gun platform, and a petty officer lying on the deck
a little further aft, with a nasty wound in his back. I found one of the men
was unwounded, but badly shaken. However, he pulled himself together when
I spoke to him, and told him I wanted him to do what he could for the
wounded. I then ran back to my group.
All the time we were going 25 and sometimes as much as 26 knots. We
had the speed on the 'Emden,' and fought as suited ourselves. We next
changed round to starboard guns, and I then found the gunlayer of No. 1 star-
board had been knocked out close to the conning-tower, so I brought another
man er to fire No. 1 starboard. I was quite deaf by now, as in the hurry there
had been no thought of getting cotton wool to put in ears to deaden noise of
guns. Coming aft the port side from the forecastle gun, I was met by a lot of
men cheering and waving their caps. I said, 'What's happened?' 'She's gone,
Sir, she s gone.' I ran to the ship's side, and no sign of ship could I see. If
one could have seen a dark cloud of smoke, it would have been different. But
I could see no sign of anything, so I called out, 'All hands turn out the life-
boats, there will be men in the water.' They were just starting to do this when
someone called out, 'She's still firing, Sir,' and everyone ran back to the guns.
What had happened was a cloud of yellow or very light colored smoke had ob-
scured her from view, so that looking in her direction one's impression was
that she had totally disappeared. Later we turned again and engaged her on
the other broadside.
"By now her three funnels and her foremast had been shot away, and
she was on fire aft. We turned again, and after giving her a salvo or two with
the starboard guns, saw her run ashore on North Keeling Island. So at 11.20
a.m. we ceased firing, the action having lasted 1 hour and 40 minutes. Our
hits were not very serious. We were 'butted' in about three places. The shell
that exploded in the boy's mess deck, apart from ruining the poor little beggars'
clothes, provided a magnificent stock of trophies. For two or three days they
kept finding fresh pieces. The only important damage was the after control
platform, which is one mass of gaping holes and tangled ruin, and the foremost
range finder shot away. Other hits, though 'interesting,' don't signify. We
started chasing a collier which had been in attendance on the 'Emden,'
and when we boarded her we found they had opened the sea cocks, and the ship
was sinking fast. So we took everyone off her and returned to the 'Emden,'


getting back there at about 4 p.m. On arriving again off 'Emden,' she still had
her colors up at mainmast head. The captain inquired by signal, international
code, 'Will you surrender?' and received a reply in Morse, 'What signal? No
signal books.' We then made in Morse, 'Do you surrender?' and subsequent-
ly, 'Have you received my signal?' to neither of which was any answer given.
The German officers taken from the collier said that their captain would never
surrender, and, therefore, though very reluctantly, the captain ordered firing
to recommence. Five minutes later, however, she showed white flags, and
hauled down her ensign by sending a man aloft. It was now getting dark, and
we did not know for certain that the cruiser 'Konigsberg' might not be near, so
we could do no rescue work that night, and had to steam away. A cry in the
darkness and we stopped, and lifeboats were lowered to pick up a nearly ex-
hausted but lucky German sailor, the fourth rescued from the water that
day. The following day the 'Emden' was again approached, and a boat sent to
take possession. All the wounded were removed and attended to by the sur-
geon, while the officers and men surrendered, and became prisoners of war.
The losses on board the 'Sydney' were 4 killed and 12 wounded, but the 'Emden'
lost 7 officers and 108 men killed, with a much larger number wounded, the re-
mainder being taken prisoners. Thus was the ' Emden,' which has done so much
damage to British Commerce, totally destroyed."
And, now, here is what Captain Glossop, of the 'Sydney,' wrote to the
British Admiralty after the action: "I have great pleasure in stating that the
behaviour of the ship's company was excellent in every way, and with such a
large proportion of young hands and people under training, it is all the more
gratifying."
The Admiralty also gave directions that all honours of war were to be
accorded to the survivors of the 'Emden,' and that the captain and officers
were not to be deprived of their swords.
The First Lord of the Admiralty sent the following message to the
'Sydney' and to the Commonwealth Navy Board:—
"Warmest congratulations on the brilliant entry of the Australian Navy
into the war, and the signal service rendered to the Allied cause and to peace-
ful commerce by the destruction of the 'Emden.' "
This small but fast cruiser was thus brought to the end of a daring career
of destruction by H.M.A.S.'Sydney.' The list of captures of the 'Emden' in-
cluded no fewer than 23 ships, which she took, released, or sank, according to
circumstances. The value of the captures has been estimated at £650,000, the
cargoes being valued at an additional £3,000,000.


;
' ~ . ■ . ■ ■ »-■ ''i
.Jpi' . - 3
. f. v .1 g j; A o F M A R M 0 It A
\r** ?' * * -* * * - v * fr *" !
V"" : 'S'VS - J ./
' ' ■■ " ■■ ' - f J
; :,r
— -"■ i
df ; / « / /• ; x* - '
- I . * ■ <■: , . r-1
' , ■ £ - ' ' / ' ■ ' * ."'• i'-' •' '*• :
'<& ■-..■■■ ... ■■:-. ■. ■ . • . ■ .'' *'w. ' - ' _
Dardanelles, including Constantinople. Showing Entire District to be Occupied


□ The Fight in the Dardanelles □
A FTER leaving Australia, our soldiers went to Egypt to complete their
/\ training and drill, and from there thev went hv sea to invade Turkey
2 \ and capture her principal city of Constantinople. The Turks had very
foolishly declared war against the Allies, and were fighting upon the
side of Germany and Austria. So now they were to be punished for this, and
their country invaded. But Constantinople is a very strongly fortified place,
and the only way to get to it is through a long, narrow isthmus called the Dar-
danelles, and this, too, is fortified, and most difficult to navigate. There are
forts upon the land on both sides, held by large numbers of Turks, commanded
and led by German officers, and they have immensely heavy guns capable of
firing the heaviest shot and shells at any ship that dares to try and force a pas-
sage. But despite these tremendous forces, the Australian soldiers landed in
boats, and compelled the enemy to retreat. Here is the story as told by one
who was there: —
THE LANDING.
" Never before has an attempt been made to land so large a" force in the
face of a well-prepared enemy.
"At 2 p.m., on 24th April, the flagship of the division conveying the Aus-
tralasians, passed down the long line of slowly moving transports, amid tre-
mendous cheering, and was played out of the bay by the French war ships.
At 4 o'clock the ship's company and troops assembled to hear the Admiral's
proclamation to the combined forces. This was followed by a last service before
the battle, in which the chaplain uttered a prayer for victory, and called on the
divine blessing for the expedition. All stood uncovered, with bowed heads.
"GOING INTO ACTION.
"TROOPS CHEERFUL AND CONFIDENT.
"At dusk all lights were out, and the troops rested for the ordeal at
dawn. It was a beautiful calm night, with a bright half moon. By 1 a.m. the
ships reached the rendezvous five miles from the landing place. The soldiers
were aroused, and served with their last hot meal. The Australians, who were


about to go into action for the first time under trying circumstances, were
cheerful, quiet and confident. There was no sign of 'nerves' or excitement.
"As the moon waned the boats were swung out. The Australians
received their last instructions, and men who six months ago were living peace-
ful, civilian lives, began to disembark on a strange and unknown shore, in
a strange land, to attack an enemy of different race. Each boat was in charge
of a midshipman, and was loaded with great rapidity and absolute silence
without a hitch. The covering force was towed ashore by the ships' pinnaces.
More of the Australians' Brigade was carried aboard destroyers, which were
to go close inshore, as soon as the covering force landed. At 3 a.m. it was
quite dark, and a start was made shoreward. There was suppressed excite-
ment among the men. Would the enemy be surprised or would he be on the
alert?
"THREE BATTLESHIPS OFF THE SHORE.
"At 4 o'clock three battleships in line abreast and four cables apart
arrived 2500 yds. from the shore. The guns were manned, and searchlights got
ready. Very slowly the boats in tow, like twelve great snakes, moved inshore.
They edged towards each other in order to reach the beach. Four cables apart
battleships moved slowly in after them until the water became shallow. Every
eye was fixed on the grim line of hills in front, menacing in their gloom, the
mysteries of which those in the boats were about to solve. Not a sound was
heard or a light seen. It appeared as if the enemy had been surprised. In
our nervy state the stars were often mistaken for lights ashore.
"RIFLE FIRE BEGINS AT DAWN.
"The progress of the boats was slow. Dawn was rapidly breaking at
4.50 a.m., when the enemy showed an alarm light, which flashed for ten minutes
and then disappeared. The boats appeared to be almost on the beach. Seven
destroyers glided noiselessly inshore. At 4.53 came a sharp burst of rifle fire
from the beach. The sound relieved the prolonged suspense, which had become
almost intolerable. The fire lasted a few minutes. Then a faint British cheer
came over the waters, telling that the first position had been won. At 5.30
the fire was intensified. By the sound we could tell that our men were firing.
It lasted 25 minutes, and then died down somewhat.
"FUSILLADE ON BOATS.
"The boats now returned. A pinnace came alongside with two recum-
bent figures on the deck and a small midshipman, cheerful, and waving his


hand, with a shot through his stomach. The three were wounded by the first
burst of musketry. Ihe boats had almost reached the beach when a party of
Turks entrenched ashore opened a terrible fusillade with rifles and a maxim.
Fortunately most of the bullets went high.
"RUSHING THE TRENCHES.
"AN ALMOST PERPENDICULAR CLIFF.
"THIS RACE OF ATHLETES.
Ihe Australians rose to the occasion. They did not wait for orders
or for the boats to reach the beach, but sprang into the sea, formed a sort of
rough line, and rushed the enemy's trenches. Their magazines were not
charged, so they just went in with cold steel.
Australians Attacking. Taking a Turkish Trench.
"It was over in a minute. The Turks in the first trench were either
bayoneted or ran away, and their maxim was captured. Then the Aus-
tralians found themselves facing an almost perpendicular cliff, with loose
sandstone covered by thick shrubbery. Somewhere half-way up the enemy
had a second trench strongly held, from which was poured a terrible fire on
the troops below and the boats pulling back to the destroyers for the second
landing party. Here was a tough proposition to tackle in the darkness. But
those Colonials, practical above all else, went about it in a practical way. They
stopped for a few minutes to pull themselves together, get rid of their packs
and charge their magazines.


' 1 Then this race of athletes proceeded to scale the cliff, without respond-
ing to the enemy's fire. They lost some men, but did not worry. In less than
a quarter of an hour the Turks were driven out of their second position, and
were either bayoneted or fleeing.
"As daylight came it was seen that the landing had been effected rather
further north of Kaba Tepe than was originally intended, at a point where
the cliffs rise very sheer. The error was a blessing in disguise, because there
were no places down which the enemy could fire, and the broken ground
afforded good cover once they passed the forty yards of flat beach.
1 ' The country in the vicinity of the landing place is formidable and for-
bidding. To the sea it presents a steep front, broken into innumerable ridges,
bluffs, valleys and sand pits, rising to a height of several hundred feet. The
surface is bare, but the crumbly sandstone is covered with thick shrubbery
about 6 feet in height. This is ideal for snipers, as the Australasians soon
found to their cost. On the other hand, the Australasians proved themselves
adepts in this kind of warfare.
"SHARPSHOOTERS CONCENTRATE ON BOATS.
"In the early part of the day heavy casualties were suffered in the
boats conveying the troops from the destroyers, tugs and transports. The
enemy's sharpshooters, hidden everywhere, concentrated their fire on the boats.
When close in at least three boats broke away from their tow, and drifted
down the coast without control. They were sniped at the whole way, steadily
losing men.
"GALLING FIRE FROM MANY POINTS.
"The work of disembarking proceeded mechanically under a point
blank fire. The moment the boats touched the beach the troops jumped ashore
and doubled for cover, but the gallant boat crews had to pull in and out under
a galling fire from hundreds of points. All through 25th April this went on
during the landing of troops and ammunition stores.
"When daylight came the warships endeavoured to support the troops
by a heavy fire from their secondary armaments, but, not knowing the enemy's
position, the support was more moral than real.
"When the sun had fully risen we could see that the Australasians had
actually established themselves on the ridge, and were trying to work their
way northward along it. The fighting was so confused and occurred in such


m
:
4jf -
wl' ; PS - ' - '' *» •
broken ground that it was difficult to follow exactly wbat happened on the
25th, hut the task of the covering force was so splendidly carried out that it
allowed the disembarkation of the remainder of the troops to proceed uninter-
ruptedly, except for the never ceasing sniping.
"AUSTRALASIANS PUSH INLAND.
"FACE DEADLY SHRAPNEL FIRE.
"But then the Australasians, whose blood was up, instead of entrench-
ing, rushed northwards and eastwards, searching for fresh enemies to bayonet.
It was difficult country in which to entrench, and they therefore preferred to
Australian Mounted Infantry Advancing in the Face of a Furious Fire. — The Graphic.
advance. The Turks had only a weak force actually holding the beacii. They
relied on the difficult ground and their snipers to delay the advance until rein-
forcements came.' Some of the Australasians who pushed inland were counter
attacked and almost outflanked by the oncoming reserves, and had to fall back,
after suffering heavy losses.


"The Turks continued to counter-attack during the whole afternoon, but
the Australasians did not yield a foot on the main ridge. Reinforcements poured
up from the beach, but the Turks enfiladed the beach with two field guns from
Kaba Tepe. This shrapnel fire was incessant and deadly, and the war ships
vainly for some hours tried to silence it.
"The majority of the heavy casualties during the day were from the
shrapnel which swept the beach and the ridge where the Australians were
established. Later in the day the guns were silenced or forced to withdraw,
and a cruiser, moving close inshore, plastered Kaba Tepe with a hail of shell.
Towards dusk the Turks' attacks became more vigorous. The enemy was sup-
ported by powerful artillery inland, which the ships' guns were powerless to
deal with. The pressure on the Australians became heavier, and their lines
had been contracted. Lieutenant-General Sir W. R. Birdwood and his staff
landed in the afternoon, and devoted their energies to securing the position so
as to hold it firmly until next morning, when they hoped to get the field guns
into position.
"Some idea of the difficulty may be gathered when it is remembered that
every round of ammunition and all the water and stores had to be landed
on the narrow beach and carried up pathless hills and valleys several hundred
feet high to the firing line. The whole mass of troops was concentrated in
a very small area, and was unable to reply, although exposed to a relentless
and incessant shrapnel fire, which swept every yard of ground. Fortunately,
much of it was badly aimed, and burst too high.
"COURAGE OF THE WOUNDED.
" 'IT WILL NEVER BE FORGOTTEN.'
"DOOMED MEN'S CHEERS.
"A serious problem was that of getting the wounded from the shore. All
those unable to hobble had to be carried from the hills on stretchers, then
have their wounds hastily dressed, and be carried to the boats. The boat par-
ties worked unceasingly during the entire day and night.
"The courage displayed by these wounded Australians will never be for-
gotten. Hastily placed in trawlers, lighters and boats, they were towed to the


ships. In spite of their sufferings, they cheered the ship from which they had
set out m the morning. In fact, I never saw anything like these wounded Aus-
tralians m war before. Though many were shot to bits, and were without
hope oi recovery, their cheers resounded throughout the night. You could see
Wounded Australians cheering their comrades advancing to attack
in the midst of the mass of suffering humanity arms waving in greeting to the
crews of the war ships. They were happy, because they knew they had been
tiied for the first time and had not been found wanting.
"FIFTEEN HOURS UNDER FIRE.
"OFFICERS DELIBERATELY PICKED OFF.
I 01 fifteen mortal hours the Australians had occupied the heights un-
der an incessant shell fire without the moral or material support of a single
gun ashore. They had been subjected for the whole time to the violent counter


attack of a brave enemy, skilfully led, with snipers deliberately picking off
every officer who endeavored to give a command or lead his men. Ihere
been no finer feat in this war than this sudden landing in the dark and storm-
ing of the heights, and above all, holding on to these heights whilst the rein-
forcements were landing. These raw Colonial troops, in these desperate hours,
proved worthy to fight side by side with the heroes of Mons, the Aisne, Ypres,
and Neuve Chapelle.
"Early in the morning of 26tli April the Turks repeatedly tried to drive
the Colonials from their position. The latter made local counter attacks, and
drove off the enemy with the bayonet, which the Turks would never face. The
Sniping the Sniper
Turks were largely reinforced overnight, and prepared a big assault from the
north-east. The movement began at 9.30 a.m.
"From the ships we could see the enemy creeping along the hill tops, en-
deavouring to approach under cover. He also brought up more guns, and plas-
tered the position with shrapnel, while the rifle and machine gun fire became
unceasing. Seven war ships crept close in, with the Queen Elizabeth further
out as a kind of chaperone. Each covered a section, and opened a terrific bom-
bardment of the heights and the valleys beyond.


"HILLS ABLAZE WITH SHELLS. I
. j
"CHARGE BY AUSTRALASIANS. . ]
"TURKS BREAK AND FALL BACK.
"As the Turkish infantry advanced it met every kind of shell which our
war ships carry, from 'Big Lizzie's' 15-inch shrapnel to 12-pounders. The
shooting was excellent, yet, owing to their splendid cover, the Turks advanced
gallantly, while their artillery not only shelled our position but tried to drive
off the ships. The scene at the height of the engagement was sombre, magnifi-
cent and unique. The day was perfectly clear, and we could see down the coast
as far as Seddel-Bahr. There the war ships were blazing away. On shore the
rattle of rifles and machine guns was incessant. The hills were ablaze with
shells, while masses of troops on the beaches were waiting to take their places
in the trenches.
"The great attack lasted for two hours. We received messages that
the ship's fire was inflicting awful losses on the enemy. There was a flash of
the bayonet and a sudden charge by the Colonials, before which the Turks
broke and fled. Amidst a perfect tornado of shells from the ships they fell
back, sullen and checked. They kept up an incessant fire throughout the day,
but the Colonials were now dug in. Some prisoners were captured, including
officers, who said the Turks were becoming demoralised by the gunfire, and
the Germans had difficulty in getting them to attack.
"THE SECOND DAY.
"Throughout the night of 26th April the Turks harassed our lines,
creeping up and endeavouring to snipe the Australasians in the shelter of
their trenches, but never daring to press the attack, although they were in
overwhelming numbers. The Turks paid dearly for their temerity. One sec-
tion of New Zealanders charged with the bayonet, driving them off in disorder.
"It was obvious on the morning of 27th that the Turks had not recov-
ered from the terrible hammering of the previous day. They had no stomach
for another big attack on the entrenchments of the invading force, which was
now firmly established in semi-circles along the front of the whole foreshore,
which was being used for the disembarkation of troops, supplies, guns and
ammunition.
"The position of the Colonials was also immeasurably improved by the
landing of the field guns and several Indian mountain batteries.


, v ; ;
"THE TURKS DISILLUSIONED.
'' The Turks evidently had intended to drive the Australasians into the
sea on 26th by a great concentration of infantry and unceasing shrapnel fire,
expecting to find the line thinly held and the men exhausted from losses and
the exertion during the landing.
"They were soon disillusionised. These Australians were determined to
die to a man rather than surrender ground so dearly won. Every man knew
his only hope of safety lay in victory, as it would be impossible to re-embark
the army once the rings of hills commanding the beach was lost.
A portion of the 3rd Australian Brigade established a hold on a narrow ridge of land facing an
enormously strong Turkish position. Though fearfully exposed, our men refused to budge, and
ultimately the Turks retired. — Illustrated War News.
'' Most troops when under fire for the first time, especially volunteers
with a few months' training, keenly feel losses at the beginning, especially if
they occur before they have time to settle down, but these Colonials were the
exception to the rule.
"INCESSANT RAIN OF SHRAPNEL.
"Despite the heavy losses the survivors were as keen as ever. The
enemy throughout 27th resorted to new tactics in the hope of driving the


Australians landing at Gaba Tepeh under a terrible Gun and Rifle fire {page 17).


Colonials off the shore and preventing supplies and reinforcements reaching
the beach.
"The enemy on the night of 26tli brought up many field guns, with which
they opened a tremendous bombardment on the foreshore and the sea, and
kept up an incessant rain of shrapnel. The trenches could no longer enfilade
the beach, as every attempt to place guns was immediately checkmated by a
few well-aimed salvos from the war Hips.
"MAGNIFICENT SPECTACULAR EFFECT.
"The Turkish gunners tried to put a great curtain of shrapnel over the
sea between the war ships and the transports and the shore. The amazing
sight was seen of scores of shells bursting and churning up the water like a
great hail storm. Some fell far out, while others made a great danger zone,
through which the boats and trawlers had to pass. This hail of lead did not
make the slightest difference to the gallant crews of the pinnaces, boats,
lighters and tugs. They took as much notice of it as if it were a tropical
thunder storm. The spectacular effect of the bombardment was magnificent,
but the damage done was practically nil.
"The war ships throughout 27th incessantly fired at any of the enemy's
infantry attempting to advance. Hydroplanes did excellent work in directing
the fire on the guns inland. The ships' Indirect firing was daily becoming
more efficient, and is now so accurate that nothing can live, provided the target
is accurately spotted.
"The Turks frequently fire their heavy guns on the other side of the
peninsula, hoping to knock a hole in Ihe transports, but they have not suc-
ceeded.
"If a Turkish war ship in the straits makes an attempt to fire, a salvo
from the Allies' ships speedily forces her to fly up the channel.
"INTENSE ACTIVITY ASHORE.
"The scene on shore is one of ihe most intense activity. One lands in
an avalanche of shrapnel, and finds legiments waiting on the beach before
moving to the trenches, fatigue parties unloading lighters, mule trains endeav-
oring to drag the field guns into position, Indians conveying their mountain
guns, dressing stations tending to the wounded, and telegraph and telephone
units laying wires. Meanwhile landing parties from the war ships have been
busy building bomb-proof shelters.


J
Jk^s-
- v? so v BP***
"I liousands of hardy Xew Zealanders and Australians are concentrated
on the narrow shore, each engaged in some occupation, for as soon as he leaves
the front trenches he is required for fatigue work. Few have had more than
a few hours' sleep for several days past. The generals and the staff officers
fare no better than the men.
GENERAL BIRDWOOD 'S COMMENDATION.
Lieutenant-General Sir \V. R. Birdwood told the writer (Mr. Ashmead
Bartlett) that he could not sufficiently praise the courage, endurance and sol-
dierly qualities of the Colonials. The manner in which they hung on to their
positions day and night was magnificent, considering the heavy losses, the
shortage of wafer and the incessant Eirapnel fire to which they were exposed
without cover. 1 hey also were exposed to incessant infantry attacks after they
had retired to the contracted line, hi t they set their teeth, and refused to
budge a foot.
Australians Bathing under a Hail of Shell Fire.
"BATHING IN SHRAPNEL-SWEPT SEA.
"These Colonials are extraordinarily good under fire, often exposal <>
themselves rather than take the trouble to keep under the shelter of the cliff.
<*ne of the strangest sights was to see numbers bathing in the sea with shrapnel
bursting- all around them.


r ? - ■/•"■■'' ' I •«BK'% j^J
§ J*jfc \ • JB? . Jj&mT '■-"-':. '3Sp>WiP*iBKT " J^kR
«jfe<|raWBR^gqBjg . : -JJP*^W^MK^^k«»| ••:< I
-W'.. — -atiw^hi
v ' ■■ ' S <? ':' " ■-. _;' V; '' - '/v*;
"This Colonial colony ashore is assuming a definite form, the whole
face of the cliff being cut into roads, dug-outs and bomb-proof shelters. An
improvised township is springing up as the troops slowly dig themselves in and
make themselves comfortable.
"We are holding a semi-circular position, with trenches well made, pro
viding ample cover, but the slightest exposure is almost certain to result-in a
hit from a bullet.
Battle by Moonlight in Gallipoli and Turks advancing under Cross-fire and Bombs.
—lllustrated War News.
41 VOLUNTEERS HUNT THE SNIPERS.
"This incessant sniping greatly puzzles the men in the trenches, and is
a great problem at present. Apparently even when an advance post is thrown
out the enemy's sharpshooters remain behind and snipe the unwary. Volun-
teers venture out nightly in order to hunt the snipers, but so far they have been
unable to keep them under.
"The cheerfulness of the men in the trenches is most marked. They
feel they have overcome the initial difficulties, and have paved the way to
success. They now occupy such a position so thoroughly entrenched that all
the Turks in Thrace and Gallipoli could never turn them out.


THE AUSTRALIANS MAKE HISTORY.
When all is said, however, the feat which will go down to history is that
first Sunday's fighting, when three Australian brigades stormed, in the face of
fire, tier after tier of cliffs and mountains apparently as impregnable as
Govett's Leap. The sailors who saw the Third Brigade go up those heights
and over successive summits like a whirlwind, with wild cheers and bayonets
flashing, speak of it with tears of enthusiasm. The New Zealander s are just as
generous in appreciation. It is hard to distinguish between the work of the
brigades. They all fought fiercely and suffered heavily, but, considering that
they performed last Sunday a feat which is fit to rank beside the battle of the
Heights of Abraham, their losses are not heavier than must be expected. I be-
lieve the British at Cape Helles fought a tremendous fight.
UNDYING FAME.
Of the Australians, it may be said that the Australian Infantry, and
especially the Third Brigade, has made a name which will never die. Around
me, as I write, the guns of half-a-dozen warships are shaking the hills. From
the ridges above comes the continuous rattle of musketry. As no bullets are
whistling overhead, the firing must be by our men. The issue cannot be in
doubt, but one knows that, even if it were, nothing could take away from the
Australian and New Zealand Infantry the fame of last Sunday's fighting.
ANOTHER ACCOUNT.
On Monday, the second day of landing, the enemy again pumped shrapnel
on to the ridges. Also they must have fired 600 shells at the landing-place,
scarcely hitting any one. The shells on the ridges were far worse, but this time
the battleship "Queen Elizabeth" was sent to support us. During the morning
the effect of her shells was like a tonic to our tired men. Huge yellow clouds
burst from her side; some seconds later came a crash as if the sky had fallen
in, followed almost immediately by a tremendous roar somewhere on land.
Looking in the direction of the Turkish position you saw a vast cloud of earth
and green smoke rise skyward. The "Queen Elizabeth" had been provided
with monstrous shrapnel sent out specially for this job. The shell weighs nearly
a ton, and, bursting, leaves in the air not merely the little puff of ordinary
shrapnel, but a miniature thundercloud.


REPELLING ATTACKS.
Early on the second morning' the Eighth Australian Infantry repelled four
Turkish charges. The Fourth Infantry made a most gallant attack with the
bayonet and drove the Turks back through the scrub until they came on the
Turkish camp. The Ninth and Tenth went straight through that until faced
by three machine-guns in position further back and came under tire of a bat-
tery. This battalion was afterwards ordered to retire somewhat, as the posi-
tion was difficult to support. The Turks next attacked the left and right of the
Third Brigade. The fire of the "Queen Elizabeth" and that of the other war-
Heroic Australians repulsing overwhelming masses of Turks, assisted by shell-fire from the Fleet
at the Dardanelles. — Illustrated War News.
ships soon settled the fate of the former attack, but, in the latter case, the
fierce fire of the machine-guns sweeping down the ridge, which was peculiarly
exposed to shrapnel fire, proved too trying for the battalion holding it. There
had been no opportunity of digging trenches at this spot, the fire being too hot.
The battalion had been put straight into this nasty corner immediately after
arrival, and was subjected to a heavy strain. For the time, the ridge was left
almost clear of our troops, and the Turks began to creep up to the edge of it
almost in the rear of the Third Brigade. This was towards evening, and the


Third Brigade had been in the trenches continuously fighting, many of the men
without any food. Every man brought ashore with him three days' rations,
but in the fierce rush up the hillside 011 Sunday morning, many had left their
packs behind.
i
THE TIRED NINTH AND TENTH.
On Monday afternoon, an endeavour was made to take some battalions of
this brigade out of the trenches to rest and collect such portions as were scat-
Artillery Shelling a Turkish Fort aided by Searchlight. The Graphie.
tered through the firing line. Part of the Ninth and Tenth were waiting down
the valley at the rear when the Turks began to take this ridge. There was
nothing for it but to send the tired Ninth and Tenth to take the ridge again. I
saw that advance from a few hundred yards away. First, one very gallant officer
of the retreating regiment came through the scrub collecting odds and ends
of his battalion from the hollows and waving them forward. Standing up all the
time, he succeeded in rallying a few men and leading them forward several


hundred yards. There the effort rested, but I saw this particular officer seve-
ral times later running up and down in the firing line in his macintosh, hopping
over the scrub amidst a deadly fire when every other living thing upon that
plateau was flat upon its face. Presently up came the Ninth and Tenth, line
after line. In very good lines of twenty or thirty they w T ent through the scrub,
rushing for all they were worth, dropping every hundred yards or so to take
breath, then up again and on towards the end of the ridge. About three rushes
After the Landing at the Southern end of the Gallipoli Peninsular. Allied troops at the
wrecked Lighthouse on Cape Helles. — 1 llustrated London News.
covered it; they were facing shrapnel and machine-guns, but reached the re-
quired position. Three times they were driven off the ridge, and three times
they came and took it. The last time they remained there. When the
Brigadier asked them afterwards what they wanted to retire for, 4 'Well, we
retired in very good line, sir!" said one stalwart, grinning. "And so they did,
the beggars !" added the Brigadier.
FINIS.








