

R.M.S. "Osterley"
Commander - W. J. JENKS , R.N.R.
SOUVENIR . . .
OF THE
. . . VOYAGE.
LONDON TO BRISBANE,
APRIL AND MAY, 1910.
SYDNEY :
Model Printery , 49-Albion Street, Annandale,
1910.


Commander - W. J- JEANKS,
SOUVENIR . . .
GF THE
. . . VOYAGE.
LONDON TO BRISBANE,
APRIL AND MAY, 1910.


AN OCEAN VOYAGE.
(By J. STANLEY HUGHES.)
What memories of the "Old Land,” of London
with “its teeming roar of myriad life, of the sweet
peace of country lanes, and the quaint dialect spo-
ken in them, are called up to the restless brain of
the wanderer by these words: AX OCEAN VOY-
AGE ! What dreams to tile Australian in England
of wild husli scenery and scenes ! The cattle sett-
ling down to their camp at night, while the fire
crackles and the jokes are cracked; the rataplan of
thunder of horses to the yard of a morning, or long
lonely moonlight rides through ring-barked coun-
try, where white, weird trunks throw out their
knotted and twisted arms, like huge human beings
killed in some awful struggle, and frozen as they
died.
To those parted by the sea from their birthplace
and their people, the mere uttering of the words
kind of throws a bridge across the illimitable blue,
bringing the old home nearer, and seeming to say:
"After all, there’s nothing so very much separating
us; only an Ocean Voyage. Some day we will take
it—ami then ”
To those who have lived always, so to speak, on
the home-farm, or have tried their wings but little
in wonder-flights, the words that are a heart-stirr-
ing music in two chords to the Nomad, have an
ominous roll, voicing the clang and clash of out-
side life-hattle.
In part, tie home-keeper is right. Those voyag-
ing across the seas, meet life in its manifold phases.
They see, here, the strife for breathing room, and
there the acres of palace inhabited by one man;


here, they are almost within hearing of the cannon,
anon, they are in peaceful tropic isles, lands where
it is always afternoon. A man may think of what
h'e reads; of what he sees he must think. The wan-
derer’s mind becomes perturbed, opens, and receives
thoughts and problems, joys and sorrows, unknown
to the patient stay-at-home, who wonders, per a
daily journal, what it is all like, but will not go
forth and see. The wanderer is the cleverer: is he
the wiser ?
Let us look at the voyage itself, apart from the
incident of the hither and thither sides. In these
days of hurry, rush and work, when even the
idlest must turn his unwilling hand to something,
or be flattened against the wall of adversity, an
ocean voyage is about the only absolute rest there is
left to us. Here, to perfection, is the recuperating
ground of the worn-out toiler—for work he cannot,
there is nothing for him to do. and nobody will help
him look for anything. It is a veritable Lotus
Land, where to “lie beside your nectar” and read
light literature is the utmost attempted by anyone.
Is it not symbolical of these quick-living days that
even this perfect rest is on the move, hurrying us
swiftly to some other scene of action, where we
must plunge ‘again into the crowd and bustle and
jostle ourselves onward, upward, too, if we can. If
it is upward, the ascending never ceases; there is
no top; step by step we toil, till suddenly the tot
tering limbs relax, the beating of the heart is
stilled for ever, and by fellow-toilers we are gently
lowered into the silent grave.
liriiilit spots in the lives of most travellers are
these ocean Sitting's from shore to shore. It is sel-
dom that you will meet with no spirit more or less
kindred with whom you can talk as you love to
talk, gliding from this to that and bade again, as
fancy wills it; or from whom in return for your ex-
periences of Africa and the Ind, you will get strange
tales from the great Xorth-TTest, or other parts,


no matter where; you are bound to want to go
there, and you never fail to tell him, wherever it is
he is going, to look out for you, as you may turn
up sometimes you do.
A lover of the land mig’ht say that it is slow;
no life. Ts not the very ship in which you are so-
journing a pulsing, vibrating, almost living, thing?
Go and look at the work she is doing
“Where the engines stamp and ring,
And tliei wet bows reel and swing.”
(Jr face it on the f'o’csle head —
‘"When the shouting seas drive by.”
Plainly enough, these speak of the strife you will
be into again before long; and the land-lover, if he
were there, would go back and hug what was left
him “of the delicious ease of a deep-sea trip.”
Four more lines, from the masterpiece of the man
who loves a steamship, with an abiding love, and
we have done for the time with ocean voyages :
“You have heard the call of the off-shore wind
And the voice of the deep sea rain;
You have heard the song; How long? How long?
Pull out on the trail again.”
It apparently being the wish of some of the in-
habitants of this floating island—“S.S. Osterley”
—not to forget at once and for ever the horrible ex-
periences of the last few weeks, it has been sug-
gested that a chronicler of the main points of the
history of that short period may be found. It is
only fair at the commencement to say that many
abler persons were deputed for this duty, but as
they did not toe the line, it has fallen to the lot of the
unlucky scribe, whose name is not at the foot of it.
Anonymous 1 insist upon being; but, just as a clue
to my identity, I will describe myself as I appear


to myself: Tall, dark, extremely handsome, a regu-
lar fierce Don Juan face, about six feet two in
stockings—no, socks (we have some beauties on
board). Also, lam of truly majestic build; I have
eyes of ethereal blue, since starting they have be-
come tinged with the azure of the sea, and .
Well, if you see me going down the gangway at
Sydney, please heave bricks at someone else, for I
am a married man, and my wife, while not proper-
ly appreciating me, has need of me.
“Ketuornons a nos moutons.” I can just re-
member the rush that occurred at Tilbury, when
we left our English girls, friends, and wives: the
hurried, tearful farewells. There was scarcely time
to say all we wished, and if people always have such
a lot to say in those last few moments, I suppose
that there never will be time.
This little souvenir is not to be of the guide-book
type, so I will, with a full sense of the security of
your approval, entirely leave out purely historical
records, such as the times the sun rose and set
each day; sufficient to say, that the sun did per-
form these functions with strict regularity during
the whole trip.
'Everyone, of course, did not take their meals
with the same regularity: those who were able t•»
walk the deck with their native-heath feeling natur-
ally foregathered with their kind: truly British re-
serve that ran only to “Pass the salt,” with, per-
haps, a shy allusion to the weather, ruled to Gib-
raltar ; towards Marseilles we talked of our future—
afterwards we only spoke of our.past.
Here are some of the types on board: There were
sheep station ruen returning' to Australia; number-
less and potential empire-builders; there were
young bloods from London; remittance and embryo
wage earning; and a small sprinkling of despera-
does, all off to this land of promise. At Gib. we
lost a few soldier men, and many went ashore to


stretch their legs. At the next port. Marseilles, we
took on a few more passengers, including some
members of the Northern Union Rugby team, the
rest of whom, I had forgot to mention, had been
with us from London —they were not numerically
great, but they took up a lot of room; veritable and
most gentle giants, every one of them; it is as well
for their managers that the Orient Company did not
grant them accommodation in strict proportion to
their cubic measurements.
Gradually people grew to know one another. The
man whom we had deemed to be a wealthy squatter
turned out to be an heir to airy fortunes, and was
journeying to Australia, evidently intent to teach
all the natives the latest and most correct rue in
the matter of socks.
The man who had been put down as an out-of-
work sort of chap, going out to try his fortune, was
discovered to be the owner of some huge slice of
Continent, and of some millions of sheep. The
quiet man became the noisy one; the effervescent
one became “still waters,” and so on, and so on.
After Naples, an idea' seemed to be prevalent
that Sports should be promoted, and for the next
few weeks an epidemic of Olympic aspiration held
the ship. The difficult and critical operation of
selecting' a committee was gone through, and the
luckless twelve elected were, as always happens,
the butts and condemned conspirators for the rest
of the voyage. However, the eight men and four
ladies selected proved fully equal to their task, and
an excellent programme was arranged. Records re-
late that Whist Tourneys, Cribbage Matches,
Bridge, Solo, Chess and Draughts all claimed their
devotees, and many were the pleasant games con-
tested. During the daytime some quite remark-
able performances were carried out. There was a
lady who could, with Certainty, from the mark,
throw twelve rope quoits consecutively into the


bucket. There were Bull-hoard champions, who
apparently held a spell upon the little sand-bags.
Deck Quoits brought to light several brilliant
players, and that fickle game —Deck Billiards —
caused many hilarious and well-fought games. Port
Said passed without any event of moment, and we
entered the Canal fully prepared for the long ten
days’ run to Colombo, these days being occupied
playing off the events on deck.
Arrived at Colombo, one and all on file great ship
were shocked and saddened by the news of the
death of our beloved King Edward, a calamity, the
extent of which we leave hardly yet been able to
realise. On the first Sunday after leaving Colombo
an impressive memorial service was held on deck.
Still more impressive was the reading, ten days
later (when on the high seas) of the Burial Service
at our time, but not the time of His Majesty’s
funeral in Windsor.
At Colombo we found an atmosphere of real
Oriental life, the brilliant colouring and native
mannerisms being found both strange and interest-
ing to those of us that went ashore for the day.
To have been able to purchase in the Bazaars for
the sum of two shillings an article that had only a
few moments before been valued most confidential-
ly at thirty pounds, was most satisfying to those
who were the happy concluders of such a bargain.
It really was most instructive to compare the prices
paid for identical articles on the return to the
steamer; they varied from fifteen shillings to a few
pence.
Again at sea, Ceylon behind us, we plunged once
more into tlie business of play. Tlfis is a sample of
what was daily occurring. Miss Pitcher is dis-
covered coming on deck by the lion cage door, and
is at once pounced upon by some eagle-eyed official:
‘■’Oh, Miss Pitcher, I am glad you have come up;
you are just in time to play off your double-deck


billiards, and then your single quoits.” “Thank
you. Yes, I shall be delighted.” But before poor
Miss Pitcher has been able to travel more than a
few yards along the deck, the way is stopped by
the bulky form of Mr. Gilford, who reminds the
lady that her opponents and partners are awaiting
her at the Bull Board End., this being in accordance
with an arrangement made the day previous. Home
letters are sadly neglected, and during the next
hour or so Miss Pitcher is hurried from one game
to another, with a most bewildering speed. The
strenuous efforts made by the members of that
Committee will ever be remembered by those who,
by various tricks and a show of great patience,
managed to collect the various contestants to-
gether. A few events were, by a general feeling,
deleted from the programme, amongst them being
the Fancy Dress Ball. A Cricket Match against the
first Saloon, played in the Eed Sea, ended with all
the glory going to the other side, and we were very
glad that on the occasiou of the second match,
which was played just before Fremantle, to be
able to come ofi victorious. I understand that a
record was thus made for the ship—the second
saloon always having to accept defeat on previous
occcasions. Our victory was vastly due to the ex-
cellent services and smart fielding of those of the
team who hailed from Yorkshire and Lancashire,
and who form part of the group representing the
Northern Rugby Union now journeying to Austra-
lia, to try conclusions with out Colonial brethren.
The way in which Smith ran round the Wireless
Room and the Engine Room Hatch with the ball,
and so, by a strategy worthy of our old friend De
Wet, secured a wicket, was worth noting.
Some, of the Sports events caused very great
amusement, the most exciting, perhaps, being those
in which the contestants were blindfolded, the
Teddy Bear Walk, and the Alligator Crawl of the
potato race was a good overture of the fun to come.
The ladies were to the fore in the calculating’ race,


and, l£ all household accounts are kept with the
same degree of accuracy, the balancing, when a
forthe i supply of cash is needed, must be very
instructing’: and yet there ore to he found people
who would hand over to these females the affairs
of a nation. Of the fourteen sums set, only two
were correct. Pandemonium was enjoyed to its
full by all. and was well entered for. The some-
what an certain form this was to take during
the morning, explained to the ladies, and they
soon rolled np in good numbers. Soane of' them ex-
perienced the day of their lives, and from the re-
marks overheard they did. One damsel confessed
that until to-day I did not exactly know what it
felt like to he well squeezed”: another, without a
blush: 4 T£ all the liugs 1 have had during my
whole life were rolled into one, it would not com-
pare with the one I received to-day, and I do not
even know who did it.” The Sports oyer, there
still remained the prizes to be distributed, and
great was the delight of the recipients oi these
little souvenirs of the trip handed to them by Mrs.
Gihliu ami His. Harriott.
SAPT HREEZES.
"Will Hr, Hones please let Hiss Great know his
last final intention!'
'Will the lady of immense proportions please sit in
her own chair next time, as the one that now looks
like a broken bundle of firewood was mine?
df th e man who continually gave advice, followed
it. where would he now be?
Hes - ■ the hat-box came back all right.
Why did you not tell the girl that you were a
married man?
Taney a country where the lady behind the
bottles stood a shout. Hail, Australia!:


Mothers’ meeting’s were held daily, under the ex-
cellent chairmanship-of the Colonial Spider.
"Will Mr. Stirweb please call at our office any
morning after twelve fifteen a.m., as our office-boy
fancies himself with five-ounce gloves.
All claims for return of subscriptions are re-
ferred to this same office-boy.
Why were we met at all ports by pilots, when we
carried an overflow with us —sky-pilots, it is true.
Is it true the two babies getting mixed at an
early period of the voyage—the two mothers have
not yet been able to discover which is which, and
which is t’other.
It is rumoured that a new piano-case has been
ordered for the music-room. He of the goggles
please note, and keep away from it.
It is also said that as a result of the competition
between the Silver Tenor of Australia and our own
Singing Collier on the high C’s, the deck over the
piano has busted upwards.
It is also suggested that the dividends of the
Orient Company have suffered considerably, owing
to the bar being closed against certain individuals,
the depth of whose thirst and breaking records
cannot be fathomed.
Hid anyone find any spare braces ?
No claims for hair-pins found on the deck will be
considered after Sydney. It is understood that the
space now occupied is required by the Purser.
Lost, Stolen, or Strayed, one Smith; last seen
waddling around Adelaide.
The popularity of the Merry Widow was even
greater on board the “Osterley” than upon the
boards in London.


Sacks brought oil boa id should be well shaken be-
icre acceptance, as ■this would save the spread of
disagreeable microbes.
Et is. perhaps, as well that a previous engagement
prevented Ethel from becoming- a Boylan.
The Bradford bantam will be well advised not to
crow too lend : may age bring discretion.
Ginger for pluck, but "'.Stone Ginger” for grit
sail sturdiness Eonghtn’t to hurt anyone.
Why was the danger sigma] so prominent in the
man who knows adl?
—Buzz Buzzz Buzzzz !
SPORTS OFFICIALS.
Pii»-xiijest. Rbv. J. A, PATTINSON.
U'jn. rHEAsnEEii..—J. H. HOUGHTON, Esq.
Hon. Skoke'iaby.—S. il. COTTEE, Esq
VijorirrEC.—Mbs. ERASER, Mess I). FRASER, Mrs. CLUTTEKHUr
Mils. PATTTNSON, S. W. LOW, Esq , W. FRASER, Es g ,
W. E, CO LI, INRIDGE, Esq., R. CLIFFORD, Es,,.
JurwEs— R. D. LOW, Esq., J. H. HOUGHTON, Ksg.
Ti xbkbkphk.—S. M. r’OTTEE, Esq.
St a ic.TKi(. .1. ' ’I, I I’KORP, Esq.


PRIZE WINNERS,
At Sports, Friday, 13th May, 1910.
Blindfold Potato Race (lady and gent.): Mr. Jones and Miss
Littell.
Orange and Spoon Race (ladies) : Miss D. Fraser.
Cigarette Race (men) : Mr. Wiltshire.
Whistling Race (ladies) : Miss Bell.
Needle Thread and Calculating Race (lady and gent.): Miss
Littell and Master Fraser.
Lifebelt Race (ladies): Miss D. Fraser.
„ (gents.): Mr. Sachs.
Sack Race (men): Mr Lomas.
Marking the Pig’s Eye (open): Mrs. Smith, 1; Miss Bell 2.
Pillow Fight (men) : Mr. Arnold.
Bottle and Cork Contest (open) : Rev. J. A. Pattinson.
Are you there ? (men) : Mr. Curzon.
Blindfold Drive (lady and gent) : Mrs. Pattinson and Mr.
Curzon.
Slinging the Monkey (men) : Mr. Sachs.
Nail Driving (ladies) : Miss Boyd.
Tug-of War (men) : Messrs. Helm, Ruddick, Mann, Sachs,
and Ward.
Telegram Race (lady and gent.) : Miss Guyton, Mr. Boylan.
Throwing the Sand Bag (men) : Mr. Lomas.
Live Wheelbarrow Race (men) : Messrs. Holdsworth and
Buswell.
Musical Shepherds (open): Miss Tracy, Messrs. Mann,
West, Sachs, and Wiltshire.
Pandemonium: Miss Kenney, Messrs, Evers, Fraser, Munns.
Total entries numbered over 400.


Bull Board (double) : Miss Boyd and Mr. Mercer.
„ (single, lady & gent ): Miss Bell, Mr. Winstauley.
Bucket Quoits : Miss Richer.
Deck Billiards (double) : Miss Ball, Mr. Holdsworth.
„ (single,lndy and gent ): Miss Ball, Mr. Clifford
Deck Quoits (double): Miss Richer, Mr. Tinker.
„ (single, lady ifcgeut.): Mrs. Low, Mr. Heyneman
Peg Quoits (double) : Miss Ciblin, Mr. Collett.
„ (single, lady and gent.) : Mrs. Clutterbuck, Mr.
J" enkins.
OrLbbage (double): Miss D. Fraser, Rev?. J. A. Pattinson.
„ (single) : Mrs. Low,
Euchre (double) : Mr. Buswell, Mr. Low.
~ (single) : Miss Ball
Chess : Rev. J". A. Pattinson,
Drafts : Mr. Spears.
Dominos : Mr. J. Clifford, Mr. J. Bartholomew.
Bridge : Mr. Low, Mr. Mann.
Whist: Mr. Simons, Mr. Collinridge,
SoLo Whist: Mr. Kershaw.
Hidden Treasures : Master Fraser.
Musical Competition : Mr. Arnold.
Undiscorered Towns: Rer, J. A. Pattinson.
Who’s Who ?
Total entries exceeded 100.


"f.gl.S. ®Bierltp,”
STATEMENT OF ACCOUNTS. Deok and Parlour
Sports Tournament, May, 1910.
Receipts. £ s d
By Subscriptions and
Entrance Fees .. 26 16 3
„ Sale of Program’s 0 7 0
Expenditure. £ s d
12 Packs of Cards ... 0 5 0
Printing, Stationery 0 8 1
Sports’ Prizes ... 18 5 11
Gratuities —
Heck Steward ... 2 12 6
Band 2 12 6
Balance ... ... 2 19 3
£27 3 3
£27 3 3
Audited and found —
J. H. HOUGHTON,
R. H. MTJNNS.
Hon. Treasurer.
May 20th, 1910.
At a meeting held later, the Balance was voted for the
purchase of a souvenir to the Hon. Sec. (Mr. S. M. Cottee.)
