

R.M.S. “ORMUZ”
AUSTRALIA
to
ENGLAND
A SOUVENIR
Voyage 10
April 8th -
to - - -
May 28th -
1925 - -


A Short Description of the Ship
Length—s7s feet. Beam—67 feet.
Horse power, 10,000. Tonnage—l4,sBB.
Launched 1915- Speed, 16 Knots.
COMMANDER L. V. JAMES, D.S.C.
Chffif Officer A. E. NicholT
2nd Officer .. H. Schofield
3rd Officer H. H. Mac Lean
4th Officer J. S. Shurrock
sth Officer H, Petit-Dann
Chief Engineer G. B. Paxton
2nd Engineer R. Whytock
Purser R. L. Watt
Ist Assistant Purser ... ... H. C. Tidy.
2nd Assistant Purser ... ... K. A, Karo
Surgeon ... ... ... ... Dr, G. King
Ist Wireless Officer ... ... C. L. Berrington
2nd Wireless Officer ... ... G. A. Watkinson
3rd Wireless Officer ... ... R. Kershaw
Chief Steward ~ ... ... H, Morris
The R.M.S, “Ormuz” was launched at the
Veesack Yard of the Vulcan Shipbuilding Company
and was named the “Zeppelin.” Shortly after the
termination of the Great War the Steamer became
the property of the Orient Company and the name
was changed to “ Ormuz.” The vessel is handsomely
appointed, carries first and third-class passengers only,
find is employed in the Company’s Mail Service be-
tween London and Australian Ports.
The Bridge is fitted with the following :
Nautical Instruments etc., including Automatic Fog
Signal Apparatus, Electric Indicator Board for Water-
tight Doors, Revolution Indicator, and Automatic
Fire Alarms and Indicators.
Radio System Wireless on “A ” Deck with
range up to 3,000 miles.


“Ours is a Nice Ship, ours is.”
(Tune : Ours is a Nice ’Ouse, ours is).
Of all the steamers in the world
There isn’t one like ours is ;
Our hands are always diving in
The pockets of our trousers.
The Barman makes us pay for drinks,
And oh ! the Barber’s blisters,
If you can’t pay or shave yourself,
You have to wear your whiskers.
Chorus :
Ours is a nice Ship, ours is,
What a nice little Ship, ours is,
The Mast’s at the top of this saucy little Smack,
The Bow’s at the front and the Rudder’s at the back,
Our’s is a nice Ship, ours is,
Crammed full of skirts and blouses,
Its eat, eat, eat, sleep, sleep, sleep,
Ours is a nice Ship, ours is.
Of all the captains in the world
There isn’t one like ours is ;
His skill is such, he knows at once
The Rudder from the Bowses,
And this we know, that come what may,
However great the dangers.
When Captain James is on the Bridge,
All we and care are strangers.
Of all the pursers in the world
There isn’t one like ours is;
He’s so polite he never minds
The Passenger that grouses.
He minds your cash for one per cent.
He picks the Sunday music,
Me asked me not to write this out
For fear of making you sick.
Of all the engineers at sea,
There isn’t one like ou»s is ;
The smell of oil and cotton waste
His Scottish blood arouses.
He thinks his smelly Engine Room
The holiest of holies.
Observe him dressed in all his best,
Amid the Port Said Coalies.
Of all the Gallies in the world,
There isn’t one like ours is ;
The mere sight of the menu card
Our appetite arouses.
For us no fifteen minute grill,
We bid the Steward hurry
And fetch along the Shredded Wheat.
The Geographic Curry.


Advice to Passengers.
As a traveller of many voyages, perhaps these few hints
to less experienced fellow-passengers may be useful in
dealing with that weird person, “ the Ship’s Officer.”
The discussion of political or other abstruse questions
is fatal, as it renders him incapable of coherent thought
or action for hours. Observe the good old adage, that
simple questions are for simple minds,” and very much
needless suffering will be avoided.
Any Officer will tell yon how fast the ship is going on
either side, the depth of the ocean at any spot, and ex-
actly how fast the ship could sail if broken down, but
this involves a great mental strain and should not really
be insisted on.
Ladies requiring information on astronomical subjects
can have it free of charge on the first clear night. Any
Officer will be only too pleased to point out ‘ Orion ” or
the Southern Cross- He is so used to it that he could do
it with one hand if he has one disengaged at the time.
If you would like to know the points of a first-class
albatross, molly-hawk, or flying-fish, and whether they
hatch their eggs under their wings, you may be sure
you will get the most authentic information on these
most interesting subjects.
The Fifth Officer is usually approached on all ques-
tions regarding baggage. He is always chosen for his
Job-like temper, and a child may approach him.
Such petty details as addressing or labelling baggage
are of no moment, as he always knows intuitively to
whom each packet belongs.
If you are moving from one port to another and have
given away all your furniture except a few heirlooms
such as kitchen tables, fire-irons, etc., you should caution
him to handle them very carefully. To ensure special
attention it is only necessary to casually mention that


you are a friend of the Managing Director. This hint
will bring the Fifth Officer to his knees. Each Officer has
a table in the Saloon : this is solely for the convenience
of passengers, and complaints about the fares, food, rolling
of the ship, or weather, should at once be directed at him.
Kindly criticism, pointing out the advantages of travelling
by the latest P. & O. boat you may have viewed from a
distance is always greatly appreciated.
The Purser must not be approached on the weather
topic, as it not his department, and the < ompanv wish to
discourage any attempts on the part of young and inexper-
ienced Pursers to manage the weather.
The Purser is usually an affable person, and takes great
delight in giving strangers any information, especially when
he is busy. Should you require stamps, change of cabin
when the ship is full, or any information regarding any-
thing you may have loft during the last twenty years, he is
the man to see.
Lastly, there is the Chief Engineer, who is not supposed
to know anything beyond his own business. Passengers
who feel inclined to notice him and to put him at his ease
should always begin by clapping him on the back and ask-
ing “ How the old coffee-mill is getting on ? ’ or if “ those
things going up and down are boilers ?’ Such simple ques-
tions will make him your friend for life, and will probably
elicit some naive reply that will delight you.
You may ask him if he is not tired of the sea, or if he
wears kilts in the engine-room, and then playfully remark
that you wonder why all engineers are Scots, and always
“Mac.” Should you notice a wild hunted look in his eye,
it means that you have gone as far as you are allowed at
one interview, but the ice has been broken, and he love;
you like a brother.


Saloon Fancy Dress Ball.
On Wednesday, 13th May, a most successful Fancy
Dress Ball was held. The Starboard Promenade Deck
was gaily decorated, and presented a very pleasing
picture to the eye, with its multi-coloured flags, lights
and, above all, the dark vault, sprinkled with stars, of a
tropical night. On the other side of the Deck were
spread lavishly filled tables, ready for the hungry dancers
when the interval arrived. Punctually at a quarter to
nine the Passengers assembled, presenting a wonderful
sight in their beautiful and varied costumes. It seemed
by the number that nearly everyone had a fancy dress
of some description. There were gentlemen wonderfully
disguised as black chiefs, Indian princes, matadors, and
many others—but the ladies eclipsed them all: there
were beautiful Pierettes. dainty Dolly Vardens, pictur-
esque wine sellers, Spanish dancers, all blending together
in one harmonious whole, and making a dazzling sheen
of colour and life.
After the Dress Parade was over, the dancing com-
menced, the band being well to the fore and being kept
playing almost continually, so great was the demand for
encores. Everyone appeared to be dancing, and the
dancers seemed to resemble a great kaleidoscope of
colour, the quietest note being the plain mess kit of the
officers. The only drawback, if any, was the heat, and
about half way through many persons had left the dance
and gone to the restful coolness of the boat deck. Still
the dance held most of its votaries to the end, and at
midnight the orchestra had finished, and the exhausted
dancers wandered away to rest, or in the case of the
males to have a final thirst quencher before turning in.
Everybody appeared to have enjoyed themselves, and,
to judge by the comments, were only sorry that tiie
evening had passed so quickly.
A number of prizes were awarded for the various
costumes of both ladies and gentlemen, a list of which
follows—Best Costumes made on board : Miss Blanche
Schachtel (Dolly Varden), Mr. Law Smith (Indian Chief).
Best Costumes brought on board : Miss Spofforth


(Twink), Mr. S. B. Johnson (“ Safety first ”). Most
Original Costumes: Miss Maxine Foy (“ Dinner Table’’),
Mr, Law Smith (Indian Chief).
R. A. F.
Third Class Fancy Dress Ball.
On Friday, the 14th May, the Third Class held a Fancy
Dress Ball, which filled the Forward Deck with colour
and the beholder with delight. It seemed that all time
and every race were represented—Carmens who looked
the part, and Villains who did not ; Nantch girls who
“ nautched ” and Prince Charmings who charmed;
whilst Moses nibbed shoulders with a Maori in “ haka ”
array, and Confucius confabulated with a communist.
One missed only Balaam and his Ass, Mephistopheles
also failed to take advantage of an opportunity to im-
prove the shining hour. Cold type, the absence of
Victor Hugo and the ire of the Editor must be the ex-
cuse for the absence of a fitting eulogy of all this gorg-
eous array, since the task is beyond the powers of an
ordinary biped in pants.
When it came to judging, one realized the difficulty of
attempting to place two prizes where all deserved a
place—Solomon would probably have refused to judge
a Fancy Dress Parade.
The first prize for ladies was awarded to Miss Alice
Barns, who wore a dainty costume, made on board, and
called “ Superstition;’’ and the second to Miss Cora Bach
as an “ Island Princess ” of a retiring disposition as befits
one unused to mingling with historical and notorious
personages.
The first prize for gents went to Mr E. D. Ward, “ a
Sea-sick Gentleman,” who wore pyjamas “the worse for
wash” and an air of wild abandon that evidently struck
some chord in the anatomy of the judges; the second
prize to Mr. J- L. Duell, a “Sundowner” who was true
t« type since he appeared only at the predestined hour.
Dancing to a late hour and the charming strains of the
Jazz Band brought to a close a brilliant and enjoyable
evening.


Meditations of a Mere Man.
A six-weeks voyage on the Orient R.M.S. “ Ormuz,”
from Sydney, N-S.W-, to Tilbury, furnishes one with an
experience bristling with matter of interest and edu-
cation.
The manner in which some hundreds of passengers,
perfect strangers to each other, are thrown together, and
the way they sort themselves into congenial groups, is a
veritable study. The delightful falling into one family,
where each one quickly learns to know everybody else,
gives a charm to the life in this limited world that is
difficult to express.
One must concede to the ladies their interest in the
matter of dress, and in this our Australian travellers take
a very distinctive lead.
The very charming (if very pronounced) silk striped
costumes in colour and design, which up to recent times
would have been considered at least daring, are now
accepted as the derntere creations in exquisite taste, and
do credit to the English and Continental designers who
thought out these novel styles, so admirably suited to the
climate of Sunny Australia None the less are the
striking designs in Graftons, beautiful printed voiles
which are always things of beauty, well in evidence: one
in particular which gowned one of Australia’s best-
known ladies deserving special reference. Zephyrs,
Fujis, artificial silks, and other materials vie with each
other to give a pleasant picture to the life on the ship.
With the men a very free and easy style prevails, from
the pants and shirt to the immaculate proper turn-out.
The daily life, with tennis, deck quoits, bucket quoits,
and the other games of interest fill up any time that
would otherwise hang heavily. And, of course, Auction
Bridge, Chess, and Draughts are always to be had, the
passengers automatically sorting themselves into con-
enial groups.
And what a wonderful variety do we find among our
Saloon passengers ! Catholic Fathers, genial and wel-
comed by all; successful station men, who are leaving
[continued on pagce 10]


Our Own Cross-word Puzzle.


Clues Across
1 A sign the ship is about to sail 9 investigations 17 a vessel 18 the
most important part of a ship 21 our home 23 an honour conferred by the
King 25 a European monetary unit 27 united 28 the boat deck at night
29 the head man of a battalion 30 an arm of the fighting forces 32 the
“Ormuz,” if she lost one propeller 36 and 126 down equal 80 down
35 human skill 36 proclamation 37 Naval store officer 39 a body of men
40 a senior Naval Officer 41 tendency 42 description of “Ormuz” 43 by
word of mouth 45 a South African animal 47 hail 48 East Indian matting
50 imitate 51 a pencil grading 53 initials of a shipping company 54 has-
tened 55 goddess of hate 56 affirmative 57 the finest motor car 58 a
demonstrative pronoun 59 same as 32 across 60 French for 58 across
61 one of the months 63 carried in the “ Ormuz ” in case of emergency
64 an exploit 67 point of the compass 68 inconstant 7I pronoun
72 relating to space 75 surname of the title of one of Bulwer Lytton’s
books 76 strategem 78 the young of ruminant animal 79 fastidious
80 Scotch equivalent for “ Not Guilty” 82 unexpected occurence 83
to cheat 84 the middle letters of 63 across 85 cancel can 86 clim-
ate “ Errors and” 88 a girl's name 89 empty 90 and (French)
92 powerless 93 Here is laid (abb,) 94 this Ship has two 95 des-
cripiion of the “ Ormuz ” relating to propulsion 96 Michaelmas Daisy
98 concerning 102 a tree 104 the King 105 England, Scotland
and Wales 106 manuscript 108 description of a coat (abb.) 110
Fairy 111 thank you 112 the devil 116 local name of one of the
Great Powers 119 the Fatherless 123 satire 124 meddler 127 aformer
Chancellor of the Exchequer i2B domestic animals 129 to watch
1 a point of the compass 13 1 a period of time 132 at no time [poetical]
Clues Down
2 not right (abb.) 3 a beheaded Turk 4 part of the body 5 an-
Army Medical Rank 6 how imitation silver articles are marked 7 the
late King 8 an established course 9 a well-known term in Euclid
10 you are 11 species 12 a Football team 13 a branch of the
Indian Forces I 4 without I 5 part of the Empire 16 slang
name for a resident of Queensland 19 a cube 20 a river in England
and also Scotland 22 apparatus for reducing vapours to liquid form
24 slang name for N.S.W. 2n necessary on boilers 28 description of
cargo sent from one ship to another 29 What helpers of parliamentary
candidates do 3I that in which one excels 33 flatfishes 35 slang
36 endures 38 not me 4+ a line of heat 46 one (French) 49 why
cabin-mates disagree 0 a gangway s 2 a hill-slope 61 a public speaker
62 a famous motor-cycle ' ace 64 preposition 65 passes an occasional
evening on board 66 infects 68 not amateur 69 a period of time
70 a Christmas carol 72 identical 73 wounds when the skin is broken
74 what governs London 75 in one (instant) 77 a blind tin 78 French
for 58 across 80 for ease 83 pertaining to the refraction of sound through
various mediums 86 used in 63 across 87 point of the compass g\ one
who pi >urs out into another vessel 97 makes heat oppressive 99 descip-
tion of the Sports Secretary 100 an acknowledgment of a debt 10l ?
103 a sailor 106 slang for 1$ down 107 a European capital 108 leading
lights in the theatrical world* 109 the leading English composer of the 19th
century 113 a naval petty officer 11 4 a witty sayiug 11s No. 6 down
beheaded IT7 a note of the diatonic scale liS that is 120 an abbre-
viated title 121 a measure of land (French) 122 a point of the compass.


their big lands and flocks and herds for a run to the
homeland; the new Agent-General of South Australia
on his way to London to take up his duties; doctors,
solicitors, stockbrokers, architects, and business men of
all sorts and classes make up this most interesting gath-
ering, which lends a charm to what would otherwise be
a dull and dreary journey.
For the amusements in the evenings, dancing is arran-
ged on the deck, and occasionally pictures are shown on
a screen fixed above the forward well deck. What is
most strange is to see at the one time the Southern Cross
constellation still high in the heavens, and the North
Polar Star down at the water’s edge.
One must not overlook the splendid service rendered
by the Captain, officers, and crew, who one and all do
their utmost to make us happy as we glide over the vast
expanse of waters.
Surely a voyage on the “ Ormuz,” whether Saloon or
Third Class, is an ideal enjoyment, and gives food for
thought for a lifetime.
ARTHUR I. KERSHAW
Ike and Mike.
They look exactly alike, and are the pets of the Saloon.
Usually they have a group of admirers peering into their
home on the Boat deck. Mr. Mark Foy, of Sydney,
secured them from some aboriginals and presented them
to his daughter for travelling mascots, They are the
quaint “ Mountain Devils,” found only occasionally now-
a-days in West and South Australia. In appearance
they look as if someone had crossed a “goanna’’ with an
alligator, and thrown in some spikes for ornamentation.
They drink through the spikes. They spear ants and
flies neatly and with great despatch. To scientists they
are very interesting as a relic of the days when the
Missing Link, the Bunyip, and other weird creatures
roamed the Bush in search of prey and pay. A curious
feature noted during the voyage was the impossibility of
turning them over —with lightning rapidity they would
recover their pose.


First Class Sports—Committee & Prize Winners.
President, J. L. Price, Esq., Agent-General for South
Australia; Hon. Sec., Commander K. A. F. Guy, BN.;
Hon. Treas., S. W. Geard, Esq.; Committee: F- E.
Chapman, Esq., W. S. Harmer, Esq., M. Konow, Esq.,
S, Lazarus, Esq., F- V. Pilling, Esq., Mrs- S Harper,
Miss D. M. Armytage, Miss L. Miles.
Bat & Ball Tennis —Mixed Doubles : Nicholson and
Miss N. Lyon. Ladies’ Doubles : Miss Stewart & Miss
L. Miles- Ladies’ Singles : Miss L- Miles. Men’s
Doubles ; Nicholson & Turnbull- Men’s Singles :
Nicholson.
Deck Quoits—Mixed Doubles : Selby & Mrs. Harper.
Ladies, Doubles . Mrs Stuart & Miss F. Mac Lur-
e Singles : Mrs. Harper. Men’s Doubles: Stringer
& Barton- Men’s Singles : Fox.
Quoit Tennis —Mixed Doubles ; Fox & Miss E,
Stuart. Ladies’ Doubles : Miss Stuart & Miss Boyd,
Ladies’ Singles : Mrs, Stuart, Men’s Doubles ; Konow
& Pilling. Men’s Singles : Konow,
Bucket Quoits —Ladies: Miss Ackhurst. Men: Konow,
Peg Quoits —Ladies: Mrs, Harper. Men: Priddle,
Bull Board— Ladies; Mrs, Harper. Men: Priddle,
Bridge—Mrs. Harper and S, Lazarus
Draughts—Dillon.
Fancy Head Dress—Ladies: Miss M. Taylor. Men;
H, G. Fox,
Fancy Dress - For Prizes, see Article on page 5,
Children’s Afternoon.
On Wednesday, the 20th May, through the anonymous
gift of a First Saloon passenger, the children of the
Third Class had a very enjoyable afternoon, each child
receiving a welcome gift. The opportunity was availed
of to make the presentation of many excellent prizes to
the winners of various children’s sporting events- The
generosity of one lover of children was highly appreci-
ated, and the happy gathering dispersed after singing
“ For He’s a Jolly Good Fellow,’’


Third Class Sports.
Committee —Chairman, Mr Gore; Vice President, Mr
Bibby; Hon, Sec,, Mr Green; Ireas., Mr Bignell,
Members —Messrs Atkinson (2), Berry, Dubbin, Holt,
Reynolds, Freakley, and Coggins; Mesdames Patterson,
Brown, Humphries and Forbes; Misses Brown, Roberts,
Rogers and Bourke,
Whist Drive, 1 Miss Kirk, 2 Miss Morris,
Euchre Drive: Ladies, N, Russell; Men, S. Bach;
Booby, Miss Roberts-
Sack Race, Boys, 1 Paddy Bach, 2 C, Hazelwood;
Girls, Miss Ward,
Egg & Spoon Race, Boys, Master Kenny; Girls,
Miss Berry (small), Miss Mnrtaugh (big).
Pigs’ Eye, 1 Miss Berry, 2 Misses Hughes & Breacher
Taylor’s Donkey Race, 1 Miss Breacher, 2 Hazelwood
Potato Races- Girls, 7-10, 1 Miss Berry, 2 Miss Holt,
Girls, 10-14, 1 Miss Breacher, 2 Miss Hughes,
Boys, 10-14, 1 Master Dobbins, 2 Master Winter.
Open 10-14, 1, Miss Ward, 2 Master Wigsall,
Long Jump, 1 Mr Morris, 2 Mr Winton.
Wheelbarrow Race, Mr Behin & Master Hutchinson
Thread Needle Race, 1 Mr & Mrs Winton, 2 Mr B,
Morris and Mrs Berry,
Skipping. 1 Master Hazlewood, 2 Miss Hazlewood,
Bobbing Apple, 1 Master Hunter, 2 Master Croft.
Pillow Fight, Men, Messrs Morris and Veltmeijer;
Boys, Masters Hutchinson, Bach and Wigsall.
Bun Race, Girls, Misses Ward, Flitt, and Hillman.
Quoits, 1 F. Thurlow, E, Baker, 2, W, Morris, Mick
Agius.
Children’s Fancy Dress: Master Mitchell (Cupid),
Master Hutchinson (Rags & Tatters), Miss Holt (Rose),
Miss Hughes (Piper), Miss Kenny (Indian-Princess),
Adults' Fancy Dress —For Prize winners see page 6.


Gems from Official Correspondence.
THE BOOTLACE, by ’ERB.
The Commanding Officer, H. M.S. “Tragedy.”
I have the honour to submit that I may have, should
you see fit, gratuitous issue of one lace to hold my star-
board boot in place ; for yesterday, the 3rd of June, while
dressing for my lunch at noon, I parted one in thirteen
places, although both boots had Service laces. Report of
loss was made by me. I have the honour, Sir, to be,
R. DUPP, Lieutenant.
The Admiral Commanding . . . Squadron.
Submitted for consideration. This officer, going to
his station for lunching ship, had hardly started before the
lace in question parted. As I consider there’s no blame of
wilfully destroying same, submit the other lace be matched
(a pink defect list is attached).
A. FRY DEGG, Captain.
The Commanding Officer, H.M S. ‘Tragedy.”
Attention is directed to Article 6, lines i and of
Home Fleet Order Rook, which states: “demands should
be in triplicate.” As to the lace—describe the fracture,
give date and place of manufacture, with details as to
length and size, how many kinds of knot it ties, its colour
(whether black or blue), its pattern, number, price when
new, and also (to the nearest penny) its market value now
(if any).
N. O. TATALL, Admiral.
The Admiral Commanding . . . Squadron.
Submitted. In compliance with your minute, 3 dem-
ands herewith, prints of the fractures are enclosed; the lace
itself it is proposed to keep unti' the Dockyard sends to
take on charge its broken ends. The details as required
by you have also been attended to.
A. FRY DEGG, Captain.


The Secretary, Admiralty.
He pleased to lay before the Hoard the details of this
most untoward disaster to a Service lace. Request permis-
sion to replace the same with pattern 3A (large), and make
the issue free of charge, observing that the deed was done
by accident and not for fun. N. O. Tatall, Admiral.
The Admiral Commanding . . Squadron.
My Lords regret the recent loss of Service laces, <me
in Nos., and they are pleased to give approval for its im-
mediate removal. The fractured pieces should be sent,
with full report of accident, to Chatham Dockyard, that
they may be subject to a strict survey. Gratuitous issue
is approved of laces, black, patt. 3a (large), one (1) in num-
ber, free of charge. “ Tragedy’s” quarterly account of
clothes should show the full amount, as “special issue”
they should head it, with voucher to support the credit.
Two sketches are herewith, they show the most efficient
kind of bow adapted to a i ervice lace to keep the boot (or
shoe) in place. When seen by officers concerned, these
should be noted and returned.
X. CUSA LAMB. for Secretary.
The Commanding Officer, H.M.S. ‘'Tragedy.”
For action as My Lords decree—sketches to be
returned to me.
N. O. TOTALL, Admiral.
Advice to the Unwary.
I have been warned (by a maiden Aunt) of the case of a
visitor to London who was so chased after that he eventu-
ally fell in by being coaxed to pose as a model for a book
cover. The “ artist ” stood him on a pedestal, dressed in
a bathing suit, and went outside for his paints. The poor
visitor stood for hours, finally dismounting from his eleva-
ted pillar to find his clothes and the “artist” both gone.
J. R. S.


TABLE OF DISTANCES.
Brisbane (New Farm) to Sydney, 514 miles
New Farm to Tape Moietor. ... miles 68
• ’ape Moreton to ('ape Lookout ... ... ~ 25
Cape Lookout to < apt* Byron ... ... ~ 72
Cape Byr«>n to North Solitary Is. ... ... ~ 79
North Solitary Is. to lacking Point ... ... ~ 96
'Tacking Point to Sugarloaf Point ... ... ~ 63
Sugarloaf Point to Woolloomooloo Dock ... ... ~ no
Sydney to Melbourne 577 miles.
Sydney to Hobart, 641 miles.
Hobart to Melbourne, 471 miles.
Woolloomooloo Dock to Sydney Heads ... ~ 6
The Heads to Uabo I*. ... ... ... f) 236
Gabo Island to Wilson’s Promontory ... 9> 191
Wilson’s Promontoiy to Port Melbourne Pier ... 144
Melbourne to Adelaide, 500 miles.
Port Melbourne Pier t-- The Heads ... ... ~ 43
The Heads to Cape Otway ... ... ~ 64
< ape Ot way to Backstairs Passage ... ... 327
Backstaiis Passage to Adelaide ... ... ~ 66
Adelaide to Fremantle, 1,353 miles.
Adelaide to ‘ ape Boida ... ... ... no
Cape Boida to King Geoige’s Sound ... ~ 912
King George’s sound to Cape Leeuwin ... ... ~ 164
1 *>pe X.e<-uwin to TmnamD ... ... ~ 164
Fremantle to Colombo, 3,127 miles.
Fremanle to Kottnest Is. ... ... ... 12
KottnfSi Is. t-> Guile ... ... ... ~ 3047
CaUt 1«> 1 oT'mbo ... ... ... ~ 68
Colombo to Suez, 3,390
t o'om l lo to Minikoi Atoll ... ... ~ 414
Minikoi Atoll to ' ape Guaidafni ... ... ~ 1301
('ape Guardafui to Aden ... ... ~ 372
Aden to Perim ... ... ... ... ~ 94
Perim !<• Daedal"S Sho*l ... ... ~ 856
Daedalus Shoal to The Brothers .... ... ~ 100
The Brothers to Shadwan Lighthouse ... ~ 81
Sha<lwan Lighthouse i<.. Suez ... ... ~ 172
Through the Canal: Suez to Port Said, 88 miles.
Port Said to Naples, 1.112 miles
Tort Said 10 Gavdo Is, ... ... ~ 472
Gavdo Is to Messina ... ... ~ 465
Messina to Naples ... ... ... ~ 175
Naples to Toulon, 426 miles.
Naples to Gbaglia ... ... ... ~ 268
Giragiia I. to Toulon ... ~ I^B
Toulon to Gibraltar, 703 miles.
Toulon to Cape d« tiata' ... ... .. ~ 544
Cape de Gata t<> Gnu altar ... ... ... ~ 139
Gibraltar to Plymouth, 1,050 miles.
Gibraltai to Ushant ... ... ... ~ 931
Ushant to Plymouth ... ... ... ~ 119
Plymouth to Tilbury, 294 miles
Plymouth to St. Caherine’s (Isle of Wight} ... ~ 116
St. Catherine’s to Tilbi ry ... ... ... ~ 178


The figures in heavy type represent the difference from London
time.
No pretence is made that these figures will prove accurate, as
weather and other circumstances have to be taken into consider*
ation.
Apl. 8 Leave Brisbane according to tide. 10 h.
~ 10 Arrive Sydney. 10 h.
~ 15 Leave Sydney.
~ 17 Arrive Hobart. 10 h.
~ 18 Leave Hobart.
~ 20 Arrive MHbournf.
~ 21 Leave Melbourne, l ass Cape Otway. 10 h.
„ 22 Through Backstaiis I’assage. 9tl. 30mln.
~ 23 Anive & leave Adelaide. Pass Cape Borda, 9h. 10m.
~ 24, 25 Crossing the Great Australian Bight’
26 Off Cape Le<-uwin. Bh, 40 min.
~ 27 Airive & Leave Fremantle. Bh.
May 2 Pass Cocos or Keeling Islands. 6h. 26 min.
~ 4 Cross the Equator. sh. 41 min.
~ 6 Arrive Colombo. sh. 30 min.
~ 8 Pass Mimkoi Islands. 4 hrs. 39 min.
~ 11 Off Cape Guardafui & Socotra. 3 hrf. 31 mins.
~ 13 In the Gulf of Aden. Pass Perim. 2 hrs. 43 mins.
~ 14, 15 In the Red Sea. Passing the Apostle Islands, ihe
Brothers & Dcedalus Light,
i, 16 Arrive Suez, Enter Canal. 2 hr».
~ 17 Arrive Port Said, 2 hrs.
~ 18 Off Crete.
~ 19 Through the Straits of Messina. Pass Stromboli,
~ 20 Arrive Naples. Ih.
~ 21 Sight Elba, Corsica & Sardinia, Straits of Bonifacio.
~ 22 Arrive Toulon, drop Mails. In Gulf of Lyons, nil.
~ 23 Pass San Sebastian & San Antonio, nil.
~ 24 Pas* Cape Tarifa. Arrive Gibraltar, nil.
~ 25 Pass Burling Islands & Cape St. Vincent, Coast of
Spain & Portugal, nil.
~ 26 In the Bay of Biscay.
~ 27 Arrive Plymouth, nil.
~ 28 Arrive Tilbury,


A Schoolboy’s Essay on Scotland.
Scotland is a braw wee land in the North of England,
It has water nearly all round it, and whisky over a large
part of it. The population is about 4i- millions including
Andrew Carnegie,
It has a peculiar language of its own, and if one can
pronounce it coherently it is an infallible test of sobriety.
It possesses considerable wealth, but very little finds its
way out of the country. Gold has at times been discov-
ered in certain districts, as well as in the pockets of certain
natives, but in both cases it has been found difficult to
work.
The best known exports of Scotland are Harry Lander
and Scotch Whisky, though sufficient of the latter is re-
tained in the country to satisfy the demands of home con-
. sumption. The chief import in recent years is Winston
Churchill.
The national dress of Scotland is th e kilt, which is a
short petticoat. In pattern it resembles a chess board, but
in cold weather the wearer finds'it more like a draught
board. It is believed to have been originally invented
because the aborigines were unab’e to find trousers big
enough to get their feet through.
The bagpipes provide the chief music of the country.
It is a wind instrument which is said, when blown to pro-
duce a tune. On many occasions in the history of war
Scotch regiments have marched to death listening to the
strains of the bagpipes, though it is not known whether
their willingness to meet the former was inspired by their
desire to escape from the latter.
Scotland has produced many well-known men, amongst
them Robert Burns, believed to have been a poet. It is
usually denied that he was born at Battersea. His most
famous poems are “ Scots who have,” and *• Stop your
tickling Jock. ”
In Scotland, for a couple to declare themselves man and
wife before witnesses is tantamount to a marriage, though
there is often a tendency in some quarters to dispense with
the witnesses.
The chief national characteristic is reckless expenditure.
BY KIND PERMISSION OF COMMANDER L. V. JAMES. D.S.C.
AT SEA.
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY J. CAVE, SHIP'S PRINTER
