

Guide
and
Handbook.
TO THE
ARLTUNGA and
WIN NECKE'S
DEPOT
GOLDFIELDS,
R.S. FREARSON'S
MacDonnell
Ranges,
South
Australia.
Containing PLANS of the Country stowing Tracks to
the Fields and the Leases, also Views, and reliable information
regarding the present developments of the Fields,
GOLDFIELD REGULATIONS,
Gold Claims, Gold Leases, and Encouragement to Mining, &c.
Price—ONE SHILLING.
FREARSON’S PRINTING HOUSE. HINOMARSH —81423


KOJffei l¥fail Coaoll leaves ■ Oodimdatta every • alternate
_ Thursday, arrives at Alice Springs each alternate Sunday,
tnd leaves game clay for the. Fields liy pack horses.
ai
Saddle and Pack Horses, a iso Traps' on" Hire.
Letters mid wires receive prompt attention from
A...
,rit'k- v v .
*f*Js-y*rx* \ i
ip&w to;
fi /
Chrs. B. SOUTH, Alice Spring's.
J: W. MANFIELD, Oodnadatta.
.*■
Macßoimell Ranges''General Store,
F.' B. ■ WALLIS, Proprietor,
Mining Requisites,' Provisions,
and General Ironmongery.
ar: =;
CAMEL PROPRIETOR*
CAMELS &. MORSES ON HIRE. Agency-Depot, GODNADATTA.
Communications of|all kinds promptly attended to at Alice Springs.,


Robt. S. Frearson’s
GUIDE AND HANDBOOK
TO THE
Arltunga and Winnecke’s Depot Goldfields,
Mac Donnell Ranges.
Containing Plans of Track and Leases,
Mr. H. Y. L. Brown’s Report,
Mining Regulations, Views, and General Information of the Fields.
Price O ST Xi S H I X. I, I 3XT <3- .
Published by ROBT. 5. FREARSON, Currie Street, Adelaide.
Printed at Frearson’s Printing House, Hindmarsh.
Introduction.
I'B P r(ifacill o m y &ui(ie and Handbook to the Arltunga and Winnecke’s Depot Goldfields
I have first to acknowledge my indebtedness and hearty thanks to the Govern-
ment, Heads of Departments, and all those gentlemen by whose courteous and
willing assistance I have been enabled to compile and publish so much valuable
information concerning the Arltunga Goldfields.
For some time prior to visiting the fields I had given considerable attention
in acquainting myself with the prospects of the fields, and being fully convinced that
the importance of their thorough development demanded the serious attention of those
in a position to take the matter in hand, led me to visit Arltunga in order to ascer-
tain the facts which I now have much pleasure in placing before the public.
Although no pains have been spared (in compiling) to make “The Guide”
reliable and up-to-date, the publisher will not hold himself responsible for any errors that
may occur.
ROBT. S. FREARSON.
A Warning ! !
While faithfully placing before the public my impression regarding the probable
good results that will follow the expenditure of capital on the Arltunga and Winneeke’s
Depot Goldfields, I must warn all men who think of going to these fields that,
unless they have their best friend (say £75 to .£100) in their pockets, they will]
most undoubtedly, have tremendous hardships to encounter. Both these fields must
have a considerable amount of capital expended on them before men of small means
should even think-of going to them and I advise such men not to go until some of the
properties are well developed, and there is a reasonable hope of their finding employment.
The track is long and hard to travel. Provisions are, at present, 50 per°cent., and in
some instances, 100 percent, dearer than they are in Adelaide.


G. Co.
E 3
C=>Js
iRINILLS^
Cj}R.YlllUi£
Sp
•VflWrVT 1 ”^
J
i
■^Ti
a
PM
• ' <
4gt ; i
:
i fin
r* fi
Wholesale Warehousemen,
ADELAIDE,
ALSO AT
PORT PIRIE & MOUNT GAMBIER.
PERTH, FREMANTLE, & KALGOORLIE. W.A.
BROKEN HILL, N.S.W.
LONDON. MANCHESTER. PARIS.


THE one thing absolutely necessary for the immediate
prosperity of South Australia is a vigorous and
systematic opening up of its magnificent auriferous
country, both in South Australia proper and its Northern
Territory. The proof that payable goldfields do occur is
now beyond dispute, and it only remains for the expendi-
ture of capital and labor to thoroughly open up these
fields, and the increase of our gold returns will be one hun-
dred ounces for every ounce now produced. The 'Splendid,
although cautious, report of the Government Geologist on
the White Range properties is sufficient in itself to justify
the immediate expenditure of capital in thoroughly mining
these properties ; but, the new goldfield recently found at
Winnecke’s Depot is, indeed, a magnificent asset for the
State, and will handsomely repay all lucky leaseholders who
can secure money to enable them to develop their proper-
ties. The White Range, which is situated six miles
South-east of the Cyanide Works at Arltunga, and 65 miles
East of Alice Springs, is one mass of highly mineralized
stone ; in some instances freely showing rough and fine
gold, and in nearly every instance showing gold by dollying.
Considering the primitive means that have in the past
been used to open up the mines in the Range, a consider-
able amount of good work has been accomplished, but, Had
more systematic methods been adopted the results would
have been much better.
The manner in which a few plucky men, among whom
Mr. Luce deserves special mention, have, for a number of
years persevered under great difficulties in proving and
developing the field, is, indeed, very commendable. Several
attempts have been made to secure capital to work the
mines, but it is only just now that capitalists are beginning
to awake to the fact that the Mac Donnell Ranges are richly
impregnated with gold, and that the investment of capital
in developing the mines means the opening up of many
channels through which business will most assuredly flow.
One drawback to the fields is the great distance from
Adelaide, and the want of quick communication with the
commercial houses ; but it is hoped that before long a tele-
graph or telephone line will be constructed from Alice
Springs to the fields, and then business men will be enabled
to make inquiries and fix up important business with
dispatch.
At Arltunga proper there are only Public Offices and
Works, viz., 10-head Battery and Cyanide Works, Post
Office, and Police Station ; also two good wells of water.
There are no General Stores at the Cyanide Works, but
one situated at Claraville, 7 miles N.E., and one at White
Range, 6 miles East of Cyanide Works. The Warden’s
Offices are situated at Paddy’s Hole, two-and-a-half miles
S.E. from the Cyanide Works. I have been informed that
a publican’s license has been granted, and an hotel is to be
erected at the Cyanide Works. There were about 125 men
at Arltunga Fields.
The development on White Range leases were very much
the same as is shown in Mr. Brown’s Report, which appears
in another part of “ The Guide.”
Arltunga Gold Returns.—Returns from the Govern-
ment Battery, Arltunga, up to the 12th November, 1902,
are as follows: —Weight of ore treated by battery, and
cyanide, 3,495 tons, 2 cwt., 3 qrs. Total gold recovered
by battery and cyanide, 4,053 ozs., 5 dwts., 21 grs. Total
value of gold recovered, £15,052 6s. 3d. Total charges for
crushing and cyaniding, £4,059 12s. 2d.
Although special attention has been given to the develop-
ment of mines at White Range, the men have also perse-
vered in prospecting other parts of Mac Donnell Ranges,
and in November last Mr. John McNeil and party made a
splendid find of gold at a locality situated about & miles
S.E. of Winnecke’s Depot, which is situated 2.4 miles a
little north of West from Arltunga, and 52 miles-north of
East from Alice Springs. At the time of my visit rain
had fallen, and there was an abundance of both water and
grass. About 50 men were on the new find, and about 30
leases had been applied for. But I anticipate by the time
my “ Handbook ” is published that more than 200 men will
be on Winnecke’s Depot field, and a very large number of
leases will be applied for. Within a reasonable distance
from the fields there is sufficient timber for mining pur-
poses to last for two years. Some of the shows have
assayed up to 13 ounces to the ton, several 2,4, 5,
and 10 ounces. The development work, so far, of course,
is not very large, but the few shafts started ai - e, in most
cases, going down on reefs from two feet wide, all of which
either show free gold or by dollying. The gold in these
reefs is of the highest quality, and worth over £4 an ounce.
So far no stone from Winnecke’s Depot has been treated
in large parcels, but I am confident that when large
quantities pass through the battery the result will be very
satisfactory, and, in some instances, will be a pleasing sur-
prise to those who may be interested.
A new find of good gold-bearing stone has recently been
made at a locality about 15 miles west of Winnecke’s
Depot, and one mile east of Bald Hill. It has been known
for some time that alluvial gold could be found in the
vicinity of the new find. Two 20-acre blocks have been
pegged out, and a number of men are now on the spot.
There is no doubt that in a short time alluvial gold will
be found in payable quantities in the vicinity of Winnecke’s
Depot. Already one man has been working ground,
situated about 2£ miles from Mt. Bartlett, and has been
successful in unearthing a nine-ounce qugget, and continues
to make a living on his claim. When more men give their
attention to prospecting for alluvial I am certain good
results will follow.
The immediate wants of Winnecke’s Depot field are a
Telephone or Telegraph wire from Alice Springs, a Public
Crushing and Cyanide Plant, and a Postal Service. If
these matters are attended to then all things else will
follow on in double-quick time.
After giving careful attention gathering correct infor-
mation regarding the goldfields I am fully convinced that
systematic mining vigorously .carried out will place these
fields in a high position amongst the rich goldfields of
Australia, and I am persuaded that the immediate pros-
perity of South Australia will be the outcome of a
thorough opening up of the country. Time and money will
be well spent in seeking for the precious metal, and ex-
perienced mining men will do well to turn their attention
to these fields.
It is a well-known fact that no great enterprise can be
thoroughly established without considerable trouble and
expense in its initiation, and this particularly applies to
the development of the Arltunga and Winnecke’s Depot
goldfields.


The Track.
The Arltunga Goldfields are about 415 miles from
Oodnadatta, the terminus of the Northern Railway.
The distance from Oodnadatta to Alice Springs by the
Telegraph Line is 306 miles, and by the track about 344
miles.
The distance from Alice Springs to Arltunga, via
Undoolya Station and Bitter Springs, is 65 miles.
The distance from Alice Springs, via Bond Springs, to
Winnecke’s Depot Goldfield is 48 miles, and thence to
Arltunga, 24 miles ; or via Claraville, 35 miles.
The track starts from Oodnadatta, the terminus of the
Northern Railway, 688 miles from Adelaide.
From Oodnadatta to Wire Creek, 22 miles (Bore —good
water); Wire Creek to Macumba, 18 miles (well only in
good seasons); Macumba to Willow Well, 15 miles ; Wil-
low Well to Delhousie Springs, 25 miles; Delhousie to
Blood’s Creek, 35 miles (General Store); Bloods Creek to
Adminga, 12 miles (water only in good seasons); Adminga
to Charlotte Telegraph Station, 18 miles (good water—-
bore); Charlotte to Crown Point Station, 18 miles (good
water); Crown Point to Goyder, 12 miles ; Goyder to Old
Crown Point, 18 miles; Old Crown Point to Horseshoe
Bend, 25 miles (good water); Horseshoe Bend General
Store to Depot Well, 17 miles (good water); Depotto
Alice Well, 12 miles (good water); Alice Well to Francis
Well, 22 miles (good water) ; Francis Well to Deep Well,
25 miles (good water) ; Deep Well to Ooraminna, 25 miles ;
Ooraminna to Alice Springs, 25 miles (plenty of water).
There are three General Stores, one Hotel, Saddler’s Shop,
Police and Telegraph Stations, and Post Office at Alice
Springs.
During my trip to the fields splendid rains had fallen,
and an abundance of water and grass was to be had.
Most of the rivers, creeks and clay-pans had water in them.
The whole of the track from Oodnadatta to Alice Springs
is fairly good, some of the stages are hard pulling through
sand, and some are very stoney. None hut good horses
will do the whole journey. Five hundred-weight, in
waggons, is a good load for each horse. Chief of the
carriage is done by camels, averaging 4 cwt. each. Camels
take 21 days to do the journey. Cost of carriage by
camels is £lO per ton, cost by waggon for machinery about
£2O per ton.
Some of the Leases at Winnecke’s Depot
Goldfields.
Paddy’s Goose (the first claim pegged)—About 30
acres situated about quarter of a mile West from Mount
Bartlett. This property has been recently floated as the
“ Winnecke’s Depot Reward Gold Mines, No Liability.”
This property is opening up very well.
Bartlett’s Dream. —40 acres. Situated West, and
adjoining Paddy’s Goose. As the chief reefs on Paddy’s
Goose run east and west Bartlett’s Dream is well situated.
This property has just been, floated as the “Winnecke’s
Depot Proprietary Gold Mining Syndicate, No Liability.”
The Junction.— 4o acres. Situated East of Paddy’s
Goose. This lease is well and favourably situated for the
same reasons as that of Bartlett’s Dream, and gold-bearing
reefs show on both properties
Golden Junction. —Situated about quarter of a mile
South of Paddy’s Goose. This property has two large out-
crops or blows, consisting of highly mineralized quartz and
ironstone showing free gold, also by dollying.
All Nations. —20 acres. Adjoining Bartlett’s Dream
on the West and Coronation on the East. Reef running
N.E. and S.W., showing free gold, also by dollying.
The Coronation. —40 acres. Third lease West of
Paddy’s Goose. Main reef, two-and-a-half feet wide,
running S.E. and N.W., dipping N.E. Shaft 15 feet deep.
A number of good reefs on this property, some showing
free gold, and others by dollying.
Black Prince. —2o acres. Adjoining the Junction on
the S.W. Shaft in centre of lease, 15 feet deep. Reef
two feet wide in shaft, running N.E. and S.W., and dipping
S.E. Free gold showing, also by dollying.
Black Swan. —10 acres. Adjoining Black Prince on
the North. Good stone on surface.
Black Goslin. —lo acres. Adjoining Black Swan and
Black Prince.
Melba. —4o acres. Adjoining Coronation on the West.
Good stone on surface carrying free gold.
Mails.
Mails leave Adelaide for Arltunga alternate Mondays
from the 2nd February, arrives at Arltunga 14 days later.
Mails leave Arltunga alternate Fridays from 23rd January,
and arrives in Adelaide 15 days later.
Fares.
Fares by rail to Oodnadatta : —First, single, £5 1-ts. Bd.;
second, single, £3 11s. 9d. Fares by coach from Oodna-
datta to Alice Springs, single, £7. From Alice Springs to
Arltunga, £2.
Railway Freight.
The following are rates of carriage to Oodnadatta, for the
. articles specified :
In 2 ton lots, 535. per ton,
exclusive of loading and
unloading.
In smaller lots, 73s 2d., in-
cluding loading and un-
loading.
In 2 ton lots, 70s. 8d , exclu-
sive of loading and un-
loading.
In smaller lota, 108 s. 6d., in-
cluding loading & unloading
■lsls. 4d. ton, any quantity.
Flour, Fruits (dried or preserved),
Onions, Potatoes, Salt
,
Iron or Steel Bar, in bundles.
Iron, Galvanized, in cases or •
bundles. Sugar.
Anvils, Steam Boilers, Crowbars,'
Iron ur Steel Bar (loose).
Cheese, Iron, Galvanized, ■
(loose), Kerosene, Machinery
in Cases, Oatmeal








J. Colton & Go, Ltd.,
78, CURRIE STREET, ADELAIDE,
Makers of all kinds of
SADDLES, BRIDLES, HARNESS, WHIPS,
TRAVELLING BAGS, TRUNKS,
K‘
j#
’I _ * c fe_
I
>\y *
nJi^sjr : >1 a o
f s ;k ■ IW*S ■ ; .f.r fc
y:
l ■
' v .... y‘4-»issr^
‘ IKS'
G\rg
’ ''
' -i.f f -"'
;--1), 1 ) s >V-- -■
•.. i
, . iv^v.i'V 1
PORTMANTEAUS, TENTS, TARPAULINS.
WOOL SHEETS,
WATER BAGS AND COOLERS,
DUCK FILTERS AND COOLERS,
And All Kinds of Canvas Goods.
♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦*
SEND FOR PRICES AND PARTICULARS.


Railway Freights (continued) — '
Bacon—l ton lots, 108 s. 6d.; smaller lots, 151 s. 4d. per ton, in-
cluding loading and unloading.
Candles, Engines, steam or oil,'.
Fuse, Groceries, Harness in
packages, Ironmongery in
cases, Machinery not in cases.
Milk, preserved, Mining
Buckets, Pumps, Hope, Shovels,
Picks in cases, Saddlery in
packages, Wheelbarrows
Drapery, Ironmongery in packages,!
Harness or Saddlery in cases, JI
Tea, Picks in bundles ... ...J
198 s Bd. per ton, any
quantity.
2455. lid. ton, any quantity.
Explosives—36Bs. lid. per ton, any quantity.
All lines are subject to minimum charges when not exceeding
3 cwt. in any one class.
Provisions.
The cost of provisions en route to and on the fields is
approximately as follows: —Flour, 200 lb., 505.; Meat,
salt, sd. per lb.; Meat, tinned, assorted, 2s. a tin; Jam,
Is. 3d. tin ; Tea, 2s. lb.; Preserved Fruits, 2s. tin ; Herrings,
Is. 3d. tin ; Sugar, 4d. lb.; Salt, 4d. lb.; Biscuits, Is. lb.;
Pickles, Is. 6d. bot.; Tomato Sauce, Is. 3d. hot.; Sardines,
small size, Is tin; Marmalade, Is. 6d. tin; Kippered
Herrings, 2s. tin ; Leibig Extract, 25., Of course, as the
fields are further developed these prices will be reduced
materially.
Travellers will do well to remember that stores should
be provided for the journey fromHodnadatta, and can be
had at Oodnadatta, Blood’s Creek, Horseshoe Bend, and
Alice Springs.
Telegraph Facilities Wanted.
Messrs. Herbert and Mitchell, members for the Nor-
thern Territory, accompanied by Mr. Denny, M P.,
waited upon the Deputy Postmaster General (Sir Charles
Todd) on Thursday, and presented to him petitions from
residents of! Arltunga, Winnecke’s Depot, and Oodna-
datta, and the vicinity, asking that a telephone or tele-
graph wire should be provided, connecting Arltunga and
Winnecke’s Depot with Alice Springs ; that further
postal facilities should be granted ; that a money order
office should be opened in the district ; and that the
parcels post, which had been stopped during the recent
dry season should be resumed. The petitions were
signed by pastoralists, storekeepers, miners teamsters,
mechanics, and others, and gave evidence of how general
the feeling is that the time has come for improving the
means of communication between the now important
goldfield centre and Adelaide Accompanying the
petitions were copies of resolutions carried at a meeting
held at Arltunga, supporting the prayer of the petitioners.
Messrs. Herbert and Mitchell pointed out that Arltunga
was now the scene of much mining work, and that large
sums were being daily invested in the field. The Govern-
ment cyanide battery had long ago proved the field to be
rich, and capable of supporting a large population, and
during the past few weeks the number of men there had
greatly increased, and was still increasing.
Sir Charles promised to obtain a report from Mr.
Bradshaw, S M., of Alice Springs, and stated that his
department was alive to the growing importance of the
place. The parcels post had already been resumed He
would carefully consider the whole of the matters men-
tioned in the petitions.
In reply to an inquiry, Sir Charles further stated that
there were some iron poles, and wire available at Alice
Springs, but not sufficient for the work suggested.
Advertiser.
REPORT
ON
WHITE RANGE GOLD MINES,
ARLTUNGA GOLDFIELD,
BY
The Government Geologist, Mr. H. Y. L. BROWN
. Government Geologist’s Department, South Australia,
Adelaide, October 30, 1902.
Sir—l have the honor to submit a report on my late
examination of the White Range Gold Mines and other
mines at work on the Arltunga Goldfield.
In accordance with your instructions, conveyed in N.T.
257 of 1901, I left Adelaide on April 11, 1902, and
proceeded via Alice Springs to Arltunga, where I
arrived on May 8. From that date to May 31 I was
engaged making an inspection and survey of the gold
mines, and on my return to Alice Springs I furnished
a preliminary report, dated June , 1902. The present
report is more complete, but relates to the condition
of the mines at that date. In addition the official re-
turns of the Arltunga Cyanide Works are appended,
giving the quantity of ore treated and gold obtained since
that time, viz., July 19 to October 13, 1902.
A geological sketch map showing also the blocks pegged
for gold-mining purposes at the White Range is
appended.
I have, &c.,
Government Geologist.
H. Y. L. BROWN,
The Hon. J. G. Jenkins, Minister Controlling the
Northern Territory.
WHITE RANGE GOLD MINES.
NORTHERN TERRITORY OF SOUTH
AUSTRALIA.
The White Range is situated at Arltunga, a goldfield
in the Mac Donnell Ranges, some seventy miles north-
eastward of Alice Springs Telegraph Station; which
latter ’-lace is 330 miles northward of Oodnadatta, the
present terminus of the Transcontinental Railway.
Oodnadatta is 688 miles from Adelaide by rail.
Gold was first discovered here in the matrix by H. E.
Luce in the latter end of 1897, at which time the ravines
and gullies in the neighborhood were being worked for
alluvial gold. In February, 1898, Luce pegged out
twelve miners’ right claims, which he amalgamated under
the name of the “White Range Gold Mine.” A month
later C. Williams pegged the block now known as the
Excelsior, and two days later J. Byrne pegged the Ex-
tended. About a week after this T. Williams and G.
Besley pegged the Great Western Block, which they


G. jSon & Go.,
TRADE
MARK.
Wholesale Grocers,
Provision Merchants,
and Importers.
J
A
* •,*
A:
J: *
1
v’. : S
1
□ssnsi-a
i s
S .
/*' / *
.* A
.C*r
-Jls ' /-'■>':■ ; ji ;
'* 1 S / ■! '-;i
.■,v . . - i . *
m
W 1
-s
■ *-i-.
*1 3
m
mm
i .
-.,0
- r _
;?«fef5SS5!
;
NORTH TERRACE, ADELAIDE (Opposite Railway Station),
And at PORT ADELAIDE, BROKEN HILL, N.S.W., FREMANTLE, W.A.,
and MINCING LANE, LONDON.
Resident Representatives at Mount Qambier, 5.A., and Kalgoorlie, W.A.
PROPRIETORS OF
And the CELEBRATED
11
ANCHOR”
BRAND GOODS.
Terai Tea
A <3 E (M T S F" O R—
RENMARK FRUIT PACKING UNION, LIMITED. YEATMAN & CO., LIMITED.
NESTLE’S SWISS MILK. SYMINGTON’S COFFEE ESSENCE, &c.
LEVER BROS., LIMITED, Sunlight, Lifebuoy, and Toilet Soaps, Sunlight Oil Cake, &c.


abandoned after having had two small parcels of ore
treated. It was then taken up by Smith and Patter-
son, and is still held by them. The South Block was
pegged by C. Williams, and upon being abandoned by
him was taken up by Dußois and Gall, who now hold it.
The West Block was next pegged by C. Williams, then
abandoned, and re-pegged by Wilson, May, and Woods.
The blocks known as the North, East, Consols, and
Hollyoak have been taken up and abandoned on several
different occasions. The Oversight has recently been
pegged by McNeil, Cole, and Fletcher.
The alluvial gold was discovered by J. Byrne, and
several of the ravines yielded good returns. They were
worked for some two months prior to Luce’s discovery of
the ore bodies from which this gold had been derived.
The White Range is composed of quartzite and
quartzose sandstone, dipping easterly, north-easterly, and
northerly along its boundary, where it is faulted against
micaceous schists, slates, and gneissic sandstone, with
occasional dykes of granite rock, diorite, &c., which rocks
it overlies. The quartzite is much faulted, jointed, and
shattered, and in the vicinity of the gold workings it is
traversed, by ravines of greater or less depth, trending
eastward and north-eastward through it, which have
doubtless been formed at the time of its upheaval. The
average dip of the quartzite is from. 10° to 20°, but on the
eastern and north-eastern boundary it is steeper—
approaching 25° to 30°. The approximate highest
elevation of the range above sea level is 2,600 ft., and
above the general level of the surrounding country about
600 ft. The area occupied by it extends far beyond the
limits of that at present worked for gold. There are
also large areas of similar quartzite country in the
Arltunga district generally, which it is advisable to
prospect, as the probabilities are in favor of additional
gold discoveries being made in them.
The thickness of this quartzite formation cannot yet be
ascertained in the vicinity of the mines, owing to its
not having been penetrated. At Corbin’s Bluff, one and
three-quarter miles westward from the workings, a section
showing its junction with the underlying metamorphic
granitic formation is visible, the thickness, by barome-
trical measurement, being 200 ft. Further southward
a deep ravine cuts into the quartzite to a depth of
340 ft. without exposing the underlying rocks, so that
the thickness exceeds 340 ft. at this place. As quartzite
beds are generally of variable thickness, and there are
evidences of dislocations and faultings, the thickness at
the mines will not be determined until the workings
have, in course of time, penetrated the mass and reached
the sub-incumbent rock. The probability is that it will
be found to have an average thickness of, approximately,
not less than 200 ft., although in places it may be much
greater. All thel gold-bearing stone is obtained from ore
bodies contained in the quartzite.
This formation varies in composition from intensely
hard quartzose sandstone, with occasional lays of soft
sandstone. At Corbin’s Bluff, on the western side of
the range, near its junction with the metamorphic and
granitic country, it contains pebbles of quartz and other
siliceous rocks. Outlying masses, which have been de-
tached from the main body by faults, occupy much lower
positions. These are also associated with bodies of
quartz containing the usual cellular quartz, gossan, &c.,
carrying gold. In a deep creek on the south-west side
of the range the basal beds consist of a cellular silico-
argillaceous rock with) ferruginous quartose conglomerate.
The granite dykes of the metamorphic schistose formation
are nowhere seen to penetrate the quartzite beds,
although the latter are much uptilted and faulted in their
vicinity.
The conditions under which gold occurs here are very
peculiar. No defined lodes have yet been met with.
There are large outcrops of quartz, but these have no
true walls separating them from the country rock; the
quartz occurring in large irregular-shaped masses and
blocks, enclosed in and intermixed with the quartzite,
and associated with quartz veins traversing the latter
vertically, diagonally, and in the lines of stratification.
The gold occurs in cellular quartz, often showing cubical-
shaped cavities (the casts of pyrites crystals) in quartz
gossan, iron gossan, iron oxides (hsematite and brown iron
ore), pyrites, kaolin, clay or pug, rubble, sand, loam, and
earthy. matter, such as fill vughs and fissures near the
surface; and in solid quartz, although in this case it
appears to be only partially embedded, and is not often
disseminated through the stone. It is found in fila-
ments and crystalline particles in the cellular quartz and
gossan, and adheres so loosely that it is impossible to pre-
serve specimens containing visible gold. The greater
proportion of the gold is in very fine particles or dust.
It has a rich color, and appears to be of high gold value.
The cellular quartz and] other matrices above mentioned
traverse the quartz and quartzite in irregular seams or
lines through the solid rock, or along fissures and joints,
and intersecting it vertically, diagonally, or horizontally,
and widening out here and there into vughs, which lat-
ter cavities generally contain more or less auriferous mate-
rial. These seams are locally known as “crevices.” In
some of the workings there are only a few of these cre-
vices, in others they are more numerous. The vughs
occur associated with them, or independently in the
rock; they generally contain iron gossan and pyrites,
clay, rubble, or sand, which materials are more or less
auriferous, and in some ca»es very rich in gold. The
general dip of these ore bodies is to the southward. As
tho course of the gold-bearing crevices and fissures is
irregular, and they often change in direction on being
followed downward, the workings assume a very irregu-
lar shape. The lowest depth reached is from 50 ft. to
60 ft. in these workings, and the width worked out in
following the auriferous stone varies from a few feet to
15 ft. or more. At the depth reached the conditions
are maintained as at the surface, and the prospects of
gold obtained as rich. The general trend of the ore-
bearing bodies is from east and west to W. 20° S.
Wherever these crevices or seams are found they appear
to be a sure indication of the presence of gold.
The stone obtained from the workings is broken up on
r, smooth rock floor or on a bullock hide, then hand-
picked and sifted; the solid white quartz is rejected,
and the cellular quartz, gossan, &c., and siftings are
saved for treatment. Stone showing a large percentage
of cellular quartz. &c., is not broken up, but saved entire
for crushing. The proportion of stone saved for treat-
ment after dressing varies from 20 per cent, to 50 per
cent, of the whole raised. This dressing process is car-
ried out to save expense in the cost of carting and treat-
ment at the battery. As the solid quartz contains
gold, it is probable that a large proportion of that re


1.
White Range (Luce’s) ...
Area, 20 acres
2.
Boulder
i l
15 “
3.
Extended
U
20 “
4.
Excelsior
20 “
5.
South
“
18 “
6.
East
U
10 “
7.
North
il
10 “
8.
Central
tl
10 “
9.
Great Western
u
20 “
10.
West
ll
20 “
11.
Oversight
tl
10 “
jected may in the future, under more favorable condi-
tions as regards cost of carriage and treatment, prove
to be payable.
The following is a list of names of the principal
blocks, with areas applied for as leases, upon which gold
mining is being carried on at the present time : —-
WHITE RANGE BLOCK (LUCE’S).
The area of this block is twenty acres. The gold
■workings are spread over the greater part of this block
from the eastern to the western boundaries, as shown on
the plan. They are locally termed “shows,” and are
distinguished from each other by names given in accord-
ance with any peculiarity they present. The principal
workings are known as the Long Lead, Perkins’, Flying
Scud, Black Angel, Kaolin, Kaolin West, and White
Spur. From all these ore has been raised and treated.
Besides those named several other localities have been
tested, and found to be auriferous. Exposures of
quartz, striking generally in an east and west direction,
are frequent at and in the vicinity of the workings.
Long Lead. —The greatest depth reached is 50 ft,, on an
inclination averaging 44° southward. Length of stope,
74 ft. A large quantity of stone has been raised and
treated.
Perkins’. —Situated at the western end of Long Lead,
and is being worked to a greater depth than that work-
ing. In both places crevices, fissures, and vughs are
being followed down and worked, and rich prospects of
gold obtained, especially from Perkins’. The width of
these excavations varies from 2 ft. or 3 ft. to 15 ft. On
the surface the ground has been worked for a length of
160 ft.
Flying Scud. — Deepest pit 50 ft., on a southerly in-
clination. Seams, crevices, &c., are followed here and
in other shallow cuts and excavations near.
White Spur.— Opencuts and pits in quartz, which is
in masses and veins. Sandstone and quartzose sand-
stone are here associated with the quartzite. Prospects
tested showed gold of a coarser character than that gene-
rally found on the field. A large body of quartz is
exposed along the) spur. Ore has beeni raised and crushed
from this place.
Black Angel. —For a distance of five chains along a
ravine workings have been opened out here and there on
quartz with the usual seams, crevices, &c., containing cel-
lular quartz, pyrites, gossan, &c., to depths of 10 ft. or
15 ft. A sandy clay here between the bedding of the
quartzite also contains gold. Ore has been raised and
crushed from these workings. Further westward a large
body of quartz over 10 ft. wide in places extends for
some distance. This stone contains the usual seams,
vughs, &c. Stone has been takep from all along these
workings and crushed as a mixed lot.
Kaolin Show.— Gold is mined for here under the same
conditions as at the other places, but it is found also
in seams and bunches of kaolin, which are often very rich.
The kaolin may be a decomposed felspathic rock which
has been intruded, or it may have been derived from the
quartzite, which is often found to enclose clay and sand
in cavities and thin beds. The greatest depth of these
workings is about 60 ft:, the last 20 ft, being sunk ver-
tically ; they extend eastward and westward intermit-
tently for some 200 ft. Quartzose sandstone and sand-
stone are associated with the quartzite here and in the
vicinity. Other workings near are of a somewhat simi-
lar character. Crushings have been taken from all these
workings. The ravine traversing this block about three
and a half chains northward from the ravine on which
the last-mentioned workings are situated shows several
outcrops of auriferous stone which have not yet been
worked. The number of places on this block proved to
be auriferous, from most of which crushings have been
taken and treated at the Government Battery, is large,
spreading over an area comprising about two-thirds of the
whole block. Besides these there are other outcrops,
showing the usual indications of gold, which have not
yet been prospected.
BOULDER BLOCK.
Gold exists here under the same conditions as on the
White Range Block. Little developmental work has
been done, so no’ special mention ia necessary. Crushings
taken are included in those from White Range Block.
Official returns from the Government Cyanide Works,
Arltunga: White Range (Luce’s) and Boulder Block,
from May, 1898, to October 30, 1901: Ore treated, 762
tons; bullion obtained, 1,111 oz. 4 dwt. 19 gr.; value,
£4,230/18/7.
WHITE RANGE EXTENDED BLOCK.
The main workings are in a ravine trending E. 25° N.
The quartz is massive, and in veins and large bodies
which have been worked across for a width of from 5 ft.
to 11 ft. Copper ores (carbonate and sulphide) have
been found here in small quantities. The usual seams,
crevices, and vughs intersect and penetrate the quartz
all through the mass. The workings extend longitudi-
nally 176 ft., and the deepest pit is about 40 ft. deep „n
an inclination southwards. Notable features are the
size of the quartz bodies and the number of vughs, cellu-
lar quartz and gossan seams, and the coarse nature of the
gold sometimes met with. Ten or twelve other places
have been proved auriferous on this block. Official re-
turns, from June 6, 1898, to September 27, 1901: Ore
treated, 213 tons 8 cwt. 2 qr.; bullion obtained, 272 oz.
1 dwt. 17 gr.; value, £1,014/11/11.
EXCELSIOR BLOCK.
Wilkinson’s and Kreig’s Tribute. —-A special feature
at this working is a wall or fissure dipping 75° to 80°
southward associated with gossan, clay, quartz, which
somewhat resembles a lode formation. Numerous
quart veins, both vertical and in the bedding of the
quartzite and quartzose sandstone, are exposed in a cut-
ting made into the hill. Gold occurs in the cellular
quartz, gossan, &c., as usual. Official returns of the


Snapshot at Oodnadatta.
Tea Party at Peake Creek.
Camels Ready to Load.
Mrs. Bagot’s, Oodnadatta.
Snapshot at Oodnadatta.
Views at Oodnadatta on the Track to Arltunga.


HWMIiD, CO\ilOU S CO.
Limited,
Wholesale Ironmongers
and Metal Merchants,
Are Prepared to Supply a Full Line of
REQUISITES for
MINING COMPANIES AND GAMPS.
EXPLOSIVES, all kinds. FUSE. SHOVELS.
DRILL STEEL. BAR IRON. All kind of TINWARE.
WIRE ROPES. PICKS. BARROWS.
TENTS and FLIES. HAMMOCKS.
GOLD WASHING DISHES. WHIP WHEELS.
TRAM RAILS, &c., &c
Quality G-OOX>. Prices RIGHT.
Delivery—PH.OMPT.
To avoid delay Orders should be accompanied by Remittances
or Satisfactory References.
Currie Street, ADELAIDE, S.A.


<Jovernment Cyanide Works, Arltunga, from May, 1898.
to October 30, 1901, from these workings : Ore treated,
386 J tons; bullion obtained, 341 oz. 17 dwt. 22 gr.;
value, £1,286/11/9.
Bow’s Tribute. —-This working is about 15 ft. deep and
12 ft. wide. Vertical joints pass through'the quartzite.
The quartz is in blocks and veins containing gossan,
solid oxide of iron, and pyrites in bunches and vughs.
Other openings have been made, and the stone proved
to contain gold. At one of these (the commencement of
a tunnel) quartz traverses quartzite and red sandstone in
intersecting veins. Beautiful specimens of crystalline
gold in cellular quartz were visible in a face of stone.
WHITE RANGE, SOUTH BLOCK.
Dubois’ Tribute. —There is a vertical shaft 25 ft. deep
here in quartzite and sandstone. The gold is found
in brown oxide of iron and in cubical casts of pyrites
crystals. It also occurs under the usual conditions in
veins, fissures, and vughs. The formation altogether
in the shaft has a resemblance to a lode with intrusions
•of country rock. Deeper sinking is required to deter-
mine this point. There are several other workings on
the same block, from which auriferous stone has been
•obtained also. Official returns, Government Cyanide
Works, Arltunga; Ore treated, 32 tons 7 cwt.; bullion
obtained, 5 oz. 13 dwt. 1 gr.; value, £254/0/2.
WHITE RANGE, EAST BLOCK.
Shanahan’s Working.— This working is 30 ft. deep on
-a steep inclination southward. The gold-bearing mate-
rial is of the usual character.
Messau’s Workings. —These are 15 ft. deep. A
feature is the presence of black iron oxide in the seams
and a fissure trending through the workings which, if
followed down, will probably lead to additional seams
■of ore.
There are several other workings on this block exposing
ore of the usual kind found on this field, crushings cf
which have, I believe, been made. Quartz in massive
bodies and veins occur on the block. I have no record
■of the yield from the ore crushed.
WHITE RANGE, NORTH BLOCK.
Evans’ Workings. —Some twelve or fourteen places
Rave been proved auriferous. The workings are from
a few feet to 15 ft. in depth, and are not of an extensive
■character.
Perks’ Workings. —The deepest pit is 30 ft.; it in-
•clines southward. The ore is of the usual character,
’Official record, Government Cyanide Works: Ore
treated, 59 tons 1 cwt. 2 qr.; bullion obtained, 102 oz.
1 dwt. 9 gr.; value, 391/17/.
CENTRAL BLOCK.
The present workings consist of a vertical excavation
14 ft. deep on a seam of quartz and gossan, showing
■casts of pyrites crystals containing red and yellow pug
or clay with visible gold. Gold is also showing in iron
■oxide, gossan, &c. There are other shallow workings on
this block on veinstone of the usual character which has
been proved auriferous. There are no records of any
ore having been crushed.
WHITE RANGE, WEST BLOCK.
Wilson's and May’s Workings. —There is a large
quartz outcrop here, alongside of which an open -ut
has been made in quartz and quartzite, with the usual
seams and vughs. Other places on this block have been
proved auriferous. Official records, Government Cya-
nide Works, Arltunga : Ore treated, 15 tons 11 cwt. bul-
lion obtained, 23 oz. 14 divt. 15 gr.; value, £93/19/8.
GREAT WESTERN BLOCK.
Smith’s and Patterson’s Workings. —Excavations of
an irregular shape have been made on bodies of quartz
and veins in quartzite. The present workings have
been sunk on an inclination of 32° for 128 ft., with a
drive 54 ft. long made in following seams of cellular
quartz, gossan, rubble, quartz with clay, iron ore, and
pyrites, along a rough broken quartzite floor, which fol-
lows approximately the bedding of the rock. Vughs
occur as usual, and are generally rich in gold. In the
vicinity there are two shallow workings showing quartz
veins with the usual associated gold-hearing seams. In
one of these latter workings iron ore veins occur in addi-
tion. Official records, Government Cyanide Works,
Arltunga: Ore treated, 251 tons 16 cwt.; bullion ob-
tained, 199 oz. 16 dwt. 14 gr.; value, £733/14/9.
Webb Brothers’ Tribute.— An inclined quartz body
has been driven along for 61 ft. at a depth of 10 ft. from
the surface. The gold occurs in the usual manner in
similar ore to that found in other parts of the block.
A feature here is a fairly defined wall, striking E. 15° N.,
and dipping southward 63°. This may prove of import-
ance if followed downwards.
OVERSIGHT BLOCK.
The workings here are shallow, having only lately been
commenced. The auriferous stone is of the usual kind
found on the field, and extensive outcrops of quartz occur
on the block.
JOKER (EVANS’).
These workings are about one and one-quarter miles
westward from the White Range Block, and near a rock-
hole named “Ooyah-leelulah.” They are now abandoned.
The lowest working is on a large irregular-shaped quartz
reef or mass 6 ft. to 8 ft. wide in places. Quartz veins,
gossan and cellular quartz, similar to that of the White
Range mines occur here, and are gold-bearing. They
have been worked to a depth of 4 ft. on a strike of W. 10°
S. for 20 yards. Higher up the range other quartz veins
and reefs have been worked, while still higher up gold is
found in quartz and kaolin. This locality is worth work-
ing. It is situated in a more favorable position for cart-
ing ore to the battery than are the other mines on the
White Range, and its prospects are most encouraging.
At the present time the most important blocks, so far
as the number of workings, and the extent and richness
of the gold-bearing stone, is concerned, are the White
Range Block, Extended, and Great Western, on which the
developments are more extonsive'fchan elsewhere.
On the same range, outside of the pegged blocks, there
are other shallow workings on similar formations, which
offer every inducement to prospectors.
The White Range is remarkable for the extraordinary
number of auriferous outcrops that are spread about


JK. JE, s'f. Tolley,
SP\R\T, PD
GtNtßp »ERC\\MnS,
Proprietors No. 8 Bonded Store,
C\ißß\t ST.,
M.mmm'rm fob —
Peter Dawson’s PERFECTION Scotch Whisky.
Ross, McKenzie & Co.’s CLANS BLEND Scotch Whisky,
Jas. Watson & Co.’s Scotch Whiskies.
Jas. Watson & Co.’s ECLIPSE Rum.
Gordon & Co.’s OLD TOM and DRY Gin.
A. C. A. Nolet’s Schnapps and Geneva.
Girard & Co.’s Brandy.
Irroy & Co.’s Champagne (Vintage, 1893).
T. B. HALL & Co.’s BOAR’S HEAD Stout
Blood, Wolfe & Co.’s WOLF Stout
Tait, Rumsey, & Symington’s Port Wines
Ruiz=y=Hermanos Sherries
Marquis=Del=Merito’s Sherries
Cooperative Tea Gardens Company’s Tea


within a short distance of one another, and for the per-
sistent manner in which the cellular quartz, quartz and
iron gossan, kaolin, clay, sand, &c., in the vughs are found
to contain gold, these substances, particularly the cellular
and gossany quartz, being almost certain indications of
its presence’; also for the absence of visible gold, except in
limited quantity in the solid quartz.
As already stated, the thickness of the quartzite forma-
tion has been proved at one place to be 200 ft. and at
another to exceed 340 ft. Up to the present the ore
bodies have been followed down to a depth of about 60 ft.
in the quartzite, and in all probability they will continue
downwards through entire thickness of the beds. The
question arises as to what change will take place with
the ore bodies when they pass into the metamorphic and
granitic rocks beneath. As these lower rocks outside
the quartzite area, and surrounding it, contain gold-bear-
ing fissure lodes which have been worked in the past and
are still in some cases yielding good returns, it is to be
inferred that the ore-bearing bodies of the quartzite will
pass into the lower series of rocks in the form of defined
lodes similar to this being worked at the Wheal Fortune,
Duffer, and other mines in the district, and I see no
reason why this should not turn out to be the case. Even
if confined to the quartzite formation only, the quantity
of gold ore contained must be very considerable. There
are no indications of a falling-off in the size and extent, or
richness, of the ore-bearing bodies. I am, therefore,
justified in holding the opinion that, with economic
mining and treatment, a large and payable output of gold
will be maintained for many years to come.
The present method of working, on account of the hard-
ness of the rock, is a slow and laborious one, and con-
sists of making small drives and excavations, following
the largest and most persistent seams, vughs, and quartz
bodies, which are known to contain gold in sufficient
quantities to be profitably worked. A more extensive
system of working, by means of open cuts, whereby large
masses of rock could be detached, would result in the
saving of much time and expense. The bagging of the
kaolin, sand, gossan, and other friable material found in
the vughs, before raising from the workings, would, I am
certain, result in the saving of an appreciable quantity
of gold, as these deposits are often very rich. Wire
tramways to convey the ore by gravitation, from the
workings to lower ground, instead of packing it by
manual labor, as is at present being done, would also
result in a considerable saving. For these reasons an
amalgamation of the/ blocks would be advantageous. The
carriage of ore by teams from the mines to the battery
costs 8/ per ton; with a battery on the spot most of this
expense would be avoided. I believe that a plentiful
supply of water will be obtained at the junction of the
quartzite with the metamorphic slate and granitic rocks,
where the former is faulted against the latter. Mulga
is the principal wood used as fuel, and gum timber, which
occurs along the Hale River and other creeks, is available
for mining purposes.
A seam of lignite, some 1-2 ft. thick, has lately been
found in well-sinking on the alluvial flats of the Hale
River. Though not of good quality at this particular
place, as it contains a large percentage of pyrites, there
is no reason why lignite should not be found under other-
portions of the same alluvial plain of a sufficiently good
quality to be used for fuel should such be required in the
future.
At the time of inspection, May, 1902, the number of
men engaged in mining 'on the White Range field was
forty, and the estimated quantity of ore raised and await-
ing treatment was 676 tons.
ASSAYS.
Forty-five samples were taken from the surface to the
lowest depths reached in the various workings, for assay.
Some of these were selected because of their favorable
appearance for gold, as typical examples of the ore, or
because they were known to contain gold; others as
samples of the prevailing materials known to contain
gold. Four samples assayed, in which gold was freely
visible, are excluded from the following list. Most of the
others showed fine gold on panning, although not de-
tected before panning owing in some cases to the friable
nature of the ore, the presence of pyrites or other ferru-
ginous matter.
Five samples returned gold from 2 dwt. to 8 dwt. per ton
Six. do., 14 dwt. to 19 dwt. per ton
Seven do., 1 oz. to 1 oz. 18 dwt. per ton
Five do., 2 oz. 2 dwt. to 2 oz. 19 dwt. per ton
Four do., 4 oz. to 4 oz. 16 dwt. per ton
Four do., 5 oz. to 5 oz. 15 dwt. per ton
Seven do,, 6 oz. 15 dwt. to 8 oz. 16 dwt. per ton
One do., 9 oz. 12 dwt. and silver 12 dwt. per ton
One do., 11 oz. 8 dwt. and silver 14 dwt. per ton
One do., 14 oz. 13 dwt. and silver 2 oz. 10 dwt. per ton
One do., 21 oz. 9 dwt. and silver 1 oz. 16 dwt. per ton.
GOLD MINES OUTSIDE OF THE WHITE RANGE,
NOW BEING WORKED ON THE ARLTUNGA
GOLDFIELD.
CARIGE S WORKINGS.
Locality approximately three miles north-east of the
White Range. Two small veins of quartz, associated
with and containing gossan and ironstone, are being
worked here. No. 1 vein trends east and west through
schistose granite, and micaceous schist, and slate, dipping
eastward. It cuts through the rock vertically, and is
faulted here and there along its course. The thickness
of the vein is 3 in. or 4 in. where greatest. It has been
followed down about 14 ft., and worked for about 20 yards
in length, thinning out to a mere wall at each end. Gold
is visible in the cellular quartz, gossan, and ironstone,
and the stone gives good prospects of gold when tested.
Five tons of ore has been stacked for crushing. No. 2 vein
trends E. 15° N., and has been excavated to a depth of
3 ft., and traced along the surface 15 yards. The
greatest thickness proved is from 4 in. to 5 in. Gold
is freely visible in cellular quartz with pyrites, and in
gossan and ironstone. One man was at work here.
SMITH’S WORKING’S.
The locality is the old Wheal Fortune Mine, some four
or five miles eastward of Claraville, on the Hale River.
The workings are on a small lode, with fairly well defined
walls 2 ft. 6 in. apart. It trends N. 18° E., and dips
westerly at angles of from 70° to 80°, and cuts through
micaceous schist and gneissic granitic rocks. The pre-
sent workings consist of a stope 40 ft. deep, which is




being carried northward at that level towards a shaft said
to have been sunk under Government subsidy to a depth
of 50 ft., on the same line of lode. The gold-bearing
veinstone occurs on the eastern wall in the formation
between the walls, and consists of quartz containing
gossan, pyrites, and iron oxide. It shows visible gold,
and good prospects were obtained from the samples
tested. The lode, although small, is well defined, and
might be exploited at lower depths with advantage. The
length already proved auriferous is about 100 ft. One
man only is at workl raising ore, 15 tons of which is stacked
for crushing. Other workings on lodes in this locality
have been temporarily abandoned.
THE DUFFER MINE.
Locality, six miles east of Wheal Fortune Mine. The
workings consist of an open stope from the surface to
40 ft. deep, on a quartz vein enclosed in a lode formation
between fairly well-defined walls 2 ft. to 2Jr ft. apart,
dipping vertically. The trend in the northern part of
the stope is 360° (magnetic north) for 70 ft.; that of the
southern portion 345° for 63 ft. It is probable that the
vein branches off into two at the point where the change
in strike occurs. The thickness of the auriferous vein-
stone, which is quartz, containing iron oxides and dis-
seminated copper carbonates and sulphide, varies from an
inch to 10 in. or 12 in. Rough gold is visible in the
veinstone, and samples tested gave good prospects. This
lode is small, but has every indication of going down and
continuing auriferous. "
The country rocks consist of stratified gneissic and
micaceous granitic schist dipping north at 20°. Diorite
and homblendic schist and granite dykes occur in the
neighborhood, similar to those found near the Wheal
Fortune Mine, and over the district generally. Twenty
tons of ore has been stacked for treatment. Three men
were at work here.
Although these auriferous veins are small they are suffi-
ciently rich to provide profitable employment to small
parties of working miners to moderate depths.
WATER SUPPLY.
The following is a list of the wells on the Arltunga
Goldfields, near and within a short distance of the White
Range: Arltunga Well, Kangaroo Well, Star of the
North (Well at the Government Cyanide Works), No. 1
Well or Muller’s Well, Munday Well, Wheal Fortune
Well, and Claraville Well.
Arltunga Well is near Paddy’s Rockhole. It has
supplied water for the inhabitants and a large number of
horses and cattle for some years, and also water for wash-
ing alluvial dirt, and at one time for a battery of three
stamps. It is situated about four miles by road, south-
westerly from the White Range gold workings. Supply
large, quality fair.
Kangaroo Well supplies thel White Range inhabitants
and numerous horses, including those belonging to team-
sters carting ore, and the police. The police station is
at this well. Situation about four miles by road,
westerly from White Range workings. Supply fair,
quality good.
Star of the North Well is situated about three-
quarters of a mile northerly from Kangaroo Well, at the
Government Battery and Cyanide Works, which it sup-
plies. The water is good for stock, and although used
for human consumption it cannot be considered very suit-
able for that purpose.
No. 1 Well or Muller’s Well. —Situated about half a
mile eastward of White Range. The supply is small.
It is used for domestic purposes. The water is fairly
good. The sinking of a well is now in progress on the
eastern side of the White Range, near the boundary of
the Extended Block, at a site selected by me on my recent
visit.
Wheal Monday Well, Wheal Fortune Well, and
Claeaville Well are within a radius of a few miles, and
are easily accessible from the White Range. Wheal
Munday Well at the time of my visit contained 40 ft. of
water. It is only used at intervals, and at this time was
supplying the men (five in number) working at the Duffer
and Wheal Fortune Mines, and their horses. . Wheal
Fortune Well is situated near the last named, but is not
now in use.
Claeaville. —The Government well here contained at
the time of my visit 15 ft. of water, the depth was 40 ft.
This well was originally 100 ft. deep, but fell in some
years ago. The water comes from the alluvial drift of
the Hale River, which is about 35 ft. thick at this place.
I believe that other good wells could be obtained by sink-
ing in the deep alluvial ground of the Hale River if more
water was’required. A small hand-boring plant would
be most useful in searching for the deep ground previous
to sinking. I have no reliable information as to the
yield of the Claraville Well previous to its falling in;
but it supplied water for a Huntington mill, besides pro-
viding water for the inhabitants and their horses and
other stock. In my report, dated October 31, 1896, I
suggested this as a source of water supply for the proposed
Government Battery, and, as an alternative, pointed out
that there was a good site for an excavated tank about
half a mile north, provided that trial holes proved the
ground to be suitable.
H. Y. L. BROWN,
Government Geologist.
October 30, 1902.
“N.T. Times Gazette,” 17th July, 1891.
By virtue of the provisions of the “ Northern Territory-
Gold Mining Act, 1873,” I, John George Knight, Esquire,
Government Resident of the Northern Territory of the
Province of South Australia, do hereby make the regula-
tions set out in the schedule hereto, and I direct that after
21 days after such regulations shall have been promulgated
in the Northern Territory aforesaid in the manner required
by the said Act, such regulations shall have the force and
effect of law within the Northern Territory aforesaid.
THE SCHEDULE REFERRED TO.
1. 'That the term of years for which any gold.mining lease
under the said Act may he granted shall not exceed


GRENFELL ST., ADELAIDE,
Port Adelaide and Port Pirie.
Fremantle and Albany, W.A. Brisbane.
London Offices—3, Chapel Street. Whitecross Street, E.O.
West India House. 96, Leadenhall St., E.C.
Hams, snipping, I insurance npis.
Liberal advances made on WOOL, PRODUCE, and
ORES, and Lowest Freights arranged to
London and all Continental Ports.
JLGKBHSTTS FOB
Lund’s Blue Anchor Line of Steamers.
Holt’s Blue Funnel Line. Qerman=Australian Steamship Co.
New Zealand Shipping Company.
Lock Line and other Sailing Vessels.
Ocean Marine Insurance Company, Limited.
Nobel’s Hamburg Dynamite, Gelignite, and Blasting Gelatine.


Schedule (continued)
21 years nor be less than 7 years, and the rent shall
be 10s. per acre per annum to be paid in advance.
2 That no gold mining lease shall be granted pursuant to
the said Act of a greater quantity of laud than 20
acres to auy applicant after March 1, 1874, the
length of which shall not exceed twice its breadth.
3 The manner in which persons desirous of having such
leases granted to them shall mark out the land they
apply for, shall be as directed in the Schedule 9,
rule 5, of said Act.
4. The mode and time of making and investigating and
determining applications for and objections to, the
granting of such leases shall be as directed in
Schedule 9 of said Act.
.6. The amount of deposit to be paid by the applicant and
objector as security for the cost connected with the
investigation, as mentioned in last preceding clause,
shall be J3lO sterling each,
■6. In case of two or more persons applying for a lease of
the same laud, reservoir, face, or dam, the claim to
such shall be determined by priority of application.
7. The form of leases under this Act, with the covenants
and conditions, shall be the same as described in
Schedule 9, rule 24, and the quantity of land leased
shall not be more than 20 acres, nor less than 10
acres, the amount of labor shall not be less than
two bona fide miners to every 10 acres—cooks,
teamsters, and others not employed on the mine
not counted as miners—and the capital to be
expended on every 10 acres or portion of 10 acres
contained in such lease shall be XISO sterling per
annum.
■B. Terms and Conditions of Amalgamation. Should leases
be amalgamated under powers given by this Act
the amount of labor to be employed, and the capital
expended, shall not be less than the total required
as if such leases were not amalgamated.
9. Any breach of the covenants, clauses, Or conditions of
any such lease shall be deemed a forfeiture thereof
10. The manner in which the amount of compensation to be
be paid by any lessees under this Act shall be deter-
mined by the Warden.
11. That, notwithstanding anything contained in the procla-
mation, dated March 26, 1874, it shall be lawful for
the Government Resident to grant leases, of pieces
of land of less extent than 10 acres, and also to grant
leases of pieces of land the length of which shall
exceed twice the breadth where such pieces of land
shall be shown to be bounded on two sides by
existing claims, provided always that such pieces of
land, as aforesaid, shall be subject to be worked by
the same number of men, and to have the same
yearly amount of money expended in the working
of the leases as if the land leased under this regula-
tion had been of the extent of 10 acres.
12. That every application made to the Warden for a gold
mining lease must be accompanied by the first
year’s rent and fees.
13. That it, after application and lodging plans of survey,
the applicant wishes to withdraw or abandon his
application, half of the first year’s rent will be
forfeited and the fees returned.
14. The Warden, upon sufficient cause being shown, may
grant a certificate of suspension of working of
ground comprised in any gold mining lease for a
' period not exceeding six months, provided that such
ground has been continuously worked for the pro-
ceeding six months.
15 The regulations made by the Government Resident, and
dated respectively, 26th day of March, 1874; 9th
April, 1889 ; and the 21st January, 1891, are hereby
repealed.
16, These regulations, and those contained in the 9th
Schedule appended to the said Act, where not incon-
sistent, are to be read together.
Given under my hand at Palmerston, in the Northern Terri-
tory, this 14th day of July, 1891.
J. G. KNIGHT,
GOVERNMENT RESIDENT.
From “ N.T. Gazette,” Sept. 17, 1 897.
PROCLAMATION.
REGULATIONS UNDER N.T. Act, 1873.
f PHAT notice of the day of sale of all lands,
1 the leases whereof shall have been for-
feited, shall be given in some newspaper
published and circulating in the Northern
Territory, aforesaid in lieu of being affixed to
some conspicuous part of such lands as provided
by Clause 58 of the said Act, and the upset
price of such lands at any such sale shall be the
sum of five pounds, £5.
Thei’e shall be paid for every certificate
granted by the Warden of exemption from the
working conditions of any Gold Minin.;/ Lease
fees according to the following scale :
Exemption for 1 month, 10s.
“ “ 3 “ 20s.
Over 3 months and up
6 months... ... 40s
In case no objection shall be lodged to the
granting of any application for a Gold Mining
Lease, the evidence required from the applicant
by Regulation No 11 of the Ninth Schedule
to the said Act that the requirements of Regu-
lation No. 5 of the said Schedule have been
complied with, may be given by affidavit unless
the applicant shall receive notice from the
Warden that his personal attendance is required
on the hearing of the application.
These Regulations, and those contained in
the Ninth Schedule to the said Act, as well as
those proclaimed by the Government Resident
on the 14th day of July, 1891, where not incon-
sistent, shall be read together.
Given under my hand at Palmerston, in
the Northern Territory, aforesaid, this 13th
day of September, 1897.
Government Resident.


3). & Is. JWurray, Ltd.
Warehousemen Merchants,
Gawler Place, ADELAIDE,
Also LONDON and MANCHESTER. MELBOURNE, Victoria.
LAUNCESTON, Tasmania. PERTH, W. Australia.
BRISBANE, TOWNSVILLE, and ROCKHAMPTON, Queensland.
BROKEN HILL, New South Wales.
Chief Ag'en.ts Itx S.A.. for
The GULF LINE OF STEAMERS.
The NORTH BRITISH & MERCANTILE INSURANCE CO. (Fire).
UNION ASSURANCE SOCIETY (Fire).
Chrs. R. SOUTH,
The ,/Uice jSprin|s.
Stores and Provisions of all kinds, also Mining Requisites and
Explosives on hand. Prospecting Parties Fully Equipped, and
arrangements can be made to forward provisions to the
Fields fortnightly.
Agent for T. WILLIAM§, Itoyal Mail Contractor.
Chrs. R. SOUTH, .Stuart Arms .Hotel
First-class accommodation for Travellers. Horses & traps on hire.
Letters and Wires promptly attended to CHARGES MODERATE.


REGULATIONS
UF THE
Northern Territory Mining Board
FOR
Gold Mining District C.,
UNDER
NORTHERN TERRITORY GOLD MINING ACT, 1873.
Alice Springs, January 17th, 1889.
INTERPRETATION OP TERMS.
1. In tiie construction, for the purpose of these regulations,
the following terms shall, if not inconsistent with the context
or subject matter, have the respective meanings hereby
assigned to them:
i. The term “reef” shall be taken to mean gold seam or
quartz, or any substance containing gold other than
alluvial.
ix. The term “alluvial” shall mean any loose soil, earth,
gravel, or other substance containing, or supposed to
contain, gold, not being solid quartz, or other rock, or
cement.
m. The term “shallow ground” shall mean alluvial ground
on which the bed rock is less than fifty (oO) feet below
the surface of the soil and “deep sinking” shall mean
alluvial ground, in which the true bed rock is more
than fifty (50) feet below the surface of the soil.
IV. Base line shall mean the supposed line of lead or lode.
v. “Prospectors’ claim” shall mean the defined area of
ground to which any prospector shall be entitled to as
a reward for the discovery and reporting of payable
gold.
vl. “Wet sinking"—The term wet sinking shall mean allu-
vial ground where water is struck below the surface
drift, and where slabbing and water bailing may he
necessary for the working of the same.
vii. “Mining Tenement”—Any holder of whatever kind law-
fully held and enjoyed under these regulations.
vnl. “Mining purposes”—The purpose of obtaining gold by
any mode or method, and of stacking, or otherwise
storing, any substance for the purpose of obtaining
gold.
IX. “Prospecting” shall mean searching for any new dis-
covery of gold in the manner hereinafter provided.
x. “Prospecting area” shall mean the defined area of
ground which any prospector shall be entitled to mark
off to search for gold therein.
xl. The word “race” shall mean the channel made for the
purpose of conveying water.
xii. The words "tail-race” shall mean a race cut or con-
structed for the purpose of draining any claim or
claims, or for carrying off water, or water and tailings
from any sluice and other gold washing apparatus used
or in connection with any claim.
xm. The words “water right” shall mean the privilege of
diverting and using the water.
xiv. The words “river and stream rights” shall mean a
supply of water for gold washing purposes within the
boundaries of a river or stream claim, equal to that
allowed to bank rights.
xv. The words "constantly employed” shall mean working
on or in connection with a mining tenement for not
less than eight hours on every lawful working day,
as provided by these regulations.
xvi. “Clear days” shall mean the days exclusive of the days
on which any act is to be done.
xvix. “Water rights”—A water right shall mean the right
to collect, store, divert, and convey, for mining pur-
poses, water from any source herein provided,
xvm. Words importing the singular number shall include the
plural number, and words importing the masculine
gender shall include the feminine gender; and the
word “person” shall mean and include any male or
female of the age of sixteen years and over.
xix. “Minister” shall mean the Minister having control of
tho Northern Territory,
xx. “Schedule”—The respective schedules referred to in
these regulations.
MINERS? SIGHTS.
2. Miners’ rights issued under “The Northern Territory Gold
Mining Act, 1873,” shall not be transferable, and any person
mining for gold by virtue of a right issued in the name ol
another person shall forfeit such right, and be liable to tha
penalties for unlawful mining.
DEFINITION OP CLAIM.
3. A claim shall be such a parcel of land as may by virtue
of one miner’s right be held for mining purposes; and a
united claim shall be any number of such parcels of land as
shall have been amalgamated; and, for the purpose of this
regulation, claims shall be divided into two classes, namely,
"alluvial” and “reef.”
MODE OP TAKING POSSESSION.
4. Any person or persons taking possession of a parcel of
Crown lands for gold mining purposes, or any number of such
parcels adjoining each other, and which may be amalgamated,
shall do so by erecting, or causing to be erected, a post at
each angle of the boundary lines which shall bound such parcel
or parcels; such posts shall, except when unobtainable, be not
less than three inches in diameter, be firmly fixed in the
ground, and extend not less than three feet above it, and each
angle shall be marked with a trench not less than six inches
wide and six inches deep and three feet in length; where posts
are unobtainable, a cairn of stones may be erected at each
corner, such caim to be not less than two (2) feet high; and
in addition, for prospecting claims, there shall be displayed
conspicuously a white flag (in the centre of the claim), with
the names of the holder written thereon, not less than two
feet square, and at least six feet above the ground. The
length of any united alluvial claim shall not exceed twice
the breadth thereof.
ALLUVIAL.
Discovery of Payable Gold Must be Reported.
5. Within seven (7) clear days after the finding of gold in


John
White Range Store,
ARLTUNGA
MINING and STOREKEEPERS’ REQUISITES
to suit all Requirements.
REASONABLE CHAROES.
Australian
Blankets I
i
and - - - \
f
flannels j
Guaranteed Absolutely
Pure Wool.
Bfl-Bfl
(Registered Trade Mark)
Made of AUSTRALIAN WOOL.
Made in AUSTRALIAN MILLS.
See each Blanket bears this
BRAND.


apparently payable quantities within a protection area, the
holder shall report said finding at the nearest Warden’s Office,
under pain of forfeiture of such area. The Warden shall
then proceed to the ground, and if sufficient gold has been
found to warrant it, he shall allot the prospectors a reward
claim (according to distance from any known payable claim) in
addition to the number of ordinary claims they would other-
wise be entitled to. Any prospector discovering hayable
gold and neglecting to report the same to the Warden without
delay shall not be entitled to more than an ordinary-sized
claim: Provided always that where such discovery has been
made more than 20 miles from a Warden’s office, one day extra
shall be allowed for each 20 miles beyond the distance.
Protection Area, Size and Form.
6. Any miner shall be entitled to mark off and hold a protec-
tion area of the following dimensions:
. Half a mile and under one mile from the yds. yds.
nearest gold workings 150 x 150
One mile and under two miles 200 x 200
Two miles and under three miles ... 300 x 300
Three " " five “ 400 x 400
Five " “ ten “ ... 500 x 500
Ten miles and over 800 x 800
Every protection area shall be efficiently worked from the time
of marking off such area until payable gold shall have been
discovered therein, or until it shall have been abandoned.
Alluvial Ordinary Claims.
7. Ordinary alluvial claims shall be in area not exceeding in
shallow ground
ft. ft.
For one man ... 100 x 100
For two men 200 x 100
For three men ... ... ... ... 300 x 100
For four men 400 x 100
And so on for any number of men without restriction as to
number of the party or shape of the claims; Provided that the
claim of each party shall be a rectangular block, no side of
which shall be less than 100 ft., and such claim shall be effi-
ciently worked forty-eight hours after being marked off, and
thereafter any share in a claim remaining unworked for three
clear working days shall be deemed forfeited.
Wet Alluvial Claims. '
8. In wet ground, where water other than surface water
exists, and necessitates slabbing throughout, or in rocki
ground requiring blasting tor 30 ft. in the sinking of the shaft
the size of th(T claims shall be as follows:
ft. ft.
One miner ... ... ... ... 150 x 100
Two miners 200 x 100
Three miners ... 250 I 100
Four miners ... ... 300 x 100
Provided that no side of the claim of more than one miner shal
be less than 100 ft/ All claims taken up under this clause mus’
be registered.
Alluvial Reward Claims.
9. The size of reward claims which shall be given for the
discovery of payable alluvial gold shall be in the proportion to
the distance from the nearest occupied gold workings of the
same description, and shall be of the following dimensions;
400 yards ... ... ... Two men’s ground.
One half-mile ... ... ... Three “
One mile ... Four “
Two miles ... Six “
Five miles ... ... ... Eight “
Ten miles Ton “
The above reward shall be in addition to the number of claims
to which the party would be otherwise entitled in ordinary
alluvial claims, and may be marked off in one block in any
rectangular shape at the option of the prospectors, provided
that no side of the block shall be less than 100 ft.
Cement Claims (Alluvial).
10. Cement claims, that is claims containing cement requir-
ing to be crushed for the purpose of obtaining gold therefrom,
shall be of an area not exceeding fifteen by ten yards for each
person. The holder of any such claim shall be responsible
for the due performance of the following duties, that is to
say;—He shall register the occupation of the claim with the
officer duly appointed, without delay, and within twenty-four
hours of such registration shall proceed and continue to work
the said claim. He shall keep constantly employed on, or in
connection with, such claim, at least one man, except as here-
inafter provided for.
Frontage Claims.
11. Frontage claims may be granted on a lead when the
sinking exceeds 70 ft., such claims to be marked out at right
angles, with the base line laid out from the prospector’s, or the
last claim obtaining payable gold. The size of the frontage
to be regulated by the Warden.
Working of Frontage. Claims.
12. Within twenty-four hours after taking possession, the
three claims, whether amalgamated or not, with the full num-
ber of shareholders, next onward on either line of the lead
from the prospector's claim, or the last shaft obtaining pay-
able gold, shall effectively commence and continued to be
worked until such claim be abandoned. On other claims, the
position of which does not require them to be so worked,
every shareholder or his representative, tx> the full number re-
quired by the dimensions of the claim, must be present from
ten to twelve o’clock daily; any share not so represented will
be liable to forfeiture.
Proving Claims and Blocking-off.
13. The holders of any claim bottoming on a frontage lead
shall be allowed a reasonable time to prove the breadth of their
claim, after which the claim shall be reduced to the prescribed
width and marked off, with the boundaries defined by a sub-
stantial square post at each corner, at least three feet high
above the ground, and set in an L trench, three feet long and
six inches deep, on each side of the post. In case of the
shaft and the drive of the holder being without the block claim
chosen, they shall be entitled to retain such shaft and drive
for the working of the claim, and such shaft and drive cannot
he taken possession of except by consent of the original owners
thereof.
Hoisting a Flag.
14. When payable gold has been discovered on any frontage
claim it shall be imperative on the' holders thereof to hoist a
red flag in a conspicuous part of their claim, as near to the
line of the lead as possible.
Ordinary liiver and Stream Claims.
15. An ordinary river and stream claim shall be a frontage
of twenty yards on the course of the river stream, and they
include the bed of the river or stream and the depth of
20 yards on both banks, but the total width shall not exceed
100 yards.
Dam mag he Constructed.
16. Any holder of a river or creek claim may construct dams
within his claim for the purpose of turning water into his
flood-race, on the condition that his dams are only of such a
height, and at such a distance according to the natural fall
of water from his upper boundary as in no way to interfere
with the natural level of the stream above his claim, and he
may extend such flood-race for such a distance beyond his
claim as may be necessary for the effectual working of the
same, provided no other claim be injured thereby. In cases
of dispute in all running streams, the level of running water at
the upper boundary to be considered the natural level, and
the Warden may order any dam to be lowered or altogether re-
moved if he deem it necessary for the purpose of this clause.
Amalgamation of Cement, River, and Stream Claims.
17. The owners of not exceeding four adjoining claims may
amalgamate them by posting on some conspicuous part of their
united claim a notice in writing, containing the number of
claims amalgamated, and the name of each shareholder, and
which shall be kept posted until the same shall have been
worked out or abandoned, and such amalgamated claim shall
be worked every working day by at least two men, until the


The Transcontinental .Hotel,
O O JDI<TJL.T}J±. r r'TJ± .
The Farthest Distanced Hotel from Adelaide.
J. B, FERGUSON, Proprietor.
First-class Accommodation for Travellers to the Goldfields.
Hone but the Best Wines and Spirits in stock.
CHARGK* MODERATE. ...
Travellers to the Fields have to stop at Oodnadatta one night, and
should wire for accommodation.
Licensed Storekeeper.
Provisions and all Mining Requisites on hand.
Contractor for the Carriage of Machinery, Stores, &c.
Alice
Best Wines & Spirits and All
Kinds of Saddlery Stocked.
Communications by wire or letter promptly attended to.


shaft thereof has been bottomed, after which the -full number
of men must be employed therein.
Cement, Ordinary River, or Stream Claims.
IS. The holder of any river or stream claims shall be held
responsible for the following duties, that is to say:—He shall
register the occupation of the claim with the officer duly
appointed, without delay, and shall, within forty-eight hours
after registration, proceed and continue to work the said claim
with the requisite number of men.
Amalgamation of Alluvial Claims.
19. Alluvial claims in deep or shallow ground adjoining one
another may be amalgamated to any extent considered by the
Warden requisite, when the workings are so wet that additional
labor or machinery is required to work them satisfactorily.
Ordinary frontage claims adjoining ope another may be amal-
gamated to an extent not exceeding eight men’s ground. On
claims thus amalgamated the labor conditions may be complied
with by dividing the number of men necessary to hold them
into shifts, working continually or intermittiugly, as the cir-
cumstances may require. The amalgamation notices must be
posted on the claims, as provided for in cement, river, and
stream claims.
Suspension of Alluvial Claims,
20. Alluvial claims may be suspended at the discretion of the
Warden, for periods not exceeding three months; notice, with
causes of suspension, to be kept posted up as provided for reef
claims (in the form given in the schedule D hereto), except
in river and stream, which may be suspended during the
continuance of floods by giving notice to the Warden.
Special Claims in Worked and Abandoned Ground.
21. Where ground has been previously worked and
abandoned the Warden may, on application, allot to ach
miner a special claim not to exceed 150 ft. x 150 ft., and issue
a certificate in the form in schedule C hereto. Every such
applicant for a special claim must comply with the conditions
of application, as mentioned in clause “Mode of taking pos-
session.”
BEETS.
Reef Prospecting Protection Area.
22. The protection area allowed to any miner seeking for any
new and unworked reef or vein shall be double the length
of the prospecting claim to which he would be entitled under
regulation 23, and during the period the said area is being
worked the holder shall be protected for three months in the
occupation thereof, and entitled to a prospector’s claim as here-
after provided.
Prospecting Reef Claims.
23. Any person who shall discover, and report the said dis.
covery to the Warden, a reef not less than one mile or more
than five miles from the nearest occupied reef claim, may occupy
as a prospecting claim, as follows:—2Uo ft. along the supposed
line of reef; not more than ten (10) miles, 300 ft. along the
supposed lino of reef; and over ten (10) miles, 400 ft. along the
supposed line of reef, by six hundred (600) feet in width. He
shall, without preventable delay, after the date of such dis-
covery , register the same with the officer duly appointed (ac-
cording to the form in schedule A hereto), and shall, within
seven clear days after date of registration, proceed and continue
to work with two men on such claim. Any person or persons
taking possession of any such claim or claims shall do so by
erecting, or causing to be erected, a post at each corner of the
claim, with a written notice thereon, setting forth that it is
a prospecting claim, and stating the name of the prospector;
where possible such posts to be at least three inches square and
showing four feet above the surface and firmly fixed in the
ground, to be kept erected and in proper repair during the
occupation of such claim.
A prospector’s reef claim may be amalgamated with ordi-
nary reef claims.
Ordinary Reef Claims.
24. Ordinary reef claims shall not exceed one hundred and
fifty (150 feet in length on the supposed course of the reef, by a
widtli not exceeding six hundred (600) feet across such course.
ii. The holder of any such claim shall be responsible for
the due performance of the following duties, that is to
say:
He shall register the occupation of the claim with
the Warden without preventable delay (according
to the form in schedule A hereto), and, within, seven
clear days of such registration, shall proceed and
continue to work the claim, and the holder of such
claim shall keep one man constantly employed on,
or in connection with, such claim, except as here-
inafter provided.
The width of all reef claims must be marked off at right
angles to the base line, but the whole or any part of such
width may be marked on either side of such line, at the option
oi the elaimholders.
To he Registered.
25. In all quartz claims the names of the shareholders and
numbers of their miners’ rights under which the claim is held,
as also the name of the reef upon which it is situated, and the
number of the claim, must be registered in a book to be kept
by the W’arden, and a copy of the entry must always be kept
posted at or as possible to the working shaft.
Reward Claims.
26. The reward claim which shall be given for the discovery
of gold in apparently payable quantities on any new reef shall
be in proportion to the distance from any reef being worked,
and as follows:
400 yards 150 feet along the line of reefs.
800 yards 200 feet along the line of reefs.
1 mile 300 feet along the line of reefs.
3 miles 500 feet along the line of reefs.
5 miles 750 feet along the line of reefs.
10 miles 1,000 feet along the line of reefs.
Plurality of Claims.
27. Any person may himself, or by his agent, take up and
hold any number of reef claims, provided such claims are re_
presented by miners’ rights, and worked by miners holding
miners’ right sin accordance with these regulations. The labor
to be employed thereon shall be the same as is next hereinafter
provided with respect to amalgamated claims.
Amalgamation of Reef Claims.
28. Any number, not exceeding sixteen, of ordinary reef
claims, which shall adjoin each other, may, on application to
the W’arden, be united and occupied as one claim: Provided
that one man for each two claims so amalgamated shall be
constantly employed on, or in connection with, such claims
until such time as payable gold shall have been found, when
the same number of men shall be employed on, or in connec-
tion with, such claims as though they were not amalgamated;
Provided that every horse eployed in working such claims,
and every horsepower of machinery erected in connection with
such claims, while used in working the same, or crushing stone
therefrom, shall be counted as two men; all such amalgama-
tions shall be registered with the officer duly appointed, with-
out delay (according to the form in schedule B hereto).
When Payable.
29. A claim on a reef shall be deemed to be payable when
the quantity of gold obtained from it shall be equal in value
to the sum which has been paid, or at current wages would
have been payable, for wages to all the miners actually em-
ployed thereon during the time occupied in extracting and
crushing quartz, together with the other necessary working ex-
penses : Provided that no reef claim shall be demed payable
until a crushing has been obtained.
Reef Claims, when Forfeitable.
30. Any reef claim being unworked for twenty-four hours is
liable to forfeiture: Provided always that such intermission
of labor be not due to the neglect of hired workmen or
tribntors.
Forfeiture of Reef Claims.
31. On application being made to the Warden by any miner
to have the right, title, or interest of any other miner to or in
any reef claim forfeited, and in the event of the same being


Oodnadatta.
= Agent for CameL§. =
T. FOGARTY,
Receiving & Forwarding
Agent.
General JStorekeeper.
Goods of Every Description Always Kept on Hand.
Goods Forwarded to the Goldfields or any part of the State.
ALL MINING REQUISITES ON HAND.
OODNADATTA.
Camels.
The undersigned has Camels
on hire for the Arltunga Gold*
fields, and Caravans leaving
weekly for Arltunga.
Loading consigned to our care will receive Prompt Dispatch.
A. A. BAGOT, Oodnadatta.




•uec.ared forfeited by the AVarden, the applicant shall then be
•entitled to full possession ; Provided that when such application
is opposed, ana a reef claim is forfeited, it shall be lawful
to have any mining plant, or othr private property, then on the
claim, valued by arbitrators, one to be chosen by each party,
or by one party alone, if the other patty decline upon request
to exercise his choice, such valuation to be subject to the appro-
val of the Warden; and the amount of said valuation, if any,
together with the cost of estimating such value, shall, within
seven days, be paid to the original owner, or lodged with the
Warden, and such payment or lodgment shall be a condition
precedent to putting the applicant in possession of such) claim.
Mode, of Application for an Unoccupied Claim or Share Liable
to Forfeiture.
32. Whenever under these regulations an unoccupied claim,
or share in an unoccupied claim, is liable to forfeiture, any
miner may apply tor possession of such claim or share therein
by posting a notice in writing in the form of schedule M hereto
.annexed at, or as near as possible to, the working shaft of such
claim, and at the Warden's office, and serving a copy thereo on
the holder of such claim or share, or his agent, if he be known.
If no objection be lodged within six (6) clear days of the post-
ing and service of such notices the Warden shall (if requested)
register the claim or share for the applicant.
Any person objecting to such registration must, within six
clear working days hereinbefore mentioned, lodge a written
notice of objection with the Warden stating the grounds of
such objection; upon receipt of which the Warden shall defer
registration until the matter has been heard and determined,
and shall thereafter be guided by the evidence submitted to
him, or by the order of the Warden’s Court.
Suspension of Beef Claims.
33. When any person or company requires, after three
months’ work has been performed on or in connection with any
claim with the requisite number of men, to suspend or partly
suspend, operations at any time, through any cause which shall
appear sufficient to the Warden, such person or company, or
the manager or secretary of such company, duly authorised bn
his or their behalf, shall make a written application to the
Warden, setting forth the reasons for which he or they require
registration or suspension, and on receipt of such application
the Warden shall, upon ascertaining and satisfying himself
that such reasons are good and sufficient, register such person
or company for permission to suspend or partially suspend
operations for any term not exceeding one calendar month
{in the form given in schedule E hereto), the renewal of such
suspension for a further period of three months may bo granted
by the Warden on his receiving satisfactory proof of the
necessity of such renewal; and after the expiration of such
suspension or renewal, work, with the necessary number of
hands, shall be immediately resumed, and no second or sub-
sequent suspension shall be allowed until six months’ work,
with the full complement of men, shall have been done on the
claim from the date of the last suspension, except in cases
where special difficulties exist, when the Minister may, on
receipt of a special report and recommendation from the
Warden, grant a further renewal of the suspension for any
period not exceeding three months. Notice to be kept posted
conspicuously on claims during their suspension; Provided
always that such registration shall afford no protection to per-
sons obtaining the same in any case where the suspension has
been obtained through any wilful misrepresentation of facts;
and should work not he resumed as hereinbefore provided, then
such ground shall he deemed to he forfeited, and may he
taken possession of in the manner provided for.
Claims not Forfeited by Neglect of Hired Workmen or Tributers.
34. No miner, holding a claim who employs hired labor to
work the same, shall he deemed to have forfeited or abandoned
his right, title, or interest in the same through any neglect,
absence, or omission on the part of any workman thereon
employed by him; Provided such neglect, absence, or omission
shall he without the knowledge of the owner; and, further,
no claim shall be declared forfeited or he deemed to he aban-
doned where the same is bona fide worked by the number of
miners required by these regulations on tribute, that is to say
—where a portion of the gross or.net proceeds of the claim, as
the case may be, is agreed upon to be returned by the tnbutor
or tributors to the owner of the claim by the way of tribute,
rent, or royalty. And the owner of such claims shall be
deemed to be working in a bona fide manner, as much as if
he employed hired workmen for that purpose, and shall enjoy
all the rights, privileges, and exemptions contained in the
regulations now in force; Provided always that if, after seven
clear days’ notice in writing of such neglect, absence, or omis-
sion being given to such miner, either personally or by leaving
the same at his last known place of residence, or in the event
of the owner being absent and not to be found, and such
notice having been advertised in one or newspapers circulating
in the locality in which the claim is situated, such neglect,
absence, or omission be continued, such miner shall be deemed
to have abandoned his claim.
Be-registration of Claims where Claimholder fails to provide
Share to carry on.
35. In any case where a claimholder in any claim shall fail
to provide his share or proportion for carrying on the working
of the said claim as required by these regulations, and shall
not have made any agreement with the remaining claimholders
for the efficient working of the said claim, it shall be lawful
for the claimholders who remain in possession of and work the
claim to apply in writing to the AVarden for a re-registration
of the claim in their own names, or in the names of other
person or persons with whom they may agree. On receipt
of such application the Warden shall give notice to such claim-
holder to show cause within ten days why such application
should not be granted. And if such claimholder should fail
to appear, or to prove to the satisfaction of the Warden that
he has provided his said share or proportion, or made an agree-
ment with the remaining claimholders for the efficient working
of the said claim, the AVarden may grant such application.
TUNNELS.
Tunnel Workings.
36. Any miner, for the purpose of working any mining tene-
ment by means of a tunnel to be driven from the surface, shall
be entitled to hold for that purpose, in addition to the mining
tenement, a width of twenty (20) feet on each side, measuring
from the centre of the tunnel from its commencement to its
junction with the mining tenement, proposed to be so worked.
Any miner taking possession of an area for a tunnel as afore-
said shall place firmly in the ground, every twenty yards along
the centre of proposed course of such tunnel, posts not less
than three inches in diameter, and projecting not less than
three (3) feet above the surface, and shall post a notice of
application in a conspicuous place upon such area, and a copy
of such notice shall be posted at the Warden’s office; and if,
within seven clear days thereafter, no objection shall be lodged
against the same, a certificate of title thereof shall be issued.
Protection of Tunnel.
37. Any miner or miners shall drive their tunnels within
their own parallels as defined on the surface; but two or more
miners may, by agreement registered by the Warden, use the
same tunnel or any portion thereof, separately or conjointly.
Twenty (2d) feet of ground on each side of any tunnel, or
portion of a tunnel, which may be outside of any claim held
in connection therewith, shall be protected from occupation.
Area for Depositing Quartz, Bubbish, Jkc.
38. An area of , two hundred (200) feet square will be allowed
at the mouth of any tunnel, or for any claim using a common
tunnel, for the purpose of depositing quartz or rubbish.
BUSINESS AND RESIDENT SITES.
Business Sites.
39. The holder of any business site shall be required to define
the same by substantial posts at each corner immediately on
taking possession, and shall, within one week, occupy the same.
Business sites may be granted on lands leased for gold
mining purposes, but only with consent of the lessee.
Cessation of occupation for business purposes for one week
shall be deemed to be forfeiture of such site.
The holder of any business site being convicted of illicit


JHorscshoe Bend
General jStore and JEating .House
is situated halfway between
OODNADATTA and ALICE SPRINGS.
PROVISIONS (including- Meat), MINING REQUISITES, &c.
In order to meet tlie demands of the Gfoldflelds a Fresh Supply of
Provisions and Mining Requisites are now ordered.
Contracts undertaken for the carriage of all Rinds oi Machinery,
Plants, &c.. Plenty of Fresh Water at all seasons.
E. H. SARGEANT, Proprietor.
. A.
KINGBBOROUGH,
Member Stock Exchange
of Adelaide,
Sharebroker
AND
Mining Agent,
3, ROYAL EXCHANGE,
ADELAIDE.
Ui
Secretary of Public Companies,
Accountant,
Mining Agent,
Universal Buildings,
GRENFELL SI ADELAIDE.


trading, the Warden may cancel the licence and close the
business forthwith.
Hesidence Sites.
40. Any holder of a miner’s right, and being bona fide en-
gaged in gold mining, shall be entitled to occupy, for the pur-
pose of residence, an area not exceeding a quarter of an acre,
subject to the approval of the Warden.
Hesidence and Business Sites.
41. Any area of ground occupied as lastly above mentioned
shall be open to mining purposes: Provided that the claimant
proves to the satisfaction of the Warden the existence of pay-
able gold in such areas, and provided also that the holders
of such areas'are paid for all improvements —such payments
to be fixed by arbitrators, and approved by Warden, before
permission to enter thereon is given to the claimant.
Hesidence Site may be Hegistered as exempt from Occupation.
42. The holder of any residence site upon which there are sub-
stantial improvements of the value of five pounds (415) may, upon
application to the Warden, and upon payment of the required
fee, have such area registered as exempt from the conditions
of occupation for any period not exceeding six mouths.
Business and Hesidence Site to be kept clean.
43. The holder of any business or residence area shall keep
the same in l at state of cleanliness, so as not to become a nuisance
to his neighbors or the public; and shall make and maintain
the necessary drains, and keep them clean and free from all
obstructions.
DAMS, MACHINERY, SITES, PUDDLING CRANES, &c.
44. Any holder of a miner’s right shall be entitled to
hold an area of ground on which to erect a dam, sludge dam,
and machinery for the extraction of gold.
No holder of a miner’s right, or other person, shall dig
within twenty yards of any dam, except with the consent of
the owner of such dam.
All applications for dams, machinery sites, and puddling
claims must be made in writing to the Warden, notice of
which must be exhibited by the applicant or seven clear
days on the ground applied for, after which, should no valid
objection be made, such claim shall be registered, according
to the form in schedules F and G hereto respectively.
The area for the site of machinery for quartz crushing not
to exceed four acres.
Puddling claims of thirty by thirty yards for each miner may
be granted in old ground; no party to exceed four miners.
Cessation of occupation of dams, machinery, sites, or pudd-
ling claims, for four consecutive weeks, shall be deemed a
forfeiture of the right therein.
Except by permission of the Warden the embankments of
all dams having a storage capacity of more than 500,000
gallons constructed for the purpose of storing water, shall be
formed of earth, with or without a facing of other material,
and shall be of the following dimensions and ac-
cording to the following scale, viz.: The base of
the embankment shall beS four (4) feet wide in addi-
tion to five (5) feet for every foot it is in height. The front
of the embankment shall have a slope not less than three (3) feet
for every foot it is in height, and the back shall have a slope
of not less than two (2) feet for every foot in height. The
top of the embankment, when finished, shall not be less than
four (4) feet in width. There shall also be a by-wash formed
at least four (4) feet below the level of the top of the em-
bankment, which shall not be less than eight (8) feet wide; and
if the storage capacity of the reservoir exceed 1,000,000 gallons,
then the width of the by-wash shall not be less than twelve
(12) feet.
Areas for Stacking Tailings , <tc.
45. Application may be made to the Warden after the
ground has been marked, for an area not exceeding five (5)
acres, for the purpose of stacking tailings, by posting a notice
of application on the ground and at the Warden’s Office, with
a description of ground applied for, seven clear working days
before the hearing.
The Wardens may, if no valid objection is lodged, and land is
not auriferous, grant the application, and register the same
upon receipt of twelve months’ rent in advance: Provided the
Warden may cancel such registration should the owner not use
the area in a bona fide manner for stacking tailings for six
months, or the annual rent is not paid yearly in advance.
ROADS AND RESERVES.
.[//plication to Mine under Hoads or on Heserves.
46. The holder of a miner's right shall not, by virtue of such
right, be entitled to mine beneath the surface of any road or
reserve, except by special permission; but any holder of a
miner’s right who is the proprietor of a claim abutting on a
toad, street, or highway may apply to the Warden for a licence
permitting him to mine beneath the surface of such road, street,
or highway, or upon such reserve, and the Warden may grant
such licence, subject to the following conditions:
I. The area for which such licence is granted on roads shall
be for the width of the claim, and extending across
the road. On reserves, where practicable, the area of
claim shall be the same as under ordinary circum-
stances :
ii. All works on the ground included in such licence must
be well and securely timbered, so as to ensure free and
safe use of the surface of the whole of the road in-
cluded within such licence to the public as in cases
of ordinary traffic upon public roads, and the licencee
will be held responsible for the payment of any
damage, whether to life, limb, or property, sustained
by the public owing to any negect on the part of him,
the licencee, or his servants in the adoption of the
proper" precautions to guard against any damage or
injury which may be caused by his mining operations.
Warden may reserve Hoads and declare Heserves.
47. The Warden shall have power to reserve from mining any
necessary road or track, and to close or alter such roads as
occasion may require, such roads not to exceed sixty-six feet in
width, and also to declare temporary reserves where necessary.
Hoads across Claims.
48. When requiste for the efficient working of any. claim,
leasehold, or machines, or for the public interests, the Warden
may authorise the making of a road over any gully, creek,
claim, or leasehold, residence, business, machine site, site for
stacking tailings, within any goldfield in such manner and
under such conditions as he may determine: Provided that
compensation be paid for the removal or injury caused to any
improvements thereon. The amount of such compensation
may be determined by the Warden, or Warden and arbitrators.
No Injury permitted to Claims or Hoads.
49. No person shall cause or permit sludge, tailings, or water
to accumulate in or flow from his claim, leasehold, reservoir,
dam, machine areas, or other authorised holding, so as to cause
danger, injury, or obstruction to any public road, or any danger
to any public or private interest.
Shafts and Holes near Hoads to he Secured,
50. Any miner having a shaft within fifteen (15) feet of a
public road in ordinary use shall securely fence or Tog the
same, and any miner abandoning any such shaft or hole shall
first either fill up or securely fence or log the same, or some
other way make it safe in a permanent manner, and no person
shall throw down or remove therefrom any fence or timber, or
other material placed for such purpose, or at any time wilfully
injure or destroy sny shaft, drive, or workings in any mine,
so as to prevent or impede the working of such mine, or any
adjacent ground, under a penalty of a sum not exceeding ten
pounds (.£10).
Unauthorised Shafts.
51. No person shall sink any shaft, or disturb the surface
of the ground, or deposit any earth, stone, or other material
in any place so as to interfere with the supply of water used
by the public, or so as to obstruct any public thoroughfare;
and no person shall undermine any road in such manner as to
endanger the public safety.
WATER RIGHTS.
Mode of Application.
52. Any miners intending to divert and use water for mining


or general purposes, or to cut a race or construct dams or
reservoirs in connection therewith, shall give notice in writing
thereof to the Warden, and such notice shall set forth the
source from which the water is to be obtained, and describe
with sufficient accuracy the point at which it is to be diverted
or used, the quantity in sluice-head required, the number of
dams (if any) in which such water is to be stored and their
situation, the probable length of the race, its intended cost
and termination, and the names of the applicants; and copies
of such notice shall be kept posted for seven clear working
days at the Warden’s office, at the source from which the water
is to be obtained, at the proposed termination of the race,
and on the site of any proposed dam or reservoir; and if no
valid objection be lodged at the expiration of seven clear
working days, the Warden may grant the required permission.
Ileads of Water—How Gauged.
53. A box sluice-head shall be a body of water 1 in. by 12 in.;
a ground sluice-head shall be a body of water 3 in. by 12 in.,
and shall be gauged in the following manner;—A box 6 ft.
long and 12 in. in width, with a scale of inches marked on the
inner side of the lower end, shall be placed at the head of
the race having a fall not exceeding 6 in. in the entire length
of it, and the gauge of water shall be taken at the mouth
of the box where the water is discharged. When the length
of the race exceeds one mile the width may be increased half
an inch for each mile.
Quantity of Water taken and left Running.
54. The quantity of water to which any party shall be en-
titled under one water right, for sluicing purposes on any
claim, shall not exceed two ground sluice-heads; and in all
river beds and running creeks from which water is diverted
for mining purposes there shall be left running' at least one
ground sluice-head for general use, when required.
Priority of Water Rights. -
55. The priority of water rights derived from a common
source shall be determined by the date of grant and registra-
tion; and in case of failure of water supply the person last
registered shall forego his rights during such failure of water
as against the person previously registered, and so on in rota-
tion as the supply diminishes; Provided always that the holder
of a water right in the bed of a stream shall have a preference
over the holder of a water right whereby the water of such
stream is diverted from its natural course.
Right to Cut Race anywhere.
bd. Any party of miners may cut any race or drain for gold-
mining purposes through any claim, or over or under any
race or drain belonging to any other party of miners: Provided
that no injury be done to such claim, race, or drain, through
or over or under which the first-mentioned race may be cut;
and the original line of any race may be altered or deviated
from by the consent of the Warden, if no prior right be injured
thereby.
Right of Original Owner to Hired Water.
57. The holder of any water right, when not using the water
held under such right, shall, if required by the Warden so to
do, turn off the water at the head of his race into its natural
channel. No person hiring water from the owner of any
water right shall have any claim to such water after it has
passed his works, but such water shall revert to the original
owner.
Warden may compel Repair to Race.
58. When, from imperfect construction or neglect, any race
is in such an inefficient state as to cause a waste of water,
or to become a nuisance to the public, the Warden may order
the water at the head of such race to be turned off until the de-
fective portion is made good.
Protection to Race.
59. No miner shall be permitted to sink, drive, or cut timber
within ten feet of any occupied race without the consent of the
owner, or as otherwise provided for by these regulations.
Exemption from the Use of Race.
SO. The holder of any water right, or race, dam, or reservoir,
in connection therewith, desirous of retaining the same unused
’ for any longer period than fourteen day*, must post notices,
to that effect, in writing, on the said race, dam, or reservoir,
and at the Warden’s office for seven clear working days; and
on good cause shown, and if no valid objection be lodged,
the Warden "may issue a certificate of exemption from use for
a period not longer than six months, and register the same
on receipt of the fee required.
Water diverted for Sale or Hire.
61. Any miners who may construct a race for the convey-
ance of water for sale or hire for gold mining purposes or gene-
ral use shall not be restricted in the quantity of water they
may divert: Provided that no prior right be prejudiced, or any
injury of a private or public nature be caused thereby: And
provided that the entire quantity of water so diverted is being
actually sold and disposed of in a bona fide manner, and any
water conveyed in excess of the quantity that is being so sold
and disposed of, shall, when the Warden directs, be allowed to
flow in its natural channel.
Right to Sell H'oter.
62. The holder of a water right may sell or dispose of the
right to the whole or any portion of such water, or let the
use of such water for a stated period; and the property and
interest in any race, dam, or reservoir, and in the water con-
tained therein, or flowing therein or through any race, shall bo
deemed to be a chattel interest, and the owner may recover in
a summary way any sum of money due in respect of any water
supplied from any such race, dam, or reservoir.
Il’aier not to he take nor polluted.
63. No person shall take water from any race, dam, or reser-
voir without the consent of the owner, nor shall permit sludge
or other noxious matter to flow into or - otherwise pollute the
water in any dam, or race, or reservoir, nor shall injure the
banks of any dam, race, or reservoir or the works connected
therewith; but the right to any water under any water right
shall terminate whenever the water so held shall be discharged
into any natural stream or watercourse.
Dams or Reservoirs.
64. Any miner intending to construct a dam or reservoir to
collect and store water therein for mining or general purposes
may apply, by notice in writing to the Warden, describing
with sufficient accuracy the site and capacity in gallons of the
proposed dam or reservoir, and the watershed from which the
water is to be collected- Copies of such notices must be
posted at the Warden’s office and on the site of the proposed
dam or reservoir for seven clear days. If no valid objection
be lodged during that period, the Warden may grant to the
applicants authority to occupy the site applied for, and a right
to cut drains on the water-sheds described, or such portions
thereof as he may think fit for the purpose of collecting the
water therefrom, and the applicant thereupon be deemed to
have an exclusive right to such water, provided no public
interest or prior right is injured thereby.
Protection to Springs.
65. No person shall be allowed to open a drain or tunnel
into any spring unless at a distance of not less than 100 yards
from any drain or tunnel which may have been previously
opened, and from which any occupied race derives a supply of
water, unless with the consent of the owner of such last-men-
tioned race, drain, or tunnel.
ii. When any miner or miners find that a waterhole on
Crown lands is necessary for domestic purposes, the
same shall be protected for" such purposes: Provided
that he or they shall affix a notice in writing on a
post at least six feet high close to such waterhole,
signed by at least four miners or holders of business
licences, stating that such waterhole is reserved for
domestic purposes only. Any person disputing the
right of the above to such waterhole shall first apply
to the Warden to settle the matter in dispute.
Causing Claims to he Flooded prohibited.
66. No person shall back the water of any river, stream, race


or watercouse into or upon any claim, or otherwise cause any
claim to be flooded, either wilfully or by neglect.
Protection to Paces and Claims.
67. No person shall permit any water used on or in connec-
tion with any claim or race to flow upon or into any other
claim, race, or tail race. All claimholders shall keep all tail-
ings or sludge from their claim clear of any other claim, race,
or tail-race, unless with the consent of the owner thereof.
Bridging Poods.
68. Whenever any race crosses any road or public footways
the owner of such race shall construct and keep in repair a
good and substantial bridge over the same of the following
dimensions:—lf over a road, 12 ft. in width; if over a pathway,
6 ft. in width.
GENERAL. .
1 Working of Claims-.
69. All claims, whether alluvial or reef, shall be constantly
and efficiently worked, and the same shall only be considered
so worked when eight (8) hours’ work is performed thereon,
by the complement of men required by these regulations, on
every working day, except Saturday, when four (4) hours’ work
shall be considered sufficient.
The Wall.
70. A wall of 3 ft. in width shall be left between adjoining
claims by the miner or miners last marking out, which wall
may be worked by the adjoining claimholders, provided they
securely timber the same.
Protection of Workings.
71. All shafts or workings shall be so enclosed or protected
as to ensure the safety of the public.
Ground to be secured with Props.
72. Any miner or miners working any claim shall secure the
ground by placing good and sufficient props and caps through-
out the whole extent of ground so worked and removed, and
no person or persons shall remove any props or timber, the
removal of which may endanger the working of adjoining
claims.
Baling Compulsory.
73. The owners of any claim in which water has accumulated
to the injury of any adjoining claim shall, on receipt of com-
plaint to that effect from the party injured, or his agent, bale
these claims, or in some other manner effectually remedy the
injury, or the party injured may at once lodge a complaint with
the Warden, who shall have power to order the owners of such
claims causing the injury to bale their claim, and keep it con-
tinually free from any injurious accumulation of water whilst
occupied by them. And the Warden shall further have power
to assess and determine the amount of damage or injury suf-
fered from such accumulation of water by any person com-
plaining, and to make an order that the owner of such claim
causing the damage or injury shall pay the amount thereof.
Props or Timber not to he Pemoved or Ventilation Obstructed
Without Consent.
74. The owners of any claim shall not remove any props or
timber in their claim, the removal of which may endanger A he
working of any other claims, and wherever the underground
working of two or more claims, or of any claim which com-
municate with each other, so as to afford the means of ventila-
tion, such ventilation shall not be obstructed by the owner of
any claim without the consent of the owner of any claim
affected thereby.
Liable to Penalty for allowing Work in Insecure Shafts, Jkc.
75. Whenever the Warden has reason to believe, or upon re-
port being made to him, that the shaft or underground work-
ings of any claim are unsafe through insufficient timbering, or
any other cause, so that loss of life or bodily injury may be
occasioned thereby, he shall cause an examination to be made
by two competent miners, and upon their report the Warden
may order the owner of such claim to do, within a specified
time, whatever may be considered necessary to remove the
cause of danger, and may prohibit any other kind of work
being done until the same has been made safe as ordered.
Pemoval of Landmarks.
76. No unauthorised person or persons shall remove any flag
or mark placed for the purpose of indicating possession of any
claim.
-Vc .tices not to be Pemoved.
77. No unauthorised person shall 'remove, efface, or otherwise
damage any benchmark, boundary post or mark, datum peg,
notice board, or notice made, erected, or posted in accordance
with these regulations.
Accidents to be Ueported.
78. In case of any accident in connection with mining,
whereby loss of life or serious bodily injury has been occa-
sioned, the mining manager, or other person in charge of the
mine or workSj some one of the shareholders, shall immediately
repoit at the Warden’s office the nature of the accident, and the
Warden shall cause an inspection to be made of the mine or
other works where the accident occurred,, by two competent
persons, and proceed to hold an enquiry into the nature and
cause of the accident, and shall forward a copy of the evidence
taken at such enquiry, with his report thereon, to the Minister
of Goldfields:
Warden to enter upon Claims.
79. It shall be imperative upon any claimholder to permit the
Warden, or his assistant, in the performance of his duty as
such, to enter upon the claim, descend the shaft, and examine
the underground workings, and, when required by him, to
render all reasonable assistance in so doing.
Warden' may Order Pemoval of Camps.
80. The Warden shall have power to order and enforce the
removal of any camp that may, in his opinion, pollute the
supply of water being used for domestic purposes; and shall
then and' there choose a sight for such camp, and any person
refusing or neglecting (after notice to remove the said camp
has been given) will be liable to a penalty of not less than five
pounds (.£5).
Use of Timber.
81. Licensed miners will not be allowed to cut and use timber
on Crown lands, except for ordinary domestic and mining pur-
poses; the proof whereof shall be upon them.
Marking more Ground.
82. Where- any miner or miners has or have marked more
ground than he or they is or are entitled to under this regula-
tion, any other miner or miners may mark off such ground
on any aide of the claim, provided that no shaft is interfered
with; and the miner or miners having marked too much ground
shall not be entitled to a wall on the side taken from him or
them.
Measurement of Disputed Grounds.
83. In all cases where the right to certain ground forms
matter of dispute between miners, each claim shall be measured
from the boundary pegs opposite to the side of the claim in
dispute, and no party shall bo protected from encroachment
unless the boundary pegs shall have been kept visible during the
workings of the claim.
Loss of Miner’s Bight.
84. When any miner has lost his miner’s right, certificate of
registration, or transfer certificate, he may make a declaration
of such loss, in the form of schedule H hereto, before a Warden
or justice of the peace, and on payment of the fee required,
such declaration shall be received at the Warden’s office in lieu
thereof for all the purposes required in making a transfer.
Taking Forcible Possession a Forfeiture of Bights.
85. Any miner taking forcible possession of any claim, or
commencing to work the same after his right to take possession
thereof has been disputed, shall forfeit all right and title which
he may have acquired to the possession of such claim or share.
Buies and Agreements to he Binding.
86. All rules and agreements entered into by a majority of
at least two-thirds in number and interest of the shareholders
of any claim or leasehold for the management and working


thereof shall be binding on the sharholders therein, provided
such rules and agreements are not contrary to these regulations.
All such rules and agreements shall be registered oy hung
a copy signed by the patties or their agents at the Warden's
office, and payment of the fee required by schedule (20) hereto
annexed, and such rules or agreements may be abolished or
amended at any time by a like majority of the shareholders
in any such claim or leasehold.
Exemption from Forfeiture of Claims.
87. Notwithstanding the provisions made in these regula-
tions, the lawful occupant of a claim shall not be liable to
any penalty, or his claim liable to forfeiture, during the time
he is incapacitated from work by illness, or has to attend any
Court of Law, or is absent upon any urgent business, or during
the continuance of floods; and he may further absent himself
from his claim during public holidays, and during fourteen
days, commencing on the 22nd day of December in each year,
without forfeiting his interest; should, however, any dispute
arise as to the claim not being represented in accordance with
these regulations, the onus of proof of the cause of absence
shall lie with the claimholder: Provided also that all opera-
tions connected with the extraction of gold from such claim, or
the preparation and erection of machinery or other requisite
appliances for this purpose, shall be deemed to be working
the claim, though carried on at a distance therefrom, and the
proof thereof shall also lie with the claimholder.
Quartz , Earth, Ac., Stacked, Protected.
88. Any miner having forfeited or abandoned his claim shall
be at liberty to retain possession of any stone, or earth, or
other substance, containing gold, the produce of such claim,
that may have been raised at the time of the forfeiture or
abandonment: provided such stone, earth, or other substance
shall be stacked on the ground, not interfering with the work-
ing of the claim. And the Warden shall, upon application
being made to him, and upon the receipt of the fee required,
register the same as the property of such miner for any period
not exceeding six months. A copy of such registration, in the
form of schedule 1., shall be affixed on the stack, and no
person during'the period of such registration shall remove the
said stack, stone, or earth, or other substance, or any of it,
without the permission of the owner.
Absentee Shareholder s Interest may be Represented by Hired
Miners.
89. When a shareholder in a claim absents himself from his
work without being duly exempted by the Warden or these
regulations, and fails to provide an efficient substitute, his
partners may, if they think fit, hire a competent miner to fill
his place; and such absent shareholder shall be responsible
for any reasonable wages due to the person so employed, and
in the event of non-payment of such wages the person so
employed shall be deemed to have a lien on the share of the
absentee in the claim in which he has been employed, to the
amount of the wages at the current rate due to him.
False Representations.
90. Any person who shall, by false representations or frau-
dulent concealment of facts, obtain registration of any mining,
or other interest, or who shall by such means obtain a certi-
ficate of exemption from work, or occupation of business, or
residence area, shall be liable to forfeit his share of the
property in respect of which such registration or certificate of
exemption has been obtained.,
Title to Claims.
91. Possession of a claim by any miner shall be prima fame
evidence of title.
Transfers.
92. The holder of any registered claim, or registered business,
residence, machine, or any other registered holding, under the
old Mining Act of 1885, or these regulations, may, in the form
of schedule K, transfer the same upon production at the War-
den’s office of his certificate of registration, transfer, certificate
(or declaration of loss thereof), and upon payment of the fee
required; and the Warden shall issue to the transferee a trans_
fer certificate in the form of schedule L.
Redemption of Titles. t
93. When the owner of any claim or other mining tenc-
ment forfeits iiis title to such claim or mining tenement, or any
portion thereof, through the non-fulhlment of any of the pro-
visions of these regulations, his subsequent fulfilment of the
aforesaid provisions shall redeem his title to any portion of
such claim or mining tenement which may have been forfeited
as aforesaid; Provided no legal process has been commenced
to obtain possession of such forfeited portion during the exist-
ence of the cause of forfeiture.
Provision In case of Death or Luancy.
94. Upon tile death of the holder of any mining tenement
or interest therein his interest may be held in reserve and
unworked for twenty-eight days thereafter, and upon the lunacy
of any holder of any mining tenement or interest therein,
the remaining shareholders may manage such interest until
it shall have been transferred to duly authorised trustees, as
provided in clause 65 of these regulations.
Interest of a Defaulting Shareholder to he Sold by Auction.
95. The non-payment of any shareholder in a claim or lease-
hold (when no deed of partnership exists) of calls made on him
for the purpose of defraying the working expenses of such
claim or leasehold shall entitle the other shareholders to a
prefereut lien upon the defaulting shareholder’s interest in the
claim or leasehold in which such expenses are owing until the
calls are paid.
Whenever any calls remain unpaid upon any share in a claim
or leasehold (when no deed of partnership exists) from a period
of one month from the call being due, a majority in number
and interest of the shareholders who have paid their calls may
request the Warden to enquire into the matter, and, if he be
satisfied that such sum is legally due on such share, he shall
cause it to be sold by auction, of which sale due notice shall
be given by advertisement in any local newspaper, and the
proceed shall be applied to the payment of all legal expenses
incurred by the process and the calls due .on such share, and the
residue, if any, shall be paid to the late owner of the share,
and the Warden shall register such share without further pro-
cess in the name of the purchaser thereof.
Arbitration.
96. In settlement of questions of value where arbitrators are
required, such arbitrators shall be chosen, one by each party,
or by one party alone, if the other party decline upon request
to exercise his choice; such valuation to be subject to the ap-
proval of the Warden, and the amount of such valuation, if
any, together with the costs of estimating such value, shall,
within seven clear days, be paid to the original owner, or lodged
with the Warden.
Unauthorised Occupation of Crown Lands.
97. Any person being in unauthorised occupation of Crown
lands on any proclaimed goldfield, may be summarily removed
by order of the Warden, and any person obstructing, or
assisting in the obstruction of, the carrying out of any such
order shall be liable to a penalty of not exceeding ten (10)
pounds.
SCHEDULE OF FORMS.
A.
Certificate of Registration of Claim.
No. Miner’s Eight, No.
18 .
Certified that has duly registered
claim, measuring feet x feet, situate
at
Fee, 2s. 6d. Warden.
B.
Certificate of Amalgamation of Reef Claims.
No. Miners’ Eights, Nos.
18 .
Certified that
being the owners of adjoining reef claims Nos. situated
at have this day amalgamated them as one
claim.
Fee, 2s. 6d. Warden.


C.
Certificate of Registration of Special Alluvial Claim.
jj 0- Miner’s Bight, No.
18 .
Certified that having made application
under Regulation 21, for a special claim of yards x yards,
situate ° I have this day registered the same
in his name. _ ,
Fee, 2s. 6d. . Warden.
D.
Certificate of Suspension of Alluvial Claim.
Minor’s Eight, No.
J>o ’ & 18 .
Certified that beill g tbe owne . r °*
alluvial claim No. situated at has received
suspension of work for from this date, on the same
/ilaira on account of __ ,
Fee, 2s. Cd. Warden.
E
Certificate of Suspension of Reef Claim.
No. Miner’s Eight, No.
18
Certified that being the holder of reef
claim No. situated at bas received
suspension of work for from this date, on the
said’ claim, on account of
Fee, 2s. 6d. Warden.
P.
Certificate of Registration of a Site for Dam or Machinery.
No. 18 •
Certified that I have this day duly registered
f nr a ■ site, consisting of situate
av
Ft», £2 per annum. Warden.
G.
Certificate of Registration of a Puddling Claim.
No. 18 .
Certified ti la t I have this day duly registered
for a puddling, claim, situate at
Fee, 2s. fid.’ Warden.
H.
Form of Declaration of Loss of Miner’s Right, Ac.
j ( > of , do solemnly
and sincerely declare that I have lost my No.
by virtue of which X hold and I make this solemn
declaration conscientiously believing the same to be true.
Declared before me at this day of
18 .
Warden (or J.P.)
I.
Certificate of Registration of Stack of Auriferous Quartz, Ac.
No. «
Under the provisions of the Gold mining Regulation, No. 88,
I have this day duly registered as the property of the stack!
of on the claim known as
situated at and provided the conditions of the said
regulation are complied with, no person shall remove the said
or any part thereof for a period of
months from the date hereof without the permission in writing
of the said
Dated this day of , 18 .
Pee, 2s. 6d. Warden.
Note.— This certificate must be kept posted on the stack.
K.
Form of Transfer.
No.
1, , of . for
in consideration, of paid to me by
of do hereby transfer to him my
No. situated at , subject to all and
singular the terms and conditions under which the said
has been held and I of do
hereby accept tire said subject to the terms and
conditions aforesaid.
Dated at this day of 18 .
Transferor.
Fee, 2s. 6d. . Transferee.
L.
Transfer Certificate.
This is to certify that I have this day registered a transfer
from to of and the said
is now the registered holder thereof.
Dated this - day of 18 .
Pee, 2s. 6d. Warden.
Note.—This certificate must be produced at the Warden’s
office when this interest is to be again transferred.
M.
Mode of Application for Abandoned Shares,
I, , of , do hereby make application to
the Warden of the Mining District C, to be registered for
share in the claim the said share being
abandoned by who is now the registered holder thereof.
Dated at this day of , 18 .
Signature.
Miner’s Eight.
■Signature No. Date.
Warden’s Office,
18 .
X hereby give notice that, in pursuance of the above applica-
tion, I intend to register as the first applicant for the
share alleged to have been abandoned by provided
that no valid objection be lodged with me within six clear days
from the posting and due service of this notice.
Warden.
N.
Scale of Fees and Rents.
The following shall be the scale of fees and rents payable
under the Northern Territory Gold Mining Act, 1873, and
these Eegulations;—.
£ s. d. Business areas ... 0 5 0
Miner’s right 0 10 0 Residence 0 5 0
Business licence (per Machine area 0 5 0
annum) 4 0 0 Tailings area 0 5 0
Reporting discovery of Water race 0 5 0
g°ld ... 0 1 0 Dam or reservoir 0 5 0
Application for mining Exemption of—
tenement 0 1 0 Business area from
Registration of— occupation per
Mining tenement ... 0 1 0 annum) 4 o 0
Amalgamation 0 5 0 Residence 0 10 0
Machine areas (per acre) 0 5 0 Claim from labor 0 10
Area for stacking tail- Race from use 0 5 0
ings (per acre) 0 5 0 Puddling claims 0 5 0
Lien 0 5 0 Declaration of loss of—
Rules and agreements 0 5 0 Miner’s right 0 2 6
Cancellation of share Certificate of registra-
certificate 0 2 6 tion 0 2 8
Stacked quartz 0 10 0 Registers—
Transfer of— £. s. d. Examination of (for
Claims or shares therein 0 5 0 each entry) 0 2 6
JOSEPH SKINNER,
WM. G. SOUTH,
CHARLES GALL,
Members of
Mining Board,
District C.
Dated this 17th day of January, 1889.


STAMP DUTIES.
Power of Attorney f or other instrument in the nature thereof —
Any instrument not under seal ... ... ... 0 10 0
Any instrument under seal... ... ... ... 10 0
Seceipt given for or on the payment of money amounting to Forty
Shillings or upwards ... ... ... ... 0 0 1
(Adhesive stamp to be cancelled by person by whom receipt
given. After penalty by impressed stamp only).
Section 32.- RECEIPTS.
(1) For the purposes of this Act the expression “ Receipts” includes any note,
memorandum, or writing whereby any money amounting to Two Pounds or
upwards, or any bill of exchange or promissory note for money amounting
to Two Pounds or upwards is acknowledged or expressed to have been
received, or deposited, or paid, 'or whereby any debt or demand, or any
part of a debt or demand, of the amount of Two Pounds or upwards is
acknowledged to have been settled, satisfied, or discharged, or which
signifies or imports any such acknowledgement, and whether the sam*. is
or is not signed with the name of any person.
(2) The duty upon a receipt may be denoted by an adhesive stamp, which is to
be cancelled by the person by whom the receipt is given before he d< livers it
out of his hands.
Section 33. If any person —
(1) Gives a receipt liable to duty, and not duly stamped ; or *
(2) In any casa where a receipt would be liab'e to duty, refuses to give a receipt
duly stamped; or
(3) Upon a payment to an amount the receipt for which is liable to duty gives
a receipt for a less amount, or separate-* or divides the amount paid, with
intent to evade the whole or any part of the duty :
he shall incur a penalty not exceeding Ten Pounds : Provided that any person
may stamp with an impressed stamp upon the terms following, that is to ary :
(1) Within fourteen days after it has been given, on payment of the duty and a
penalty of not exceeding Five pounds:
(2) After fourteen days and within one month after it has been given, ou pay-
ment of the duty snd a penalty of not exceeding Tea Pounds:
and shall not in any other case be stamped with an impressed stamp.
Totalizator. —Two and a half per centum upon the gross takings.
General Exemptions from, all Stamp Duties—
1. Wills and testamentary instruments.
2. Certificates of Title issued from the Lands Titles Registration Office.
3. Customs bonds.
4. Administration bonds.
5. Bonds to the Crown.
6. Bond on appointment of a special bailiff.
7. Memorandum of association, articles of association, rules and regulation*
of an incorporate company, association, or society.
8. Marriage Settlement; and post-nuptial settlement on wife, by whomso-
ever made
9. Mortgage bonds guaranteed by the Government of the State.
10. Articles or indentures of apprenticeship.
11. Leases from the Crown.
12. Leases to the Crown, and to any persons on behalf of the Crown.
13. Power of Attorney limited to a power to sign and seal leases from the
Crown.
14. Duplicates of counterparts of any instrument liable to duty.
15. Conveyance on sale of any goods, wares, merchandise, horses, cattle, sheep,
or other movable chattels when the value does not exceed £2O.
16. Every assignment or transfer endorsed upon any policy of life insurance
effected with any life assurance company made for the purpose of
securing ihe repayment of any money advanced or lent upon the
security of such policy of assurance.
17. Any mortgage of real property and mortgage given by way of bill of sale ox
otherwise of livestock, goods, chattels, and effects, or other personal
estate.
SCHEDULE OP CHARGES.
Affidavit or Declaration * when sworn or declared and subscribed Amount of
before a Special Magistrate, Justice of the Peace, Commissioner . Duty-
for taking Affidavits, or Notary Public. (If adhesive stamp, to £ s. d
be cancelled by person making) .. ... ... OXO
Agreement * not under seal, not otherwise specifically charged. (If
adhesive stamp, to be cancelled by either party ... ... 0 1 0
Stamp on Annual Licence — 255. for every £lOO or part of £lOO of net
premiums of any kind whatsoever received or
in any manner charged in account by any
such company, person, or firm, or by his or
their agents during the twelve months pre-
ceding the year for which such liceneemay be
taken out (except life and personal accident
insurance premiums, the licence of which
shall be 10s for every £lOO, or part of £100).
Such premiums shall be the net premiums,
and be counted so as to exclude any com-
mission or discount, and any portion of such
net premiums actually paid away by way of
re-insurance affected in South Australia with
any other such company, person or firm, and
the duty in respect of any one licence shall
not in any case be less than £25,
r
To be taken out by any company,
person, or firm of persons,
whether corporate or unincor-
porate, who carry on in South
Australia and life, fire,fidelity,
guarantee, livestock, plate
_ glass, or marine assurance or-
j insurance business whatever,
and whether the head office or
principal place of business of
such company, person, or firm
of persons is in South Aus-
tralia or elsewhere.
* Stamps may be either adhesive or impressed. t Impressed stamps only.
Bank Note. — A sum to be paid by banks quarterly for duty on bank
notes issued by them —For every £lOO, and also for the frac-
tional part of £lOO of the average quarterly amount of such
notes in circulation ... ... ... ... 0 10 0
Bill of Exchange , Cheque or Order * payable on demand ... 0 0 1
Bill of Exchange * of any other kind whatsoever, and Promissory
Note of every kind whatsoever, drawn or expressed to be payable,
or actually paid or endorsed, or in any manner negotiated in
South Australia —
Except bills of exchange of any kind whatsoever drawn in
South Australia, payable at anyplace beyond the limits
of the Commonwealth of Australia, for every £lOO, or
fractional part thereof. Is.
For every £25, and also for any fractional part of £25 ... 0 0 6
Bill of Lading or Shipping Note + for goods exported from the
State... ... ... ... ... ... 0 0 6
Conveyance or Transfer f on sale of any property —
Where the amount or value of the consideration for the sale
does not exceed £5O ... ... ... ... 0 5 0
Exceeds £5O and does not exceed £100... ... ... 0 10 0
For every £lOO, and also for any fractional part of £lOO of such
amount or value ... ... ... ... 0 10 0
Conveyance f of any other kind not before charged ... ... 10 0
Deed f (except as otherwise provided in this Schedule)—
For any deed where the consideration money therein expressed
is not more than £lOO ... ... ... ... 0 5 0
For every additional £lOO, up to a total of £4OO, a further
sum of ... ... ... ... ... 0 5 0
For every deed or transfer of any kind whatsoever not otherwise
specified in the said schedule ... ... ... 10 0
Lease or Agreement for a Lease f or any written document for the
tenancy or occupancy of any lands, tenements, or heredita-
ments, the following duties in respect of the rent at the
rate per annum —
Where the rent shall not exceed £5O at the rate per annum .. . 0 2, 6
Where the same shall exceed £5O and not exceed £lOO ... 0 5 5
Above £lOO, for every fractional part of £lOO ... ... 0 5 0
Of any other kind whatsoever ... ... ... 10 0
Lease ■)■ under section 29, sub-section 2 ... ... ... 0 2 6


v. 7 f '> /? 3 ' v ' 1 A ft T
v fej V;< A ~y r fV J j fr\ * ■,* 'i
w | W#. f % i mV $ ; ? s v*
? I i i. ■■ a Hti i
I | c% F l?/ :
II? 44 4 rX
*■;
A'.
j’-j
}iji
j i'
y ,^-^kf,v s
&a ■ m ■
• ■isrr, :i\ ~r**v v
\' f !&*>''*
fe'; „:. ;pi kV, .V-** N V?" X.
?Vfi.,!f‘..v£ »;>..•-■’. V>i?.r /,v,5. ‘■ ; r- il « r 'V ■;&.%
S "■'■
mzt
I'
si %
ss Sit'S' % -'■'l^
ll iOfte
! !
•»<*/ •■*."
> % •>■•; ■/
1 *
t' ‘A
f; ’!■■ i'V* jW.J
H> : -;
14
d§*M,
iv.f. "“ y •*» *’ •>■••-• r-'- *-»"/
. h.s $$ * *?■# '
** # $S , v r-'.- , *r* -01
1 -• h‘£ £*/.-->/ rf
' ■•--- -p'' ■*
Jf
/•£'
.
M
f'-\”” 4'',
®n&.
v~v
,'A
£ $ ,V t>.v ‘
t If rS vx
&> vcy •»>
'X ■:/*
%$h h'-r
. .1
A f V-5 «-;*f ‘i£i
*at J«.* ■i’p ! tp. til
%i>»vS i-3t.
:< : «i
te?*
, t
■£?*'&
ft-t , -; *./■
VSv J<>.
*f.i-,r!'-r> i»y
HicdSiest
A*‘s’; fe=*'«w|
4,,4<| «I.SLw ; .
.'vsi ;*>«
\ ?4 f
i* bit* y
$ tj
tA
'W
si 0
Al
r: f: pi
:l
i
\A
hif
'4j
‘A^
*f! ‘A*
..ki'-J-j
.■W'
t;
W 1 *5
‘ 4f $ £■• '£i ;« SI !)• fc » I ;‘f ,/■{?
i >i > ••* I W it »«, fi rt. ft %a & g
.\,-P JiA ■ I?;,‘j. ;6. --in/ i>. j--v v-rfi'.v '*£*--&
t;
ri-Vi *r&
k./ .a a.»
* t * » A 4 A A..A_> ft ■*.*>.» A * 4 *
cm A !.<' Cr\ & | |
*2? i?i V *■ «-<• /is. iw-
Ail JJTD ASIA
.*. j* h,J • | W J si Mjh / ;v*
- ! ' .•••,• •
~1H H 4
( ■::.
3 1508 01462204 2
AAA
X;/ V '5.-P'
Vr
v* ■
■•*■


DRINK
AMGOORIE TEA.
IMMMs smt.
FRY’S
WL*
PURE CONCENTRATED
COCOA.
|
*
Packed in Gold Top Tins.
