

Reprinted from “ The Pastoralists' Review May 15, 1907.]
Rabbit Destruction by a Contagious Disease.
Dk. J. Danysz's Report.
Results oe Experiments carried on in collaboration with
Me. A. Latapib on Broughton Island from 20th October,
1906, to Ist May, 1907.
THE aim of the researches I had to make on Broughton Island
was to find out—
-Ist.—lf the rabbit virus can give in practice better results than
the means of destruction hitherto employed.
2nd. If the rabbit virus can be used on stations infested with
rabbits without any danger to man, domestic or wild animals.
The first of these two questions may be considered as solved as
far as it can be under the special conditions of climate and soil
found on the island, and which will rarely be found on the main-
land.
As regards the second question, viz., the harmlessness of the
rabbit virus to other animals, I will show in the course of this
report the results of very reassuring experiments made up to
now, but I have thought it necessary to expose domestic animals
to contagion for a whole year, and to carry on the experiments
till October next.
It is known that some contagious diseases of men and animals
are more frequent and more virulent at certain seasons of the
year; we must see whether sheep, cattle, horses, pigs, fowls, &c.,
can resist the rabbit virus with the same indifference during the
spring as well as during the summer, in autumn as well as in
winter. This part of the work will be carried on fully by Dr.
Tidswell, who will make a special report on this important ques-
tion.
My aim was also to find by every means available to me on the
island a method of rabbit destruction that can be used by any-
body, and which would be serviceable on large stations. We
could not limit ourselves to show that the disease was contagious
and say that it was sufficient to destroy the rabbits.
Microbes are living creatures whose properties vary according
to the conditions of time, temperature, surroundings in which
they are placed, the way they are inoculated, the food with
which they are mixed in order to get the rabbits to take them.
To make this method really useful and practical, we have
studied all these conditions. I will show in this report the fol-
lowing points:—
First, the results obtained on Broughton Island with—
(а) Experiments of -contagion.
(б) Experiments to ascertain the -suitability of the baits and
other means of infecting the rabbits.
(c) Experiments showing practical methods to prepare the virus
on a large scale.
(d) Conditions under which the virus can be kept and the
length of time during which it will keep all its infectious
properties.
2nd.—The conditions under which the preparation of the virus,
its distribution, and its use on stations should be arranged in
order to give the best results.
I have more particularly insisted on this point, that every new
method requires a special apprenticeship, and upon that part of
the work squatters will have to understand and carry out for
themselves.
3rd.—l will answer in a few words the criticisms of my method
which have now and then appeared in some of the Australian
papers.
Experiments oe Contagion.
The experiments of contagion have heen made on rabbits shut
in cages and on rabbits living in the open in an enclosure.
Experiment No. 3.—On the 23rd of November, 1906, fourteen rab-
bits were put in a wooden cage, having been previously made to
drink a culture of rabbit virus in some " bouillon.” In the
same cage were put six fresh rabhits, and on the Ist of December
ten more. Out of the fourteen rabbits directly infected with the
bouillon ten died between the 25th and the 27th of November,
four within eight days. Out of the sixteen exposed rabbits put
in the same cage, fifteen died from contagion in from three to
twenty-two days.
Experiment No. 4.—On 27th November, in a cage were put five
rabbits which were fed with lucerne and carrots sprinkled with
virus. On the 28th the cage was cleaned and eight other rabbits
were added-- - All' the- rabbits died in from two to ten days.
Experiment No. 6.—On the Ist day of December, raljljits
were put in paddock No. 3 (three quarters of ak acre ); to
these were added fifteen directly affected with lucerne Crinkled
with virus. The soil being sandy, rabbits have rapidly matt» deep
and extensive burrows. It was impossible to count exactly -the
dead and live ones hidden in the warrens.
We estimated approximately the number of live rabbits by
counting all that came to eat the lucerne which was placed in
one of the corners of the paddock. '
From the Ist to the 20th of December there were found dead
on the surface five of the originally infected rabbits and twenty--
nine others which had taken the disease by contagion. Sixty-
seven live rabbits could be counted at night when they came to
eat tlie lucerne.
The conclusion is that fifteen contaminated rabbits have com-
municated the disease to approximately eighty-three rabbits who
lived with them in the same burrows.
It seems that the epidemic stopped there; the number of rab-
bits living kept the same till the end of January, 1907. The sur-
viving rabbits, as well as the paddock where they were, have
been used for another experiment.
Experiment No. 44.—0 n the 18th of March, 1907, were shut to-
gether in paddock No. 4 (three-quarters of an acre) 133 healthy
rabbits and thirty-eight infected by the mouth or skin. Six rab-
bits contaminated the same way were placed in a cage as " con-
trol;” these all died in from two to five days.
The soil of No. 4 paddock is low and less permeable than that
of No. 2; the rabbits could make very few burrows. Nearly all
the dead rabbits were on the surface; it was possible to count
the dead exactly and to follow the progress of contagion.
The experiment was started on the 18th of March in the morn-
ing; on the 19th, twenty-four hours after, we found already the
dead bodies of {a) eight of the infected rabbits; (6) four of the
exposed rabbits. (It is possible that the rapidity of infection of
these four rabbits may be accounted for by inoculation through
wounds received in fighting.)
It is certain that the four rabbits (6) were infected by rabbits
diseased but still living. The same may be said of all the rab-
bits dead during the first week of the experiment.
From the 18th to the 26th of March we found the bodies of (a)
twenty-two of the infected rabbits; (6) nineteen of the exposed
rabbits-
Prom the 25th March till the 17th of April we only found dead
(a) three of the infected rabbits; (&) seventy-three of the exposed
rabbits.
There is no doubt that during this period the rabbits (6) have
been contaminated not only by direct contact with the sick and
live rabbits, but by the virus deposited by those sick and dead
upon grass, on the soil, and in the water (some heavy rain had
fallen).
It is to be expected that the mortality amongst the rabbits in
No. 4 paddock has not yet ended. This experiment will be car-
ried on, and will show how long the virulence of microbes can
still maintain itself.
The total result of these four experiments is that seventy-two
rabbits infected with the virus all died themselves and gave the
disease to 193 rabbits, out of 307 healthy rabbits with which
they were put; in other words, one rabbit infected directly by
the virus has given a mortal disease to about three others (2.68
exactly).
These experiments allow us to affirm with certainty two very
important points:
Ist. The pasteurellosis of the rabbit is a disease which can
transmit itself from the diseased to the healthy during the life
of the diseased.
2nd. The spots where the infected rabbits have lived and died
remain infectious for a certain time. It is very important to
draw attention to the fact that we have never obtained on
Broughton Island the infection of the lungs and nose which is
the most contagious form and the most frequent of the pas-
teurellosis of the rabbits of Europe. On Broughton Island we
have been unable to obtain this form of the disease, neither in
open-air experiments, nor in cages. Since we were able to do
so in the laboratory of the Board of Health in Sydney (see Dr.
Tidswell’s report), we must conclude that the special climatic
conditions of the island prevent the appearance of this form of
the disease, and that such conditions will not exist on the main-
land.
To sum up, the experiments of contagion which we have been
able to make on Broughton Island have proved that the pas-
teurellosis of the rabbit is just as contagious and spreads itself
just as well amongst rabbits in the open, under conditions as
similar as possible to natural life, as it does in cages.
The observations made on Broughton Island as well as in the
Board of Health laboratory enable us to hope that on the main-
land, by the help of different climatic conditions, the disease
will be more contagious than on the island.


It was hardly possible up to now to carry on any precise ex-
periments with rabbits living in liberty on the island. The 600
rabbits introduced here in March, 1906, have not multiplied as
was expected; they have only bred once, and actually there are
not more than three or four to the acre.
Direct Infection with the Virus.
There are several ways to infect rabbits wth virus, but they
do not all give equally sure results. The microbes of the rab-
bit pasteurellosis penetrate into the organism through exposed
skin and through internal passages.
It is sufficient to rub with a few drops of virus the bare skin,
or to put a drop in the eyes, on nose or on the tongue of the
animal to infect him and kill him with certainty. It is there-
fore possible to infect rabbits by feeding them with the virus
mixed with a bait or even by sprinkling them with bouillon cul-
ture or with the flesh of a rabbit dead with infection, minced and
mixed with water.
The choice of a bait is important, because the virus eaten by
the animal with the bait penetrates the organism through the
lining of the mouth and gullet before reaching the stomach.
Therefore when you mix the microbes with pollard, which en-
closes them completely in a compact dough, infection is more
difficult than when you spread them on lucerne and on some
carrots.
Out of forty-seven rabbits who have received some virus directly
in the mouth, forty-six have died; one only has survived.
Out of fifty rabbits fed on lucerne sprinkled with virus, forty-
five have died, and five have resisted; out of forty seven fed with
pollard, twenty-five have died and twenty-two have resisted.
It must be noted that the result of the infection depends as
much on the virulence of the culture used as on the nature ot
the bait. It is very probable that by keeping on passing always
the same culture from one rabbit to another, one will make it
more and more virulent and specific for the rabbits; then a mix-
ture of this culture with pollard may give results just as gooa
as with lucerne.
In its present condition of virulence it is necessary to intro-
duce at least one drop of culture of the virus in the mouth of a
rabbit in order to infect him and kill him with certainty; with
one pint of virus it is possible to infect 10,000 rabbits in this
way. Should we manage, as we most probably will, to reduce
this dose to one-tenth of a drop, we will be able to use in order
to infect rabbits any bait which will not be harmful to the
microbes.
Even now, taking 1 as bait lucerne, pumpkin, carrots, or by
sprinkling with virus rabbits caught in a trap, toe can obtain with
certainty better results than by poison.
The best way to use lucerne would be to put a little of it in
small enclosures fenced in with wire; get them used to it, and
then to sprinkle it with virus in broth.
In order not to waste the lucerne, it would be well to sprinkle
it with the virus only once a week in each small enclosure. It
takes about eight days to kill all the rabbits who have eaten the
virulent lucerne; by distributing the virus once a week only, you
will avoid infecting the same rabbits twice.
To infect rabbits caught in a pit trap you only have to sprinkle
them (with a water can) with virus in broth, or, better still (with
a millet broom), with the flesh of infected rabbits minced and
mixed in water.
By thus establishing a certain number of centres of infection
on each station, and by keeping them going when feed is scarce,
results would be obtained which I cannot possibly indicate with
precision, but which would certainly be more satisfactory than
those obtained so far with poison.
On© experiment made in paddock No. 3 (area, three acres) will
give us some idea.
Experiment No. 11.—On the 25th of December, 1906, 320 healthy
rabbits were put in this paddock, together with a few sheep,
cows, horses, pigs, goats, fowls, and three kangaroos. They were
fed on lucerne contaminated with the minced flesh mixed in
water of two rabbits dead of infection.
On the 4th of January, 1907, twenty infected rabbits were added
in the same paddock.
On the 25th of January we gave them more infected lucerne.
On the 20th of February we could only count thirty-two live
rabbits, who came at night to eat the lucerne.
There were few rabbits found dead on the surface, nearly all
died in very deep burrows which they had dug in the sandy soil
of the paddock. It was easy to perceive that the greatest num-
ber of these burrows were not inhabited any more; the smell
that rose proved sufficiently that they contained many dead
bodies.
When the climatic conditions will allow it, it will be very
easy to infect rabbits by putting a certain quantity of virus in
the water which they drink; in this case you would have to pul
one pint of broth (or one minced rabbit) to two or three gallons
of water, and renew this every day.
Preparation of the Virus in the Laboratory and on a
Large Scale.
From what has been seen we can conclude that in order to
have good results we must have some virus sufficiently virulent,
so that a very small quantity of culture (say one drop) absorbed
by the rabbits in some way or other kills them with certainty
in the proportion of 95 per cent, at least.
We have also seen that microbes are creatures very sensitive to
the variation of their surroundings and of the conditions under
which they find themselves.
This part of the work is too technical for me to explain here in
all its details. I can only say that the preparation of the rabbit
virus in pure cultures, the growing of cultures for use on a
large scale, will require a special laboratory, and can only be
conducted by a bacteriologist expert in this kind of work.
This laboratory will manufacture a very active virus, which,
sealed in small glass tubes, will preserve all its activity for at
least three months, and which can easily be sent by post.
Those who want to use the rabbit virus will be able to always
have at their disposal a certain quantity of it and to utilise it
at the opportune moment.
In order to spread the virus during, say, four or five months
of the year and propagate the epidemic so as to get good re-
sults, we would have to use, I believe, about (5 litres) ten pints of
virus for each 1000 acres per week, which would amount to large
quantities for the treating of the rabbit-infested parts of Aus-
tralia.
There would be no difficulty in preparing several tons of virus
per week, or even per day, in a properly-appointed special labora-
tory; but difficulties would start when the virus would have to
be sent to stations far from the railway.
The virus prepared in a central laboratory, enclosed in bottles
or in tins, would have to be used at least fifteen days after its
preparation; its price would be fairly high; with the packing
and sendng it would cost at least fid. per pint.
The application would be much easier, and would be cheaper,
if the squatters could prepare themselves the cultures they re-
quire with the starting culture they could get from the labora-
tory.
We have tried two methods to propagate the virus, which seem
simple and easy for the squatters and farmers to use.
The microbes of the rabbit virus can be cultivated in a broth
of rabbits; this broth is strained through a cloth. With one
rabbit you can prepare two pints of broth, which can be steri-
lised by boiling it in kerosene tins adapted to the purpose. The
growth of the microbe in this broth is then started by adding
to it the blood of a rabbit just dead from infection. One or two
days after this infected broth can be used to infect other rabbits.
All that is wanted is a boiler to boil the rabbits, some kerosene
tins, a thermometer, a “Primus” stove or a spirit lamp, and a
few glass tubes.
It is simpler still to prepare large quantities of virus by
mincing infected rabbits in a mincing machine; with one rabbit
one can prepare three pints of a liquid sufficiently infectious.
The rabbits do not eat so readily the baits prepared with
minced rabbit as they do those made with broth culture; but to
sprinkle rabbits caught in pit traps, the liquid prepared in with
minced rabbit is better than the broth, because it contains in
solution blood and other albuminoid matters which stick to the
hair, and which the rabbit licks.
When the time comes to use these methods, all interested will
get full particulars and instructions on this subject.
Immunity of other Animals from the Eabbit Virus.
Although this part of the work has been left to Dr. Tidswell,
who has largely given the report of his first experiments carried
on in the Board of Health’s laboratory, I felt it necessary to
satisfy myself on this question, and was able to do on Broughton
Island the following experiments:
On the 26th of December, 1906, five sheep were inoculated under
the skin with half a cent, cube of a culture which kills rabbits by
inoculation with a dose of 0.000001 cc. (one millionth part of a
cubic centimetre, one cubic centimetre, equal to twenty drops).
I took the temperature of these sheep three days before inocu-
lation and for ten days afterwards; no change of temperature,
no trace of reaction at the site of inoculation was observed. In
February these five sheep were inoculated a second time.
On the 27th of March one of these sheep was killed, on the 19th
April another. The post-mortem examinations showed no sign ot
disease whatever. All the people on the island have eaten this
mutton, ivithout feeling the least symptom.
On the 18th of January, 1907, one horse and one pig were inocu-
lated under the skin with half a cubic centimetre of rabbit virus.
The horse showed during three days a little swelling at the site
of inoculation, but nothing more; he never ceased to do his daily
work. The temperatures taken three days before and during five
days after inoculation are as follows:—lsth, 99.2; 16th, 98; 17th,
98.2; 18th, 100; 19th, 99.1; 20th, 98; 21st, 99.3; 22nd, 98.2; 23rd, 99.2.
The pig showed no symptoms; his temperature was always nor


mal. On the 20th of December, 1906, in a three-acre paddock we
put one horse, one cow, two young bulls, one calf four weeks old,
twenty sheep, one ewe lamb six weeks old, two goats, four ducks,
four geese, two turkeys, and 320 rabbits. On the 25th all these
animals were given lucerne sprinkled with rabbit flesh mixed in
water. On the 4th of January were added twenty rabbits which
had been infected beforehand. On the 25th of January all animals
were given once more rabbit virus sprinkled on lucerne. Thirty
rabbits were found dead on the surface; most of the rest died in
their burrows. So far all the other animals remain perfectly
well.
We have said above that the experiments on harmlessness of
rabbit virus for other animals will be carried on by Dr. Tidswell,
but the results so far obtained fully justify the hope I had
before coming to Australia, that my virus would be dangerous only
for rabbits.
1 must here mention that some Australian papers have printed
lately extracts from a work of Messrs. Chamberlain and Jouan,
which came out in the “ Annales d ITnstitut Pasteur,” January,
19C6. We read therein that all the pasteurelloses have a common
origin, and each of them set up epizootics amongst all animals
liable to disease of this kind, and specially amongst sheep, pigs,
horses, and fowls.
To this 1 can reply that nobody up to now has made on this
question experiments so numerous and conclusive as Dr. Tidswell
in the Sydney Board of Health laboratory and I on Broughton
Island. I must also point out that all pasteurelloses are viru-
lent to rabbits; they are so much like each other under the
microscope that it is impossible to distinguish them by this
means. Therefore, if in laboratories or elsewhere rabbits are
found diseased or dead with a pasteurellosis, it would not be pos-
sible to tell at once whether this pasteurellosis is specific for the
rabbit or had previously been derived from a sheep, a pig, or a
fowl.
Suppose, for instance, that an epidemic of chicken cholera
breaks out on a farm where they also keep rabbits. Since tne
chicken cholera is very virulent to rabbits, the epidemic may
also spread to the latter at the same time or later. In this case
the microbes, though isolated from rabbits dead from infection.
are not specific for rabbits; they will kill fowls also because they
are really the fowl pasteurellosis.
This origin of the microbes of the different pasteurelloses is,
therefore, very difficult to determine, especially when they are
isolated from rabbits, which, as I said, can be infected and die
from chicken cholera, from sheep pasteurellosis, as well as from
the pasteurellosis which belongs to them alone.
This is no doubt the cause of differences of opinion which exist
amongst men who have studied this question.
To sum up, from all the experiments made up to now we can
conclude that the rabbit virus will destroy at least as many
rabbits as the best poison by direct infection, and two or three
times as many by contagion. It is, besides, very probable that
in the districts once, infected epidemics will break out spon-
taneously from time to time, and will greatly reduce the num-
ber of rabbits.
Considering the conditions under which we had to make our
experiments so far, we could not possibly do much more.
I wrote in a letter to the Premier of New South Wales, dated
25th January, 1905, that “whatever the disease or diseases which
could be employed to fight the invasion of rabbits, it is not to be
hoped that definite results could be obtained after one single
intervention or even of several repeated during one or several
years, or even that it be possible to exterminate all the rabbits
in the whole of Australia once for ’all.”
The rabbit mortality will most often, if not always, be in pro-
portion to the intensity and the extent of the measures in rela-
tion to the infected territory, but only a fairly long experience
could give us precise information with regard to this question.
These experiments can only be carried out on stations, and
before that can be done we must wait for Dr. Tidswell’s report
and for the sanction of the Government.
Meanwhile M. Latapie will continue on Broughton Island to
keep up the virulence of our cultures, so that everything will
be ready when the time comes to start on the mainland.
(Signed) J. DANYSZ.
Broughton Island, 27th April, 1907.
McCarrou, Bird & Co., Printers, 479 Collins-street, Melbourne,


