

NEW SOUTH WALES
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
RABBIT DESTRUCTION
Methods Which Have Given Most Promise
The destruction of the rabbit is an important aspect of the operations
of the farmer and grazier, and the following notes on the methods which
have given most promise have been obtained from reports and articles by
Veterinary Officers, Inspectors of Stock, and Rabbit Inspectors, who have
had actual experience in the work, particularly Messrs. F. Gavel and 0. J.
Woollett, Stock Inspectors, and T. P. Glennan, Rabbit Inspector. While
they contain nothing new, and are probably known to men of experience on
the land in rabbit infested districts, they may be of value to new settlers and
those in districts which have only within recent years become infested.
Rabbit-proof Fences.
One of the first steps to decide in considering the question of freeing land
from rabbits is whether it will pay or not to erect rabbit-proof fences.
Generally speaking, it may be said that it will be a satisfactory investment,
and it is the only way in which freedom from rabbits can be maintained.
Practically the only exceptions are to be found in poor, scrubby and rough
country, on which the expenditure might well be greater than the value of
the land. Money spent in poisoning, trapping, and fumigating without the
property being previously netted is (in a sense) money wasted, as it will be
a recurring expenditure and will only give temporary relief, though if
thoroughly done it may give very efficient temporary relief. Where the
whole property is not netted, the best lands should be fenced off from the
poorer parts. If the holding is of any size, in addition to the netted
boundary fence subdivision netted fences should also be erected.
The best rabbit-proof fences are those constructed of wire netting 42
inches wide, 1J inch mesh, and 17 gauge, placed 6 inches in the ground and
3 feet out. The fence panels are not usually of the 9to 10 feet variety, but
are made longer with heavier posts, interspaced with droppers and protected
by barbed wire. For a distance of a chain or so on both sides of the fence
a line should be cleared of all timber lying about, and of all standing trees
which are likely to fall on the fence. All burrows and warrens within that
distance of the fence, however large they are, must be dug out, as otherwise
they will sooner or later cause trouble. This work is better done before
the fence goes up. The work outlined above will save the fence from
damage by falling branches and trees, and enable it to be readily inspected
either on horseback or by vehicle, and in times of bush fires will prevent
much loss.
111231 A


It is advisable to use the best grade of wire netting on account of its
greater resistance to stock, especially large stock, and its durability. The
netting is best placed on the outside of the boundary fence (in watercourses
it should be hung on the lower side) and tied securely to a wire which
should be level with the top of the netting. No. 8 wire is satisfactory but
the high tensile wire now obtainable is the more economical. Attaching the
netting to one or more wires a foot apart in the fence will strengthen it con-
siderably and hold it in an upright position. The netting should be put
straight into the ground to a depth of 6 inches. The idea of curving the
netting in the ground is not good as it must facilitate the passage of the
rabbit one way, and to be efficient a rabbit-proof fence should be an obstacle
to the movement of the rabbits in either direction. The more the move-
ments of rabbits are hindered the less breeding will take place.
When fences are erected across creeks or other watercourses, the netting
should be hung on the lower or down stream side, as in flood time the netted
fence will be damaged by the weight of rubbish brought down. Provision
A Rabbit-proof Gate.
Note how this gate closes on to, and not inside, the post; it is hinged in the same way.
[From “ Report on Rabbit Menace in New South, Wales,” by D. G . Stead.
for floods can be made by erecting flood gates, which will fall automatically
under pressure or can be lowered and raised again when floods have passed,
or in the following manner : On the lower or down stream side of the fence
secure the bottom edge of the netting to a good bed log which is fastened in
the ground and will not wash out. Then loop up the netting on wire hooks
in such a way as will give fair resistance in flood time, but will give way
under heavy pressure and, falling down stream, will allow water and flood
debris to pass over it.
Rabbit-proof Gates.
On roads where there is much traffic it is important that gates be strongly
made and well hung. The gate should hang on a separate post, and the
bottom of it should be a little higher than the ground thereabout. This
will permit of putting in a fair-sized ground plate and building up the road-
way so as to prevent water lodging there. The ground plate should have
a flat surface, and will be all the more durable and firm by having a heavy


plate on each side. When strainers are used as gate posts it is not long
before the contraction of the wires causes some slight give, and the gate
becomes no longer rabbit-proof.
Gates should be of good width, and provided with guard posts firmly
erected. All harbour and rubbish should be cleared away from the neigh-
bourhood of the gates.
Destruction of Surface Harbour.
All hollow logs, hollow trees, collections of rubbish, masses of under-
growth such as blackberry and lantana, and anything which will give
surface cover to the rabbit should be destroyed.
Destruction of Burrows and Warrens.
If the eradication of the rabbit is aimed at, all burrows and warrens must
be dealt with. The most thorough method of dealing with them is to dig
them out. In doing so, the trenches are best kept open while at work, the
A Good “Set.”
The “ pad.”, between the rabbit warren and the river is clearly shown. A spring trap—not visible,
of course—is set in the wide portion in the foreground.
[From “ Report on Rabbit Menace in New South Wales,’’ by D.G. Stead.
earth being thrown clear and all branches and all off-shoots marked as they
are found, in order that they may not be lost sight of. The burrow must be
dug out to the last end if no rabbits are to be missed. The use of dogs to
drive the rabbits underground will make the work more effective.
Where the areas to be treated are large and the nature of the country
and the soil make it feasible, digging in the burrows to a uniform depth,
or ploughing them, will be satisfactory, provided continued watch is main-
tained afterwards, and any burrows found opened up are treated by fumiga-
tion. Horses and bullocks can both be used with either a road, dam sinking,


or large disc plough. In addition to the ploughing, the tramping of the
bullocks will force in the burrow and destroy its value for the rabbit.
When the rabbits have taken possession of hilly, rocky country, ploughing
will be impossible and digging out difficult, but as far as possible the
burrows should be broken up with spade and mattock and plugged. In
extreme cases it will be more satisfactory to fence off such places and
destroy by poison and fumigation.
Trapping.
The trapping of rabbits is viewed in two lights. First, from the com-
mercial aspect, and second, with the idea of eradicating the rabbit. Only
the second viewpoint will be seriously considered here. Trapping alone
will never exterminate rabbits over a large area, but it is very useful in
reducing their numbers, and in assisting in finally clearing up a holding
on which other work has been proceeding and which is netted in.
The type of trap most widely used is the steel spring trap, which is set
about the warrens and other places frequented by the rabbits. This is
also the most efficacious trap, but the supervision of the numbers which are
required for any appreciable result means a considerable amount of work,
a good deal of which must be carried out at night.
The number of traps which one man can work varies with the country,
but probably ranges from 70 to 100. In commercial trapping the traps
are usually set at the feeding grounds, buck heaps, etc., but if rabbit
extermination is sought they will also be set at and near the mouth of
burrows. The ordinary trap is not made fine enough for rabbit work, and
the trapper files the catch down to suit himself.
To set the trap, an oblong depression is made in the soil, level at the
bottom, and sufficiently large just to take the trap, so that the trap sets
firmly. The trap is placed in this, and the peg driven into the soil. The
plate of the trap is covered with a small piece of paper to keep dirt from
falling through, and then gently and smoothly covered with a little soil.
Traps should be cleaned and not contaminated with anything possessing
an odour.
Pit traps are of value where rabbits are on the move along the fences.
They are so constructed that when the weight of the rabbit comes on to
the top of the trap it is precipitated into the pit. In country which is fairly
clear and well subdivided by fencing, pit traps are not of great utility. In
rocky country, on river banks, and in places where the last few rabbits are
being sought, wire netting traps fitted into the mouths of the burrows are
of value, especially as they will catch kittens as well as adult rabbits. For
commercial work they are of little value.
Fumigation.
By fumigation is meant the introduction into the burrows, usually
under pressure, of gases or of finely divided powders which liberate
toxic gases after their introduction. The gases chiefly employed are carbon
bisulphide, carbon monoxide, and hydrocyanic acid gas,


“LANGVARWIL”
Rabbit Exterminators
The Surest, Quickest and Cheapest method
of destroying Rabbits 100% Efficient!
Many methods of eliminating the rabbit pest have been tried, but until the introduction
of the “Langvarwil” method, a very small percentage of efficiency was ever attained. All
“ Langvarwil ” models generate carbon-monoxide, a deadly heavier-lhan-air, gas which
penetrates the deepest warrens and deals sure and sudden death to every rabbit there.
Rabbits killed by this method in the warren are therefore buried underground and the
blow-fly pest which invariably follows destruction on the surface is eliminated.
Wood and water are the only raw materials needed to produce this deadly gas, and as
wood and water cost nothing to the average pastoralist, you will readily understand that
it is impossible to find a more economical method of fumigating than this. All “Langvarwil”
models are very simple in operation. In the hand-powered models there are no intricate
mechanical parts to get out of order or need replacing, and the first cost is definitely the
last. With the engine-powered models, the only cost of operation is that of petrol and
oil, and this is very, very low with both types of engines used in these models.
Available in four models—the Intermediate Model
(as illustrated), the “Midget,” the “Junior” and
the Horse-drawn Model.
Sole Agents for N.S.W.:
DANGAR, GEDYE & CO. LTD.
Malloch House, 10-14 Young Street, Sydney.


Va
Prices as low
as
£l3/10/-
THIS CERTAIN, CHEAP
AND EASY WAY . . .
CARBON MONOXIDE RABBIT
FUMICATOKS
Use only wood chips and water to generate
large quantities of deadly carbon monoxide
gas.
NO CHEMICALS TO BUY. I
Made in two types. An engine driven mode!
is available for larger properties. Write for
full particulars.
MOFFAT-VIRTUE LTD SSCSX*-*
11-25 PALMER STREET, SYDNEY,
Telegrams; “Virtue,” Sydney Phone: F 2141 (3 lines)


In using any gas, the most satisfactory results will undoubtedly be
obtained if a pump is used to force the gas or powder into the burrow.
Special pumping machines can he purchased for use with carbon bisulphide
or calcium cyanide (to produce hydrocyanic acid gas). The pump em-
ployed with carbon bisulphide has also a smoke-producing apparatus affixed,
as the gas is colourless, but this is not required with calcium cyanide.
Carbon monoxide and associated gases are produced by the burning of
straw or any vegetable rubbish, and the smoke and gases drawn off from
the burning material, which is carried on a specially constructed machine,
are forced into the burrow by an attached pump and a length of hose
pipe.
The same gases can be employed by using the exhaust fumes from a motor
car; these can be conveyed into the burrow by means of a piece of hose pipe
attached to the exhaust.
Whatever gas is to be employed, the work should be undertaken system-
atically, and the country worked on a face. A pack of dogs should be
actively employed driving the rabbits underground, and surface rabbit
harbour should be destroyed as the work proceeds, so as to give the rabbit
no cover except in the burrows. The burrows should then be taken one
by one and fumigation commenced by introducing the hose pipe into ope
or more openings of each burrow, and closing up all the others as soon as
smoke is seen issuing from them. When sufficient gas has been forced in
(and experience will soon show what is required), the last openings are
closed and the burrows left. Each day investigation should be made to
see if any burrows in the part of the holding already treated have been
opened up, and they should be re-treated or traps set in such opened up
burrows. In addition a few traps in well-selected spots will assist in re-
ducing the number of the rabbits missed.
Fumigation is quite a valuable factor in rabbit extermination, but it
requires backing up in most cases with other methods to make a complete
success. Combined with the destruction of harbour and ploughing in of
burrows, it is very effective. If surface harbour is left it cannot be
properly effective, except by numerous repetitions.
Where the number of burrows and the area of ground are small the
destruction of the rabbits by gases can be effected without the purchase of
any machinery. Calcium cyanide flakes may be purchased, and introduced
into the openings of the burrow by means of a long-handled spoon. The
burrow should then be closed up. The gas is generated somewhat more
slowly, but it is quite effective.
Carbon bisulphide may also be purchased alone, and balls of cotton waste
or old sacking saturated in it can be pushed well into the openings of the
burrows and the openings closed. Fumigation is harmless so far as live
stock and birds are concerned.
Poisoning.
Rabbits are usually poisoned by the use of what are known as baits.
These baits are composed of a mixture of some food with a poisonous
material, to which is often added some substance with an odour which is
f 11231—8


supposed to attract rabbits. These odorous materials are called decoys,
and while at times they appear useful in attracting rabbits, at other times
equally satisfactory work is done without them. The commonest poisons
used are phosphorus and strychnine.
Phosphorus is usually employed made up with a mixture of bran, pol-
lard, sugar or treacle, and cinnamon or aniseed. If phosphorus itself is
used a little carbon bisulphide will be required to dissolve the phosphorus.
There are, however, various commercial poison mixtures which can be
purchased ready made for dissolving and mixing with the pollard. It
should be remembered that phosphorus is inflammable, and should be kept
under water when not in use.
The following methods of using phosphorus are given as examples: —
(1) Ingredients; Phosphorus, carbon bisulphide, molasses, oil of aniseed,
pollard, and bran.
Take a clean pickle bottle, and half fill it with water, adding two table-
spoonfuls of carbon bisulphide (merely to dissolve the phosphorus, and a
lessen quantity will do if it is allowed to stand overnight); then break
under water and add to the contents of the bottle two sticks of phosphorus,
and in an hour’s time the mixture will be ready for the pollard, etc.
Procure a tub (a wooden one is best) and put 2 gallons of clean water
into it. Then stir in a quart of molasses and a teaspoonful of oil of
aniseed. Add the contents of the pickle bottle, straining through a piece
of chaff bag or hessian (in case of undissolved particles of phosphorus).
Stir well to mix thoroughly, then add the pollard, which if very fine will
be all the better for a few handfuls of bran. Keep stirring and adding
pollard slowly, until the right consistency is obtained. Your bait is now
ready for use. Be careful not to make it too stiff at first until it is tried
in the poison cart. See to it that the cart is in good working order and
free from any old sour bait, also that no string from the pollard bag gets
into the mixture and interferes with the proper working of the machine.
The above-mentioned mixture should be laid whilst fresh and sweet. It
may, in cool weather, hold sweet for a day or two, but the fresher it is
the better. There is absolutely no danger of fire if the above directions are
attended to, and the above quantities will provide enough bait for a full
day’s work, if put through the usual form of poison cart.
It is important that the baits should hot be too soft. How to gauge the
correct consistency will come with experience. If too much water is used
the baits are not cut properly, and they stick to each other, with the
result that long rolls are put out. In such cases there is danger to stock,
as well as waste. The proper quantity of water depends on the quality of
the pollard. If the operator is treating fairly level ground and has a
strong horse, he should be able to put out two tins of poison in a day of
eight hours.
(2) Ingredients : Two tins commercial poison containing phosphorus,
M, lb. pollard, 2 lb, bran, 2 lb. brown sugar or treacle, 1 dessertspoonful
groped cinnamop,. 6 to 7 quarts water.


The ingredients are best mixed in a tub. The poison should be dissolved
in about 4 quarts of warm water and thoroughly stirred. The sugar should
be dissolved in water before being added, and all the ingredients should be
mixed to a thick doughy consistency. If the rabbits have not been inter-
fered with for some time they will generally take the bait without sugar or
cinnamon. When they become a little “poison shy” then add one or both of
those ingredients.
The best time to use the poison cart is after a dry spell when rain falls
in sufficient quantity to soften the ground and feed is beginning* to grow,
or when the feed is ripening. If practicable, the best time of the day to
set out phosphorised pollard is late in the afternoon, as the sun makes the
bait hard and less attractive.
It must be remembered that rabbits take two or three days to die from
the effects of phosphorus, unless they have eaten many baits, when they will
be found near the trail.
Strychnine is generally used with black thistle root, but apples, carrots,
turnips, quinces, cabbage stalks and other firm vegetable matter may be used
in the same way as is described below in connection with thistle roots.
Dig up green roots of the black thistle, and having washed them free
of soil and scraped off the “whiskers,” cut them into baits about half an
inch square. Then place them on a clean chaff bag to dry out most of the
natural moisture, and while this is being done the strychnine can be made
ready for use. Grind to a powder as fine as flour an ounce of the best
strychnine, and have the roots ready, the quantity of which can be measured
easily with an empty 2 lb. jam tin. Ten tinfuls of roots will yield approxi-
mately 2,500 baits, and by sprinkling them with the strychnine and shaking
them well, the poison will be well distributed over the roots.
Thistle root and strychnine may be laid by hand in trails made for the
purpose with a hoe or other trail-making means. Where extensive bait-
laying is to be done, the ordinary poison cart is best. Take off the gear-
driving chain and fix a large funnel above the spout of the cart, and the
bait can be dropped through it into the furrow as close or as far apart
as desired.
_ Thls bait has the ady antage of quick action, most of the rabbits being
killed either right on the trail or at no great distance from it. This makes
it an easy matter to gather the carcases and secure the skins, if so desired.
The bait retains its destructive properties for several days unless much rain
falls on it.
The thistle root and other vegetable baits may possibly be improved in
efficiency by allowing them to stand overnight mixed with a little icing
sugar at the rate of a dessertspoonful to a 2 lb. tin of baits. The fluid
fiom the tin is then poured off and the strychnine mixed in with it.
A formula which is reported as giving excellent results in some districts
is as follows: 10 drops of vanilla, 6 drops each oil of rhodium and oil of
cumin, 1 ounce strychnine, 1 tablespoonful each of sugar and flour and B'so


thistle root baits. It is usual to mix the sugar, the oils, the strychnine and
che flour with the baits in the order named, and as with mixing all baits for
poisoning purposes the material should he handled as little as possible. The
mixing is preferably done with a stick.
Strychnine may he used with wheat in the following manner:—Boil
P. quarts of wheat in 3 gallons of water, and while boiling stir in
2 lb. of molasses; allow to steam and cool; drain off all fluid and add 1
ounce of finely ground strychnine. Mix thoroughly and lay out in trails.
Whilst the use of poisons in these ways is sometimes very effective, there
is undoubtedly risk of poisoning stock, and particularly sheep, whilst there
is more than a suspicion that native birds have been destroyed in the same
way. Nevertheless, in some areas it still remains one of the useful methods
of destroying rabbits. It is doubtful if alone it would ever exterminate
them.
Decoys. —The use of odorous substances as decoys has been referred to
above. In addition to those mentioned, oil of cinnamon, sandalwood,
schnapps and coffee are used, hut the exact value of these materials is very
uncertain.
Poisoned Water. —In inland country, where water is scarce and holdings
so large that most of the methods of rabbit destruction practised in the
Eastern and Central Divisions cannot he utilised, poisoned water is the
chief agent used in rabbit destruction. This method bf destruction is
naturally of most value in dry periods. To be effective it requires the
fencing off of the stock water supplies, so that the rabbits cannot get at
them. Poisoned water is then exposed in troughs or otherwise, in such
manner that the rabbits can obtain access to it, but stock cannot. The
arrangements made will naturally vary with the circumstances of each case.
Arsenic is the poison chiefly used. A mixture made as follows will he
effective; —Arsenic, 2 oz.; washing soda, 4 oz.; water, 1 gallon.
Boil these quantities until the arsenic is dissolved; add 2 oz. sugar, and
stir well. For use, add 2 gallons of water.
Strychnine may also he used at the rate of 1 oz. dissolved in one-third of
a pint of acetic acid added to 12 gallons of water.
A Warning.
Whatever method of rabbit destruction is utilised, thoroughness is essen-
tial. It must not be forgotten that most of the agents used in rabbit
destruction are harmful. Calcium cyanide gives off poisonous fumes, car-
bon bisulphide is poisonous and inflammable, phosphorus is inflammable,
and arsenic, strychnine, and phosphorus are deadly poisons. All these
should he handled with care, and should be stood well out of reach of
children.


Rabbit Destruction by Disease.
Although many proposals have been put forward for the destruction of
rabbits by disease, none have so far been found practicable and safe.
The most extensive investigations were carried out with what is known as
the Danysz virus. After exhaustive tests and an investigation by an
independent committee, the conclusion was arrived at that, although no
danger to native Australian fauna or domesticated animals was to be
feared, there was little, if any, prospect either of the use of the micro-
organism concerned bringing about the desired result, as it was found that
it was apparently present in Australian rabbits, and occasionally led to
localised mortalities. This is not the only example of a micro-organism
commonly found in some species of animal which, under certain conditions,
becomes accentuated in virulence and causes mortality. These conditions
cannot be reproduced artificially amongst animals in a state of nature, and
consequently such organisms are of very little value as agents of destruc-
tion.
Another disease which was widely investigated was chicken cholera. The
causal organism of this disease will infect rabbits provided they ingest it,
but as it does not spread its use would be in no way superior to poison,
added to which it has the disadvantage of infecting birds.
There are not infrequently localised mortalities due to coccidiosis of the
liver, but this parasite is so widespread already in Australian rabbits that
it is obviously useless as a means of reducing their numbers. None of
the other known internal parasites of the rabbit have had any appreciable
effect on the pest. The same may be said of those external parasites which
have been studied. A disease known as rabbit myxoma has been investi-
gated at Glenfield Veterinary Research Station, but it was considered too
dangerous to proceed further.
The likelihood of any disease condition being found which would be
really effective in reducing the rabbit pest to such an extent as to warrant
action is very remote. To be of value such a disease must —
(a) spread readily amongst rabbits in a state of nature;
(fo) not produce immunity;
(c) be harmless to all native fauna, domesticated animals and birds
and man.
Every opportunity is being taken, however, to investigate the possibilities
of this method of attack, and it is asked that landholders co-operate with
the Department by advising local inspectors of stock when they observe
mortality among rabbits, or sick rabbits from which material for dispatch
to Glenfield Veterinary Research Station may be obtained.
Sydney: Alfred James Kent, 1.5.0., Government Printer —1936.


