

and OTffBJ^PLAYS
C




OTHER PLATS
FOR CHILDREN.
ARTHUR M. HEATHCOTE,
AUTIIOn OP “THE DDCHF.SS Or UAYSWATEB AND CO.,’’ “ Ills TOAST,’
ETC. ETC.
N.B.— Copies of each of the Plays can be had separately,price 6 d.
each. For permission to perform the Plays in public (i.e.
when money is taken) application must he made to the Author,
care of Messrs. W. H. Allen rf- Co., 13 Waterloo Place, S.W.
LONDON:
W. H. Allen & Co., 13 Waterloo Place,
PALL MALL. S.W.
1890."


CONTENTS.
Characters.
Boys. Girls. page
1. Ragged Robin .... 1 4 1
2. The Tea-Merchant's Daughter
of Pekin . . . .2 1— 17
3. Dame Durden . . . .1 4 87
4. Iphigenia 0 8 49
5. The Magic Ruby . . -2 3 69
6. The Deer Blue Ska . . .2 1 85


.. • V'tzJi'jjnoi
i ZwM %L
“V 6 -
PREFACE.
In offering this little volume of Plays for Children
to the public, the Author claims for them no other
merit than that they are actable, having, all but one,
been acted by the young people for whom they were
originally written. They mostly need very few
actors, and no scenery or costume beyond what can
be easily managed in most homes.
He has, however, arranged some of them so as
to give an opportunity for a more elaborate “ get-
up ” if the manager prefers it, and has put in some
supernumerary characters which can be left out or
not, as suits each company. These last, and the
words they speak, have been put in square brackets,
thus [ ].


Although, in his opinion, the details of drosses and
scenes are best left to the taste and resources of each
manager, he has found the less experienced of these
so thankful sometimes for suggestions, that he has
added some suggestions for the costumes, and a list
of properties, to each play.
Very simple and well-known tunes have been
selected for the few songs that are introduced, but
the words can, of course, be altered to suit more
modern airs if preferred, or the songs can be loft out
altogether in most of the plays.


RAGGED ROBIN:
1 Xittlc |loral plan.
CHARACTERS.
Hyacinth ... ... (King of the Blowers, afterward*
disguised us “ Hugged Robin."')
Dame Fungus ... (Inhabitants of the
Lily of the Valley...) ] RW FW
Daffadowndilly ...> (. Village.
The Fairy Fernleaf.
[Courtiers and Wild Flower Maidens.]*
SCENE.
Partly in Hyacinth’s Bower and partly in the Wild Flower
Village.
COSTUMES,
These should suggest in their colour and, as far as possible,
in their shape, the flowers personated by the characters. The
following are merely suggestions ;—
Hyacinth (Ist dress). —A long tunic of maize colour
trimmed with a darker shade of the same and gold; a gold
belt with purple jewels; a long regal train of purple from the
shoulders; a crown of maize coloured hyacinth blossoms; long
curling hair; a scqitre representing a large purple hyacinth; a
jewelled chain round the neck; purple and gold rosettes on the
* These characters, and all the text in square brackets, can be
left out.


shoes. '2nd dress (as Ragged Robin). — A short pink tunic,
jagged and slit at the bottom and round the sleeves like the
petals of the flower; green knicker-bookers with a fringe of
leaves at the knee; green belt of leaves; pink rosettes on shoes; a
smedl pink cap on one side with a “ Ragged Robin ” stuck in it.
Dame Fungus. — Scarlet petticoat and stockings; a brown
print gown looped up with small fungusses; puffed sleeves, open
bodice laced with red; white kerchief and apron; white hair
confined by a close cap; and over it a brown high-crowned hat
with fungusses in front; mittens; buckled shoes; and a crutch
stick.
Lily of the Valley. —A white Watteau gown looped up
icith lilies of the valley over a green jietticoat, the bodice trimmed
ivith green and lilies of the valley; long curled hair; a white
hat, turned up icith green for the out-of-doors scenes, and a
small mob cap for the cottage; green rosettes on shoes.
Daffadowndilly. —The same, with yellow instead of green,
and daffodils in place of lilies of the valley.
Fairy Fernleaf. — Short white skirt trimmed with silver, or
glass dew-drops and small ferns; a star on her forehead, and a
large fernleaf as a wand.
[Courtiers (as Garden Flowers) and Wild Flower
Maidens, according to the flotccrs they represent.]
SCENE I.
Hyacinth’s Bower in Flower-Garden-Land. — 2 he King is
discovered asleep on a couch of roses.
Opening Song.
[Either’] heard outside [or sung by attendant
Courtiers watching over the royal couch.']
Air, “ Come o’er the stream, Charley."
Good watch wc arc keeping,
Soft creeping—scarce peeping—
While sound thou art sleeping
The hot noonday hours


So long we are slaving,
Rest craving—boughs waving—
We ’re surely behaving
Like dutiful flowers.
Full well we’ve obeyed thee.
With fern-leaves to shade thee,
And gently we’ve laid thee
On petals of rose.
Xo wasps can molest thee,
Xo midges infest thee ;
Securely, then, rest thee,
We guard thy repose.
Repeat —Good watch we are keeping, &c.
(/Is the song ends, lIVACIN'TII awakes, starts up
[wm'es his hand to dismiss his courtiers ], and
advances yawning).
11 vac. To some, no doubt, a charming thing "twould seem
To be of all the flowers king supreme ;
To rule the floral nations with a nod,
Or with a movement of my golden-rod ;
To deal disgrace or favour, death or pardon,
And wear the crown-imperial of the garden.
Once I was pleased, when crowds bent down before
But now their constant scrapings only bore me.
I’ve come to think that every man’s a victim
Who hasn’t got a soul to contradict him.
I loathe the state of Court—the pomp, the chatter—
Its gaieties are flat, its courtiers flatter;
Where’er Igo I’m cheered—l hate such rows.
The very bushes plague me with their bows.
It’s all so stale—l’d give up rank and station
For something new—some sort of mild sensation.


My gold and silver I detest—indeed,
Change for a sovereign is all I need.
(Soft music-—The foliage at the hack opens, dis-
closing the Faiuy Fernleaf.)
Fairy. If you ’re so dull, among your palace bowers,
Why don’t you choose a consort from the flowers?
She’d help the burden of the crown to bear,
And of your money gladly take her share.
Hyac. The Fairy Fernleaf has but to suggest—
Of all sensations this would please me best.
But where shall I in one fair maiden find
Beauty and sense and virtue all combined?
Fairy. If my suggesting will not give offence,
There is the Rose—
Hyac. Well, she is a girl of scents;
But every rose has got a thorn which catches ;
I should not care to wed a wife who scratches.
Fairy. Jasmine?
Hyac. She's rather sickly, so they tell us.
Fairy. The Crocus?
Hyac. Her complexion is so jealous.
Fairy. The Lily?
Hyac. She’s too tall, and grand, and white ;
And Mary-gold is rich, but such a fright!
Fairy'. There’s Cineraria.
Hyac. Her mind’s so small;
And when you’ve seen her airier charms—that’s all.
Fairy. Well, Polly-anthus is remaining still.
Hyac. But she’s engaged already to John Quill.
Fairy'. And the Miss Stocks—
Hyac. Old cats—in dowdy frocks!
No, I love freedom, and avoid the stocks.
Fairy. Forget-me-not ?
Hyac. Oh, she’s “ a blue,” I Yvcen.
Fairy. Well, Mignonette ?
Hyac. But she’s so very green.


Fairy. Your garden friends a poorish set appear.
What say you to the wild flowers V
Hyac. Good idea!
I’m sick of all these stuck-up hot-house maids,
I ’ll choose a queen from out the woody glades;
Some simple girl 1 ’ll raise to he my queen,
Who fancies she is “ horn to blush unseen."
Love in a cottage ! it is quite romantic.
Oh, won’t it make the garden beauties frantic !
When, as my wedding-cards each one receives,
They find I’ve scorned their flowers, nor asked their
A proclamation to the woods I ’ll send,
And choose a bride before this week shall end.
Fairy. I ’ll take your message for you.
Hyac. Meanwhile I,
Disguised in rags, will to the greenwood fly.
And there, myself unknown, my time 1 ’ll use,
From all the rustic maids a bride to choose.
Fairy. While there, your name shall Ragged Robin be.
As for your rags—why, there you are, you see.
([Touches him tcith her wand, his royal robes Jail
off, leacing him disguised as Hacked Robin.)
Duett —Air, “ The Campbells are coming ’’
Hyac. Thus shabbily clad to the woods I ’ll go,
AVhere soon a fair maiden 1 'll win, I know.
Fairy. And covered with rags they will never trace
The form of the King of the Flower Race.
Hyac. Oh they ’ll beat me—beat me—do me brown,
And they ’ll treat me—treat me—like a clown,
And when they discover I own a crown,
Oh, won't their anger be softened down!
Both (repeat). Thus shabbily clad to the wood ’ll go.


SCENE 11.
Kitchen of Dame Fungus’ cottage in the Wild Flower
Village—Fireplace with kettle. Shelf with tahle-cloth.
tea-things etc. Tahlc, four stools, a cottage armchair,
toasting-fork hy the frqdace. Cupboard door at the
'I he Dame, Lily, Daffadowndilly and Robin are dis-
corered sweeping the room.
Quartette —Air, “Bonny Dundee.”
Lily. Oh, what a commotion ! The dust how it flies!
It is all in my mouth and my nose and my eyes.
Daffa. And the cobwebs will cling in a horrible way—
Oh, that is the worst of a cleaning-up day.
All. Come, sweep the dust up—as quick as we can ;
Come, gather the tea-leaves—into the dustpan,
The sooner it’s done, why, the sooner we ’re free,
So make the place bonny as bonny can be.
Dame. Come, bustle about! You do nothing but stare,
And idlers, you know, I can never a-bear.
Robin. We ’re doing our best, so do leave us alone.
Or you really will wear us right down to the bone.
All. Come sweep the dust up, etc.
(A dance with brooms, sweeping as they go.)
Dame. There is the cupboard, put the brushes in it,
And tidy up the room this very minute.
(Lily and Robin put the furniture straight.)
Now shake the rug, (to Daffa.) aud mind, Miss, what,
you’re at,
Or you will get the shaking—not the mat.
Lily (aside to Robin). Isn’t she cross?
Robin (aside). Yes, horribly unkind;
But I ’ll do all your work, so never mind.


Dame. Now then, young Robin, don’t stand idling so.
Foil can’t afford to waste your time, you know.
Remember, in the gutter you were found.
Robin. Pooh!
Dame. Hey, what’s that ?
Robin (coughing). A little guttur-al sound.
Dame (raising her hand). IVe a great mind—
Robin (dodging her). Now don’t get cross, it’s wrong.
Dame. Take that, you town-bred sparrow, get along.
(Aims a blow at him—he jumps aside.)
Daffa. How well you jump!
Robin. Town sparrows never fall,
For they are gutter-perchcrs one and all.
Dame. Now clean the windows, please, and scrub the floors,
If you’ve done chattering like a pack of daws.
Then put the kettle on to make the tea,
Or in hot water you will shortly be.
Next lay the breakfast, girls, ere I return,
Or how 1 “ lay it on ” you ’ll quickly learn.
(Shales her slick and Exit R.)
(The girls curtsey —then draw a breath of relief)
Daffa. How worked to death a wretched servant maid is!
Don’t you wish, Lily, that we were both ladies ?
Lily. No, don’t talk nonsense. Lay the table, do.
Robin. Oh, let me —l 'd do anything for you.
(Looks tenderly at her and then pxds the cloth, etc. on very
crookedly. Daffadowndilly goes to back.)
Lily. Fie, fie.
Robin. Don’t push me off—my clothes are torn.
Is’t for that reason that my suit you scorn ?
Lily. Hush, hush, she ’ll hear us.
Daffa. (coming down). Well, at any rate
You might lay out the cups and saucers straight.
Lily. Why you Te as cross as babies—little wee things—
When they get fractious all about their tee-things.


Daffa. Robin, you fill the tea-pot.
Robin ( horrified ). Eh? who? me?
(aside) 1 wonder how on earth one makes the tea.
(lie fetches the sugar-basin, ten-caddy and kettle while the
girls are linsy at the hack.)
First one puts in the sugar—there it goes.
The water—then the tea-leaves, I suppose.
(He hesitates and puls kettle on the table.)
Lily (at the hack). Now then, make haste.
Robin (putting in ten-lea res). I ’ll risk it—in you go, leaves.
Daffa. (at the hack). You ’re very slow.
Robin. Of course, the tea’s all sloe leaves.
Lily (coming down). Now have you made that tea?
Robin (aside). I hope it’s right.
I fear the water was not boiling quite.
Daffa. (coming down). You’ve put the kettle on the cloth.
Robin (rubbing the mark with his sleeve). All right!
Daffa. You can’t get out the black, you wretched wight!
And I declare with work I’m nearly dead.
(Hirowing herself into the armchair.)
Lily. Don’t loaf about, but go and get the bread.
Daffa. Oh yes— l understand— l ’d better run.
Two’s company, of course—and three is none.
(Exit R. angrily. Robin and Lily look at each other
shyly.)
Robin. What can I do for you?
Lily. Well—let me see—
Robin. I know quite well what you could do for me.
Lily. What’s that ?
Robin. Why, let me be your faithful slave.
Behold me kneeling. (Kneels.)
Lily. Robin ! Please behave !
Robin. The place of footboy here, I only took,
Because I fell in love with you, the cook.


Daffa. (outside). Here is the bread. (Throws on a loaf.)
Robin (catching it). Oh, say that 1 ’ve succeeded;
Your pity, like this loaf, is hadly needed.
Tell me that you consent my suit to bless;
Say, do you love me, Lily ? Speak !
Lily. Well—yes.
(Robin rises and is nhout to hiss her trhen enter Daffa-
downdilly hurriedly, R.)
Daffa. Here comes the dame.
Lily (to RobinJ. You make the toast, quick run.
Robin (aside). I haven’t got a notion how it’s done !
How to make toast I know not in the least,
Though I’ve been often toasted at a feast.
Daffa. (poking the fre). The bars are ready—come, how
slow you are!
Robin. I never was intended for the bar.
(lie begins toasting. Enter Damk Fl'noi'S, R.)
Dame. Now girls sit down (they sit—the Dame pours out the
tea). What’s this? Who made the tea?
Robin. Oh, please, ma’am, I’m afraid that it was me!
Dame. How dare you, rascal, make it then with sich water!
Why, it’s as cold and weak as so much ditchwater!
Girls, make some more—there, take away the pot.
Now, is the toast done?
Robin ( producing a black piece). Here you are—all hot!
Dame. Hot! It’s all charred—my teaching you’ll
disgrace;
You ’re only fit for some char-woman’s place.
(Robin comes to the table.)
The milk—take care, don’t spill it over me
Daffa. He is a muff!


Yes, and a muff-at-tea.
You ’ll ne’er be worth your salt—l tell you flat.
An idle good-for
(Soft music heard.')
Goodness me ! What’s that ?
(The cupboard door at the hack opens, showing the Fairy
Fernleaf in a lower of Jems.)
Fairy. lam the Fairy Fernleaf; do not fear me.
Just stop one moment, I request, and hear me.
I come express from Hyacinth, your king,
And this the message that to you I bring:
On this day week a queen he means to choose
From the Wild Flower Maidens—that’s my news.
He will not come himself—at his request,
I shall select the maid I think the best.
Air, “ Great Eastern Polka.”
Dame. Isn’t it exciting—How I shall delight in
Seeing all the maidens for the royal favour fighting.
Daff. Goodness, only fancy—if by any chance I
Chosen to be queen of all the flowerets should be !
Robin (to Lily). I, if they should choose you—shall for
ever lose you.
And the horrid, nasty King is certain to ill-use you.
Lily. There’s no cause to fret dear— l am free as yet,dear.
There is not the slightest fear that they will fix on
All. Well this is exciting—How I shall delight in
Seeing all the maidens for the royal favour fighting ;
Showing off their graces, making fine grimaces.
Everybody thinking she the queen is sure to be.


SCENE 111.
Outside Dame Fungus' cottage in the Wild Flower Village.
It is decorated with garlands, and a rustic throne covered
with flowers stands on the R. of the stage.*
(Enter L., Robin crying, followed hy Ltly.)
Lily. What is the matter ? Are you in disgrace ?
Why keep your handkerchief before your face ?
Is your tooth aching, dearest ?
Robin. Aching—Well
I am a-king all over, truth to tell.
It is not that that grieves me, but to-day
The King intends to take his bride away.
Lily. What then ?
Robin. As you’re the nicest, you’ll he taken,
And then poor Robin will be quite forsaken.
Lily. Nonsense ! his choice would never fall on me.
But, if it did, what would the difference be ?
I’d rather sooth your toothache at your side
Than wed the King with all his acres wide.
{Melodrama tica Hy.)
What is his plenty to your frugal crumb ?
A cot with you ! —so on ad libitum.
Robin (ditto). O peerless maid! No base-born thoughts
can fetter her!
O skee—ies above ! etc.—etc.
Lily. So dinna think that I ’ll desert you, pray,
For my first course would be to run away.
Robin. Sweet Lily! Now no more with doubt I’m racked.
(Puts his arm round her. Enter L. Dame and Daffa-
downdilly [followed by various Wild Flower
Maidens]. Robin and Lily separate hastily.)
• This scene can be acted with the same scenery as the previous
one, if preferred, the throne being arranged inside the cupboard.


Dame. Kissing! You scamp! IVo caught you in the act
How can you, Lily, thus yourself demean
When you Ve a chance of being chosen queen?
Daffa. Oh yes, a chance—by no means certain, though,
/may be thought the best, for all you know.
And why it should be Lily more than me,
I really must confess 1 cannot see.
Dame. As far as that goes, I’ve a chance as well;
Why / should not be queen I cannot tell.
I still am very handsome, I am told,
And neither am too young nor yet too old.
Daffa. How I do wish the Fairy M ould appear!
It’s very rude to keep us waiting here.
A fairy should be punctual to the minute.
The throne is ready.
Fairy (suddenly appeariny in the throne'). Yes. And she
is in it.
(All turn and kneel to her.)
About the village searching I have been,
But find no maiden fit to be a queen.
So that, in fact, the choice appears to be
Between you two—
Dame (highly affronted). Ahem !
Fairy. 1 mean you three.
Daffa. We have prepared a dance.
Fairy. Begin, my friends.
My judgment shall be given when it ends.
(A dance with garlands of flowers. Afterwards, while the
Fairy deliberates they walk about in couples — Robin
with Lily.)
Robin. My heart goes thump—for you she’s sure to choose,
And Kings’ commands are law—you can’t refuse.


Daffa. I think the others have but little chance—
I always look bewitching in a dance !
Dame. These chits would make poor queens, that I must
say.
The fairy several times has looked my way.
Fairy. Listen to me (they all stop). ’Tis thus that I decide ;
Lily is chosen for her sovereign’s bride.
(Lily/(life into Korin's arms with a scream 'lhc Dame
and Daffadowndilly lean against each other aghast—
hurried music — Tableau.)
SCENE IV.
Kino Hyacinth’s bower as In Scene I.—Enter Lily
followed hy the Dame and Daffadowndilly, L.
Lily. This is the day I have so long being dreading
(crying) The fatal day appointed for my wedding.
Dame. You silly girl ! I’m quite ashamed of you.
Daffa. I call it affectation, that I do.
To cry so at becoming queen is silly,
And very unbecoming' too —Miss Lily.
Lily. But what grieves mo is this—First tiling this morn
I found that Robin from our house had gone,
And just when I most need to bo protected.
Dame. Just like the scamp.
Daffa. Yes, quite as I expected.
An idle good-for-nothing little chap.
Dame. He’s just the sort of boy I like to slap.
Daffa. Of course he never cared a pin’s head for you.
Dame. That’s plain enough.
Lily ( taking out a letter). Oh! silence, I implore you.
There’s some good reason why he leaves me so.
He’s busy, p’rhaps—he is engaged, I know.
He left this letter : “ Lily—do not fear,
When most you need me, I will then appear.”
(7 ],e Fairy Fernleaf appears as in Scene I.)


Fairy. King Hyacinth approaches.
Daffa. ( spitefully ). All! you sec.
Where isyour swain? I knewthat false he’d be.
(Enter R. Hyacinth in his royal roles and veiled. All
kneel. \Courtiers foliate and group themselves behind the
King.-] A march is jilayed.)
Fairy'. Good people rise, and July forward stand
And take with joy thy Sovereign's proffered hand.
Lily. O noble king, your mercy do I crave—
I love another.
Hyac. (in a gruff voice). How now! Minion ! Slave!
Who is ’t you love ?
Dame. Oh, nought could be so bad;
A horrid, nasty little beggar lad!
One Robin
Fairy. Ragged Robin?
Dame. Yes, the same.
Dobbin’ by disposition, as by name.
Daffa. As Lily seems so obstinate, your Grace,
I should be very pleased to take her place.
Dame. Or, if an older queen you would prefer,
I’m sure I’m quite at your disposal, sir.
Hy’AC. I hesitate. You, Fairy, shall decide
Which of these ladies is to be my bride.
Fairy. Are you quite sure? Xow listen, please, to this.
(to Daffadoyvxdilly') You're not in love rvith Ragged
Robin, Miss?
Daffa. I’d rather wed an ogre, tall and grim!
Dame. I’d rather kill myself than marry him!
Fairy. Thank you; that greatly simplifies the thing,
Since Ragged Robin is, in fact—
Hyacinth (i inveiling). The King!
(General surprise. Tableau .)


(to Daffa) You, Miss, an ogre grim, would rather
wed.
(to Dame) And you, good Dame, would sooner far be
dead.
No fear! I would not thrust on you, I’m sure,
A match that you so little could endure.
Lily, look up. No more refuse you can
To make your Hyacinth a happy man.
Lily. There is my hand, my heart with joy is throbbin’;
But, King or not, I'll call you Bagged Bobin.
Fivale —Air, “ Tink-a-Tink.”
Lily. Now all our trouble and woo is done,
Past is our grief and pain.
Bobin and Lily at last are one,
Never to part again.
Bobin. All that now we have got to say
Is a few words to you
(to the Audience )
Just to hope that you like the play,
And to wish all adieu.
All. Think-a-think-think-a-think-think-think-think-
Think it a charming play.
Wiuk-a-wiuk-wink-a-wink-wink-wink-wink
Wink at the faults we pray.
Curtain.


FURNITURE AND PROPERTIES.
Scene I.— Hyacinth's couch. [Branches for the courtiers .]
Fairy's icand. King's sceptre.
Scene ll.— Fireplace, icith transparency to represent a hot
fire. Table, four stools, armchair. Cupboard to open.
Shelf or second table at back. Four brooms. Hearth-
rug. Kettle. Table-cloth. Four cups, four saucers,
teapot, milk-jug, sugar-basin, tea-caddy, spoons, knives.
Loaf. Fender and fire-irbns. Toasting-fork. Piece
of toast blackened on one side. Dame's stick.
Scene lII. —I krone decorated with flowers. Robin's handker-
chief. Garlands for the dance.
Scene IV.— Letter. Hyacinth's veil.


Charley O’Brine
CHARACTERS.
r
... ...(a British Tar). ■,
... ...(a Tea Merchant of Pekin). t>.
Sell-sell-Bi-bi...
SlNGSONGSIGIISO ...
(Ids daughter). yfl
The Tea-Merchant’s Daughter of Pekin;
%\t gtcrclrant, % |pfo, an& % partner.
SCENE.
Pekin—partly in Sell-SELL-Bi-bi’s house, and partly in the
street.
COSTUMES.
Charley.—lsi dress—Blue seaman's shirt, large collar,
white ducks, large straw hat, belt with clasp-knife hanging
to it. 2nd dress—Long Arabian robe with hood, false nose and
spectacles, long white beard.
Sell-sell-Bi-bi. — Robe to the ancles, with quaint em-
broidery; a spiked collar; Chinese hoots, with thick soles; a
covering for head to look bald, with pigtail; a round hat.
Singsosgsighso. —A jacket to the knees, with similar em-
broidery; long skirt hiding her feet; hair gathered into a knot
on the top of the head; large fan. T \hen she appears at
window, a large hight-cap. 2nd dress, when mad—A sheet
over her costume, her hair,down, and a wreath of flowers and
straw.


SCENE I.
A street in Pekin, outside Sell-sell-Bi-bi’s house. Door
and window of the home at back. Enter Charley, R.
He gazes at the toindow.
Charley. That is her lattice that I see again.
Oh joy, once more to see that much-loved pane !
’Twas from that casement that she popped her head
Last night before she put herself to bed.
When she had gone, long long I stayed behind
Watching the shadows on her window-blind.
Who shall describe the blackness of the night
When, to my sorrow, out she snuffed the light ?
0 beauteous Singsongsighso ! peerless maid,
1 ’ll wake your slumbers ■with a serenade.
Song —Air, “ D’ye ken John Peel ?”
Charley. Do you see me here in the street, I pray?
Do you see me here at the break of the day?
Do you hear me sing my lovelorn lay,
Though it is about five in the morning ?
Singsong. (heard within). Yes, I see you there, my swain,
so true,
And the morning’s cold, and your nose looks blue,
So I ’ll open the window and speak to you,
Though it is about five in the morning.
(She appears at the window in her night-cap.)
Both. Oh! good morning, What hours you keep!
You are up before the sunbeams peep.
We can have a chat—for papa’s asleep,
And it’s only just five in the morning.
Singsong. Just wait, love, while I put on my affairs,
Slip on my slippers, and then slip down stairs.
{She shuts the window.)


Charley. She comes. How can I this suspense endure ?
How well her night-cap suits her, to be sure.
But, oh! how modest all at once I feel;
I hope she won’t appear in des-habille.
How coidd I face her with her hair all down,
Or, how address her in a dressing-gown?
Shiver my spars ! I’m not afraid to woo her.
Courage, my boy—and pop the question to her.
(Enter SINGSONGSIGUSO from the house.)
Singsong. We haven't got a moment, dear, to lose,
Papa is up and putting on his shoes.
He’s got his pigtail still to plait and tie,
So we’ve one moment ere we say good-bye.
Charley. Oh, Singsongsighso, won't you say the word,
And name the day ?
Singsong. Now, pray, don’t be absurd.
What can Ido ? If Pa’s determined still
To say “You shan't!” how can I say, “I will”?
His heart’s of stone.
Charley. But even if it is,
Is there no plan to melt this heart of his?
What do you say to letting down your hair—
Making a speech of anguish and despair—
Getting a scene up—talking lots of bosh
Of love and mangled hopes ?
Singsong. Oh, that won’t wash!
Don’t talk of it—you make me feel so low.
Come, have a little dance before you go.
(Dance, in the middle of which enter Sell-sell-Bi-bi sud-
denly from the house. Chord. Tableau.)
Sell-sell. Dancing! Dear me, the pranks young people
P%,
The airs they give themselves, too, now-a-day!
Ah, by the Emperor’s teapot! who’s this here ?
Why, who’s your friend? Pray introduce him, dear.


Singsong, (confused). Oh, don’t be cross, Pa ; it’s a friend
I saw—
At least—that is—we never met before;
But chancing to pass by—in fact—l thought—
Perhaps—l mean—and he ’ll explain, in short.
Charley. This is the case, old chap. You see, I chanced
To pass this way
Sell-sell (with irony'). And thereupon you danced.
Charley. This lady I perceived, in homely way,
Just taking in the milk, sir, for the day.
I stopped to help her, and, I hope her father
Won’t think me too officious.
Sell-sell. Fishy, rather!
And so you ’ve drunk up jug and all, I see.
Taking the milk in! You can’t take in me.
Singsong, (aside). We’d better tell, (aloud) Papa, for
some weeks past
He's courted me.
Sell-sell. So here’s the truth at last.
(Singsong, and Charley kneel before him.)
Charley. Pity that artless creature’s loving ’cart.
Singsong. Pity your darter struck by Cupid’s dart.
Charley. See what a beautiful young pair we are.
Sell-sell. What taste ! to pitch upon a common tar.
She’d better wed a tinker or a tailor,
Than that a seaman should with love assail her.
(to Charley) Now, then, be off! (to Singsong.) You
silly girl, don't blubber.
(to Charley) You roving wretch !
Charley. Contemptible landlubber!
Sell-sell. Come, no abuse—you’re half seas over—
I ’ll have you in the stocks for breach of peace.
Charley. I ’ll run you through.
Singsong, (rushing between them). Oh, murder! Fire!
P’lice!


Air, “ King of the. Cannibal Islands.”
Sell-sell. Poke him, choke him, daughter, do !
Hold him, or he ’ll run me through.
I would rather marry you to
The King of the Cannibal Islands.
Singsong. You’d better be off without delay.
He ’ll give you in charge if you longer stay.
I prythee be careful what you do,
For I never have seen him look so blue.
Charley. Hoax him, coax him, smooth him down.
Please him, tease him, do him brown.
You could even melt the frown
Of die King of the Cannibal Islands.
Charley. Well, I must /you! fyour
Sell-sell. You’d better leave (her Ito j her fate.
Singsong. I pray thee (me J (my ,
Caugh Hyou h il beif lJoul wait;
T e 18 1 quite as obstinate
I am J u
As the King of the Cannibal Islands.
(Dance, Exit Charley, It., kissing Ids hand to
Singsongsigiiso, icho is dragged off by
Sell-Sell-Bi-RI info the house.')
SCENE ll*
Room in Sell-sell-Bi-bi’s house. Sell-sell-Bi-bi and
Singsongsigiiso are discovered at tea.
Singsong. Don’t look so cross, Papa, for goodness sake.
You can’t imagine what a face you make!
Sell-sell. You graceless child! Ain’t it enough, I pray,
Your doting father thus to disobey,
* N.B. —These two scenes can be acted as one, if preferred, in
which case Charley alone exits at the end of the song.


By keeping up, in spite of my objections,
This most ineligible of connexions,
But you must taunt your loving parent, too?
I Ve a great mind—to beat you black and blue.
Singsong. But just consider, daddy,.how one can
Keep one’s heart whole from such a dear young
Sell-sell. You must have known my great objection,
daughter,
To anything connected with the water.
My only child, remembering how long
I suffered in the steamer to Hong-Kong,
Might spare me the distress, I do aver,
Of marryin' her to this great marin-er.
Singsong. ( romantically ). But think, Papa! when fearful
storms o’erwhelm,
How grand to grasp the wheel and guide the’dielm !
Sell-sell. Pooh! Grasp the wheel, indeed! What stuff!
No, no;
You know the proverb says, “ Come veal, come woe! ”
And if you wed him, in your sailor lingo,
You’d best look out for squalls, you had, by jingo !
You’ll have to keep yourself upon his pay,
And live in constant dread of quarter-day.
You will exist on commons short—if any,
For from my hands, pray don’t expect a penny.
Singsong, (loftily). Starvation, Pa, with him—now, pray,
note this—
Would simply bo a state of perfect bliss.
Sell-sell. Oh, well, since my persuasions are in vain,
I must take stronger measures, it is plain.
I ’ll lock you in our attic, which, you know,
Is rather damp, and draughty if it blow.
There the blithe mouse will course the chamber
through,
And many a rat 'll make a rattle, too.


There flies will congregate, anil spiders spin
Erratic webs between your nose and chin.
There will the rafters creak and plaister crack,
And drops of damp will trickle down your back.
I ’ll bring you bread and water, day by day,
And bolt you in, lest you should bolt away :
There you 'll remain till to yourself you come,
And if your spirits don't fail, why it's rum.
Singsong. But why this opposition, father, why V
Have you some other match, pray, in your eye ?
Sell-sell. Why! By the Emperor's silver-mounted chalice,
And all the bells upon the summer palace !
Of course 1 have. Dear, dear, lam a flat;
I actually forgot to mention that.
Why Chinki-Munni-Tin-tin-Hi himself
Has offered you his hand and all his pelf.
A mandarin, you know—you cannot choose
But make some alteration in your views.
Think of his palace, child—it’s worth your while ;
Each story's modelled in a different style.
The outside's painted scarlet—nothing duller—
And every turret’s of a different colour.
Think of the decorations on the walls—
Grittins and crescents, spikes and bells and balls;
His furniture is gorgeous—so I’m told—
And all his chopsticks ivory tipped with gold.
Singsong. Lor, Pa, be quiet! Cease this good advice—
I wouldn’t have him, not at twice the price.
His palace, many coloured as it is,
Is not so many-coloured as his phiz.
His forehead’s yellow, and his nose is blue,
His cheeks arc varied with a purplish hue;
His pigtail’s scarlet and his eyes are green.
A greater monster I have never seen.
Just add a squint and hideous limping fect r
And there—you’ve got the creature quite complete.


Sell-sell. O wretched father! O ungrateful daughter!
To think of this—and after all I Vo taught her!
Was it for this with fond paternal care
I trained her locks to form that knot of hair?
Was it for this, with pains too great to tell,
I squashed her foot into a walnut shell?
Was it for this I taught her how to know
A man of station by his pig-tail’s bow?
Was it for this I trained her up to see
How good and wise the wealthy all must be ?
And how it is our duty, stern but clear,
To judge a man by what he has per year?
Was it to see her scorn a mandarin,
And choose a sailor quite devoid of tin ?
Well, this rebellion we must try and quiet,
By shutting up and cutting down her diet.
Come, miss, my power no longer shall you dare—
So to the garret we will straight repair.
(Drags her out .)
SCENE 111.
A garret wretchedly furnished, and much out of repair.
A window, C., with view of the roofs of Pekin. Old
tea-chests and other lumber about. Singsongsiguso
discovered.
Singsong. Papa imagined that I never could
Live long up here with nought but bread for food.
But when he takes his frequent forty winks,
I am not quite so lonely as he thinks.
My Charley scales the window—spite of dad—
With such a ladder—oh, he’s such a lad!
( Whistle heard outside — Singsongsiohso leaves her
handkerchief. Enter Charley by the window,
C., with a basket on his arm.)
Charley. Well, sweet, how are you? Pretty bobbish, eh !
Singsong. How is it, Charley, you ’re so late to-day ?


Charley. Why I ’ve been busy marketing just now;
And pretty well I’ve managed, you’ll allow.
Here’s a dried tongue, three large hath buns, some
bacon;
This is my steak, or else I'm much mi-staken,
A twist, some potted meat—and then, look here !
Two bottles (pints) of Bass's bottled beer.
So on the whole you ’ll do for meat and drink,
Without your bread and water, I should think.
Singsong. Oh, what a love you are ! So good! So clever!
Charley. Come what’s the news? Is Ba as cross as ever?
Singsong. Oh dear, such fun! He thinks it quite appalling
To find my spirits rising and not falling.
I told him that my mirth arose, no dbuht,
From the amount of humour all about.
He little knows the company I find,
And what good things they always leave behind.
Charley. Well—have the mice of late annoyed you, dear?
Singsong. No, never since you set the traps up here.
The flies were dreadful and the gnats grew louder,
Until you bought the Persian insect powder;
That was the thing, it killed them by degrees ;
Also the spiders and those horrid other insects;
And now you've patched the holes in roof and walls,
The drops of damp have dropped their frequent calls.
Charley. Come, that’s all rigid; and, since I stuffed the
door,
There’s not a draught here as there was before.
So now that everything looks taut and prime,
What shall we do to pass away the time ?
Singsong. Come, dance a hornpipe, do, and sing a song—
There, don't bo shy—a something not too long.
Charley. But are you sure, dear, that our tuneful numbers
Will not disturb your father’s mid-day slumbers?
Singsong. No fear; and we can hear in time to stop.
Come, no excuses : —one, two, three, and hop.


Air, “ Over the Sea.”
Charley. Over the sea, over the sea—
Hurry and scurry and bustle for me,
Over the sea, over the sea—
Gallantly roving along.
So we ’ll sail—sail—sail
Wherever the wind is—to East or West Indies;
We ’ll sail—sail—sail
From London away to Hongkong.
Over the sea, over the sea—
Beef and salt-butter and pickles for me ;
Over the sea, over the sea—
Biscuits as hard as a stone.
But we munch—munch—munch,
And wash down the prog with a stiff glass of
And we crunch—crunch—crunch,
As happy as dogs with a bone.
(At the. end of the song Charley dances a hornpipe.)
Sell-sell, (outside). Now then, Miss Singsong, what may
you be at ?
Having a polka with some friendly rat ?
Singsong, (tragically). Heavens! My pa!
Charley. Now don’t stand there appealing
In that pathetic manner to the ceiling.
But, talking of the ceiling, will you sec
If there’s a cupboard for con-cealing mo?
Singsong. Into this tea-chest jump—you won’t be found;
Papa won’t stay five minutes, I ’ll be bound.
Charley (getting in). A tea-chest! O stern Fate, to us
poor men
Thou teachest strange expedients now and then,
Singsong. Keep still. Your refuge fits you to aT.
You’re a he heau if you are not hohea.


(She shuts the lid of the box and goes and sits
facing the wall, L. Enter Sell-Sell-Bi-bi, R.)
Oh, that’s you, Pa. Now, don't disturb me, pray ;
I’m having such a lark—there, run away (laughing).
Sell-sell. There! that’s the way with her. I never saw
Such a disgusting flow of fun before.
I thought up here—so dull, day after day, it is—
She must be destitute of jokes and gaieties.
But no, she seems to thrive on solitude
And, with the cats, don’t seem the slightest meu-ed.
The nimble earwigs and the busy flies
And idle moths she seems to idolize.
In fact, this room all day resounds with laughter.
(Sinosongsighso bursts into a Jit of laughing.')
Well, what’s the joke, Mias? What’s the fun you're
after ?
Singsong. Oh, such a lark, Papa; I’m just beginning
To make this ancient spider teach me spinning,
While all the while the beetles on the beams,
Who carry rudeness really to extremes,
Are sitting boldly staring at my shoes.
(Goes into fits of laughing again.)
Sell-sell. Oh, what will give that girl a fit of blues ?
I thought ’twould tame her, when I first began
To put her on tire bread-and-water plan.
I tried it, and—the little that one knows—
The more I water her the more she grows.
(cogitates.) Why is it so ? 1 ’ll make some observations.
(poking about the garret.)
She must have got some hidden recreations.
A solitaire board or a smuggled book,
A novel, or a paper in some nook;
(struck with an idea)
Or, p’raps, she spends her time in making jests
Upon the superscriptions of these chests.


That’s it! At any rate, from this same place
The chests are just as well removed, in case.
(to Singsongsiohso) I’m going to take away these
boxes, dear;
They Te in your way.
Singsong, (alarmed). Oh, Pa !
Sell-sell, (aside). I’m right, ‘tis clear.
(Begins removing the tea-chests. Sikgsongsighso
advances.)
Singsong, (aside) x Aly stars! was over heroine placed, I
pray,
In a more fearful situation—eh ?
In greater tremor I have never been.
If Papa sees him, there will be a scene.
(Sell-sell-Bi-iii lifts up the chest in which
Charley is, leaving him sitting on the bottom,
which comes out; without seeing what has
happened he goes towards door, R.)
Sell-sell. This tea-chest is an empty one, I find. ( Exitß .)
Singsong. Contentedly he leaves contents behind.
What an escape! Now, quick, be off!
Charley (goes to door, R). I will.
SINGSONG. No, no; you silly. By the window-sill.
( pushes him to ivindoiv, C.)
Charley. One fond embrace you ’ll grant before I go ?
Singsong. Well, just one little one, and then
(As they embrace enter Sell-sell-Bi-bi, R.)
Sell-sell. Hulloa!
Tableau.
Air, “ Green grow the rushes, oh!”
Charley. Oh—oh—hero’s a go!
There will be a row, I know.
Sell-sell. Dear, dear—this looks queer.
What are you a-doing here V


Singsong. Pray, pray— go away.
(aside) Come again another day.
Charley. Try, try—not to cry.
Keep your spirits; don’t say die.
Sell-sell. We—we—now can see
Cause for all this gaiety.
Singsong. Lor—lor—what a bore!
I shall never see you more.
All (together). Oh—oh—here’s a go ;
Who’d ha’ thought ’tWould happen so ?
Well—well—what a sell.
Fortune’s turnings none can tell.
(Dance. Curtain.)
SCENE IV.
Exterior of Sell-Sell-Bi-bi’s house as in Scene I. Enter
Sell-sell-Bi-bi from the house.
Sell-sell. Well, here’s a pretty mess! My daughter
seems
To make a point of going to extremes.
First—when I try to mew her up a bit,
Nought I can do will tame the little chit.
Now, when at last I’ve got her separated
From that ship’s mate with whom she would have
mated,
What does she do but take the other tack,
And turn a melancholy maniac.
She sits and mopes—all sustenance refuses,
And one can’t make her chew unless she chooses.
So I’ve been forced at last to advertise
In all the papers, printed extra size,
And stuck on all the walls where bills may stick.
That “ Sell-sell-Bi-bi’s lovely daughter’s sick,”
And that her curer, whosoe’er he be,
May claim her hand, besides a moderate fee.


80 THE TEA-MERCHANTS DAUGHTER
’Twas my one chance—a man in my position
Can’t pay the price of any good physician.
(Enter Chakley, 11. He is disguised as an
Arabian sage, with long white beard, turban,
and flowing robes.)
Charley. Excuse me, sir. My business is pressing,
But is it Sell-sell-Bi-bi I’m addressing ?
Sell-sell. The same, sir.
Charley. Pray excuse my off-hand manner—
My name is Dosof Ipecacuanha.
Arabia is my land, and, I may say,
That I’ma trifle famous in my way.
Sell-sell. May I enquire, sir
Charley. Come, no vagaries.
I am the chief, sir, of apothecaries.
As you ’re my friend, I don’t mind telling you,
I rather think I know a thing or two.
Now, hearing that your daughter’s out of sorts,
Of matrimony having, too, some thoughts,
I come to wed and cure her.
Sell-sell, (aside). Curious person!
Must take the offer, though—might have a worse ’un.
(aloud) Sir, it’s a chance that ought not to be missed.
The lists are opened free to all who list.
Charley. ’Twill just be necessary, sir, to state,
The symptoms you’ve observed in her of late.
Sell-sell. Well, sir—my child—just now—you ’ll under-
stand,
Has rather—wanted—
■Charley. To be took in hand ?
Why don’t you lock her up? ’Tis just the thing
A fractious lady to herself to bring.
Sell-sell. Well, sir, IVe tried it; but I grieve to say
I Ve gone too far, she’s moping quite away.
She sits and pines—no food with her agrees.
She’s ill at dinners, and she’s ill at teas.


■Charley. May I enquire of you what plan you’ve tried,
What are the remedies that you’ve applied?
Sell-sell. I’m sure I’ve done the very best I could.
Tried various plans, but found them all no good.
Read her accounts of murders and distress,
Ta’en from the pages of our daily press.
The largest part I went on to relate
Of every Parliamentary debate.
Then, as light reading cures the deepest glooms,
Read “ Harvey’s Meditations ’mid the Tombs ”;
“ Clarissa Harlowe,” in twelve vols. or so ;
And “The Night Side of Nature ” —Airs. Crowe.
Rut all to no avail, for still she pines,
Loses her spirits, and then takes to whines.
Charley. Most strange! I can but guess from what you say.
That there’s some love affair, sir, in the way.
Sell-sell (aside). This man must be a conjuror, I vow;
How could he find that out, I wonder, now.
(ahud) You ’re right, sir.
Charley. Ah! the old old tale again;
Depression and reaction on the brain.
Troublesome things, false lovers and bad nights.
However, we will soon put things to rights.
Lead on. My dress is, p’raps, a shade too shady,
But matters press—p’raps you ’ll prepare the lady.
Song —Air, “Down from the heights of the dark
Pyrennees.”
Sell-sell. Now, sir—make not a sound—
Tread on tip-toe and keep silence profound.
Be cool and be steady—l ’ll make the girl ready.
But you will not cure her, sir, I ’ll be bound.
But—if—you cure my daughter, sir,
Then, my good friend, you may pocket your fees,
And many my daughter, sir—since I have taught her, sir,
That she must take any man that I please.


Charley. Now, sir, pray lead the way;
We ’ll set the girl all to rights, I dare say.
My hand is quite steady, my instruments ready,
And pills, draughts and powders, a grand array!
And—-if—l cure your daughter, sir,
Then, in my joy, I shall ask for no fees,
But marry your daughter, sir—nor stop to court her.
Since she must take any man that you please.
(Exeunt to the house.)
SCENE V.
Hie garret as in Scene 111.
Singsongsioiiso is discovered seated on a tea-chest, in the
conventional dress of a mad heroine—long white roles,
hair down and dishevelled, a ivreath oj flowers mixed with
straw, etc.
Singsong. This is the greatest lark I ’ve ever had;
It is such fun, pretending to be mad.
Papa’s quite frightened, and I don’t despair
Of being sent to take a little air ;
Then I might see my Charley, who has been
Quite banished since the grand discovery scene.
As for these quacks with whom Papa assails me,
They can’t make out a bit what ’tis that ails me,
’Tain’t likely—notwithstanding all their chatter-
Seeing there’s nothing in the world the matter.
Here’s Pa—l must be careful what I say.
Now for some raving in Ophelia’s way.
(She seats herself on the ground, crouched up, grinning, and
making faces, L. Enter Sell-sell-Bi-m, R.)
Sell-sell. That’s how she sits for hours, knees to nose;
Which, as one knows, is not an easy pose.
Singsong, (raving). Alas! Ale miserable! And woe, woe!
I must remark, ha ha— he he—ho ho!


’Tis New Year’s Day! Set hairpins on to boil,
Quaff bowls of Rowland’s rich Macassar oil.
At top a chignon stewed—’tis called jugged hare,
And fried high heels at bottom, I declare.
The harvest moon sits smiling on the wain;
Tread softly, dearest, lest you tear my train.
See, lilies white glide gently on the water.
Oh, fitting time for oysters, and for porter!
Let no one try to prove—’twill be no use —
That I cannot say bo unto a goose ;
Let none believe it, for it is not true.
( Turning sharply to Sell-sell-Bi-bi)
I’ve said it many a time, I know, to you.
Why, who’s this ancient fogy—can it be
The old museum mummy? Joy—’tis he !
Sell-sell. She doesn’t know me.
Singsong. ( examining him). Ain’t he hideous rather.
Sell-sell. Not know Papa ! Oh, this must go no further.
(Goes to door, R., and beckons. Enter Charley, R., still
disguised).
Charley, Excuse me, sir, I couldn’t stop all night;
I thought the lady must be ready, quite.
Sell-sell. Oh, quite—allow me, sir, to introduce you
(presenting his daughter).
Singsong, (wildly). Another of ’em ! Oh, Papa, you goose
you!
Charley. Little excited—yes—yes—yes— l see.
Don’t be alarmed, sir; leave the case to me.
With such a patient one must deal with care.
Would you oblige the lady with a chair?
(Sell-sell-Bi-bi places two chairs—they sit.)
Singsong, (aside). You ugly creature! fancy wedding you.
And what a contrast to my Charley too!
Charley. Now for the pulse. Ah! quick—it’s ninety-three.
She is a little heated, sir, I see.


Sell-sell. Oh, sir—her ravings carry all before ’em.
Pray don’t expect the very least decorum.
Singsong. Well, such a monster I did never see—
Such an old ogre—ok </er-acious me !
Charley. Come, let me hear what line your illness takes.
Pray are you wakeful, miss, or have you aches ?
Singsong. Not in the least.
Charley. No aches—aha, just so!
Giddiness in the head at all?
Singsong. Oh, no!
Charley. Ever attacked hj pins and needles, which is
(Or ought to be) the harbinger of stitches ?
Singsong. Stitches and pins and needles! No, sir, no;
Although I have of late felt but sew-sew.
Charley. Quite so. I thought as much—then ten to one
You ’ve a good appetite for meals.
Singsong. I’ve none!
Charley. No appetite ! Dear, dear—then I divine
That your best medicine’s some light Hungary wine.
(to Sell-sell-Bi-bi)
Have you a spoon or paper-knife at hand?
I wish to inspect the throat ; you understand.
Sell-sell. I’ll go and fetch one. (Exit R.)
Charley (discovering himself). Don’t you know me, dear ?
Singsong. My stars! My Charley—how did you get here?
Charley. What, don’t you see my game ?
Singsong. Oh, to be sure.
You come here to perform the perfect cure,
■ And win my hand.
j-Crf.vRLEY (re-masking). Hush! still your fluttering breast.
Here comes your father from the medicine-chest.
(Re-enter, R., Sell-sell-Bi-bi, with a huge soup-ladle.)
Sell-sell. I ’m sorry, sir, I can find nothing flatter
Than this soup-ladle
Charley. Oh, it doesn’t matter.
Your daughter’s cured.


Singsong, (taking Charley’s arm). lly her preserver’s side,
His bride elect.
Sell-sell. Well, I’m electrified.
Singsong. Now, Pa, don’t stare. I’m quite in my right
mind,
And just as sane as anyone, you ’ll find.
Sell-sell. Well—well—it’s odd, but it’s all right, I s’pose.
What must be must be—and so now, here goes.
Take her—be happy—hope you ’ll like the life!
(turning away in qnguish)
My child an old apothecary’s wife !
Singsong. No, no, not quite so bad as that, Papa;
Only the mate of honest old Jack Tar.
(Charley throws off his disguise.)
Sell-sell. What, you! I ’ve done it—here ’s a pretty go !
Charley. Come, don’t be cross. I won her fair, you
1 ’ve lots of brass, you ’ll own, if not much tin.
Sell-sell. Well, well—it can’t be helped, so I give in.
(Joins their hands again.)
Finale. —Air, “The Gamekeeper.”
Sell-sell. Well, I protest; it’s not fair, for everybody
knows
1 can’t refuse to let you wed so near the piece’s close.
So you must bear the blame yourselves if anything
goes queer,
For it’s high time, quite, to say good-night to every-
body here.
Singsongsighso. Well, Pa, you really are a —respectable
old thing,
And when I sail abroad, all sorts of presents I will


For—just at last, you really have turned out a duck—
a dear,
And it’s high time, quite, to say good-night to every-
body here.
Charley. As I and my companions have done our best to
please,
We hope you’ll give a kindly word before we cross
the seas.
For then shall we, without a doubt, be happy, n.wer
fear;
And it’s high time, quite, to say good-night to every-
body here.
(Repeat the last verse together ami dance.)
Curtain.
PROPERTIES.
Scene I.— Night-cap.
Scene ll. —Chinese table, with tiny cups of tea; two seals.
Scene lll.— Tea-chests; one large one with loose bottom;
basket with provisions.
Scene IV. —Stafffor the Arabian Doctor.
Scene Y. — Tea-chest; chairs; ladle.


DAME DURDEN,
HER THREE SERYING-MAIDS.
A LITTLE PLAY FOR SMALL CHILDREN.
CHARACTERS.
Dame Durden.
Margery (a Tom-hoy)
Kitty.. ... {too fond of dress) > her serving maids.
Dorothy Draggletail (a lazy slut) )
Robin frOOl)feu.ow (a tricksy sprite).
SCENE.
In or near Dame Durden’s cottaye.
COSTUMES.
Dame Durden. — Print gown looped np over a scarlet petticoat,
large ivhite apron, stomacher, white kerchief over shoulders,
black stockings, shoes, and buckles, mob cap, white hair, mittens,
crutch stick, spectacles.
Margery. — Light print gown looped up over blue petticoat,
small apron, open bodice laced across, a white under-bodice,
blue stockings, shoes, small buckles, black velvet on neck and wrists
small cap.—ln second scene, a hat.
Kitty. — Same in style, but brighter and smarter hat.
Dorothy. — Same in style, but very untidy and slovenly.
Robin.—lsi dress—Short red tunic, knickerbockers and
stockings, a little red cap with long stiff grey feather. '2nd
' 4


dress—Long brown cimk tcith hood, u-hite hair, rough stick.
3 rd dress—Loose dark green tunic to the knees, dark wig and
heard, slouching hat, a pedlar's hox and wares. 4 th dress —
The 3rd dress with the 2nd over it, and the Ist under all.
SCENE I.
Kitchen o/Dame Durden’s collage. Margery, Kitty, and
Dorothy discovered at icork, sireeping, dusting, frc.
Song —Air, “ So early in the morning.”
Come sweep the room and brush the grate;
Come dust the soot from every plate ;
Come set the kettle on the hob,
And polish every nook and knob.
So early in the morning, ( three times)
Before the break of day.
Marg. Is all put straight? The dame will soon be
down.
Oh, Dorothy, do please untuck your gown.
Kitty. I can’t think how it is that you don ’t feel
Untidy with your slippers down at heel.
Dorothy. How can a girl to dress herself contrive
Who’s got to be downstairs each day at five ?
Kitty. With nothing to reflect our tired faces
Except a glass that’s cracked in seven places!
Now, Doll, you’ve got to put the brooms away;
It is my turn to fetch the milk to day.
Marg. And mine to make Dame Durden’s tea, and cut
her
A nice thin slice or two of bread and butter.
(Exit Kitty, L. Margery cuts the bread.)
Dorothy. The brushes in the passage here can lie,
And after breakfast I will put them by.
Marg. The dame will not like that.


Dorothy. Oh, nevermind;
She’ll never see them, bless you, she’s so blind.
(Puts the brushes outside R.,anit then throws herself
into a chair.)
Now if I rest a bit, I’m not to blame,
I’ve done my work.
Maeg. (starting). Good gracious! here’s the dame.
I’ve not filled up the teapot—deary me !
Wherever can that kettle-holder be ?
(Rushes to take the kettle—and drops it.)
There! look ! lam unlucky, am I not ?
How could I tell the nasty thing was hot?
Dame (outside). Hey day! Heyday! (Enter R.)
Whose turn was it to day
',To put the brushes and the brooms away ?
Doeothy (jumping up). Mine, ma’am.
Dame. I thought as much; it’s just like you—
You ’re always slovenly, whate’er you do.
Go, put them by. (Exit Doeothy, R.)
The kettle on the ground!
Now, Margery, that’s your work, I ’ll be bound.
Maeg. I couldn’t help it, Ma’am—l touched the top
And burnt my fingers, so I let it drop.
(Picks it up.)
Dame. Was there no kettle-holder?—silly child!
When will you be less heedless and less wild ?
And, by the bye, where’s Kitty?
Maeg. ’Tis her turn
To fetch the milk, and butter from the churn.
Dame. She’s late—but she is stopping, I suppose.
To dress her hair, or furbish up her clothes.
Just peeping in the mill-pond as she passes—
That girl is much too fond of looking-glasses.
(Enter Kitty, L., Dorothy, R.)
Now, girls, come here, I want to speak to you.
Miss Kitty! leave off looking at your shoe.


To-day, as you Te aware, is called May-day.
On whicli you always have a holiday.
But Dorothy has lately been so lazy
And so untidy that she drives me crazy.
You two may have your holiday, but she
Must stay at home and do the work with me.
Now don’t get into scrapes, yourselves don’t tire,
Nor tear your petticoats on every briar.
No fear for Kitty, she ’ll take precious care
To keep her finery without a tear,
For otherwise she would not deign to wear ’em;
But as Miss Margery’s rather harum-scarum,
She’d best take care. Now mind, as I shall wait
To see you safe in bed, don’t come home late.
Maeg. Oh, thank you, Ma’am ; I will have such a scramble ;
Across the wood, I think, 1 ’ll take my ramble.
Dame. Don’t lose your way, that’s all, you giddy head.
Kitty. Oh, shall I wear my new hat trimmed with red?
Dame. What care I, Miss! To breakfast come, I say.
(Jlhey sit round the talk .)
Dorothy. Oh dear! What shall Ido at home all day ?
Dame. I'll find you work, my dear, don’t be afraid;
I’ve always lots for every serving-maid.
(Ihey begin breakfast as the curtain falls.)
SCENE 11.
A u-ood, a large tree at the back, with branches near the ground.
Enter Kobin Goodfellow, R.
Robin. Here is fine work for me—fine sport—to tease
Three silly girls in any way I please.
I ’ll plague them finely—for why should I not ?
They, each of them, their special faults have got:
Margery here and there and everywhere,
Eager and heedless beyond all compare;
Kitty so vain, and Dolly worse than both.
There’s nothing I detest so much as sloth.


Now is my time, my victims come this way.
First on Miss Margery my pranks I ’ll play.
To hide myself, this bush I’d best step in;
I must disguise myself ere I begin.
(Exit Robin, R., as Enter Margery and Kittv, L.)
Kitty. Well, you may talk for ever, I don’t care ;
That lane ('pointing L.) will be much cooler, I declare;
I shall go there. But tell me, child, now do,
Does this new hat look better than the blue ?
Marg. What does it matter?
Kitty. Oh, but do just look;
It is the last thing from the fashion book.
And you ’vc got on that old frock!
Marg. ( impatiently ). Never mind.
Kitty. And here’s your apron all got round behind!
Marg. There, let the things alone, do, Kitty, pray ;
What does it matter how one’s dressed to-day?
You are pranked out indeed!
Kitty. Be quiet, do !
I won’t be lectured, anyhow by you. {Exit. R.)
Marg. Well, go along then. I shall ramble here.
Let’s hope the brambles will admire you, dear.
{Enter, R., Robin disguised as an old crone.)
Robin. Good morning; how d’ye do, my pretty miss?
Marg. Good morning, Dame, {aside) Now who on earth
is this ?
Robin. I’m old and tired ; beneath this tree I ’ll sit.
Wilt help me to the bank ? I ’ll rest a bit.
(Margery helps her to sit under the tree.)
Ah! when I was as young and strong as you.
What pranks I used to play, what things I’d do!
This very tree I’ve been in many a time ;
But now the girls are all afraid to climb.
Marg. I’m not.
Robin. Up there one sees for miles around;
But you would stick half-way, Miss, I ’ll be bound


Maeg. Not I. I’d soon get up. But missus told me
Not to go scrambling so, and she would scold me.
Robin. And pray how would she know, you little goose,
A word about it?—that’s a poor excuse.
You are afraid, my dear—it's plain enough—
To spoil your clothes and make your hands look rough.
Maeg. I’m not; and just to prove it isn’t true,
I ’ll climb—but only up a branch or two.
(She begins mounting the tree.)
Robin. Well done! You’ve got some pluck; call out to
me
As soon as you the distant view can see.
Maeg. I can see nothing yet—but this is fun!
Robin. Go up a little since you Ve once begun.
Maeg. (mounting). There’s nothing still— (slips) —oh! there,
I Ve hurt my wrist,
And given my ankle such a horrid twist.
I can’t get down.
Robin. Ha! ha! I sadly fear
That comes of disobedience, my dear.
(Exit R., chuckling to himself.)
Maeg. Horrid old woman! Well, I must get down.
Oh, how my foot hurts! And IVe torn my gown.
(Scrambles down limping.)
How shall I get along! O luckless me !
I never will again so heedless be.
(Exit R., limping and crying. A pause. Enter, L., Kitty with
a wreath of wild floicers.)
Kitty (sitting under the tree). Just one more rose, a bit of
fern, and there,
The wreath is done. I’ll try it on my hair. (Puts it on.)
I’m sure that suits me ; I expect I look
Just like a wood-nymph in a picture book,
Or fairy tripping lightly on the grass.
Oh, how I wish I’d got a looking-glass !


In pretty clothes there’s very small attraction
If one can't see them— that's the satisfaction.
There’s someone coming here. Who can it he ?
A sort of pedlar-looking man I see.
(Enter Robin, It., disguised as a •pedlar.')
Robin. Any fine wares, my pretty lass, to-day?
Laces or silks or ribbon bright and gay ?
Kitty. No, none to-day. (aside) That tiresome Dame, I
know,
Would scold me if I spent my money so.
Robin. Tray, Miss, inspect my wares, they ’re very cheap.
Kitty. It couldn’t do much harm to take one peep.
What have you got?
Robin. 1 ’ve everything, my dear;
I’ve silks and satins, laces, ribbons here.
Here’s bodkins, scissors, pins and needle-cases.
Here’s rouge and creams for beautifying faces.
Here’s the last trimming for your high-day bonnet.
Here’s countless ballads and the last love sonnet.
Here’s harrowing ghosts and love tales without end.
And here’s a book, *‘ The Fortune-tellers’ Friend.”
The prettiest scarves and kerchiefs ever seen ;
And chains and brooches fit for any queen.
Kitty. Oh dear! that scarf is such a pretty blue.
And I’ve just had my wages paid me too.
Robin. Allow me, Miss, to try the scarf on—so.
I can’t help looking at you, do you know,
It does become you so. That’s blue, you see—
Becomes a fair complexion to a t.
Kitty. Oh, Sir! I can’t decide if it is right.
Robin. You’ll take it, Madam?
Kitty. I’m not certain quite.
Robin. I’m sure you’d not repent it; do but try it.
Kitty. I cannot see ’twould be much harm to buy it.
What is the price ?
Robin. Ah, Miss, you ’ll take it, then ?


Kitty (taking out purse). Well, what’s the price?
Robin. To you, Miss, three and ten,
Though worth five shillings—cost me more to buy ;
But when a lady asks, I must comply.
Kitty (aside). A very civil man, though rather funny.
(aloud) I ’ll take it then, sir pedlar; here’s your money.
(Pays him. As she puts back her purse, ROBIN
picks her pocket.)
Good morning, Sir.
Robin. Good morning, Ma’am, to you.
Kitty. It’s quite a bargain—and a lovely blue.
(Pals it round her, and Exit L.)
Robin. Ha! ha! IVe got her purse—and there she goes,
Thinking of nothing but her looks and clothes.
She’s stepped upon her scarf; and, I declare,
The silly child has left it dangling there.
She’s crossing now the bridge, and as she goes,
She turns to look at her smart furbelows.
Her scarf has caught her foot—she trips—she’s down,
All in the mud and water—scarf and gown!
She scrambles out all dripping! Anyhow,
Her vanity has had a lesson now !
(Exit R., laughing).
SCENE 111.
The Kitchen as in scene I. Dorothy discovered sweeping.
Robin Goodfellow seated on the table, cross-legged.
RoßlN(n.wfe). Now for some fun! While thus my cap I wear,
I am invisible, so I don’t care.
Dorothy. I can’t sweep any more, I ’ll dust the shelves.
Oh dear ! why can’t all kitchens clean themselves?
I’m tired to death, and how my arms are aching!
I’d like to give that Dame a thorough shaking.
To let those girls go scampering away,
And keep me here to do the work all day!
(Throws herself into a chair. Robin gets off the table.)


Robin (aside). I can't stand this, I ’ll frighten you, my dear ;
I ’ll make a wasp come buzzing in your ear.
(He goes behind Dokotiiy, and buzzes in her ear. She starts up.)
Dorothy. I hear a wasp! The horrid nasty thing,
I know it’s on my cap ! I’m sure ’twill sting.
All! there it is again. What shall Ido ?
You odious plague, I ’ll soon dispose of you !
(She flourishes a duster about whererer she hears the buzzing,
and knocks down the crockery and furniture.)
Robin (aside). That’s right, my dear! You quite fulfil my
wishes.
Don’t spare the chairs! Knock down the plates and
dishes!
But still, I can’t help hinting all the same,
There’s a good chance you 'll catch it from the dame.
{Enter Dame Durden, R.)
Dame. What’s this? The furniture all scattered round!
The dishes lying broken on the ground !
Dorothy! are you crazy ?
Dorothy (half crying). No, Ma’am, no.
But there’s a horrid wasp been bothering so ;
I don’t know how I broke the things, I’m sure.
Dame. Such carelessness no longer I ’ll endure.
But one more trial I give you, only one.
If when I next come back, your work is done,
The hearth well swept, the brushes put away,
And all this mess cleared up, you then may stay.
If not, you pack at once—l give you warning—
And leave my house first thing to-morrow morning.
(Exit R.)
Dorothy. What an old griffin ! Why, no girl alive
To do the work, unaided, could contrive.
I’m tired to death already. I 'll sit down
And think about it.
(Crosses to chair. A* she passes Robin he tears her frock.)
Oh! there goes my gown.


How did I tear it? But it’s always so.
My things all tear, my hooks and buttons “ go,”
My pins fall out, my strings all come untied ;
They wouldn’t stay, however much I tried.
(Leans on her elbow ami upsets a trorkbox .)
Had ever girl such luck as mine before ?
There’s the dame’s things all spilt upon the floor!
(Bursts out crying.)
Robin (aside). Poor thing, I ’ve plagued her well; but if
she’d take
A little pains—one effort if she’d make—
I’d help her on.
Dorothy (drying her eyes). I ’m crying—this won’t do.
Dorothy D., I’m quite ashamed of you!
To punish you for being such a dunce,
You ’ll just pick up these workbox things at once.
(While she is picking up the things, Robin puts
the furniture and plates straight, etc.)
So far, so good ; and now, I think—dear me!
I put the brushes all away I see.
And someone’s actually swept the grate!
Well, now, I’ll put the silks and cottons straight.
(Sits down to arrange the trorkbox.)
Robin (aside). Now she’s begun to be a tidy maid,
She quite deserves, I think, a little aid;
I ’ll mend that tear.
(Sits at her feet mending her gown.)
Dorothy. Which A the scissors’place ?
Oh, yes, just there—and next the needle-case.
Here’s the stiletto—oh, how sharp it feels'
That with the bodkin goes up by the reels.
Oh, by the bye, I want that needle there ;
I quite forgot to mend this horrid tear.
Where has it gone ? Some fairy or some elf
Has mended it, or else it’s joined itself !
There, the room looks quite neat and tidy now.


Why, that chair jumped up of itself, I vow!
Here comes the Dame, too. How surprised she’ll be !
(Enter Dame Dukdex, 11.)
Dame. How are you getting on ? I came to see.
My stars and garters ! Here’s a fine surprise.
The room in order ! Can I trust my eyes ?
You have been quick. Well, well; what’s past is past.
You’ve found out how to use your hands at last.
(/VilsDorotiiyon t/ie shoulder, who enrtsegs, and looks sheepish.)
SCENE IV.
(The same. The Dame discovered hutting.)
Dame. A month has passed since that most happy day
When my three handmaids, each in her own way,
A lesson learnt. There’s Margery still keeps
Her energy, but looks before she leaps.
While Kitty, neat and tidy still in dress,
Of finery already thinks much less.
In Dorothy the change is wondrous quite,
To what she was she looks so fresh and bright.
It’s odd, though, that we none of us have heard,
Since that May holiday, a single word
About the crone whom Margery met—it’s funny—
Nor of the pedlar who took Kitty's money.
(Enter Kitty, L.)
Kitty. Oh, Ma’am, as Margery and Doll and I
Were coming from the dairy here hard by,
We met a woman in a hood and cloak
Who asked where you were living. When she spoke
Margery grew so red, and looked so queer,
I can’t think what's the matter. See, they ’re here.
(Enter L., Margery and Dorothy showing in Robin Good-
fellow disguised as the old woman.)
Marg. This is the woman, Dame, who tempted me,
On that May-day; to climb into the tree.


(Robin throws off'Ms cloak am! appears as the pedlar.)
Robin. Miss Kitty, do you know me ?
Kitty. Oh, how droll!
This is the pedlar-man my purse who stole.
(Robin buzzes. Dorothy starts, anil Robin pursues her about
the stage, buzzing.')
Dorothy. Was this the wasp that frightened me that day?
Dame. Well, you seem fond of changes, any way.
Robin. Just one more change, and then you ’ll see before
( throwing off his pedlar's disguise)
The Robin Goodfellow renowned in story.
No need for me my trumpeter to be;
Shakspere has told you plenty about me.
You, Dame, must pardon me for all my fun,
When you consider how much good it’s done.
Dame. That will I, Master Robin; thanks to you.
Each one of them has learnt a lesson true.
Nor would you find, amongst all ranks and grades,
Three better girls now than my serving-maids.
(The girls and Robin dance round the Dame as the curtain
PROPERTIES.
SCENE I.— Table, chairs, tea-things, table-cloth, brooms, bread
and knife, kettle.
Scene ll.— Steps behind the tree; wreath for Kitty; stafffor
old crone; jiedlar's box and wares; purse and money.
Scene lll.— Table, chairs, workbox; crockery to break;
broom, duster.
Scene IV.— Table, chairs; knitting for the Dame.


Iphigenia
CIIAKACTEIIS.
Agamemnon ... (leader of the Expedition against Troy).
Calciias... (Chief Priest of the Temple of Diana at Aulis).
1\ icander ) (attendants on Agamemnon).
Philippes)
Ist Priest.
2nd Priest.
Clytemnestra (Agamemnon's Queen).
Iphigenia (their daughter).
[Diana.]
[Priests, People of Aulis, Hunters, etc.]
SCENE.
Aulis—partly in Agamemnon’s house, partly in the Temple of
Diana.
N.B.—This play teas originally written to he performed by
only three actors; when, this is done, Diana becomes a voice


heard outside, and the people of Anils do not appear; the
characters can he thus arranged: —
Agamemnon) , ,
_ _ [ ... ... (Isi actor, a singer ).
Ist Priest ) v J J
Calciias
Philippus ... ... (2nd actor, not a singer).
Clytemnestra
Nicander
2nd Priest , , . ,
Ipiiigenia ’ (•”'« actor, a singer).
Diana’s voice
COSTUMES.
Agamemnon. —Grecian tunic to the knee, white and gold;
scarlet toga and sandals; longhair, hound with a gold hand;
heard; gold armlets; hunting horn and spear. In the pro-
cession, a long black toga in place of the scarlet one.
Calciias. —White robe to the feet; long white train from
the shoulders; gold belt and head hand; white hair and long
white heard.
Nicander and Philippus. — Dark Grecian tunics, sandals,
short togas, Grecian caps, hunting knives.
Ist and 2nd Priest. — Rohes similar to that of Calciias,
hut not so long and flowing.
Clytemnestra.— Long maize tunic and skirt, trimmed with
Grecian pattern in purple; purple toga; jewelled hell and
crown and armlets; a maize tulle veil from the crown. In the
procession, her toga and veil are black.
Ipiiigenia. — A dress similar in shape, hut of pale green and
silver; pearl ornaments. In the procession, she is entirely in
white, with a white veil over her head.
[Diana. —Blue and silver tunic, nearly to the ankle; silver
sandals, belt, and how; a crescent on her head.)
[Hunters and Populace. —Dresses similar to Nicander’s.]


SCENE I.
Hall in Agamemnon’s palace at Aulis. [Large entrance, C.,
showing a view of country, with the Temple of Diana in
the distance.'] As the curtain rises, a hunting chorus is
heard faintly in the distance.
Air, “ Here’s to the Maiden of Blushing Fifteen.”
Here, where the forest is open and wide ;
Here, where the brambles are thicker;
Over the banks and the rivers we ride,
Quicker and quicker and quicker.
Now for a race, keep up the pace ;
Never give in till the end of the chase.
(The chorus is repeated, getting gradually louder;
pause. Dogs are heard haying, horns are
wound, etc.; then enter, C., Agamemnon,
rcith hunting spear, followed ly [HuNTEES
and] Nicandee and Philippus hearing a
dead deer between them.')
Agam. Methinks you stoop beneath your noble freight.
Phil, (going, L.). My gracious lord, it’s such a fearful
Agam. AVait!
AVe mil awhile inspect the quarry here.
O noble beast—O royal doe
Nican. (groaning). Oh, dear !
Agam. Hence, base-born slaves, O men of little ardour;
Carry your burden to the royal larder.
Bid the cook dress it in his primest style,
And not forget the currant sauce the while.
(Exeunt, L. [Huntees and] Philippus and Nicandee with
the deer.)
Agam. (advancing). How sweet, when wearied with
successful chase,
Is an arm-chair beside the fire-place.


How sweet a daughter’s love that fain would tender
The slippers that are warming in the fender!
Sweet for the outer man—while for the inner,
There loom in view some misty hints of dinner.
Then is the time the day’s mishaps to tell,
Those little anecdotes that sound so well;
Anecdotes furnished, it is right to mention,
Partly by fortune, partly by invention.
Sweet moments! I, alas ! must steel my mind
To leave all such domestic joys behind,
Must quit my home, on glory solely bent,
And with war’s canopy must be content.
Off with these fond regrets, my failing heart!
To-morrow for the Trojan shore we start.
(A distant sound of lamentation is heard.)
What mean those most mysterious sounds of woe ?
Why does my heart go pit-a-pat-ting so ?
A dark foreboding shades me with its wings;
My mind foretells—all sorts of nasty things.
('Enter , L., Nicandei: pale and trembling.)
Nican. My gracious lord—l try to speak in vain—
My gracious lord
Agau. Pray don’t say that again !
Nican. O noble chief—illustrious—brave alone,
And every other epithet that’s known,
Whose fame is spread by ev’ry penny-a-liner
From Athens to the distant Cochin-China.
O King of men!
Agasi. Go on—make haste, speak out.
Nican. Well, you have been and done it just about.
Agasi. What mean these tidings from your lips that fall
So terrible, so ungrammatical ?
Nican. You heard that cry ?
Agasi. . I did, foreboding dire !
Perhaps the venison’s tumbled in the fire.


Nican. No, no, that is not quite the little game;
But “ the fat’s in the fire ” all the same.
For in the hunt this morning, it is found,
We trespassed on Diana's sacred ground ;
And by your spear—the shock you 'll scarce survive—
Her sacred hart is dead !
Agasi. No ! Heart alive!
Nican. This is the cause of all these signs of woe,
And won’t you catch it neither, sir—oh, no !
(A prolonged wail heard. Enter Calchas, L., lamenting.)
Calchas. Let lightnings flash! Let deepest thunder
growl!
Cry, Grecians, cry ! Ye sons of Aulis, howl!
Weep, weep, with cypress leaves your brows adorning,
Clothed in the hues of night and robes of mourning.
(Turning to Agamemxox.)
Ha ! Murderer! Dost not tremble at thy crimes?
Oh, let me curse thee several dozen times.
Thine was the trespasser’s intruding heel—
The “ utmost rigour of the law ” thou ’lt feel.
Go, humbly kneel before Diana’s fane ;
Go, promise never to do so again.
In sackcloth expiate thy deed so rash;
With cinders, go lament this precious hash.
Agasi. Pooh ! ’t was an accident, a thing of fate.
A hecatomb will put the matter straight.
(To Nicaxder.) Hence to the butcher. .Make him under-
stand
He is to slaughter all his stock in hand,
And send them to the temple as appointed.
( lo Calchas.) Would you prefer the carcass whole or
jointed?
Calchas. Diana’s wrath, then, think’st thou to appease
With trumpery butcher's-offerings like these ?


Agam. Oh, if you think it won’t do any good.
Nicander, stop
Calchas. Well, yes, perhaps it would.
(Agam. nods to Nicander, who exits, It.)
The goddess, though, is angry; you should hear her.
She storms and raves—forme, I daren’t come near her
’T will be a wonder if she doesn’t send
Something unpleasant on your head, my friend.
Agam. (aside). It’s very plain to see one thing, at least—
I’d best not quarrel with this worthy priest.
(aloud) Now, my good Calchas—putting olf all joking—
This little matter really is provoking;
And as a friend whose good advice I value,
I shall get you to counsel me.
Calchas (sarcastically). Oh, shall you?
Agam. Come, come; you might so help me if you would.
Think an apology'd be any good ?
Calchas. None in the least.
Agam. Would she not pity feel ?
Not if I make the tenderest
(A clap of thunder.)
Both. A peal!
Calchas. I tremble, through my limbs there goes a shiver
Like Dian, down my back I have a quiver.
I should divine, from all these queer sensations,
The Goddess comes to make some observations.
[Diana appears in the central entrance in a large crescent
moon.]
Song, Diana— Air, “Fair, fair, with golden hair.”
List, son of Atreus! Oh, list to me,
While what is fated I mention.
How you could ever so foolish be,
Really, is past comprehension.


See! see! beneath the tree,
There was my favourite lying.
Struck, son of Atreus, oh! struck by thee,
I saw my own darling lie dying!
Anchored in Aulis thy galleys lie,
Calmed shall they be for a season—
Stricken with fever, thy men shall die.
If you should ask me the reason,
Why—see! see ! etc.
(Calchas and Agamemnon strike attitudes of
dismay as the scene closes .)
SCENE 11.
The same. Table and seats placed , C. Agamemnon and
Iphigenia are discovered at breakfast.
Song —Air, Old Men’s Chorus in “ Faust.”
Iphigenia. Won’t you take a cup of tea?
Agam. Yes, if you please.
Iphi. Which of the teas ?
Agam. Green, *my darling, and for me
No milk or sugar must there be.
Iphi. Horrid idea!
And it I fear
Terribly bitter must indubitably be.
Both. But on the whole, we both agree,
Nothing is better than a cup of tea.
Iphi. Won’t you have some toast, papa?
Agam. Buttered, I see,
Gloriously!
Iphi. Mind you leave some for mama.
What a greedy old thing you are


Agam. Ma’s late to-day,
But I daresay
We shall not miss her very very terribly.
Both. And on the whole, etc.
(At the end of the song Agamemnon falls into a
melancholy attitude.')
Inn. Now, pa, look up for goodness sake. I hope
You don’t intend for ever thus to mope.
Come, read the paper; it will cure your blues.
See, here’s the “Illustrated Athens News.”
(Gives him the paper.)
Agam. Behold! the heading that my eyes first meet
“ Fever at Aulis in the royal fleet.”
Cheering! I turn the page ;on this I light—
“ Peculiar fall of wind on Friday night.”
Well, as a last resource, I look up here—
A leading article about that deer!
You see it’s useless; let the thing alone;
It’s clear I’m marked for Melancholy’s own.
(Retires to the hack', as Clytemnestka enters, R.)
Clyt. What, breakfast done! All cold, of course, my
share of it.
Of course it is! I might have been aware of it.
Of my vexations this is but another.
But still you might have waited for your mother.
Such treatment, though, I daily now expect,
I’m used to every species of neglect!
Ipni. Mama
Clyt. O yes; you ’re going to say I ’m late;
That’s right, complain, insult, prevaricate.
No one can guess the trials I endure,
The treadmill’s quite a joke to them I’m sure ;
And, now, to make my many worries worse,
Your pa must needs incur Diana’s curse,


And into general hot water get,
While my arrangements are, of course, upset.
Iphi. I’m sure there’s not a plan he hasn’t tried
To make up for it
Clyt. That’s right, take his side.
Iphi. The quantities of beasts—but I’m afraid
To say how many offerings he’s made.
Clyt. And what will be the end? He ’ll go, he will,
And leave his wretched spouse to pay the bill.
([seeing Agamkmn'OX)
Oh, there he is; you’d better run along,
I may be coming out a little strong.
(Exit Iphic.enia, II.)
Agam. (aside). A storm is brewing; yes, my mind foresees
If the ■wind iconH rise there will be a breeze.
Clyt. (at hrcalfast). I wonder, sir, you aren’t ashamed to
face
Your injured spouse, when you Te in such disgrace.
After behaving like the worst of gooses
Agam. Dear
Clyt. Don’t reiterate absurd excuses.
Everyone knows if you’d not been demented
This pretty business might have been prevented.
Agam. But, darling
Clyt. Hold your tongue and hand that knife.
Trespassing, too; and at your time of life!
Agam. There was no notice up. Besides, my dear,
Why do you mind so much ?
Clyt. You Te thick, that ’s clear.
Why a Brcotiau could not fail to see
Your room is better than your company.
Besides, this fever puts me in a fright!
Why, I might catch it
Agam. (hopefully). Goodness! so you might!


Clyt. My eye is on you, sir. Aha! you shun it.
You brute! You hope I shall (rushes at Min').
Agasi, (escaping, pursued hy Clytemnestra). IVe been and
done it!
(Exeunt, It.)
SCENE 111.
Ihe Interior of the Temple of Diana. An altar, C. Two
hanging lamps shaped like crescents. Enter, R., 2nd Priest
with a broom.
2nd Priest. Ugh! What a mess! The door-mat folks
won’t use.
Why can't the people svipe their votive shoes
When scrapers are provided ? Goths and Vandals!
They might have had the grace to scrape their
sandals.
It ain’t the trouble ; no, it’s the disgrace.
I must look out for a more easy place.
Few situations are so hard as mine,
A priest-of-all-work at a pop’lar shrine.
No perquisites, unless a fellow picks
The droppings from the festive candlesticks.
The wages, too, is miserably small;
No “ Sunday out,” and nothing found at all.
We priests are always grumbling—for myself, I
Have half a mind to try my luck at Delphi.
(Enter, It., Ist Priest with a basket of evergreens
and flowers.)
Oh, here you are at last! It’s just like you ;
You always leave me all the work to do.
Ist Priest. Well, don’t you talk, or think you ’re injured,
pray!
Who took the temple shutters down to-day?
Who lighted the hot-water apparatus?


2nd Priest. Oh, you, of course. There, there, don’t aggra-
vate us.
Ist Priest. Who cleaned the lamps, and scoured the altar
arter?
2nd Priest. Oh, you—you —you—of course you ’re quite a
martyr.
Ist Priest Quite so ; so, if you’ve done your accusations,
Suppose you help me with these decorations.
(They hang up festoons at the hack.)
2nd Priest. Where did these flowers come from d ’you
suppose ?
Ist Priest. Some nursery gardener that Calchas knows.
He’s to supply the flowers, they agree,
And gets his tickets to the festas free.
But here comes Calchas; light the altar, pray;
I ’ll snuff the lights, and put the brooms away.
(They light the altar, put au-ay hrooms, basket, etc.,
and get into position. It. and L., as enter, L.,
Calchas [followed hy a train of Priests, who
form a semicircle while'] he mounts the step, C.)
Full chorus —Air, “ The Humming Bird Valse.”
Diana, Diana, Diana, our queen,
■Whose car is so silvery, shining and silvery,
Mark thou—oh! mark where thy vot’ries are seen.
Pour down thy silvery, silvery sheen.
Cheer us—cheer us—cheers us—we pray!
Near us—near us—near us—oh stay!
Hear us—hear us—hear us—to-day.
(repeat) Diana, Diana, etc.
(Grand sacerdotal Pas Mysterieux; at the conclusion
the music changes to a distant march.)
Calchas. What sounds are these ?
Ist Priest. , . My lord, it is the King.
He comes to make his daily offering.


Calciias. Hence, hence to meet him ; light up all the
porches.
Let all the priests and menials hear torches.
Mind that the royal train—as sure as fate—
Leave their umbrellas at the outer gate ;
For if they don’t—l know their nasty tricks—
They ’ll poke the place to atoms with their sticks.
(Exit Ist Priest, L. [followed by attendant priest].')
( To 2nd Priest). Xowtellme truly—just to ease my mind,
Are you quite certain I’m all right behind.
2nd Priest (examining his dress). Quite right, I think.
Calciias. That’s well—for there’s no knowing.
And are my draperies all nice and flowing?
And are you sure my chaplet is quite straight?
Fetch me a mirror ; I must titivate.
(2nd Priest gives him a hand-glass, and exit, L.)
(Looking at himself.) Well, without doubt, much beauty
there may be
E ’en in an ancient physiognomy.
In a white beard there’s something wise and sage—
Not that I look by any means my age.
My hair’s no longer black ; but one can say
That grief has turned it prematurely grey.
And as for wrinkles, why, beyond a doubt,
If care begets them—care can get them out.
(Powdering his forehead; looks at himself again.)
Xow that a very good “get up” I call,
Dignified, sage, but not too old at all.
(March repeated louder; trumjwts.)
Aoam. (heard outside). Remain below, mute and attentive
be!
Nicander—you alone will follow me.
{Enter, L., Aoamemxox.)
Calciias. Hail, king! Hail, noble chief!


Agasi. Tray cease this fuss ;
I don’t want hailing like an omnibus.
I wish you’d drop this complimentary manner,
And say a good word for me to Diana.
Calciias. What can Ido ? This language somewhat odd
is.
Agam. Peace! For the last time I have sought your
goddess,
To know how I may put this matter straight
Brought on me by the fickle hand of Fate.
Calciias. For shame ! Perhaps, so far from being fickle,
Fate, to preserve you, put you in this pickle.
(Enter Nicander, L., with a haslet offruit.)
Agam. Here are my offerings. Some pears.
Calciias. Delicious!
Agam. And hot-house grapes.
Calciias. Come, things look more propitious.
Agam. That’s the remark you ’ve made each time, you
I think its pitious without the pro.
No more I ’ll offer—this shall be the last.
Not all my presents will wash out the past.
(Calciias puts the offerings on the altar as
Agamemnon advances.)
Song, Agamemnon —Air, “ Forest Flower Yalse.”
Oh, forbear ; and have mercy, I pray.
Is it fair to behave in this way?
You know well it was an accident too;
And sparing and forgiving are always the things to
So do, if you please—send us a breeze.
It is irritating—to be kept waiting.


So disclose us a plan,
That somehow we can
Get rid of this ban
Aggravating.
Oh, forbear, etc. (repeat).
(The symphony ends with loud thunder.)
Calchas. Diana is angry, you will not escape her.
List to the thunder’s roll
(.4 scroll drops on the altar.)
All. A roll of paper!
Agasi. Calchas, svhat meansthis? Do you understand?
Calchas (picking up the scroll). I know the writing, ’tis
Diana’s hand.
My fingers shake ; my limbs refuse their functions.
List while I read you the divine injunctions.
(Beads) “ If Agamemnon wish to free
“ His fleet from inactivity,
“ There is a way which, he will find,
“ Without delay will raise the wind ;
“ And he shall lead his soldiers hence,
“And free them from the pestilence,
“ And svin his svay across the svater—
“lf he icill sacrifice his daughter!
(Loud chord. AU fall into attitudes of horror as
the scene closes.)
SCENE IV.
The same. Slow march heard softly; gradually getting louder.
Enter a procession, L.* [Priests strewing flowers, then ]
Calchas hearing the knife; more Priests with torches.
As they pass through they sing.
N.B.—When acted by three performers, Calchas and the two
priests pass through first, and, while singing the chorus outside,
change to the costumes of Agamemnon, Iphigenia, and Clytem-
NESTRA, entering L. when the chorus is over.


Song —Air, “ Trobadour enchanting.”
Sadly we are chanting—chanting words of wailing;
But ’tis unavailing—she must die to-day.
Hard appears the dread decree ; but we must obey.
What is fated so must be—she must die to-day.
Sadly we are chanting, etc. (repeated).
(As the Priests go out, enter [maidens in white.
followed hy\ Iphigenia reiled; then
Agamemnon, Clytemnestp.a [and attendants ]
all in mourning.)
Song, Iphigenia. —Air, “ Annie Lisle.”
Here where the ancient buildings—o’er us nobly rise.
Here where the temple gildings—shine against the
Here let me pause a minute—gaze around the fane.
Mark every stone within it—l shall ne’er again.
Grey pillars! Massive, solemn! Known and loved so
Every arch, and every column—hear my last farewell.
Some —like dreamy Naiads—love the emerald wave.
Some—like the sportive Dryads—seek the shady cave.
Here I should love to wander—neaththe arch of stone,
In the corridors to ponder—pensive and alone.
Grey pillars, etc. (repeat).
('1 he procession moves on, and the first part of the
Priests' chorus is heard faintly in the distance
as they go out.)
SCENE. V.
Agamemnon’s Palace as in Scene I. Curtains are drawn
across the central entrance.
(Enter Philippus and Nicander,#.)
Nican. Well, well, Philippus, I must say, you know,
That this is an unmitigated go.


Phil. The poor princess, for Agamemnon's sake,
Must bear the consequence of his mistake.
How did she take the tidings, poor young soul ?
Nican. Supreme ! She seemed to like it on the whole.
When she was told it, never thought of crying;
Nor e’en changed colour when they talked of dying.
She is a stunner!
Phil. Yes, that’s very clear;
The fleet’s release will cost her father dear.
Nican. Well, I don’t see it’s him that pays the price ;
Besides, she’s going at a sacrifice.
Phil, (looking off, L.). Ilulloa ! What’s this ? I see the
funeral train,
With dance and laughter, coming back again!
Nican. The King and Queen in a triumphal car
Are carried—yes, upon my life they are !
Phil. Is this the way parental grief they show ?
Oh ! I shall have delirium, 1 know.
(Loud cheers heard off Z.)
Nican. They Te shouting now—who late so loud lamented..
Phil. Let’s come and see—they must have gone de-
mented.
( Exeunt , L. More cheers; the population ot
Anlisis heard singing icithout.)
Air, “Feast of Lanterns.”
Glory to Diana—Great Diana!
Glory to the Queen and Huntress be ;
For bringing out the matter in a manner,
So uncommon satisfactory. '
Honour to the queen—the wind is rising ;
Soon about the galleys unto Troy to bring..
In a manner, really most surprising,
All the stricken soldiers are recovering.


Air from “ Martha.”
Sing, then; sing, Auleans,
Sing with voices loud and light,
liaise, raise, your joyful paeans,
Men of Aulis—all is right.
{Enter, L., Agamemnon, Clytemnestea [iatten-
dants and populace]. Loud cheers from the
populace outside. Agamemnon waves his hand
and mounts upon a chair ; all are silent; he
turns impressively to the crowd, Li)
Agaji. My friends, ’t were wrong upon this great occasion
To let it pass without a small oration.
’T is hard to tell the joy that’s in me rising,
To find you all so very sympathising.
If there was one thing, friends, that could bestow
One bit o’ comfort in my bitter woe,
It was to feel you pitied her—the votive,
And also could appreciate my motive.
It touched me—there were crowds to sympathies.
’T was not your number, though; it was your sighs.
The knife was raised—then feel my daughter could,
As she stood under, she was understood ;
And when the goddess flashed before our eyes,
And stayed the knife—what cheerings rent the
And when she took her in the chariot, then,
“ Oh, what a squall was there, my countrymen! ”
A shout of sympathy, kind people, which
Filled up my swelling heart to bursting pitch.
A shout we shall remember to a green
Old age—we shall—l speak for self and queen.
{Loud cheers. Agamemnon lows, Clytemnestea
turns to the crowd.)


Clyt. The King, though very well in some respects,
The duty of a host somewhat neglects.
You must be thirsty, and would like (with cause)
Some cider, after making such appl—ause.
louder cheers .)
And in the servants’ hall—a cool retreat—
’T is meet we meet, and there mete out some meat.
Since Dian has our sails, as I may say,
Ke-breezed, why not re-gale ourselves, I pray ?
My daughter’s gone—fain would my mother’s heart
Have seen her once again before we part;
And packed her things, and words of parting said.
But since she’s gone, let’s drink her health instead.
('Tremulous music. The curtains at back, C., open.
discovering Ipiiigenia standing on a large
silver crescent, supported by clouds.)
Ipm. Papa—Mama—l’ve come to say good-bye,
Ere to the Tauric Chersonese I fly.
There at Diana’s temple I shall stay,
And there, I hope, you ’ll look me up some day.
Say you forgive me, Ma, before I go.
I’ve been a shocking little bore, I know.
I’m sure I used to wear you to the bone,
With dirty frocks and pinafores alone ;
Nor properly appreciated, p’raps,
The efficacy of maternal slaps.
Clyt. Iphi, my dear, when young, there’s no denying,
You used to try yourself to render trying ;
And you succeeded ! Oh, no mortal knows
The work it was to get you in your clothes!
The wonder is you didn’t drive me wild;
But, as you didn’t, I forgive you, child.
Iphi. Generous Ma! Nor less, Papa, to you,
My filial apologies are due.


How very oft my little fist, that ought
To smooth your locks, has pulled them out in sport.
How oft, when in your chair you chanced to doze,
With burnt cork have I blacked that honoured nose.
Agasi. Affecting memories before me rise;
I rather liked it, dear, than otherwise.
Iphi. Then now to you Papa— Mama, to you—
To all around, in fact—l say adieu.
Finale —Air from “Martha.”
Iphi. (as her crescent slowly moves off'). So good-bye;
I’m going—going—going—see !
Where I shall live
So very very happilee.
I shall come
Papa, Mama, to visit you.
So, now, I wish you all a fond adieu.
Agasi. So good-bye,
She’s going—going—going—see,
Where she ’ll live
So very happilee.
She svill come,
Mama, to visit me and you ;
So now I wish you, dear, a fond adieu.
(Repeat ensemble. All wave their hands as the
curtain Jails.)


PROPERTIES.
Scene I. —Horns (heard outside). Hunting spear. Carcase of
deer. Thunder. [Crescent for Diana.']
Scene ll —Classical table and seats. Tea-things half classical
and half modern. Newspaper.
Scene ITT. —Altar (with spirits to light). Lamps. Broom.
Basket, with festoons offlowers. Taper tolight the altar.
Hand-glass. Trumpet (outside). Basket of fruit.
Thunder. Scroll.
Scene IV. —Baskets of flowers to strew. Sacrificial knife.
Torches.
Scene. V. — Table. Seats. Crescent for Iphigenia.


THE MAGIC RUBY;
THE THREE WISHES.
CHARACTERS.
Rustipha Grabdallah (a rich old Turk).
Hassan (a young camel-driver).
Balsora (a fruit girl).
Zobeide ... ... (Rustipha?s sister, an old maid).
The Genius of the Ruby.
Two customers [guests, etc.)
The scene is laid in Constantinople.
COSTUMES.
Rustipha. —Crimson tunic, trimmed with gold; black and
gold sash; black full trousers, trimmed with gold; crimson and
gold turban; grey hair and beard; crimson slippers.
Hassan. — White tunic trimmed with scarlet; oriental sash
of pah and dark blue stripes; pale bluefull trousers; scarlet and
white turban; scarht slippers.
Balsora. — (lsi dress) —Pah green cotton tunic, and full
trousers, trimmed with dark green; dark green sash; small
turban of the same material as the tunic; dark green slippers.
(2nd dress) —White satin tunic trimmed with silver; pink full
trousers with silver; pink and silver turban; pink slippers ; pearl
ornaments; a long lace veil, starting from the turban, looped on
the shoulders, and trailing on the ground; a feather fan.
Zobeide. — Small zouave jacket, and full irotisers of black
velvet and gold; dark blue short skirt with gold; white under-
shirt; turban of black velvet and blue; white hair; grid bracelets
and necklace. ■ . •


Genius of the Ruby.— White dress, trimmed with silver and
red tinsel rubies; a silver wand with a large ruby at the end.
Customers. —Long blade cloak's, covering them from the
shoulders to the feet; on the head white linen coverings, such as
Turkish women wear in the streets, with face coverings only
showing the eyes.
[Guests. —Costumes similar to Rustipha's and Balsora's,
2nd dress of various colours,']
SCENE I.
Balsora’s fruit shop. At back a large window. A stand, R.
covered with Jruit, behind which is an ottoman. Boor, L.
Balsora is discovered sitting cross-legged on the ottoman, serving
two customers.*
Song —Air, “ The young May Moon.”
Bals. These figs you ’ll find delicious quite,
And if you doubt me, pray take a bite ;
For then I’m sure you ’ll readily—readily—
Readily own that the price is slight.
All (repeat). And then I’m sure |y o u| ’U readily, etc.
Bals. Those melons are extremely nice;
And if you doubt me pray take a slice.
For then I’m sure you’ll willingly—willingly—
Willingly pay me so small a price.
All (repeat). For then, etc.
Bals. This change I think, Ma’am, is your due,
Pray write down where I shall send them to.
Good morning, Ma’am, I’m really and truly,
I’m really and truly obliged to you.
(j During the song the customers have chosen and paid
for their purchases. Exeunt customers, L.;as
they go out Hassan peeps in at the window.
Hass. Well, my gazelle ? (comes in by window.)
* The two customers can be played by the actors who take the parts
of Kustipiia and Zobeide, whose costumes would be entirely hidden.


Bals. (starting). Oh ! How you made me jump!
List how my heart is going thump-a-thump.
Nextitime, young man, you come to see your charmer—
Your dear gazelle—please don’t so much alarm her.
Hass. You can’t be cross with me, I know, my own.
(chucking her under the chin.)
Bals. Good gracious, Hassan—let my chin alone!
Your manners are too free for one so young.
Besides, rude thing, you made me bite my tongue.
Hass. How don’t begin to scold ; I can’t endure it.
If your tongue hurts, p’r’aps holding it would cure it.
Let’s change the subject. When shall we bo married?
Bals. Oh, we must wait.
Hass. But think how long we’ve tarried.
We were engaged a year ago, or more ;
And’t was no waiter’s place I bargained for.
Bals. That’s true •, an answer though you can’t expect,
Till you’ve proposed in manner more correct.
Begin again.
Hass. What, something in this style ?
(poetically) O peerless nymph! Wouldst thou but
grant one smile,
Thy trembling slave might dare the wish to frame,
Of Hymen’s fetters coupled with thy name !
Bals. Too flowery—out of date.
Hass. ’ Tis true indeed.
(prosaically) Madam, the businesslike alone succeed.
I therefore own I’m chiefly interested
To know what wealth you have—and how invested ;
If rich, your partner I should wish to be ;
If not, I ’ll try elsewhere. R.S.Y.P.
How does that do ?
Bals. Oh, quite the proper style.
But we’re too poor to marry yet awhile ;
I’m still in debt; my shop is far from thriving.
Hass. It’s ditto ditto with-my camel-driving.


Bals. Rustipha for my rent is always pressing,
And says he ’ll seize my goods, which is distressing.
Hass. We might each ply our trades, and catch more buyers,
Working together—like a pair of pliers.
Bals. But we should have to save so much, that we
More like a pair of pinchers far should be.
Oh, if I was but very rich! My eye!
What lovely silks and satins I would buy ;
What lace—what gems! No longer poor and needy,
I'd soon cut out that stuck-up Miss Zobeide.
(crosses the stage, and strikes her foot against a
ruhy lying on the floor.)
What’s this?
Hass. ( taking it). Hulloa!
Bals. ( snatching it hack). Now, let the thing alone.
Why, by the prophet, it’s a precious stone!
A ruby set in gold—see how it shines!
Hass. Engraved with strange mysterious-looking signs.
Bals. Perhaps they’re words.
Hass. Well, read them if you can.
Bals. No, no, I have it; it’s a talisman.
Let’s rub it hard, and see what it will bring.
Hass. One—two —three—rub it.
(Balsora nibs the ruhy. The Genius at once
appears.)
Gen. Please, ma’am, did you ring?
Bals. Where did you come from ?
Hass. Who on earth may you be ?
Gen. I am the Genius of the Magic Ruby.
To grant you wishes three I have the power ;
So choose the first.
Bals. Oh, give me half-an-hour;
I can’t decide so quickly.
Gen. As you like.
I will appear again when noon shall strike.
(lie Genius disappears.)


Hass. I must be off; too long e’en now I’ve tarried.
What shall you wish ?
Bals. That we may soon be married.
Song —Air, “ Johnny comes marching home.”
Bals. Oh, merrily let us dance for glee.
Both. Hurrah, hurrah!
Hass. For very soon we shall wedded be.
Both. Hurrah, hurrah!
Bals. I ’ll have six bridesmaids, I declare,
With wreaths of roses in their hair.
Oh, indeed, we
Shall be
A thoroughly happy pair.
Both (repeat). Oh, indeed, etc.
Hass. We soon shall be as rich as Jews.
Both. Hurrah! Hurrah!
Bals. And then ourselves we can amuse.
Both. Hurrah! Hurrah!
Hass. We ’ll have a carriage, I declare,
In which we ’ll go to take the air.
Oh, indeed, we
Shall be
A thoroughly happy pair.
Both. Oh, indeed, etc.
(They lance. In the middle knocking i.i heard, L,
Hassan jumps out of xcindmc, kissing his
hand, while Rustipha and Zobeide enter, L.)
Rust. Well, what a precious time you Ve kept us waiting;
Zob. I must confess it’s rather aggravating.
Standing with such a sun upon one’s head,
I’m sure I wonder that we ’re not struck dead.
Rust. Such treatment, too, does not befit our station.
Zob, But, there, poor thing! she’s had no education,
Bals. (pointing to ottoman). Pray, take a seat.


Zob. ( inspecting it with eye-glass). D’ you think I ever sat,
My good young woman, on a thing like that ?
My seats are Persian rugs of brightest hue.
Bals. That’s very well, for persons such as you;
But I’m so poor
Bust. Yes, yes; and, by the way,
It was about your rent I came to-day.
Bals. Grant me some time.
Bust. No, no; at once you pay.
All rents, you know, grow bigger by delay.
Bals. The melons this year are so far from big,
And for my pears folks do not care a fig;
Even my currants, though they are so nice,
Will not bring in this year the current price,
While on my grapes, although I have so many,
I find I am not raisin’ e’en a penny.
Bust. Well, it’s not my fault if your garden fails.
Zob. Pray, spare us these extremely low details.
In the high circles which I grace, you know,
These sordid scenes are not quite comme-il-faut.
Bals. Only a week I ask.
Bust. No, not a day!
You go to gaol to-night, unless you pay.
Bals. Oh, if I was but very rich indeed,
From all this trouble I should then be freed.
(a clock outside begins to strike twelve.)
If only I could have a stroke of luck.
(at the last stroke the Genius appears, and at the
same time Hassan is seen at the window.)
Gen. What is your wish, ma’am? Twelve o’clock has struck.
Hass, (aside). Will she remember? Will she faithful be ?
Bals. (aside). Now, shall I ask for riches? Let me see.
It’s not exactly what to him I said;
But when I’m rich, of course, we can be wed.
To lose this splendid chance would be a pity.
(aloud) I ’ll be the richest lady in the city.


Hass, (aside). Forgotten! Never will I wed an heiress!
Gen. To-morrow you shall wake a millionairess.
Song —Air, “ Liliburlero.”
Bals. I shall have sums of money untold,
Bolling all day in silver and gold.
Hass. And at poor me, in seedy old clothes,
She will turn up her beautiful nose.
Zob. Now that she is so rich and so grand,
You, brother dear, must be asking her hand.
Bust. Well, about that in time w r e will see ;
She may refuse to listen to me.
All. She will ride about like a queen,
Carried about in her own palankeen;
Servants and slaves will go riding before,
Lackeys will follow behind by the score.
SCENE 11.
The gardens of BalsOUa's Palace by night. Illuminated
for a party. Small tables, with refreshments and seats,
stand about.*
Music. Enter R., Balsoka, richly dressed [and guests).
Song —Air, The 3rd Figure of the Lancers.
Bals. Merrily, merrily, sounds the band;
Many a—many a guest’s at hand.
{Enter Kustipiia, L.)
Oh, Mr. Bustipha, how do you do-ooo?
(Note prolonged while they bow and curtsey.)
I’m really delighted to welcome you.
Haven’t we got an enchanting night ?
Bust. Everything looks so extremely bright.
Bals. Won’t you accept of a cup of tea? (going to table.)
Bust. Half a cup only, I beg, for me.
(He takes a cup and passes on.)
• There is no reason why this scene should not be done aa an
interior if preferred. ,


Bals. Merrily, merrily, sounds the band;
Many a—many a guest’s at hand.
(Enter Zobeide, L.)
Oh, Mrs. Zobeide, how do you do-ooo? (how.)
I’m really delighted to welcome you.
Haven’t you had a tremendous drive ?
Zob. Only four miles, though we call it five.
Rost. Very bad road, though, I grieve to say.
Bals. Do have some tea, ma’am, and don’t say nay.
(Zobeide tales a cup and passes on.)
Bals. Merrily, merrily, sounds the band;
Many a—many a guest’s at hand.
(Enter Hassan, L.)
Oh, Mr. Hassan, and how do you do-ooo? (how.)
I’m really delighted to welcome you.
Hass. I am afraid that I’m rather late.
Zob. Isn’t this really a splendid fete ?
Rust. Nothing so grand did I ever see!
Bals. Dear Sir. Hassan, a cup of tea?
(A dance with tea-cups; drinking and hawing.
After the dance Hassan strolls off, L., and
Balsora, R. Rdstipha and Zobeide ad-
vance.)
Rust. Well, this is gorgeous!
Zob. Hum ! Sad want of taste!
And badly managed. There ’ll be frightful waste.
Balsora too—so vulgarly bedecked!
But there—poor creature, what can one expect ?
Rust. Hush! Not so loud ;’t were foolish to offend her.
Some of your taste, dear, you might surely lend her.
Now she’s so wealthy, she is quite a catch;
And she and I should make a first-rate match.
Zob. Oh, yes; but it’s a pity, I must say,
That she’s got such a low-bred, vulgar way.
Look at the way she grasps her cup of tea;
Compare her for a moment, dear, with me.


Look at the way she walks! You can’t contend,
It’s equal to your sister’s graceful bend.
Rust. As long as she’s got money, I don’t care
About accomplishments and style and air.
For all I care, her notes she need not know,
If of bank-notes she has a goodly show.
Drawing and painting, and all that, is stuff;
If she can draw a cheque, that’s quite enough.
Zob. Well, come and look at the illumination,
And find a chance to make your declaration.
{Exeunt L., Zobeide and Rustipha. Enter, R.,
Balsora, looking very melancholy.')
Bals. Oh, dear! I’m feeling very much dejected;
I don’t find wealth at all what I expected.
I’m wretched in these tiresome gorgeous clothes,
And keep on catching this (kicking her train) about
my toes.
Though Rustipha his law suit now can’t bring.
His own suit he keeps pressing—nasty thing!
While Hassan has become so odd and shy,
He never speaks to me—Oh, I could cry!
(Enter Hassan, L., nervous and embarrassed;
he advances to shake hands.)
Bals. Going already ! Why we’ve scarce begun.
I quite agree though that it’s not much fun.
Hass. I fear—l think—that is—l mean to say,
In such a scene I’m only in the way.
Bals. I fear you find the party dull and poor.
Hass. Oh, no—quite—quite—the opposite, I’m sure.
I ought—must thank you—fun and merriment—
(dismally) Most charming evening—really—ever spent.
Bals. Do have some supper, pray, before you go.
Hass. Oh, thank you—but I fear—no thank you—no.
Bals. You’ve got a long walk
Hass. Not so very far,
Bals. Well, good—good-night.


Hass. Good-night.
Bals. (sighing heavily'). Ileigho !
Hass. ( do ). Ah—ha!
{Exit Balsora, R.)
I can stand this no more—l ’ll go and dwell
A lonely hermit in some desert cell,
Where dirges I can sing in mournful tune,
And pour my sorrows to the wild simoon.
Since I have lost that maid, than all maids fairer,
I ’ll hide my sorrows in the great Sahara.
(Enter Zobeide, hurriedly, L.)
Zob. Oh, have you heard the news? I am so happy !
There’s a delightful marriage on the tapis—
But I must tell you who, without more chatter.
My brother and Balsora What’s the matter ?
Hass, (aside). Then this decides it; my last hope I lose.
(aloud). Oh, what a—most delightful piece of news.
If Miss Balsora shotdd ask, by the way,
Where I am gone to, would you kindly say
That to the desert I have just departed ;
There to reside a hermit, broken-hearted.
Zob. I ’ll give your message, certainly—but see
Balsora comes herself. (Exit Hassan hastily, L.) He ’f
gone ! Dear me! (Exit, L.)
(Enter R., Balsora, followed by Kustipha.)
Bals. Oh, Rustipha, do leave me, pray, in peace ;
Or I must really call for the police (going).
Bust. Stay, stay, fair nymph.
Bals. No chaff ! I ’ll not be caught.
“ Fair nymph,” indeed! I’m nothing of the sort.
I know from what your compliments arise.
It’s just because my fortune’s such a size.
Although you praise the colour of my hair,
’Tis for the colour of my gold you care.
Rust. You wrong me, fairest! Would you had not any!
Or but the modest income of a penny!


What I’d admire, e’en if your state were worse,
Is your fair person, madam; not your purse.
Bals. (aside). How to get rid of him V I know the way;
My answer for a time I must delay.
(aloud) Your offer was so unexpected, sir,
AVith my relations I must first confer.
I ’ll answer you to-morrow morn at ten.
Bust. AVell, I shall be on tenter-hooks till then.
(He retires to the hack. Balsora adrances.)
Bals. Riches are quite detestable, that’s plain.
Oh, how I wish that I was poor again!
Rustipha then his offer would withdraw-,
And Hassan, p’r aps, be natural once more.
Free from the bother that this fortune brings,
I shouldn’t have to wear these horrid things!
{Enter Zobeide, L.)
Zob. Oh, here you are at last; I thought I saw you.
I’ve got a message, dear Balsora, for you.
Hassan requested me, my love, to say
That to the desert he has run away,
To be a—what-d’ye-call-it, he declares—
Hermit, you know; or one of those affairs.
He has left no address, I think, behind him.
“ Post Office, Great Sahara,” p’r’aps would find him.
Bals. I ’ve driven him to this, I ’m much afraid.
Oh, I must call the Genius to my aid.
(She ruhs the talisman. The Genius appears.)
Gen. The summons of the ruby I obey.
AVhat is your second wish, Balsora, say?
Rust. I ’d ask as much more gold as I could get.
Zob. AVhat you most want’s a book on etiquette.
Gen. If on more dainty dishes you would live,
If even larger parties you would give,
If you’d have still more suitors to your hand,
And Hassan drive to a more distant land ;


If you’d have greater trouble every way,
Then ask for further riches.
Bals. Spare me, pray !
My wish is this: Take everything IVe got;
Restore me to my trade and humble lot.
Zob. What! become poor? Just as she was before!
Rost. And I Ve proposed to marry her—oh, lor!
Song —-Air, “ The Woodpecker.”
Bals. Oh, how glad I shall be
To be poor once again,
And at last to be free
From this horrible train!
I’d give up in a trice
All my jewels and gold,
To see Hassan as nice
As he was of old.
All (repeat). Oh, how glad she will be, etc.
SCENE 111.
(Balsora’s shop as in Scene I. Curtains are drawn across
the window. Balsora, dressed as in Scene /., is dis-
covered asleep on the ottoman. Soft music.)
Bals. (waking). Hassan! I thought that Hassan had come
back.
I fear’t was but a dream. Alack! alack!
I ne’er shall see my lover true again,
But an old maid henceforward shall remain.
Oh, will my troubles ever, ever end ?
I will take counsel with my fairy friend.
(She ruhs the ruby. The Genius appears).
Gen. AVhat is your will?
Bals. O you in magic skilled,
Tell me, where is my Hassan ? Is he killed?
Or is he dwelling in some foreign nation,
Forgetting me ’midst rounds of dissipation?


Gen. Across the desert he is wandering yet,
Trying in vain your image to forget.
Across the sand he goes, with weary tread;
His food has failed—his water is all sped ;
But as he sinks exhausted on the plain,
Your name he murmurs o’er and o’er again.
Bals. Oh, horrible! It’s my fault if he dies.
Gen. I ’ll show a vision of him as he lies.
So ( waving her wand ) by the magic of the rosy rays,
And by the mystery of the ruby’s blaze,
I summon up before your very eyes
A vision of your lover, as he lies.
(Soft music. The curtains draw aside, showing a
vision jramed in the window of llassan lying
beneath a palm-tree in the desert, half-dead ;
an empty water-gourd and a pilgrim's staff lie
beside him. There is a red sunset glow over
the picture. The curtains dose.}
Bals. Oh, Genius ! I must save him. Can’t Igo ?
Gen. Soft, soft; you have your third wish yet, you know.
Bals. Oh, so I have ! My wish is very clear.
That llassan was all safe before me here ;
Gen. Then, so it shall be. llassan, quick, appear!
(Soft music. llassan springs in from the win-
dow-curtains .)
Good-bye, young folks, my mission now is done ;
Besides—Two’s company and three is none.
(Ihe Genius disappears.)
Hass. How like old times to find you in this dress !
Bals. How nice to meet thus, after our distress!
I’ve been so wretched
Hass. So have I, dear me !
Bals. But now we Te both as jolly
Hass. As can be!
My days upon the desert did not charm me ;


Even beneath the palms they weren’t too palmy.
The only food I had was dates
Bals. Oh my!
At school I always thought the dates so dry.
(Knocking heard at the door.)
Hass. Why, who ’s that knocking ?
Bals. Rustipha, I s’pose ;
I) ’you know he’s had the folly to propose!
Now that I’m poor, he won’t know what to do.
Suppose you hide, and watch our interview.
(llassan hides behind the fruit stall. Enter
Rustipha, L.)
Rust. Good morning, Missßalsora—l’m afraid
You find it dull, returning thus to trade.
Bals. Oh, not at all—l like it—so I tell you.
What article to-day, sir, may J sell you ?
Rust. Nothing to-day. {aside) Now I’m perplexed com-
pletely ;
How can I get out of my offer neatly ?
Bals. These melons are the best—though these are bigger,
Or try a fig
Rust, (aside) I shall cut such a figure!
And I’m afraid that she’s so free of speech.
She ’ll tell the secret and be sure to
Bals. , Peach ?
(Rustipha coughs nervously, and clears his throat.)
Rust. D’ you think two people who do not much care
For one another, make a happy
Bals. Pear ?
Well that depends. I think you know they might,
If both, sir, are disinterested quite.
Rust. Hem ! Don’t you think that when a wife you take,
Disparity in age is a mistake ?
(aside) I wish that Zobeide would come; I know
She would have managed this an hour ago.
Bals. I scarcely know.


Rust. I’d better, then, be short.
I must break off the match; I feel I ought.
Bals. You jilt me then—am I to understand?
Hass, (springing out). This is an insult that I cannot stand.
Come, you must fight.
Bals. Oh, Hassan, prithee cease,
Hass. You run away.
Bals. I ’ll call in the police.
(She runs out, L., they fght to music; at the end
Rustipiia falls. Enter, L., Balsora and
ZOBEIDE hastily.)
Bals. Oh, which is killed ?
Zob. (fainting). My brother! Catch me, do!
Bals. Hold up, ma’am, pray— l can’t attend to you.
(Hassan and Balsora talk at hack.)
Zob. Poor brother! Well, I warned him long ago;
But he would mix with folks so very low;
And this is the result—l hope that ho
Has made his will, and left his gold to me.
But there’s no doubt, I fancy, on that head.
Rust, (sitting tip). The only doubt is whether I’m quite
My wound, dear sister, was not mortal quite,
Although it put me in a mortal fright.
Zob. What! You ’re alive? Well, that is nice.
Rust, (coldly) For me.
(Music. The Genius appears.)
Gen. Come, things are going splendidly, I see.
Balsora dear, to make them still more pleasant,
I’ve brought you here a little wedding present.
(gicing a hag of gold.)
You wished for wealth—no more, I think, you ’ll do so ;
But this will set you up and buy the trousseau.
Bals. And nothing’s now remaining, but to say
Good-night to all, and finish up the play.


Finale —Air, “ Life let us cherish.”
Now, so happy we ’ll be
In our cot so trim.
Hassan will take care of me,
While I will work for him.
And all the day we will sell our wares
And drive a prosperous business ;
And each will lighten t’ other’s cares.
And share the other’s happiness.
Now, so happy they ’ll be, etc.
( Dance with Turkish fans oj different colours .)
I. —Fruit stand, with fruit; ottoman; money for the
customers; talisman; eye-glass for Zobeide; hell to strike
the clock on.
ll. —Small tables with refreshments; seats; Chinese
lanterns; teacups and saucers; talisman.
lll. —Fruit stand; ottoman; talisman; water gourd;
pilgrim's staff; swords; hay of gold.


THI ©IIP mWE
SEA.
CHARACTERS.
SOALTFIN
Ereon
(an old sea-monster, learned in magic arts'),
(a young Triton. the submarine postman).
Coeelle
(a mermaid).
The scene is laid at the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean.
COSTUMES.
Scalifin. — Yellow tunic, trimmed with Hack; black stock-
ings; long black snaky hair; false nose and spectacles; a crown
of yellow shells; black staff, with yellow shell at the end.
Eeron. —Green tunic, trimmed with silver; silver belt; light
curly hair; small green and silver cap, shaped like a shell; a
postman's bag slung across his shoulder, a trident in his hand.
Coeelle. — Long white robe; coral-coloured scarf across it;
very long hair; wreath of coral and pearls; pearl necklace and
armlets; silver belt.


SCENE I.
Corelle’s cave at the bottom of the ocean, hung round with
pale green curtains. An opening at hack , icith a recess,
hidden by a curtain. On one side a couch, half-hidden by
drapery, on tvhich lie a looking-glass and comb.
As the curtain rises, Corelle is discovered playing a little
silver harp.
Song —Air, “ The Bailiff’s Daughter of Islington.”
Oh, deep blue sea! oh, deep blue sea!
You are thought very nice, I know;
But though your grottoes lovely be,
I find them very very slow.
(Lays down her harp and advances.')
Cor. There are, I ’m told, some people who suppose
A mermaid’s life is all couleur de rose ;
But, oh, they make a very great mistake
Who tinge the ocean blue with crimson lake.
I’m sure, for my part, I’ve no time to spare
To sit on headlands, combing out my hair;
Or ride on dolphins o’er the waters blue,
As we are generally thought to do.
What with old Scalifin, who daily wooes,
And plagues the more the more that I refuse ;
And Erron, whom I like, but who—in short,
Who doesn't pop the question when he ought;
I’m worried so I scarce know what to do,
And thoroughly perplexed between the two.
Why are things so contrary, flat, and stale ?
Why is a mermaid’s such a woeful tale ?
(Enter Erron, L. His manner is very shy and
nervous.)
Good morning, Erron.
Err. ‘ Morning, miss (pause). Eine day.


!. And is that all, sir, that you ’ve got to say?
(aside) I really hoped to-day he would endeavour
To ask my hand; but he’s as shy as ever. .
(aloud) Sit down (they sit). Have you done work?
Oh, yes. Of late
The postman’s work’s been getting out of date.
Advancing science in these realms so damp
On penny postage e’en has laid its stamp;
Since cables, wires, and telephones were laid,
There’s been the greatest difference in our trade;
And mermen use the cable now to say,
“ Don’t wait for lunch,” or “ Shrimps for tea to-day.”
(aside) I must screw up my courage to propose,
But if she should refuse! She might, who knows ?
She’s very civil though ; I think I ’ll try.
I—hem (coughs).
(encouraging him). Yes, sir.
(relapsing — aside). Oh, dear; lam so shy.
And she’s so pretty. If she were but plain
’T would be quite easy. Well, here goes again.
(aloud) Miss—this—at least—l want—l mean to say.
. Pray, speak.
(giving it up). This letter—twopence, please, to pay!
(Corelle seizes the letter, opens it angrily, and
crushes it.)
. A bill! (aside) I vow he does it just to bore me.
I don’t believe ho cares a morsel for me!
. (aside). It’s no use, I can’t do it by degrees ;
I ’ll shut my eyes and flop down on my knees.
(He falls suddenly on his knees.)
Fair nymph!
Oh, sir!
. (relapsing). I think you’ve dropped a pin.
(She turns aivay disgusted. He plucks up courage.)
Corelle !
(turning). What is it?


•Eek. (giving it up). I’ve so bumped my shin!
COE. (aside — half-crying), v
He does it just to spite me—l could cry,
I don't believe a bit he’s really shy.
(aloud) It’s useless my remaining, you must own ;
I leave you, sir, to rub your shins alone.
(Exit, angrily, R.)
Eee. There, there ! she’s gone. How could I hesitate ?
And here's my rival coming. Wretched fate !
(Enter Scalifin, L., carrying a bandbox, ivhtch
he puts down at the back. He is very ugly.)
Scal. (advancing to Ereon, whom he takes for Corelle).
Fair nymph ! The queen of these abodes so blue,
In humble tone I whisper (sees Eeeox) Oh, it’s
(aside) My rival; pert young shaver.
Eee. (aside). Cross old brute!
Scal. (aside). If he here, he ’ll interrupt my suit.
Yet she would ne’er to me prefer that lad.
No, no ; I can’t believe, her taste’s so bad.
Out of the way, though, he had better.be.
I will employ a little strategy.
(aloud) My friend, I think ’twere civil, if no more,
Just to congratulate me.
Eee. Why, what for?
Scal. You have not hnard? You make me blush. Well—
well—
On my engagement to your friend Corelle.
Ebb. Corelle!
SCAL. (imitating). Corelle! Yes. What’s the matter,
pray ? v
is arranged ; the very wedding-day—
The clothes, cake, carriages, and all bespoken.
(Eeeon stands horror-struck. A pause.)
Eee. Good-bye, Corelle! Good-bye. .My heart is broken.
(Rushes out, L.)


Scal. (sneering). Poor thing! Well, he’s disposed of, any-
how.
I ’ll see about the lady’s wishes now.
(Enter Corelle, R. She looks round.')
Cor. Erron is gone. Good morning, Scalifin.
(aside) AVhy did the parlour mermaid let him in ?
Scal. I’ve called to-day. I fear’t was bold of me
To bring a little gift (getting the bandbox).
Cor. (suddenly interested). Oh, let me see.
Scal. And as to future plans
Cor. Don’t be unpleasant.
Postpone the future. I prefer the present.
Scal. This bonnet, from the realms of earth above,
Quite in the latest fashion.
Cor. (taking it). What a love 1
Scal. (smirking). You call me love. Oh, happy man.
Cor. Not you!
It is the bonnet I’m alluding to.
Scal. Do you, then, scorn my suit? Oh, say not so.
I’m very comfortably off, you know.
And I’ve been told by those whose taste well known
That in appearance I am an Adonis.
My talents too
Cor. Enough. It might be said,
Perhaps, sir, that your trumpeter is dead.
I can’t at once accept the hand you proffer,
Give me a day to think about your offer.
Scal. (going). Good-day then, till to-morrow, (aside) She
is mine;
My flattery—wealth—good looks she can’t decline;
And if she’d any thoughts of that young shaver,
The bonnet would decide her in my favour.
(He kisses Ms hand and exits, L., while Corelle
sinks on to the couch.)


SCENE 11.
Same Scene. Coeelle is discovered walking up and down in
thought.
Coe. Why should I doubt? Erron, for all one knows,
May never pluck up courage to propose.
He cannot love me, too—he would not pause—
I’m sure that I don’t care for him two straws!
Scalifin’s ugly, but ho’s very kind,
And may have splendid qualities behind ;
He’s very wealthy, and quite worships me,
And I should pay out Erron famously.
One’s best in looks, and one in wealth and station.
I’ll sleep upon this fearful hesitation,
And I will pray the wave-sprung goddess Venus
To send a dream and thus decide between us.
(She advances and stretches her arms up.)
The Supplication.
Aphrodite, fair and mighty!
Foam-bom, fairest—if thou carest
For thy votary forlorn,
Listen to me billow-born.
Goddess free—of the deep,
Let me see—while I sleep,
In a dream what lot I win
If I marry Scalifln.
(She sinks on to the couch and draics the curtain
round her. Soft music. Voices are heard
singing softly without.')
While you sleep, sound and deep,
Dreams shall hover o’er you.
Pictured clear, shall appear
Future scenes before you.


(Soft music; the curtain draics lack from the
recess, showing a vision of Corelle kneeling
before Scalifin who is heating her.* The
curtains close, and the voices are again heard
singing.)
Thus you see what shall he
If this man enthral you.
This mistake—if you make
Grief shall sure befall you.
(Corelle awakes, draws aside the curtains of the
couch and advances.)
Cor. Thanks, Venus, for the warning you have sent,
So clear that none could doubt of its intent.
Scalifin I’ll dismiss at our next meeting;
I ’ll never run the risk of such a beating.
If Erron loves not—or is still afraid,
I ’ll live and die a dismal, cross old maid;
Wear mits, drink tea, for bits of scandal hunt,
And always take offence, and wear a front—
But see, the dawn has broken. I declare
I ’ll be a mermaid true, and comb my hair.
(She sits, R., with a hand-glass, combing her hair.
Enter Scalifin, L., at back unperceived.)
Scal. (aside). She does look pretty; and what lovely hair!
Oh, she and I should make a pretty pair!
Cor. (to herself). I hope that Scalifin will soon be here.
Scal. (aside). She talks of me—unseen, I hover near.
Cor. Because when he proposes Hymen’s fetter—
(Scalifin rubs his hands with glee)
The sooner I get rid of him the better!
♦ Where there are two sisters sufficiently alike, one might represent
Coeelle in the vision ; Coeelle might then start Irom the couch,
and fall into the same attitude as her counterpart in the vision.
Otherwise, she must of course get round from the couch to the recess
during the singing.


Scal. (aside). Eh?
Cor. Yes ; he’s, after all, a dull old prose.
And, then, so hideous—such a dreadful nose!
Scal. (aside). Furies!
Cor. His frowns do certainly appal.
But then his smiles—(Scalifik, pacified, grins
horribly.) Oh, they’re the worst of all!
1 pity men who fancy they look winning ;
And think they’re smiling sweetly when they’re
grinning.
Well, I must give the man an explanation,
(rising) And send him off
Scal. (advancing). I ’ll spare you that vexation.
Don’t plague yourself to speak—it’s well for me
I overheard your sweet soliloquy.
So I am ugly—you despise my nose !
Oh, very well. You think me an old prose,
And you won’t have me—eh, my lady fair?
Cor. No, sir; you’re frightful! I detest you—there!
Scal. And do you think I shall allow you, Miss,
To marry that young Emm, after this?
No, no ; you Ve dared my power, and you shall smart;
I know a little of the Magic Art.
(he waves his hands before her like a mesmerist.)
Cor. What would you do ? Help! Help! Release me!
Scal. (making passes). No.
Cor. Horror! I cannot move! Oh, let me go !
(she remains fixed like a statue in the middle of the stage.)
Scal. No, no, my scornful belle—you can’t get hence;
You ’re under a mesmeric influence.
(he fetches from the side a magic cap with an
zmtransparent veil falling allround it.)
This cap and veil upon your brows I place.
Now, you shall see the way I make a face.


(he raises the veil, showing her face Hack and dis-
torted hy means of a mask fastened to the cap
under the veil).
You shall retain this beautiful complexion
For all your life ( holding up the looking-glass to her).
Cok. Oh, horrible reflection!
Scal. Until some swain your beauty shall entrance
Who ’ll marry you. A very likely chance!
Coe. Wretch! This, at least, I know. If e’er I wed,
That very day your magic art is dead.
SCAL. I don’t deny it; but I’ve nought to fear.
I don’t think you ’ll get many offers, dear!
(Corelle sinks on to the couch, hiding her face in
her hands, while Scalifin stands pointing
triumphantly to her.)
SCENE 111.
The same. Enter Erron, L., dejectedly.
Err. What will become of me, I’ve not a notion.
All night I wandered through the realms of ocean,
Forgetting letter-boxes, posts, and pillars,
And all the parcels due at coral villas;
For as I went some fiend was at my side,
For ever whispering “ She’s another’s bride.”
I’ve come to take, like lovers in a book,
At the “ beloved object ” one last look.
{Enter Scalifin, R.)
Scal. (aside). It’s Erron. There’s a saying true and neat,
If not quite new, which says “ Kevenge is sweet.”
(aloud) Ah, Mr. Erron.
Err. (turning away). Don’t. It’s all in vain;
I really can't congratulate again.
Scal. I came to tell you—what, perchance, you knew—
The marriage
Err. Yes; all over—that’ll do.


Scal. No, on the contrary; ’t was a mistake.
The lady has refused me for your sake.
Err. What do you mean ?
Scal. (wiping his eyes). It’s true. Excuse these tears.
She loves you—won’t have me.
Err. Hurrah! Three cheers!
At least—of course, your grief it’s rather hard on;
But I’m so jolly— (Scalifin groans.) Oh, I beg your
pardon!
Scal. (going). I ’ll say you ’re here*
Err. Stop! Wait a minute, do!
I feel so nervous at these times, don’t you?
Scal. Think of her lovely cheek, and lip, and eye.
(Exit, it.)
Err. That’s just the thing that makes me feel so shy.
If she were only ugly—not a belle,
I think that I could manage twice as well.
(Enter, it., Scalifin, leading Corelle, veiled.)
Scal. Behold your bride! Of beauty so splendacious.
(He unceils her.)
Err. (nervously looking down). How can I dare to hope ?
(he raises his eyes and starts) Oh, goodness gracious !
Scal. Ha— ha ! he — he ! A stopper to your wooing.
This little tableau, now, is all my doing.
I gave her that fine phiz; and you’ll agree
I’ve made you both as wretched as can be.
Err. Not so. A jewel of its gleam bereft
Has still its value and its richness left;
Though clouded o’er it makes a poorer show,
You cannot rob it of its inward glow.
When she was beautiful, she seemed too fair.
Too far above—to speak I did not dare.
Corelle, more precious far than gem or gold,
Say—will you have me ?
Cor. ( falling into his arms). Emm, dearest!
Scal. i Sold!


( While Coeelle embraces Erron, her cap and
mask fall off behind him).
Cor. The spell is crushed. Of Scalifin we ’re rid,
Whom, ere he goes, I thank for what he did.
His malice won for me a husband true;
Whose worth, whose merits
Ere. Dearest, that will do.
Soar. I ’ve failed this time ; but did my best, I’m sure.
Who could have thought he’d wed a blackamoor ?
{going) My parting wish is this—now don’t reject it—
May you be happy; but I don’t expect it.
{Exit, L.)
Err. All will be charming, if these friends we see
{advancing to the audience)
Approve the wedding
Coe. In the deep blue sea. ■
Curtain.


PROPERTIES.
Scene I. — Couch; harp; postman's hag; letter; handbox and
bonnet.
Scene IL — Couch; stick for Scalifin; magic cap, with mask
and veil; looking-glass and comb.
SCENE Hl. — Postman's bag; magic cap.


