

I y Ir^mrMi]i A
i # *■ - li Jj :^2\y f j /
w' _\ \M ■ | \" t '^"ivm
f Jr I |
i' !flk\ XM \. \ / S
JACKOWHACKO^GREYBEARD


H WkM
*v»e oi *** -At# V^Y 8 \
VY/?- f 4R rt p ittP e V A i V r \
\VU/1 \a*£ e a\a> a «. »** / v VlLL>'
K| ot^ a ' . V
coUt> v vr d> e * c \<\ « eca w9e ° $ <&
PI- <^;i• . S&$
:§r.
' oe o^^ot^ 0^We^ a «J-
Wi0h *
*»* ° t *e « 0 t v r oUtvA e ®S
ffi|| -?cSSsS?5SSt
v ttte? , tf*** a^ 9 ' ®/f
#1« &•$>& S


C 18122
2 0 JUN 1945
Jacko Whacko enjoys a cob of corn.
Raiding the Cornfield
Greybeard, Jacko Whacko and all the other monkeys of the tribe
of Langurs, who lived in the great, grey, grim Himalaya Mountains in
the far distant country of India, were very fond of the sweet, young,
tender cobs of corn which the natives grew in their fields. In fact
when Jacko Whacko was asleep, he liked nothing better than to
dream that he was eating a sweet, young, tender cob of corn.


The natives, whose cornfields were often raided, were very, very
angry. Just when their corn was getting nice, and big, and juicy,
the bandar-log (pronounced bun-der 10-gr), which of course you
know means "Monkey folk," would come and raid their beautiful
cornfields. The bandar-log took all the best, all the sweetest, all the
softest, all the biggest, all the juiciest cobs of corn, and trampled
down the crop, leaving the beautiful straight stems bent and twisted.
The natives tried all sorts of things to keep them away from
their crops. They tried scarecrows (or should we call them scare-
MONKEYS?), they tried making noises with large rattles, they tried
lighting fires round their fields, they tried tying pieces of cloth, which
fluttered in the breeze, to long strings all round their crops, and they
even tried having men amongst the corn to chase and frighten the
monkeys away.
But it was no good. Why, when they had put men amongst the
corn what did that badmash bandara, Jacko Whacko, do? He actually
hung by his tail from the nearest tree and pelted the men with hard,
green walnuts. His aim was so good, and he hit them so often, that at


last the men had left the fields with himps on their heads as big as
eggs.
Jacko Whacko had laughed, and laughed, ana laughed, and
then all the monkeys, hundreds, and hundreds, and hundreds of
them, had come down from the treetops and eaten all the best, all
the sweetest, all the softest, all the biggest, all the juiciest cobs of corn
and trampled down the crop. This had happened not only once, but
Jacko Whacko pelted them with hard green walnuts.


many times. It got so bad that none of the natives would take a turn
at crop-watching for they knew just what would happen to each one
of them when his turn came round to watch.
The angry natives could stand it no longer. They sent for the
English Police Officer to help them, telling him just what was the
matter. When he came he looked at the fields, looked at the forest,
looked at the trees and listened to the chatter, chatter, chatter, chatter
of the natives all about him. He scratched his chin and thought for a
minute, then he said, me a platform in the middle of the
cornfield and on it build a little hut of cornstalks. Then go back to
your village and leave me here alone. I'll stop the monkeys stealing
your corn."
The natives did as he told them and the Police Officer took his
air-rifle and bullets and sat down in the hut made of cornstalks.
There he waited for the monkeys to come, and while he waited he
loaded his rifle with hundreds of tiny bullets which were little things
just the size of a match-head. There we will leave him waiting for the
monkeys while we go and find them in the forest and see what they
are doing.


The officer scratched his chin and thought for a minute.


"Kow wow week," said Jacko Whacko to Greybeard as he sat
on the limb of a great tree, "What about some nice, sweet corn?"
"Kcw woo woo," replied Greybeard, which as you know means,
4t That's a good idea!" and he gave a loud call which rang through
the forest and echoed from tree to tree.
At once the monkeys started to gather around him. Long
monkeys, short monkeys, fat monkeys, thin monkeys, old monkeys,
young monkeys, in fact, all sizes and sorts and shapes of monkeys
came hurrying to him. Greybeard waited for a minute or two for all
the monkeys to gather around him and then for the tremendous
chattering to die down, before he spoke to them all. "Kow wow
week," said Greybeard, "What about some nice, sweet corn?" "Kow
woo woo!" shouted all the monkeys, "That's a good idea!"
"Come on then!" shouted Greybeard. And off they went,
swinging away through the treetops with great, long, flying leaps
from branch to branch.
Jacko Whacko and some of his mischievous young friends let


The officer raised his rifle and took aim.
Greybeard get well ahead, and then they swung after the other
monkeys singing as they went.
"Swinging high up in the tree tops,
Swinging from branch to branch,
Living on berries and walnuts,
Leading old Greybeard a dance."


This was a favourite tune of theirs and old Greybeard used to
get very angry when he heard it, for he thought it showed a great lack
of respect for him and he always blamed Jacko Whacko for
starting the singing and making up the words.
Before long the tribe arrived at the edge of the forest and
gathered in the great, tall trees that overlooked the village cornfields.
They were all chattering and laughing together and made such a din
that old Greybeard had to shout at the top of his voice to make
himself heard.
"Kweel kwar," he shouted, "Be quiet, and listen, to hear if
there's anyone about."
The monkeys were silent, they hung there in the trees and
looked, and listened, but could neither see nor hear anyone. At last
old Greybeard was satisfied and he gave the call.
"Kwar week quo," said Greybeard, "Go ahead and get your
corn. Jacko Whacko, you stay here with me and keep watch. Fll


teach you not to sing that song.'*
Poor Jacko Whacko was very disappointed. He had to sit up in
the trees and watch for natives while all the other monkeys trooped
down into the cornfields to eat as many as thev liked of those sweet,
* •
young, tender cobs of corn.
Greybeard sat well up in the tree 011 the edge of the forest and
Jacho ff hacko was disappointed. He had to watch while others ate corn.


watched. There was no sign of anything moving about the cornfield
except for the monkeys pulling the corn-cobs off the plants. Jacko
Whacko hung by his tail and watched too, but he saw no sign of
anyone moving about. As they were not frightened of the natives
they both began to drowse in the sunshine, to pass the time until their
turn came to go down into the crop for corn for themselves.
The English Police Officer in his cornstalk hut, sat still and
waited for the monkeys to get well down into the cornfield. He too
waited and watched. When all the monkeys had settled down to their
meal,of corn he looked at Greybeard, raised his air rifle, took careful
aim, and fired.
"Ping," went the air rifle and Greybeard woke up with a start
and sprang into the air shouting, "Kweek, kweek, KWEEK!" As he
landed on the branch again he turned a somersault, trying to look at
his back, just above his tail. "Kweek, kweek, KWEEK!" he shouted,
and scratched violently at his back.
The monkeys raced from the cornfield, swung into the trees and
sat chattering and looking about for the cause of the upheaval.


Greybeard turned a somersault trying to see what had bitten him on the
hack.
Jacko AJ' hacko raced over to Greybeard to see what was the matter.
He looked at Greybeard's back and saw a tiny hole in the long, flossy
fur. Some of the older monkeys came over at his call and looked too,
then they all scratched their heads and wondered.
Kwar quee week quo," said Greybeard, "'Something stung
me! Perhaps it was a hornet." "No," said Jacko Whacko, '"that's
not a hornet's sting, but I don't know what it is."


After a while the monkeys went back into the cornfield again
and Greybeard and Jaeko Whacko again kept watch. Again the
officer raised his air rifle.
"'Ping," went the rifle and Jacko Whacko's tail slipped off the
branch from which he'd been hanging, and he fell head first till he
landed with a great, "Bump", across the branch lower down.
"Kweek, kweek, KWEEK!" he called as he fell. "Kweek, Kweek,
KWEEK!"
Greybeard raced to help Jacko Whaeko and all the other
monkeys again raced out of the cornfield and swung into the tall
forest trees.
"I've been stung! Eve been stung!" shouted jacko Whacko as
his breath came back, "Oh, it does hurt." Greybeard and the other
monkeys gathered round to examine Jacko Whacko's wound, and
there was a terrific chattering as they talked it over and wondered
what had happened. Each monkey had a different idea of what had
caused the stings. Some said it was hornets, some said it was wasps,


J
3P^
He landed with a bump across the branch lower down.


some said it might be bees, but none of them really knew.
After a while, the monkeys decided to go back for more corn
and swung down the trees again. This time they left other monkeys
to watch, and Greybeard and Jacko Whacko went down into the
cornfield to get corn for themselves.
After a few minutes the Officer raised his rifle again, and this
time, fired twice. "Ping! Ping!'* went the air rifle, and both
watching monkeys jumped into the air and squealed, "Kweek,
kweek, KWEEK!" One was holding his tail in one hand and looking
at the tip, the other was violently scratching his arm. "I've been
stung! I've been stung!" they shouted and made such a noise that
again the other monkeys raced out of the crop, and up the forest
trees.
The chatter was terrific. Monkeys were talking and shouting
to each other. Monkeys were jumping about, looking behind them,
trying to find out what was causing these funny stings. Every
monkey was wondering whether he'd be the next to get stung.


The Officer raised his air rifle again, and this time he fired shot
after shot. "Ping!-ping!-ping!-ping!" went the rifle. From the forest
trees loud shouts broke out. "Kweek, kweek, KWEEK!" "KWEEK,
KWEEK, K-W-E-E-K!" shouted monkey after monkey.
The noise was terrific, monkeys were jumping from branch to
branch, others were dropping to the ground, others fled from the
scene and swung through the forest squealing as they went. Some
were holding their arms, some were holding their legs, others grasped
They raced for trees, squealing as they icent.


their tails and squealed, while others scratched violently at their hacks
as they raced away.
Roar after roar of laughter came from the hut of corn-stalks in
the centre of the cornfield. The officer could not stop laughing for
some time, at the antics of the monkeys as they fled. At last he got
up and walked to the village where he told the natives he was sure it
would be some time before the monkeys stole the corn again.
In the heart of the forest a very sad. sorry, tribe of monkeys sat
in the tree tops examining each other's wounds and chattering about
their experience. The saddest and sorriest monkey of all was Jacko
Whacko, who had two stings, and had just been whacked again by
old Greybeard, because he had laughed at Greybeard trying to look
at the sting on his own back.
And now we leave our monkeys in the great, grey, grim Hima-
laya Mountains in the far distant country of India, until we read
about them again in "Shere Khan's" next Jacko Whacko book called
"The Wedding Procession".


1> . n booHf° r
l| , rs Jo" 11 Ci "C though l^u^ 0 /^
M ° eaX ;i doubt ir fl 0ordW^ rC >u8
I •§»
H arx
*Ss ■^^SsSgSfc?--'*'
Sm m
in^ c i tfll 6 ''' t Hop®' ' »i *'
teller also- 1 ' m T^M
/%j£ naiue- 01 S<U» ..gflEuu
Npf £'< >T~ s« le - . „ a« A '5i"[,' *
<v\V %F/€+ , to a
' W \.i , „ »'J»<*° _ ,."*..27
jfeii
wkm£ »*> »'*" ,v •■ k^tsr


SLV ■ S g £m*r
SHERE KHAN
STORY
% ...
In the great, dense jungles of India live bears and wolves, elephants and
leopards, jackals and monkeys, and many, many other wild animals.
Amongst them all there is one great Lord of the Jungle, who is old, and
wise, and knows all.
▼ \ * ►
lie can tell tales without number, of natives and animals, for he roams
everywhere, and all others give way to him at the meeting and drinking places
and on the forest paths.
This great Lord of the Jungle is Shere Khan, the Tiger, and this is one
of his stories.
Printed by The Langlea Printery Pty. Ltd., 433 Kent Street, Sydney, for the
publishers, "Shere Khan" Productions, N.S.W.
