





- ■. X
K '
ut
" ' v :
“Let us not be weary in well doing; for in due season we shall
reap, if we faint not.” —Galatians vi., 9 v.
It is recorded in ancient story, that the L aced com on ians -
people, poor and of small resources —offered to their Gods lean
sacrifices, while the Athenians offered rich and costly ones; yet
the Gods preferred the offerings of the former to those of the lat-
ter. The oracle was asked the reason of this, and answered,
“The Lacedaemonians are a people who give their hearts to
their Gods, while the Athenians only give gifts to their Gods.”
Our Heavenly Father “abhors the sacrifice, where not the heart
is found.” The heart is the seat of the affections. It is the heart
that loves, and that truly worships and serves. They, in whose
hearts are the flames of love, show it. When the sun of
righteousness is shining on the soul of man, beams of brightness
and beauty are reflected on the world. The love of Christ con-
strains. This is the spring, and motive power of well-doing.
St. Paul is here speaking of one branch of work —almsgiving —
the distribution of gifts of love to those who have given up their
time to the work of teaching. “ Let him that is taught in the
word communicate unto him thatteacheth in all good things.”
This exhortation may be applied to all church-workers.
To these, God has given different powers, graces, and gifts.
They have their natural and acquired idiosyncracies, and among
them you find rugged, stern-tempered disciples like John the
Baptist, and gentle, amiable, tranquil ones like John the
Evangelist; musical Davids ; meditative Isaacs; quiet, devo-
tional, pensive Marys, and active, bustling, energetic Marthas ;
meek, diffident ones like Moses, and impetfious, eager ones
like St. Peter ; babes in Christ, young men, and fathers in


Christ Jesus—a noble band, who through faith are overcoming
the world, and whose names are blazoned forth in the great mus-
ter roll in the Book of Life. There are many and varied gifts,
but one Spirit. The affections of those taught by Him are
centred on Christ. They submit their wills to Him, for He is
their King reigning in their hearts. They have received of His
spirit, and live in communion with a present, but unseen Saviour.
We limit the exhortation of the text this morning to Sunday-
school teachers, whose work and labour of love may be very ap-
propriately described as well-doing. The teacher takes his posi-
tion not in loco parentis, but in loco pastoris. The mission is
pastoral rather than educational. They are doing the same work
as ‘the gordained Ministers of Christ, though in a different
sphere, and with a somewhat different commission, are our fellow-
labourers and fellow-soldiers, helpers unto the truth, workers
together with God, the messengers of the churches, and the glory
of Christ.
The end of their teaching is not mere amusement, or the enter-
tainment of the young with political and social questions ; with
matters pertaining to art, science, and literature ; with childish
speculations or profound disquisitions. The judicious teacher will
draw from many a well, pluck flowers from many a garden, find
“ sermons in stones, and books in the running brooks.” He will
use illustrations many and varied to enforce and impress truth.
He will bring to the service of religion every charm, make
art, science, poetry, and painting, handmaids to religion. He
may with wise Solomon seek to find out acceptable words,
but he keeps before him the great object of leading to the
knowledge of Christ. The Holy Scriptures, and the Book of
Common Prayer are his storehouse. Man’s fall, man’s sinful-
ness and waywardness, man’s helplessness, Christ’s conde-
scension and grace, 'His incarnation, His Divine personality,
His humiliation, His cross and passion, His agony and
bloody sweat, His atonement, all-sufficient, and sufficient
for ail, His glorious resurrection, ascension, and session
at God’s right hand; the beauties, loveliness, and attractive-
ness of His character; the work of the Holy Spirit, the Divine


helper, comforter, and sanctifier; the claims of Religion, the obli-
gations to a life of holiness; the privileges of the Fatherhood of
God and Brotherhood of Man; death, judgment, and eternity.
"What momentous subjects! How suggestive ! What an honour
and privilege to sow these seeds of truth in the heart, which
shall germinate, bud, blossom, and bring forth fruit thirty-fold,
sixty or a hundred-fold —to cultivate the spiritual vineyard, and
to train plants that shall bloom through eternity, sons and
daughters who shall be as the polished corners of the temple _
Among the old Romans there prevailed this touching custom.
The face of every new-born infant was turned to the Heavens.
Thus it was taught man’s duty was to look above and beyond
this world. So the teacher would turn the hearts of the little
ones Zionward, train them for the Children’s Paradise, and lead
them to the Children's friend, teach them to go forward and
onward, bearing the banner with the strange device, Excelsior !
Your work is an act of obedience to the command of that lover of
the young, who invited the little ones, who declared that out of
the mouths of babes and sucklings he had ordained strength,
who accepted the loud Hosannahs of infant nurslings, and
whose last dying commission to His beloved Church was “ Feed
my lambs.”
It is for your own well-being, the well-being of the young,
the Church, and this land. It will save them from a thousand
ills to mind religion young. The restraints by which they are
surrounded are helpful. There are indirect benefits to the
children, their parents, and society, and direct benefits. Some of
them are brought to love Christ very early in life, I know ; though
in others the spark may not be fanned into a fame for a time,
and the seeds lie dormant for a season. The impressions
are there, and will have a civilizing and
and sooner or later we may hope issue.Sln convictions.
As regards the Church the school should be
and attractive nursery. From it should spring disqualified
teachers and workers, those qualified to serve God in Church
and State, aud adorn the varied walks of Christian life. Your
work is for the well-being of the land, if “Righteousness


exalteth a nation.” “ What is to be the salvation and elevation
of our country ?” said a philanthropist to a distinguished states-
man. “ Sir,” after a few moments thought, whs the reply,
‘ ‘ This nation will be saved by the training of her children to
love the Saviour, and what a part the Sunday-school must take
in it.” He was a true philanthropist and patriot. Your work
is for the real elevation of the people and the glory of God.
In this, as in other spheres of work, there are temptations to
weariness, or as the word used by St. Paul signifies to be dis-
heartened, to lose heart, and to act as cowards. Some of these
arise from personal unfitness and an unhealthy soul-state, from
neglect of spiritual cultivation, and from want of a thorough
understanding of your commission and work. Again, there are
discouragements arising from the work being carried on in un-
wholesome, ill-ventilated, and uncomfortable rooms, the bad
management and superintendence of the school, from the falling
off of numbers, from want of discipline in the school, sympathy
and affection among the teachers, from the absence of a well-
selected sectional library, from irregularity and unpunctuality
of children and teachers, from men frowning on it who should
know its dignity, beauty, and usefulness, and bid it God-
speed.
Take the work itself. It is fatiguing and hard at times, and
needs much self-denial. It is difficult to find time for due pre-
paration, to learn the art of teaching, to know how and what
to teach—difficult always to gain the attention and instruct giddy
girls and playful and perhaps wayward, mischievous boys. It
is hard to search for scholars, to properly visit them in
their homes, to take a personal interest on weekdays as well as
b to on the work from week to week, year
to year to brktg. forward the old, old subjects, and see so few
results— results. The faithful sower grieves. Oh,
where ate the golden sheaves ?
Though there be temptations to weariness, many and varied,
are there not glorious rewards ? God puts these before
you, that you may be encouraged. No work is profitless that
is done for Christ s dear sake and the good of others. Rewards are


held out everywhere in Holy Scripture. Christ felt their influence
in his great trial hours. For the joy that was set before Him
He endul-ed the cross, despising the shame. The work done
from love is remembered by God in the archives of Heaven.
There is real pleasure in it. Is it a pleasure to adorn the bodies
and to develope the minds, the beauties and graces of children ?
Is it a pleasure to polish and refine these jewels, and no pleasure
to train them for eternity—no pleasure to be rewarded by their
attention, their teachableness, and gentleness, their increasing dili-
gence and love —no pleasure to uproot the thorns and thistles,
and evil weeds growing apace—no pleasure to add to the hap-
piness and honour of our race ? Above all, is it no real pleasure
to co-operate with God ? But there is a greater reward than
all this in having led some to Christ and His glorious service.
This is your aim and your object.
In due season we shall reap. The due season may be
when you are in a right state of soul to enjoy the reward
—your patience, your love, your faith sufficiently tried. In
God’s time—the right time —you reap; you sow, and others
gather and garner. At last, the gladsome Harvest Home.
The success of the labours of Eobert Eaikes. whose centenary
we celebrate at the present time, was very great. That grand
old Churchman, assisted by the Eev. T. Stock, began mid much
discouragement, but within seven years he had the pleasure of
knowing 250,000 children were attending Sunday-schools. The
simple and prayerful teaching of the Holy Scriptures, the Church
catechism —that most useful compendium of Christian truth—and
Watts’ hymns were the means used. The results were seen in
the changed character of the boys. Gladly and cheerfully they
frequented their schools, and the cathedral services, were trusted
by their employers, and on enquiry it was found that none of
Eaikes’ boys were inmates of the gaol. The brutalising practices
so common even on the Lord’s day were discontinued. Eaikes’
praises were soon sung in the cotter’s hut and the palace. Ills
work is held in everlasting remembrance. Our schools and
scholars are his monuments. His memory is in all the churches,
and even kings and queens have become the nursing fathers and


mothers of our schools. In due season you too shall reap, and
your labour shall not be in vain. Christian biographies show
direct results, and also that many late conversions are readily
traced to Sunday-school agencies. The seed is planted, and in
due time the grain garnered and the fruit gathered. In the great
day of account there is the great reward for those who turn many
to righteousness. They shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament and as the stars for ever and ever.
These are the honours not of those teachers who may be
compared to the dead men in Coleridge’s Ancient Mariner—
the dead pulling the ropes and steering —who are like the
finger-post pointing the way on the road, but motionless.
Ah, me, there are such! They have never known their
need, nor felt the love of the Saviour. They may go in and out
among our children, and labour and talk and teach, but they will
not be a religious power in the school. If frivolous and worldly,
if faithless and prayerless, unchanged in heart and life, what
success can you expect? Canyon freely give when you have
not accepted ? Can you impart life and warmth when your
hearts are dead and cold? Can you give light when your
understandings are darkened —lead to Christ when Christless ?
God the Holy Ghost give you to see your true condition !
0 Christian fellow-labourer, be not weary. Are there dis-
couragements? What a Master you serve! What need you
more when he is present, and you have his encouraging pro-
mises? The presence of an earthly General among his soldiers
when charging the enemy has urged them to wondrous deeds of
daring, and has been as valuable as a whole brigade. What
cannot those Christful souls accomplish who go forth to their
work realizing the presence of their captain ? Once an officer
who had been doing good service, came to his General and
said, “We have taken a standard.” The General looked
at him, but uttered no words. The officer again shouted,
“Sir Charles, wm have taken a standard.” “Then go,”
said the General, “ and take another.” So Christ urges, and
beckons you on. Helpers in Christ Jesus, follow your Master
fully—form a high idea of your work. Magnify your office.


Let Christ teach you, and be your example in teaching. Be
loving. Learn to reverence your scholars. Make your teaching
interesting and attractive. Profit by experience. Adapt your
plans to human wants and interests. Be more earnest, gentle,
faithful, prayerful, diligent, hopeful, and Christ-like. Go forth
to your glorious work in faith, duly trained Look
for and expect success. Be stirred to realize your privileges and
responsibilities. You are stewards. Be faithful, and know that
well-doing springs from, and is intimately associated with, well-
being. You are servants : serve constantly and gladly. Your
reward is sure. Let the young look forward to engage in this
work. Let the aged stand to their posts while health lasts.
What a blessing may your experience be to others! Let there
be no criminal backwardness in undertaking this work. Alas !
that there has been so much. May it never be so again,
but may our celebrations stir one another to say, “Here
am I Lord, send me.” I point you to your captain, and
would fire your memories with the heroisms of great souls such as
Eaikes’, and the glorious company of the pure and holy who love
that work—our Lord High Chancellors and English Statesmen,
aye, and by the memories of the splendid heroisms of the humble
and self-denying poor. I point you to the martyred and sainted
dead and to the white-robed and palm-bearing train above. I
point you to the great and ever victorious captain, Jesus. All
honour to you if faithful soldiers and servants !
Parents, regard your children as heaven’s gifts, not mere toys to
amuse you, flowers, or sunbeams. They are lent by God, and
you have to train them for heaven. Your duties cannot be
transferred. Those precious jewels must be burnished with youi
own hands. Our teachers are ready to help you to fulfil your re-
spousibilities, and need your hearty co-operation m theii work.
Happy those parents and teachers who are mutually helpful,
and who have teachable and affectionate children.
Fellow-churchmen and churchwomen, know that our Sunday-
schools have a strong claim on your prayers, and your sympathy,
and require your liberal support. Hinder not their usefulness
by failing to recognize their claims. Now is the call for in-


creased interest and zeal. Now is the opportunity for seeking
to develope the unknown powers of our Sunday-schools. A
blessing indeed is in them.
Go forward, 0 Christian teacher, and the Lord be with thee.
The Lord be pleased to say, “From this day I will abundantly
bless thee and thy work.”
G. F. Fuller, Printer, Parramatta; and 385-387, George-street, Sydney.




