

J-'lr ' Ar
5 -Hit
RAILWAY TO INDIA AND THE EAST.
To the Editor oe “ The Colonies and India.”
Sir, — Your notice of the Hon. Mr. Campbell’s pamphlet, 11 India
in Six, and Australia in Sixteen, Days,” induces me to offer a few
remarks upon the subject. Rapid communication with our Eastern
possessions and Southern Colonies becomes of more importance daily.
But a short time since we were satisfied to be taken to India in
twenty days and to Australia in forty. Now tb at the cable is our
daily and hourly experience, we find it desirable to transport our-
selves in a much, shorter time. But the connection between Europe
and the Southern Colonies is a subject of importance to the whole of
Europe and Asia, as well as to the British Empire, as I believe the
ultimate route to those Colonies must be through Central Asia.
The Euphrates Valley route involves so many changes and delays
that it will be too costly a route for the conveyance of goods.
Indeed, I do not think it can ever be of use for conveyance of goods
except to and from India. Besides which, the cost would have to be
borne by Great Britain alone, as she is the only nation likely to be
benefited by it.
The alternative route, which I have studied for some years, is by
way of Central Asia to the western borders of the Chinese Empire,,
thence descending the valley of the Brahmaputra through Assam, with,
branches to (1) Calcutta, (2) Saigon, and (3) Canton. This line,,
unlike that of the Euphrates Valley, would be always passing through
healthy and temperate countries, probably the most productive in tb©
world. The products would be gathered on the route, and carried
direct to their destination—furs from Siberia, silk and tea from China
and Assam, &c.; and these would be brought with less trouble, and
without losing any of their qualities as at present on the passage by
sea—products also that would pay for carriage by railway. None of
those mentioned could be brought direct by the Euphrates Valley line;
in fact, that line will be available only for passengers and mails. It
cannot be a comfortable jea-aaey; passing as it does for a great part
through unhealthy districts, under a broiling sun, without any ocean
breeze to temper the heat.
By the alternative route through Central Asia, travellers will
always be passing, through a mild climate and clear atmosphere, while
the after-voyage from Saigon, or from Singapore, will be through the
Eastern Archipelago, surrounded by beautiful scenery, in one of tb©
most delightful partsof the world, fanned by the u spicy breezes, ”
where the lotus-eaters live, and where, in the words of the Laureate,
6 ‘ it is always afternoon.”
More than a third of this line is already constructed. If through
trains were started it would be possible now to go direct from
Calais or Ostend across. Central Europe and Russia to Orenburg.
And a further section, is in progress. The middle section would b©
partly along the old caravan route traversed by Marco Polo and the
merchants of the Middle Ages. Calcutta would be within eight or
nine days of London, Hong Kong and Saigon would be reached in
the same time (though so much farther from the proposed terminus
of the Euphrates route). Japan and Australia would be only a week
farther oil'; Melbourne and Sydney, when the overland Australian
line was completed, could be reached within nineteen days, a much
shorter time than by either of Mr. Campbell’s suggested routes.
The recommendations for the Central Asian route are—(l) that it
is a world’s route: England, France, Germany, Russia, India, China,
Japan, Australia, New Zealand, are all interested in it. (2) It
passes through temperate regions, and food and fuel are obtainable all the
way along. (3) More than a third of the line is already constructed,
and on the remaining- sections there are no great rivers or high ranges
to be crossed, (4) It passes, not through comparatively unpopulated
districts like the Euphrates Valley and Syrian deserts, but through
the most productive parts of the world, and opens up a highway to
Jour hundred millions of people. (5) It would carry us nearer to
(/Japan requiring several changes which the Euphrates
f Valley line involves), one change only taking travellers for those
countries, or, if via Australia, three for passengers to New Zealand.
I am, Sir, yours faithfully,
EDWARD A. PETHERIOK.
Yarra Yarra, Brixton, S. W,
April 18, 1888.


1508
00062057
