

RAILWAYS IN WARFARE,
THEIR GENERAL MILITARY USE
DEFENSIVE AND OFFENSIVE.
IT C. STU AR T - CANS DELL
OF THE
NEW SOUTH WALES CORPS OF ENGINEERS.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
William Brooks & Co., The City Printers,
queen’s place, below bridge street.


COPYRIGHT,


f irsl
PREFACE.
the re-organisation of the military forces of the
Colony upon a quasi-militia basis in November,
1878, orders were promulgated (by the Brigade
authorities) to the effect that lectures would
henceforth form a part of the curriculum of
X studies in the scientific branches of the service. It was in
J[ response to this suggestion that the then three senior
officers of the Engineers (I refer to Lieutenant-Colonel
Rowe, Major Parrott and myself) volunteered to take in hand the
necessary lectures on technical subjects in military engineering.
This arrangement induced me to formulate my first paper on
Railways in Warfare, comprising ordinary and field railways
and trench tramways, which I submitted for the consideration
of the Military Force generally on the 16th June, 1880, at the
Victoria Barracks, just prior to the opening of the School of
Military Engineering there. A part of this paper I have
revised to date in order to allow of a discussion upon the many
points of interest involved.
The Author.
Sydney, November, 1895.




RAILWAYS IN WARFARE:
Defensive and Offensive.
This subject specially recommends itself to the attention of
a Corps of Military Engineers. In the present age of skilled
warfare, in which the highest mechanical powers are adopted
in aid of physical strength, railways have already played a most
important part, and it is desirable to illustrate how very
important is the matter in reference to the defence of the
Australian Continent as a whole, for in considering the defence
of this country, the importance of providing special protection
to the seaboard most assuredly comes within the province of
the military engineer. It can hardly be questioned that, with
a very extensive coast-line to protect, and with limited means
of men, material and money at command, these colonies must,
for economical as well as prudential reasons, combine for their
■common defence ; and such combination will in no way be so
much assisted as by a well designed system of railways—since
by enabling the rapid concentration of men and material upon
.any threatened point—it will, in effect, multiply the operations
and otherwise augment the defensive powers of a force, which
might else prove insufficient in case of attack ; and also in
whatever degree existing lines of railway may affect the
operations of troops in future warfare, it is undoubtedly of
extreme importance that an army should have amongst its
members a body of men conversant at least with the elementary
principles of railway construction, because by being familiar
with the duty of each part in any structure, they know where
to attack it, in order to either disable or destroy, or even repair
the same, according to the exigencies of the case. It must also
be palpable that more especially in a militia or citizen military
force composed of mechanics, artizans, navvies and others,
there are many men to be found with the requisite knowledge
of these duties.


The history of the past forty years displays the great value-
of railways in time of war, and their employment increases-
immensely the advantages conferred by good roads. Even in
the time of Julius Caesar, great military roads were made to
entrenched camps. Now as railways and tramways are but
improved roads or communications they are invaluable, and
their introduction either previous to or during a campaign
secures three important advantages:—firstly, in mobilising
armies; secondly, in concentrating these armies on the
frontier, coast, or threatened points of an invaded territory
and thirdly, in bringing up material and supplies of all kinds-
from the base of operations. The labours of the staff of an
army are constantly directed towards attaining the greatest
rapidity in mobilisation, the success of a war depending much
upon the celerity with which armies can be got ready previous-
to their being concentrated on threatened points, so as to
enable them, if necessary, to take the offensive. Of late years-
the arrangements for rapid mobilisation have been the subject
of grave consideration and practical organisation as to details.
While in 1859 it took 37 days for France to collect a force of
116,000 men in Italy, in 1866, the Prussian armies of 220,000
men were placed on the frontiers of Saxony and Silesia in a
fortnight, and in 1870, Germany, by means of her railways, was-
enabled to mobilise her force in 9 days, and to send in 8 days-
more an army of 400,000 men and 1,200 guns to the French
fiontier. Valuable use can be made of railways even
after operations have begun, such as transferring fractions;
of an army from a distant point, bringing up reinforce-
ments rapidly at critical times, and keeping the front
well supplied with munitions of war. But it is in their
effect in modifying the conditions, hardships, and privations of
war that railways are of no less importance, since they enable an
army to dispense, in a great measure, with the enormous land
transport corps or military trains which formerly passed between,
it and its base, and from the great speed and comparative cer-
tainty that can be obtained from them, the area of supply is-


largely increased. The wounded and sick—who in former days
remained in the place where they had fallen or in the
neighbourhood and thus encumbered the movements
of armies can at the present time be removed to the
rear with the greater ease and regularity and receive
better care, comfort and relief in the hospitals estab-
lished away from the field of operations. This also applies
to prisoners, who can be promptly disposed of by the same
means. During a war great advantages are thus obtained from
the use of railways; economy of time and physical labour in
the concentration of armies ; in the disposal of prisoners ; in the
accumulation and distribution of food j in the transport of
stores; and in securing the full fighting strength of all available
men by disencumbering armies of the sick and wounded. The
introduction of railways in warfare has not, however, altered the
main principles which govern the selection of points on which
magazines or depots should be established, nor the direction of
the lines of supply, but in fact has made the choice of these
points and the establishment of depots much easier, as they can
be placed at the junction of important railway lines in order to
■embrace more country and facilitate supply. During the Franco-
German war of 1870-71, the German army had transport supply
companies attached to the divisions of each army corps. When
travelling by rail, the troops were fed at certain stations, or sup-
plied with their food at these stations. Phe whole management
appears to have been admirably carried out, and, when so per-
formed, it considerably facilitates operations. Pield or military
railways are made to carry the largest possible freight consistent
with their being constructed in the least possible time, while
speed is a secondary consideration and must generally be low.
tramways, worked by manual, horse, steam or electrical power,
.afford an easy means of communication from artillery and
engineer parks at a siege to the batteries and advanced trenches.
A trench tramway laid in the parallels and approaches is ap-
plicable to the service of ammunition to the siege battery maga-
zines ; for the transport of engineer material; for the moving up


of guns into position and for the removal of the sick and'
wounded to the rear.
Although railways as now constructed are comparatively a
late invention, dating their introduction from the construction of
the Manchester and Liverpool line in 1829, there is ample
evidence to show that the necessity for increased facilities for
transporting material was recognised at a far earlier period,
although the means then adopted were doubtless crude in the
extreme. However, the Crimean war, in 1854-56, was the first
in which a railway was prominently used. A line about five
miles long was constructed from Balaclava to Sebastopol, and
worked by the land transport corps, but was not finished until"
the war was far advanced and in a strategical point of view had
no influence on the operations, being principally used for the
transport of material. The navvies worked at it hard and
honestly, with a few exceptions, but the dread of the provost-
marshal eventually produced a wholesome influence on the dis-
position of the refractory. In order to hasten the completion'
some of the Naval Brigade also assisted in its construction.
The line wound its way from the post office at Balaclava towards-
Kadakoi, above which township on the hillside a stationary
engine had been placed. This pulled the trucks up from Bala-
clava. The Turks at first were greatly astonished and scared by
the puffs of steam from its iron lungs and the shrieks and
screams as it was put in motion. The Cossacks posted beyond
the valley could see the works of the I‘ailway which must have
caused them very serious apprehensions and excitement when
they beheld the trucks rushing round the hill and down the
incline at the rate of twenty miles an hour. They galloped up
to the heights to look at this phenomenon and then capered
about shaking their lances when the trucks disappeared. In
the bombardment of Sebastopol the whole of the British forces
were employed in the transport of an enormous number of
projectiles and tons of ammunition required for the service of the
batteries, so that the railway rendered some good assistance in
the carriage of shot and shell, and enabled a depot to be formed'


four miles from Balaclava, which, however, was not large enough
for the demands made upon it, being emptied almost as soon
as filled by parties from the regiments in front, who carried the
ammunition to the camp depot, four miles further on. It was in
the Italian campaign in 1859, when the French were able to
pour troops into Piedmont with great rapidity and regularity
that the use and great advantage of railways were first shown
for concentrating purposes, and on two occasions in that
campaign, the armies in the field were re-inforced during
the progress of the battle by fresh troops brought up
by rail. The influence of railways upon and their great value
in military operations were next exemplified during the civil war
in America, in 1861-65, a conflict which illustrated their immense
power. The late General Sherman stated “that one single line
of railway, which he had conquered bit by bit trom the enemy,
supplied his army of 100,000 men so admirably that not a man,
horse or mule was for a day without food, and the troops were
always provided with abundant supplies of clothing and
ammunition, and not only was the daily supply kept up, but pro-
visions for several weeks were stored on different points of his
line of communication.” Again in the Prusso-Austrian war of
1866, railways were found to be extremely advantageous. The
expedition to Abyssinia, in 1867-68, was attended with great
difficulty of transport over a rugged, mountainous country.
During this war a line was laid from Zoolla to the Koomaylee
Pass, but unfortunately was not completed until about the
cessation of hostilities. Later on, in 1870-71, during the
Franco-German war, railways played a very important part,
heavy calls being made on them. The special line made by the
Germans was not ready for working until within a few days of
the fall of Metz, when it became useless; but the Germans,
reaping the advantage of an offensive warfare, possessed numer-
ous lines between their front and their base, and by these means
were able to place fifteen corps d’armee, complete, on the
frontier in a fortnight from the day of the order of mobilisation
being given. During the investment of Paris they ran on a


single track from 12 to 14 trains per diem, a circumstance which
enabled them to feed their army round about the besieged city,
and to bring up artillery and siege material, and also reinforce-
ments averaging from 2000 to 3000 men daily. In addition to
all this, upon the capitulation of Paris, the Germans actually
brought up to the very gates of the city a sufficient quantity of
food and other necessaries to prevent its reduced inhabitants
from perishing of hunger and exposure. A portable railway sent
■out with the expedition to the Gold Coast or Ashantee in 1873-
74, was absolutely useless, because of imperfect stability, and
the obstacles and dangers of this expedition were much
increased by the want of the means of transport which a work-
able line would have afforded for the first 30 miles on the road
to Coomassie. Since then greater perfection has been attained
in the making of portable lines and even steel bridges for them,
notably that type invented by Alfred Cottrau, an Italian
■engineer, and which has been claimed as a practical solution
■of establishing temporary communication rapidly and efficiently.
In 1877-78, during the Russo-Turkish war, the railroads were
again in great requisition; and in the last Anglo-Afghan cam-
paign the great trunk lines of British India were the means of
rapidly transporting large supplies of men and material towards
the frontier and field of operations. During this war the greatest
feat in the way of rapid railway construction was accomplished,
130 miles being laid in xoi days, under the direction of Sir
Richard Temple. But it was in the Egyptian war of 1882-85
that railways played the most important part. Up to this period
their operations had been wholly confined to affairs of transport.
In Egypt, however, trains were actually converted into movable
Batteries for attack and defence. During the brief time that
elapsed between the bombardment of Alexandria and the
arrival of the British Infantry, the slender naval force ashore
did an especially good piece of work. A locomotive engine
and some goods trucks, which the able-seamen and the marines
found when the town was first taken possession of, were
by them converted into an armour-clad train, on which they


mounted and served a forty-pounder gun, and very soon this
style of movable battery, constructed under the direction of and
named after Captain Fisher, became an important feature in
this war. Lieutenant-Colonel Hermann Vogt, of the German
army, in his commentaries on this campaign, thus describes the
novelty: —“ The Locomotive, which is protected on all sides
from the enemy’s fire by iron rails and sandbags, is placed in
the middle of a train composed of a number of open trucks pro-
tected by iron plates and sandbags. The engine, which is
intended only to go at moderate speed, can be stopped at once
by brakes, and several empty trucks in front prevent danger
from the explosion of the enemy’s mines. A Nordenfeldt gun
is mounted on the first armoured carriage, and a forty-pounder
■on the other, which, by means of a crane, can be so quickly
dismounted and remounted, that it is said that one minute
suffices from the halting of the train to dismount and
Ere the gun. A specially ingenious arrangement also enables
a Gatling gun or a forty-pounder to be fired from the carriage
without any injury from the recoil ensuing to the train ”...
“ Materials and tools were always carried in order to
repair any damages to the permanent way, etc.” The plan of a
.similar train was laid before the British war office in 1871, by a
Mr. Evelyn Liardet, who took out a patent and asserted his
rights thereto; but the idea was claimed to have been
■suggested, so far back as 1849, by Mr. James Anderson, C.E., of
Stockbridge, Edinburgh, who submitted his plans to the Duke
of Wellington and Lord Hardinge at the Horse Guards in the
year mentioned, but owing to the great cost of such trains at
that period, “ the Commander-in-Chief did not think it
necessary to offer any opinion on the matter.” In the Egyptian
campaign, Arabi very soon imitated his enemy by mounting a
gun on a truck which was screened by a shield to prevent the
contents being seen, and several sallies, by both parties, were
made in this fashion. The Egyptians being in possession of
nearly a thousand miles of railway, which, radiating from Cairo,
the capital, led to the most important military posts, could have


destroyed the lines effectually at the large bridges, and if they
had reached the bridges over the Nile before the invader, then
at any one of them, they could have made a final appeal to
arms. The British in following the railway line in their
advance with the main body of troops acted in accordance with
the European tactics of war, as communication with the rear
was thus rendered more easy. At Tel-el-Kebir, Arabi brought
up reinforcements by train on to the battle-field, and upon
defeat his forces principally took flight by the same means ;
while the British also attacked the position along the side of
the canal with armoured trains. During the campaign new
strategic lines from Suakim to Ismalia and to Berber were
projected. The latter, of which great things were expected, as-
some supposed it would, as a permanent line, exert a powerful
influence in pacifying the Soudan, was to be a total length of
280 miles. In a work of such magnitude and difficulty, to bo
accomplished in the face of an active enemy, nothing like an
actual contract could have been entered into, and the position
occupied by Messrs. Lucas and Aird, in charge of details and
execution was merely that of agents of the Government. The
advance into the country and the plotting out of this great
scheme, in conjunction with a water supply was naturally left
to the Corps of Royal Engineers. Notwithstanding the slow
delivery of plant, and the majority of the navvies and skilled
workmen originally selected for the work being requisitioned
for military purposes and other drawbacks, the line was-
completed as far as Otao, a distance of 21 miles, and an
elevation of 1350 feet from Suakim. Despite the enormous
expense incurred and the labour bestowed, the work was then
relinquished on account of a probable cessation of hostilities in
this part of the country, and the vast stores of material
conveyed for this undertaking by some thirty ships were
returned to England to be utilised to connect various defence
works at many fortified positions on the coast.
Besides the enormous advantages before enumerated,,
railways greatly facilitate the first operations of the assailants,


and the late General Sir Edward Hamley, in his “ Operations,
of War,” wrote as follows on their influence in defensive and
offensive warfare : —“ Offensive, compared with defensive war
must still be enormously costly; but the invader will retain and
even augment, by means of his railways, the advantage of making
a sudden concentrated advance on part of an extended line of
defence; and even the combined resources of railways and
telegraphs could not avail to meet the first onset under
circumstances geographically unfavourable to the defence
“ But on the other hand, the defender, if forced
to retreat, will easily destroy for the time being the
railways in the territory which he is quitting while
preserving the full use of those which he still covers;
whereas, the assailant must either content himself with
the ordinary roads or pause to repair the railways and to
reorganise the means of supply through those channels. Thus,
the advantages of the initiative will, in such a case, be much
more transient than before, and the defender will concentrate
on the threatened line with far greater comparative facility. ,r
From the foregoing the same author concluded that “an
invader (supposing other circumstances to be favourable) should
direct his attack on a part of the theatre of war where railways
exercise small influence, since their effect on the whole is in
favour of the defender. The movement to a flank of large-
bodies by rail, within reach of the enemy, must be especially
dangerous, because the troops follow each other in small
isolated fractions and are very defenceless if attacked during:
the transit.” The cause of the partial failure of military railways
hitherto made is to be found in the impossibility of executing
the works of which ordinary lines consist, such as cuttings,,
embankments, bridges, etc., with the rapidity necessary for
laying down a field railway at the commencement, or even
the early part of a war; and in reviewing the value of
railways during war, it must not be forgotten that their
importance causes them to be attacked, and consequently,
as railways are more easily destroyed than ordinary roads, pre-


■cautions must be taken to protect such lines of communication
from the incursions of an enterprising enemy. The nature of
defence depends upon the nature of attack likely to take place.
During the American war, the railways were exposed to con-
stant from large bodies of cavalry, so that isolated sentries
were of little use, and good signalling observations and flying
columns were the modes resorted to for their defence. In the
Franco-German war troops were supplied from the Landwehr to
carry out measures necessary for their protection, and when
there were not many regular troops available, the duty was
committed to small parties of patrols, and if the rails, &c., were
destroyed or in any way interfered with, the inhabitants of the
country were punished. During the Egyptian war much trouble
was caused by the frequent raids of Arabs, who, generally under
cover of night, scooped the sand from underneath the sleepers
and burnt them and also carried off material from many places
along the line. Thus the experience obtained from previous
campaigns shows that war cannot at the present day be carried
on with any prospect of success without well-organised military
railway service corps such as are in vogue in all the leading
European countries.
It is evident that railways must play an important, perhaps
the most important, part in the general defence scheme of
Australia, more especially as the greater portion of the popu-
lation will necessarily be always scattered over a large area of
country, and also because it would be a financial impossibility
to fortify all points that might be accessible to an enemy along
such a great stretch of sea-shore. Lieutenant-Colonel Von
Scheliha, in his treatise on “Coast Defence during the American
Civil War,” points out that the construction of railroads
radiating with their branches to different points on the coast,
recommends itself as a preferable and even a cheaper method
than the erection of extended and costly permanent fortifi-
cations at points that in themselves of no vital importance, do
not contain navy-yards, arsenals, depots, &c., and which could
be protected by forces stationed at suitable distances near the


junction of railroads and held in readiness for any case
of emergency.” It must be remembered too that
railways are reproductive works, whereas forts and batteries
are not and may soon become obsolete. In the
civil war of America the Confederates erred in making
an attempt to hold too many points upon the coast, and also'
upon the banks of navigable rivers, when, by means of the
railways traversing their territory in all directions, it might
have been feasible to convey considerable forces to places being
besieged or threatened with a serious attack, and then flying
columns, detached from the defending force, could have
occupied the enemy after a landing until reinforcements arrived.
The late Major-General, Sir Peter Scratchley, R.E., K.C.M.G., in
his first lecture on “ The Defences of New South Wales ” to the
officers of the military force in 1879, speaking of the power of
railways in defence, and also of military federation as a great
desideratum, said, “We cannot lose sight of the fact that when
Melbourne and Sydney are connected by rail, the defensive
power of each colony will be largely increased,” and again the
same officer, at the conclusion of his third lecture, remarked,
“In fact, I desire to introduce in military affairs a common
agreement between the Australian Colonies, for defence
purposes, without waiting for that political federation which-
may not come for many years, and without waiting for a time
of war, when it is always dangerous to introduce reforms.”'
“ When Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney and
Brisbane are connected by railways, and the principal ports
are properly secured from an attack, the defensive power of the
country will be so greatly increased as to render the success of
any hostile expedition an impossibility.” “The economy
which would result from such a combination does not need
demonstration.” “ Military federation would be the crowning
of the edifice of self-defence which the Australian Colonies are
building up, animated by the common aim of placing this
portion of the British Empire in a position to resist foreign
aggression, and thereby directly strengthen the hands of the


mother country.” The great trunk lines referred to were
completed through from Brisbane to Adelaide in June, 1889,
and as all railways are also managed as well as constructed by
the several Governments, good points have been thereby
secured in favour of the defensive scheme of Australia. There-
fore a very considerable portion of the inhabited area of this
-continent is now upon a better footing as regards defence; but
although these colonies have no foreign frontier to protect as
is the case with other parts of the British Empire, like India,
Canada and Africa, it must not be forgotten that a vast
seaboard offers many vulnerable points of attack, for which
reason the complete preservation of the country must ultimately
involve a very extensive system of coast defence. Now to
partly meet this contingency it will be observed that as the
railway systems are now so arranged, the bulk of the troops
could be concentrated on any important point where an enemy,
eluding the naval squadrons (as a first line of defence) had
gained a footing, and also that if defeated at first, nothing
could prevent a retirement of the defenders into the interior.
Thus the chances of a permanent occupation of the country by
a hostile force, at any rate in the settled districts, is very slight
indeed. Not only are the capitals connected by rail, but many
lines converge on these cities from the interior, so that each
colony could quickly concentrate troops in its metropolis, and
thence despatch them into the neighbouring states and oppose
a common enemy with great facility. Western Australia must
play a lone hand until the line which has been explored from
Perth, its capital, to Port Augusta in South Australia is carried
out. Comparatively speaking, Australia as an island-continent,
is in the nature of its defence similarly situated to Great Britain
and Ireland, but of course on a more gigantic scale. Of the
capital cities, Melbourne situate at the head of an extensive and
well-protected bay encircled by a very complete system of
railways, and Brisbane some distance up a narrow, winding,
and comparatively shallow river flanked by railways are
naturally the best defended positions, while Adelaide and


Sydney are less so by reason of their close proximity to and
■easy command from the sea. In reference to New South Wales
in general and the city of Sydney in particular, it must be
admitted that the defence will be incomplete until certain
railways are constructed. Of late years the Hawkesbury River
and the coal port of Newcastle, to the northward, and the coal
■emporiums and minor harbours of Bulli, Wollongong, Shoal-
haven and Kiama, to the southward, have been connected by
rail with the Metropolis, which will prevent them being made
use of by a hostile fleet, and Sydney has undoubtedly been
rendered more secure against attack by tramways to the
suburbs and surrounding districts. However, an extension of
the South Coast Railway to Jervis Bay, and lines to the
batteries on the northern and southern sides of the harbour, to
Manly, Long Bay, and also the extension of the Botany line to
La Perouse are urgently needed, as the carrying out of such a
scheme would increase tenfold, at a minimum cost, the strength
of the position for strategical reasons before enumerated.
Many complaints have arisen concerning the break of guage
which occurs on the main trunk lines at two out of three
boundaries of the colonies, but although the fact is to be
regretted its inconvenience is much exaggerated. While admitting
that transference occupies time and that such commercially
is a monetary consideration, still, in a military point of view,
there is but a very remote contingency of guns of large calibre
or munitions or stores of magnitude being sent on emergency
from any particular point threatened in one colony to any
particular point threatened in another colony, because the main
lines of each colony run well inland after tapping the coast at
or near the capitals, and heavy ordnance would not be required
at intermediate positions away from the coast nor indeed in so
many cases if railways are to become an important factor in
defence. Only field and machine guns, which are easily
conveyed would be removed when and where required, while
the troops could be readily transferred when halted at the
borders for supply of provisions. It must also be taken into


consideration that troops transported by rail, would, after a long
journey, be unfit for immediately taking the field, hence a short
delay would be immaterial.
To recapitulate; —firstly, railways and tramways are
favourable to the defence of a country; secondly, they greatly
multiply the power of defence by enabling, as it were, a
small force to perform the duties of a large one, and if
necessary to take the offensive; being also useful for the
mobilisation, concentration and reinforcement of armies ;
for the carriage of material and supplies ; for the removal of
prisoners and the sick and wounded ; for the moving up of
guns into position and the service of ammunition in the
trenches; also for movable batteries in attack or defence ;
thirdly, they greatly lessen the cost of defence by reducing the
requisite number of extensive permanent fortifications ; and
fourthly, without these means of communication war cannot,
at the present day, be carried out successfully. Taking a
cosmopolitan view of the subject, as war has of late been
rendered more complicated and costly, it is necessary to give
an impulse to scientific investigation in order to establish
those principles, which, while they provide for a more perfect
defence, shall thus minister to the convenience and comfort
of civil life as well as to the maintenance of security and
peace among the nations.
Wm. Brooks & 00., The City Printers, Queen’s Place, Sydney.




