

/■ Cs Aevog - . AftvO AV
| RAILWAY ECONOMY
•|| IN VICTORIA. .jf
FRANCIS A. CORBETT.
MELBOURNE :
*W. FAIRFAX & CO., 78, COLLINS STREET, EAST. Jff
JAMES J. BLUNDELL & CO., COLLINS STREET, WEST.
GEORGE ROBERTSON, COLLINS STREET, EAST.
• c


J A
■


RAILWAY ECONOMY
IN VICTORIA.
PEANCIS A. COEBETT.
MELBOURNE:
W. FAIRFAX & CO., 78, COLLINS STREET, EAST.
JAMES J. BLUNDELL & CO., COLLINS STREET, WEST.
GEORGE ROBERTSON, COLLINS STREET, EAST.
1 8 5 7.


PRINTED BY W. FAIRFAX AND CO., 78, COLLINS STREET, EAST,


PREFACE.
The form in which this pamphlet appears seems to
demand some explanation. The careful reader will perceive
that points which are presented with comparative promi-
nence, do not at the present moment engage public attention so
much as they have done; and that questions, which have now
happily ceased to excite any very animated discussion, have
a good deal swayed the general tenor of the argument. This
is accounted for by its having been written, just as it is now
published, during the long evenings of last July; at a period
when the newspapers were crowded with communications
on railways, provoked by the meetings of the Chamber of
Commerce and editorial articles, and of course prior to the
publication of the Report of the Surveyor-General, and the
mass of valuable information by which it is accompanied, as
well as to the discussions, within and without the Legislative
Assembly, which have been called forth by the contents of
that document.
Captain Clarke, in his able speech on the subject of
railways, has very truly remarked that there are broad
principles which could not be advantageously discussed in a
report. Yet the determination of general principles is
essential to the adoption of a good system. Feeling that the
treatment of the subject at the time I refer to was not such
as to satisfy myself, and supposing that many others were
similarly circumstanced, and noticing an incompleteness in
all that was said and written which tended to leave opinion


unsettled, I was induced to make an attempt to bring the
economical branch of the subject more in view. Circum-
stances prevented publication at the time, but as the trans-
ference of the subject to examination by a Select Committee
of the Assembly is sure to give rise to fresh discussion, it
has appeared to me a favorable period for placing my views
before the public, in the expectation that they may be sugges-
tive of others of greater value. lam the more encouraged to do
so by the hope to that effect, which Captain Clarke expressed
when he did me the honor, in his place in the Assembly, to
quote from the manuscript then in his possession; and
which he subsequently renewed, notwithstanding the
difference between us on many of those very points to which
the strongest objections were urged by his opponents in the
House—proving that he has been more desirous of seeing
that carried out which was most for the public good,
than obtaining any personal political triumphs.
I avail myself of the opportunity afforded by a preface,
to make a few remarks on the present aspect of this
question.
While I agree in the abstract with most of what has
been said on the necessity, under certain circumstances, of
strong and expensively constructed works, nothing which
has yet appeared has induced me to modify my opinions, or
has in the slightest degree tended to convince me that it is
impossible to have cheap and lightly constructed railways in
this country. Before, however, giving my reasons for being
unconvinced by the surveys and statements given in the
appendices to the Railway Report, it is but justice to the
engineers by whom these great labours were performed,
and from whom these statements have emanated, to state
that I have believed, ever since the late Legislative Coun-
cil adopted the Report of its Committee, recommending
surveys to be made of “ a line of railway not exceeding 200


miles at an expense not exceeding £BO per mile,” that the
result would be necessarily unsatisfactory. It was under this
impression, I wrote much of what is said in reference to rely-
ing too much on professional men, or imposing on them duties
which are not properly theirs. Had the Committee recom-
mended a good survey to be made of a certain area of
the colony with a view to the selection of railway routes,
and had they placed no such limitation on the expense,
we would now be in a much better position. But com-
bining with this limitation of expenditure the selection
before surveys were made, of a direct route from
Melbourne to Castlemaine, and of a direct route from Gee-
long to Ballaarat, was little short of ordering surveyors
merely to mark out these lines as they went along. Had
Captain Clarke been instructed to obtain all the necessary
topographical information, and to propose, for the considera-
tion of the Legislature, a series of lines founded on that
information, I have little doubt but that we should have had
a very different scheme presented from that before us, and
that we should now be in a better position to commence these
works.
The representations made to the Surveyor-General led
him to adopt the notion that the great midland ranges
render steep inclinations and expensive works inevitable.
Nevertheless there is nothing, in the hundreds of pages to
which the Report extends, that I can see, to warrant the
assumption. To whatsoever extent the nature of the country
at either side of the ranges may necessitate the adoption of
unfavorable gradients, the summit level of them, I repeat,
does not do so. In the first place there is no necessity
to go over the ranges at the high points selected. This,
however, is in accordance with the instructions of the old
Legislature. Secondly, even if these points be adopted,
their height need not occasion the steep gradients which the


engineer-in-chief proposes. The summit level from Mel-
bourne to Castlemaine is 1,886 feet above the terminus at
Batman’s Hill, and is 47 miles distant, making the necessary
gradient only lin 131. Had a serpentine course of greater
length been sought for, in place of strictly adhering to the
unfortunate instructions to mark out a “direct line,”* the
gradients might have been many feet more favorable even
than this, instead of having barely practicable inclina-
tions of 1 in 58 and lin 59. The necessary gradient
between Geelong and the summit level near Ballaarat is no
greater than 1 in 140, and yet the proposed route gives
gradients of lin 54. The necessary gradient of a line in
the Kilmore direction is not more than 1 in 208, and may be
much less by choosing a circuitous route, the summit level
being 1,138 feet above Batman’s Hill, or only 26 feet per
mile. With these facts before me, lam warranted in
asserting that the height of the ranges does not render
heavy works or rails necessary.
The strength to which railway works should be made
depends upon other circumstances besides gradients; for in-
stance, the rate of speed, in proportion to which the shocks are
greater or less, and the engines must be more or less weighty,
and the maximum weight of the load which it is advisable
should be draAvn in a single truck—whether it is better to
have a greater number of trains run each day with light loads,
or fewer with heavy. All these circumstances, and many
others, affect the question of light or heavy works; and as
the Committee of the old Council did not give any opinion
on these points, the engineers must have assumed them in
making their calculations. I am not aware whether these
gentlemen assumed 15, 30, or 60 miles an hour as the rate of
speed for which the works should be constructed, or 20, 40,
* This resolution in favor of direct routes has suggested the examination of the
policy of straight lines across the country, which is found in the text.


or 80 tons as the load, or 10, 20, or 30 carriages or trucks
as the length of the train to be attached to each locomotive,
but of this I am sure, that when the Legislature directed
estimates to be prepared, it should have adopted resolutions
on these points for the guidance of the engineers.
The surveys which have been made under the resolu-
tions in favor of direct routes, and of two particular lines, are
not such as can be adopted without re-examination. The
Mount Alexander line after passing the summit level,
though it should have uniformly a descent, ascends five times
and descends seven. This can scarcely be necessary.
When the lowest practicable summit level across
the great central ranges is agreed upon, the necessary
inclinations should be ascertained pretty nearly, and
every portion of the line which was less or more steep
than this necessary gradient, should be looked upon as a
comparative failure, received with distrust, and sanctioned
only after a rigid investigation. Staking out a line of
railway is like tracing out the path of a labyrinth puzzle—
one has to start again and again, a hundred different times
from a hundred different points, and when a barrier is met
his steps must be retraced to another and another point
from which to make fresh starts in search of the true line.
One foot cannot be positively fixed till the whole course
is determined, because an entry, be it ever so short, into a
wrong valley, may be irretrievable. The temptation of a few
good miles may render 100 miles of bad road inevitable.
Careful and extensive surveys should be made, and from
them good maps compiled, shaded to show the height and
inclination of every spot, so that anybody could trace out
and examine for himself the various routes; which, when
provisionally selected, should be tested by actual survey.
The chances are a 100 to 1 that lines marked out on imper-
fect surveys are wrong, though done under the superinten-


dance of the most ingenious and ablest man. In railways,
above all other things, nothing should be done hastily. Ill-
chosen lines confer little benefit, and bad gradients are an
eternal expense and waste of labour.
We should promptly adopt a system of Railway Economy,
determine the broad principles in accordance with which our
works should be formed, and take care to carry them out
with circumspection and deliberation. Let us eschew
peddling and false economy. If an engineer-in-chief is
competent to direct the disposal of millions of money, he
should be placed in a position suitable to his ability and to
the great trust reposed in him. If he is deserving of no
greater consideration than a clerk, many of whom have
an equal salary with his, then he is unfit for a task affecting so
deeply the welfare and prosperity of the colony. It is to be
hoped that our Legislature will recollect that the present
unsatisfactory position, as regards the speedy commence-
ment of railways is not the fault either of Captain Clarke,
Captain Pasley, or Mr. Darbyshire, but is a necessary con-
sequence of the loose, indefinite and erroneous proceed-
ings of the late Legislative Council, and that they will
adopt resolutions more precise, complete and decisive.
March 17th, 1857.


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
Preliminary Remarks. Railway legislation. Functions of the Legis-
lature. Parliament, not the Executive, to determine the many
economical questions connected with Railways ... ... 9
CHAPTER 11.
CHAPTER 11.
By whom Railways should be made. The Legislation of the United
Kingdom not a guide for Victoria. Necessity of guarding against
a waste of capital. Making public thoroughfares a source of
private income ... ... ... ... ... ... 12
CHAPTER 111.
CHAPTER 111.
State Aid to Private Associations. Impolicy of the system of
guaranteeing interest. French system of Guarantees sound in
principle. Inconsistency of giving Grants of Public Lands
to Railway Companies ... ... ... ... ... 15
CHAPTER IV.
CHAPTER IV.
Importance of ascertaining what the Economical Principles
INVOLVED IN THE FORMATION OF RAILWAYS ARE. What CCOllOmy
in railway construction is. Nature of the benefits conferred by
Railways ... ... ... ... ... ... 18


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER V.
Effects of Transport by Railways on Production. Injurious con-
sequences of a high rate of Carriage. Cost of Carriage in the
United Kingdom and the United States. Effects of bad roads
on Agriculture ... ... ... ••• 22
CHAPTER VI.
CHAPTER VI.
Choice of Routes. Selection of routes in connection with the carriage
of commodities. General principles on which routes should be
chosen. Interest of the mining, agricultural, and trading sections
of the population in routes. Railways through fertile land de-
sirable. Principles on which routes should be chosen. Short
routes and straight lines desirable only under certain circum-
stances. Routes the chief cause of the costliness of English rail-
ways. Curious principle of expenditure by private companies
illustrated; consequences of their policy; its frequent ill-success.
The system pursued by private companies not applicable to this
colony ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 29
CHAPTER VII.
CHAPTER VII.
Choice of Routes (Continued). Parliament should not rely too much
upon professional judgment in the selection of routes. Danger
of acting precipitately. Necessity of extensive and careful
surveys ... ... ... ... ... ... 42
CHAPTER VIII.
CHAPTER VIII.
Construction op our Railways. No choice between the most im-
proved kind of Railways and common roads. Economy of labour
the object of railways. Wooden and iron tramways. The inad-
visability of adopting an inferior mode of transit shown by the
the history of railway improvements ... ... ... 44
CHAPTER IX.
CHAPTER IX.
Construction of Railways (Continued). Speed not relatively so im-
portant here as in England Passenger traffic of most im-
portance in England, and goods traffic in Victoria. Lines of
lighter construction suitable to our present wants. Curves and
light rails admissible in this country. Gradients. Economical
considerations involved in determining the reduction of ascents. 49


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER X.
Costliness op Railway Works. Effect of the value of money on
expenditure. Importance of trespassing little on the capital
of new countries. Works may he made costly for the sake of
durability in old and wealthy countries. Influence which the
probable fall of labour, and the certain increase of population,
should have on present expenditure. Costliness of construction
adverse to the interests of the more remote parts of the colony. 54
CHAPTER XI.
CHAPTER XI.
A general system op Railwats. The course pursued in Belgium.
Applicability of it to Victoria. Necessity of connecting the gold-
fields with each other. A grand trunk line through the midst
of the colony. Benefit of proclaiming a general system at an
early period. The land not to be kept idle till the railways are
made. Cross lines. Priority in selecting termini should be de-
termined according to population ... ... ... ... 61
CHAPTER XII.
CHAPTER XII.
Conclusion. Borrowing money for making Railways. National Debt
objected to on false grounds. General remarks. ... .. 69




RAILWAY ECONOMY IN VICTORIA.
CHAPTER I.
PRELIMINARY REMARKS.
Railway Legislation. Functions of the Legislature. Parliament, not the
executive, to determine the many economical questions connected
with Railways.
Of all the questions which at present occupy the atten-
tion of the people of this colony, there is none of equal
importance with that of railways, and certainly there is no
other calculated to afford the members of our nety Parlia-
ment so favourable an opportunity of evincing really useful
and solid abilities. The services which they can render will
not be confined to vicing with one another in displays of
liberality as regards votes of public money, nor in exhibitions
of zeal on behalf of the respective districts they represent.
Their duties will greatly exceed the mere selection of
termini or stations; for there are many matters connected
with the principles on which our means of intercommuni-
cation should be formed, which are much less dependent on
professional knowledge than the generality of people seem
to think. Indeed, the part which the engineer, in his purely
professional capacity, has to perform, is quite distinct from
the economical considerations which must affect the con-
struction of railways and the choice of routes. He has
necessarily almost as little to do with some of these
questions, as the collector of taxes ought to have in dictating
the policy on which the fiscal system should be based, or as
a keeper of a prison in determining what are the social,
moral, and political motives which should determine the
principles of penal jurisprudence. Had this been kept more
fully in mind by those who have had control in the forma-


tion and management of lines of railway, and had they
yielded themselves up less implicitly to the guidance of
engineers, there would have been fewer complaints of the
comparative ill success of lines, better dividends for share-
holders, though, no doubt, fewer monuments of mechanical
skill and of prodigious national and individual wealth. The
railway engineer has very little more to do with the
position and course of a line, and with the expenditure
which should be incurred in its construction, than the
architect employed to build a shop or a store has to do with
its situation, size, and costliness. The retailers and mer-
chants who employ or consult the latter are the best judges
of the sites where they will get most customers, and of the
accommodation required for their business, as well as of the
portion of capital they can afford, or may consider prudent
to expend, though they will, of course, yield in some mea-
sure to the suggestions which such circumstances as the
situation of the ground, the nature of the foundation, the
vicinity to materials, and many other matters of the like
nature, will present to the minds of men of professional
experience. Sending out railway engineers to survey and
mark out lines of road, without, in the first instance, fur-
nishing them with instructions as to the views and limits of
the projectors, would be a very great error. To prescribe
certain principles for the guidance of the executive in the
selection and construction of the railways will form a very
leading duty of our representatives.
The Legislature ought, in the first instance, to come to a
determination respecting certain general principles of
railway construction of far more importance than e,ven the
great question of the narrow or wide guage, which so long
occupied committees of the House of Commons. A general
standard of action should be fixed upon. The expense per
mile which it is undesirable to exceed, in the grading or
laying out of the track on which the rails are to be laid
should be specified ; the maximum of gradients and of
curves, in the various circumstances which combinations
with different levels entail, should be specified; the tracts
of country which it is most desirable to traverse should be


pointed out, and other limitations and obligations imposed;
and then, and only then, should the surveyors be sent out
to discover how neatly they can approach to all the condi-
tions laid down. They will, under such cirumstances, instead
of searching out for good hard hills, free from sand drifts,
and otherwise favourable for magnificent tunnels; or instead
of selecting the steep banks of creeks suitable for viaducts
of enormous span, calculated to excite the admiration of
travellers, and to procure the eclat of newspaper paragraphs,
about “ the progress of the stupendous works,” seek for
valleys which can be penetrated without cuttings, and flats
which can be crossed without embankments and fillings. In
determining all these things, professional knowledge and
experience should be consulted and obtain due weight; but
in availing ourselves of them, we should bear in mind the
costly consequences of yielding in too facile a manner to
the narrower propensities of professional enthusiasm, when
not chastened by economical reflections or the more enlarged
views which ought to characterise the statesman.
Where railways are made by private companies the
question of dividends alone is involved, but where they are
made by the State, politico-economical considerations
should entirely govern the principles on which they ought
to be constructed. To arrive at a determination as to what
these principles are, we must review many questions of very
wide scope and of the highest importance, and which are so
interwoven with one another, that we can very imperfectly
see the force of one, if we do not at the same time keep the
other in view. Before, however, proceeding to deal with
the topics alluded to, the often debated question of whether
railways can with greatest public advantage be made by the
State or by private Qompanies, seems to demand some, but
not, I apprehend, very lengthened comments.


CHAPTER 11.
By whom Railways should be made. The Legislation of the United
Kingdom not a guide for Victoria. Necessity of guarding against
a waste of Capital. Making Public Thoroughfares a source of private
income.
In the first place it should be borne in mind that there
are very few parallel circumstances between an old country
supplied with good roads, and a new one. In the former
instance the State has already provided and maintains a
mode of traffic for the public, and the question in that
instance is whether it shall provide an additional set of
roads of a different kind, or surrender one of the two to
private monopoly. But in a new country, where the
Government has as yet no roads, the real question is which
of the two kinds it ought to construct; whether it shall
instead of availing itself of the progress of science and
mechanical improvement, construct the roads to which less
enlightened ages were of necessity confined, or whether it
shall perpetrate the absurdity of wasting the capital of the
country on double lines of roads of two different kinds, one
of which it will endeavour to render as useless as possible
by attracting all traffic to the other; or whether it shall
surrender the roads of the country into private hands, and
have no public lines of intercommuication, and graft upon
the latter monstrosity the absurdity of giving up a large
quantity of the public lands to become private property for
ever.
The course pursued in reference to railways in the
United Kingdom cannot be looked upon as a deliberate act,
or taken as a precedent furnished by the statesmen of that
country, because, when the Imperial Government suffered
itself to be drawn into the system of allowing private com-
panies to acquire possession of traffic by railways, this mode
of transit was an experiment, the advantage of which was
questioned, and the progress and importance of which no
person foresaw. Locomotives were practically unknown


when the Bill. for the Liverpool and Manchester line was
passed; the country then possessed a complete provision for
intercommunication, superior to that of any other nation in
the world; and no one had a thought of calling upon the
Government for anything superior to the mail coach-roads
then existing; but in this colony, we are without roads,
and if the Government make the old-fashioned and inferior
ones, and let private individuals form the superior descrip-
tion, our capital will be wasted just the same as if the
two kinds were made out of the public revenue, the one
alongside the other, or as if rival companies were suffered
to make competing lines.
Now, be it remembered that it is as much the charge
and duty of Government, provided it can do so without in-
fringing private rights or liberty, to guard against that por-
tion of the capital which is in private hands, being squan-
dered or wasted, as it is to preserve that which is more im-
mediately under the charge of the Executive. Thus, a man
will not be allowed to burn his own house. The nation at
large suffers equally when either division of its capital is lost.
All portions of it, whether in public or private hands, give
employment to labour, and some one or all branches of in-
dustry must inevitably suffer when any part is wasted or
unprofitably expended. It is not altogether useless to re-
peat that it was not an optional matter Avith the English
whether the national capital should be ex-
pended on tAvo sets of roads, inasmuch as the one had been
made before the improved kind Avas discovered; and if
there Avere a choice, no statesman, no man pretending to
any knoAvledge of political economy, Avould sanction, much
less recommend, the double expenditure. To us, fortu-
nately, a choice is open.
If, then, it be conceded that there ought only to be one
set of roads, and that, in the case of the main thoroughfares,
railways should be preferred, the question is narroAved to
the OAvnership of the latter. Let those Avho are of opinion
that raihvays should be suffered to fall into private hands,
say whether they Avould, if the same parties Avere Avilling
to make common roads or bridges, Avheresoever traffic


was likely to be large, approve, on the ground of the State
being saved the outlay, or of private persons managing such
things better than the officers of Government, of their
being handed over to monopolists with the right of levying
such tolls as would give them a fair interest for their money.
People are so accustomed to consider common roads and
bridges as by right and necessity the property of the public,
that they would scarcely listen to a proposition for their
alienation ; and yet there is no reason why it should not be
done in one case as Avell as in the other. All men recognise
the advantage of the most complete freedom for traffic ; all
acknowledge the importance, as regards the progress of
trade and industry of the utmost facility for intercommuni-
cation, and there are few Avho would not experience strong
sensations of dismay at common roads being passed out of
the hands of the public. Very many consider it a highly
questionable policy to charge a toll even for the mainte-
nance of common roads; and there is scarcely a man in ten
thousand who would approve of such tolls being increased
for the purpose of augmenting the general revenue.
Almost unanimously would men exclaim that such a step
would retard the progress of the country to the snail’s pace
of Asiatic despotism; that it would be sinking into the
policy of dark ages and semi-barbarous nations. Never-
theless it would be as correct in principle, and fully as con-
sistent, as to hand over railways to private monopoly and
profit. The reason we do not all grasp and recognise the
inconsistency of considering that the superior description of
roads may be private property, and that the inferior should
not, is merely because we have never seen the one done, and
circumstances have led to the other being permitted, and
habit so completely reconciles us to both systems, that we
do not think of examining into their merits. Men are
gradually becoming so sensible of the injury of tolls and
charges, that they are preparing to abolish even such
things as tonnage dues for the maintenance of light-
houses, and to defray harbour expenses; and yet others
will propose to have the internal traffic of the country made
a source of private income.


CHAPTER 111.
State Aid to Private Associations. Impolicy of the system of Guar am
teeing Interest. French system of Guarantees sound in principle.
Inconsistency of giving Grants of Public Lands to Railway
Companies.
We next come to the novelty of guaranteeing to the
proprietary of railways a certain rate of interest. The
grounds upon which this extraordinary proceeding was jus-
tified, were, it may be presumed, the usefulness and advant-
ages of railways. But omnibuses, drays, steamboats, and
all branches of traffic and industry are useful. If, therefore,
we enter into an engagement, provided lines do not pay,
owing to their being badly selected by ill judging projectors
and speculators, that they shall, nevertheless, be profitable
to them, why do we not, on the same principle, guarantee
to farmers, whose labour is the most essential of all, that
they shall receive a suitable profit on their industry? Why
do we not in like manner encourage lines of w T aggons and
O oo
coaches throughout the country ? Are not the omnibuses
to St. Kilda, Collingwood, and Richmond as beneficial as
the railway to Sandridge ? It may be urged as a reason for
palliating those guarantees that private railways relieve the
wear and tear of public roads ; though it certainly was not
on this account that the lines to Geelong and Williamstown
were guaranteed, as all the traffic to those towns was by
water. But if this argument be admitted as sound, we
ought also to ensure a profit to the owners of the Geelong
steamers, and to the companies who have lately opened
those highly useful lines to Port Albert, Port Fairy, and
Portland. The fact is, we have been legislating without
reflection, and not upon principle, and the legislation of
caprice can never be other than a series of blunders and
inconsistencies, ahvays discreditable, and often injurious.
Another reason assignable for encouraging private com-
panies to relieve the Government of the duty of providing


the means of transit, is that the necessity of borrowing
money and taxing the people is thereby obviated. This is
not, however, a national advantage, but merely the shift of
a bad financial Government, because it makes little difference
to the country at large whether a portion of its capital is
sunk by Government or by private citizens, or whether it
has to pay for that capital in the shape of taxation, or by
fares extra high.
There are, beside the defectiveness of the principle, many
other objections to guaranteeing interest on private enter-
prises, one of the chief of which is the bonus which it offers
to wild and reckless speculation. If men’s capital be
secured to them by Government, they will, on little better
than cursory examination of the merits of lines, become
shareholders. “It is notorious” to quote from a work of
respectability, “ that the greater portion of private railways
have been brought into existence by secretaries, engineers,
or persons hoping to become directors, or having some
object in attaining notoriety, and oftener still by men who
were no better than sharpers. The original projectors and
nominal shareholders of lines have not, in the great majority
of cases, been the solvent persons on whom the carrying out
and completion eventually devolved. The names on the
first of these lists disappear after a few dividends are called
for. The representations about the cheapness with which
the lines could be made, the facilities which the country
afforded, and the statistics of the immensity of the traffic,
have been invariably false and exaggerated.” And if people
have suffered themselves by such fictions to be deceived
where their risk was entire, what would be the success in
procuring lists of shareholders where there was no risk, or
where the shares may be sold at a bonus in foreign markets.
Guaranteeing interest is holding out temptations to strug-
gling men or adventurers, who are too clever and too
dishonest to be contented to live by steady industry ;it is
seducing the public into bad speculations, and causing the
precious capital of the country to be misapplied or wasted.
Railways are got up in most countries in the same manner
as we have seen land and building societies got up in this


colony, by men whose ingenuity and neediness are on a par.
It we are to have railway companies, the proprietary should
be forced to watch their shares with the same interest they
would their private business. Not only should they not be
guaranteed any interest, but the clause making them liable
only to the extent of their shares should be yielded only
after a very strict examination, and on very stringent con-
ditions.
There is reasonableness in the Continental system of
guaranteeing a certain rate of interest to companies, and
paying half the cost of construction, because the lines are
only leased and revert to the State after a certain period.
In fact, it is a peculiar system of Government loans, in
which the State guarantees a minimum interest, gives the
subscribers a chance of a higher rate in return for the an-
nuities being terminable, and allows them a voice in the
management, because they have an advantage in its success,
and would be sufferers by mismanagement. But to give the
hard earnings of the people to wealthy speculators, without
any ultimate return, may be legislation, but it certainly is
neither wisdom nor justice. If the people are taxed for a
general system of railways, every man in the community,
even the very poorest, gets a recompense for what he pays in
the reduction of all the commodities he consumes, or in the
increase of employment occasioned by the progress and
extension of industry; but the benefit derived from private
lines is only local, and they, in too many cases, become
public nuisances.
As regards the system of giving away the national lands
to private companies, we have not to trace back much of
our local history to find an expression of public opinion
on the matter. The Government gave a piece of land for
a wharf to the agents of the Peninsular and Oriental Com-
pany (which at that time performed services as important as
those of any railway company) and imposed conditions so
onerous as to be declined by the English directors, and
which were somewhat similar to those of the French railway
system —that is to revert with all improvements to the public.
It appeared, however, to some of our worthy merchants,


wao, no doubt, would be liberal enough in voting subsidies
for rapid postal communication, so very monstrous a
thing to give public property away, even for a term of
years only, that a patriotic emeute was the consequence.
Yet not a word of remonstrance has been uttered—not a
denunciation has fallen against granting land for wharves,
and the right of making railway piers at Sandridge,
Geelong, and Williamstown—not a murmur has been raised
against giving a half a quarter of a mile of land fronting
Flinders-street and the Yarra, some of the most valuable
in the city, to a few private gentlemen, who could proba-
bly give no other reason for asking it for nothing, than
that they could well afford to pay for it—not a voice was
ever raised against Batman’s Hill Station being made a
donation for individual profit; nevertheless, if it is wrong to
give wharves to steam packet companies, it is' equally so to
give them to railway companies. -
In place of railways being constructed by private com-
panies and a profit guaranteed by the Government, it
would be much more rational if they were made by the
State, and a certain moderate rate of Interest guaranteed
by the towns and districts through which they passed, in
return for the special benefit derived by them. This would
have the effect of preventing lines from being prematurely
made, and would be a check upon undue preference to
places whose interests were advocated by influential,
active, or persuasive men.
CHAPTER IY.
Importance of ascertaining what the Economical Principles involved in the
formation of Railways are. What economy in Railway construction
is. Nature of the benefits conferred by Railways.
From the question whether the internal traffic of the
country ought to be retained within the control of the
people themselves, through their Legislature, or abandoned
to private monopoly, we may turn to the discussion of those
matters which appertain to the economical principles which


should guide us in the construction of our lines. For we
cannot with propriety proceed to the consideration of the
engineering branch of the subject without previously
coming to a distinct understanding as to the reasons why
and wherefore we desire railways in preference to common
roads; also, as to whether we attach the same precise
meaning to the terms we use in reference to them.
To give an instance as regards the latter (the meaning
of terms) let us take the often repeated statement that stone
bridges are more economical than wooden ones. This may
be true, but before we agree to it, we must first understand
in what sense the word “ economy ” is used by those who
make the assertion, and how it is understood by others.
There is immediate economy, and ultimate economy, which
are two very distinct things, and open a wide margin for
discussion, as will be shown more fully hereafter. Thus one
man may say it was more economical to give £6 for a coat
than to give £3, and another may consider it the utmost
extravagance to go to such a price. Both would be right in
their way, because they judged according to their relative
positions. It would be better for the rich man to give the
higher price if the dearer article lasted more than twice as
long as the cheap; whereas, the present use of money may
be so important to the poor man, that it may be more advan-
tageous for him to buy five such coats for three the other
would get. So a professional man may use the term economy
in an engineering sense, and a politician and financier may
understand it very differently.
In like manner, we must agree as to the nature and kind
of benefits we propose to draw from our mode of intercom-
munication, before we can determine satisfactorily the kind
of roads best adapted to supply our peculiar wants —whether
common roads, or cast iron or wooden tramways for horses,
or oval rails for locomotives. If we want railroads chiefly
to supply the deficiency of navigable rivers, canals, inlets,
extensive coasts, or numerous harbours, it may be wise to
have them differently placed, taking different routes, or of a
somewhat different construction from what they might be
if we required them principally for passenger traffic. In


considering the economy of railways in Victoria, we must
not overlook the many peculiarities of our position, and
above all we should examine whether their employment
here may not be somewhat different from their use in other
countries. If, for example, we want them chiefly for the
conveyance of commodities, we must take into consideration
the kind of commodities to be transported, and where these
are likely to be procured. It would be the height of absur-
dity to make a line through an arid and barren soil, were we
to contemplate its being mainly used for the transportation of
agricultural produce. On the other hand, having passenger
traffic chiefly in view, we must unquestionably select the route
where population is most numerous, or likely to be so. Hence,
if we reflect for a moment, we cannot fail to perceive that
very different considerations from mere engineering facilities
govern the choice of routes. An examination of the
CJ
economical part of the question will, moreover, lead us to
perceive that the great difference in the cost per mile of con-
structing railways has not been altogether occasioned, as
very many people seem to think, by engineering obstacles.
Everybody, now-a-days, is aware why it is that commo-
dities and passengers can be carried so much more cheaply
on railways than on common roads, but it is necessary for
reference in the argument which follows, and to preserve the
connection of the deductions Avhich are derivable therefrom,
to recall the mechanical reasons which occasion the disparity.
The difference of friction or cohesion between wheels
passing over soft yielding roads, and over hard rails of the
most approved construction is so great, as to amount to an
economy of power rising in some instances to little short of
twenty-fold in favour of the latter. Mr. Wood, in his trea-
tise, estimates the difference between the power of a horse
drawing on a railway, as compared Avith his execution on the
best English turnpike road, as 7.5 to 1. In other Avords, that
as much may be transported by two horses on the former, as
with fifteen on the latter. The gain derivable from the
introduction of railways is, therefore, in proportion to the
roads Avhich they supersede.
On the Quincy tramroad, the plates of Avhich Avere of


iron, the usual load for one horse, drawing at the rate of
three miles an hour, was ten tons, which closely corresponds
with Mr. Wood’s estimate, inasmuch as on the best common
roads in the United Kingdom, from five and twenty to thirty
cwt. is an ordinary load. If we divide seven and a half
(Mr. Wood’s estimate of a horse’s power on a railway as
compared with a common road) into ten tons, it will give
exactly 261 cwt. as a horse load. In this country, where
the roads are incompletely formed, it is not too little to
assign 15 cwt. as the load which one horse can draw, taking
the average of the wet and dry season, at the same rate of
speed as on the Quincy road. Thirty cwt. is a good load for
a two horse dray. The proportion, on this estimate, between
what a horse does on our roads, and what lie could do on an
iron tramroad, would exceed 13 to 1. Thus the economy of
railways in this country would probably be such as to dis-
pense with twelve out of every thirteen horses, and fully
five out of every six men at present employed in the carry-
ing trade ; and this great amount of power should then, of
necessity, be applied to other industry, and would be equal
to a large addition to our supply of labour, and certainly a
much more profitable addition than that derivable from an
equal amount of immigration. The advantage, therefore,
of railways entirely consists in the economy of labour or
power; and the more excellent a line is, that is, the less
friction in drawing a load on it, the more perfect its rails
and the carriages used on them, the greater will be its supe-
riority over the common roads of that particular country
where it is introduced, and the greater the benefits it will
confer.
But when we represent the superiority of railways by
figures, indicative of their economy of labour, we convey a
very faint idea to most minds of the benefits conferred on
the community by their introduction. To persons little
acquainted with political economy, all the advantages de-
rivable from labour-saving machines, do not readily flash
across the mind. So it is of the utmost importance, as
regards the progress of railways, that the great results of
them should be kept constantly under public attention, for


men will not be over-ready to incur a large expenditure if
they are only told that railways are advantageous, and not
completely filled with the conviction.
The benefits of railways not being the same in kind, nor
equal in degree in all countries, it is essential that we should
have a pretty distinct idea of the nature of the good they
may be expected to do for this colony, before we can deter-
mine how we ought to make our lines so as to render them
best calculated to effect the object in view. Now there is no
better way of making men sensible of the gain of an im-
proved mode of transit, than illustrating the consequences
of a bad one in retarding or absolutely prohibiting the pro-
gress of industry; to do which, we shall therefore proceed.
CHAPTER V.
Effect of Transport by Rati. ways on Production. Injurious conse-
quences of a high rate of carriage. Cost of Carriage in the United
Kingdom and United States. Effects of had roads on agriculture.
The astonishing efficacy of gold, beyond any other pro-
duction, in leading to the rapid settlement of new countries
is almost entirely founded on the fact of its containing more
value to a given weight and bulk than any other commodity.
For this reason the cost of its transport, as compared with
its value, is almost inappreciable. The cost at the ordinary
rate of cartage of carrying a ton of gold from Mount Alex-
ander to Melbourne does not amount to one ten thousandth
part of its value, while the cartage of common pig iron over
the same route would greatly exceed its price at the sea-
board. The result is, that men raising gold can send the
produce of their labour to the remotest end of the world,
no matter how bad the mode of conveyance, while men
raising iron can only find a market a few miles from the
mine, unless they have a very superior mode of transport,
without which the richest iron mine cannot afford them a
remunerative field for their labour, or form the nucleus of
a settlement. Not the relative productiveness of the two


mines, but the cost of carriage would make the difference;
for if the miners could raise one hundred tons of iron by
an amount of labour no greater than that with which they
can now glean an ounce of gold, the result would be the
same—the iron would be useless. The consequence of this
principle is, that the settlement of the interior of a new
country will always be rapid in proportion to the high value
of its productions as compared with the smallness of their
weight. Thus, as wool is eight times as valuable as wheat,
people can straightway settle in far more remote parts of
the interior to produce wool than they can wheat, and the
progress of a country, fit in its natural state for growing
the former, would be much more rapid than one only fit for
growing the latter. No matter how rich the soil is, as com-
pared with that of all other countries, no matter how varied
its capabilities of producing the more essential and bulky
commodities, it will have nothing to offer in exchange for
foreign manufactures and luxuries, [without being able
to procure which there can be no rapid, if any, settlement
of a country by a civilised people,] unless the cost of trans-
port is less than the price obtainable at the sea-board.
Thus, though land were so rich as to produce 1,000 bushels
of wheat per acre, with the smallest conceivable labour, it
would be worth no man’s while to grow it 100 miles from
market, if the cost of cartage for that distance were equal
to the price there. Hence the greater the facilities of trans-
port, and the cheaper commodities can be brought to the
centres of population, the farther from those centres can
cultivation be extended, and the more numerous the articles
which can be produced in any given spot. For example, if
carriage were 3s. per ton per mile, a commodity such as
wood, selling for £l per ton, would not be worth the bare
cartage seven miles from market. But if the carriage could
be reduced to Is., the wood cut down merely for the pur-
pose of clearing ground, would be worth removing to a
distance of twenty miles. Supposing the cost of preparing
wood for fuel to be Bs. per ton, it would occasion positive
loss, at a cartage of 3s. per ton per mile, to take it a greater
distance than four miles, but at Is. it could be taken twelve


miles, at no greater disadvantage. So with all commodities,
the more costly transport is, the narrower the circle within
which they can be produced, as will be more fully shown by
the following tables, illustrative of the effects of a bad mode
of transit in restricting production.
The rates of cartage are taken from the circular pub-
lished in the Argus on the first Monday of each of the first
six months of 1856, and the distances are those given in
Bradshaw's Guide.
TABLE
SHOWING THE BATES OF CARTAGE
FROM MELBOURNE,
Horse Drays Per Ton,
O o
tjp bo
S O U
> a
6
S
fc*
3
*h
o
Ph
j
t-S
Place.
Miles.
230
£ s. d.
30 5 0
£ s.
43 0
Alljury
Beech worth
25 6 8
35 0
38 0
12 16 8
17 10
Bendigo
Castlemaine
Elmore ...
10 10 0
8 11 8
Total 665
87 10 0
119 10 1 128 10
Rate, 2s. Bd. per ton, per mile.
The average rate of transport by horse teams in this
colony is, according to the above table, 2s, Bd. and a
fraction per ton per mile, consequently the value of every
commodity is diminished that amount every mile it is
distant from the market, till eventually remoteness causes
the cartage to exceed the difference between the market
price and the cost of production.
The following table will show the effect which this
heavy charge has in confining the circle of production, or
in restricting, to use another form of expression, the number
of articles which can be produced beyond certain distances
from the market. The prices are taken from the Argus, of
the 30th of June :


A TABLE
SHOWING THE EFFECT OF TRANSPORT
DRAYS ON PRODUCTION.
BY HORSE
<D
O C-l
s
U
QJ
CD
03 CQ
D d
IS
1 g
M pH
d *
O rj
§1
.h
* a
b
PH ■
'Tfl
a o
W
O
.
b. a
£ o
r
H
s
W
Price at Market
Value 10 miles from Market
Do. 20 do. do.
Do. 30 do. do.
Do. 40 do. do.
Do. 50 do. do.
Do. 60 do. do.
Do. 70 do. do.
Do. 80 do. do.
Do. 90 do. do.
Do. 100 do. do.
Do. 110 do. do.
£ s. d.
22 0 0
20 13 4
19 6 8
18 0 0
16 13 4
15 6 8
14 0 0
13 13 4
11 6 8
10 0 0
8 13 4
7 6 8
s. d.
8 0
7 3 3-7
6 6 6-7
5 10 2-7
5 1 5-7
4 5 1-7
3 8 4-7
3 0
2 3 3-7
1 6 6-7
10 2-7
1 5-7 I
£ s. d.
6 10 0
5 3 4
3 16 8
2 10 0
13 4
...
£ s. d.
1 5 0
£ s. d.
9 16 8
8 10 0
7 3 4
5 16 8
4 10 0
3 3 4
1 16 8
£ s. d.
40 0 0
38 13 4
37 6 8
36 0 0
34 13 4
33 6 8
32 0 0
30 13 4
29 6 8
28 0 0
26 13 4
25 6 8
£ s. d.
8 0 0
6 13 4
5 6 8
4 0 0
2 13 4
1 6 8
*
Supposing the ton measured to be equal to a ton weight.
Note. —Calculated at 2s. 8d. per ton per mile.
By the above table, we are shown that firewood has no
commercial value ten miles from market, and even within
that distance timber contributes nothing towards the expense
of clearing land ; that potatoes are of no value at fifty miles
from the place of consumption, and if the cost of growing them
were £2 10s. per ton, they could not be raised beyond thirty
miles; that another kind of produce—hay, would probably
be struck out of the lists of farmers’ crops, at less than
forty miles; that if the cost of growing wheat be five
shillings, instead of being eight shillings and sixpence as
Mr. Dennys estimates it, there can be no tillage beyond forty
miles from market, so long as carriage is Byd. per bushel for
every ten miles. Each mile, therefore, that the husbandman
is removed from market, the fewer crops he can grow, and
the less he will be in a position to offer produce in exchange
for the tea, sugar, clothes, furniture, and tools required for
his family and labourers, until finally he is compelled to
confine his farming to the mere depasturing of such animals
as can bear themselves to market, or furnish articles, such
as wool and tallow, which are of great commercial value
in proportion to their weight. High carriage has all
the injurious consequences of a barren soil or un-
propitious climate, in retarding the progress of wealth
and population; it lias an almost incalculable effect


in rendering labour less productive, because it confines men
to the cultivation of the poorer and more barren soils near
large cities. If there was land capable of producing food
enough for the people, at the rate of forty bushels an acre,
but situated eighty miles from the various markets, it could
not even be sown in wheat, much less in any of the coarser
crops, and the land near the market, producing perhaps
but twenty bushels an acre, should of necessity be resorted
to, thus rendering the labour of two men only as productive
as that of one with the assistance of cheap carriage.
Every mile you recede from the market the better must be
the quality of the land which you can bring under the
plough, till finally, owing to the pressure of costly cartage,
none is rich enough to pay for cultivation. On the other
hand, if the cost of transport becomes low, none but good land
need be resorted to, and superior soil, previously excluded,
will be brought within the circle of cultivation. This it is
which has mainly led to the rapid progress of cultivation in
England of late years, and which in a great measure
sustained rents under the change from protection to free
trade. This it is which has made it possible to cultivate
the lands of the United States, many hundred of miles
from water carriage. The markets of the whole world are
opened, by means of railways, to the husbandmen of the
interior of that vast continent.
In the foregoing pages attention has been drawn to the
fact that the economy of tramroads, as compared with such
roads as ours, would be equal to a gain of twelve out of
every thirteen horses. Allowing an average of six men to
guide these thirteen horses on common roads, and one man
to each horse on tramways, there would, by the introduction
of the latter, be a gain of five out of every six men. This
would altogether make the expense to us of conducting traffic
on railways less than an eighth of what it is at present.
It may be as well to remark that in the present state of
this discussion, it is unnecessary to take into consideration,
when speaking of the gain of railways, the charge for in-
terest on the capital sunk. We do not charge anything for
the capital expended on common roads, and whether we
should do so on railways is a debatable subject; neither on


the other side, is there as yet any need of taking into
account the greater economy attainable by the use of steam,
and of all the improvements in rails, wheels, &c.
The charges made by the English Railway Companies
are not regulated by the cost of conveyance, but by the
competition which the facilities of carriage by sea, by canals,
or by common roads, afford. When the Liverpool and
Manchester line was first opened, it charged 3|ch per ton, per
mile, for carrying corn. Other lines in the United King-
dom have conveyed goods less than Id. per mile. The
average cost in the State of New York of carrying a ton
one mile, is 9.20 mills, or less than one cent; and the
average of the charge is two cents eight mills, or less than
three half-pence per mile. The New York Central Railroad
appears to charge highest: the rate is thirty-four mills for
the ton of 2,000 lbs., or about three half-pence farthing per
imperial ton, per mile. We may, therefore, it is to be
hoped, safely assume that on our railways it will not be
found either necessary or expedient to charge more than
one-eighth of the present price, or four-pence per ton per
mile, that is, about £l 6s. Bd. to Castlemaine, and
£l 17s. 4d. to Sandhurst; and on this
estimate the
circle
of production will, as compared with
common roads
>, be
extended as follows:
TABLE SHOWING THE EFFECT OF THANSPORT
RAILWAYS ON
PRODUCTION
rH
SO OS M
gH s =*
E
u
O
O CL,
Ph • * •
g o go
gH pH
CQ cs
R H
£ S "
O O
Ph ft
o fl
o o
fcs Eh
£ u
• S o
Ph eh
u
o .
ft a
ft
£ s. d. s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £
Price at Market '22 0 0 8 0 6 10 01 5 09
Value 10 miles from Market21 16 8 7 10 13-14 6 6 81 1 89
Do. 20 do. do. 21 13 4'7 9 12-14 6 3 40 18 49
Do. 30 do. do. 21 10 0 7 8 11-14 6 0 00 15 0|9
Do. 40 do. do. 21 6 87 7 10-14 5 16 80 11 8 9
Do. 50 do. do. 21 3 47 6 9-14 5 13 4 0 8 4|9
Do. 60 do. do. 21 0 0,7 5 8-14 5 10 00 5 08
Do. 70 do. do. 20 16 8 7 4 7-14 5 6 80 1 88
Do. 80 do. do. 20 13 47 3 6-14 5 3 4
Do. 90 do. do. 20 10 0 7 2 5-14 5 0 0
Do. 100 do. do. 20 6 8 7 1 4-14 4 16 8
Do. 110 do. do. 20 3 4 7 0 3-14 4 13 4
Do. 120 do. do. 20 0 0|6 11 2-14 4 10 0
Do. 130 do. do. 19 16 8j6 10 1-14 4 6 8
Do. 140 do. de. 19 13 4 6 9 4 3 4
4 3 4
Do. 150 do. do. 19 10 0 6 7 i;i-]4 4 0 0
s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d.
16 8 40 0 08 0 0
13 439 16 8 7 16 8
10 0 39 13 4 7 13 4
6 8 39 10 0 7 10 0
34 39 687 68
0 0 39 3 47 3 4
16 8 39 0 07 0 0
8 13 438 16 8 6 16 8
8 10 0 38 13 4 6 13 4
8 6 8 38 10 0 6 10 0
8 3 438 6 86 6 8
8 0 0 38 3 46 3 4
7 16 8 38 0 06 0 0
7 13 437 16 8 5 16 8
7 10 0 37 13 4 5 13 4
6 6 8'37 10 0|5 10 0


If we compare this table with the previous one, and
reflect upon the consequences of the different results pre-
sented, we cannot fail to be deeply impressed with the
prodigious benefits which the introduction of railways
confers upon every country, and more especially upon a new
one. At the remotest borders of the colony, almost every
kind of produce may be grown with advantage for con-
sumption in the midst of it. Instead of resorting to the
inferior lands because of their vicinity to market, only the
richest and best need be cultivated for many years, and in
place of the husbandman suffering from the great disad-
vantage of being confined perhaps to the production of
Avheat and oats only, and having to deteriorate his ground by
setting these over and over again, he can by the help of
railways practice every kind of rotation, and freely select
that crop for which the soil is most fitted. The result of
such a change would be, as regards this country, that the
same number of persons who are at present employed in
agriculture, would, in place of only producing a portion of
the food now consumed in the colony, be able to supply its
entire wants at a much lower cost than at present, and have
a considerable surplus for exportation. Before the intro-
duction of railways into the United Kingdom, the market
Cardens were confined to the immediate neighbourhood of
O V o
the towns, and for rich lands close to large cities almost
fabulous rents were paid. ISTow the most bulky vegetables,
and those requiring to be transmitted without delay, are
forwarded from the most remote parts of the kingdom, and
there is no land precluded from being turned to the best
account by reason of its position. Labour has consequently
become more productive, and the people are now more
prosperous and capable of bearing greater burdens than at
any former period. The foregoing tables show us that so
long as the mode of transit at present endured in this colony
continues, only the very richest lands can be cultivated in
cereal crops, whereas, under a system of transport by rail,
the rich lands of the remote Murray District may be
rendered available for the production of every sort of produce
required by the population of the most distant of the gold-


fields, or by tlie inhabitants settled adjacent to the shores of
Port Phillip Bay. With railways through our rich lands we
need have little apprehension either of the flour of South
Australia entering into successful competition with that of
Victoria, or be jealous of our own labouring population
enjoying high wages, against which farmers are too prone to
exclaim, Reaping-machines may be good, but railways are
still better, and would form the more profitable investment
of the two for the capital of agriculturists and landowners,
though invested through the unpopular medium of
taxation.
CHAPTER VI.
Choice of Eoutes. Selection of routes in connection with the carriage of
commodities. General principles on which routes should be chosen. Interest
of the mining, agricultural, and trading sections of the population in routes.
Eailways through fertile lands desirable. Principles on which routes should
be chosen. Short routes and straight lines desirable only under certain
circumstances. Eoutes the chief cause of the costliness of English railways.
Curious principle of expenditure by private companies illustrated. Conse-
quences of their policy. Its frequent ill-success. The system pursued by
private companies not applicable to this colony.
Having reviewed the nature of the advantages conferred
by railways, we are in a position to take into consideration
the policy best calculated to obtain for us those advantages
in the highest degree, at the least possible cost, in the places
where they are most required, to the greatest extent, and
within the shortest period our resources will permit.
As regards route, we have one principle established by
the foregoing tables, namely, that the greatest benefit of
railways is in the transportation of those commodities of
which the consumption is large, and the bulk of which bears
an inverse proportion to their money value.
Thus, if we had only such articles as gold, spices,
jewellery, laces, silks, and some others of tire finer
descriptions of manufactures, we would scarcely be


warranted, where capital is so precious, in going to any
great expense to effect improvements in the mode of trans-
porting them, even though we possessed no mode of convey-
ance superior to the primitive caravans of the deserts. It
would be of little consequence to pay an excessively high
rate of carriage for the few ounces of mustard a man
annually consumes; but when it comes to five tons of
forage required for his horse in the year, of which the
carriage is perhaps £SO or £6O; when it comes to the bread
and the vegetables he personally consumes, weighing
perhaps seven hundredweight and on which he is pro-
bably paying £4 per annum for cartage, it is a matter
of importance. The deductions these considerations
lead to are: —
First, that we should most especially adapt our railways
for the transport of such commodities as agricultural
produce, and for the more bulky articles of general use—
for the raw materials of manufactures and houses, and the
coarser tools and utensils of trade.
Second, that we should have our railways pass
from the parts where these commodities are or can be
produced in the largest quantity, to places where they
are most marketable.
To these two deductions avc may add: That in laying out
our railways avc ought to aim at rendering them as effective
as possible in promoting the industry of our oavh country,
and giving it facilities for successful competition Avith
imported commodities.
The greater portion of the coarser and more bulky
commodities consumed in every country being of native
production, and except for very brief periods, and under
very extraordinary circumstances, entirely so in neAV
countries Avhere the population is small in proportion to the
territory, avc may assume as a species of corollary to the
foregoing propositions, that a country possessing so much
fertile land as Victoria Avill groAV sufficient agricultural pro-
duce for the Avants of its inhabitants, after the lapse of a
very brief period, provided the impediment of bad roads
be abated.


Before stating the conclusions to be drawn from these
propositions, it is necessary to direct attention to the
following facts:—
I. That railways must always have their termini in
those places where the population is most concentrated, and
that in this colony the two great centralising points are the
gold-fields and the seaport towns.
11. That these two sections of our population being
consumers, not raisers of raw produce, the consequence is
that the seaport towns want railways for the purpose of
transporting such articles into the interior as are not
produced there, and for bringing back those commodities
which the mining and rural population have to offer in
exchange, and that the gold-fields require railways in the
first degree for bringing in the more bulky raw produce of
the country, and in the second degree for bringing the
less bulky imported commodities manufactures and
foreign luxuries—from the seaport towns.
From these postulates we may derive the conclusions
that the mining population is mainly interested in having
the railways come from and pass through the richest agri-
cultural lands, where food and forage can be most cheaply
grown, and, consequently, that for the routes of all lines
from the seaport towns, agricultural lands should, as much
as possible, be selected. The seaport towns’ population, in
their position of consumers, are not interested equally with
the mining in having the lines pass through the agricultural
lands, because they can procure the bulky commodities at a
comparatively cheap rate by sea; but it is nevertheless
greatly their interest, as traders or persons maintained by
by trade, to have the growers of the raw produce which
they consume settle in the interior of their own country,
as they will then have the supplying of so many more
people with imported commodities, the dealing in winch
constitutes the chief business of the inhabitants of maritime
cities ; and moreover, as the mining population undoubtedly
will, within a short period, be entirely supplied Avith agri-
cultural produce grown in their OAvn neighbourhood, the
trading community will not require raihvays for the trails-


mission to the mines of such bulky commodities as flour,
potatoes, hay, oats, and the like. As, however, the loss of
tliis branch of trade to the merchants of Melbourne and
Geelong will be compensated for pari passu with its decline,
by the additional demand of the large agricultural popula-
tion which will be employed in providing food for the
miners, lines to such parts of the country as they may be
expected to settle upon, are most desirable, in order that
they may be at once furnished with those articles which a
rural population usually require in exchange for raw
produce.
Independently of the interest which every section of the
community has in developing all branches of industry, it is
to be recollected that the agriculturists are at present an
important and rapidly increasing class, and will before long
be, in all probability, as important as any other. Moreover,
theirs is the only branch of industry which is absolutely
precluded from spreading by want of roads, and they are,
therefore entitled to primary consideration in the selection
of railway routes.
Now, in a country where water is scarce during a consider-
able portion of the year, a dense agricultural population can
settle nowhere but in the valleys of rivers and large creeks,
and on the rich lands which most usually are to be found only
in such valleys. Consequently, if railways are to be laid out
with a view to agriculture, the valleys of those streams
which lie adjacent to the direct line between the centres of
population, or in other words between the natural termini,
should always receive a preference in the selection of
routes.
A barren soil can never pay either for the outlay or
maintenance of that part of a line which passes through it,
and every portion of road which lies near poor land, so far
contributes nothing towards the development of the industry
of a country, consequently the expenditure on it is compara-
tively wasted, if more fertile land could have been opened
up. Roads between the seaport towns and the gold-fields
Avould, therefore, according to the several propositions laid
down, in a great measure prove failures if, for the sake of


directness or shortness of routes, they were to be con-
structed through land of inferior fertility. As regards the
interests of the miners, they would fail in two important
requisites.
Firstly, Because agricultural produce would not be
brought from the nearest and richest lands, and the miners
would consequently be subject to the loss of consuming
produce drawn from the extreme end of the line, where the
markets would probably be dear, and the articles inferior,
owing to their having been sea-borne.
Secondly, Because they would necessarily have to suffer
under an excessive rate of carriage, inasmuch as the down
trains from the gold-fields, passing through a barren country,
could have little return freight, and the charges inwards
should therefore cover the cost of the goods-trains going both
ways. As regards both the agricultural and seaport towns’
population, lines so selected could not prove successful,
because they would not, to a degree commensurate with
the outlay, augment the resources, economise the labour, nor
stimulate the increase of population in the interior; all of
which it is extremely advantageous to commerce to promote.
The conclusion respecting the choice of railway routes
to which this reasoning leads, is:—
That we should, cateris paribus, not give a preference to
the shortest routes, unless the lands through which they run
are equally fertile with those opened up by more circuitous
lines.
This is contrary to the system which actuates private
companies in England, because railways there are principally
constructed with a view to the traffic between the termini,
and with very little reference to the intermediate districts.
It is necessary, therefore, to have the different circumstances
of the two countries well impressed upon the minds of those
who have the laying out of our railways, as there is a strong
tendency amongst us to imitate the systems of the mother
country, Avithout sufficiently investigating the reasons for
their adoption.
The next principle of railway formation Avhich should
be observed in a country Avithout roads, is:—


That the greatest possible length of line should be
obtained for a given sum of money, so far as that can be
done, consistently with giving a preference to fertile and
well watered lands.
The very opposite system prevails Avhere private com-
panies have the making of railways between large cities;
because it is generally their interest to get the shortest pos-
sible line for a given sum of money, and hence the enormous
cost of railways in some countries has been occasioned, not,
as many believe, by engineering obstacles, so much as by a
principle which in such cases governs the choice of routes,
and to which all considerations of expense have to yield.
For persons having in view only their own private
gain, this policy would, if it could be maintained, be sound,
but it is one of the greatest objections against railway traffic
being given up to those who have no other object in view
than acquiring immediate dividends, and shutting out all
chance of competition. The rationale of this seems to have
been overlooked by those who complain that there must be
something radically wrong in the fact of the railways of
England costing on an average £34,000 per mile, while the
railways in Belgium, and in the United States, have cost
only one-fourth of that sum. People have searched in vain
for a way of accounting for the disparity. The per
cent. Avhich the heavy Parliamentary expenses came to, or
the per cent, devoted to the purchase of land, are not
sufficient to make up the difference. Weighing against
these, are cheap labour, cheap materials, and the facilities
which good roads and canals offer for construction, as
compared with other countries. The enormous cost is then
attributed to the directors and engineers, Avho undoubtedly
are the real authors of it. But the reproaches which have
been launched against them are scarcely warranted; inas-
much as they are right, in very many Instances, in obtaining
a short route at a very great extra cost.
The principles on which private companies have acted in
an old country, and those which Government should pursue
in a new one, are diametrically opposite. We must, there-
fore, take care that railway engineers, educated in and


habituated to the English system, do not commit thq fatal
mistake of introducing it here, as they have, done elsewhere.
The policy to which allusion has been made is a matter of
so much importance, and so highly interesting, as to warrant
fuller illustration.
If, for a railway required between two large towns,
there were two practicable routes, one nearly in a straight
line, and the other of a very circuitous course, and that
both would cost the same gross sum of money, it would, in
the majority of cases, be the interest of a company to
choose the shorter. Suppose, for instance, that the cost of
the line by either course would be £900,000; that the
length by the shorter, passing through hills and over valleys,
entailing tunnels and viaducts, were thirty miles; and that
the length by the circuitous route, over a very favourable
country, were forty-five miles, the cost per mile in the
former case would be £30,000, and in the latter only
£20,000. The short one would cost per mile 50 per cent,
more than the long, and would be an instance of that enor-
mously expensive mode of construction so much complained
of. Yet if there were not an additional traffic acquired on
the circuitous route equal to the additional number of miles
which the trains would have to pass over, the Railway Com-
pany would, if it selected the longer line, lose enormously
in the working of it. Let us assume, for illustration, that
the traffic was entirely of passengers between the termini,
that 400,000 persons passed over the line in the year, and
that the cost of moving them was a halfpenny per head per
mile. The working of the short route under these circum-
stances would only be £25,000, while the cost on the longer
would reach £37,500, entailing an annual loss of £12,500,
or more than If per cent, on the subscribed capital. This
amount lost by working the longer line, would pay interest
for a loan of £312,500 at 4 per cent. Consequently, if the
company were to borrow the last mentioned sum and ex-
pend it on the short line, in addition to the original capital
of £900,000, its position would be no worse, as regards
dividend, than if the long and cheap line had been
selected, though the cost would be no less a sum than


£40,416 13s. 4d. per mile. To this expenditure the com-
pany would, therefore, be justified in going to avoid the
long line, which yielded no intermediate traffic. In other
words, not only would it be as well, under the supposed
circumstances, to give a preference to the short line, if the
cost of both were the same; but it would be good policy,
so far as private interest would be involved, to purchase it
at an expenditure of £1,212,500, in preference to the long
one at £900,000, or double the cost per mile; and, moreover,
the passengers would be convenienced by performing the
journey in two thirds of the time ; while all chance of the
company being harrassed by competition would be provided
against.
We will, in further illustration of this curious principle
in railway expenditure, suppose that a certain additional
traffic was acquired by taking the longer route, and see what
the effect would be. We will continue the assumption,
already adopted, that the same fares should be charged on
either line, owing to opposition or from an apprehension of
creating it, and we will suppose the average of passenger
fares to be 3s. 6d. for the journey, which would make the
total receipts £70,000 *; out of which must be deducted the
cost of working, which has already been set down at
£25,000 for the short line, leaving a profit in the latter
case of £45,000, or 5 per cent, on the capital of £900,000.
Had the longer route, with only the same receipts and
£12,500 additional working expenses, been chosen, the
profits would have been reduced to the sum of £32,500, or
3.6 percent. But if an additional traffic of 100,000 passengers
had been acquired by taking the circuitous course, the gross
receipts would be augmented to £87,500, and the cost of
moving (a halfpenny per head per mile) to £46,875, leaving a
balance for division of £40,625, or a dividend of 4.5 per cent.
Or again, if passengers to the number of 600,000 were ob-
tained, the receipts would be brought up to £105,000, and the
working expenses to £56,250, giving a profit of £48,750, or
a dividend of 5.4 per cent. Thus it appears that to receive
compensation for making a cheap line, instead of a dear one.
* The number of passengers being 400,000.


additional traffic in proportion to the increase of distance
must be obtained; or to express the same thing in other
words, the advantage of procuring a short route is often so
great, that the expense of attaining it may be increased in an
inverse proportion to the additional traffic attained on the
longer route —the less the latter, the higher the cost of con-
struction per mile may be for getting a short line.
The following table, taking the long line as the standard,
will give an idea at what cost a short one may be procured,
in proportion as the additional traffic obtained is
graduated:—
Expenditure on . , r
t- i Amount per
short Ime which I Lr -, ,
would yield the nnk] of capital
J , • which may be
respective j
, , expended on
dividends ob- f , r
, • j , short line,
tamed on long.
Dividend
Traffic on
short line.
Traffic on
long line.
Profit on long per cent,
line. I on long
line.
400.000
400.000
400.000
400.000
400.000
600,000
550.000
500.000
450.000
400.000
48,750
44,687
40,625
36,562
35,500
27,692
30,242
33,231
37,500
41,538
PASSENGEES.
PASSEEGEES.
Thus it appears, when the long line has a traffic which
yields a profit of £48,750 or 5.41 per cent., that only
£830,769, or £27,692 per mile can be expended on the short
line, if the same dividend is to be had from both —that
when the longer line gives a profit of £44,687 10s., a sum
of £907,257, or £30,242 per mile may be expended on the
short; and that when the long line only yields 3.61 per
cent., the shareholders receive the same interest on their
money, though they lay out £41,538 per mile on the other.
It is not intended that the figures given in this table and
in the foregoing paragraphs, should be taken as an exact
representation of the proportion to which the wear and tear
and expense of working any existing line amount. An
alteration either in the fares, or in the proportion of expenses


to the receipts, would very much alter the amount per mile
which might be expended, but such does not affect the cor-
rectness of the table, as a hypothetical illustration of a
principle in railway expenditure, which leads to an enor-
mous outlay to procure the shortest line between two given
points, when the traffic obtainable on the various routes,
which it is possible to select, is small in comparison with the
traffic afforded by the towns at the extreme ends. Take,
for instance, the railway between Manchester and Liver-
pool, in which case the main portion of the traffic is fur-
nished by the two terminal cities, which at the time of
opening the line, possessed an aggregate population little
short of 400,000. In this case the country lying adjacent
to the direct route, offered little inducement to make the
line circuitous. To the south lies Warrington, of which the
inhabitants do not number more than sixteen or seventeen
thousand persons, and on the north, at a considerable dis-
tance, lie Wigan and Bolton, the united population of which
does not exceed one-fifth of that of Liverpool and Man-
chester. A railway through these might, perhaps, have
been made at a lower rate per mile, but for the sake of an
additional traffic, comparatively small, the company would
have been at the eternal expense of moving a population of
400,000, a distance of nearly one-third more. They have,
accordingly, expended largely for the purpose of obtaining
a line almost straight.
Take in the next place an instance in the opposite
direction. One of the cheapest lines in England is the
Newcastle and Carlisle. The population of these towns
does not amount to one-sixth of that of Liverpool
and Manchester, and the line is more than twice as long.
It is evident that two towns so small would not of them-
selves pay the working of a long line made straight at a
great expense, consequently, the projectors had to make it
for the intermediate traffic, rather than for that from the
termini; and it is accordingly one of the most serpentine
lines in the kingdom.
The company have been rewarded for procuring the
greatest number of miles of railway for their capital of


£200,000, by a dividend far above the average received on
the other English lines. Similar instances might be adduced,
showing that cheap lines have been remarkable for their
sinuosities, and they have, generally speaking, been made with
the view of the traffic from the interior to the termini
and between intermediate stations, rather than for that
all through from the extreme ends.
In Ireland, the chief cities are not nearly so populous as
those of England; they are much farther apart, and their
intercourse with each other is small as compared with that
which each of them has with the rural districts. The
seaport towns want railways for the purpose of collecting in
agricultural produce for exportation to England, and for
distributing amongst the agriculturalists the manufactures
and foreign produce brought from the other side of the
Channel. The lines in that country are therefore, to a
considerable extent, laid down on the principle of obtaining
the greatest number of miles for a given sum of money.
The Great Southern and Western Railway, between Dublin
and Cork, in place of following the shorter and more direct
route of the old coach road, sweeps round, with one portion
of the line nearly at right angles to the other, through the
rich and level lands which lie towards the middle of the
island, and is more intended for intercourse with the in-
terior than for traffic between the cities at either end; and
notwithstanding the great outlay on its entrance into both
of these cities, it has cost but £20,026 per mile. The same
may be remarked of the Midland Great Western Railway,
which is a straighter line than the other, but is not depend-
ent on the direct traffic between Dublin and Galway. The
cost per mile has been only £16,893, and it pays a dividend
of 5 per cent., with a traffic of only £26 per mile per week.
The Belfast and Ballymena line, also remarkable for its
sinuous course, has been executed at a cost of £13,339 per
mile ; and with receipts of only £22 per mile per week, pays
a dividend of 4| per cent. In England we see lines paying
no more than half this interest, notwithstanding that they
have a traffic of two or three hundred pounds per mile per
week. Hence it appears that the policy of sacrificing every


consideration to the principle of obtaining the shortest line
between the great centres of population, and doing little or
nothing for the advancement or convenience of the adjacent
districts, or the smaller towns, has not always been suc-
cessful. The cause of this is that a large outlay per mile
requires corresponding receipts; besides which the directors,
in order to prevent those places, neglected by the original
route, from obtaining railways, which would to a certain
extent be competing, have been ultimately forced either to
make feeding lines into their own at enormous cost, or to esta-
blish subsidiary companies, to which they have had to
guarantee a certain rate of interest, in order to induce the
avoidance of routes, of which they had apprehensions, but
which would in all probability be more advantageous to the
public. These cross lines have absorbed the profits of the
trunks. Indeed, the history of branches and extensions
formed by the great English railway companies, would be
nothing less than a disquisition on the impolicy of surren-
dering the thoroughfares of a country to be made a source
of private income, and of allowing various portions thereof
to become the seats of separate interests and jealous rivalries,
thus occasioning an enormous waste of capital. “ The system
of branches and guarantees,” it has been remarked, “ has
reduced the dividends on the great trunk lines above 50 per
cent, during the past ten years, and the value of railway
stock to one-half, and in some cases to one-fourth and
one-eighth.” When once a trunk is formed through a
difficult country, the branches which are afterwards made
from it to the towns which were neglected in the first
instance, are almost invariably expensive, and the aggregate
of those feeding lines often amount to a greater number of
miles than a circuitous route for the purpose of including
them would have done. The selfish principle of making
lines of railway with the view of dividends only, often
meets with retribution, because Parliament cannot refuse to
recognise the claims of the neglected districts. Let us
O O
beware of falling into the same error.
In this colony we have no great terminal cities, such as
London, Liverpool, Manchester, Bristol, Birmingham, and


the like. Our whole mining population does not equal that of
a second class town in the United Kingdom, and is scattered
over a surface of country as large as many English counties
put together. We have a chain of diggings from Bendigo
to Ballaarat, and from Ballaarat to Fiery Creek and the
Avoca; but in no part of the interior have we a concen-
trated population like that of Melbourne. We have not a
population condensed into divisions of 200,000 or 300,000
persons, each within thirty miles of the other; we can,
therefore, have no foundation in reason, for imitating the
system of making lines short, without regard to the cost
at which shortness can be procured. Our railways must
have more reference to the future than those of countries
which have less prospects of progressive change. We know
that if we run roads through rich and well watered lands,
population will be sure to settle on them; and if we make
roads from those lands to the centres of our mining popula-
tion, we at once procure for the latter cheap food, the
thing they chiefly want railways for, and give a market at
the diggings, to those who will settle upon and cultivate
those lands. Moreover, if we make our railways from Mel-
bourne pass through the rich lands in the interior, we will
not have to import agricultural produce, nor see our farmers
wasting labour on poor ground, yielding only eighteen or
twenty barrels an acre, instead of gleaning crops, twice as
great, from the superior but more remote lands. By adopt-
ing a sound railway policy, we shall greatly accelerate the
settlement of those places where the people, by reason of
the greater productiveness of their labour, can afford to con-
sume most largely of all commodities which ought naturally
to be imported into a new country. The Southern and
Western Bailway Company (Irish), already spoken of, made
the journey between Cork and Dublin very much longer
than it might have been, and, moreover, for the sake of a
cheap line, were induced to avoid the large towns of Kil-
kenny and Clonmel. They have been rewarded for their
policy by the rapid increase of the small towns through
which they have passed, and by good dividends. So ought
we to make our lines much longer for the sake of erabrac-


ing more favourable districts. For example, if, in place of
running a line directly to Bendigo, through Keilor Plain and
the Black Forest, one much cheaper per mile could have
been obtained by going up the valley of the Yarra, through
Prahran and Boroondara, and by the valley of the Plenty
to Kilmore, from that part to the north of the ranges which
run through the centre of this colony, and which there divide
the counties of Bourke and Dalhousie, and from thence to
the valley of the Campaspie and the Coliban; if such a
prolonged route were much cheaper per mile than the more
direct one, and if the land were equally or more fertile (com-
mon roads being alike unsupplied in either district), it
should be preferred. Likewise, if, by keeping the valleys
of the Barwon, the Leigh, and the Yarrowee Rivers, a
cheaper route per mile from Geelong to Ballaarat could be
obtained, than one direct through the villages of Meredith,
Lethridge, &c., it would be entitled to the preference ; or so
might a line on the other side of the county of Grant, branch-
ing from the Geelong and Melbourne Railway, and opening
the markets of Ballaarat, Geelong, and Melbourne, to the
farmers of the Werribee, Bacchus’s Marsh, and Ballan.
CHAPTER VII.
Choice op Routes (Continued). Parliament should not rely too much
upon professional judgment in the selection of routes. Danger of
acting precipitately. Necessity of extensive and careful surveys.
In the opening remarks of this paper attention has been
drawn to the danger of relying too much on mere profes-
sional knowledge in the selection and formation of our
railways; and the advisability of the Legislature forming
resolutions as to the general principles of railway legislation
and construction has been urged.
To leave the selection of lines or the choice of routes to
individual judgment would be a most serious error, and a
parliament which throws too great responsibility on public


officers abdicates its most important functions. A man may
be a most accurate surveyor, his trigonometrical lines and
angles may stand the test of any future scrutiny; he may
be painstaking, active, and highly intelligent, and yet
twenty different things that should be uppermost in a man’s
mind when choosing a railway route, may never occur to
him; not one of the important economical questions, nor
many of those very complex calculations which govern
many steps in railway construction. And independently of
these considerations, the selection of a route, even with
pretty full instructions, is a thing that requires a peculiar
turn of mind that not one engineer out of fifty possesses to
a high degree. A man may have a very great amount of
information on all the mechanical points connected with his
profession, may be a first-rate builder of viaducts and
bridges, have an eye that would detect the smallest fault in
a contractor’s work, be a rigid overseer, a most admirable
compiler of estimates, or an excellent designer of great
public buildings, and yet, even with the assistance of
instruments, not be half as good in mapping out a favourable
route as many bushmen and bullock-drivers who cannot
write their names. Serious mistakes have been committed
by engineers of note in the United Kingdom, notwith-
standing their having had to trace their lines upon those
magnificent Ordnance maps, of which a nation may well be
proud, with the height of every field and hill in the country
marked upon them. To many it never occurred to look for
a route beyond a mile or two at either side of the old roads
of the country, or to commence their lines at any other
sides of the towns than those which lay in the direction of
one another. If our engineers are not very careful and do
not, in this unsurveyed country, avail themselves of the levels
indicated by the rivers and creeks, they will get themselves
into labyrinths of hills, out of which they can only extricate
themselves by tunnels, cuttings, and viaducts.
We should guard ourselves, notwithstanding the urgent
need for railways, against moving precipitately. Acting
in haste and repenting at leisure, is peculiarly unsatisfactory
in the case of works which take a long time to complete, and


the blunders of which are discovered ere they are finished.
In the case of a long railway, before fixing a route, the
country for twenty-five miles at either side of a direct line
between the termini, should be surveyed, with considerable
care, as to the levels and the quantity and quality of good
lands, and also as to the probable existence of minerals, coal,
and building materials; and the public should have
some opportunity afforded it of canvassing the merits of the
different routes. Moreover, many engineers should be set
to work at the selection of routes, and an emulation excited
as to who could come nearest to the requirements of the
public, and most fully comply with the principles laid down
by the Legislature. They should besides receive every
encouragement to lay open and expose the defects of other
and rival schemes. If a Government engineer is appointed
who has the selection of all our railway routes, and he does
not turn out a man of great ability and rare genius, many
of our lines will in all probability be ill-chosen, and after
going on for years wasting millions of capital, we shall
find the progress of the country unaccelerated. Such men
as the country requires cannot be retained for the small
salaries at present given to ordinary road engineers and
district surveyors.
CHAPTER VIII.
Construction of our Railways. No choice between the most improved
kind of railways and common roads. Economy of labour the object
of railways. Wooden and iron tramways. The inadvisability of
adopting an inferior mode of transit shown by the history of railway
improvements.
Having so far discussed the important question of routes,
we may now take into consideration the general principles
which ought to influence us in the construction of our
railways, both as regards their kind and quality and the
expenditure upon them.
So far as the kind of railways is In question, there can be


no choice between common roads, and the introduction of
all those improvements which mechanical and engineering
skill have introduced. All these have been founded on the
very same principles which have led to the substitution of
railways for common roads, namely—the economy of labour,
and every one of them, which is a real improvement, effects
an ultimate saving greater than the cost of procuring it.
Now there is no reason in the world to be afraid of any
expenditure which economises the labour of a country ; but
this can only be done by expending in the right place and
on the true principles.
If we make sure that we are effecting a saving, we can
have no doubt that we are procuring the means of paying for
an expenditure. It is here, however, that we want the
judgment of great engineers and good directors ; men of
deep thought and great calculating skill. It is here our
dangers and our hopes lie. If a man had genius enough to
execute a tunnel under Bass’s Straits, or to build a tubular
bridge over it, including all the calculations relative to the
necessary strength of its materials in proportion to its
length and the weight upon it, and yet made a cutting not
warranted on economical grounds, he would be an indifferent
railway engineer. If we go to an expenditure of 20 to
procure a saving of 10, and refuse to go to 22 to get a
saving of 12, or of 24 to get a saving of 14, we are acting
more absurdly, so far as principle is involved, and more
inconsistently, than if we did not attempt to procure the first
saving. We would, no doubt, do well to gain the saving of
10, though w T e went no farther; but we would show
ourselves, nevertheless, to be great dolts to have stopped
short there. If, on the other hand, we spent 20 to save 10,
it might be very bad policy to expend 25 to raise that
saving to 12, and still worse policy to go to 30 to save 13.
We would be raising our expenditure by a quarter and by
one half to procure an additional power of only l-sth and
3-10ths. Our engineers must be men who can calculate all
such points to a nicety.
The advantages resulting from the substitution of rail-
ways for common highways have been already pretty fully


enlarged upon. The prodigious effects which their economy
of labour produces on the progress of all industry, but par-
ticularly of agriculture, and their power in accelerating the
progress of new countries, has been thus strongly urged,
less for the purpose of stimulating activity, than with the
design of keeping in mind the objects we have in view in
providing our mode of transit. The better the kind of
railway, the greater the amount of benefit it confers. If
we select a description of road half as efficient in econo-
mizing power as we might do, we will save the labour of
men and horses in a proportionately less degree, we will
lower carriage but one-half, and will give much less exten-
sion to the circle of cultivation. People have gone so far
as to propose wooden rails in place of iron, in imitation of
the temporary tramways of Yan Yean ; and this proposal
seems to have been listened to, by men who can scarcely,
even for a second, forget that throughout the whole world,
except amongst savages ignorant of its use, iron is always
used in place of wood where strength and hardness are
required. If, merely because wood is cheap, we should use
wooden rails, we ought on the very same principle forthwith
get wooden picks and shovels, and fasten our ploughs to the
horses tails to save harness.
It has been said that rails might be laid over the surface
of the country in its natural state. Most certainly they
might, if we could only find a country, the natural state of
which possessed the requisites for a railway; if it at once
presented an even and hard surface. But rails over uneven,
yielding, or undrained ground, subject to be softened by
rains and floods, would be little better, and in many cases
worse, than a common road. The writer of this passed over
an extension of a railway the first day it was opened, and
owing; to the bed of the road not having; settled down into
a state of hardness, the train which travelled portions of the
line at forty miles an hour, came to a stop, and the truck-
horses and navvies had to be put in requisition to get it on
to the harder part of the road.
Such suggestions are worth noticing, and only worth
noticing, because they present an opportunity of illustrating


the consequences of doing things imperfectly, and of point-
ing out that the end we want to arrive at can only be
attained by availing ourselves of those improvements and
inventions, of which the substitution of rails for broken
stone forms but a part.
Another proposition is that we should use the old-
fashioned flat plates with raised edges for keeping the
wheels from slipping off, in place of the modern oval rails,
and flanged wheels. This is about as absurd a suggestion
as to return to stone hatchets, merely because they were in
use prior to the discovery of iron, or to cross-bows and
arrows, because their antiquity, in comparison with rifles,
is as great as their inferiority.
Men invent but slowly, and the first invention is never
perfect. The defects of one step in improvement suggest a
second and so on. Now friction being the whole matter
involved in the question of roads ; and iron, from the fact
its being harder and smoother than timber or stone, and con-
sequently occasioning less friction when in contact, was long
since esteemed preferable to those substances, where circum-
stances admitted of its being used. But on the introduction
of iron tramways, common wheels with wide tyres were
used on flat plates. It was however, in course of time
perceived that if the contact of the wheel and the plate
were diminished there would be a great reduction of friction.
This suggested the idea of standing the plate on edge,
and thus at once reducing the friction, and economising the
iron, owing to the additional strength which a plate of a
given weight on edge has over one on the flat. To enable
this great improvement to be carried into effect, the happy
contrivance already mentioned of having the flange on the
wheel was introduced. It was next hit upon that if the
edge rail was rounded on the top there would be less
friction than if left flat, and to prevent the wheel being cut into
by this narrowed surface, the wheels were case-hardened,
which reduced the friction still more; and again the tyre of
the wheel was bevelled, or rather turned, so as to be convex
from the inside to the outside, giving the flange a constant
tendency to fall or press away from the side of the rail.


The advantage of this series of beautiful inventions was a
gain of power in the proportion of 17.5 to 27.8; that is,
that seventeen horses could do as much on the new rail as
twenty-seven could on the old. The history of these pro-
gressive steps suggests the qustion: “ What then, in the
name of common sense, could induce us to reject such
improvements ?” The flat plate, like the stone hatchet, has
nothing to recommend it, except that it is more ancient,
more crude, and less scientific, and certainly would never
have been in use at all, if the oval-edged rail had been
thought of in the first instance. Its greater liability to
breakage is alone sufficient to condemn the flat cast-iron
plate.
It is also proposed that we should use horses, which are
a most expensive power, in place of steam, though we call
for steam in place of sails, which cost little to maintain.
Let us by all means use horses if oats and hay are cheaper
than coal, if horses are as lasting as iron, and if it is more
economical to lay down horse-tracks between our rails, than
to use locomotives, and if there is a saving in putting up
stables, and houses for ostlers and stablemen every six
miles of the road, besides maintaining a due proportion of
overseers, to say nothing of fattening pigs and poultry
out of the forage.
It is excusable to repeat that the reason why railways
are preferable to common roads is that there is less friction
on them. To diminish friction is the sole object to be
gained, and those mechanical contrivances which most fully
effect that object are, if we have railways at all, so advan-
tageous as to leave no choice between common roads and the
introduction of all contrivances which diminish friction in a
higher proportion than the additional cost of obtaining such
improvements. Whether we should have the primitive
tramways of the last century, ought to be as little a matter
of debate amongst us as whether we should fall back from
the Royal Charter model to the first efforts in steam navi-
gation, to complicated engines perched upon the decks of
clumsy barges, with strange looking paddles out near their
bluff bows. The only question which should be held


worthy of discussion is where and how railways of the
most improved mechanical construction, as regards curves,
gradients, and permanency, should be laid down. The two
former of these questions are more than half professional,
and the last involves more economical than engineering
considerations.
CHAPTER IX.
Construction op Railways (Continued). Speed not relatively so im-
portant here as in England Passenger traffic of most importance
in England, and goods traffic in Victoria. Lines of lighter con-
struction suitable to our present wants. Curves and light rails
admissible in this country. Gradients. Economical considerations
involved in determining the reduction of ascents.
It has already been pointed out why railways in England
have been constructed in a manner so immensely more
expensive than they might have been. One of the objects
of getting the shortest route between the termini is the
great effect which a short passage has in increasing pas-
senger traffic. If a man can, during a brief absence from
his counting house, go thirty or forty miles and back, he
will take many more journeys in the course of the year
than if he were to lose a couple of days from his business
for each trip of that length. The effect of this is said to
increase passenger traffic nearly 75 per cent. Expeditious
travelling is a matter of immense economical importance.
If in a populous country 5,000,000 of men gained, by
facilities of travelling, two days each in the year it would
be equal to an addition of 10,000,000 working days to
its productive labour. During the year 1853, when there
were neither post-offices, banks, nor the many other
facilities for business on the gold-fields which at present
exist, it is probable that every digger on an average was
occasioned a loss of nearly three weeks by journeys to
Melbourne and Geelong to transact affairs which can now
be done on the spot, or, taking the improved roads and
conveyances into account, with an absence of a couple of


(Lays. This waste of time must have caused a loss to
the productive labour of the colony little short of
£500,000 in that year. Bearing in mind then the advan-
tage of quick travelling, we have to consider to what extent
we require it as compared with England.
Now, making the fullest allowance for the importance of
speed, it does not, when all circumstances arc taken into
consideration, seem politic to make a large outlay on that
account. The chief reason for coming to this conclusion is,
that the carriage of merchandise and produce is so much
more important than that of passengers, that avc should
endeavour to make whatever capital we can afford to expend
give us a great extent of goods’ carriage, rather than a small
amount of quick passenger traffic. We want railways chiefly
for the carriage of products, because we have no roads or in-
land navigation. The carriage of goods is the first necessity,
inasmuch as travellers can move themselves, or ride, or go
in light vehicles, which are not much affected by minor
obstacles.
England is so well supplied with the means of con-
ducting the heavier traffic, and her passenger traffic is so
enormous, that railways are chiefly constructed with a view
to the latter. Her enormous coasting trade, by means of
which so much heavy commodities are distributed, has
increased even between those seaport towns which are con-
nected by railways. The canals running in competition with
railways are doing more than before they encountered this
opposition ; in fact, the carrying trade by rail is to a great
extent confined to parcels, light goods, and agricultural
produce which suffers from delay. Eor this country, rail-
ways will have to do all that the common waggons, the
canal boats, and coasters of the United Kingdom do for it.
In England the greater portion of agricultural products are
consumed near the places where they are produced. The
corn is carried directly from the barn to the mill, and the
great towns round the coasts are principally supplied with
what is brought by sea; and so it is, to a great extent, with
all other commodities, even manufactures. In this country,
comparatively few articles will for a long time to come be


produced near the places where they arc consumed. All
manufactures will have to pass inland on rail, and the
markets for agricultural products will be much more remote
than those of old countries thickly studded with populous
towns.
If, therefore, we have to make our railways less for
passengers than goods’ traffic, we have proportionally less
occasion to construct them for a high rate of speed; and
if so, we should not go to the extra expense which that
entails. We need not make them so strong, nor constructed
so heavily, as the English railways. A high rate of speed
occasions immense stress upon all the works. The rails
must be much heavier to bear the shocks, and more strongly
secured; the sleepers must be heavier and closer, and more
thoroughly secured from movement or vibration. Our
railways might be constructed more lightly than the English
lines, but on mechanical principles equally good; for a
railway designed for moderate speed only, no more requires
to be made as strong as one for a higher rate, than a
dwelling-house does to be made of as heavy materials as a
store which has to bear its tons of goods. The architect
who would put down as expensive foundations, and walls as
thick, for the former as the latter, would be extremely
ignorant, and an engineer who would make a railway equally
strong under the two conditions of traffic would err no less.
Another reason why our lines may be more lightly con-
structed, is that there will not be the same large number
of passengers in the trains. In England the number is so
great, that in order to shorten the trains, which is a thing of
much importance, particularly in going round curves, the
carriages arc made very wide, overhanging the wheels and
causing great lateral pressure on the rails. Our carriages
need not be so wide. But the most important inducement
to adopt the principle that rapid movement should not be re-
quired is, that we may have much sharper curves, and conse-
quently can dispense with the costly system of cutting
straight through every obstacle. Curves, unless united with
gradients are not objectionable for the purposes of this
colony, and the introduction of edged rails and bevelled


wheels ought almost to have extinguished the objection
to them. Before any railway is undertaken, this ques-
tion should be determined by the Legislature. To settle
it after the lands are surveyed and laid out, is not unlike
latching the stable-door after the horse is lost.
Of the many questions which will no doubt form the
subject of Parliamentary enquiry, one will most probably
be as to the most economical rails for this colony ; whether,
owing to the plcntifulness of wood in some parts, it may
not be advisable to lay the rails on longitudinal sleepers
which are objectionable only on narrow lofty embankments,
of which it is to be hoped we will not have a large pro-
portion, If by their use, coupled with a moderate speed, we
could have 30lb. in place of the 731 b. rails in general use in
England, we would effect a saving of over 6,000 tons of
iron on a single line of rails of 100 miles, which, taking into
calculation the cost of carriage up-country, would probably
occasion a saving little short of £l,OOO per mile. If we
have lighter rails, lighter sleepers, a less depth of ballast,
narrower embankments, lighter carriages and trucks, it will
make a great difference in the extent of railway accommo-
dation which a given sum of money can afford.
Gradients involve so many considerations purely pro-
fessional, that the determination of most points connected
with them must be left to the judgment and careful calcu-
lation of the engineer. A judicious man will always, when
there is a doubt, err on the side of economy, and will,
especially in a country like this, where common labour is so
dear, be ever on the alert to avoid cuttings and embank-
ments. In the case of a hill involving a great loss of power
on a long road, he will not hesitate in incurring a consi-
derable outlay on its reduction; but where there are a great
number of ascents in proportion to the length of road, he
will be cautious to estimate well before he determines
Avhether the loss of power may not be endured with less
disadvantage than the great outlay consequent upon cutting
down many hills, and will weigh carefully whether it may
not be advisable to leave the improvement of gradients to a
future period, when labour may be cheaper, and when the


increase of traffic would make it of more importance to
diminish such loss of power. lie will recollect that there is
a great difference between the consequences of gradients
on common roads and railways. In the latter there is often
only a loss of speed on the ascent, and this is made up for
by a corresponding gain on the descent, whereas on common
roads there is no such compensation, because horses generally
travel slower on a descent than on a level road, and often
find it more distressing. It must, at the same time, be
admitted, that the reduction of railway gradients is highly
desirable where the steepness of an ascent obliges a loco-
motive, in place of lessening its rate of speed, to have lighter
trains attached to it. Even a person reflective only to a
moderate degree cannot fail to be impressed with the
lamentable waste of the labour of a country occasioned by
a few miles of bad road, or a few steep hills, when they see
a horse on a journey of perhaps a hundred miles, only
taking half the load he might if such obstacles were
reduced, and that he has to make the journey twice over, or
take eight days doing what he might have done in four.
To cut away one hill, when it causes such a loss, is most
desirable ; but if there are ten such hills on the line, it
becomes almost ten times less desirable to reduce them,
because there is little advantage, so far as travelling the
whole distance is concerned, in reducing one if all be not
removed. When there is a bad part on a ten-mile road,
having the same traffic per mile per day as on one of a
hundred miles, it is ten times less important to remedy it
than it is the longer line; but if the traffic on the short one
increases ten-fold, it then becomes a matter of equal im-
portance to rectify its condition as it is that of the long road.
So with railways. Everything connected with expenditure
on them involves many considerations, requiring the most
careful attention, the profoundest calculation, and a very
high order of genius on the part of the engineers, and if
they have those qualities, they will in a country where so
much is to be done, make economy their rule of action.
They will recollect that the day has passed when ex-
pensive works were a credit, and that the highest reputa-
tion is now to be gained by cheap lines.


CHAPTER X.
Costliness op Railway Works. Effect of the value of money on ex-
penditure. Importance of trespassing little on the capital of new
countries. Works may be made costly for the sake of durability in
old and wealthy countries. Influence which the probable fall of
labour, and the certain increase of population, should have on
present expenditure. Costliness of construction adverse to the
interests of the more remote parts of the colony.
The next point for consideration is the degree of dura-
bility which it is advisable to give to the works. In this
matter, the Legislature will experience much difficulty,
because the bias of professional men almost invariably
inclines to works of stability and costliness. It is, however, a
question in which economical considerations are paramount,
and to these professional instincts must be forced to
yield.
The additional expenditure which we may make for the
sake of adding permanency to works is dependent, amongst
other things, on the value of money, which varies in all
countries; on the probability of such a fall in the wages of
labour and in materials, as may admit of the reneAval of
works at a cheaper rate than that at which construction of
a durable character is at present attainable; on the possi-
bility of the discovery in this new country, of cheaper and
better materials than are now known, and on the probability
of alterations in the lines being found advisable, in conse-
quence of their having been made through an nnsurveyed
country, or owing to the shifting of the population.
The number of bridges in England, including those
which go over roads as well as rivers, have been calculated
at two and a quarter per mile ; and though it is not at all
likely avc will have anything near that number in Victoria,
still they will, under the most favourable circumstances, form
a very considerable portion of the expense of our lines. It
is, consequently, a matter of great importance to come to a
determination as to how they should be constructed, and what


is true economy as regards them, as well as station-houses,
sheds, workshops, platforms, &c.
The rate of interest, when not distorted by usury laws,
by the exactions to which capitalists arc exposed under
tyranical Governments, or by ill-advised bankruptcy laws,
which always enhance the risk of lending, by placing the
lender at the mercy of the dishonest borrower, is a fair
criterion by which to estimate the relative value of capital
in different countries. When we see under circumstances
precisely the same, such as mortgage of well-circumstanced
freeholds, a difference in this respect, we may safely conclude
that the opportunities of employing capital Avith advantage
are great in proportion as the rate of interest is high, and
that the money which every man has, or wants, is valuable to
him in proportion to the rate of interest which he can get as
a lender, or will give as a borower.
In new countries of great natural resources, where the
population is rapidly increasing as every day rolls on,
new opportunities for the investment of capital are opened.
As numbers increase, new land may be brought under the
plough, new houses built, more implements made, more
mills, breweries, and manufactures erected. Where popu-
lation doubles in fifty years only, all those need only be
doubled within the same period; but where it doubles in
five years, there are ten times as many chances presented for
engaging in various enterprises. Hence it is that in England
and other old countries, where there is not room for rapid
development, the rate of interest is, under ordinary circum-
stances not more than half what it is in the United States,
nor more than one-third of what it is here. If you take
£IOO by taxation from a capitalist in England, you deprive
him only of from £3 to £4, and a man in business tff
£5 or £6 per annum. Here if you take the same sum from
a capitalist, he loses £l2 per annum, and a tradesman suffers at
least £2O yearly. The consequence of this great difference
is, that it would be worth a man’s while in this colony,
instead paying any given tax at the present moment,
to engage to pay double as much at the end of five years ;
whereas, in England he would be loser if he were to


pay double before the expiration of eighteen or twenty
years.
Taking the rate of interest here at per cent,
it would be worth a person’s while to pay anything less than
£BOO at the end of eighteen years to avoid a present payment
of £lOO, because at 12£ per cent, capital very nearly
doubles every six years; while in England, taking the
interest of money to be 4 per cent-, it would only be
worth while to purchase a present release by a payment
of £2OO at the end of the same period, consequently it
would not be justifiable to save the people of England a
portion of a tax, if by so doing, works were made to last
less than eighteen years ; whereas, in this colony, it may be
sound policy to make them of little more than six years
duration, and renew the tax so often for the purpose of
putting them up again and again. For instance, if in a
country where interest w r as 4 per cent., a building costing
£l,OOO, which would last only six years, could be
made to last eighteen by being made of a more durable
material which would cost £2,000, the loss to the community
would be nearly £25 per cent, if it were made of the cheap
material. Had it been originally made of greater durability,
its cost at the end of eighteen years would be £4,000,
namely the first outlay of £2,000, and the loss of interest,
which would amount to £2,000 more. But if it were built
of the cheaper material, its cost at the end of the same
period, when it should be renewed for the fourth time, would
be no less than £4,960, which would be made up as follows:
—The first erection, together with interest, would be £2,000,
at the end of eighteen years ; the first renewal with twelve
years interest would be £1,697, and the second renewal with
years interest, £1,263.
But in a country where interest was 12J per cent., the
result would be quite different. There, by erecting the cheap
work, though of short duration, there would be a great gain.
For example, if the expensive work, costing £2,000, and of
eighteen years’ duration were put up, the ultimate cost
should be estimated at £16,000, because the capital would
have doubled three successive times by the end of that


period. If, however, it were built at the outlay of £ 1,000
only, and renewed at the end of six and twelve years, the
cost would only be £14,000. The first £I,OOO would
amount to £B,OOO at the end of eighteen years, and the
two renewals would respectively come to £4,000 and
£2,000 when the twelve and six years’ interest would be
added. Thus it appears that the very same policy which
would occasion a loss of nearly one-fourth in one country,
might result in a gain of one-eighth in the other. By
making works more permanent where capital was abundant,
there Avould, within no very long period, under the circum-
stances we have supposed, be a gain equal to half the
original outlay, and vice versa where capital was scarce and
precious.
It is a very general impression that there is a gain in
making costly works, if the durability be augmented in a
higher proportion than the increase of outlay ; that is if by
doubling the cost they are made of fourfold permanency, and
by trebling it, to last six times as long; but no doubling of
outlay for any amount of permanency, beyond the period of
capital doubling, is justifiable on the grounds of economy
alone, whatever it may be for other reasons. Thus, if when
money is of such a rate of interest as to double in six years,
you make a work costing £l,OOO, which would only last six
years, last thirty-six you, by doubling the first outlay,
occasion a positive loss, instead of effecting a gain. The
£2,000 would have doubled six times in thirty-six years,
and have amounted to £128,000 ; while, had the work been
built up six times, at an outlay each time of £l,OOO, the
total cost, including interest, would have been only £114,000.
If, however, the duration of a work can be increased
several fold by an additional outlay less than the first neces-
sary cost, it may become economical to increase the expen-
diture; for example, if by expending £1,500 instead of
£l,OOO, you make the work last thirty-six years, the
eventual cost would fall from £114,000 to £96,000, which is
the sum which £1,500 doubling six times over comes to.
The principle just explained is applicable to many por-
tions of railway works, sucli as wooden bridges the duration


of which is much lower in proportion than the cost as com-
pared with stone ; but stone bridges being several times more
expensive, are by no means economical in a country where
capital is exceedingly precious. Now, economy is the chief
thing to be considered in railways as well as in machinery.
They are made for economy and use, and not for ornament.
There are many things, such as dwelling-houses, in which
comfort, health and respectability very properly take
precedence over economy. There are cases where
costliness is requisite. It is no economy, for
instance, to have miserable stockades, where a warder or
policeman is required for every half-dozen prisoners, instead
of having strong, securely built, and well arranged prisons,
in which the persons and health of the inmates are at once
preserved. There is no economy in having public schools
flimsy and ill-ventilated to a degree detrimental to the
health and strength of the rising generation. There is no
economy in having public offices so unsuited to the climate
as to occasion frequent illness amongst those who have to
spend a large portion of their time in them ; and thus
have to pay men money for time during which they are
under the treatment of physicians. There are cases in
which it would be paltry not to make a sacrifice of capital,
however precious, for ornament; but in economical works,
such as roads, nothing will justify any other course than that of
the utmost frugality. Where so much is to be done, when all
parts of a country are in want of the means of transit, not
to make the funds available for roads go as far as possible,
is a great national detriment, and a gross injustice to the
more distant places, which must necessarily receive roads so
much the later as the other works are made more expensive.
It may be said that we can borrow money in Europe, at
a much lower rate of interest than it is worth here; but
that does not affect the principle on which we should act.
No matter at what rate we may be able to procure loans,
money is worth to us our current rate of interest, and should
be husbanded with equal care as if the higher rate were paid
for it. We borrow to avoid trenching upon the precious
capital of this young country, or, which is the same thing, to


obviate the necessity of pressing too heavily at present upon
the taxpayer; moreover, if we cannot borrow all we could
profitably expend, we will the longer postpone the period of
having recourse to domestic capital, by making that which
we can get from abroad stretch as much as possible. It is
also to be recollected that a country cannot borrow largely
without paying proportionately higher for it. If a Govern-
ment, however secure, throw a large quantity of invest-
ments into the market, they will, like any other commodity
which is abundant, fall in price; that is, the rate of interest
will inevitably rise ; and a country like this cannot look for
extensive loans in the English market, without producing a
degree of caution amongst lenders, for which they will be
sure to charge. Besides the more we borrow, the greater
will be the interest of our debt, which can only be paid by
taking from the taxpayers that which they can profitably
employ, and with which they may increase the national
wealth.
If the interest of money were only 2 per cent., every-
thing required for permanent use should, unless the obstacles
were considerable, be made to last thirty-five years, whether
in buildings, machinery, or implements; and if a large out-
lay must be incurred to make works sufficiently permanent
to last that time, it may be wise to go to some additional
expense to make them last a considerable time longer. In
Holland and England, and countries similarly circumstanced,
men act on this principle and are economically correct.
There, houses, stores and workshops, and even fabrics for
common use, are made made with a view to durability. But
in the United States, where mercantile instinct is extremely
keen, men care very little about things lasting many years.
Accordingly the buildings of the latter are run up with
great rapidity, and with very little regard to durability.
They too are right.
There are other reasons wffiy we should at present hus-
band our capital. The usages of labour will undoubtedly
fall in course of time, and when that takes place, works can
be renewed at a much lower outlay than that for which du-
rability could now be added to them. Besides, when the


country advances in population, arts and manufactures;
when artizans and mechanics, machinery and tools are to be
found nearer the places where they are required, works can
be constructed much cheaper than when all these have to
be transported to remote parts of the colony. With a fall
in the wages of labour, there will also be such a fall in the
interest of money, as to render it sound economy to make
our works of a more permanent character.
But a more impressive reason than any of these is, that
population is increasing with great rapidity, and that a
larger population can bear the expense of a work much
better than a small one. A sum which would amount to
£1 per head on the number of inhabitants at present in this
colony, will not, in all probability, come to more than four
or five shillings per head in fifteen or twenty years. Not
only will the renewal of works be absolutely lower, but it
will be relatively lower than their present cost.
Let us, therefore, while we adopt every mechanical im-
provement of an economical character in the construction
and working of our railways, eschew the system of burying
all our resources in a few model lines ; but rather endeavour
to afford every district a share of the great advantages which
railways confer, by spreading them as widely as possible;
and the economy of them will rapidly enrich each place, and
so increase its wealth and power of expenditure, that the
portion which it will be called upon to contribute towards
renewals and improvements, will be a very trifling burden
upon it. If we were to take away the entire of mens’
capital, for the sake of making railways everlasting, we
would deprive them of the means of turning the latter to
account; but if we allow them to retain a portion of capital,
and make the railways of no more than moderate durability,
we not only leave them the power of renewal, but, owing to
the benefits conferred by a good system of transit, we aug-
ment it.


CHAPTER XI.
A general system of railways. The course pursued in Belgium. Applicability of it
to Victoria. Necessity of connecting the gold-fields with each other. A grand
trunk line through the midst of the colony. Benefit of proclaiming a general
system at an early period. The land not to he kept idle till the railways are
made. Cross lines. Priority in selecting termini should be determined
according to population.
Though it is beyond the scope and pretensions of this
pamphlet to offer suggestions respecting routes, I will, never-
theless, for the sake of illustrating the foregoing arguments,
attempt to outline a project; admitting at the same time that
it is hazardous even for a professional man who has not
acquired a good topographical knowledge of the country to
offer any definite proposition.
In matters of legislation, whenever a historical parallel
can be found, men ought invariably avail themselves of the
experience it affords. They should look about them to see
Avhat others, in circumstances similar to their own, have
done; and how far their course is applicable as a standard
to follow. If we do this, we will naturally revert to the
plan pursued by Belgium, as the Government of that
country was the first which undertook the task of establish-
ing a general system of railways at the public cost.
The object, as first proposed in 1833, was to unite the
principal commercial towns of the interior with the sea at
one side, and with the frontiers of France and Prussia on
the other, connecting all the chief cities in the manner most
advantageous to the general interest of the country, but at
the same time paying all due regard to the particular
interests of the several localities.
The first step which the Government took for the
accomplishment of the project, was to have a survey made
of the Kingdom, and the main lines were then determined
with reference at once to the general features of the country
and the industrial relations of the different places, as con-
nected with the production and supply of commodities, and
the intercourse of the large towns with each other, and with


foreign countries. In-the selection of a central station, the
claims of Brussels, the capital, were set aside in favour of
the much smaller town of Mechlin, which was found to be
more favourably situated, in an engineering point of view,
for the lines to converge to from all quarters of the compass,
besides presenting several economical advantages, and
amongst them the important one that the lines embracing
it passed through a greater number of large towns than
would have been the case had Brussels been made the centre
of the system.
The fact of a preference being given to a comparatively
small place on account of the superiority of its situation,
speaks much for the public spirit of the people, for their
self-denial where the interests of the commonwealth were
concerned. It is a testimony in favour of the system of
state railways; and ought to be recalled to mind when
certain citzens of Melbourne abandon themselves to cen-
tralising instincts, and exhibit so paltry a spirit as to
express apprehensions, and actual hostility at the prospect
of Williamstown being served by a closer connection with
the city of which it is the seaport*. If people cherish such
feelings towards a place having interests inseparable from
and identical with their own, it is much to be feared that
the introduction of a well devised and equitable system,
based on enlarged views as regards the future, will meet with
an amount of opposition which can only be overcome by a
very strong Government, and one composed of men of a
very resolute and unyielding temperament in enforcing
what they are convinced is for the public good.
There are many circumstances attendant on the settle-
ment of this colony which suggest the applicability to it of
a plan similar to that pursued in the formation of the
Belgian railway system. A very large proportion of our
population is concentrated towards the interior of the
colony, similar to the seats of manufacturing industry of
central Belgium. The miners form a great producing in-
dustry, and their labour produces little of what they con-
sume —a state of things which must always render them the
* Written in July last. Better feelings are now apparently predominant.


centre of a large traffic, converging from all parts of the
frontiers.
There is also some resemblance between the geographi-
cal position of Belgium and Victoria. Both countries have
the sea at one side only; and on the other three sides each
of them is enclosed by a great continent. New South Wales
and South Australia are to Victoria as Prussia and France
are to Belgium; and we must look forward to have, within
no very distant period, a trade with both of those colonies,
across our frontiers. The Murray already promises to be to
Victoria what the Rhine and Meuse are to our European
prototype. This country cannot boast of many good har-
bours, and Belgium has only Antwerp and Ostend, which
correspond with Melbourne and Geelong on the one hand,
and with Port Fairy and Portland on the other.
A similarity of position and circumstances entail like
wants. We want to unite the sea-port towns with the
mining districts, and both of these with the food-producing
lands; and we want also to connect the various diggings
with each other.
As regards the connection of the sea-port towns with
each other, we may very well imitate the Belgians in this
respect. They did not run a direct line between Antwerp
and Ostend; because the sea, which is the cheapest of all
modes of traffic, rendered the necessity of such a step less
immediate ; neither would it be wise in us to act in a differ-
ent manner as regards the connexion of Melbourne and
Geelong, with Belfast and Portland. But the importance of
connecting the various diggings Avith one another does not
seem to have engaged public attention sufficiently.
It is of great importance to mercantile men to be able to
travel from one diggings to another Avith facility ; but it is
a matter of still greater consequence that commodities should
be removable according as the population shifts, and as the
different mining markets become overloaded, or fall short of
supplies. A person Avho has not been witness to the effects
of an alteration in the density of the population
of the various gold-fields, can form no idea of the prodigi-
ous and lamentable losses to Avhich storekeepers, and all


persons engaged in occupations dependent upon, or subsi-
diary to the miners, are subjected, owing to the want of
accommodation for travelling between the various gold-fields.
Traders have in a moment their stocks made superabun-
dant ; and see them rotting, while fresh supplies are being
poured in from Melbourne and Geelong to some neighbour-
ing gold-field which has become an object of attraction. The
cost of transporting bulky commodities is such as to deter men
from making the attempt to save themselves from the conse-
quences of the loss of their former customers. Smiths have
to move their forges, bakers their ovens, carpenters their
tools, and all other tradesmen in like manner the utensils
of their arts, at a prodigious cost. The diggers can scarcely
get implements,food, and other necessaries, when they reach a
new spot, or crowd suddenly on an old one; or they obtain what
they require at terms so exacting as to strip them in a few
weeks of the savings of a whole year’s labour. They are,
consequently, deterred from yielding to the promptings of
that enterprising and energetic spirit to which we are in-
debted for the rapid outspread of our gold-fields, and the
opening up of the territory. Their losses drive them to the
verge of despair. Mining industry as being the most im-
portant, and as maintaining the greatest portion of our pop-
ulation, is deserving of primary consideration in the distri-
bution of our railway expenditure. A grand trunk line
passing through the midst of the long belt of auriferous
country in which the principal diggings are situated, would
save the loss of much of the time of our labouring popula-
tion, prevent the waste of a great deal of capital, and dimin-
ish the suffering and misery to which the immense number
of travellers on the gold-fields are exposed; and ought,
therefore, form a portion of our railway system which
should stand high in the order of precedency for execution.
It is more necssary to urge the claims of existing in-
terests, amongst the foremost of which are the relation of
the gold-fields to each other, when notions, started at a
period of wild and visionary projects, continue to occupy
public attention. The expectation appears to exist of the
early completion of that portion of the Melbourne, Mount


Alexander, and Murray River Railway, which was designed
to connect Maiden’s Punt with Bendigo, and which is as
attractive on a prospectus as if the line had been projected
by the most skilful manufacturer of bubble companies. But
it is to be hoped that the construction of the portion alluded
to will be reserved for a period when there will be something
more weighty in proportion to its value than wool, to give em-
ployment to a railway, and when the country along the Lower
Campaspe, now almost a desert, has acquired some popula-
tion and cultivation; or at least, until the public are satisfied
that the country there possesses the qualities to attract and
maintain a population. It is, no doubt, desirable to make
our railways with a view to the future; but they must also
be chosen with reference to existing wants and interests.
They must, in the first instance, be made through and be-
tween those spots which are actually settled. Be it remem-
bered that not a sack of any commodity will reach our
central gold-fields—those in Talbot or on the branches of
the Upper Loddon—by way of the long navigation of the
Murray, after a railway is opened from Melbourne to Castle-
maine and Bendigo. It is, therefore, very difficult to under-
stand for what traffic this extension of the Mount Alexander
line was devised, and continues to be seriously entertained.
What we want is to have railways made to connect those
parts of the country where the population is at present most
numerous, and where the capital of the country has been
already invested. We want them where they will confer
the greatest immediate advantage, and at the same time
laid down in such a manner as to exhibit evidence of design,
and form a connected well-devised and convenient system,
so that when the various parts become successively joined,
they will present the appearance and afford the advantage
of long lines intersecting each other at the most convenient
points. For example, if Melbourne were made the centre
of the system, instead of some point towards the middle of
the colony, it would occasion much greater cost and incon-
venience to all the rest of the colony, than it would afford
convenience or benefit to Melbourne. It would be worse
for a person resident at Castlemaine, who wanted to go to


Albury or Beechworth, to have to come to Melbourne first,
than it would be for a person from Melbourne to go to Beech-
worth via Castlemaine. If well devised, the lines will offer
full convenience without competing with one another.
Any person placing a map of this colony before him, and
observing the points where the population is most closely
settled—where the mining, the trading, and agricultural in-
dustries have taken their seats —will perceive that they lie
within an obtuse-angle-triangle, of which Melbourne forms
the apex, and the base of which passes from Portland to
Beechworth. In the long belt of country extending between
the two latter places, lie our principal gold-fields, the richest
and best watered lands, and fully half the inhabitants. A
great trunk line from the neighbourhood of Beechworth
to Portland, would open the agricultural lands on the
Ovens, King, Goulbourn, and Broken Rivers and on the Seven
Creeks, to the diggings situated in the Murray districts, as
well as to those of M‘lvor and Mount Alexander. A rail-
way so placed would be within reach of the farmers of
Kilmore and Kyneton, would go close to the country
watered by the Upper Loddon, and pass near the Sandhurst,
Tarrengower, Maryborough, Creswick, and Fiery Creek
Diggings. Following the course of the latter mentioned
stream, which is, no doubt, auriferous far down from its
source, it would enter upon the valleys of those rivers which
flow through the Port Fairy and Portland Bay districts;
opening at one and the same time the rich agricultural lands
of the western part of the colony to the gold-fields’ markets,
and turning to advantage the harbours of Portland, Belfast,
and Warrnambool, for the shipment of that produce which
is now, for want of roads, excluded from them.
The benefit of proclaiming, at an early period, a great
midland trunk line, as a fixed part of our railway system,
would be important, inasmuch as it may influence the
neighbouring colonies of New South Wales and South
Australia to adopt a systematic plan in the construc-
tion of their railways, to correspond with ours, and thus
form a stream of traffic from Sydney to Adelaide through
the centre of Victoria. It is, moreover, of great importance.


if our present land system is to be continued, that the public
should have a pretty clear and early understanding as to the
general direction of the lines ; because people will then pur-
chase the lands in the neighbourhood of them, on the un-
derstanding that they will be opened up by railroads, and
a proportionately high price will be paid. If they settle
there before the lines are made, our railways will pay from
the moment the trains are started. On the other hand, if
the course of each line is kept concealed till the period of
its commencement, the land must be reserved to prevent
a huge system of jobbing by wealthy speculators, who, from
their position, will inevitably have the earliest information as
to the course of each line, and will be able to buy up all
land open for selection; or the people will settle in districts
from which they will afterwards have to remove ; or what is
worst of all, the land must be kept idle till the different
lines are completed, rendering the latter comparatively use-
less during the first years of their existence. The land
should not be kept idle for a moment, and the people ought
to have a general idea of the part of the country where they
could settle with most advantage to themselves and the com-
munity; neither of which things could take place if the
lands were kept back from sale, pending the construction of
the railways.
From the belt of high land through which the proposed
trunk line should run, nearly all the rivers of the colony
fall, in nearly equal numbers, to the south and north ; and
present nature’s plan for cross or intersecting lines. With
those lines which our progress will require towards the far
north, we need not at present trouble ourselves, as the
country there is as yet but thinly inhabited. Besides the
positions of the different rivers—the course of the Avoca,
the Loddon, the Campaspe, and the Goulbourn, will place
the route of our lines there almost beyond discussion.
With regard to those passing from the south, a Belfast
and Warrnambool junction line might meet a branch from
the Grange and the valley of the Wannon, somewhere to
the westward of the Hookins Biver. The Geelong line
would fall in either after passing close to Ballaarat, or round


the western side of Lake Burrambeet. From Melbourne
there should eventually be tAvo or three lines, one of
which should certainly pass near Kilmore, so as to form
at once a connection with Bendigo, BeecliAvorth, and sub-
sequently with Sydney, uniting the agricultural districts
of Kilmore, of the Plenty and East Bourke, and the Kan-
garoo and Anderson’s Creek diggings, with the markets of
the interior and with the sea.
A plan, such as that sketched out, would, together Avith
the water-carriage betAveen the harbours, form a complete
circle of communication, embracing Avithin it the richest and
most populous parts of the colony.
In making a selection of the portions which should be
first completed, priority ought to be conceded to those places
which contain, unitedly, the largest population, or suffer the
greatest inconvenience from the absence of metalled roads.
After the connection of Melbourne Avith Sandhurst or
Castlemaine, the three principal goldfields—Bendigo, Mount
Alexander, and Ballaarat—should be successively united,
including as many of the newer gold-fields along the
Loddon as the nature of the country Avould permit. The
eastern line, passing near Kilmore, Avould open up por-
tions of the colony, having claims Avhich place them high on
the list of precedence, as Avell from the number of inhabi-
tants as on account of the existing traffic and the amount of
land fit for tillage.
As regards the completion of any system Avhich could
at present be devised, it may be observed that the effects of
our first lines upon the progress of different districts cannot
fail to produce changes which may disturb any calculations
now formed.


CHAPTER XII.
Conclusion. Borrowing money for making Eailways. National Debt
objected to on false grounds. General remarks.
There are questions connected with railway economy not
dealt with in the foregoing chapters, though they have been
subjects of public controversy. They are of that class
which the necessity of the case determines, or which the
plain good sense of the community, after brief examination,
tacitly and gradually excludes from discussion.
For example, though the system of borrowing money for
the construction of public works has been practised under
the most enlightened governments and sanctioned by the most
eminent statesmen, the policy of its adoption by us has been
called in question. These objections against incurring a
national debt have, in these pages, been indirectly met, by
urging the importance of sparing the capital of new coun-
tries having only a small population, and by drawing atten-
tion to the fact that a sum which would press heavily on
the infant resources of a state, will be a very light burden at a
future period when capital andpopulation shall have increased.
There ought to be no fear of incurring a debt on account of
that which is reproductive; nor is it an injustice to those who
come after us, if they receive value for the burden we im-
pose on them. It is to debts contracted to carry on the
wars of aggression or ambition that the arguments of econo-
mists are applicable, and to taxation levied for maintaining
in idleness great masses of men who should be adding to,
instead of eating up, the wealth of the community. To
apply the same arguments against an expenditure which
would develope the resources of a country, and enrich it, as
have been used against that which impoverishes and ex-
hausts, manifests a very imperfect mental organization.
Whether our railways should be made with a double or
single track, is another question which does not appear to
require much consideration. When traffic augments, and
experience proves a single track insufficient, dangerous or


inconvenient, it will then be time to make provision for the
altered state of things. At present equity and policy de-
mand that the benefit of railways should be diffused as
widely and rapidly as possible, and the expenditure not ap-
plied to the formation of a few expensive and very complete
lines.
Some objections have been raised against the Mount
Alexander line. It may not be the best route, but it is to
be recollected that the Legislature not only authorised the
purchase, but adopted the Report of a Committee of the
House recommending a direct line to Castlemaine; and it
'would not be correct or prudent of the Government to excite
public dissatisfaction, by any further delay. The public, so
far as the newspapers and our public bodies are indications
of popular sentiment, have been most clamorous against
further postponement, and if compliance with public impa-
tience occasionally leads to premature measures, such cir-
cumstances form some of the penalties which have to
be paid for popular government and “ pressure from
without.” If we continue, in the matter of railways, to
indulge the habit which has grown upon us of imputing
dilitariness to the administration, we must reconcile our-
selves to errors consequent upon imperfect surveys. We
must make up our minds to suffer something for want of
confidence in our leading men, and to purchase the benefits
of promptness by some of those drawbacks that inevitably
ensue from hastiness.
If there be any foundation for the belief that the routes
already determined upon are not the very best that might
have been selected, it must at least have the good effect of
showing the Legislature the error of not having, in the
first instance, discussed and adopted a system of railway
economy, and will suggest the desirability of instituting
careful enquiries into all the circumstances which ought
to determine the principles on which railway communica-
tion shall be conducted. The peculiar requirements of this
country, as compared with others, must be ascertained, and
how far we may imitate or depart from the course pursued by
them; whether our policy ought to be to get the longest or the


shortest lines between the various termini for given sums of
money; whether we should construct them for mercantile
traffic, and with the view of making them subsidiary to the
promotion of agriculture, rather than for the rapid transit of
passengers and mails ; whether we ought to incur a heavy
additional outlay for durability and speed, or whether we
should husband present resources, and leave improvements
and additions for a future period, when capital will be less
precious, labour more abundant and cheaper, and when
there will be a greater population to bear the burden.
These points, and many others, will no doubt be made
subjects of enquiry, and it is to be hoped they will be entered
upon with enlarged views, and however vigorously the
battle for political power may be fought about matters
of opinion or feeling, that a spirit of patriotism, and an
honest desire to promote the common weal will pre-
dominate on the subject of railways, involving so vast an
expenditure, and affecting so deeply the general interests
of the country, its rate of progress, and the prosperity
of the people.
W. FAIEEAX AND CO.. PEINTEES, COLLINS STEEET EAST.


