

RAMBLING THOUGHTS
OF A
RAMBLING MAN.


THOUGHTS
OF A
RAMBLING MAN.






RAMBLING THOUGHTS
OF A
RAMBLING MAN
DURING A VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD .
% pfcimnto
TO
HIS CHILDREN’S CHILDREN.
BY
T. DYER EDWARDES.
LONDON:
PRIVATELY PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR.
1876.


LONDON J
PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS,
STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS.


Ship ‘ Eweretta ’ at Sea,
August, 1844.
My dear Children, —
Shortly after my departure from England it
occurred to me that I might write an account of
my voyage and life at sea, with its various incidents,
and the thoughts suggested by the varied scenes
through which we were about to pass as well as of
the internal daily observances of “ aboard-ship ” life.
All these things made me hope that my jottings
of thought and travel might be such as to prove
not only interesting and amusing, but a source of
instruction to you, and indeed to myself also, as the
act of writing down will impress upon my mind pass-
ing incidents which might otherwise be altogether
forgotten : hence my little “ Log ” will serve to mark
events, and form a channel to convey the varied im-
pressions and ideas arising from this or that scene
or subject. Each will naturally be most varied in
traversing so many thousand miles of ocean. Another
reason for my keeping this journal may be added,
viz., that in a few years, when (through the kind


providence of Him who holds the life and destiny of
man in His all-wise, all-loving hand) I may be re-
stored to you and a happy peaceful home, I can look
over these annals of my wanderings with pleasurable
interest, and the more so having you all around me.
With the aid of your dear mamma, I shall therefore
endeavour to carry my wish into effect, in the heart-
felt humble hope of advantage to you, and to myself.
So far as you are concerned, when this reaches you,
my little Mary, I will suppose that you will not
only be able to read writing, but have also com-
menced learning “ Geography,’’ which will greatly
assist you in following me, and enable you to under-
stand and appreciate many things and descriptions of
places which would otherwise be unintelligible to an
uneducated little girl.
I may here tell you, my dear children, that you will
find “ Geography ” a most fascinating portion of your
studies, bringing you, as it were, face to face with
foreign scenes and cities totally unlike what meets
the eye in England,—countries as delightful in climate
as beautiful in landscape, rich in fruit, flower, and
verdure, beyond all conception. It tells you of places
famous for their soft calm beauties, and of others where
Nature is portrayed in her grander and more sublime
features. Countries again noted in history for pro-
ducing heroes, valiant men who unceasingly toiled for


their country’s good. Thus, knowing the value of
education, I hope you will do justice to my expecta-
tions by paying every attention to the instruction of
those appointed to teach you, and apply all your
energies to obtain information. In asking your young
minds to understand the latitude, the longitude, course
and distance, and the every-day work of a ship at sea,
I feel I should he demanding too much. Hence I
thought, that by giving my wanderings in a different
and newer strain, I might succeed in creating in you
a desire to trace my steps over the “ Ocean blue,” and
also induce you to ask such questions as would greatly
assist you in your future studies. With these hopes,
and a Father’s fondest wish, I pray that your conduct
may always be dutiful, obedient, and affectionate to
those who daily and hourly watch with loving interest
over the progress of your minds and education, and by
strict attention on your part to acquire a perfect and
healthy development of those talents with which it has
pleased God to have endowed and blessed you. For you
know He will demand an account for wasted talents —
and one day you will deplore lost opportunities and
misapplied advantages. By obedience and assiduity
now, you may become hereafter rich in knowledge
and fitted to fill honourably, usefully, and nobly
those stations, and perform through life those duties
which may fall to your lot. Hold fast to your duty—


first to God, next to your neighbour by your conduct
and example, and to yourselves, by living in the
faith, fear, and love of God, so that you may be in-
heritors of His glorious kingdom hereafter, that you
may increase “in wisdom and stature, and in favour
with God and man,” is the prayer of
Your loving and absent
FATHER.


‘EWERETTA,’
A baeque of 356 tons, commanded by Captain B.
Darby, left Portsmouth on the 24th day of April,
1844, bound for Sydney, New South Wales.
APRIL!—The old saying flits across my mind:
“ March winds and April showers
Bring forth in season gay May flowers.”
May this be a propitious saying for me!
T. D. E.




PART I.
FROM PORTSMOUTH TO THE EQUATOR.




RAMBLING THOUGHTS.
Departure.
The Eweretta ’s bound for a distant main,
Please list to the tale of a voyaging man.
His “ Log ” pray peruse, perchance ’twill amuse,
If you read with attention and time not abuse.
At all events, Mary, for thy father’s dear sake.
Read, and mark well, while I my Voyage relate.
Some truth it will give, some fiction, some play,
At which little “ Carrie ” will smile, I dare say.
And soft little “ Pussy,” the baby, I mean,
Ah! what shall I say to my own “ fairy queen ” ?
I see her bright eyes, her sweet smiling face,
Alas ! in her mem’ry Papa has no place ;
But I hope to return, and affection to find
In the heart of my “ Liz,” though she teas left behind.
In April I left you, now mark well the time —
’Tis a varying month in our northern clime—


Compare it, my children, with life’s fleeting hours,
Its sunshine and rain, yet to May it brings flow’rs.
So in life some dark clouds or rain may appear,
Yet God so directs them that we need not fear;
And soon His bright presence shall gladden our heart,
And bid both the cloud and the tear-drop depart.
SONG.
We qet Under Way.
“ Aeouse, arouse, my merry, merry men,”
The captain he did say—
“ Arouse, arouse, my merry, merry men,
We must get under way.”
“ The capstan man, my merry, merry men,”
The boatswain he did say;
“ Man the capstan all! my merry, merry men,
We must get under way.”
Up started all the merry, merry men,
The capstan heaves away;
“ Round all, round all, my merry, merry men,
Anchor’s apeak, hurrah!”


“ The topsail drop, my merry, merry men,”
The boatswain he did say;
“ The topsail drop, my merry, merry men,
Sheet home and then belay.”
“ To the capstan now, my merry, merry men,”
The capstan heaves away;
“ Cat the anchor now, my merry, merry men,
For now we’re under way.”
►oJO{o~ —
JVI UJ3TER THE CrEW.
Our anchor is weighed and the pilot’s on board:
“ All hands to the muster. Ho! Boy, pass the word ;
The sails are all set, and the wind it is free.
Now farewell to the land and our dear country! ”
—
The Pilot J^eavinq.
The niainyard’s back’d for the pilot to leave,
And feel we no pang as softly we breathe,
“ Farewell to our home, to the land of our birth;
Farewell to our friends, our kindred, our hearth.”


Long years may elapse till we ’gain clasp the hand
Of those whom we leave in our dear native land.
Ah! who can depart from yon beautiful shore
And not feel a dread they may see it no more ?
For many sail forth with hearts full of pride,
But never return, and now sleep ’neath the tide;
But “ Hope, brightest hope,” that sweet beacon of
light,
Soon dispels our dark fears, and “ cheers us with
night.”
We sleep, and forget for a time all our pain,
And dream we are with all our dear ones again.
“THE PILOT!” —When the pilot comes on hoard, he
takes the sole charge of the ship, and his duties require
him to remain until the ship gets well off the land, and
fairly into what is termed by seamen “deep water,” that
is, safely from shore and out of the Channel. When this
man, as I have said, comes on board, the chief officer, or,
as he is also called, first-mate, prepares a list of the crew,
which, upon the pilot taking leave, is forwarded to the ship’s
owners.
“ THE WATCH ” is divided into two sections—the “ star-
board,” or right-hand side of a ship, and the “larboard,”
or left-hand side. Latterly this last name has been changed,
in consequence of the numerous mistakes arising, and serious
accidents occurring, from the similarity of sound between
“ Larboard ahoy ” and “ Starboard ahoy,” when used in


The W/tch.
“ Starboard ” and “ larboard ” divide we the men:
So named is the “ Watch,” and we number teii;
Eivals in service, agility, strife.
So those mates who command are rivals in life.
The second aspires a “ first ” mate to be,
The “ first ” to command a good ship at sea.
Thus at sea, as on shore, contentment’s a prize,
Which, eluding our grasp, passes swift from our eyes.
Great ambition stains life, as envy the heart;
They rankle, then punish, with feverish smart.
a hurried call, during a storm or panic of any kind; so now
“ larboard ” is done away with, and “ port ” is substituted.
The “first watch” is from 8 o’clock in the evening till
12 o’clock at night. The “midnight” or “middle watch,”
from 12 o’clock until 4 o’clock in the morning, from which
time, until 8 o'clock in the morning, is called “ the morning
watch.” The “ second officer,” or, as now called, “ second-
mate,” takes charge of the “ starboard ” or “ captain’s
watch,” and the chief officer, “ first-mate,” the “ larboard ”
or “ port ” watch. There is a good deal of good-humoured
rivalry between the “ starboard ” and “ larboard ” watches,
accompanied sometimes by much fun, sailors in general
being as playfully mischievous as most schoolboys, loving
fun as much as kittens, and droll as monkeys, whom they also
emulate in swiftness of running up and down the rigging.
Scarcely a day passes without some “ prank,” i. e. “ trick,”
0


Then let us beware of two evils so great
As undue ambition and envy, —for hate
Is engender’d by these, and God will not bless
The person who ever His edicts transgress.
The Saturday Kiqht.
“ Farewell to old England ! the land of the free !
A glass shall go round for you and for me! ”
being played, and constantly we hear, “ The starboliens will
do us if they canimmediately followed by the good-
hnmoured retaliation, “ Will ye, my boys 1 ”
When the heart is heavily oppressed with sorrow, and
the eyes dull and heavy from the bitter tears wrung from
them, or aching it may be with the suppressed tears, such
as the heart only can shed in the anguish of parting from
the beloved ones afar, perchance weary watching the fast
fading shore, which as it recedes seems to sever the last
cord binding them to their native land, and striving with
nervous eagerness to catch one more, yet one more glimpse
of a familiar spot or landmark, before the eye loses it perhaps
for ever. Or again, tired from a listless look-out over the
vast and unaltered scene of a “ world of waters,” and with
a body overpowered with weary lassitude produced by
inaction, which perhaps it is as often as being weary from
hard labour; and the hearts of others racked by doubts of the


The Adieu.
Adieu to our friends, wherever they be, —
God bless them on land as well as on sea.
To sight though they’re lost, yet to mem’ry dear,
So pass we the glass, and we’ll give them a cheer,
A cheer from the heart, —one, two, three, hurrah!
Oh ! could they respond, which heart would say nay ?
Though distance divides, and the time may be long
Ere welcome be given, “ like morning bird’s song
present, dread for the future. . Under, such varied feelings
and conflicting emotions, who has not felt the sense of
relief which the deepening shadows of evening produces,
the soft, still, and beautiful harbinger of night, and blessed
hope of tranquil sleep? The solace afforded to the lonely,
sad heart, the weary body, or the oppressed mind by sleep,
—truly as well as beautifully is such sleep described as
“ tired nature’s sweet restorer!”
It was an old established custom to give a double allow-
ance of “ grog,” i.e. strong rum or whisky, with “ little
or no water,” as the stronger the better “Jack Tar” likes
it. A sailor likes his “ grog ” potent. Thus upon the “ first
Saturday at sea,” and on each succeeding Saturday night,
the steward was generally heard to “sing out” in true
nautical parlance,—meaning in our more sober land English,
“call out,”—“ Grog 01” Sailors, like soldiers, are taught
obedience, and so to this demand for their presence immc-
c 2


But turn we to Him who ordaineth our way,
Who wills what is best, His commands we ’ll obey,
In Providence trusting, submitting with grace,
And though time may be long, yet good will take
place.
Oblivion in sleep gives the mind some repose,
In the morn we’ll arise to new duties dispos’d.
Our ship is at sea, and the beautiful spray
Like snowflakes dash o’er, as we speed on our way.
diately, the heavy run of eager men, “ tumbling up,” as they
express it, is heard to receive with the utmost alacrity the
reward of present obedience —the dearly loved, and much-
longed-for beverage. And having, at a single draught,
swallowed their allotted portion, amid the genial good wishes
to surrounding messmates, expressed in hearty “ Here’s to
ye,” “ All round my hat,” and other polite speeches, couched
in some similar language more expressive than elegant, after
their “ quantum suffieit,” —disposing of the grog, please under-
stand —frequently attempts are made at song singing, the
performance of which is often ludicrous, but sometimes
really affecting, but most times displaying more energy of
lung than the science of harmony. After the musical treat,
the men often testify their desire for a little more lively
exercise, by asking “a side for a bend,” such being the (by
them) approved mode of soliciting room enough for a dance.
Sailors, as I must inform my little readers, are more remark-
able for agile and monkey-like activity than renowned for
graceful movement, though many of them do indeed dance
well, excelling in that dance—peculiar, I think, to seamen—
called “ The sailor’s hornpipe.” However, I shall leave to


Daybreak.
While the dew yet lies on the sylvan lawn,
And nature wakes from sleep,
Ere man has commenced the work of day,
And the sun rises o’er the deep;
’Tis sweet to list to bird’s first note,
Calling his mate to raise
Her voice in concert with his own,
To sing Jehovah’s praise.
your several imaginations the forming an idea of a dance
“on board ship at sea.” The dance being finished, all is
brought to a happy conclusion in a more friendly than
strictly musical manner by “ Now for a song all round.”
“LIKE MORNING BIRD'S SONG.”—What can be
more touching than the “ skylark’s ” first chant to the
break of day ?
DREAMS.—“ When dreams take place,” says Maonish,
“ it is evident that the whole mind is no longer in a state of
inaction. Some one or other of its functions is going on,
and evolving its own peculiar train of thought. If a person’s
mind or memory, for example, be active, he will then recall
with more or less vividness, former scenes or impressions.
If his imagination be strongly excited, images of splendour
or gloom may appear before his mental eye. These impres-
sions, at the same time, will often possess a character of
exaggeration which would never have belonged to them had
the judgment been awake to control the fancy in its exagge-
rated flights.” —The Philosophy of Sleep, by B, Macnish, p. 52.


ft D^eam.
I slept, and dreamt —the vision was not bright—
My wife appear’d, then children came to sight.
With anxious looks they ask, “ Why do you roam ?
Why leave us thus ? Why leave your own dear home ?”
It seemed I tried to make them comprehend
The cause why prudence urged me thus to bend
My way across the ocean, and I strove
To make my reasons plain to those I fondly love.
“ Children,” methought I said, “ Dame Fortune, blind,
Fickle in purpose, deceiving when most kind,
Go, blame this goddess, for you know ’tis she
Who holds the gold which tempts the world and me ;
Blame her, or praise, to me ’tis very clear
We must our duty do, although it cost us dear.”
I saw the starting tear, the downcast head:
My heart was wrung —my vision fled.
SUNEISB. —Those who have never found themselves
floating over the broad bosom of “ Old Father Ocean ” far
from land, and surrounded on every side by the wide-
spreading, undulating kingdom of “ Neptune,” cannot do
justice to —nay, can scarcely imagine—the exquisite beauty
of a sunrise at sea. The solemn stillness, a stillness indeed
such as may he felt, meets the ear, —the flood of glory
which greets the eye,—the vast expanse of water, usually
a clear green or sapphire hue, from whence the expression


I started, woke—and found it but a dream.
Alas ! the mind’s at work, and busy fancies teem:
The flickering night-lamp brought more close to view
The features of my wife, and children too ;
For on a panel by my bed was placed
The portraits of you all in infant beauty traced.
My eyes grew moist, and nature gave a sigh ;
I prayed for grace to Him who rules on high,
And asked in faith for strength and power to do
All that was just and right for Him and you.,
AT SEA,
’Tis break of day; the moon herself grows dim.
As o’er high heaven “ Aurora’s ” light doth skim.
Who can portray the beauties we behold ?
A rising sun o’er this our ocean-world.
applied to that peculiar 'shade called “ sea-green,” with its
circling belt of distant horizon, —a softly-flowing sea, some-
times still and smooth as glass, again at times covered
with tiny ripples, often mighty heavings of the water, as
if some living creature moved beneath the watery breast of
the ocean, —varied are the appearances, each beautiful; but
the one to which I now allude presented to the eye a scene
of calm beauty and grandeur such ns few hearts can witness
without emotion, or resist its sublime influence; and which


Here we behold triumphant from afar
The bright god “ Phoebus ” guide his glitt’ring car;
And bursting into life, come speeding on,
Harbinger of day, the everlasting sun;
And where’s the painter who can form such shade,
Or copy gem-like tints, as Phoebus made ?
Refulgent light! commanded but by One,
Whose power thou art, “ Thy will be done.”
He marked thy course, and said, “ Rule thou the day
But once He bid thee stand, and then thou didst obey.
To the Ocean.
Hail to thee, Ocean, so vast and so wide!
By thee have the stout masts of brave ships been
bow’d
And tost o’er thy billows, as playthings for thee ;
For great is thy power, 0 beautiful sea !
should engender holy feelings toward the Omnipotent Power
of the High and Lofty One, the great Creator of such a scene,
and mighty body of water, held in its strict and appointed
bounds by Him.
“ OCEAN.”—A Greek word, used to indicate extensive
bodies of “ salt water.” The word “ ocean ” first occurs, it
appears, in “ Homer.” The “ Pacific ” Ocean is the largest
known; the estimated expanse of its water being 100,000,000


Strong men have gone down in the pride of their life,
Succumbing to thee in the fierce mortal strife.
And mothers, their babes to their bosom close press’d,
Have sunk to their rest beneath thy broad breast.
Hail! to thee, Ocean, so beauteous and blue!
Trackless thy waters, so boundless to view.
And hail to thee, Science, our guide here below,
Who gave us a “ Murphy ” (he’s “ Irish” you know),
He invented the “ compass ” that sailors might know
The direction to steer, and the right way to go.
Before that, the stars were what they steered by,
And storms often hid their light in the sky.
Then hail, mighty deep ! to thy great power and space,
We bow, as our way o’er thy trackless fields trace;
But a greater than thou holds thy power in sway,
Who said, “ Peace, be still; thy proud waves here
stay!”
The “I am ” of life, it was He formed the sea,
Holds it in check, and protects you and me.
square miles. The “Atlantic” ranks second, being estimated
at 30,000,000 square miles. The “Indian” Ocean third,
estimated at 25,000,000 square miles. The “ Arctic ” Ocean
fourth, estimated at 4,000,000 square miles. This ocean is
connected with the “ Pacific ” by “ Behring ” Straits, and the
“ Atlantic ” by the straits between Greenland and Norway.
“WHICH GAVE US A MUEPHY.”—“ The mariner’s
compass” is said to have been invented by an Irishman


Sunday.
Hail ! sacred day, and hallowed of seven,
For rest is ordained, so ordered by Heaven;
But, when the wind’s “ rude,” and the barque rolls
oppress’d,
The “ children of sea ” are debarred of that rest —
But where is the spot under heaven’s high rule
That the heart cannot worship, our conduct to school.
In solemn thought bend then to Him who’s above,
And ask for a “ mind ” to revere His great Love !
Our conscience oft tells us there’s no time, no place,
But God can see, hear us, and grant us His grace.
named “Murphy,”, in the year 1229, (See Maunders’
‘ Treasury of Knowledge.’) But although I use the name
to serve my purpose here, yet the true history of this most
valuable little instrument seems to he involved in much
doubt, and its real discoverer and place of origin, as well
as the date of its first introduction and use, are all obscure,
if not absolutely unknown : the ancient Chinese lay claim
to its invention, as it is said they had known it in the year
1115 b.o. (Vide Haydn’s ‘Dictionary of Dates.’) The
Chinese were a most inventive as well as mechanical
people, so they may have really been the inventors.
SUNDAY. Upon this sacred day, it is generally
managed that the seamen should have “ watch and watch ”


No village-bell to bid the heartgood cheer,”
On this fine day—
Yet on the broad expanse of waters here,
We thus can pray: —
“ Great Lord of earth, of air, and this wide sea,
By Thee we live,
In pity listen to the prayer which we
In tribute give.
Thy ways in part unseen, Thy power divine
O’er everything.
Oh ! grant me knowledge,.that the heart may shine,
On all Thy gifts;
In singleness of heart, Lord let me ever feel
This blessed truth,
through the twenty-four hours, thus lightening the duty.
And I must say, to the credit of our merchant navy, that
most captains have prayers upon Sunday morning, when
every one is expected to appear at the service “ clean and
in fair order,” the captain or the doctor reading the prayers;
and only such work is done as is absolutely necessary for
the protection of life, and the furtherance of the voyage.
I knew a lady who upon a voyage was amused by a little
girl of seven years old, whom the captain often played with
in fine weather, and she was so good and so merry, even the
sailors loved her. One Sunday the sun was warm and
bright, and the sea calm. The captain asked her to romp with
him at play. She replied, “ Oh! no, sir, this is Sunday—
God’s day! ”


That Thou, the God of love, wilt only deal
In mercy mild.
Lord guide me through the tempting path of life,
By virtue bold,
And guard me from the elements of strife
When I am old.
That I may spend the years allotted me
In faith and fear;
And faithful in the vineyard work for thee,
My Saviour, dear.”
Thus, on the lone deep sea, the mind can dwell,
For Thou art there.
But oh ! ’tis sweet to hear the village bell,
Calling to prayer.
The Inland, Anthony.
The towering Cape de Yerd we near each day,
The heart grows light, ’tis merry, merry May ;
So pass we time, which pass’d is lost for ever,
The everyday of life’s an airy feather,
CAPE DE YEED ISLANDS were so called by the
Portuguese, because the sea to the west of them is covered
with “gulf-weed,” and presents to the eye some resemblance
to extensive meadows. The islands of Cape de Yerd


Blown from the wing of time, to be
Lost in a dread eternity.
* * * * ' #
* * * * *
Since we left home full twenty days have pass’d,
No “ reef,” or “ royals ” furl’d, so kind the blast
To cheer our heart, thanks to bright heaven,
We sight the land, “ St. Anthony’s ” at eleven !
Bold in appearance, headlands looming high,
Through hazy clouds, which vex the eager eye.
’Tis said the people are by priests beguiled,
Who, by the arts best known to Rome, have wiled
These wretched, superstitious creatures to believe
They must adore the Pope, and Mary who T 1 relieve
Them from their sins, and so to “ Rome ” they bend,
Who now and then her absolutions send!
An emblem which well feeds their superstition,
And sanctioned by the Holy Inquisition !
I mean, the regulation string of beads
And graven image too attached, must needs
Be hung around each “ tawny Christian ” neck,
And have no more religion than the throat they deck.
were discovered by a Portuguese navigator named “Juan
Fernandez,” in the year 1456. The group consists of
fourteen islands, hut of these only nine are inhabited, the
names of the principal are—Santiago, the largest, which is


The beads can’t feel; the image too is blind,
’Tis blindness all, a darkness of the mind,
“ Egyptian darkness such as may be felt ”
Is o’er the heart, and will not, cannot melt
So long as Rome her thraldoms wield ;
The mind’s entombed, the eyelids sealed.
Foul Superstition, dark as murky night,
Thy votaries tremble at the open light.
Unmask its follies—and the “ race is run,”
The mind once pierced, ah, then, a soul is won !
fertile and well cultivated; the chief town is called Yille dc
Praya by the French, Porto Praya by the Portuguese; the
climate is very unwholesome. The next in rank, St. Nicho-
las Mayo, is mountainous, but fertile in cotton. St. Lucie,
St. Vincent, which produces beautiful woods, and abounds
in turtle. The next is called by the French LTle dc Sel,
or The Island of Salt; and St. Anthony’s. The Island
of Salt is so named from the peculiar whiteness of its
appearance, and the great quantity of salt found upon it.
The number of inhabitants amongst the islands amounts to
GO,OOO or 70,000, mostly negroes, mixed with some mulattos,
the descendants of those Portuguese who originally settled
there, and a few whites. The people profess the Roman
Catholic religion, and are great zealots. The negro abori-
ginals are irascible, perfidious, vindictive, and cruel. They
have dry seasons, which are followed by famine, from which
disease and death result. Sometimes the periodical rains
do not come—then the vegetation fails. The seas around
these islands are dreaded by mariners, and avoided on account
of the dreadful maladies which attack them from the un-


Deception?.
Now pass we the land of a tropical sea,
The “ thermometer ” ranges at seventy-three ;
The “ barometer ”’s still for want of a gale,
And the “ nor’-east trade ” wind gently swells every
sail.
Who can express well, this free, buoyant life,
This freedom from care, and all earthly strife ?
wholesome air, and the long calms they have to endure there.
The produce of the islands chiefly consists in “ coffee, salt,
wood, and tortoise,” from the shell of which our beautiful
combs and various ornaments in tortoiseshell are manu-
factured. For more general information read in the ‘Penny
Cyclopaedia.’
ST. ANTHONY’S. Our situation at noon 14T5 N.,
25 - 40 W., land very high, weather hazy, with a strong trade-
wind from E.N.E. Ship sailing about three points free.
THE NORTH-EAST TRADES. —lt is only in the
open parts of the Pacific and the Atlantic oceans that
the trade-winds blow. They extend to 3000 miles in width,
say from 20. V N. to 23£ S. latitude. (Vide Basil Hall’s
‘ Fragments of Voyages.’)
DECEPTIVE APPEARANCES are almost every-day
occurrences at sea in one shape or another. Bennett states
(vol. ii. p. 71), “When in Pitt’s Passage, with the islands
of Gomona, and Oby-major in sight, some very extra-
ordinary effects of refraction had often been visible to us


Serenely and mild, this balmy air serves
To generate life and give vigour to nerves.
Around the horizon is a dark, deep line,
A “ bank ” is seen, to some a certain sign
Of lightning, thunder, or perhaps a squall,
If, as might happen, the wind should “ veer and haul.”
The hank disperses, and the cloud ascends,
No lightning flashes, and no thunder rends;
The air’s serene, no heavy rain-drops fall,
The masts don’t shiver, nor “ rude Boreas call.”
Thus do we speculate, upon the wind and weather,
Surmise, and wisely say, we should experience gather ;
But like the little fable, of the “ eggs in the basket,”
Experience often shows us our wise surmises blasted.
Man, like the “ glass,” denotes the state of weather :
The “ mercury’s up," he’s light as any feather;
When down, and clouds o’ercast his little sky.
The spirits sink, and off these feathers fly.
since we entered the Archipelago; hut we never were so
strongly mocked as upon the present occasion. The boats,
which were floating on a calm sea, at a distance from the
ship, were magnified to a great size, and the crew standing
up in them appeared as tall masts or trees, and their arms
when in motion looked like the sails of a windmill, while
the surrounding islands (especially at their low and tapered
extremities) seemed to bo suspended in the air, some feet
above the ocean’s crest.” I recollect seeing nearly the same
thing myself.—T. D. E.


FliBH !
“ Get a line, get a line ! for fish are to be seen,
The spoil is round the ship,” so we looked very keen,
To lure the fiscal game, with bait, hook, and line, —
“ All hands aboard,” are bent it seems on fish to dine.
“ Steady, my lads ” I heard close by a jovial old tar say,
“ Keep very close your line, I say, and let your fish
have play;
And mind you never count your game, e’en when he’s
on the line”
Snap, as he spoke, goes fish and line, alas! and it was
mine.
Swift glides away the wounded fish into his salt-sea
home,
And mark’d with blood the course he took along
where hundreds roam ;
BONETO.—A fish weighing from six to twelve pounds.
It will take bait, but may be caught by “ red rag.” When oh
deck and dying, the shaded colours are in lengthened stripes,
and the shades very bright.
ALBACOEE will weigh up to 150 pounds. Their
strength must be very great, for I have seen them spring
20 feet clear out of the water. They are not bad eating,
although, like most ocean fish, dry. Stewed in port wine, it
is not a bad dish.—T. D. E,.
D


He thinks he’s safe among his kind, nor ever fear’d
their hate,
They spread abroad as if in doubt, then round their
wounded mate,
With eager eyes, and murd’rous haste, they close with
direful hate.
The scent of blood the signal seems for all the finny
tribe
To close in hot pursuit around, and rending try divide
Amongst themselves their wounded friend,
Alas ! that such should be his end:
See yon boneto darting through the foam,
His eye is on the flying-fish, and rests on him
alone.
The “ little one’s ” a dainty bit for the other monster
thing,
Who ope’d his mouth, as though to speak! but ’twas
to such him in ;
DOLPHIN! —Basil Hall says : “ I have seen this fish
leap from the water with a velocity little short of a cannon-
ball.” The length of a Dolphin’s spring cannot be less
than 30 feet, and when he falls you can see him like
lightning gliding through the water. This magnificent
fish may truly be called the “ Gem of the torrid zone,” the
“ Chameleon of the sea.”
FLYING FISH weigh from half an ounce to two pounds,
and are in length from three inches to eighteen. The wings


I thought, as he sunk to his home, beneath the foamy
brine,
You, sir, for dinner, had some fish, but I have none for
mine.
The beauteous dolphin now behold, he tries to reach
the goal!
And swift as forked lightning throws himself amid the
shoal.
Boneto, and big albatross, and dolphin, ah! take
shame,
To eat so very small a thing, as flying-fish by
name.
Yes, yes! ye little helpless race—the prey of those
great things,
This only seems your sole reward for being blessed
with wings.”
are about one-third tho length each side; their colour is
a dark deep blue along the back, a light grey under the
stomach running to a clear white. The length of flight
these little fish are able to take is from 100 to 2000 yards;
they rise to a height of from six to twelve feet above the
water. Keith, when speaking of the Jews, says, “ Except,
perhaps, tho flying-fish, there was no race existing on the
earth, in the air, or in the water, who were tho objects of
such an unremitting, relentless, and general persecution.”—
See ‘ Keith’s Evidences of Prophecy,’ p. 84, note 1.
d 2


The North st,ar.
The heavens are clear, the stars brightly shine.
In the south they excel and are very fine.
See yon distant speck, what star can it be,
Just above the.horizon, and dipping the sea?
’Tis the star of the “ north ” the mariner’s guide,
The “ loadstone ” of hope, the homeward - bound’s
pride.
Its altitude’s low, full distant, but bright;
As south’ard we sail, ’twill recede from our sight.
Variable^.
Sickly and faint, grow the “ north-east trades,”
The heat’s oppressive, and our spirit fades,
We long for night, and bless the setting sun.
To bask in evening’s breeze—and so live on :
VARIABLE THE WIND!—The space between the
“nor’-east” and “sou’-east trades” is called the “Vari
ables,” and the wind and weather coinciding well deserve
the name. For in one hour we have hard squalls, calms,
heavy rains, clouds, and sunshine, and the wind varies
according to the time of year. Sometimes the “north-
east trades ” are lost in “ seven degrees north; ” at others, a


Variable the wind, from seven to the “ line,”
With squally weather —anon, a bright sunshine;
Then cool sou’-easters come, man’s fever’d frame to
brace,
The equator’s line we pass, yet ne'er a line we trace.
“ Blow, my bonny breeze, cool sou’-easter blow;
Herald of lawyers’ wigs, white as winter’s snow
In summer heat, in light and shade you play
Then spread, 0 “ grey sea mist,” and balk the god
of day.
Pajsjsinq the I+ine.
In times of old, so sailors tell with glee,
Ho man cross’d o’er the “line” but Neptune first must
see.
For the good old soul would rise, and tell him with
spirit,
Whether, as a boy or man, he possessed any merit.
ship may carry them to the “ line,” and so meet the “ south-
east trades ”in about two degrees south. When this is the
case, a quick passage is generally made to the “ Cape.”
SUNDAY, 26tu MAY.—Thirty-two days from Ports-
mouth ; crossed the Equator in west longitude, 22 de-
grees.


But now the times are altered, “ sadly changed,” they
say;
The old “ sea god ” is vanish’d; how can poor Jack
play ?
Thus Madam Fashion does away with every sort of
rule,
And sends poor slighted Neptune into the shades to
cool.
For thus far our voyage has been very fine;
In thirty-two days, we cross the great “ line.”
The “ south-east trades ” are blowing with spirit,
Free do we steer —and—Darby has merit.
Opinions are many how a good ship should sail,
At a “ foretopmast steering-sail ” many do rail;
“ Close hauled is the best,” some wiseacres say,
Although ’tis allowed that the ship makes less
way.
jSuNJ3ET.
Oh ! who can live and see yon glorious light
Tint the horizon, and then pass from sight,
IN PASSING THE “SOUTH-EAST TRADES,” many
are of opinion that the ship should he sailed “ close-hauled,”
that is, to sail close to the wind, in order to be well to “ wind-


Doubt tbe existence of an Eternal Being,
The soul’s good God, all wise, all seeing ?
New beauties spring to life. In life’s short hour
The clouds are tinged with every coloured flower; .
Azure, deep crimson, red, and sombre grey,
All lend their aid to bless departing day.
Farewell great luminary of life and light!
The world without thee would be lost in night,
All nature then would droop, the flower, bud, and tree,
The herb, the bird, and the insect which we see.
A SoNQ.
Day’s declining, our labour’s done ;
Fast descends the' setting sun;
The sea is calm ; now moonbeams play,
Merrily, merrily, dance away.
Our life is free, we ’re on the sea ;
Our course is clear —no land at lee;
Our sails are spread, the wind is low,
Merrily, merrily, on we go.
ward ” when they cease, which varies, according to the time of
year, from the 22nd to the 30th degree of south latitude. This
plan I do think is a bad one, unless the ship sails unusually


The watch is set, and still we sing;
The “ grog ” we pass, and care we fling.
Come ! one song more, one measure tread,
Merrily, merrily, “ lads of the lead.”
In sleep, sweet sleep, our eyes are clos’d;
In dreams, soft dreams, the mind’s dispos’d.
In fancy’s waltz dear forms we see,
Merrily, merrily, so dance we.
Midnight trance, now lost for ever;
Morning’s light from shade doth sever;
New duties call us with the day,
But merrily, merrily’s still our lay.
In three parts we our voyage may define ;
The first is pass’d, ’twas the “ tropical line
From which to the . Cape the second we call;
The last from the Cape, is the longest of all.
well, for with ordinary merchant vessels, it is evident that
by keeping close to the wind, they not only make “ lee-way ”
hut cannot go through the water so fast as if the yards are
well braced in, so as to allow of the foretopmast steering
sail to be set. It is true a degree or two may be saved
in one case, but in the other time would be gained, as well
as the ship eased, which will more than compensate the
loss.


PART II.
FROM THE EQUATOR TO THE CAPE OF GOOD HOPE.




PART II.
(Southern Hejyhpphere.
Turn we to the south, new beauties we behold,
And trace the hand of God —His wonders here unfold!
Great is Thy wisdom, all praise is due to Thee,
Who rulest o’er the stars and commandest the sea;
Who treasurest up the wind in the hollow of Thy hand,
And bidst the angry billows cease; ’tis done at Thy
command.
The STARg.
All is quiet! and the shades of night appear
The stars to lighten and the heart to cheer;
Celestial light of heavenly birth
Creative bodies revolving with the earth.
More near ye seem, bright gems of night,
Or else the eye’s deceived by azure light.
THE STARS. —In our vapoury skies the stars are com-
paratively obscure, and many insignificant-looking, but in
three-fourtbs of the world, and eminently in the regions
near and between the tropics, tbeir use has been felt and
acknowledged from the earliest ages. There they give


Your very track seems more defin’d, more true;
We mark thy rising, and thy setting too.
On Circinus’ right a cluster is seen
Of magnitude small—yet to sight very keen:
’Tis the cross of the South, all hail be to thee
The emblem of “ Hope ” for Eternity !
Thy distance measured, time and place are fixed.
Here science ends, and suppositions mixed :
Eor if beyond a certain stage we go
“ All’s lost in darkness,” learning’s turn’d to woe,
The mind perplex’d, our bodies fall away,
And health no more returns to bless our day.
not merely light sufficient for night travelling (but by their
risings and settings, both dependent upon the daily motion
of the earth), they supply an unerring dial of the night
hours, and by their place in the heavens announce the
seasons, and even designate periods of those seasons, highly
important to man. In the East they are the silent yet
lively and beautiful friend of the traveller, the husbandman,
and the mariner; they are to us the book of the sublimest
science of the philosopher; and to all, the writing of
the finger of God in the heavens. (Eor this refer to Dr.
Croly on ‘ Divine Providence,’ p. 33.)
ALL’S LOST IN DARKNESS—
“ Innocent joy 1 alas ! how much
Could I have lived still blest with such;
Nor proud and restless, burned to know
The knowledge that brings guilt and woe.”
(From ‘ The Loves of the Angels,’ by T. Moore, p. 38.)


If “ learning ’’ power gives, then Reason says;
“ Make every use of her in all the rightful ways;
But do not mix her good with philosophic leaven,
You are not meant to soar by learning up to heaven.”'
Whaler seejv!
The “ bell ” strikes four ! so count the hour as six.
We ’re call’d on deck to see some whales play tricks.
“ Eight sperm ” are they, and of enormous bulk,
In length full sixty feet one monster’s hulk,
“ With study pale, and midnight vigils spent,
The star surveying sage—close to his eye
Applies the sight-invigorating tube,
And travelling through the boundless length of space,
Marks well the courses of the far-seen orbs,
That roll with regular confusion there,
In extasy of thought! But ah, proud man!
Great heights are hazardous to the weak head.
Soon, very soon, thy firmest footing fails,
And down thou droppest into that darksome place,
Whence no device, or knowledge ever came.”
( From ‘ The Grave,’ by Blair.)
THE BELL. —On board ship the bell is struck to de-
note the hour: for example, say at noon, 8 bells, at 1 p.m.
2 bells, at 4 p.m. 8 bells; and so on until midnight. The
nautical day is the same as the real solar day, and is the
interval between two noons, or equal motion of the sun.


We track them hy their wake, see ! how they blow,
Now flap their tails, and now they dive below,
’Tis said for fifty minutes they at times remain,
Then rise for air, and so draw breath again.
I see (in fancy) near, some whale-boats float
With harpoons pois’d, from the head-man’s boat,
See the lance all ready for a deadly aim,
And the cord all clear for its bulky game.
In fancy still I see them strike the blow :
“ Back, back the boat! quick, quick, or else she’ll go !’*
Swift through the water does the whale-boat glide.
The whale is fast, the well-known flag is spied,
Now from the ship more men and boats they send.
The fish is cross, and now more line they bend,
The lance does its work, and see the water’s red.
Now she’s poised in air, she raises high her head ;
WHALE. Bennett, in his ‘Whaling Voyage Bound
the Globe,’ vol. i. page 394, thus relates the sighting of and
capturing a very largo whale: “ Upon the morning of the
24th a solitary sperm whale, of large size, was seen to
‘ spout ’at some distance from the ship. Before the boats
could approach him, he descended, and continued under
water twenty-five minutes. At the end of that time, he
rose to the surface of the water, but after a few spoutings, he
again dived, and fifty minutes elapsed before his next ap-
pearance, when, rising in close vicinity to the boats, he was
almost immediately harpooned. Tho monster proved both
active and mischievous. At a very early period of the attack,
he severely shattered one boat with his flukes, and subso-


Full deadly is her aim, oh! see the boat’s too near,
Crash goes the timber ! there, the men all cheer.”
A struggle ’twas for life or death, the last it was
to be,
For man has proved dominion o’er fish of the sea.
The JAoop.
See yon full moon, uprising from the deep
To light the upper world for man’s relief;
The dancing waves with her soft beams do play,
And the air is tuneful with the dashing spray.
quently endangered the crew of the second, hy keeping his
lower jaw suspended for some moments over their heads.
He was destroyed in less than three hours, however, and
after two days not a vestige of the monster brute remained in
the ship beyond eighty barrels of oil, and a ‘lower jaw,’ 14£
feet in length, which with the ‘teeth’ was preserved for
the manufacture of ornamental implements. The largest
size recorded is 76 feet in length and 38 feet in girth.”—
Vol. hi. p. 154.
THE MOON.—The superstitions in various countries
are innumerable; indeed each have their own peculiar
“say ’’ upon the appearance of the new moon, as well as


The night’s serene, a balmy influence steals
O’er the heart; the mind’s disease it heals ;
In part, at least, it quiets its misgiving,
The past, the future, dead as well as living.
Thy value scarce is known, 0 moon, by those who
roam
Over the ocean (call’d by some the seaman’s home),
For tides are influenc’d by thy time and flace ;
So they expand—recede—and then give space.
Thy very peeping into sight is hailed with glee,
Because men say, “ mysterious luck’s in thee.”
They gaze at thee and wish, and, if by chance they’ve
got it.
Three times turn their purse, or some coin they’ve in
‘ their pocket.
I’ve even heard it said that at thy rounded full
Some honest folk grow mad, and reason’s self gets
dull.
at the full. It was formerly supposed that if pigs were
killed when the moon is increasing, the bacon would
prove better in boiling. Haydn notes that the “ full moon
was held favourable by the Spartans for any undertaking.
And the Greeks looked upon the full moon, or the conjunction
of the sun and moon, as seasons favourable for marriage! ”
“All hail, to thee, moon! all hail to thee,
I prithee, good moon, reveal to me
This night, who my husband (or wife) shall he.”
(The Form of Invocation to the New Mcon.)


What I have said may all be true, or all untrue may be,
But this I know, thou beauteous orb, I fondly worship
thee;
Then take my homage, 0 celestial light!
As given to Him who ruleth thee and night.
The silvef{ J-<una.
Bright shines the moon; all cloudless the sky;
The air all balm ;
The low wind sings its gentle lullaby
The mind to calm.
Hark to the sound of the silvery spray
From the waves’ top,
List to the murmur of the deep sea’s lay;
It cannot stop.
“The theory of ‘lunar’ attraction is not sufficient to
account for the varied phenomena presented, and I am the
more confirmed in this opinion by the recent discovery by
Monsieur Daupey, viz. that the height of the tide varies
■with the atmospheric pressure, being highest when the
barometer is lowest. Professor Oersted seems to entertain
similar doubts also, for ho inclines to the opinion that the
tides' rise from some unexplained principle of circulation.”
{See Buck’s ‘ Beauties and Harmonies,’ vol. i. p. 195.)
‘‘PENNY CYCLOPAEDIA,’ under the head of “Selina,”
13


For “ the water-pipes ” their voices raise
And ever sing
Of Him who taught how to sound His praise
With everything.
These are Thy gifts, great Lord of life, ’tis bliss
Repaid by vice,
For ’twas on such a night—a night like this !
Eve lost Paradise.
Spirit of these soothing hours, Euler of the night,
Keep this mind free,
Give me by grace and power divine the heart’s true
light,
Virtue to see!
The Eclipse.
Three hells are struck; the time is half-past seven;
The moon is full and clear, and bright the heaven;
A speck is seen to dim the moon’s soft light—
An eclipse it is—o wondrous sight!
says, “ The moon was worshipped as a goddess by the ancient
Greeks. She is generally represented as the sister of Helios,
or the Sun, sometimes as his daughter, and occasionally as
his wife, and the mother of the four seasons.”
“ HARK, ’TIS THE SOUND OF THE SILVERY
SPRAY.”—“There is a beautiful passage,” says Buck,


Refer we to an almanac call’d “ Nautical,”
A learn’d book, not problematical,
In which are noted records of astronomy,
Giving time and place to natural phenomena.
Nine is the hour; the eclipse at its height;
The moon is obscured, although not lost to sight;
Its rounded form is seen, of colour red,
A cloud now passes o’er, and all is dark and dread.
’Tis midnight; faded is the cold dim light;
The silv’ry moon’s now free to greet the morning
bright.
All then is now—as all was long before;
Experience tells us we have nothing more.
The heavenly bodies move by nature’s laws ;
Thus we define a rule and give the cause.
’Tis from the past all human knowledge dates
And leaves us ever talking, and raising fresh debates.
The future, then, is judgment’s unform’d plan,
The mighty arbitrator but a pigmy man.
But after all admitted it must be .
In past and present just results we see.
“ in Goethe’s ballad of ‘ The Fisherman,’ where he describes
the pleasure which is derived from gazing upon the sea, and
another passage reminds travellers of that scene in Asia,
where aplaintive harmony is described as being heard in the
air, arising from the sounding waves of the ocean, beating
beneath an atmosphere of unwonted purity.”— ‘ On the
Beauties and Harmonies,’ vol. i. p. 18G.
E 2


The workings of astronomy are truly great:
To mark the time of change in this world’s state.
To tell the minute, nay, the moment too,
When each revolving orb shall pass in view.
To knowledge vast great wisdom is required,
To keep the mind well pois’d is much to be desired;
Beyond a certain limit if we go
How does it end ?—in madness, misery, or woe !
Adieu to Pair Weather.
The “ south-east trades ” we lose in two and thirty.
Adieu, fair weather, now for all that’s murky,
“ BEYOND A CEETAIN LIMIT IF WE GO.”—What
says Isaiah? “I am the Lord that maketh all things; that
stretcheth forth the heavens alone; that spreadeth abroad
the earth by myself; that frnstrateth the tokens of the liars,
and maketh diviners mad; that turneth wise men backward,
and maketh their knowledge foolish.”—lsaiah xliv. 24, 26.
1844. Gth June. —Forty-three days at sea, lat. 23° 15' S.,
long. 32° 09' W. The “south-east trades” gave us their
adieus; the wind is in the north-east, but very light.
THIS TOTAL ECLIPSE of the moon was observed
on Friday, the 31st of May, 1844, when we were in
latitude 11° 20' south, longitude 27° west, the ship’s head
being south-west. The night was most lovely, and the


To the southward and eastward now we steer
To round the stormy Cape in winter drear.
Not a pleasant prospect, I think I hear you say,
To encounter storms of wind and sea by night as well
as day.
—.oKKo. —
Lone messenger of the great Pacific,
What dost thou here ? ’Tis quite prophetic
To see an albatross in twenty-five—
A white one, too —as I’m alive !
stars were made more brilliant by the partial darkness
around. At 8.40 p.m., the eclipse was total, and the few
passing clouds gave a colouring to the glorious heavens as
they drifted onwards. One must have been an eye-witness
of the scene to understand it, for it is quite impossible to
give an adequate description of its sublimity. The Psalmist
says, “The heavens declare the glory of God, and the
firmament showeth His handiwork.” An eclipse of tho
moon is an unusual phenomenon, since she actually loses
her light in whole or in part; while, in an eclipse of the
sun, the moon hides it from one part only of the earth.
The former can only take place when the conjunction (or
•sameness of longitude) of the moon, or earth’s shadow, that
is, the apposition of the sun and moon, or the full moon,


Three species of this bird, ’tis said exist,
And those in southern seas the commonest:
The body white, the head a bluish-grey ;
The back is shaded from light fawn to bay;
Their wings extend from ten to eighteen feet,
And in the air are steady more than fleet.
The eye is keen, approaching to deep black;
The bill pale pink, and strength it does not lack;
Flesh-coloured are their legs, and webbed the feet.
Harmless to their kind; they care not what they
eat;
happens when the moon is near her Node. (See ‘Penny
Cyclopaedia’ under head of “Moon.”) The theory of eclipses
was known to the Chinese at least 120 years before Christ I
By most of the eastern nations an eclipse was supposed
to be the effect of magic, hence their custom of beating
the tom-tom (a sort of tambourine) during its continuance.
The first eclipse recorded was on the 19th of March, 721
b. 0., at 8.40, according to Ptolemy. (See Haydn’s ‘ Dictionary
of Dates.’)
ALBATROSS.—There ore three species of this bird—the
“albatross of China,” the “yellow-and-black beaked/’ and
“ the common,” which is most frequently met with in the seas
of southern Africa. It is the largest sea-bird known. The
top of the head is of a muddy grey, the rest of the plumage
is white, with the exception of several transverse black bands
upon the back; the feet are of a deep flesh colour; the bill
a pale yellow. It weighs from twelve to twenty-eight
pounds. It does not confine itself to fish alone, but will prey


On chance they live, so skim the waters o’er;
Feast on dead whale, disgorge, then look for more.
The bait and hook now snares them for our prize,
And, once on deck, they have no pow’r to rise;
Their aerial wings they stretch, then, sick with pain,
Snap goes their bill! Great bird, you snap in vain.
On death we talk ; the bird lies proudly still,
While some demand his skin, others claim his bill;
Unconscious of the change, that change which alters
never,
He dies, and to existence now is lost for ever !
upon any other sea animal. Notwithstanding its great
strength, it never ventures to attack other sea-birds. (See for
further information, ‘ Penny Cyclopaedia.’)
Bennett, in his ‘Whaling Voyage,’ vol. i. p. 11, says:
“We witnessed an amusing instance of the great voracity
of this species (the ‘ wandering albatross ’). A strip of
porpoise blubber, which could not have weighed less than three
or four pounds, had been thrown overboard, and was floating
upon the sea, when it was seen and instantly pounced upon
by an albatross; and although, as wo watched the result it
appeared perfectly impossible that the bird could manage
such a very bulky morsel, yet, after a little while and with
a few minute exertions, he actually contrived to swallow
it entire; and although he was unable to rise from the water
for a flight after this undertaking, yet he continued to swim
about pertinaciously in pursuit of a hook and line baited
with the same tempting food, and only escaped being cap-
tured by the hook breaking off in his beak.”


A SoNQ.
I love to see a ship at sea,
All sail set to the wind ;
I love to see the land at lee,
The white foam left behind.
I love to feel the bonny breeze.
That fills the sails so true ;
I love to be on the lively sea
With shipmates all true blue.
I love to see the sunshine bright.
The waters blue around;
I love to feel these spirits light,
As o’er the sea we bound.
I love to see a sunset sky,
It smiles on parting day;
The shades of evening drawing nigh,
Sing we our roundelay.
I love to see the moonbeams play,
Around our gallant bark;
I love to hear the sea boys’ lay,
And watch the waters spark.


I love to see the stars shine bright,
And hear the deep-ton’d bell
Proclaim the hour to cheer the night,
And hear the “ All! all’s well! ”
Cape of Qood Hope.
Stkakge stories of the Cape old sailors tell,
Of “ Plying Dutchmen,” phantoms bound by spell:
Of seas which top the “ mountain winds ” that ’scape
Prom Father Vulcan’s bellows in the fiery lake!
Thus, in doubt and fear, our youthful sailors keep
Their midnight watch; below, they cannot sleep
Por dreams; they start; and then a fancied form
Points at a wreck, or bids them hear the storm.
Alas! what can it be ? whatever can create
Such troubled inward fears of a “ nether state ” ?
Alive! yet in the world of dreams we soar,
Dead as to sight, and lost to earthly pow’r!
Sleep on; and soundly sleep, each sailor boy.
And let not fancy’s phantoms e’er destroy
Thine hour of peace —for, this we all well know,
That nothing happens but ’twas order’d so ;
Still trust thyself to Him, who cares for thee,
In storm, or sunshine, on the land or sea.




PART III.
FROM THE CAPE OF GOOD HOPE TO AUSTRALIA.




PART III.
Death T(idep each Bfjee2;e.
On May the twenty-sixth we left the - line
To cross the “ south-east tradesthe weather fine,
In thirty-two days we have manag’d to sail
To “ seventeen east,” without meeting a gale.
If fair keeps the breeze, this night we shall be
Five degrees from the Cape, the land on our lee;
Blow, blow, merry breeze—now the swell helps us on,
And clear is the ocean we enter upon.
On, on we go, our hopes soaring high
And dream not, ere night, how sadly we’ll sigh;
Yes, sigh! for Death is near, and at his stern commands
None dare to disobey, nor stay, when He demands!
ft JMan Ovefjboa^d.
A man, a man’s o’erboard! heart-rending cry.
Confusion reigns. Alas ! the sea runs high.
1844. June 27th.—At 2 p.m., with a stiff breeze blowing,
and in a cross sea, poor William Finch fell overboard, and
was, I should say, about twenty minutes in the water before


From “ fore ” to “ aft,” along the decks all run.
“ Down helm ”’s the word; no sooner said than
done.
The shivering sails are deaden’d to the mast,
Brave, hearts! now man the boats; pull fast, pull
fast!
To windward now they ply. The man is seen;
The spot is marked, is marked by eyes all keen.
The hovering birds now guide the brave boat’s crew,
They pull their best to save a messmate true.
Up go their oars ! 0 God! and wilt Thou save,
Thine erring creature from a watery grave ?
The ship is trimmed to meet the boat’s return,
But what the tidings we have yet to learn.
he was picked up, which was at the very moment he was
sinking for ever. But though saved from actual drowning,
yet his life was not preserved, for upon being taken into the
boat he gave but a sigh, and in that sigh his soul went out
to Him who gave it. In appearance he was one of the
finest young men I ever saw, and only about twenty-five
years of age. Had the ship been provided with a life-buoy,
most assuredly he would have been saved, and a promising
life preserved.
“FREE IS THE MIND, AND FREE SCOPE IS
GIVEN.”—In a book, called ‘ Charles Lever, or the Man of
the Nineteenth Century,’ the author (the Rev. William Gres-
ley), speaking upon religious liberty, says, “ But the Great


She closes fast, and now, all eyes can see.
The manly form of him saved from the sea.
Yes, the form is there, but the soul has fled.
Alas, all hope is pass’d, poor “ Finch ” is dead.
Liv’d but to sigh his thanks to those brave few;
For in the boat he died, the ship in view.
Oh, what a warning! let us pray and hope,
Though called from active life, with death to cope,
That God with pity heard the parting prayer
Of him whose soul is lost but for Thy care.
From God life’s essence springs, and from our birth
We ’re into being called, to walk this earth.
Free is the mind, full scope is given
To serve, or not serve Thee ; the prize is heaven.
Creator deemed it conducive to His glory, that there should
be a race of intelligent beings, who might yield him a free
and willing homage; for in the freedom of the creature was
involved the possibility of sin. As if man could not sin as
well ns obey, then he had been no free agent. Again, our
final destiny is placed in our own hands; good and evil,
heaven and hell, placed before us, our choice, then, is free.”
At the same time that God allows us to be “ free agents,”
He distinctly shows us our duty, He leaves no side paths
for us; He says, ‘ This is the way, walk ye in it,’ ‘My word
shall be a lantern for your feet,’ ‘ The angel of my pre-
sence shall go before you, and bring you to the place pre-
pared for you. Beware of Him, for he will mark iniquity,’ ”
&c., Exod. xxiii. 20.


“ Father, Thy mercy’s great! to Thee we bow with
awe
And to Thy will submit, that will to he our law.
With humbled feelings we now ask and pray
Thy mercy, Lord, for him, whom we have lost this
day.”
The C/pe Piqeoh
Flying about, and in our wake, is seen
A pretty bird—“ Cape Pigeon ” call’d, I ween.
In numbers fast they come, around they play :
Now swim, now dive, now take some bait away.
Entangled by a thread, one bird is caught;
The airy prisoner on the deck is brought.
He flaps his wings and spreads them out in vain;
Upright he cannot stand—he’s sick with pain.
“ CAPE PIGEON, or Pintado Petrel,” says Bennett, vol.
ii. p. 245, “ is perhaps the handsomest of all tho Antarctic
sea-birds, and its ermined plumage corresponds well with
the blue ocean, which it frequents. Its habitation is the
high south latitude, and chiefly about the Capo of Good
Hope and Cape Horn, although, when seduced by ships, it
will follow the temptation, and occasionally enter the heart


The bait disgorged, he cowers on the deck;
Power to mount aloft his wings now lack.
To death he’s doom’d, the skin ’s a tempting
prize:
One struggle more, and soon the poor bird dies.
With down so very fine the body’s cover’d o’er;
Prom wing to wing, he measures three-feet-four.
The body’s white, its eyes no brightness lack;
The back is striped, and spotted o’er with black.
The !
The wind blows hard and the clouds look dark,
The glass is falling, and the waters spark.
“ Stand-by top-gallant halyards ! ” is the cry.
“ Let go! clew up and furl a storm is nigh.
of the tropics. The half-mourning garment of this bird is
as neat and elegant as can well be imagined. The head
and neck are black, with a semi-lunar white mark beneath
the eyes. The beak and wings are very prettily and dis-
tinctly mottled black and white. The beak is of a jet black;
the toes are completely webbed, and the head provided with
the short ‘ sessile ’ spur which characterises the petrel family.
F


Deep grows the gloom, the heavens darker scowl;
The sea more restless grows, the winds do howl;
Swift flies the scud, the storm begins to bark,
And sea-birds flit around just like the lark.
They soar, they curve, and now are lost to sight.
Farewell, ye winged tribe, —fast comes the dusky
night.
Harder blows the wind, and the sea runs high.
The word’s “ All hands to reef! ” —a squall is nigh.
“Brail up the spanker!” and the “jib” down
haul,
“ Up with the helm,” and let pass the squall.
“ Close reef the topsail,” then the “ mainsail
stow; ”
“ Send down top-gallant yards —make snug be-
low.”
“ Furl now the fore-sail, and foretop-sail too.”
“ Eun up the stay-sail, quick, my hearties true.”
“How bring her to the wind, and so let her ride
Till the daylight dawns, or the winds subside.”
“THE ELEMENTS ALL STEIEE.”—A ship in a storm
at sea is beautifully described in ‘Martin Chuzzlewit,’ by
Charles Dickens, chap. xv. “ On, on, on, over the countless
miles of angry space roll the long heaving billows. Moun-
tains and caves are here, and yet are not; for what is now
the one, is now the other; then all is but a boiling heap
of rushing water. Pursuit, and flight, and mad return of


With tempestuous fury now the gale doth rage,
And the barometer our anxious thoughts engage.
Oft the good ship surges, and the spray she sends
As to the storm most gracefully and gallantly she
bends.
No moon to guide us, dark and drear’s the night;
The lightning flashes, and the sea foams bright.
Hark to the thunder! what an awful peal 1
And the rain descends, —oh, who at rest can
feel ?
“The elements all strife,” the good ship’s speed
retards:
Heavily she rolls, —hold on, brave mast and yards.
The waves with fury on our deck fast break.
Good barque, we hail thee ! we no water make.
In much suspense, the weary night is pass’d,
The wish’d-for dawn appears, appears at last;
And with it comes (all thanks to “Thee, great
Pow’r”)
A lull, to cheer us in this trying hour;
wave on wave, and savage struggle, ending in a spouting-
np of foam that whitens the black night; incessant change
of place, and form, and hue; constancy in nothing hut
eternal strife, on, on, on, they roll, and darker grows tho
night, and louder howl the winds, and more clamorous and
fierce become the million voices in the sea, when the wild
cry goes forth upon the storm, ‘ A ship I ’ ”
F 2


The storm goes down, and the rough sea around,
The heavens clear, the very clouds spell-bound.
A sapphire sky once more now blesses sight,
All praise to God who kept us through the night!
The sun will light and warmth to nature give,
And to the ocean home in which we live.
In the dark hour of dread, who hath not felt
A hallow’d feeling, when to Heaven he’s knelt ?
“ Great Spirit, by Thy Holy Pow’r Divine,
Give grace, and let a thankful heart be mine,
That I may bless and praise Thee as I ought to
do:
Countless Thy mercies, countless are Thy blessings
too.”
The stof}my Petrel !
Here ! the stormy petrel in greater numbers teem,
First on the quarter, then upon the beam.
Up and down they flicker o’er their watery hounds,
Spread, then gather close, then separate like hounds
STORMY PETREL, says Bennett, in his ‘Whaling
Voyage round the Glohe,’vol. i. p. 12, “were frequently
about the ship, skimming over the waves, in their peculiar
rapid flitting manner, every moment dipping into the sea,


Light grey their colour, symmetrical their shape,
Their pretty wings well curv’d, and of the swallow
make.
Black are their legs, and fully webb’d their toes,
On weed, or sperm, they feed, what else no one
knows.
Other sea-birds chiefly roam about our wake,
To pick up dainty morsels thrown out for them to
take;
“ But why do ye disdain to come a little near ? ”
In this I know I’m ignorant, and more than me, I fear.
The Caeml
Who in latitude south of thirty-nine
Would expect a calm in drear winter-time ? ‘
We see old Ocean still, no waves are heard to
bark;
The wind has ceased to roar, but the clouds are very
dark.
and raising a slight splash on its surface, then rebounding
to renew their airy flight again through the air. There is
something very interesting in these little birds: they appear
too diminutive and feeble to brave the vicissitudes of the open


And now we look around, o’er the water’s great ex->
panse,
We see no ripple —yet, afar in advance,
See that mountain swell, how boldly it comes on ;
And heaving up the ship rolls on, never, never
done.
The sails hang loose and heavy upon the yards so
high.
“ Flip flap, flip flap,” for the wind they sigh.
“ In thy lonely bosom,” great and mighty Ocean,
No calms can e’er exist, all is life and motion.
The wind thy master is, the solid earth thy throne,
Obedient to His voice, rest is to thee unknown.
ocean, and yet are always so active and merry on the wing,,
both in rough weather or calm, They are, however, more
inclined to take shelter from a very severe tempest, than
other sea-fowl, and are as commonly met with on the
equator as in the colder climates of high latitudes. The
somewhat general opinion that their appearance is indicative
of a storm is not correct. Sailors, as a rule, seldom injure
the “ little stormy petrel.”
IN THY LONELY BOSOM.—“ The atmosphere is ever
agitated by the breeze or gale. The calm is the vacuum,
that for a brief space interrupts the progress of the elements,
and the clouds, the winged messengers of the sky, rest on
the mountain tops, impatient of delay. The tides, the
currents, and the swell of the ocean are for ever changing


I said that all was calm, but o’er th’ horizon great
Heavy clouds arise, and they look big with fate.
The sunlight is obscured, he soon must sink to rest,
And darkness deep shall reign, over the ocean’s breast
All, all is silent, not a sound is heard, —
Hark! now the bell strikes four: pass, pass the word.
- ■■■ <x£Sso° -
JVl ijstd Weather.
Why should the weather the mind affect ?
Why feel we ill at ease, why fume and fret ?
and vibrating from pole to pole.” (Macintyre, ‘On the In-
fluence of Aristocracy,’ p. 404.)
“ As I was one day expatiating on all these wishes, and
lamenting that the rich only were enabled to realise them
(that is to travel), you checked my enthusiasm by saying,
‘ I have travelled, and this is the result of my experience.
In the midst of deserts we think of woods and valleys. In
glens, we sigh for plains. In plains the eye wanders in
search of mountains. In the storm we pray for a calm and
repose. In peace we sing the glories of war, and vice versa.
In solitude we meditate upon the society of men, and in
cities we celebrate the comforts of a rural life and the charms
of village and hamlet. Everywhere man is restless, listless,
and disappointed.” (‘ Buck upon the Beauties and Harmonies
of Solitude,’ vol. i. p. 161.)


Why are we master’d by such aerial laws ?
Ask we the why ? nay, let us seek the cause.
Let the bright sun his cheerful light but give,
The “ why ” is answer’d, and again we live.
The “ cause ” defin’d we murmur at what’s sent,
And say ’twas wanted not, it is not what we meant.
Suppose we had our wish, would we stop at this ?
No! of course “we would not die,” never do amiss.
The very granting would but pall the sense,
And man’s desire would die by sufferance.
When the wind was fair it did not blow with
“pluck,”
And now ’tis foul we call it “ our ill luck.”
Thus, day by day, we onward go and live ;
We sigh for what we have not, cannot give.
If for anxiety we could show good cause,
And prove our case, by good old Nature’s laws,
Then Reason to our aid would kindly send
Her helpmate Patience, the mind’s best friend.
“ Content,” says Zimmerman, “ can only be found in the
tranquillity of the heart, and in solitude. The bosom gladly
opens to receive and welcome this wished-for inmate, and
shelters warmly it and its attendant virtues.”
CAPE FLY-AWAY. The bank of dark clouds seen
running along the horizon appears at times so much like
land, that the oldest sailors are constantly being deceived
by it, particularly when land is known to be in the vicinity,


Cape Fly-away.
For three days past the sun has been obscur’d,
The weather squally, hard to be endur’d;
When, all at once, a cry of land upon the beam.
We look! and see it now, ’tis plain it is no dream.
But with suspicion our brave Captain scann’d
The heavy clouds that monopolise this “ land.”
He named it well “ Cape Fly-away,” I mean,
And “ Fly-away ”it is! for only clouds are seen.
The Inland of J3t. Paul’? 1
Two hours have passed! Again we hear the calls
Of “Land on the bow!”—’tis true, we make St. Paul’s.
From the dreary Cape we nineteen days have been,
The weather “ variable,” no ships seen.
ISLAND OF ST. PAUL’S. —1844. July 16th. —Out
eighty days. At 2.40 p.m. we made the island, which is thus
described by Hosburgh, who says: “ This island was ex-
amined in 1697, by Ylanning, a Dutchman. It may be seen
in clear weather 20° S. lat. (this I should very much doubt), and
extends eight or ten miles N.W. and S.E., and is five miles
in breadth. Upon the cast side, there is a circular basin,
abreast of which is a good anchorage, in from 21 to 23
fathoms water, with a tide of about 2i knots (this is most


Oil! what a speck, on this vast southern ocean,
Is this strange island of volcanic motion.
Hot springs, which range from blood to boiling
heat,
O’errun with rushes wild, nought else you meet;
Dismal and black it looks, the coast all foam,
The sea-birds rest, and here the seal’s at home.
Reef-bound it seems, we see the waters dash
’Gainst the lone rock, the ocean billows lash.
Within thy reef, which breaks the high waves’ force.
We entered, just to look around, of course.
’Tis said, thy blacken’d land yields famous game
To those who do not mind the species—or the
name j
The Seal, to capture—cub and fully grown—
His carcass stew, but not for oil alone.
singular). Upon the island there is long coarse grass and
very little water.” Mr. Cox, of the ship Gustavus, in 1789
examined the island. In rowing round the basin, smoke
was observed to issue in several places amongst the stones
close to its verge, and a pocket thermometer, which stood at
82° in the open air, rose to 190° when immersed in the water,
and then, in about a minute, fell to 185°, and this was found
to take place in several parts of the basin. The people on
shore, when “ sealing,” constantly boiled their dinner of fish
in these springs. The ship Clyde (Blair, master) called at this
island in October 1820, and found a Frenchman residing
there, with four slaves, who were employed in catching and
salting fish for the market in Mauritius. Two of the Clyde’s


The fur we value, and the skin is tanned;
The liver’s quite a treat in this poor lonely land.
And in the north, the Esquimaux say there
The flesh is dried, and used for winter fare.
On the eastern side a basin’s formed, 'tis said,
(The outer rocks protect its sandy bed,)
And all around are springs of water boiling hot,
Where sportsmen well can cook the fish which they
have got.
In the basin fish abound, in countless numbers play,
And to the hardy fisher yields an ever-ready prey.
So all-unconscious are they of a hidden snare,
That even a rag of black or white they’ll seize without
a care,
And in the space of one short hour or so—
You’d catch a ton! and then on board you go.
boats caught five tons’ weight of fish in a few hours, among
which was a species of most excellent cod.
THE SEAL TO CAPTURE. The seal is an amphi-
bious animal, of which there are many varieties, and is prin-
cipally hunted for its skin and oil. They will yield from
eight to ten gallons of oil each. To the Esquimaux, the seal
is of as much importance as bread to Europeans. The flesh
forms their usual meat, the fat is partly dressed for eating,
and partly consumed in their lamps. The liver of the seal,
when fried, is esteemed as an excellent dish. The skins form
their dress, and are made waterproof: they also serve to
cover over their tents.” (See M'Culloch, vol. i. p. 1088.)


Van J-(And.
The days of August have just numbered eight,
And much our patience has been tried of late;
At least we think so—this is quite enough,
To make one restless, and the temper rough.
The wind is not exactly foul, nor is it fair,
The weather’s hazy, murky is the air;
And every now and then, as squalls pass o’er.
It brightens up—then thickens as before.
Between the changes, see! each eye doth seem
To search for land, for land at bow or beam.
We wait not long, for right ahead is seen
The Mewstine rock, and other rocks between.
Back distant far, behold Tasmania’s strand,
The small twin sister of the greater land.
Both the nucleus of England’s pride and shame,
0 ! may thy hardy sons with honour toil for fame, —
Yes! toil so well for fame, that in Historic page
All shame may die, and so be lost in Age.
AUGUST Bth, 1814,—At 10 o’clock a.m. made the land
situated off the south-west part of Yan Diemen’s Land. Lati-
tude 43° 16' south, longitude 146° 13' east: weather thick
and hazy.


ftujßTß/UA.
We round Van Diemen’s Land in gallant style,
The breeze propitious, now we all can smile.
Buoyant our spirits, and well they may be
For hail “ fair Australia!” thy Port now we see.
Land ! of hope bright, of fear, doubt, and dread.
The mildew of “ hope,” o’er some wanderer’s head;
The touchstone of “ fear ” from justice or shame ;
The “ dread ” doubt fulfilled, by loss of good name,
The future’s a “ dread ”to those ones crime stain’d,
Violating those laws so wisely all plann’d,
That those who wrong suffer may safely appeal,
From peasant to peer, and redress’d are with zeal.
I said “ mildew of hope ” to many a band.
And yet, we live “ hoping ” this beautiful land
May bring forth brave sons, whose pride it shall be
To boast of their “ land of nativity.”
The “ fear,” honest fear, which manly hearts thrill,
Who leave their far homes, to work “ with a will.”
The flutterings of “ doubt ” which o’er the mind steals,
The weal or the woe, which only Time heals.
This is Nature’s just law, that each living thing
The ordeal must pass which life’s changes bring.
Then, hail! thou fair land of forthcoming toil,
All hail! fair Australia, thrice blest be thy soil 1
AUGUST 14th. —At 6 o’clock a.m. made the land!


The Houf{ of Paf^tinq!
The hour of parting’s drawing near,
The heart feels sad, the mind is drear;
The last deep sigh but seldom cheers,
The word Farewell is drown’d by tears.
Who can feel these pangs of anguish ?
Who can see the drooping form ?
Who the man, commanding language,
Can calm the mind, ’mid such a storm ?
’Tis duty, hope, and time united,
The mind’s best friends to soften grief;
But oh! how many hearts are blighted
Before these friends can give relief
For duty, though she’s stem, commanding,
If obey’d, still clears the way;
Whispering soft, while still demanding,
“ Courage! for those far away.”
Hope still cheers the weary hearted.
Shining on us from above,
Pointing onward —bids “ departed
Joy return —ye work for Love! ”
Then, farewell friends of long months’ standing,
Shipmates all so staunch and true;
And may we each, upon our landing,
Welcome find—but- troubles few.


A I(ep:ly
TO SOME LINES ADDRESSED TO ME BY CAPTAIN
DARBY, UPON THE WORD “FAREWELL.”
How oft, when roaming o’er the deep blue sea
With others I have met, who, like to me,
Have left their home, their wife, their friends, their all,
To pass to other lands, obeying duty’s call, —•
How often have I smiled, whene’er ’twas said,
“ This one has left a wife,” and “ that a maid,”
A joke is pass’d, the merry laugh goes round
(Ah! little think we how they both may sound).
Thus, what in one state we with laughter view.
Experience in the other does our heart subdue.
Thanks for thy lay! ’tis an echo of the past.
So vibrates the mind, meant not to last;
And in return, accept my honest wish
When thus I tune my harp and sing of bliss.
“ May you always be happy,
Abounding in health!
May you ne’er want a “ nap,”
While increasing your wealth.
May your friends remain firm,
Forsaking you never;
May your mind ne’er be stern,
Or cause friendship to sever.”


To JVIy Wife.
WRITTEN AT SEA, ON OUR OTH WEDDING-DAY,
25th op jdne, 1844,
The revolving years succeed each other fast,
And nine we now have seen.
Yes! my absent wife, those years have pass’d
Since married we have been.
Yarie'd as April day hath been our lot,
And varied still may be,
Yet may we one day hope to find some spot
A rest for thee and me.
Then grant my prayers, ye Powers'that know
How fervently they ’re made.
Oh!. give that blessing, health, while here below
We wander in life’s shade!
I took thee from thy home and much lov’d land,
The land which gave us birth,
And o’er the ocean, to Australia’s land,
The antipodes of earth.
I brought thee hack, and thus redeem’d the pledge,
Which to thy sire I gave,
“ That ere seven years pass’d o’er his head
And he to life be spared,
That I would toil, would toil both day and night
That he his child might see.”
Alas! ’twas vain; his mind was gone, and yet to sight
His daughter knelt with me.


Ah! little thought I then, that ere three years would
pass,
That I should say “ Farewell! ”
But so it is, and thus my lot was cast.
’Tis like a parting knell!
Most true, my heart is sear’d, the mind can’t
dwell
With pleasure on the past;
Yet hope, that heavenly gift, doth cheer me well,
And whispers, “ ’Twill not last.”
Then cheer, my heart, and look for brighter days,
For home, and children's love.
To thee, my wife! I tune a wishful lay.
“ 0 ! grant it, Power above,
May health be soon restor’d,
Happiness crown the board,
May love with truth united be,
And discord fly from charity;
May religion ne’er depart,
Sweet contentment fill thy heart!
May thy sway be gently mild,
May the mother bless the child,
And the child obedience show!
May thy heart feel others’ woe !
May thy hand most freely give!
Thy charity for ever live! ”
Thus I pray, though far away,
On this our mutual wedding-day.
G


“ Oli! what a world of beauty
A loving heart might plan,
If man hut did his duty,
And helped his fellow man !
Then angel guests would brighten
The household with their wings,
And love divine enlighten
The trials this life brings.”
jVlijvo Body.
We suffer twice, ’tis often seen,
From being too, too over keen.
ILL-AT-EASE.—I feel that these affairs have cast their
shadow o’er the “ lively spirit of my nature.” But we know
that when the “ mind is ill-at-ease ” the body lacks its wonted
buoyancy, thus far we are all the creatures of circumstances.
KINDNESS VEBSVS DISCORD.—How differently our
daily life—its happiness or misery is influenced by the
temper or disposition of those around us, and what a heaven
is presented when, lighted up by kind and gentle manners
and a sympathetic disposition, these soften the harshest
temper, create confidence, and soothe the various trials of life
to which all are subject. Reverse all this picture, and what
shall we see ? One which can only be looked upon with pity


The mind’s uneasy at a thought
We ruminate, and then we’re caught.
That which was once no bigger than a bee
Is now as large as any tree.
Thus in life, we very often find
One small, small evil overturn a mind.
It magnifies, and so grows larger,
At first a jackass, then a charger!
The doctor’s called—he probes the sores—
He shakes his head—the patient roars,
He gives a poultice, and directs a lotion,
With something else to give a motion.
Thus from a pimple on the shin,
Are ulcers form’d by a poison’d skin.
The scratching which we gave at first
Instilled the poison from our fingers curst!
and dread. Constant discord produces disgust, for which
absence is the only antidote, and distance closes the career.
MIND AND BODY are not so closely allied but that the
one may suffer more than the other. The one may have the
sense of pleasure, while the other may be lost to action.
Certain, however, it is, that both mind and body suffer twice
as much, as we can show good cause or reason for. Antici-
pation is the bane, but reality is the antidote.
Prosperity spreads its mist o’er the waters of adversity, but mis-
fortune clears it away.
o 2


November-ip P/pr.
This month, the last but one of all the year,
The next invites us to our “ Christmas cheer.”
Hail! Christmas, hail! season of all our joy,
From king and noble, down to peasant boy.
Hail! Christmas, hail! that gave to us a King !
Carols now prepare, and let our voices ring:
Glory be to God ! to our Eternal King!
An Acetic on {Sunday.
Sacred the day, and the number divine
Unto countless of thousands is hless’d.
Not a creed that exists, in whatever clime,
Disallows human nature some rest.
All difference in sect, or colour, or place,
Yield the same fruit, by seeking for grace.
The £}yef(yday of Xufe-
Grey mom appears, and daylight comes apace,
And man his course begins to run the race —


His hands to labour, or his head to spin
New hubbies for the world, or to make a pin.
Observe the care which sits on this man’s brow,
Or drops of sweat on that one’s hoary pow.
A simp’ring fool now passes by with glee,
And bows him low, e’en to the rich man’s knee.
“.Are all alike ? none diff’rent here ? ” I say.
“ No !.” cries the tailor; “fashion rules the day.”
“ Not true,” the miser says, in cringing tone,
“ In gold there’s merit, and in gold alone ! ”
Each one vaunts his trade, or high-born station—
We find it thus in every well-known nation.
Various work is given to various orders,
And oft we find themselves their chief recorders.
High and low, rich and poor, all have got their
station:
Society is rul’d by the scale of each graduation.
Lawyers, doctors, churchmen, tailors,
Pastrycooks, and soldiers, sailors, —
Who can wonder if, in all this jumble,
Men, like dogs, will growl and grumble ?
This one is rich, that not worth a feather;
This one pinch’d for coin, that one pinch’d by
leather.
If then in wisdom we could all agree,
Rest satisfied, and from ambition flee.
The rich man modest, and the poor content,
In Paradise we’d live, and so, I think, ’twas meant.


Thus the drama goes from day to day, I ween,
Thus the Play of Life, and then we quit the scene.
Night follows day, and so the course is run,
In “ every day of life ” there’s something to he done.
Adieu to the Year.
Another year has gone, and with it fled
My various thoughts, my sayings dead.
’Tis but to think, to act, to speak,
That makes up time—the rest is sleep.
What ip Tijvie ?
Call’d into being, yet hath never been.
The light thy sire is, Darkness is thy queen.
The past and present of a mighty plan.
Then the dread future, who alive can scan ?


A guE£Tlofb
0 man ! who treads this world’s wide maze,
Ask but thyself what length of days
Hast thou to run ? what time, what space,
To thee’s allow’d to fill thy place ?
For Time is like the clouds which flee.
Space—what is it? —Eternity !
So, poor wand’rer, is thy life,
Made up of Time, of space, of strife.
Then, ask again, 0 wandering man!
In what consists thy anxious plan ?
Is it of gold ? why, that gives strife!
Fame ? That is but the breath of life.
What are riches ? what is earthly fame ?
What is life without a spotless name ?
0 wanderer! make but sure of this,
And thou thy life shalt end with bliss!
SONG.
“Hope! What ijs Hope?”
T, Dyer Edwardes, Esq., Music by Frank Mori.
Hope, hope, hope, what ’s hope? what’s hope to the
mind?
Tis the soul’s brightest gem in the crown of old Time.


Give hope to the mother, away flies despair;
Give hope to the lover, he ’ll laugh at old Care;
Give hope to the captive, the captive is free,
Though deep in a dungeon, or on the broad sea.
Then hope, hope, what’s hope ? what’s hope to the
mind?
’Tis a star, ’tis a star of the brightest kind.
’Tis a star, &c.
Take hope from the mother, she dies in despair;
Take hope from the lover, he’s the victim of Care;
Take hope from the captive, and then call him
free,
His fetters may fall, still captive is he!
Then hope, hope, what’s hope ? ’tis free! free as the
wind;
Gold cannot buy, or the tyrant bind.
Then hope, &c.
The
What means this sad desponding feeling,
Like icy fingers, o’er me stealing ?
Why are my senses thus diseased ?
And e’en of hope,*the mind’s bereaved ?


Dark clouds of doubt emerge from thought—
In the howling blast I’m caught, I’m caught!
’Mid the lightning’s flash I see a form —
’Tis he! ’tis he!—Demon of the storm.
My sight grows dim, and no relieving tear,
But drops of dew, of dew distill’d by fear;
My limbs give way, loud knocks my heart,
As the Demon bold uplifts his dart.
On! on he comes —see! see his giant strides.
A fiery lake beneath, beneath him glides.
I feel his vampire breath! I hear him call:
“He’s mine! he’s mine!” ’tis darkness all.
Now chaos reigns, the mind from light has fled,
And midnight’s solemn bell sounds o’er my head.
“ All’s lost! all’s lost! ” the one eternal cry.
Hark ! ’tis the night owl’s screech! —I die! I die!
“G|ooD-KiqHT, Old Bnqland!”
“ Hark ! ’tis the signal gun,
Our Blag now is free;
See see, the sun has set
O’er a gilded sea.


“ Our star-spangl’d banner
Its homage has paid,
And the mantle of heaven
Is casting her shade.
“Good-night! good-night, Old England!.
A fair good-night to thee!
To-morrow’s dawn we leave thy strand,
For the broad and open sea.”
Thus sang a young and ardent man,*
As on his ship he gazed :
“ 0 England! have I seen thee, then,
The beautiful and brave! ”
“ Brave are thy sons, old England,
And bold and brave are we ;
From the parent stock we are a branch,
A branch from thy green tree.
“ The sun ne’er sets upon thy lands,
Ambition’s great in thee!
Oh! sheath thy sword —for ever leave
Thy planted branches free!
“The old oak bends by weight of years,
It tells a tale of time ;
Then, England, mark, mark well our type,
The ‘ lost branch ’ of thy line.
* A young interesting American, who had what he called “ done
England complete.”


“ Fathers of this mighty land,
May thy councils steer
The helm of state in safety, guide
Through every storm and fear.
“ Good-night, good-night, old- England !
A fair good-night to thee:
At morrow’s dawn we leave thy strand,
For the broad and open sea.”
The of oui\ Father we leave
Foil THE We£T.
The land of our fathers
We leave for the West,
And frosty-white waves
Will lull us to rest.
On her cradle of water
Our gallant barque glides;
All safe from the shore
And dangerous tides.
The fast-fading landscape,
That line of deep blue;
The wind as it passes.
Each sigh’s an adieu.


Bright and clear shines the moon,
O’er a silvery sea ;
No noise but the ripple—
So, happy we’ll he.
Let sorrow be banish’d,
For why should it last ?
Our home’s on the wide sea—
Life’s anchor is cast.
The birds of the ocean,
As round us they come,
Seem to say, “You are welcome
To our sparkling home.”
“ Up, lads, for a measure
Fill, fill, every can, —
One cheer for old England,—
Drink, drink every man !
“ Then three cheers for our Queen!
One more for each lass
Who loves a true sailor, —
So pass, pass the glass.
“ Good-night to. our land, lads,
Our life is now free,
And we ’ll roam far and wide
O’er the bonny blue sea! ”


The Wijvd.
Whither it cometh or whither it goeth,
None can tell!
Unseen, but felt, its power is great —
Such God’s will!
Without it, mortal life would cease to be.
Herb and tree
Would wither; and Nature’s laws would bow to
Death’s decree.
CojVCtUJSIOJ'I,
AND GENERAL SUMMARY OP VOYAGE,
Children, the Log of my voyage is ended—
Hay it serve all the purpose for which ’twas intended!
By bringing a father’s love close to your heart,
Who was forced for a time from his dear ones to part.
THE GOOD OF AIE AND WlND.—Without wind,
all nature would become stagnant. Pestilence would rage,
and all life would end from disease. The vitality of tree,
flower, and every green herb would be sapped. The very


May the reading incite you to study; for now
Is the time to improve, and your talents bestow
Upon gaining that knowledge which age cannot
steal,
AVhich will always give pleasure in woe or in
weal.
Now Time is God’s gift, and naught upon earth
Is so precious to man—’tis of heavenly birth.
Our moments fly quickly—they are here, now are
gone;
Therefore use well old Time, while as yet he’s your
own.
I have painted a ship sailing out with the tide ;
Speeding gaily, not knowing what fate may betide—
What storms or what perils she may have to endure,
Ere she anchors at rest in her haven secure.
Such is youth going forth in a world yet unknown,
All unheeding the compass on quicksands are
thrown.
I have pictured the Ocean, so broad and so deep,
Eise in fury, as o’er it the stormy winds sweep ;
So storms will arise o’er our life’s flowing sea,
But still trust to the Hand at the helm, for He
light would soon wither and blast tho most beautiful of
earth’s gifts. See, then, in this alone, the wisdom, power,
and love of God 1


Will pilot you safe to that heavenly shore
Where weary ones rest and are troubled no more.
I have shown you the sun rising over the water,
His bright light and warmth around us to scatter;
He runneth his course, and never stands still,
He obeys the commands he loves to fulfil.
So youth in its hours of bright early morning,
Must steadily work, without murmur or scorning.
I have painted the sun setting calm and serene,
No vapour or cloud in the sky to be seen;
So live, that life’s sunset be as calmly serene,
No cloud to obscure, no doubt come between
The Saviour and you, to whom He hath said,
“ Behold! lam with you, why then be afraid ? ”
The stars, too, I ’ve shown, shining brightly and
clear,
While studding the dark sky, afar off and near.
Those silent mysterious orbs fixed upon high,
Like lamps nightly lighted and hung in the sky.
So may rise o’er your young hearts the Bethlem
Star,
And shed there the brightness no sorrow can mar.
Now I’ve brought you with me to my long-wished-for
port,
Having often been made by the tempest its sport.
All praise be to God, who has kept me safe through,
And will bring me in time back to England and
you.


Oh ! may each, when Life’s voyage below here is past,
Find that haven of rest promised ns at the last.
See the Sun of His presence dispel our dark night,
And rest with Him ever, where all things are light.
In the presence of God is light,
And fulness of joy for evermore.


BILLY BLUE .*
“Is that the way you pass the Commodore, you long-legged object, and
put your hands out of your pocket — d’ye hear ?”
“No rows! No rows! Go on, my child.”
* On the north shore, opposite Sydney, is a point called Billy Blue’s Point.


GENERAL ABSTE
ACT OF THE KWERETTA’S VOYAGE.
Date.
Days.
Out.
Wind.
Latitude.
Longitude.
Barometer.
Thermometer
1844.
April
24
i
North-Westerly
..
..
Weighed at 2 a.m,, and sailed from Spithead, At 4 the Pilot left.
>♦
30
7
North-West
43-59
N.
13 -18 W.
29-80
64
Last 2 days wind moderate and light, weather hazy, at times small rain .....
May
6
12
11 1*
31-45
tl
19-31 „
2910
69
Weather beautiful. The Nor-Easters have run us into the Trades. See Ther.
Getting warm.
»>
12
18
11
17-28
11
25-36 „
24
Having steady and strong Trade-winds. Variation of compass J a degree.
»♦
1C
22
Variable and light
8-04
11
22-03 „
Steady
80
Steering S. by E., weather hazy. Trades declining. Boneto caught.
It
21
27
11 1*
3-43
11
17-52 „
29-90
86
At noon tacked ship to southward. Strange sail in sight.
»>
27
33
S. to S.-East
1-13
S.
E.
11
81
Weather is as usual in the Variables, unsettled, squalls, rain, &c. Many fish
seen.
I)
31
37
V »»
10-39
11
26-43 „
30-00
80
„ „ Trade winds keep much to E. Stars very clear and beautiful.
June
1
38
S.E. Easterly
13-05
J»
28-15 „
3000
79
The moon nearly at full, at 8.40 r.sr. Greenwich, and 6.40 p.m. by Ship. The
altitude of the moon being 24.40, the Southern Cross first discerned.
At 7-30 p.m. observed i
the beginning of
an Eclipse of the
Moon. It was a ~ *
sight altogether Moon,
most grand, beau- O s .'
tiful, and sublime. S - E - b y E - s .i. E ,
o
, O
* WJ3.W.
\w.
7
44
E. and fine
25-56
„
31-47
»J
75
Weather more settled. Two ships seen. Ship’s head S.W. by S.^—
14
51
>» 11
29-57
»?
24-52 „
30-00
74
Wind and weather more settled. Two vessels in sight. Albatross seen.
11
21
58
N.N.W.
29-12
11
130 „
30-70
it
Weather past two days steady. Ship steering S.E, by E.
Swell from West.
28
65
N.W.
37-42
It
20-21 „
29-70
60
Weather lightening, current in our favour. Wind fresh.
July
4
71
E. to B.N.E.
38-18
11
40-20 „
29-90
66
At 2 p.m. poor W. Finch fell overboard; was picked up by the boat, but too
late to save his life.
11
10
77
Variable and light
38-03
»»
57-47 „
30-30
56
Close-reefed for a gale. Shipped rather a heavy sea. More moderate.
»>
18
85
North-Westerly
NoS.
light
29-50
56
Cloudy, but fine. To-day a calm. The air cold.
11
25
92
N.E. Easterly
42-30
»*
109
29-15
56
Wind increasing. Close-reefed. Nasty cross-sea. Ship labouring hard.
Aug.
2
100
North-Westerly
42-56
11
13605 „
It
)»
Weather for past few days delightful. Barometer very high.
>♦
8
106
South-Easterly
NoS.
light E.
It
11
At 10 a.m. made land S.W. cape of V. D. Land, Mewstine Eock. Wr. hazy.
?»
14
112
Southerly
37-19
150-25 „
29-80
58
Yesterday, at 6 a.m., made the land of Australia. About Cape Howe.
)>
19
117
North-Easterly
No S.
light E.
29.90
60
At 10 p.m. Sydney light seen. At 10 a.m. tacked, and stood in for land ; day
beautiful. At 4 p.m. Jackson, the Pilot, boarded us, took us into port in
fine style, and anchored at 10 p.m. So ends our passage after 117 days.
“All’s Well that ends Well.”


PART IV.
MISCELLANEOUS PIECES.


TONBRIDGE WELLS, FROM MOUNT EPHRAIM HOTEL, TUESDAY, AUG. 20, 1850.
The last Sketch of M. D. E.


PART IV.
Ode to spri^q.
Spring ! Spring! joyous Spring,
Youth and mirth around thee cling:.
Skipping lambs and op’ning flowers
Dance around thy gladsome bowers.
Snowdrops raise their gentle heads,
Peeping from their frozen beds.
Crocuses, with wings of gold,
Next their beauties rich unfold.
The modest violet, soft and fair,
With odours sweet perfumes the air.
Whilst hedgerows, bursting with new life,
Contend with Nature in the strife
Of love and joy to Him supreme.
Whose praise should be our endless theme.
These lines were composed by my dear wife (and they are her
last) about the 23rd of October, 1850.
T. DYER EDWARDES.
October 2nd, 1851,


Hiqh Ojmjh,
At old High Onn was mirth and glee—
Bright were our spirits, spirits we !
Begone! old vapour, hated care.
Begone ! vanish into London air!
High Onn is free from city strife,
Her master’s wedded to a country life.
Her mistress (not forgetting Eichard, too,)
Declare against a buckled shoe!
Live on, ye happy trio of our race,
And envy not the City lace.
That gives to outward show a smile,
But lives in smoke to generate —its bile!
London, April 1848.
MY DEAR MISS, —Had I not been an ungracious dog,
I should before this have given the “ Queen’s Treasury ” the
benefit of my mite, and so taxed your time, by reading
my thanks to you, and your good brother, for much kind
attention—attention which has created a lively feeling of
remembrance. Now ! although I stand convicted, by a self-
constituted jury, of being ungracious; yet, that same tribunal
acquits me of the graver fault of being unthankful. Believe
me, then, that as tho index of “ Father Time ” passes, so will
April 1848 present to the mind its memento of the past.
London, 1848.
MY DEAR, —If we allow time and silence to go hand
ip hand, forgetfulness gets the better of reason, and cold


ftjHTICIP/tTIOJL
Who has not felt a douht, a fearful dread
Steal o’er the mind, and by the senses led—
A something yet to he, a something near.
Which keeps us in a frenzied state of fear ?
Cruel mock’ry ! a real, an unreal thing
That hails Anticipation as its king.
A two-edg’d sword he holds, and in his train
Are seen Eiches, Honour, Poverty and Pain !
He’s happy who can truly say, “ I’ve scann’d
The tracing of a mighty, mighty hand! ”
Thrice happy he who in this hour can trace
The workings of an unseen, inward grace!
neglect gains a victory. Now, when the mischief is done, we
cry aloud, “Oh world, thy slippery turns 1 ” forgetting that
we have assisted to make the ice.
■, Let me also remark, that in using the common excuse,
“ I have nothing to say,” I much fear that wo allow Idleness,
with her “ drooping head,” to withhold the pen, because it
is too much trouble to think.
- Now I, the writer, have some excuse for silence; and that
excuse, we, in our wisdom, hold to be legitimate, ’cause why ?
First, is it not said, “ one’s wife is one’s self” ?—well, my wife
wrote: ergo, I wrote. Secondly, I possess not the quality
to indite what is called descriptive, much less reasoning,
letters. Thirdly, of all men I have least the gift of writing
“ chit-chat,” or that sort of comfortable letter which “ ladies
love to dwell upon.” Lastly, the oft-repeated note, which


JVI Y Of JVIY sOj{.
The child is very round and very fat—
His father’s, own boy.
He smiles and kindly takes his pap,
But then he’s very coy.
His likeness let us bring to view,
A perfect little fellow;
He is so like a drop of dew
(All leather and prunella).
We ’ll give him first a wee round face,
And then a little scowl;
But then you can a dimple trace,
To mystify the “ owl ” (whole).
says nothing but “ Eemember mo,” not only doubles patience,
but punishes the purse; hence, in avoiding one rock, I hope
I have not, in your estimation, split upon the other, for
recollect, if I have, you have “ home me goodly com-
pany.”
Now, to the purpose of my letter. So you are going to be
married ? Well; take my wishes in this sentence ; “ May
you be happy.” And to be the better suited to your altered
state, expect not too much; let your motto ever be, “Bear
and forbear,” and depend upon this, it will bring a golden
harvest, by creating instead of destroying social enjoyment.
It is truly said, “ we live by and in anticipation,”—let us call
it the mind’s weather-gauge.
Were we to duly index the result, I believe it would be


SONG.
“Time Wa?”
Words by T. Dyer Edwardes, Esq,, Music by Frank Mori.
Time was when we were gay,
Alas! that time is pass’d,
Time was when we could say
Why should clouds o’ercast ?
Time was when all look’d bright,
Too bright to last;
Time was when thought so light
No dread of future cast.
The mom of life an op’ning flow’r,
No thought of strife to blast the hour,
found that, for a wise and good purpose, such would fall far
short of our conceptions. The other day I wrote a few lines
upon this very word, and you shall hare them, although
they ill suit the “Congratulations” of this very special
occasion; yet, like a “ woman true,” if you like them not,
why, e’en use fire to destroy that which has destroyed virgin
paper. Before taking hat in hand, with the last adieu to
, let me beg of her to give the writer’s good wishes
and respects to him, her future, perhaps her present, lord.
I will suppose your sister has given a flourishing description
of our hoy; of course he is “ the very gem of a child.” Does
sho not say so? Well, you shall have my say also about
him.


Hope in full sail, no rock was seen,
Soft was the gale, so did we dream.
Time is when mem’ry clings
To visions of the past,
Time is when pleasure’s wings
Are clipp’d by winter’s blast;
Time is when the lone bird has ceas’d his song to sing,
Time is when the fun’ral dirge does o’er the lost one
ring.
The eve of life a closing flow’r,
The day of strife has had its hour;
The storm has pass’d, the haven’s clear,
No winter’s blast can reach us here.
Briqht st,ar of JVlemory.
Height star of memory,
How long does it last ?
Follows life’s ebb and flow,
As its orbit is cast.
“BEAR AND FORBEAR.”—Man is naturally selfish,
and lam but part of the human family. The bright specks
of our existence are only seen now and then, and when seen
they are too often envied, rather than followed. Now, without
vanity, but in all simple truth, I will call you one of those


Bright star of memory,
How long does it last ?
From the dawn of the child,
Till the pulse beat is past.
Bright star of memory,
How long does it last ?
Till the sun-spirit of hope
Is lost, lost in the past.
Bright star of memory,
When life’s line is sever’d,
Is hope then for ever lost ?
Echoes echo, Never ! never!
“To JAY of( Hlg CHRIpTEJHfiQ-
Day”
Ip thy young heart and infant mind
Could feel what I now feel,
When bending low to God who’s kind.
The anxious heart to heal!
bright specks! For nature—l should say God—has bestowed
upon you all your father’s ease of temper and command of
self. Good 1 Be generous, then, to thoso who constantly sip
the bitter draught of another’s element. Could we all
“ bear and forbear,” what happy creatures we should be 1


My boy ! my boy ! the hour is near.
Thy christening-day is come.
May grace rest on thy head, and cheer
My first-born infant son!
To pray for riches, wealth, or power,
Would break a high decree ;
But I would ask, in life’s short hour,
“ Content may dwell with thee.”
Look to thy God, who gave thee life—
May it continued be—
And in this world avoid all strife,
And live in charity.
Walk humbly with thy fellow man;
Be never turn’d aside
From true religion, and its plan
Ever through life abide.
0 God ! thy choicest blessings give
Unto my infant son :
May health be his, and may he live
For many years to come!
Prom it would spring the golden harvest of social harmony,
instead of destroying domestic enjoyment. A lady once said
to me, “ My husband is not blessed with the best of tempers;
but I know that he possesses a good heart. Now how, think


I give thee, child, a token bright,
The stamp of royalty :
My son, for ever keep in sight
Fair truth and loyalty.
To thy country and its rulers be
High minded, just, and true;
Bow to the law, and you will see
No cause in such to rue.
So may thy life run smooth and clear,
As onward flows the stream.
Thy parents’ hearts assist to cheer,
And be their true “ sunbeam.”
ftfl OJS THE Woi\D j3ujHDAY.
Sunday ! the Christian’s day of rest,
Unto God our thanks are due.
Not with lips or outward dress
Does He accept from you:
All from the heart must come the prayer,
Yes! Christian, ’tis God’s due.
you, do I rulo him ?”“I do not know,” said I. “ W ell, then,
I shall tell you: I rule him by silence. I never have, and I
hope never shall, aggravate him when temper rules and not
reason.” I could only reply: “ You are to bo envied; you


An ftCF(O£TIC ON THE J3aCF(AMENT.
Sacred the rite, as deliver’d to twelve,
And holy, most holy by them it was held.
Creed upon creed have disputed the rite,
Rule upon rule supported by might.
“All are lost,” cries the one, “ who differ from me.”
Man eats not, he drinks not, the thing that he sees.
Eternal Godhead ! grant me to know
Naught but truth, through Thy grace, while here I’m
below,
To live in Thy faith, hope, fear and charity!
Lfpoj't Faith, Hope, ajmd Charity.
Faith is an emblem of the mind of man,
A nation’s weal or woe, ’tis friendship’s hand.
In life, ’tis God’s own gift: then hold it fast
Till death, and when thou’rt smitten by
His fatal dart, ’twill soar with thee on high.
have reached the inner chamber of Philosophy whilst
thousands of professors only gain the door.” There is a
saying time-honoured, —alas 1 not much used, —“ Words are
silver, silence is gold.” A friend of mine once knew a
married couple, who relates a story somewhat to the point.
The husband was hot-tempered, the wife not cold. He
spoke hastily, she replied briskly; he answered harshly, she
not over sweetly ; and so they lived, until a friend advised'


Hope is the Spirit’s essence, wond’rous bright.
Oh what is life without Thy blissful light ?
Placed in the heart a beauteous star,
Enlivening all around, though seen afar.
Charity! thou greatest of the three,
Had man but thee, how truly blessed he’d be.
All nature would rejoice, in thy most lambient light,
Eight would triumphant reign, in sound and sight.
In thee alone we gain a God-like prize.
To live without thee all our ills arise!
Ye who would mount the golden ladder try.
Let avarice die !
To TlfrfE, ETC.
Time’s mighty course, like a track in the sea,
When pass’d, then is lost in Eternity!
Yet time to the heart is a gift from above.
It lightens life’s load, and brightens our love!
her to speak to the priest who was a peace-loving old man,
and shrewd withal. Ho said, “ Mary, when John comes
homo cross, and begins to scold, just fill your mouth with
this holy water, and don’t swallow it or put it out until
he stops scolding.” She did so, and after a little time he
became gentle and quiet. This was the effect of silence on
her part.


Time is to the heart and to mem’ry dear,
Bringing balm to the soul, while it slackens the tear.
It gives to us mortals some space to reject
False notions of pride—upon God to reflect.
So pass we along on the pathway of life,
Unhappy to some, from surmise or strife;
Of good or of evil, the goblet we sip,
Then say that “ Fate forces the cup to our lip.”
Time is now! Time’s spent, and pass us he must;
Soon shall we part, we return to the dust.
Then his turn shall come, when he ’ll be no more!
For man, sinful man —what is there in store ?
Democracy.
Alas ! ’tis true Democracy may prevail,
Upset all order, and the wise assail;
But in the end, ’tis ever ordered so,
It falls, it vanishes like melted snow.
Letter to Egbert Claeke, Esq., upon reading M. Guizots
‘ Democracy of France.’
MY DEAE SIE, —I have read Guizot’s “Pamphlet”
with great interest, and have to thank you for it. It is the
golden fruit of time, gathered from the tree of experience.
Let me add, the book is replete with the wisdom of a great


Old Father Time has well defined the rule,
That he who acts the tyrant plays the fool.
Guizot! thy work is well deserving praise.
France! note well the tale of other days ;
Recall the Exile—secure a statesman true.
Down with Democracy—or Democracy
Will down with you!
To ouq Doq J^adofiie.
At home we have a small wee dog,
Madorie is his name;
His little feet are like to frogs’,
His two bright eyes the same.
When Mary called him “ little man,”
He wagged his tail with glee.
And like a parch’d pea in the pan,
So jumping glad was he.
mind, and ought to serve as an index to the Democratic
Spirit which it so ably denounces.
The few remarks respecting Napoleon and Wellington
(pages 12 and 13) are well worthy recording, for volumes
upon the subject could say no more.'
Tours
T. D. E.


When Carrie took him in her lap,
And patted him to sleep ;
She put on him her own night-cap,
From cold that he might keep.
Then Lizzie slyly pull’d his tail,
Which Carrie thought was spite;
And at her she began to rail,
And “ Dourie ” to show fight.
Then “ Tomby ” called out, pouting,
“ What for you tease him so ?
Nussy! bring some bread for him:
Da hurt him little toe! ”
Miss Baby now began to pipe,
The others all to sing;
And Dourie’s eyes were duly wip’d
To make him quite the thing.
SONQ FOI\
I love my love, she’s dress’d in blue,
I love my love, because she’s true ;
I love her for her sprightly mind ;
I love her, for her heart is kind.


Yes, Love, ’tis said, is blindly blind!
And add to this a fickle mind,
Can handle well his fiery dart,
Can pierce and rend the wounded heart!
Love may be blind, with “ fickle ” mind,
May cast his “ dart ” and wound the heart;
But true-love’s knot he can’t untie.
While Hope’s bright star is standing by!
T. D. E.
The JL(Amejmt.
Oh take me not away from her,
My dear, my only friend,
Who once could soothe my listening ear,
And all my faults amend!
Oh could I see that face again,
That ever smiled on me,
And view that kind and lovely form.
So oft caressing me!
But now those hours have passed away,
And cannot come again.
Why should I pine ? Is that the way
To meet her there again ?
I


For now indeed she is rewarded
For all her grief and pain :
She has found a place of rest at last,
Where we may meet again.
C. I. E.
Twij'tKUfiq Star£.
Peetty stars, that shine so bright
In yon sky at dead of night,
How I wish that I could soar
Up so far to Heaven’s door!
How I wonder at the might
Of that God who placed you there,
To be a light on earth below—
An earth so full of pain and care !
As you run your wondrous course,
Pilling men below with joy,
Praise Him who made you shine so bright
And sparkle so without alloy.
Ye worlds of never-ending bliss,
Of joy, and love, and heavenly light,
Praise Him, the giver of all good,
The Lord of hosts, the God of might!
C. I. E.


“I CARE WHETHER I PEEA/3E YOU
OR J4OT.”
[From my dear departed child, Caroline .]
January 24th, 1857.
To honour our parents is one of the first duties
enjoined in Holy Scripture; to obey them is included
in the same commandment. The utmost care should
he taken by a dutiful child to behave to those from
whom (under God) they have received so much, with
the greatest deference and respect, even though it
seems often hard to obey them, when commanded to
perform an irksome duty. Even though it should seem
to us to he unnecessary, still it is our duty to obey;
for when they have the welfare of their offspring
nearest and dearest to them, why should their will he
questioned, when it is undoubtedly for their welfare ?
Children are commanded to show love to their parents.
(Gen. xlvi. 29.) To obey them. (Gen. xxviii. 7 ; also
(Gen, xlvii. 30.) To attend to parental teaching.
(Proverbs xiii. 1.) “ A wise man heareth his father’s
instruction, but a scomer heareth not rebuke.” Also to
take care of parents. (Gen. xlv. 9-11; Gen. xlvii. 12.)
Many, many others might be found in reference to
our filial affection. To use the words “ I don’t care ”
I 2


to any one is a great breach of politeness; but when
used towards a parent is quite unjustifiable. Even when
the expression was made use of under the influence
of passion or temper, still no excuse could be made.
Scripture enjoins us both to subdue and control our'
temper. (Eph. iv. 26; James i. 19.) When using
this phrase, we evince a total disregard of the opinion
of the person addressed; and when used to a parent,
it violates a sacred duty, for to please and gain their
good opinion ought to be our most earnest desire.
(Proverbs, x. 1; Proverbs, xxix. 17.) The awful judg-
ments pronounced against undutiful children, and
many examples, ought indeed to be a solemn warning
to those inclined to rebel against their natural pro-
tectors ; while the beautiful promises, and instances
where they have been fulfilled, ought to encourage us
to endeavour to perform this most sacred duty to
the best of our power.
C. I. E.




A Humble Petition-
We, the undersigned, are about to beg of you a great
favour, which we presume will not cause the least
unpleasantness, as your humble servants only require
one of two words, Yes! or No! After it has been
uttered, if not favourable, the subject will be resigned
into the arms of Oblivion !
c’est ceci.
Wednesday is Twelfth Day! We do not think
you could have any objection to our having a few
young friends to spend the evening with us. To have
a large party is not the least what we want, only a few
of our old friends. Your Highness made the remark,
on taking this house, “ that the dining-room would do
admirably for a dance.” We quite agree with you!
Not the least fuss need be made; the piano is all ready,
and the only thing possibly required is to have the
table removed! Hoping you will kindly take the
matter into consideration, at the same time contem


plating that your beloved daughters will soon he too
old for such youthful follies!
We remain, with all respect and affection,
Your dutiful children,
Mart, Caeeie, and Lizzie.
1, Hyde Park Gate.
Mein Liebling, Sie miissen uns tanzen lassen.—M. D. E.
Carissimo mio, non mi rifiutate questo piccolo favore.—C. I. E.
Je vous adore, je vous embrasse, si vous nous aocordez ce plaisir.
—E. S. E. .




FAMILY RECOEDS.






THE FAMILY OF THOMAS DYER EDWARDES AND MARTHA
EDWARDES.
Name.
Dates of BirtU and
Baptism.
Place.
Sponsors.
Marriage.
Charlotte Dyer .
/27 th Dec., 1836
(January 30i.li.
jsydney, N. S.W.
Mrs. Hall. H-] AnrVmr
Lucy Sharp. 1
M.D. Hunter, j (
(18th July, 1872, married
Mary Dyer . .
/24thMarch,1838.
(April 21st.
|Sydney, N. S, W.
(J. W. Sharp.
(W. II. Yeldoyn. 1
(Sarah Dyer.
to Fred. Thos. D. Led-
gard, of the Inner
Temple, Barrister - at-
Law.
Caroline Isabelle.
/6th March, 1840.
\7th April.
jsydney, N. S. W.
(John Wyley. 1 Died !
(Miss Bowles. > 5th Sept.
[Married, 1864, to Edwin
Frend, of Wray Park,
(Mrs. Gordon. ) 1864. 1
| Reigate.
Elizabeth Sarah .
/13th July, 1843.
(Sept. 13th.
jworthing, Sussex.
(B. F. Watson.
| Elizh. Sharp.
(Mrs. Hitchman.
’Married, 1870, to John,
eldest sun of John R.
Reeves, of Woolhays,
Wimbledon.
Thomas Dyer.
/21st Feb., 1847.
(July 21st.
(Finchley Road,
/ Loudon
(J. W. Sharp. D.
< J. Russel Reeves.
Mrs. J. W. Sharp.
Sophie Ann . .
/28th April, 1848.
(June 15th.
”
1
(John Brown.
(Mary Wyley.
(Mrs. Lord. 1
1
Married, 1871, to Thos.
James, second son of
J. Russell Reeves, of
Wimbledon.


JVlemo. of Family Birthday^,
January. .
February . T. D. E., sen., 17th, 1807. T. D. E., jun.
21st, 1847. Mary Alice Reeves, Bth, 1872.
March . . Mrs. Beattie, 6th, 1810. Mrs. S. Sharp, 7th,
1810. W. E. Sharp, 9th, 1842. M. D. E.,
24th, 1838. C. I. E., 6th,-1840.
April . . Martha Edwards, 9th, 1807. S. U. E., 28th,
1848.
May . . . Mrs. Sharp, 3rd, 1777. T. Sharp, 22nd, 1808.
J. B. 0,, 6th, 1813.
June . . . Ethel Mary Ledgard, 2nd, 1873. Constance
Dyer Ledgard, 4th, 1875.
July . . . Elizabeth S. Edwardes, 14th, 1843.
August . . Mrs. Begbie, 28th, 1809.
September .
October . . Mrs. F. Wyley, 23rd, 1814. A. Begbie, jun.,
18th, 1849.
November . Major J. N. Sharp, 3rd, 1811 (died 17th
August, 1856.)
December . Sophie Sharp, 12th, 1840.'


The “ Why ” I added “ F ” to the
Fin/e Syllable of Najme.
In the year 1855, finding the estate of “ Moynes Park ”
in dispute, and a marriage into the Gent family of one
“ William Edwards ” of Dunmow likely to bo traced to my
advantage, I set to work, and obtained certificates of birth,
&c.; and, upon - finding, by the earliest entry, the name
certified as “ Edwardes,” I at once altered my signature,
thinking that in case of Chancery proceedings I should
stand in a proper light; and I see no reason why, if my
ancestors dropped the “ e,” I should not take it up again. I
therefore now sign my name,
T. DYER EDWARDES.
Extract from Register at Dunmow, Essex.
Marriage.
Married 2Sth October, 1659.
John Edwaedes 1
and >
Elizabeth Smith. J
Christenings.
“ John, the sonne of John Edwardes and Elizabeth his wife,
baptized 12th Aug. 1661.” Then follows the entry—
“ Thomas Edwards, baptized 28th August, 1662,” in
which the “ e ” is left out by the clergyman.


My W^nde^i^s.
1819. West Indies, Jamaica; over mountain, lull, and dale;
1823. and crossed the Rio Grande.
1827. China, Canton.
1829. Australia, Sydney.
1832. China, Manilla, Island of Ternatte.
1833. Australia, Sydney.
„ Van Diemen’s Land.
1834. „ 2nd visit all over the Island.
„ England, France, Germany, Switzerland (4144 miles).
1835. Cape of Good Hope.
„ Australia.
1841. Port Phillip, Melbourne. “ Clonmel.”
„ • Pernambuco.
„ England.
1844. Australia. Van Diemen’s Land.
„ Mauritius, Ceylon, Malta.


1845. Ceylon, Suez, Egypt, Malta.
„ England, Holland, Netherlands, the Rhine.
1846. Rhine, Frankfort, Brussels.
1854. France, Paris, Bordeaux.
„ Switzerland, Danube.
1855. Munich, Malta, Constantinople, Black Sea, Balaklava,
Sevastopol.
1856. Channel Islands, through Mid-England, all the Cathe-
drals.
1858. Switzerland, Chiavenna, Milan, Venice, Triest, Prague,
Dresden, Berlin, Hanover, the Hague, Hamburg,
Paris.
1860. Mediterranean, Gibraltar, Malta, Messina, Naples,
Civita Vecchia, Leghorn, Turin, Paris.
1861. The Rhine, up and down, diverging on each side.
1862. The Mediterranean, P. and 0. Company, staying at all
ports.
1869. Italy, Rome, Naples, Toronto, Capua, Florence,
Geneva, Paris.
1872. The Mediterranean, Suez, Aden, King George’s Sound,
Melbourne.
1873. Sydney, N. S. W., Ceylon, Bombay,
1875. Bruges, Brussels Spa, The Rhine, The Danube,
Luxembourg, Coblentz, Home, and enough for my
Life-time.


I have noted my parentage, my birth, my marriage
and my wanderings. It is therefore only left me to
add “a sketch of my career in life.” It has been
eventful in a degree, and certainly successful. In
blowing my own trumpet it is to anticipate the ques-
tion of my grandchildren,—
“Well, mamma, what was grandpapa Edwardes?”
Stage 1. 1819. Oct. 1. I took to the sea, but the
sea did not take to me.
Stage 2.1822. At a Jamaica plantation; which suited
me less, although a good appointment for a mere boy.
Stage 3. In 1823 (Nov. 30) I had an appointment
given me in the Custom House of London by my
more than friend, Edward Dew, Esq. (who died 22nd
January, 1834), and before I reached my eighteenth
year, my income was 2001. per annum. Future
official prospects did not suit my boyish ambition, so
I bid adieu to Her Majesty’s Customs.
Stage 4. 1826. Dec. 28. I was given a seat in the
office of Messrs. Hopkins & Glover, American Agents
and Brokers. This was my “stepping-stone” in a
commercial life, and I soon picked up what. I re-
quired, and although I had a partnership in view
(only twenty years old!) my heart yearned for the
eastern world with a wider field of action. I obtained
my wishes!
K


Stage 5. 1827. Left for China, arriving on December
29th. I picked up for the second time many crumbs
during my stay in China of fourteen months; held
various official as well as mercantile situations; when,
to my grief, my health gave way.
Stage 6. 1829. February 4th. Left China in the
Cumberland for Australia, and on the 15th of April
same year arrived at Sydney, New South Wales, and
was fortunate enough to sell my “ shipment of China
produce ” to advantage. In less than two years I
had obtained the ins-and-outs of “imports and ex-
ports,” more particularly as regard China. Thus
prepared for the future in
Stage 7. 1831. December 4th I left Sydney for China
on the ship Larkins, arriving at Canton January 1832,
My valued friend, William Jardine (he died 27th
February, 1843), complimented me on my Australian
statistics, and said, “ Take a partner, charter a ship,
and return from whence you came. I will open a
credit for you with my firm; act with honour, prudence,
and integrity, and all will end well.
Stage 8. 1832. February 17th. On my twenty-fifth
birthday, I entered into partnership with Matthew
Dysart Hunter (who was the second son of General
Sir Martin Hunter of Anton’s Hill, Berwickshire, N. 8.),
under the name of Edwards & Hunter.


Stage 9. 1832. July Bth. We sailed in our own
chartered ship, the Agnes, with a general cargo for
Manilla and Sydney, New South Wales. We had a
long, dreary, and anxious passage of one hundred and
seventy-eight days.
Stage 10. 1833. January 2nd. We arrived at
Sydney with a clear coast before us, and we trimmed
our sales accordingly. We took a warehouse, stored
our goods, and sold “ our general cargo ” gradually at
a good profit. Our spirits were high and our actions
somewhat hold. “All’s well that ends well.”
Stage 11. For seven years we continued in business,
and we had seven years of success. Our position w r as
strong and stood high; indeed, we were the first house
who had direct ship cargoes from France and Batavia,
and the China tea-trade was chiefly under our command
Our chief connexions were first-rate: viz., Messrs. Jar-
dine, Matheson & Co., China; Messrs. Lyall, Mathe-
son & Co., Calcutta; Messrs. Majoribanks, & Ferrars,
London; Messrs. Baring Brothers, London; Messrs.
Coutts & Co., London; Messrs. Gregson, Melville &
Co., London; add to these their correspondents through
the range of the mercantile world—they were ours
also.
Stage 12. 1840. 30th June. I retired from my firm
of Edwards & Hunter at the age of thirty-three,
having created an income of 40001. per annum, and
K 2


this, too, after having been in business only eight years
and four months. Our success was great. We worked
hard, and strictly followed the advice of William
Jardine.
Stage 13. 1841. March 30th. Self and family left
Sydney in the Louisa Campbell, and arrived at South-
ampton, England, 24th July same year. My mer-
cantile career ends.*
Stage 14. My public career is in a narrow compass,
but, thank goodness! I have never had reason to be
ashamed of its course. It stands thus
In 1846 I refused the offer of an appointment “ as
Gentleman-at-arms to Her Majesty.” My wife said,
“ Court not the costume of vanity.” I acted by her
advice.
1852. One of the founders of the London Chartered
Bank of Australia. Resigned my directorship 1874,
May.
1852. April. Appointed a director of the National
Bank of Ireland, and in 1863 (March) resigned.
1853. Australian Agricultural Company. Appointed
director. Resigned April 1857.
* See Loss of Steamer Clonmel, p. 137.


1861. Cape Town Railway. Appointed a director,
August 30th.
1866. West Flanders Railway. Appointed a director,
February 24th.
1866. Committee Drury Lane Theatre. Appointed
to a Seat.
1874. On the Council at Royal Albert Hall.
CLUBS.
1841. The Old Clarence Club.
1842. Garrick Club.
1867. The Reform Club.
To conclude, let me confess I never had any am-
bition except during the period I was a member of
the firm of Edwards & Hunter. A public career in
the House of Commons was open to me more than
once; but I never could be brought to think it right
—to pay for it! My opinion has ever been—A free
seat from a free constituency. This is true honour!
These Records are now brought to a close. Thank


ful indeed I am to a kind Providence in prompting
me to plant a church at Waverly, New South Wales,
as well as to restore and decorate my native church at
New Shbreham in Sussex. I have one other hope as
to “ churches,” viz., that I may yet live to hear the
chimes of St. Mary Abbots, Kensington.
T. DYER EDWAEDES.
July, 1876.


THE ‘CLONMEL.’


4 Clarendon Terrace, Clarendon Road, Netting Hill.
March 24th, 1857.
Dear Sir,
The accompanying scrap relating to your
adventure in the Glonmel, will, I hope, be interesting
to you. I have attempted a copy from the old sketch
also.
It should have been sent to you before, but illness
and change of residence interfered.
I am, dear Sir,
Yours truly,
ROBERT RUSSELL.
T. D. Edwards, Esq.




liopg of the ‘Clonmel.’
[I have given the loss of the Clonmel because she
was the first coast steamship between Melbourne and
Sydney. My adventure after her loss and consequent
trip for government aid through Bass’s Straits to
Melbourne in an open whale-boat is also given as
described in Captain' Simson’s notes in the Port
Phillip Herald of Bth January, 1841.]
“ The Io Peeans which resounded a month ago on the
arrival of the first steamer, the Clonmel, at this port,
have scarcely ceased to vibrate in our ears, when the
melancholy duty is imposed upon us of chanting her
funeral dirge. The noble steam-ship Clonmel— this
annihilator of space—this condenser of time, in our
important and increasing traffic with the metropolis
and the sister colony—this Argo which would have
brought many a Jason to our modem Colchis in search
of the golden fleece is, we lament to have it to say, a
wreck, being now fixed on a reef off Corner Inlet, with
but a remote probability of her being saved in whole
or in part. To convey to a stranger in words the


sensation created in our community by the melancholy
tidings of her loss would be a difficult task. Indeed,
it seemed as if some grievous national calamity had
befallen us; indeed, had it not been for the oral
testimony of Mr. D. C. Simson, who came up from the
wreck in an open whale-boat, the report would have
been at once attributed to one of those thousand-and-
one vagaries which Rumour, with her hundred-tongued
mouth, is so apt to trumpet forth, when we have been
some time without arrivals or news. On this occasion,
however, the very worst anticipations were founded,
alas! on truth; and the long-wished-for communica-
tion by steam —commenced under such favourable
auspices—which promised such mighty results to our
province, has by this untoward accident been inter-
rupted for a period, though we sincerely trust but for
a short one. The powerful influence which we know
is now being excited in England in our behalf, by
several wealthy and respectable colonists who returned
to Europe at the commencement of the last year, will
embrace steam navigation on an extensive scale as one
of the most prominent of their plans in recommending
the investment of British capital in our country;
besides which, the Hunter’s River Steam Navigation
Company’s boats are now nearly finished, and we hear
of individuals embarking their funds in private steam
vessels coming out to these Colonies. Thus the sus-
pension of our commerce by steam —for the benefits of


which our local position gives us so many advantages
—will he hut temporary.
“The plain unvarnished narrative by Mr. D. C.
Simson, reported below, will inform our readers of
all the particulars attending the loss of the ill-fated
Clonmel; it will also convey to them a picture of
courage and self-devotion of which our national history
teems with innumerable instances; nevertheless, cha-
racteristic as they are of the British sailor, each
occasion of their recurrence reflects additional lustre
on his country and his profession.
“An intrepid little band of five seamen, headed by
Mr, D. C. Simson (himself a brother tar), and joined
in his enterprise by Mr. T. Dyer Edwardes (late of
the Firm of Edwards & Hunter), a fellow-passenger,
bravely committed themselves in an open whale-boat
to the dangers of our tempestuous Straits, to give our
local Government information of the situation of the
Clonmel, and send their unfortunate fellow-passengers
and crew the relief of which they stood so much in
need. Fatigued, but not exhausted, they succeeded
in their noble purpose. How enviable must be their
feelings on reflecting that by their exertions they
have prevented much misery, and that, by the speedy
assistance despatched with a promptitude worthy of
all praise by His Honour the Superintendent, des-
pondency, nay, even despair, may have been averted
from the party left at the place of shipwreck!


“ The public, we are sure, will join with us in lauding
the heroic conduct of Mr. Simson and the gallant crew
who so laudably volunteered their services and risked
their lives in the cause of humanity. It seemed as if
Providence designed those occasional accidents for the
express purpose of eliciting the generous feelings in-
herent in our natures, and so fostered in the breasts
of British sailors by the many incidents of their event-
ful lives which give them exercise. By this means,
we have occasional opportunities of proving the in-
correctness of the many misrepresentations by our
enemies, by which every sentiment characteristic of
man would seem to be excluded from the minds of our
fellow colonists. We are sorry that Mr, Simson, one
of the most heroic of his adventurous party, has been
the principal sufferer both in purse and person.
“ The cutters Sisters and Will Watch sailed for the
wreck yesterday morning, having on board Captain
Eoach, agent of the Clonmel, Mr, Lewis, harbour
master, and Lieut. Russell, with a detachment of the
28th Regiment. Their early departure was greatly
facilitated by Captain Buckley of the Eagle, who in
the most praiseworthy manner furnished the cutters
with every requisite from his own vessel, thus avoiding
the delay consequent upon having to obtain water,
provisions, &c., ashore.
•* The following is Mr. Simson’s statement:— :
“ ‘At half-past 3 a.m. on the 4th instant, I started three


men on shore to get the beakers filled with water.
They had scarcely filled them and brought them down
to the beach, when I observed the natives coming down
upon us. I hurried them on board, and got under
weigh, the wind blowing hard from the eastward at
the time. After a severe pull of four hours, we were
at last enabled to weather the southern point of the
cove, .to hoist sail, and run for Wilson’s Promontory,
which we rounded at 10 a.m., the sea running very
high
“ ‘At 2 p.m. we were abreast of the Port Phillip Heads;
but, to our extreme mortification, when within a mile
of being in a secure harbour, we found the strong ebb
tide created such a ripple and so much broken water,
that I did not consider it prudent to run over it. We
were, therefore, obliged to keep the boat’s head to
windward from that time until the flood-tide would
make. We were in this tantalizing situation for four
hours, when, to our inexpressible relief and joy, we
saw a cutter making for the heads, and, bearing down
upon her, found her to be the Sisters, Captain Mulhall,
to whose hospitable reception I cannot do sufficient
justice
“ ‘ Mr. Edwards, on finding himself in safety, was
attacked by a spasmodic affection of the heart, which
gave me much uneasiness, but from which, I hope,-
by the kind treatment of his Melbourne friends, he
will soon recover. The crew suffered much from over


exertion and wet, occasioning in some cases dysentery.
I suffered much in my eyes and face from constant
exposure to the sun and salt water.’ ”
Mr. Simson forgot to note that Mr. Edwards steered
the boat for a good portion of the last fifteen hours
(Simson became nearly blind.) Again, when the vessel
was sighted, Mr, Edwards was tied to the mast, in
order to hold up the handkerchief of distress.*
* I was received in Melbourne at the cottage of W. H. Yaldwyn,
Esq., and attended as a brother by my wife’s dear friend, Caroline
Bowles, now Mrs. Archdeacon Braim.—T. U. E.


THOMAS SHARP, ESQ


THOJMAg SHAHP,
, August 12,1841. Died at Leamington, in Warwick-
shire, in his 71st year, Thomas Sharp, Esq., the well-
known Coventry antiquary.
This gentleman was born in the city of Coventry,
and received his education at the Free School.* It
is also said he was originally intended for the
Church, but, it appears, circumstances ordained that
it should be otherwise. In the early part of his life,
he carried on the business of a hatter and felt-maker,
the one retail the other wholesale, in a house in
Smithford Street, well known as the residence of the
celebrated Peeping Tom.
His partiality to the study of the antiquities of his
native city displayed itself at a very early period of
his life, and he was fortunate in having two excellent
coadjutors, viz. Mr. George Howlette and Mr. John
Nickson,! both of them resident in the city.
* “ This school was founded in the reign of Henry VIII. by John
Hales, and amply endowed by him in 1573. The school-room was
the Church of St. John’s Hospital, and the ancient oak seats with
which it is fitted up, came from the choir of the AVhite Friars.”
f For an account of Mr. Nickson, see the Obituary in (Jent. Mag.
for July, 1830, p. 90, and that of Thomas Sharp, October, 1841.


In the year 1792, Mr. Howlette was elected Mayor.
By this event, Mr. Sharp and Mr. Nickson were
enabled to procure access to the numerous ancient
documents, leet books, guild books, &c., relating to
the city, existing in the Corporation Treasury in
St. Mary’s Hall. Here was a rich mine hitherto un-
explored by the antiquary, and it may be scarcely
necessary to add that the opportunity was seized with
alacrity by these indefatigable gentlemen. Mr. Sharp
examined the Latin documents, from which he made
copious extracts, and which he regularly paged and
indexed; while the English department came more
immediately under the care of Mr. Nickson.
About the same period, these three gentlemen, in
order to illustrate their copies of Dr. Thomas’s edition
of Dugdale’s ‘ Warwickshire,’ engaged Mr, Jeayes, a
drawing-master, then residing in the city, to visit
every parish in the county, to take views of the seats
of the nobility, manor houses, churches, and all the
civil and ecclesiastical antiquities then existing. The
original work was afterwards divided into five hundreds,
forming as many separate volumes, and facsimile
title-pages were then printed by Mr. Wm. Header,
who presented them to these gentlemen. Great praise
is justly due to them for this spirited undertaking,
for, as may be anticipated, many of the most remark-
able and ancient edifices are now destroyed. One of
the copies contained upwards of 070 illustrations, viz.


108 engravings, 40 original drawings of brasses, 223 of
churches, and 300 of antiquities.
In the year 1820, Mr. Sharp and Mr. Header deter-
mined to procure rubbings _nf the ancient brasses
which were known to exist in the county of Warwick;
with that intention they visited, or caused to be
examined, nearly all the churches, at very consider-
able labour and expense. From these impressions
reduced drawings were taken, and inserted in the
work above specified. The originals were subsequently
disposed of to W. Staunton, Esq., of Longbridge
House, near Warwick.
Having married, Mr. S. retired from his retail trade,
and took a house in Little Park Street, where he re-
sided many years, carrying on a wholesale business.
In the public transactions of the city he was ever
a, leading character. He was a member of the Drapers’
Company; and one of the trustees of Mrs. Bailey’s
Charity. In 1794 and 1809, he was elected Ac-
countant-churchwarden of St. Michael’s Church, and
he also filled that office from 1810 to 1817. His
indefatigable attention to the repairs of that noble
and ancient edifice is well known, and has been duly
appreciated. He also rendered essential service by
his pertinent remarks and observations during the
time when St. Mary’s Hall and the church of the
Holy Trinity were under repair.
One of his first communications to the public will
L


be found in the Gent. Mag. for 1793, pp. 1103, 1162,
in which he inserted a lengthened reply to the late
Mr. Gough, relative to his remarks on St. Mary’s Hall.
It bears the signature of % under which initial Mr,
Sharp frequently communicated. Another commu-
nication in the same volume on St. Michael’s Church
at Coventry, p. 690, bears the signature of “Phil-
archaismos.”
In the year 1797, when Government found it neces-
sary to accept the services of volunteer associations
in defence of the country against a foreign foe, Mr.
Sharp enrolled himself in the First Troop of the
Coventry Volunteer Cavalry, and in which he re-
mained till the corps was disembodied.
He occasionally occupied his time in the intervals
of business by arranging the stores which he had
previously accumulated; portions of which, relating
to some of the principal buildings in Coventry, were
printed by Mr. Header gratuitously, who presented
them to him for private distribution among his anti-
quarian friends.
Mr. S. had long been a collector of ancient coins,
and had amassed a large number of Homan and
English; but his cabinet is not reported to have
included anything of much rarity or interest, with
one exception only, viz., the half-florin of Edward 111.,
of which he was the casual and fortunate purchaser :
this coin is the rarest of the English gold series; it is


now in the British Museum, and no other has yet
been discovered. Mr. Sharp contributed an engraving
and account of it to the Gent. Mag. for Oct., 1800,
p. 945.
He also collected a series of 33 Coventry tokens,
which he subsequently had engraved—and in con-
junction with Mr. Nickson, and Mr. Edmund W.
Percy (who lately died at Leamington), had 25 medals
struck at Birmingham, on which were represented the
ancient and modern edifices of Coventry. A few im-
pressions were taken in silver and copper, and the
dies were immediately afterwards destroyed.
In 1793, Mr. Sharp communicated to Mr. Nichols a
drawing and description of a crucifix, of copper gilt,
22£ inches high, found in Bosworth Eield (engraved
in ‘ History of Leicestershire,’ vol. iv. p. 557).
In 1800, he communicated to the Gentleman’s
Magazine an account of a British Torques, and some
ancient British coins (see vol. Ixx. p. 817).
Mr. S. wrote an account of an ancient gold ring,* or
amulet, weighing 1 oz. 13 dwts. 8 grs. troy, which was
found in Coventry Park, in the autumn of 1802, upon
which were engraved the Crucifixion, and several
* A ring of jet, on which was the representation of the Cruci-
fixion, with the inscription, “In hoc signo winces,” was dug up in a
garden belonging to Caludon Castle near Coventry, prior to the year
1784. (An account of it was communicated to Gent. Mag. vol. liv.
p. 814, hy “ Observator”—David Wells, Esq.)
I- 2


singular devices and inscriptions. The paper was
read before the Society of Antiquaries, in London, on
May 23rd, 1816, and -was published in the 18th
volume of the Archmologia, p. 306. An engraving of
this ring, together with a similar account, was pub-
lished in the Gent. Mag. for June, 1803, p. 497.
Mr. Sharp’s knowledge of engravings and their
arrangement enabled him to illustrate a copy of
Granger’s History of England with much ability and
success, as he disposed of it for upwards of 1000 Z.
He was extremely serviceable to the Corporation of
Coventry, by an arrangement of their large and
curious collection of muniments, so greatly to their
satisfaction, that they presented him with a piece of
plate, as a token of their grateful acknowledgments,
with a suitable inscription. He also arranged the
numerous deeds and other MSS. belonging to the
church of the Holy Trinity, and drew up a very
serviceable and suitable index.
In 1825, he published ‘A Dissertation on the
Pageants or Dramatic Misteries anciently performed
at Coventry, by the Trading Companies of that city;
chiefly with reference to the vehicle, characters, and
dresses of the actors. Compiled in a great degree
from sources hitherto unexplored, to which are added
the Pageant of the Shearmen and Taylors’ Company,
and other Municipal Entertainments of a public
nature.’ This is a singularly interesting quarto


Tolume, and is highly creditable to Mr. Sharp. Many
of the particulars were extracted from the ancient
account boobs of the various trading companies of
Coventry. It was reviewed by Mr. Hamper in the
Gent. Mag. for Dec. 1825, p. 527.
Mr. S. proposed in 1825, to publish 125 copies of
the ‘ Lvdus Coventrise, or Corpus Christi Plays,’ from
the MS. in the Cottonian Library in the British
Museum, with notes and illustrations, in 2 vols. Bvo.,
and issued a prospectus to that effect; but not having
obtained 80 subscribers, which would have been
necessary to reimburse the expenses of printing and
publishing, he relinquished the undertaking. This
work has however recently been edited in Bvo. by J.
0. Halliwell, Esq., for the Shakspeare Society.
Mr. S. was also the editor of the ‘ Ancient Mysteries
and Moralities,’ from the Digby MS. in the Bodleian
Library, at Oxford, published by the Abbotsford Club.
In conjunction with the late Mr. Hamper, Mr. S.
was the compiler of ‘Kenilworth Illustrated; or the
History of the Castle, Priory and Church of Kenil-
worth, with a description of the present state,’ in
1 vol. 4to. 1821, a book of much interest, and contain-
ing many good engravings by Eadcliffe of Birmingham.
On relinquishing business, about the year 1831, he
removed to Leamington, when his Warwickshire col-
lections were, by purchase, added to those of William
Staunton, Esq., of Longbridge House near Warwick.


Mr. Sharp compiled ‘A Catologue of Provincial
Copper Coins, Tokens, Tickets, and Medalets, issued
in Great Britain, Ireland, and the Colonies, during
the 18th and 19th centuries; arranged according to
Counties, &c. With particulars of their fabrication,
names of the artists, and miscellaneous remarks illus-
trative of the rarity of particular specimens. De-
scribed from the originals in the collection of Sir
George Chetwynd, Bart., of Grendon Hall, co.
Warwick.’ Of this work, a few copies were hand-
somely printed in 4to. for private use, by Messrs.
Nichols and Son, in 1834.
In 1835-6, Mr. S. was occupied at Grendon Hall,
in forming collections for a Memoir of Sir George
Chetwynd’s grandfather, William Chetwynd, Esq., of
Brocton Hall, in Staffordshire, who was honoured with
the friendship and patronage of the great Lord
Chesterfield, and was his lordship’s Under Secretary
of State for the Home Department in 1745.
His last publication w r as ‘An Epitome of the History
of Warwickshire,’ published by Mr. J. Merridew,
Mr. Sharp was for many years an intimate friend
and correspondent of the late Mr. Hamper, whose
letters he carefully preserved, and presented a large
collection of them to Mr. Staunton, a short time
before his last illness. With many other learned
antiquaries of the last half century, he maintained
a frequent correspondence. He was intimate with


Mr. John Carter, and also with Mr. John Britton, the
celebrated architectural antiquaries. In the true
spirit of an enlightened inquirer, his stores were ever
open to his friends. He contributed to Dr. Hardwood’s
‘History of Lichfield,’ to Capt. Smith’s ‘Antient
Dresses,’ and to Mr. Hone’s publications; and nume-
rous other works might be enumerated, to which he
supplied useful information.
In person Mr. Sharp was tall, thin, and of a
gentlemanly demeanour.
His last illness was long and lingering, attended
with great debility, and he died most deservedly
esteemed and regretted.
By his wife he had a numerous family. His eldest
son, Thomas, held at the date of his death (16th Aug.,
1873) the rank of Major in the Indian service. His
second son, John Hickson Sharp, was a Major in the
Bengal Engineers, and died. at Lahore 17th Aug.,
1856. His third son, James Burley Sharp, left
England for Australia, Aug., 1835, a settler and a J. P.
for the Murrumbidgee District, Hew South Wales; was
married and had a large family; retired into private
life, 1873. His second daughter, Lucy, married Alfred
Begbie, Esq., one of the Suddar Judges, Bengal Pre-
sidency, who died 3rd June, 1873. His third daughter,
Elizabeth, married Frederick Wyley, Esq., M.E.C.S.
and J.P., who has been twice Lord Mayor of Coventry.


An Account of an Ajiciejvt Qold
found Coventry in the
Ye/I\ 1802.
Communicated to the Society ,of Antiquaries, in a Letter
from Thomas Sharp, Esq., of Coventry, to Henry
Ellis, Esq., E.R.S., Secretary.
[Read before the Society, May 23,1816.]
(From The Archceologia, vol, xviii.)
My dear Sir, —As you expressed a wish to exhibit
my ancient Gold King to the Society, I with much
pleasure communicate the following account of it.
The King was found in Coventry Park, near the
Town Wall, in the autumn of 1802, by a person
getting up potatoes, and weighs 1 oz. 13 dwts. 8
grains.
The centre device represents our Saviour rising
* The ring is now in the possession of T. D. E., and is at the
South Kensington Museum. It has had the attention paid to it of
no less than three lectures, and he has refused the sum of £lOO for
it. It is a family relic, and as such will no doubt pass into the
hands of his nephew, William Edwardes Sharp, a captain of the Royal
Artillery.—T. D. E. •


from the sepulchre, and in the background are shewn
the hammer, ladder, sponge, and other emblems of
His passion. On the left is figured the wound of the
side, with the following legend, “the well of ewer-
lastingh lyffe.” In the next compartment two smaller
wounds, with “the well of confort,” —“the well of
gracy;” and afterwards two other wounds, with the
legends of “ the well of pitty—the well of merci.”
From some small remains it is evident that the
figure of our Saviour, with all the inscriptions, have
been filled with hlack enamel, whilst the wounds and
drops of blood issuing from them were appropriately
distinguished by red.
On the inside of the Eing is engraven “ Wulnera
quinqi dei sunt medicina mei, pia crux et passio xpi
sunt medicina michi, Jaspar, Melchior, _Baltasar,
ananyzapta tetragrammaton.”
The exterior devices and inscriptions are very
similar to those which Sir Edm a Shaw, Goldsmith and
Alderman of London, directs by his Will, circa 1487,
to be made on “ 16 Eings of fyne Gold, to be graven
with the well of pitie, the well of mercie, and the well
of everlasting life.”
The inscription withinside is an Amulet, and various
instances might be adduced of such usage. In the
account of the Gentleman’s Society at Spalding, is
recorded a present of “an amulet that had touched
the heads of the three kings of Cologne, whose names


were in black letters within: ” and allusions to the
five wounds of Christ are so frequent, that it may
suffice to notice the occurrence of the particular verse
—“Yulnera quinque dei sint medicina mei,” in
Caxton’s “ Chastysing of Goddes chyldern.” Sign.
F. v. “ Also some use that discypline and scorgynges,
for such passios say therewyth thise verses—Yulnera
quinque dei sint medicina mei; ” and to remark that
the Portrait of Bp. Waynflete, in stained glass, for-
merly existed in the East window of the School
founded by him at Waynflete, with the same verse
underneath.
Of the barbarous word ananyzapta, the only notice
I have met with is in Julii Eeichelti Exercitatio de
Amuletis (Argentorati 1676, 4t0.), who in plate vi.,
fig. 2, gives a representation of an Amulet in form of
a Medal, having on one side the superscription
“ Tetragrammaton,” and upon the Cross in centre
“ INRI.”—The reverse reads “ Ananizapta dei,” with
the word “ Emanuel ” upon the Cross; on which he
observes as follows:
“Frequens quoque abusus est in amuletis signi
crucis, de quo supra. Hujus insigne documentum est
amuletum argenteum in Tab. YL, numero secundo,
in quo corrupti & magici vocabuli Ananisapta derivatio
non neminem frustra exercuit. Sachsius Grammarolog.
pag. 871, ex Freitag. Noct. Med. cap. 39, pag. 193
docet, quod contra lethales morbos usurpent versum :


Ananisapta ferit mortem, qui leedere queerit. Forte
igitur amuletum hoc iis appendendum, qui quocunque
lethali morbo decumbent.”
I lately saw a massy Thumb Eing of Iron, covered
with a thick lamina of Gold, withinside of which was
the following inscription—ffje Tnnnmjapta 0 rpi 0 T.
—being the only further, instance I have met with.
The word “ Tetragrammaton ” needs no remark, and
perhaps I ought to apologize for so diffuse a com-
munication as the present.
I am, my dear Sir,
Very truly Yours,
THOMAS SHARP.
May 21s#, 1816.


To MY D/UQHTER Oj'J HER WeDDI^Q-DAY.
Sat, dearest Martha, shall thy bridal day
Remain unhonour’d by the Muse; unsung
Thy change of state, and without notice due
And unrecorded pass the great event,
Charg’d deeply with thy future weal or woe ?
Forbid it, all a Father’s love and care!
For though methought I’d hung my lyre to rest,
Never again to wake its tuneful chords :
Yet may I not, thus urg’d, “a recreant prove,”
But task myself and all my better pow’rs,
Making affection aid the want of skill
To celebrate my Martha’s wedding-day.
Oh I were it mine to boast a poet’s fire
Such as our Scotts and Byrons ’erst possest,
Then should thy bridal, dearest girl, be sung
In strains that, rising from parental love,
Should well be worthy of the cause and thee!
But since this is denied me, and I feel
The chill of age damping those feeble pow’rs
Of poetry, which thyself and partial friends
Were wont to praise, and thus to make me vain;
Let me in simple, but sincerest guise,
Pour forth the breathings of a father’s heart
In pray’rs and wishes that thy wedded life


May pass in calm domestic peace, giving
And receiving happiness—that thy lot
May be as free from trouble, care, and sorrow,
As e’er the choicest of Heav’n’s favourites
Was blest with. And should a further blessing
Still be granted me, I would humbly ask,
Here or at Sydney, we might meet again;
And having realiz’d the full completion
Of my fondest hopes and heartfelt wishes
For your welfare, I might with thankfulness
And cheerful resignation, close my eyes in peace.
Nor be unsung thy husband’s gen’rous name.
In whom true honour, innate, sits enthron’d,
And all that forms a perfect British merchant
Is concentrated in one bright specimen:—
Cool judgment, quick discrimination, and
Unwearied application and research;
United with a warmth of heart and feeling
That wins, and firm retains, esteem and love.
To him, my Martha, thou hast giv’n thy hand,
And with it, too, full well I know, thy heart;
Keceiving in return the valued gift
Of his entire affection and his love.
Be it thy care to keep the precious charge
Safe and unharm’d; from cold estrangement free,
And all the ills that threaten wedded love.
When the now wife forgets her plighted vows,
And ’stead of strength’ning those holy bonds


Which should have made her and her husband one,
By increas’d acts of kindness, bland attention,
And that all-winning charm of mild submission
Which best becomes the female character—
In evil hour strives for the mastery,
Quitting her sex’s choicest privilege,
Even her very weakness, and daring
To risk her own legitimate ascendance
For that which nature and her vows alike forbid.
Oh Martha! warn’d by sad example, and
Thy father’s deeply urged admonition,
Shun this fatal rock! So may thy bark sail
Smoothly down the stream of time, protected
From the numerous though unseen dangers
Which beset those who thus rashly venture
Upon a stormy and forbidden sea.
Now, dearest child, —heart-rending word, —farewell!
And with that word receive, warm from the heart,
A father’s blessing; may it cling to thee
Through life, and fraught with the rich efficacy
E’en of a patriarch’s benediction,
Bring down upon thy head prosperity,
Domestic happiness, content, and peace.
THOMAS SHARP.
July, 1835.


To jVI ARTHA, FROJvI HER DEAR PAPA-
When last Papa a journey went,
Some lines to brother Tom he sent,'
Which Martha took unkind:
The little maid was full of fears—
Indeed, ’tis said she shed some tears—
And grief possessed her mind.
She loved Papa not less than Tom:
Each night she prayed that safe at home
“ His darlings ” might him see;
And yet she cries, “ Lo all this verse
To Tom does Joey’s cares rehearse;
But never mentions me!”
My Martha dear, when home I sent
The lines that gave this discontent,
And pain’d your little heart,
A parent’s fondness sought to please
Each darling child —and, sure, of these
His Martha claimed chief part.
And though no verses I indite
Of dolls and ribbons (girls’ delight).
Nor sing your thimble’s praise,
Yet that my dearest girl I love.
And gladly haste this truth to prove.
Witness these feeble lays.


Then, Martha, rest your gentle heart;
Thy father’s love in equal part
Be sure, dear girl, thou hast.
I love my Tom, love Lucy too,
Love Nickson —still have love for you,
Which whilst I live will last.
Tell them of this, and say, my dear,
To lose that love they need not fear
While duteous they remain.
Be to each other good and kind,
Your lives and loves in one combined,
And great will be your gain.
My Martha sleeps, while this I write,
Sweet slumbers on your eyelids light,
Each dream delight in turn;
And soon may Heav’n the prayer accord
Thy little lips this eve forth pour’d
For father’s safe return.
THOMAS SHARP.
Dedikqton, Monday Evening.
29 ih June, 1812.


APPENDIX.
M


The following selection of subjects, composed by a
valued friend (Nannie Constance St. George),
has been sent to me at various periods, and which
I now print, with the sanction of the writer, as a
fitting close to the Book of “ A Kambling Man.”
T. D. E.


APPENDIX.
A OF THE * * * FAMILY.
Black winter winds had come, and on their cold
wings borne
The heavy drops, from dark clouds torn,
Came plashing down with sullen sound,
While drifted snow lay piled around.
Anon it changed, and the storm-fiend’s dart,
The piercing hail, chills every heart;
And the moaning wind, as if in grief,
Sighed low, and sobbed a moment brief.
Then comes a roar, a maddened blast,
As bows the stout ship’s towering mast,
And makes the bravest shrink in fear
To see their watery grave so near.
And then that ship, with its crew so brave,
Sinks down and down in the seaman’s grave.
One long wild shriek is on the blast,
“ 0 God, have mercy!”—’tis the last.
******
******
M 2


On such a night we gathered round
A festive board, where jovial sound
Seemed mockery of storm without;
And oft we paused, as if in doubt
Whether or no we had a right
To laugh and jest on such a night.
And as wild and shrill the storm swept round,
Our own in our neighbour’s fright we found ;
So we left the board, and close together
Sat whisp’ring low to one another.
Said one, in youthful spirits bold,
“ ’Tis such a night as ghostly tales are told ;
The weather is the sort they all delight in
To leave their graves and give us all a fright in.
Almost I fancy that some spectral dame
Would choose it, just to visit him whose name
She bore in life; or to appear in view
Of him who wronged her by his vows untrue.
’Tis said that spirits can come back for spite,
And pinch and tease us in the dead of night.”
“Beware, young man, you jest of solemn things.
I know of one round whom Death’s wings
Had closed so closely that his fell embrace
Left on the earth at last no cherished trace ;
Yet he eluded all the watchful care
Of deep sarcophagus. Would I might dare
To tell the fact, that spirits who from earth had fled
Could from the humid land of dead


Return, when by deep love they ’re led;
And hatred, too, can bring them hack, ’tis
said.”
The last who spoke, the oldest of us there,
I see him now —his silvery hair
Combed from his forehead spoke his age,
And a snow-white beard proclaimed the sage.
His eye had all the fire of youth,
And bore the index of a love of truth.
None disbelieved what he avowed —
His word’s sufficient to convince a crowd.
We begged a story which he said he had.
With moistened eyes, and tones so low and sad,
He said the tale was one that very few
Had heard, but that he knew ’twas true.
The family wished it all forgot;
So, though the tale I ’ll tell, the name I T 1 not.
***•»*
We drew more close, and stirred a blaze,
And looked around with nervous gaze.
The ladies shivered closer still,
The weather meanwhile worked its will.
The casements rattled in the blast,
And many a frightened glance was cast.
The thunder rolled, the old house shook,
The doors were banged —while every nook
In that great hall caught up each sound,
And echoed it, while all around,


With leaping pulse and half-caught breath,
Listened with awe to the tale of death.
******
A line old family had dwindled down,
Till a boy and girl were left alone.
All, all from earth had passed away,
But two now lived, and day by day
More closely they were linked together—
The sister and her baby brother.
She was his elder by six years or more,
And loved with love none other bore;
And he was delicate, that dark-eyed youth.
She lived but for him, and in sooth
’Twas often said, “ If one had died
The other soon would reach his side.
An hour they were ne’er apart,
Their world each other’s loving heart;
Their tastes the same, the same books read,
Each followed where the other led.
Their paintings copied from the same,
And each the same pet sought to tame.
They grew together side by side—
Would they had both together died!
But no; the one was taken, the other left,
In this cold world of every hope bereft.
* - * * .« * *
At length a lordly suitor sought her,
A deeper shade of love he taught her;


And soon she gave her hand to one
Who loved her for herself alone.
For though she’d riches at command,
’Twas not for them he claimed her hand.
* * * * * •
******
A brief time passed: again she’s come
To visit at her brother’s home,
And absence only served to render
The love of years a love more tender.
The time sped on, and he, the heir
Of wealth and many an acre fair,
Was ordered for a time to change
The northern air. So they arrange
In Italy he’d remain awhile,
His sister saying, with a smile,
“ Now, Sydney, while you ’re idling there,
Of dark-eyed beauties pray beware.
I should not like a sister from
Amongst the worshippers of Home;
Come back and try to win the smile
Of some fair daughter of our isle.”
They parted: he to Genoa went,
And many a listless hour he spent;
While in his boat he skimmed the waters,
Nor thought he of Italia’s daughters.
And many an hour from night he stole
To list to soft, sad “ Barcarole,”


Yet still no beauty pleased his eye—
He turned from all without a sigh.
I can’t tell how he came at first
To know Francesca, hut she hurst
The veil that o’er his heart had been.
He loved her ere he well had seen,
And passion’s wild tumultuous stream
Made everything a waking dream.
He loved with manhood’s wildest flame,
Yet trembled as he spoke her name;
And every eve, at twilight hour,
He listened to that voice whose power
Enthralled and chained him by the side
Of her he longed to call his bride.
’Tis needless to go on—no day went past
But found him more enamoured than the last;
And oft he prayed that she would name the day,
When as his wife he’d bear her to his home away.
His sister came, and prudence urged
For time; but his mad passion surged
His reason, and amid the wave
Of feeling, prudence found its grave.
Just then a friend of his arrives,
Who saw Francesca, and who strives
With never-tiring patience to supplant
Poor Sydney, and her love to grant
To him instead. His rank was high,
And dazzled false Francesca’s eye.


His sister well foresaw the end:
Francesca fled—and fled with Sydney’s friend.
•,•• » « »
Long Sydney lay by fever tost,
Having of her, the loved, the lost.
His sister did her much loved part
To soothe the bruised, the broken heart;
And when his feeble strength returned,
’Twas sad to witness how he mourned.
For the bitterest drop of all his anguish now
Is to reflect no bridal vow
Or priest had blessed the sinful act, —
This was enough his reason to distract.
******
******
His brother, good Lord Charles Bland,
Was wanted in his native land,
And said “ That change of scene was best
To cure the heart of its unrest.
So, Sydney, start upon a cruise,
It will renovate you and amuse,
And then come home and glad us all
In health and spirits to the hall.”
* * * * * *
**'* * « *
’Twas night, and night in that sweet clime
Is only day wrapt up in darker blue sublime,


When sunlight sinks on ocean’s breast
To kiss, and be by her caressed
A short time, ere he flings away
The purple for the roseate hue of day.
’Twas night, and Sydney and the Lady Bland
Stood musing on the tide-washed strand.
Their thoughts were sad and full of care:
Hers for him, and his the sinful pair.
He was just starting on his lonely way,
And she was leaving, too, at break of day.
His last sad words were, “ Mary, if I die,
I ’ll come and say a last good-bye.
I could not rest in any place
Until I see once more your face,
Up til I tell you how I am,
And if the future is a dream.”
One more embrace, more loving than the last;
One burning kiss, with arms around him cast,
She longed to hold, to bid him stay.
He turned—he’s gone —for ever gone away.
******
******
And months had passed since on that strand
They parted. Poor Lord Charles Bland
Had passed away. He from his horse
Was thrown—a mangled bloody corse,
Was carried to his loving wife, ■
She who had loved him moredhan life.


And when she saw him in his shroud,
She called in frantic tones aloud,
“ My love, my all, come hack once more,
Glad my poor heart—oh, ’tis so sore !
It cannot be that thou art gone,
And left me here, love, all alone—
Open those loving eyes again—
Speak, e’en to say you are in pain,
I would so surely give relief,
Your sufferings I would render brief.
Give me a sign you are not gone for ever,
It cannot be that we, love, now must sever.
I could not bear the yawning grave
Should hide thee from my eyes. Oh, save
Him,, God! I will not with him part.
My God, assist and raise my breaking heart.”
Alas! alas, those eyes are quenched,
That glossy hair in blood is drenched ;
Those eyes, whose glance ne’er met her own
But beamed with loving light that shone -
Deep in her heart, where now its ray
Will bum until the Judgment Day.
For thought will live until the barrier’s riven,
Where re-united they will meet in heaven.
******
* * * * * *. *
It is so wretched to observe the start
Of wild surprise, when first the heart


Takes in its misery, and the eye
Can speak but half its agony —
While yet we ’re scarcely conscious of our loss,
And will not bow as yet to take our cross.
But when the feebly dawning sense
Yet more and more takes in the dense
And black’ning darkness all around,
And wakes to sorrow newly found—
All this is wretched to behold,
And makes the watcher’s heart turn cold.
******
******
Her first attempt at thought or reason
Was of her brother. For a season
She had forgot that near a year
He was away; and now her fear
Was that his absence might be longer,
Her love for him had now grown stronger.
’Tis well she cannot all foresee
The sorrows of her destiny.
A year had passed since, side by side,
They stood and watched the silver tide
That rippled murmuring to their feet,
Soft, sad, and low, in tones so sweet.
’Tis night, and yet she cannot rest,
And morn oft sees her bed unprest;
Her pillow looks so lonely now,
She hates to lay her throbbing brow


Down in the night, for memories came
All linked with his, her husband’s name.
’Twas night,—the curtains were not close, —
She watched the moonlight as it rose,
When a shadow came as on the wall.
She rigid lay, she could not call,
And she heard, in accents soft and mild,
As mother uses to her child :
“ Mary, my sister, hear me now,
I come to fulfil my plighted vow.
In Grecian seas, by tempest tost,
My boat went down. My crew were lost,
And I went down the last of all,
To lie until the Judgment call.
What now I know do you believe—
There is a God, who will relieve
All mankind from their sins who own
The merits of His precious Son.”
“ It cannot be my darling brother,
I who have loved you as a mother.
Just Heaven! I cannot bear to part,
To lose the last. My breaking heart
Has in this world no tie but thee —
It cannot, no it must not be.
’Tis but a dream—you ’re by my bed, —
I will not believe that you are dead.”
“ ’Tis no wild dream, we meet no more;
I told you how I died before.


I only came that you might know
I loved you. Now farewell! I go.”
“ Oh, Sydney, leave me but a token;
I dream not that the tie is broken
That bound us both on earth so long,
It seemed by a love than death more strong.”
She felt upon her arm a touch
Of fingers pressing gently, such
As oft her brother, when in play,
Had used to draw her hand away.
She knew the hand—her heart stood still,
Then wildly heat—she felt a thrill
Of hope that he had come at last,
And half her sorrow now is past.
She cried, “Oh, welcome, Sydney, welcome home!
Thank God at last that you have come!
That I’m not left here quite alone.”
Alas! her voice sunk to a moan ;
She tried to clasp the lingering hand;
She looked to where she saw him stand.
The fingers loosened in their clasp;
She tried to seize them in her grasp;
The form was moving slow away,
“ Farewell,” it sighed, “ I must not stay.”
She looked with horror—strove to call—
When naught she saw against the wall;
Then tears came rolling thick and fast, —
She felt that hope’s for ever past.


So passed the night. The morning shone,
But happiness with hope had gone.
Her last earth tie is cut in twain.
Lightheartedness for her again
Is passed for ever, —nothing now
Could take the shadow from her brow.
Eager we listened, though he ceased to speak,
And none seemed willing for a time to break
The silence that upon us hung,—
Deep interest chained fast every tongue.
Till then our feelings were represt,
Though much we longed to hear the rest:
If any mark, or sign, or token,
Appeared to show her rest was broken
By anything but midnight dreams;
For often busy fancy teems
With sights and sounds in dead of night,
Which vanish with the sunlight bright.
Then, one and all, we cried, “ Tell more,
And say if any mark she bore ? ”
He raised his head and heaved a sigh,
A tear-drop glistened in each eye.
“ Yes, yes,” he said, “ ’tis strange as true,
Next morning there was plain to view
The impress of the dead man’s hand ;
And ever more she wore a band,


To hide it from the curious gaze,
For nothing could that mark erase.
But I had seen it very often,
And saw it on her in her coffin.”
We asked no more; it seemed he taxed
His strength, and that his nerves relaxed.
So we thanked him, and then went to bed;
But sleep from most amongst us fled,
And, when had passed the hours of night,
We heard with horror and affright
That the old man’s spirit back had fled
To God who gave it. He was dead.
* * « « * «
In JVIE/vioßiAjtf.
In memory ! Does this sad word enfold
The only intercourse we now can hold ?
Is this poor line the all that now remains
To breathe affection or to ease its pains ?
Nor husbands’ tears, nor brothers’ tender cares,
Nor all that mothers’ watchfulness prepares ?
Nor yet His efforts, who so well can blend
The skilled physician with the anxious friend.
Could aught avail, the mandate forth was sent,
And God reclaimed the treasure he had lent.


Mysterious spoiler ! Death, who loves to part
The dearest ties that bind the human heart
Amid the varied scenes of earthly woes,
How many long and ask for thy repose ?
The aged, friendless, wearied, toil-oppressed,
Look to the grave, as to a home of rest;
And deeming life a load, or rack’d with pain,
Implore the peace of death, and ask in vain.
These all passed o’er, thy ruthless arrows fly,
And youth and worth and talent prostrate lie.
Oh, wherefore this ? Where’er we look around,
There are that seem but cumberers of the ground.
But hark ! a soft, a whisp’ring sound draws near—
“ A still small voice ” descends upon mine ear ;
“ Say, wouldest thou, like Israel of old,
Offer to God the lean ones of the fold ? ”
Not these befit His altar. God has given
To some below the attributes of Heaven.
He formed them pure, with high expansive mind,
That scarce submits to be to earth confined.
Not only do they shrink from actual vice,
But shrink from contact with its votaries.
And such was she, hut such are not for earth;
For God has called them His before their birth.
Yet, called and chosen, still the destined saint
Partakes of Adam’s universal taint;
And Angels weeping view the coming hour
When Satan’s snares may hold him in their power.
N


But hark! thro’ Heaven, the Saviour’s melting voice
Makes Satan tremble. Heavenly hosts rejoice:
“ Father, preserve him from the ills to come.
Myself will bring him to My glorious home.
Father, I will that those whom Thou hast given
Shall be with Me where now I am, in Heaven.”
He spoke, I was alone, His Spirit showed the way,
And led Thy loved one to eternal day.
July 21th, 1874.
Hope oj4, Hope ever.
Yes, hope is a treasure, why can’t it be yours?
You’ve blessings untold and others in store.
You have health, and the blessings of home all
provided,
And children to love you —ah ! what would you more?
Yet more are you promised by “.Him who can’t lie
“His angel before you to guide in the way,
And bring you in peace to the place He’s prepared,
And strength will be yours, as the length of your day.”
All things He gives largely,—“ He gives as a king,”—
The comforts of earth and the blessings of Heaven,
No good things can He in His love let you want,
The former and latter rain freely are given.


And if for a time in the desert you wander,
He T 1 speak such soft words in His “ comforting truth,”
You’ll see the “door open of Achor’s fair valley,”
And you T 1 sing as you did in the days of your youth.
And if more yet is needed of comfort on earth,
Why ask of your God, for He says, “ As I live,”
(And He knows all our wants as a fond father does),
“No good thing I’ll hold from those who believe.”
N. C. DE SAINT GEORGE.
1874 — 1875-
’Twas midnight, and darkness hung over the plain,
The cold earth was cheerless and drear,
A hollow blast swept over mountain and main,
’Twas the sigh of the dying old year.
Around him the spirits, who during his reign
Had succumbed to relentless death,
Now hover, and add to the old year’s pain,
With the touch of their ice-cold breath.
Then slowly emerging from under a cloud,
The moon deigns at length to appear.
What makes the pale beauty desert her dark shroud ?
’Tis to welcome the forthcoming year.
K 2


In silence she comes, like a dream of the night,
Though unseen and unheeded, glides on;
Thus time passeth by, and we heed not its flight
Till life’s precious moments are gone.
But, oh! who, looking back to the years that are past,
Can refrain from the penitent’s tear ?
Then, Christians arise, and let sin from us cast,
And begin a new life with the year.
For T. D. E. from N. G. St. G.
The Adieu, 1875.
The midnight hour has struck,
The dying year has fled;
From time unto eternity
The fleeting hours have sped.
A leaf is turned within
Our book of life below;
The records of our deeds is there
Inscribed, for weal or woe.
What would not many give
The dead year to regain—
One wasted hour to recall?
They long, but long in vain.


Time, with relentless hand,
Has turned his fatal glass.
Swiftly the sands of life run down,
The precious moments pass.
Now memory recalls
The thoughts of vanished years,
The long-gone time comes back again,
With all its hopes and fears.
The aged tell once more
The tales of childhood’s days,
While joy and hope, before the young,
Their brightest pictures raise.
And if with tears we see
The “ old year ” bid adieu,
With cheerful hearts and happy smiles
We ’ll welcome in the “ new.”
We pray each one of us
May be from sin kept free,
And strive by faith on earth to gain
A blest eternity.


The Drowned Q^ave*
The scene was most beautiful, and my glad soul
longed
For solitude, to complete the charms that thronged
Over my heart of woodland scene, whose deep’ning
shadow lies
Mirror’d faithful in the bosom of the lake and change
defies.
The varied hue of woodland bower and op’ning glade,
Where leaves, chameleon like, are changeful ere they
fade,
And many a fragrant flower bends down its pretty
head
To kiss and scent the water over which I onward
sped.
And I almost felt now tempted, like the pearl-divers
brave,
To plunge and find new beauties beneath the placid
wave.
* This is one of the places shown and told of at the Lakes of
Killamey. Carty was drowned while saving a lady who was in a
boat which was upset. She was saved, but Carty was lost. I thought
the story so pretty —of “not ruffling the water o’er the grave,”
that I write it for you, loving the Irish as you do. If you like them
and the story, tant mieux —if not, why, tant pis I
January 25th, 1876.


The day was fine, the water calm, brightly shone the sun;
Selfish, I longed to hold the witching scene my own.
And then I thought that I should like to be
Where none would follow or my deep joy see.
“ Is there no spot,” impatient then I ask,
“ Where unmolested I can idly bask,
In silence lone, amid some lovely scene
Of limpid water and the woodside green ? ”
“Oh ! yes,” said one, “ we ’ll take you to the grave
Of poor Tim Carty, who lies ’neath the wave,
Where, while she lived, his Cohen dhas, poor Kathleen,
came to weep,
And maybe thry to waken from sad and lonesome
sleep.
But soon she droop’d, an’ then she died; but we -come
often yet
To see where our old comrade lies—for Tim we can’t
forget.
An’ we think he feels less lonesome to hear us talk
awhile,
An’ know he’s not forgotten.” (I could not, dare not,
smile.)
Onward we go; the men beguiled the way
With many a biting jest and many a witty say;
And one old man, too, there had such a pleasing store
Of what I would call “ lies,” others “ legendary lore,”
Of the Chief O’Donougho, upon his milk-white steed,
Rising from the lake, though long he has been dead.,


And thrice happy he who sees the famous chieftain
riding;
For to him no fear of ills or any woe betiding
Shall mar his sleeping hours, or meet him on his waking,
Who sees the fam’d one rise, and the course that he is
taking.”
And I had dreams of days long past and gone,
When on that lake the painted galleys shone
Ere yet the island bowed beneath the Saxon yoke,
Or cold mistrust men’s fellest passions woke;
Of beauty, who enraptur’d listened to her lover true,
While sailing in soft dalliance with him o’er the
waters blue.
Swiftly we sped, the stalwart rowers bent
Over the oars; and often as they went
They sung, in measured cadence to the oars,
The wild, sad songs each Irish heart adores.
And many a gleesome, boist’rous laugh they raised,
Whene’er their strength of muscle or their songs I
praised,
Then all at once the strain was altered,
And rough deep voices strangely faltered;
And waking from my dreamy state I saw
Each eye cast down, it seemed to me in awe;
Whilst idly lean’d each arm and oar,
Near a jutting rock which rose before,
Fretting each tiny wave that broke
Against its base, and sadly woke


Weird echoes in the lonely space,
Like spirits in a haunted place.
We floated gently o’er the spot —
I scarce knew if we moved or not —
And then they told me “ There, beneath the wave,
Lay poor Tim Carty in his watery grave.
And we cannot ruffle the water deep
Where he, poor fellow, lies asleep”
I have often seen a marble tomb
Begirt with heraldry and gloom,
Where widow wept her anguish’d tear,
While calling to ears that cannot hear.
And I’ve seen the kingly dead laid down
In all the pomp that attends a crown —
And I’ve seen the trappings of the brave
Spread o’er their coffin and o’er their grave.
But I never gave a tear or sigh
As I saw them hid from human eye.
But to this lone grave, prepar’d by angel’s hand
At His command who made the sea and land,
I gave a tear, as sadly then I gazed around,
And thought no grander tomb could anywhere be found
So beauteous, or so peaceful, as the clear, and placid
wave
Which swept me past for ever from “poor Tim
Carty’s grave.”


Bundoran.
Beauteous is the ocean, with its wild and wayward
tide,
Bolling on for ever in such grand and boundless
pride.
Chameleon-like its tints, the rainbow’s varied dyes—
Now white as chastened arctic snow, now with th’
emerald vies;
Changing then a moment, it steals the azure hue,
Eeflected in its bosom from a sky of heavenly
blue,
Like a child in placid sleep, when its waves have
sunk to rest,
Or like a silver mirror, so polished is its breast.
And its voice is low and tender, as in whispers now it
says,
“ The water-pipes with joyful noise ” proclaim their
Maker’s praise.
Like a giant when refreshed he rises up from sleep,
The ocean’s crested billows (those playthings of the
deep) ■
Bear their head in majesty, heaving upward to the
sky,
And in its pride and power, throws its feathered arms
on high.


No sweet lullaby it sings—now its voice’s a sullen
moan,
Breaking on the rocks above, like a prison’d spirit’s
groan.
In all we see, in all we hear, in every sight and
sound,
We must confess the hand of God —His presence all
around.
Tho’ ’tis not now “a still small voice” rebuking
every fear,
Yet, “as the waves lift up their voice,” we feel that
God is here.
Majestic are the rocks, frowning darkly and severe,
On which I gazed in childhood’s years, in thought-
fulness and fear.
“ For ever sure they stand,” those pillars of the deep,
Coeval with the flood they are, rugged, bare, and steep;
For He who holds the wind in the hollow of His
hand,
Set them to be the ocean’s bound—they’re fixed at
His command;
And fiercest wind, or sea’s wild rage, they do and
shall defy,
To give to God the praise He owns, His power to
glorify.
I see and hear all this as I write, and I write from tho sight and
sound, but badly from my headache 1
N. ST. G.


Voiced of the Kiqht.
“ THE MIND NEVEE SLEEPS —IT SPEAKS IN THE
SILENT HOLES OF NIGHT.”
What “ still small voices ” speak to us
At midnight’s silent hour,
When nature’s self is hush’d to rest
And thought asserts her pow’r.
Then, magic-like, the mem’ry wakes,
Clearing the mists of years,
And brings us back the scenes of youth,
Seen dim amid our tears.
The voices of the lov’d, the lost,
Steal then upon our ear,
Seeming to say once more to us,
“ Oh ! dry the starting tear.”
The faces of the long since dead
Again appear to sight;
Meteor like, they pass along
Mid calm and holy light.
They come and blessed commune hold,
As oft they did before,
And cheating fancy almost says,
“ They ’ll never leave us more.”


So life-like does it all appear,
The mind so paints again;
Scenes, conversations, each so true—
Thought lives without its pain.
The tear of sorrow is repress’d
(And gladness fills the heart)
To gush with threefold violence,
When from us they depart.
And conscience to us speaks at night,
Proclaims with trumpet tongue
The deeds which we have done,
• The tears which we have wrung.
For though the tones are low and sad,
They then seem very clear,
Bidding us “ retrieve the past,
Eternity is near.”
For though our fellow-man may not
Know of the deeds we’ve done.
To God’s all-seeing eye they are
Clear as the noon-day’s sun.
God’s messengers, too, stand and talk
To us in silent' night,
And raise our hearts in confidence,
To heavenly places bright.


Cool hands they lay upon our brow
(When hot and damp with fear),
And bid us “ lay aside our doubts,
For God Himself is near.”
They smooth our weary pillow then,
And soothe our troubled breast;
And tell us of the time when we
With Christ shall calmly rest.
Friday Evening, January 27th, 1876.
I send the foregoing to you, as I feel you have the best right to
them, as your last conversation gave rise to the ideas. I have not
spoken of “good deeds." Ah! no—they are spoken softly by angels,
and written by the same Hand which will place the star of mercy
and charity in the crown —one day yours.
N. C. ST. G.
The Dew ojy the Violet.
I SAW a pretty wood flow’r gleaming,
Soft nestling ’mid green leaves, and seeming
Asleep, or in deep thought was dreaming,
As I walked along a lane.
I stood a moment at her peeping,
To see if she were sleeping;
But, no! her eye was wet, like weeping,
In that sweet, shady lane.


I saw the pearly tear-drop lying,
Then hasten’d towards her, sadly sighing,
To think her ill, perhaps, or dying
So lonely in that verdant lane.
Hers was an eye of heavenly hue,
Beauteous in its deep-dyed blue.
I-said, “ Sweet flow’r, pray tell me true,
Why weep you in this lovely lane ? ”
“ Ah, no !” she said, “ I am not weeping;
But kindly dews around are steeping
Each thing, in hope of longer keeping
Alive to beautify this lane.
“ Kind Nature, taught by Him who made us
Bloom on earth, and gracious bade us
Charm the eye, and made the leaves to shade us,
Sends dew to bathe the flow’ry train.
“ And we faithful do God’s bidding well,
As we glad the eye and sweetly smell,
For He bids us loudly, truly tell
His glory in our sweetest strain.
“ A lesson, too, He bids us teach thee :
Frail mortal, let it rightly reach thee,
That He who made both thee and me
Will reckon at the last with all.


“ God made all things in heaven above;
The waters deep show forth His love,
The teeming earth each powerful prove
That an Almighty hand made all.”
Subdued, I thanked the pretty flower,
And picked it, not to keep an hour—
But evermore—that its sweet power
Might teach humility and love.
April 26 th, 1876.
The Firpt
Fair harbinger of summer hours,
Fruits of April’s balmy showers,
We hail thy presence, sweetest gem,
Of Flora’s pure chaste diadem,
, Beauteous child of May !
Snowy buds of hope, thou seemest
Like scented stars, around thou gleamest
O’er each green bank and hawthorn dell.
Where tiny fairies love to dwell,
Beauteous child of May !
Mayest thou prove a prophet true,
Shedding Hope—as morning dew


Falls on flowers, when dropping low,
Imparting life and richer glow,
Beauteous child of May!
To every heart bowed down by care
Speak hope! and dry the starting tear;
Bid each remember God is nigh,
To hear the faintest prayer or sigh,
Beauteous, fragrant child of May!
May 23rd, 1876.
i(INE£, UPOft A LAFJQE FULL
of Flower.
Modest of form, and fair in the extreme,
Whose pure pale blossoms in the sunlight gleam,
With rapturous glee we hail thy foliage gay,
Thou fairest of spring of the breath of May.
Thy balmy sweetness, and thy variegated hue,
Thy clust’ring buds, when spangled o’er with dew,
Gladden the eye and cheer the drooping heart,
And seem to bid our sorrows all depart.
Thou art an emblem of our hopes and fears,
Now filled with gladness, and now dimm’d with
tears.
o


How like thee when our hopes are highest raised
By vain fancies, or by flatterers praised.
Earthly projects for a time shine fair,
Sparkling with light, as with some jewel rare;
Then weird uncertainty will take its place,
And all the bright appearances efface.
Blossoms redolent of scent, like guides, appear,
Who upward point us, as if nothing here
Were certain, in this weary world below,
But disappointed hopes, or disappointing woe.
And still more emblematic thou,
With external beauty on each clust’ring bough,
With fragrant flow’rs to enrich the breeze of mom,
And yet, behind those flowers, there lurks a rankling
thorn.
And so it is with friends we often meet:
Their smiles of welcome in our sunshine greet;
But in adversity, or sorrow’s trying hour,
Their friendship is tht thorn behind the flower.
Sweet hopes which never more may fade away,
Friends who in friendship can no more decay,
Are only found in realms of endless bliss
In Heaven, where all is perfect happiness.
May 29 th, 1876.


The sojyq of the Bohemiajsi.
I love my wild Bohemian life,
’Tis free from worldly care and strife.
I pick the flowers where’er I roam,
And find a friend in every home.
I love each thing that’s fresh and free,
For they are types of life in me.
I love my gay Bohemian life,
For, free from sorrow, care, and strife,
Albeit on the mossy banks,
I eat my frugal meal with thanks;
Where sounds I hear, and sights I see,’
Are types of freedom’s life in me.
I love the verdant shady nook,
Where winding steals the pebbly brook,
Free as the wind above it blowing,
All heedless whither it is going;
And gliding on so merrily.
It seems a type of life in me.
I love the flowers of every hue—
Crimson, white, or azure blue;
Th’ humbly nestling on the ground,
While shedding perfume all around.
Unconscious of the ills that be,
Most happy types they are of me.
o 2


I love the little bird and bee,
Each flitting by so joyously;
Sporting in the summer air,
Enjoying all that’s sweet and fair.
In the flower, the bird, and bee,
You will find true types of me.
I love to watch the ebb and flow
Of tiny waves that come and go,
From the ocean far and wide,
In the never-ceasing tide.
In thy freedom, boundless sea,
Is a type of life in me.
I love to see the glorious sun
Rise gloriously bis course to run;
To feel bis warmth, and in bis might
To know the Hand who formed bis light,
To know Sis band is caring me.
The sun’s a type of life in me.
I love to watch the moonbeams play
Over the sea and land away;
Now peeping into fairy dells,
Now glinting down on coral cells,
In their wanderings fitfully.
The moonbeam is a type of me.
But ah! in each thing I have named,
End and Death are both engrained:


Bird and bee and flower must die,
Brook and sea alike be dry.
Moonbeams cease, no night shall be
When we the face of God shall see.
No more the sun shall rise or set.
Ah! let us never, then, forget
In fulness we shall shine within
The presence of our God, from sin
And sorrow parting. Care—
Aye, all that can the soul ensnare —
Shall end, as we shall gathered be
To God for all Eternity.
ISHMAEL.
I was called “ a heartless Bohemian ” by a person the other day,
so I send you my song. Excuse it.
June 2ith, 1876.


INDEX.
A.
PAGE
ABSTRACT OP VOYAGE 96
ACROSTICS 84, 107, 108
ADIEU, THE 19
ADIEU, THE, 1875 180
ADIEU TO FAIR WEATHER 52
ADIEU TO THE YEAR 86
ANTICIPATION .' 101
AUSTRALIA, LAND OP . . . . . .77
B.
BOHEMIAN, SONG OF THE ... . . .195
BRIGHT STAR OF MEMORY 104
BUNDORAN 186
C.
CALM, THE . . 69
CAPE FLY-AWAY 73


PAGE
CAPE OP GOOD HOPE 57
CAPE PIGEON, THE ...... 64
CHILD’S LAMENT, THE . / . . . .113
CHRISTENING DAY, TO MY INFANT SON, ON HIS 105
CHRISTMAS PETITION, A HUMBLE . . .118
'CLONMEL,’ LOSS OF THE . . . . . 137
CLUBS . . . . . . . . .- 133
CONCLUSION 93
D.
DAYBREAK . . . . . . . .21
“DAY’S DECLINING” (SONG). . . . .39
DEAREST TARPUS 117
DEATH RIDES ON EACH BREEZE . . . 61
DECEPTIONS .31
DEMOCRACY 110
DEPARTURE .13
DESCENT, TABLE OF 123
DEW ON THE VIOLET 190
DREAM, A 22
DROWNED FISHERMAN’S GRAVE, THE . , 182


E.
PAGE
ECLIPSE, THE 50
EVERY-DAY OF LIFE, THE 84
' EWEEETTA,’ THE .9
F.
FAITH, HOPE, AND CHARITY . . . .108
FAMILY BIRTHDAYS, MEMO. OF . . . .125
FIRST ALBATROSS SEEN 53
FIRST MAY-BUDS, THE 192
FIRST SATURDAY NIGHT, THE .... 18-
FISH SEEN 33
FRENZIED MIND, THE . .... 88
G.
GOOD NIGHT, OLD ENGLAND! . . . .89
H.
HIGH ONN 100
HOPE ON, HOPE EVER 178
HOPE, WHAT IS HOPE? 87


PAGE
HOUE OF PASTING, THE .... 78
HUMBLE CHRISTMAS PETITION, A . . .118
I.
“I DON’T OAEE WHETHEE I PLEASE YOU OE
NOT” .115
I LOVE TO SEE A SHIP AT SEA (SONG) . . 56
IN MEMOEIAM 176
INFANT SON, TO MY, ON HIS CHISTENING DAY 105
L.
LEGEND OP THE ** * FAMILY . ’ . . .163
LAND OP OUE FATHEES . . . , .91
LIZZIE, SONG FOE . 112
M.
MADOEIE, OUE LITTLE DOG . . . .11l
MAN OVEEBOAED, A . ... .61
MAY-TEEE FULL OF FLOWEE . . . .193
MIND AND BODY 82
MIND AND WEATHEE 71
MOON, THE 47


PAGE
MUSTER THE CREW .15
MY PORTRAIT OP MY SON 102
N.
NORTH STAR, THE 36
NOVEMBER IS PAST 84
O.
OCEAN, TO THE . 24
ODE TO SPRING 99
P.
PASSING THE LINE 37
PILOT LEAVING, THE 15
Q.
QUESTION, A 87
R.
REPLY, A 79
S.
SACRAMENT, AN ACROSTIC 108
ST. ANTHONY, ISLAND OF . . . . .28
ST. PAUL’S ISLAND .73


PAGE
SATURDAY NIGHT AT SEA 18
SHARP, THOMAS, ESQ., MEMOIR OP . . .143
, ACCOUNT OF AN ANCIENT GOLD RING 152
, LINES “TO MY DAUGHTER ON HER
WEDDING DAY” 156
, LINES “TO MARTHA” . . . .159
SILVER ORB LUNA, THE 49
SONG OP THE BOHEMIAN, THE . ... . 195
SONG FOR LIZZIE . . . . ... 112
SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE 43
SOUTHERN STARS 43
STORM, THE .65
STORMY PETREL, THE 68
SUNDAY, ACROSTICS ON ... 84,107
SUNDAY AT SEA ....... 26
SUNRISE AT SEA 23
SUNSET AT SEA 38
T.
TIME, TO . . . . . . . . .109
TIME WAS WHEN WE WERE GAY (SONG)" . 103
TWINKLING STARS , . . . . . 114


v.
PAGE
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND .76
VARIABLES . .36
VOICES OF THE NIGHT 186
W.
WANDERINGS AND CAREER, MY . . . . 127
WATCH, THE 17
"WE MUST GET UNDER WEIGH” . . . 14
WHALES SEEN 45
WHAT IS TIME? . . .. , . . ,86
“WHY” I ADDED "E” TO THE FINAL
SYLLABLE OF MY NAME . . , .126
WIFE, TO MY . . . . . . . .80
WIND, THE 93
1874-1875 . 179


LONDON:
FEINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS,
STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS.


