







RANDOM ROT.
A JOURNAL
OF
THREE YEARS' WANDERINGS ABOUT
THE WORLD.
BY
JAMES EDGE PARTINGTON.
“Why, then, the world’s mine oyster,
Which I with ‘pen' will open.”
[ FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION ONLY.]
ALTRINCHAM:
PRINTED AT THE GUARDIAN OFFICE.
1883.




PREFACE.
1 have been absent from England for nearly three years,
and to most of my friends that time in my life is a
blank. With the idea of filling in that blank, I have
printed my Journal, trusting that while it affords them
amusement, they may benefit, as I have done, by some of
the information gathered in distant parts of the world.
I take this opportunity of thanking friends that I have
made in my wanderings, for the kindness and hospitality
which have made those wanderings so thoroughly enjoyable ;
and to them alone I dedicate these pages.
16, Pembridge Square,
London.




RANDOM ROT:
A JOURNAL OF THREE YEARS’ WANDERINGS
ABOUT THE WORLD.
CHAPTER I.
Southward Ho ! —A Dilemma—Outward Bound—Farewells —Settling Down—
“A Life on the Ocean Wave”—Mai de Mer with a Vengeance—
<e Cockles ” to the Rescue —Sea Legs at Last—Relief —Amusements on
Board—Bless the Babies—Strictly Nautical —In the Tropics—An Alarm—
“All’s Well That Ends Well”—Our Noble Selves—The Southern Cross—
Cape Verde—Funeral at Sea—Perspiration and Desperation —Ministering
Angels—The Doctor, a Contrast —A Narrow Escape—Father Neptune’s
Pranks—Right Once More —A Scotch Divine—A Night at Sea—The
Ship’s Barometer—A Big Growl from the Steerage—At the Antipodes.
MALL things lead to large results —so it was in my
RfegSl case. One night, when dining with a great friend
I’SBhi of mine, Dr. R ,it was proposed that, as
neither of us had ever seen “ Jamrach’s,” we
should go down together the following day to the East
end of London, to pay him a visit, and see his wild beasts
and other curios. It so happened that on our way there
we passed along the docks, and the doctor, after explaining
to his little boy, who had come with us, that it was
there Captain G ’s vessel sometimes lay, turned to
me and said, “ Now, there’s a chance for you, if you
ever want to go to Australia! Captain G- commands
the ‘ Kent,’ one of Money Wigram’s line of steamers run-
ning to Melbourne.” I took little notice of this at the time,
as I had then an idea in my mind of going out to Canada
and the States in the autumn ; but certainly, within a week,
I asked myself the question, “Why should I not go to Aus-
tralia ?” And so it comes about that lam at present on board
the “Kent” bound for Melbourne. Dr. R had intro-
duced me to Captain G , and he being a capital fellow, I
finally decided to go, and to go, too, within a month. There
B


was no time to be wasted. I had a good deal to get ready, as
in all probability I should be away nearly two years, and
had many friends to say good-bye to. Of course, the fact
of Captain G commanding the “ Kent ” had been my
primary reason for going to Australia, so you can imagine
my disappointment when, within a few days of sailing, hear-
ing that he had been taken ill and was not going for this
voyage, but that the “ Kent ” would be commanded by
Captain H , who had only just arrived in the “ Somer-
setshire” from Australia. I had also been led to suppose
that I should have a cabin to myself, and had for that very
reason taken one of the smaller ones ; but on going down to
the ship before starting, I found that another passenger had
been booked to share the cabin with me. I could not stand
two in so small a space, so I returned to the office to change
my berth. I here learned that I had been christened “ Chief
Cabin Partington,” from the fact that there were already four
others of the same name as myself going.
The “ Kent ” is one of the Money Wigram and Son’s line
of Australian steamers, built in 1876, barque rigged, auxiliary
screw, 1,662 tons register and 2,304 burden, fitted with two
vertical compound engines of 300 h.p., capable of working
up to 1,500 h.p., 300 feet in length, and in beam, with
114 feet of poop. Captain Holt, commander; Noke, chief
officer; Atkinson, 2nd officer; Hatherell, 3rd officer; Nash,
4th officer; Profit, chief engineer; Dr. Govett, surgeon;
Hill, chief steward and purser; Parry, chief cabin steward ;
Midshipmen Bentley, Foster, Waterer and Holt; three
engineers, Chips the carpenter, who, with A.B.’s, make
up a total of 94.
10 th May, 1879. —Outward bound. Having sent all my lug-
gage down to the ship before she left the dock on Wednes-
day, there was nothing but a few little things, forgotten
until the last moment, for me to take down to Gravesend
where the “ Kent ” was lying. I had taken my mother
and sisters down to see the ship, and my quarters, when I
took my luggage, as there is nothing I hate so much as
sorrowful farewells in public, so to-day, having said good-
bye to them all “ at home,” I went down to Fenchurch-street
by the underground, where some friends met me, and went
on to Tilbury and so on board. They, however, only
remained with me a short time, and as we were advertised to
sail at 12, they said “ good-bye ” and left at about 11.30 to


catch their train back to town. Another friend had promised
to come down and see me off; but, instead of himself,
came a telegram, saying it was the servant’s fault that he
could not come, as they had forgotten to call him. We
did not leave our moorings until 3.35, when I was
very sorry to find that the only two nice-looking girls on
board, and with whom I had got into conversation, were
not going with us, for they came up to wish me a pleasant
voyage. It was bitterly cold going down the river, and
everybody walked the deck wrapped up in furs and
great coats. Before sunset we rounded the North Foreland,
which I so well remember seeing some years ago on my
way from London to Cork. Before turning in for the
night we saw the lights of Hastings.
11 th May. —To-day was wretchedly cold, with occasional
showers of rain, which kept the decks in a nasty damp
state. The day was spent principally in getting things
straight. Fortunately, my cabin companion had not joined
at Gravesend, so I got all my things well settled before
turning in, which I had to do earlier than I intended,
■owing to a nasty sea getting up.
12 th May. —We arrived in Plymouth at 12.30 A.M., and
anchored just within the breakwater. The morning was
most lovely, and the first time this year that it could
possibly be called hot. Soon after breakfast we got up a
party, and went ashore to post letters and make our last
purchases. The ship was advertised to sail at noon, so
Iby that time we had to be on board, although she did not
finally get under weigh until after three. We had a most
fortunate start with a fair wind, and soon after leaving
sighted Eddystone Lighthouse. Eddystone Lighthouse was
built first of wood by a Mr. Winstanley, who boasted of
the strength of its structure by many inscriptions, and
calling out as he ascended it, “ Blow, ye winds; rise, 0
ocean; break forth, ye elements, and try my handiwork,”
which they did and swallowed up both. The next one,
built by a Mr. Jfogard, was destroyed by fire. Smeaton
was successful,/and his lighthouse has defied the war
of elements, arid shed forth its warning rays for upwards
of a century, / Although the old lighthouse is as sound as
when first erected in 1759, the gradual undermining of
the rock has rendered the site insecure. [The new light-
house has been built from designs by Mr. Douglass, a
3


man of experience, and is somewhat different from.
Smeaton’s design. The tower rises 160 feet above the level
of the sea, the lantern being placed at an elevation of 130
feet instead of 72 feet, as in the old structure. Its range-
has thereby been increased from 14 to nautical miles.
The light is also more powerful. The two lamps have an
illumination equal to 722 candles. The new lighthouse is.
constructed entirely of granite, of which 4,668 tons have
been used, as against 988 required by Smeaton. It took,
four years to build, and was opened by the Duke of Edin-
burgh on May 25th, 1882.] As we went out of harbour
Mount Edgecumbe looked lovely. My cabin companion
joined here; he turned out to be an English clergyman and.
an uncommonly nice man, but rather big.
May. —-In the morning we passed a homeward-bound
P. and 0., one of the British and Indian Steam Navigation
Co.’s steamers, and one of the return troopships from the
Cape, the “ Serapis ”we believe. Later on in the day, we.
passed a fruit ship from Lisbon, which, owing to the light-
ness of its cargo and a heavy head sea, was pitching,
tremendously. We signalled her, but she was a long time
in replying, and the reason given by one of the officers to a
little girl on board was that the captain was using her flag,
as a sheet.
14 th May. —l am now very bad indeed with sea-sickness.
We have a heavy sea on and a light cargo. She rolls tremen-
dously, but fortunately for me, one of my fellow-passengers,
has taken me under his care, and came into my cabin
this afternoon and insisted on my getting up, dressing me
himself while I lay in my bunk, then washing my hands and
face for me, and taking me on deck, walking me up and down
for some time. He then put me to bed again, and finally
dosed me, coming into my cabin with the words, “lam sorry
I cannot get you oysters, but I have ‘ Cockles ’ for you.” He
also gave me some specific of his own, which tasted very
strongly of sal-volatile. While on deck, we saw several
bottle-nose whales playing round the ship.
isth May. —l am thankful to say I have at last got over
my troubles of sea-sickness, and now have got my sea-legs.
The day has been most lovely, and has passed very plea-
santly. I will leave the description of my fellow-passengers
until I know more about them, but so far I have made the
acquaintance of several, including the only unmarried lady
4


on board, Miss W . We have all now our proper
places assigned to us at table. Mine is next to the chief
engineer, who is an uncommonly amusing man. To-night,
upon my next-door neighbour being asked what he would
'take, he innocently replied, “ Show me the hill of lading,”
which brought down the roof of the cabin, rather appro-
priate, too, considering the hungry state we were all in and
the solidity of the viands.
16th May. —To-day has been very hot. The principal
has been a raffle for a model sailing ship, and
also a sweep on the ship’s running for the day. Stormy
petrels have made their appearance, and a few turtles were
seen to float past the ship. We are now almost abreast of
‘Gibraltar, but of course far out of sight of land. The day
before yesterday we just sighted Cape Finisterre. I am
thankful to say the awnings have been bent to-night, so to-
morrow we shall be saved the trouble of wandering about
•after shelter. Skipping is our principal exercise, as we have
-any quantity of children on board, and it is one of their
amusements teaching several of us the art. The thermo-
meter to-day has been 103 in the sun.
i.'jth May. —Up to the present our cabin, which, I am sorry
to say, is far astern and also opposite the companion, has
been a perfect pandemonium. The screw is bad enough,
and the continual clatter of people going up and down the
•companion ; but the worst of all is that the steering appara-
tus is out of gear, and makes an infernal din. Then, too,
there are several children and two or three babies, who
join their voices in the general hubbub. Last night we really
slept comfortably. My cabin companion is an uncommonly
nice fellow, full of dry humour, and well stocked with amus-
ing anecdotes. We passed Madeira during the night, I am
sorry to say, as I looked forward to having a glimpse of it.
We dined to-day for the first time without fiddles on the
table, the sea having gone down considerably. The wind, I
don’t believe, has varied a point since leaving Plymouth, so
we have carried a considerable amount of canvas. We are
'Steering S.S-W., and have been doing so now for three days.
The second-class passengers have considerably more fun
than we have, for they sing away nearly all the evening;
at all events they amuse us, and perhaps enliven us a
ilittle, as the evenings are very long, the sun setting before
■seven.
5


iß th May, —l am fearfully disappointed at missing seeing
both Teneriffe and the Canary Islands, owing to the haze.
There is only 30 miles between the Great Canary and
another of the group, and we passed between, so had the day
been clear we must have bad a grand view. This morning
there was service in the saloon, which the Captain read, as
Mr. C begged to be excused. A Presbyterian minister
delivered, as he called it, an address. I contented myself by
listening through the skylights, as the saloon was too
crowded and consequently very hot. In the afternoon we
read and slept. To-day I saw, for the first time, a nautilus,,
a beautiful specimen, with all his feelers spread. They
are also called Portuguese men-of-war. They look most
lovely, sailing on the top of the water and glittering in the
sunshine. An appropriate passage in Mark Twain’s.
“ Innocents at Home ” was shown to me this afternoon
by Miss , who decidedly scored a point by it. It
runs: —“ If you are of any account stay at home and
make your way by faithful diligence; but if you are of
no account, go away from home, and then you will have•
to work, whether you want to or not; thus you become
a blessing to your friends by ceasing to be a nuisance
to them —if the people you go amongst suffer by the
operation.” (Loud laughter.) I sincerely hope lam doing
the former —but not the latter. This evening six or seven
of us got together and commenced singing.
19 th May. —lt was a lovely morning, so I was up earlier
than usual, and enjoyed a thorough romp with the children
before breakfast. We noticed quantities of skipjacks.
leaping alongside the vessel. A canary, too, has perched
in the rigging, much to the amusement of the boys on.
board, who have spent half the morning in trying to
catch it. They also amused themselves by trying to catch
the petrels by trailing cotton at the stern, in the hope that
the poor little things might get entangled. The sea is.
now almost calm, with very little wind, and the morning
has been spent by the sailors in unbending the principal
sails and stowing them away. There is no chance of
anything but light breezes for the next few weeks, as we-
ave now in the tropics. I was amused to see that they have
got the steerage passengers to work to assist the sailors.
Land was sighted just before lunch, away in the distance,,
and all glasses were brought to bear on it. While playing.
6


a rubber after lunch in the saloon, Mr. N came down
to tell us we were running quite close to land; and on
coming on deck found we were within two miles of it. It
was a rock bound-coast, with almost perpendicular cliffs, the
Great Desert of Sahara stretching away behind. In the
rocks we noticed some marvellous natural arches, one of
which we passed close enough for me to get a sketch.
In the days of sailing vessels, there lived near here a large
colony of natives, who supported themselves entirely on
plunder obtained from the wrecks. Times are, fortun-
ately, bad with them now. We were all dozing on deck,
having exhausted ourselves with the extra exertion of
sight-seeing, when we heard the Captain sing out, “ Helm
hard a-port ” —“Lower the jib : engines full steam astern !”
You can imagine how we all sprang from our seats to see
what was the matter; and those who happened to be below
rushed up on deck at hearing the signal gong, and the
engines suddenly stop. We were almost on the top of an
enormous reef, which could be plainly seen right ahead by
means of the breakers, for there was now a heavy roll on,
causing a few to feel squeamish again.* It was an exciting
scene to see this huge ship, suddenly brought, as it were, to a
standstill, rising silently on the huge rollers, and answering
magnificently to her helm. There is no doubt we are a
good deal nearer land than is the usual custom; but the
Captain has taken advantage of the lovely weather to get as
near to the coast as possible, in order to have a look at it,
and notice if there were any possible places for beaching a
ship in case of fire ;f but I must say it was a great deal too
near to be pleasant. One or two of the passengers, the
minister in particular, were really frightened, and I doubt
their sleeping at all comfortably to-night, as we are still close
to land, and expect to pass Cape Blanco at about 12 o’clock.
Talking about sleeping comfortably, I doubt whether we
shall, as Mr. C discovered and killed a colony of heavy
artillerymen in our cabin to-day. He himself has suffered
from their attacks; as yet I have escaped. lam at present
* This reef was not marked in the charts, and only mentioned in the books
as “There is a reef somewhere,” &c., and the reason it was not sighted sooner
was that the sun was ahead of us, causing a fearful glare on the water.
tAt least, that is what he says,but I fancy the desire to make a quick passage
was a good deal to do with it.
7


almost frightened to look at myself in a glass, having
allowed my beard to grow, and it has now got in its worst
stage of bristlehood.
20 th May. —Last night the Captain proposed, if I wanted
exercise, I should get the chief engineer to give me some coal
trimming; but I managed better than that, for on coming on
deck at six this morning, the chief officer asked me to assist
him in scrubbing the benches with sandstone. I may here
mention that in no ship before have I ever seen officers of
the ship, the captain, of course, excepted, work like those on
board this vessel do. After the scrubbing was done, the
hardest part began—passing buckets to sluice the deck
after the holystoning, and by the time it was over I had
reduced myself a couple of pounds. Of course this sort of
work does not increase one’s appetite for breakfast! In
the henroost this morning there was a dead fowl, just too
late to have his life saved by the butcher. He went over-
board, I am thankful to say; but I always avoid fowl, and
especially in curries. The best thing on the table at present
is the beef, which really almost melts in one’s mouth, as we
have not had any weather hot enough yet to affect it, and
then again it is all hung in ice-houses.
Perhaps now it would be as well to describe a few of the
passengers and officers of the ship. Captain H is indeed
a captain to be proud ot. He is over six feet, broad in pro-
portion, and a particularly nice fellow. The chief officer,
Mr. N , follows in the captain’s footsteps with regard to
size, and is a capital officer, and so are all the re st P ,
the steward, must not be forgotten, being almost the most
important man on board —certainly, as regards one’s com-
fort, and before starting I had been strongly recommended
to place myself under his tender care for the voyage. Dur-
ing the few days I was on my back with mol de mer he was
kindness itself, and ever since has looked upon me with a
kindly eye, bringing me coffee to my bunk at six and a cup
of tea at five in the afternoon. Then there is my dinner
steward, who does his duty well in tempting my appetite—
not that it needs it. Now we will deal with the passengers.
The Rev. W. R. C , the sharer of “ Cabin C ” with
myself, is a tall fine-looking man, rather reserved, but
particularly nice, and improves greatly on acquaintance. His
living is at Sandhurst, of which he is rural dean. Sand-
hurst is the old Bendigo of mining notoriety, about 100


-miles up country from Melbourne. Mr. R , a Presby-
terian minister, whose nose is evidently too long, for it
is always poking into other people’s business, and his
-friend, a Mr. B , who looks as if holystoning would
improve him (I can say this now, as I could stand it no
longer and shaved to-day, so look once more clean), also is a
man with an enormous appetite, and is watched with much
anxiety at meals. Mr. R was the man who was so
frightened at our little escapade yesterday, and I am told
hardly slept a wink through fear, as also several of the
second-class passengers, who positively refused to turn in, but
waited their supposed fate with resignation. Mr. P , who
astonished the British public by the elegance of his gar-
ments, is a Yorkshireman, a carpet manufacturer, and an
agreeable man. Mr. F and his daughter, a man full of
anecdote, in which I am fortunate, as he sits opposite to me
at dinner. He is an artist of Munich, and is taking out a pic-
ture of his own bought by the Melbourne Gallery; they have
also engaged him to work for them. His little girl is more
‘German than English, talking French, too, like a native.
Mr. N , a very pleasant and intelligent man, travel-
ling for his health. It was he who was so particularly
kind to me when ill. With him, and travelling, I believe,
to take care of him, is Mr. W , an out-and-out cad,
utterly oblivious of the fact, without a “h ” or a “ g ”
:in his alphabet. Here is a specimen :“ I says to ’Arry,
if you feels hill, take a couple of dozen of Horstralian
hoysters with a bottle of pale hale ! ” this, too, from a
man who preaches “ abstimience ” and is a dipsomaniac
.asylum keeper. He eats and talks more than half a dozen
others, complains of indigestion (no wonder), and snores like
a pig. He is vulgarity personified. Then comes a tribe in
the McC family and effects. Himself and wife, six
children, two governesses and nurse, five cows, and three
dogs. He thoroughly crowds us out. His two little girls
are particularly nice and my constant companions. He is
the “Pickford” of Melbourne, and, I suppose, propor-
tionately rich. Mr. W is a very gentlemanly man of
riper years and a colonist. He is accompanied by his
daughter. Mr. S and his wife, who were passengers
in the “Kent” on her homeward journey, and who, like
myself, were returning in her solely on account of knowing
'Captain G . My acquaintance with them and with Mrs.
9


R , also a colonist, began the first day, and we have
remained fast friends ever since. Mr. G , late of the
15th Lancers, travelling in search of pleasure. Mr.
T , late Lieutenant R.N., who risked his all on a
woman and lost, and is now going out to the Colonies to try
his luck. Curiously enough, the people come from near
Blairgowrie, where his father was the minister for many
years; he is also related to Colonel R , of Craig Hall.
Lieutenant H , R.N., and his wife, going out to make
a survey of the coast for the Queensland Govern-
ment. Mr. H , a very broad Scotchman, with wife and
several children, his eldest daughter being an extremely
pretty and elegant girl. Mrs. M , widow of the cele-
brated Dr. M ■, of Melbourne, and particularly nice and
not a colonial. Then come a Mr. and Mrs. C. R , and a
Mr. and Mrs. J. G , and their respective babies, in which
they are wrapt up. There are many others whose descrip-
tion may appear as my diary goes on, for we are in all 60
first-class passengers. When leaning over the side to-day
I saw an enormous sun-fish swim past. To-night we got
leave from the Captain to bring the piano on deck, on which
Mr. M , a professor of music in Melbourne, started a
waltz, which soon set us going. It was immense fun danc-
ing on deck, and we kept it up till ten o’clock. Soon after
leaving off dancing a steamer’s mast-head light was reported,
and of course everybody turned out to watch what it might
be. When we neared hershe hoisted a light to the mainmast
head, and fired a signal light, throwing five balls into the air.
We answered, and she turned out to be the French mail
boat from Goree. Donald Currie’s Cape steamer passed
during the night, and some of the passengers thought our
ship was on fire, as we signalled her, as well, and the fire from
the signal fell past their cabin windows. The Southern
Cross is now visible, and I must say my first sight of it was
one of intense disappointment, as the four stars of which it is
composed are not of the greatest magnitude, one of therm
beingvery indistinct. It is indeed a swindle. Mr.W to-day,
on seeing a whale, said, “ It spouts like a helephant,” and
when it disappeared said, “You will see it again, for they all
rm'ergrate.” The Captain capped this by telling a tale of a
man who spoke of “borigines of the antipodes.” To-day we have
passed directly under the sun’s perpendicular rays, as at this
season of the year the sun reaches 20° north of the equator.
10


21 si May. —Up for my morning’s work at six o’clock. To-
day at about twelve o’clock we sighted land, and it was not
long before we were abreast of Cape Verde, a most danger-
ous-looking place for a ship in rough weather; high
perpendicular cliffs with a nasty reef running several miles
out to sea. There are two lighthouses, one on the head
of the cliff, the other on a piece of low-lying ground.
We could distinctly make out that the country round was
well wooded for Africa. After rounding the headland we
got sight of the Island of Goree, on which is a French
settlement. Away out at sea were four canoes filled with
natives, evidently fishing. They seemed frail barques to be so
far from land. They might have got a good price for their
fish had they been able to get anywhere near us.
22 nd May. —The heat is intense, and it is telling on many
of us. I am not feeling as well as I could wish ;on deck it
is bad enough, but the cabins are something unbearable.
To-day the thermometer has been 125 0 on deck.
2 3rd May. —-To-day has been hotter than ever, and every-
body is capable of doing nothing. Choir practice had been
fixed, but the ladies felt too limp, and the men were only too
glad of an excuse to get out of it. A poor woman only 35
years old died this morning of apoplexy. She and her sister
had not been out of their cabin since coming on board,
which no doubt caused her death. They had seen better
circumstances, and did not like mixing with the rest of the
steerage passengers, as they are a very roughish lot. I had
to turn in very early to-night, as I felt far from well, having
been able to eat nothing all day. Thermometer 130? on
deck, 86 c in cabin at night.
24 th May. —I was awakened this morning by the bell
tolling for the funeral of the poor woman, which took place
at eight o’clock. The body was tightly wrapped in sail
cloth and heavily weighted, and was, until committed to the
deep, covered with the Union Jack. The steamer was
stopped during the whole of the service, which was per-
formed by one of the priests on board, she being a Roman
Catholic. During the whole of the service the rain came
down in torrents. Mrs. G , the wife of a young Irish-
man going out to seek his fortune in Australia and travel-
ling second-class, was taken ill to-day with serious fainting;
fits and had to be carried up on to the poop-deck. It has
been a bad day for me, as I had been able to keep nothing;
11


on my stomach. Mr. N has been kindness itself, but
■our doctor on board is next to useless: he is easily
•described by the two well-known lines :
Ho, ho ! his nose doth show
How oft to his lips blackjack doth go.
The heat in the cabins has been something awful, and I
don’t know what the others must be, for I believe mine is
the coolest on the ship, being at foot of the companion.
Mrs. M was very kind in bringing me toilet vinegar, &c.
25 th May. —I was slightly better this morning, so Mr.
N insisted on my coming on deck; but I had not been
up long before I was again fearfully ill. Fortunately,
P had brought my mattress and pillows up, and laid
them on the skylight for me, so I retired to them. I am
thankful to say after this I took a turn for the better, and
at last was able to keep down a little water in which oat-
meal had been scalded. I have had a very narrow shave of
gastric fever, which on a ship with so few comforts for
invalids a.nd a doctor that I could have put no faith in,
plight have had serious results. They have been unable
.to have service to-day, owing to the heat, much to the
disappointment of the Scotch divine. I have not moved
•off the skylight all day, and stayed on deck as long as
possible, dreading going below on account of the heat.
These ships are the worst I have ever been in, being
devoid of all comforts, and totally unfit for passenger traffic
in the present day. Some of the ladies have been chaff-
ing Mr. Y , an Irishman, going out partly on account
of his health and partly to settle in Australia, that he and
myself are to be shaved to-morrow on crossing the line,
Sbeing our first time ; of course, as I am ill, he believes it
'will only happen to him, and he is in an amusing state of
mind, for he does not know what to believe, but declares he
will lock himself in his cabin, and came to me to-night to
borrow my revolver.
26 th May. —There was a poor woman brought on the
;poop deck this morning more dead than alive, on account
of the heat. The doctor is greatly to blame, as he hardly
• ever goes near the second-class and steerage passengers.
lam feeling much better, but am dreadfully weak. Mr,
M has read me a lecture upon taking care of myself,
.for he says, in case of a relapse he would not answer for
12


the consequences. Early this morning (5.30) the ship’s-
course had to be altered to escape a tremendous water-
spout, which came too near to be pleasant ; the rain came
down in buckets-full. It is rather cooler to-day, it being
only 84° in the cabins in the early morning. We crossed
the line about 12.x0, some waiting anxiously for the
bump as we went over, but we quite forgot to put the hair
across the telescope to let the unwary see it. In the even-
ing Father Neptune came on board and issued his invita-
tions for the following day. On the poop deck he delivered
three letters, two for the young middies and one for Mr..
Y , which caused a good deal of amusement. Two
afterwards came into ray hands intended for my two name-
sakes in the steerage, so Neptune’s, like the London post, is.
not always regular. After some nautical songs, Neptune
and his followers retired to their palace in the deep until
to-morrow.
27 th May. —Early this morning preparations were being;
made for Father Neptune’s reception; a huge sail on the
main deck was filled with water, and a plank put right
across the middle. On coming on deck after breakfast.
Father Neptune was seen proceeding from the direction of
the fo’c’s’le, seated on a gun-carriage, with his wife and heir-
apparent by his side, drawn by four marine monsters, and
followed by his attendants, headed by the secretary, barber
and doctor, with his pill box and medicines, and ending up
with four policemen. The dresses of the different char-
acters and the whole arrangements had been got up with
great care, the sailors having obtained leave from the
Captain before leaving Plymouth. Directly Father Nep-
tune had taken up his stand at one end of the plank, with
his spouse by his side and the doctor at the other, with
the barber and his materials in the middle of the plank,
the four great beasts leapt into the water and began to
howl for their expectant prey. The names of the different;
unfortunates were called out by the secretary, who stood at
Neptune’s right hand, and when the patient appeared he
had first to be passed by the doctor, who either felt his
pulse while he held in his hand a small frying pan, which
took the place of a watch, fastened round his waist by a
chain; he then prescribed either a huge pill made of
molasses and flour, or a draught of some liquid stuff horrible
to look at. The efforts of the different patients to avoid.
13


"taking the pill were very amusing. The patient .was then
handed over to the barber, who seated him on a stool pre-
paratory to answering the questions as to his name and
number put to him by the secretary. When he opened his
mouth to answer, the shaving brush was immediately poked
into it. The operation of shaving then began, accompanied
in some cases by shampooing, according as to how the
patient behaved, or to his popularity on board. The
razors, four in number, were made of wood or iron, the first
being cut like a saw. After this operation he was thrown
head foremost into the water below to be ducked by the four
monsters before being released. Towards the end, while the
doctor was examining one patient, by listening to his chest
through a huge funnel in the place of a stethoscope, the
ship gave a lurch and both doctor and patient fell into
the water. The entertainment ended up by their all
tumbling into the water and having a general “ bar-fight.”
After it was all over a subscription was got up in order to
have athletics in the afternoon, as it was a general holiday—
with the exception of the engineers, for the engines had
stopped in the morning for repairs and repacking. The
afternoon was varied by watching the sports, which con-
sisted of races, jumping, sack racing, wheelbarrow racing,
and finally the greasy pole swarming and rope climb-
ing. In the stern there was a party busily engaged in
fishing for a shark, which was hovering about us; they
managed to hook him twice, but each time he carried
away the tackle. In the evening the sailors gave a
concert, which was opened by a short speech from Father
Neptune.
28 th May. —There has been little or nothing done to-day,
except watching the flying fish, which are about the ship in
thousands. Unfortunately, the wind is dead ahead, so we
got all the blacks from the funnel, which keeps us in a con-
stant state of filth, and there is very little chance of it chang-
ing for several days, as we are now in the S.E. trade winds.
I have all my meals on deck, and during dinner to-night a
large sword-fish went by with huge jumps in the air. At
breakfast this morning Mr. G suddenly called out,
“Steward, I found three bugs in my berth this morning;
• don’t let it occur again.” He now passes by the name of
The Blue Light —l fancy originating from his wearing a blue
serge suit. Thermometer, Bi°.


2Q th May.- During the night a flying fish came through
■one of the open port-holes, having jumped at the light.
30 th May. —To-day I have spent in bed with a bad head-
ache, and a slight return of my late illness; but my cabin
being in the position it is I have plenty of company.
3isif May. —-To-day has passed without much being done,
we still have a head-wind, and the blacks are more trouble-
some than ever. Cape pigeons have made their appear-
ance. It was joyful news to-day to hear on taking our
bearings that we were half a day in advance of the
“ Kent’s ” quickest passage.
Ist June. —The Captain has been ill, so to-day Mr. C
read the service and the Scotch divine gave his address. I
am afraid this ship is paved with moral macadam from the
number of those who did not turn up to service who had at
first intended to do.
2nd June. —The wind has almost dropped, and the sea is
without a ripple, but it does not look like lasting. The men
have to-day been hard at work bending the sails. One of
the middies was sent aloft for three hours, and as it was a
head-wind he got the full benefit of the smoke and blacks,
and came down looking like a chimney-sweep. The moon
is now at the full, and the nights most lovely. It was
-curious to see the planet Venus set. She looked almost like
a lighthouse or some ship’s light, so close did she seem.
Ships are often known to alter their course for a setting
star. Last night the engines had to go at half speed to
repair some feeding pipe which had burst.
■ryrd June. —There was a slight alteration of wind during
the night, which was immediately taken advantage of by
setting sail, but this morning, on coming on deck, it was
back in its old quarter. Blankets were served out yesterday,
for although we are not yet out of the Tropics, it is begin-
ning to feel chilly, especially after sunset; the awnings were
unbent to-day, which looks like good-bye to all hot weather.
Just before dinner to-night we were caught in a white
squall, but having no sail set it did not affect us ; after it
was over there was a most perfect rainbow without a break
in it, and as the sun was setting at the time, it was as large
as it could be. I saw one as perfect last year over the
Campagna near Rome. The steward told me to-day that
during the last week he sold 1,100 quarts of beer and 100
-dozen of mineral waters.
15


4 th June. —The squalls last night were forerunners of bad’
weather, for we have run into the tail end of a gale, and.
there is a heavy sea on, which has put many of us toes up,
myself among the number.
s th June. —Better; but still queer, so I kept my bunk.
until Mr. N came and hunted me out at about three
o’clock. Mr. C has been in the same state as myself,,
so I have had companionship. He says he feels like the.
Irishman, who not having had anything to eat for three days,.
“ his stomach began to wonder whether his throat was cut.”
6th June. —All right again, so up this morning, shortly
after breakfast, and found everybody in great excitement
over a barque, which was evidently making tacks to come
near to us, and in which she succeeded; she turned out to be
the “ Soteria” homeward bound, and signalled us “ Report,
us all well.” She passed within ioo yards, so we saluted,
them with three cheers, which they returned. In the after-
noon one of the young McC s ventured up the rig-
ging; the four middies were down on him, or rather uj>
after him like a shot, and lashed him there until he had.
promised to pay his footing. On his father coming forward
with a bottle of whiskey he was released.
yth June. —“ Land in sight ” soon brought most of us on
deck, and away on our port-bow we got a distant view of the
Cape. What would we not have given for some news from
there ? but there is no chance, as we are now below the
latitude for Cape steamers. During the morning a sail was
sighted, which made tacks to come near us. She was a
barque, evidently without cargo,making for the Cape; she only
saluted on passing. There are now any amount of albatrosses,
molly hawks and ganets (Solan geese) about. The youthful
population have spent the best part of the day fishing for an
albatross, and I have added zest to their sport by offering
ios. for the first, as their feet make capital tobacco pouches,
and their wing bones pipe-stems. In the middle of the day
we passed through any quantity of sea-weed, washed here
by the current from the Magellan Straits. This evening,,
after dinner, I paced the deck with T , and had a long
yarn with him about mutual friends in Scotland. We have
now been exactly four weeks at sea. Cards in the evening
are now our chief amusement.
B th June. —I did not turn out of my cabin until 11.30, and
soon after coming on deck we were overtaken by a heavy
16


white squall, and as we had all sail set it made us move, and
we all fervently wished it might last till the end of the voy-
age. The day has been more or less squally, which has
helped us along considerably. Mr. C is still confined
to his cabin with a bad sprain, which he got jumping out of
his bunk, which is the upper one. He told me a good tale this
morning of an Irish clergyman,who having two churches, one
at each end of his parish, gave out that he would preach at
the one in the morning and at the other in the evening,
and baptise at both ends.
g th June.- —The wind is still fresh, with heavy squalls, but
we are carrying all sail, so ought to be making fair way.
Towards evening the wind freshened considerably, and it
was with some difficulty that they were able to get part of
the canvas in, and before night it was blowing a gale with a
heavy sea running, and torrents of rain. The Scotch divine
was thoroughly frightened, and wondered much at our playing
at cards, when perhaps we might be going to the bottom the
next minute!
10 th June. —The Scotch divine remained on deck the
better part of the night frightened out of his life. It has been
an awful night. I have long wished to see a storm, and now
I never wish to see another. I was very bad, but, fortunately,
our cabin was on the lee side of the ship, so one could sleep
comfortably without the fear of being pitched out. In the
saloon crash was followed by crash, as plates chivied tea-
cups and saucers, and occasionally one met a leg of mutton
too near one’s head to be pleasant, closely followed by a ham.
The cabin I had originally chosen, with the awning
window on to the main deck, was flooded out by a green sea
breaking over and smashing the window to atoms. The unfor-
tunate occupant was in his bunk and got deluged ; several
of the lower deck cabins were washed inside-out by their
port-holes being stove in. Those who were well enough ta
eat had not much opportunity of satisfying their appetites,
except of cold mutton, as the galley fires were put out, and
no meat could be cooked and no bread baked. The sight at
night was something too grand ; the sea, one mass of phos-
phorus, was thrown into a thousand jets over the ship and
sails, making it almost look like some weird phantom. The
sea was running “ mountains high,” or, to reduce it to its
actual level, the waves were about 40 feet, and at times the
good ship seemed to stand and stagger in the trough of
c
17


some big sea, and looked like a frightened thing, then sud-
denly made a plunge and rode over the next monster wave.
Of all things our canvas suffered the most, nine of
our sails being disabled, some actually torn to shreds,
so much so, that in the morning it looked as if
they had had a washing day forward. The sails dis-
abled were the jib, minor jib, foretopmast, staysail,
foretop gallant sail, upper foretop sail, main trysail, fore-
sail, maintopmast staysail —and, as the Captain re-
marked, when they went, he could turn in comfortably for
the night and let her do her worst. One great thing to be
said is, she has kept her course through it all, although it has
been one of the stiffest gales she has ever had to endure.
ii th June. — Many of the ladies were terribly frightened
last night and hardly went to bed at all. Certainly, to a
nervous person it was not enlivening, as the gale had not
abated in the least. The poor Scotch divine looked ten
years older; somebody had told him that we were in latitude
47 0 or thereabouts, as we were not quite sure where we
were, but that in all probability we were driving dead on to
the Prince Edward Islands, where the “Strathmore” was
wrecked, and early this morning he was at his post looking
out for icebergs. Towards evening the gale began to abate, we
having had 48 hours of as stiff a gale as it would be possible
to ride out. The most unfortunate part was that it had come
from the south, instead of from the south-west, where they
may be generally expected from at this time of the year. Had
it not been for this we should have made a good run of it.
After all we are still neck and neck with the best trip she
has ever made, and on account of our cabin being at the foot
of the companion, we have had to have blankets nailed over
our passage ventilating panels.
12 th June. —This morning both myself and Mr. C
made our appearance on deck. It is his first appearance
since Saturday. The sea has considerably gone down,
although there is still a tremendous swell on. Mr.
W ’s bon-mois come periodically. “ Do you see Tarns ?”
he said this afternoon. We could not make out what he
meant, so we applied to the priests as knowing Latin.
They failed also to understand ; he meant “ Taurus ,” as
he referred to one of Mr. McC ’s bulls. In the evening
we had a 100, after which I had a long chat with Mrs.
M .
18


1 3th June. —I think everybody was thankful for so quiet
a night, and made up for the last two by sleeping soundly.
The day has been passed in general discussion of rhe
gale and in recovering from its effects. The sights taken
to-day show that during the last four days we have run 904
knots. This afternoon we saw two very large whales playing
about, quite close to the ship, and whale birds there were
also in any quantities. They looked exactly like surf in the
distance, as the under part of their wings is snow white.
A solitary sea swallow hovered about the vessel, which must
have been very far out of its bearings, as they hail from
much farther north. I have shot them on the South Coast
of Ireland. The sailmakers have had a hard time of it
repairing. I was astonished at the size of the sails ; it
took 22 men to carry forward the foresail after it had been
repaired.
14th June. —It has been a most perfect day, or rather was
up to about 4 o’clock, when the wind suddenly shifted right
round, and from having all sail set, we had suddenly to take
in every stitch. The change of wind quite changed the day
from warmth and sunshine to coldness and clouds, turning
to a nasty drizzle in the evening. Some of the stewards on
board have curious ideas of one’s wants. On calling out
this morning for hot water it was brought me in a big cup.
Some weeks before leaving England there was a startling
picture in an “ illustrated,” called “ Practising for the
Zulus,” in which the soldiers were depicted slaughtering the
sea-birds with their pistols- We tried the same this after-
noon, but not with the same result, as we never touched a
feather. On a sudden change of wind this afternoon, it was
a curious sight to see the water, the crests of the waves
being curled the wrong way by the contrary wind.
15th June. —We had service as usual at 11.30, and as
we had a fair breeze the engines were stopped just before,
which also gave the engineers the chance of doing some
slight repairs. Like most landsmen, I was under the
impression that if one place is due east of another the
shortest way of getting there would be to steer due east.
Not so; for if you steered due east you would follow one
of the lines of latitude, which, if you look on a globe, goes
in a circular direction, so that by steering, as in our case,
south-east, you would arrive there sooner; this is known
as circular sailing. Mr. R has gained the name of the
19


Smuggler. He passed amongst the stewards as Whiskey
Johnny, and has lately been taking too freely' of that
spirit; so the Scotch divine got hold of him and made
him promise not to take any for a certain number of
days. The temptation was, however, too much for him,
and he got it smuggled into the smoke-room. The day
has been warm and delicious, but turned cold in the
evening and came on to blow. The Scotch divine had a
service in the second-class quarters, as we objected to
him in the saloon.
16 th June. —We have had a rough day of it, with
heavy wind. I did not turn out. I have gained for myself
on board the nickname of The Ship’s Barometer, as my
being on deck or in my bunk is a true sign of the
state of the weather. The Captain proposes lashing me
in the latter, so ensuring bad weather. This may sound
odd, but what is bad weather to me is fair to them, as
we are now in search of the N.W. winds, and have been
since leaving the Cape. Unfortunately, they are a long
time in coming.
i ythjune. —M came in about n, and insisted on my
coming on deck, and I think I nearly spent the rest
of the day in walking up and down to keep myself warm, as-
we are now in mid-winter. On hearing to-day that one
might expect a north wind in the morning, one naturally
rather shuddered, forgetting that a north wind would be in
the southern latitudes the warm wind, and the south the
cold one.
xß th June. —Of course, now we are beginning to wonder
when we shall get in, as we are still in search of this north-
west wind. Some are very doubtful as to the day, and the
fact, too, that we cannot go on steaming much longer, as
the owners do not allow enough coal to carry through with,
expecting that at least seven days shall be made by sail only,
A nasty cross sea has got up, and the barometer has fallen !
19 th June. —111 in bed all day, and if companionship in
such cases is consolation, I certainly have had it. On
deck the reports that come down are most miserable, and
all agree lam in the best place. They raised the screw
this morning, and we are now getting our first taste of
sailing.
20 th June. —Up directly after breakfast, and not sorry was
I at being early, for it was a lovely day on deck—bright
20


sunshine, such a relief after the last few days. Last night
was one of the most miserable I have spent; ours is now
the weatherside, and she rolled tremendously; and, as we
had scarcely any wind, there was not enough weigh on her
to keep the rudder steady, which banged about with each
successive roll. I had to fasten a strap to the ribs of the
hunk along me, and pass it round my arm to keep me in
it. The screw now hangs at rest, having been unhitched
from the shaft and hauled up into a chamber. It weighs
about 9 tons. The second and third class passengers came
yesterday in gangs to inspect it. Talking of these pas-
sengers, they have afforded us some little amusement by
sending on several occasions a deputation to the Captain.
They are generally headed by a man, whom we have chris-
tened “ Punch,” and whom the Captain says is politeness
itself. The subject in question is generally brought forward
in the form of a letter, which is formally read out; one of
the subjects in the last was the question of bread and pro-
visions. They wanted ducks and chickens, and objected to
the bread as being “ emigrants’ bread,” and about which
they were rather insulting to the Captain. He had the
weather gauge of them, however, by wanting to know what
they were but emigrants, which offended them mortally.
According to law they are emigrants, and only entitled to
emigrants’ fare ; instead of that they get fresh meat every
day of the week. They have threatened all sorts of things,
amongst which is to publish a letter in every paper in Mel-
bourne as long as the “ Kent” remains in that port. I wish
they would, for we fare very badly ourselves. The wind
does not come round as we wish it, but it will do very well
as far as lam concerned if it remains where it is. It was
thoroughly comfortable this evening in the saloon, hardly a
movement. We have all sail set, and are slipping along very
nicely. The first thing I noticed to-night on deck was,
that we have no masthead light, as we are now a sailing
vessel.
June. —I forgot to mention yesterday our excitement
upon the cry of “ Fire!” which, as it turned out, had hap-
pened in Mrs. M ’s cabin, by her dresses, which were hang-
ing on the bulkheads, swinging against the candle. In a
ship of such modern build, I am surprised at their having
such old-fashioned arrangements, some of the candles not
even possessing globes. Mrs. M got her hand slightly
21


burnt, but otherwise, except damage to the dresses, no
further harm was done. The wind has again played us
false, so during lunch they had again to lower the screw and
get up steam, and directly the screw began the wind
freshened, but only to die away again before sunset. Dur-
ing last night the wind had come so much ahead as to com-
pel us to alter our course to S. by W., which looked almost
as if we were on an expedition in search of the South Pole. To-
day the fact of our being in the Antipodes was most forcibly
brought home to me. The 21st of June —our hottest day at
home—is mid-winter here. The sun is as far north as it
goes in 23 0 , 28', the boundary, of course, of the Tropics.
At dinner to-night I moved up to midway in the saloon,
where the motion is much less ; so I thoroughly enjoyed my
dinner. I took Mrs. M ’s seat, who scarcely ever
comes to the dinner-table. We are now seven hours ahead
of London time. Sun sets at four o’clock.
2,2nd June. —Both the Captain and Mr. C did not
feel equal to taking service this morning, so we went without.
It was a lovely day, though bitterly cold, otherwise we
should have almost imagined it summer weather. Last
night was one of the worst we have had for a long time,
and many were the grumblers this morning. Fortunately, I
slept like a top ; the vessel gave a big roll, and before quite
finishing, it pitched, which gave a most unpleasant motion ;
but really, now I can begin to congratulate myself I am by
degrees getting a better sailor. Somebody asked Mr.
C this morning whether he had got me into
good order. “ No,” he replied, “ I have long ago
given him up. It would take a 40-horse power parson
to manage him.” The Scotch divine gave them a long
dose below in the evening to make up for his disappoint-
ment of the morning. Mrs. R , Miss W , and myself
spent the evening in the second officer’s cabin. Although
he is not a general favourite, he is, in my opinion, the best
of the lot. The chief officer is too officious, and generally
hated.
2 3rd June. —A bitterly cold day, so I did not even think of
turning out until 12 o’clock, and after lunch I wrapped
myself up, and went in for a regular afternoon’s deck-pacing,
in spite of the occasional sleet storms. The screw was
again raised, as we have a fair wind, and now really have
only enough coal left to carry us home for the last three
22


days, so sailing becomes Hobson’s choice ; if we have luck,
we ought to be in Hobson’s Bay this day week.
24 th June. —We have now a fair wind and are going along
deliciously. It is still cold, so there is nothing done but
pacing the deck. On retiring to my bunk last night I fortu-
nately discovered, before turning in, that somebody had been
playing me a practical joke, the perpetrator of which I had
not much difficulty in guessing. My pillow had been
covered with violet powder. It was fortunate I discovered it,
in time, or I should have been a grey-haired old man in the
morning. Thermometer 39°, our coldest day.
25 th June. —A most miserable day, with heavy rain and
snowstorms, but the thermometer stands at 39°, so we
shall now by degrees be getting into warmer climates. I
spent most of the day walking the deck with the Captain,
as I could not stand the stuffiness of the saloon. The
Scotch divine astonished us to-day by saying he did not
like where he sat at meals, as there were so many double
intenders. They certainly chaff his life out, but it is his
own fault, as he lays himself open to it.
26 th June. —I turned in last night looking forward to a
good night, but no such luck. I was awakened by a figure
in curious costume, standing in my cabin door, and calling
out my name, “ Wake up, wake up, the ship’s full of
water.” It certainly looked lively, on at last getting my
eyes open, to see one’s cabin full of water. There was
nothing for it but to tuck up one’s “pyjamas,” and turn out
to call the watch. It was coldish work on deck after a
warm bunk. Having got hold of the officer of the watch,
and brought him down to inspect matters, I assisted Mr.
C , who was hard at work rescuing the trunks, &c., and
making a big pile of the bigger ones, and filling the bunks
with our smaller parcels. Mr. C took up his position
on the top of the trunks and acted as overseer of the works.
It seemed an interminably long time before anybody
arrived, with the exception of one of the middies, who stood
gaping at the top of the main deck ladder with a lantern;
this so “riled” Mr. C as to sing out, “Don’t stand
there like a fool, but go and bring somebody. Bring twelve
men to bale out the water.” Atkinson arrived, and having
got a light we went in search of the cause. The water
was at least four inches deep, and deeper in the ladies’
saloon, into which we first went, and from which we could
23


hear rushing water in the neighbouring bath-room ; but it
unfortunately was locked, so Parry had to be found before
we could get in. When we did, there was the bath-tap full
on, and the bath overflowing. It appeared that a bundle
which had been stowed away there had become dislodged by
the movement of the vessel, and rolling down had got
jammed between the tap and the bulk-head, so turning on
the water. The watch were soon hard at work, baling out
the water in the passage, and the stewards in rescuing ship’s
property, quite regardless of our troubles. I spent a plea-
sant three-quarters of an hour, ankle-deep in water, mopping
up with bath-towels. We should have come off much worse
had we not made a barricade of our carpet in front of the
door. We came off the worst of anybody, owing to the saloon
door making a backwater, and we being also on the lee
side of the ship. One of the sailors remarked, “ This is
weather in the cabins, sir.” The chief steward appeared on
the scene, so I called out for grog, which he produced, and
so saved me a cold. The ladies’ saloon was one scene of
chaos, with the water being washed about from side to side
by the roll of the ship. I am afraid the piano and har-
monium will suffer from their bath. We got to bed shortly
after, and I made up for lost time by sleeping on till after
twelve o’clock. The accident certainly has done good in
one way, as it has given us a splendid subject of conversation,
which is getting rather a difficult thing now, at all events,
to find anything novel. I think most of the time is spent in
abstruse calculations as to when we ought to sight Cape
Otway, as everybody is now sick of the voyage. The ship
is also uncomfortable, and it is a case of “a new broom,”
as it is our chief officer’s first voyage as such, and everything
is either being painted or varnished. We are now having
long evenings, as the sun sets before four o’clock.
2 Jth June. —A most lovely day, and lam told this is my
first real taste of Australian weather. You can almost
imagine you smell the gum trees, or perhaps see that well-
known “ ’possum ”up that tree. We are having some lovely
sunsets, the first we have seen of any beauty since leaving
England.
28 th June. —This morning I have spent talking over my
route, and I have finally come to the determination to spend
much longer in the Colonies than I had first intended,
beginning after a short time in Melbourne and Sydney with
24


the Fiji Islands, returning in the spring, that would be
in October and November, to Victoria and New South
Wales, and on to New Zealand and Tasmania for the
summer. In the autumn, if possible, I intend going
through Queensland, as Mr. R has kindly offered to send
me a round through the stations and place horses at my
disposal. The Scotch divine has christened W “ The
foul-mouthed belly-god.” In the fore part of the ship the
day has been occupied by an auction of all things no longer
necessary. In one instance a pair of blacking brushes were
put up, which the auctioneer strongly recommended to the
attention of the public, and especially that portion of it
going out to the Colony to seek their fortunes, as it would
give them, in case other things failed, something to earn a
living by. During the sale, which was taking place near
the galley door, the cook put some pepper on the fire, which
set the whole of the audience coughing and sneezing, and
creating a good deal of disturbance. In the afternoon the
chief engineer took me over the engine-room, stoke-hole, and
coal-bunkers—the last, indeed, was darkness personified,
and I could not see any coal whatever.
29 th June. —There was no service this morning, as the
Captain was not well enough. It has been a lovely day, and
I have spent the whole of it pacing the deck, “yarning”
first with one and then another. In the evening we had
service, with a sermon bj. Mr. C , after which we had
some hymns and music. It has been most unfortunate,
and we all heartily sympathise with our good-natured
captain; for just at a time when a fair wind was wanted to
get us in under the 50 days, a dead headwind set in and
has been blowing hard all day. It is of importance to him
to get in under the 50 days, this being his first voyage in
the ship, and anything over the forties is considered a bad
passage.
30 th June. —This morning on waking the wind had fallen,
and the sea was perfectly calm. The ship is looking
now as if she had only just come out of port, instead of
after a long voyage, as all masts and spars have been
freshly painted, and deck-houses and taffrail rails re-
varnished. It is all very well for her to look nice going
into port, but it does not add to the comforts of the
present passengers. We are, of course, now all excitement,
for to-morrow we expect to sight Cape Otway. In the
25


afternoon we held a meeting as to a testimonial to be
delivered to the Captain, and at which it was decided that
it should take the form of a purse of sovereigns, accom-
panied by an address.
ist July. —H came into my cabin this morning at
6.15 and woke me up with a “ Land ahead ; get up if
you want to see the sun rise over Cape Otway.” It was
not long before I was on deck. We were then just pass-
ing Moonlight Head, about two miles from shore, with
Cape Otway right ahead, and the first streaks of dawn
breaking from beneath the heavy clouds on the horizon in
flashes of golden light. We passed the Cape about seven
o’clock and signalled ; so now our voyage is virtually over,
having done from Plymouth to Cape Otway, a distance of
11,636 miles, in 49 days 6 hours. The sunrise was the
finest I ever saw, even beating those of Syria and Palestine.
I was this morning reading a published diary of a passenger
in a former trip of the “ Kent’s ” and came across these
verses :
How welcome the sound of the mariner’s cry,
As with keen eyes he gazes afar,
And tracks out the land from the sea and the sky,
While we join in his hearty hurrah.
There is joy in the “ Kent ” from stem to stern
As we eagerly look o’er the main.
The land! the land ! for which all of us yearn—
Look ahead ! there’s the land again.
Up, up with the signal! the pilot bears down—
There’s his boat, like a speck, on the sea :
Australia, the hopeful, the land of renown,
Is now looming out at last on our lee.
The Heads, the entrance to Hobson’s Bay, were now right
ahead of us, and it was not long before the pilot came on
board. We were most fortunate in the day, as generally
here it is very rough, on account of the strong current run-
ning out against the tide and known by the name of the
“ Rip.” Once inside the Heads there are two chan-
nels, the north and the south, the latter being ours, as only
ships drawing 13 feet and under are allowed up the former.
After passing Sorrento and Queenscliff, both Melbourne
watering-places, and various other spots, mostly named after
shipwrecks, we retired below to deliver our purse of
sovereigns, £42 in all, and testimonial to Captain Holt-
The proceedings were opened by an appropriate speech by
26


Mr. C , and replied to, after which champagne was
handed round. The health of Captain Holt was'proposed
by Mr. McC and drank with filled glasses, followed
by three cheers and three cheers more for the gallant
captain of the “ Kent.” After a most lovely sunset we soon
came to our berth alongside Sandridge Pier.
27


CHAPTER II.
Reflections, Wise and Otherwise —Melbourne Oysters—Bribery without
Corruption —Contemplated Flight to Fiji—The “ Lions ” of Melbourne-
Curious Coincidences—Amusements ofthe Antipodean Metropolis—A Con-
firmed Inebriate—Disappearance of a Curious Character—Off to Adelaide
—Favourable Impressions—Reminiscences of Whalley Range—A Man-
Woman, or Nearly So—Social Life at Woodhouse —Good Advice —At
Melbourne Again—More Dancing and Dinners.
Sg||S(lUß voyage has ended safely, I am glad to say, and I
[SR] don’t think there is a soul on board that is not glad
to get on shore, for seven weeks is a long time to be
at sea with at the most, taking all together, only
seeing land for about an hour from leaving Plymouth till
arriving at Cape Otway in Australia, and passing but 12
ships, of which we were only able to speak to two and to
signal three more. It is certain I could never recommend
anyone to go out in any of Money Wigram’s boats, as for a
long ocean voyage, such as this has been, there are not
enough comforts; for instance, for the whole of the saloon
passengers there were only two cabin stewards, and towards
the end of the voyage we possessed only two soda-water
tumblers, and so few of the smaller ones that the steward
had to collect some from the cabins ; at breakfast it was
often a case of waiting until your neighbour had finished
before you could get a cup of coffee. The sanitary
arrangements, too, were most defective, and there was
not sufficient attention paid to passengers’ comforts. As
regards her sea-going qualities I believe the ship to be
perfect. Five minutes after touching Sandridge Pier, G
and myself had scrambled down the ship’s side and made
for the station, with handbags only, leaving our luggage till
to-morrow. Melbourne is about two miles from the Pier,
and connected by trains running every half-hour. We had
decided to go to the Oriental Hotel, partly to escape the
mob, and partly from its having been recommended to us as
a new hotel, in a good position. We drove up in what is
here called a wagonette, very much like an Irish inside car,


to the hotel, and found it quite deserted ; so we got into our
vehicle again, and drove to the Union Club Hotel,'where we
got rooms, but very poor ones. It is a most unfortunate day
to have arrived in Melbourne, it being “ Separation Day/'
and a general holiday to celebrate its separation from New
South Wales as a distinct colony. Nearly everybody was
out of the town; besides which it is a race day, and there
was an inter-colonial football match with South Australia.
After a wash we turned out to find something to eat.
as they had nothing in the hotel but cold beef; and
most fortunate we were, after hunting about for some
time, in dropping upon the best oyster shop, where
we had some magnificent Sydney oysters at is. a
dozen, quite equal to our natives. We then, after
strolling up Collins-street and Bourke-street, the two
principal streets of Melbourne, went to the Oriental Hotel,
and found somebody this time, and were so charmed with
it that we engaged rooms for the morrow. We returned
to our hotel, where we found P ——, who had not yet
turned out, so volunteered to take him the rounds, or as
much of them as we had yet learnt. After visiting one or
two cafes we turned in for the night. It is a most curious
feeling, the dead silence at night. It almost gives one the
horrors, after all the noise on board ship.
2nd July. —On waking this morning at about eight o’clock,
I was strongly reminded of the mornings in the Riviera
in the beginning of November, and this is midwinter.
There had been a slight frost in the night, but the sun
was quite warm, even at nine o’clock, and not a cloud to
be seen in the sky. What a change after England!
While drying myself after my cold tub, I nearly came an
awful cropper, as I have not yet quite got my land legs on,
and I was allowing for the roll of the ship. Directly
after breakfast we flew to a barber’s shop, and fortunately
hit on the best. I certainly never paid more, 35., cutting
and shampooing. He ought to make a rapid fortune at
that rate. After that we went to see the wonderful talking
parrot at the Albion Hotel; he can say almost anything,
sing several songs, and, if required, swear like a trooper.
After paying our bill at the Union Club Hotel, we drove up
to the Oriental with our bags, and got two large front
rooms. There happened to be a directors’ meeting, which
accounted for its deserted appearance when we drove up
29


yesterday. From here we walked to the station, where we
met M , whom I arranged to meet in the afternoon, as
he wants to make me an honorary member of the Victoria
and Yorick Clubs, and to take me to see them. We also
met R and Y bound for the Union Club Hotel, but
we persuaded them to go to the Oriental, which they did.
Mrs. R was in the train with us going down, and at
Sandridge we met some more of our fellow-passengers. Hav-
ing got all our luggage together, we returned to Melbourne
by omnibus. The ’buses are built on the American system, the
coachman acting as guard as well, and you pay your money
through a small hole at the top end. It strongly reminded
me of Mark Twain’s description in his “ Innocents at
Home.” The next thing to be done was to inquire at the
Post Office for chance letters, but there were none. Girls
here are almost entirely employed in the minor depart-
ments. I also made inquiries about the Fiji boats. I
found everybody most obliging, and anxious to give all the
information in their power. The next place was James
McEwqn and Co.’s, where G wanted to call. They
happened to be the agents for the Fiji boats, so I
again made inquiries, and dropped upon a man that
knows Chip, so he put me up to the ropes as to
how to get there. The next steamer is on Saturday,
and carries the mails; so I hurried back to the hotel to
write a letter in order to give due notice to Chip of my
coming, as I intend going up by the boat at the beginning of
August. It was now luncheon time, so we turned out and
were tempted into Gunsler’s, which happened to be the
proper place for our wants, which were supplied to perfec-
tion. Having met M and seen the Victoria Club, which
adjoins the Town Hall, we went on with him to the Customs
to clear our baggage, and found that a shilling on each eye
stopped the officer seeing and one in his mouth speaking,
which saved us some trouble. I had forgotten my passage
ticket, so had to get identified at the agents’ as being a pas-
senger by the “ Kent.” There we met the Captain; but he
is down on his luck, having got himself into a serious scrape,
and has been dismissed. We heard something of this on
the papers coming on board at Queenscliff. It has put
rather a damper on us all at the end of the voyage, as he
is so generally liked. On looking through our baggage after-
wards at the hotel we found we had got a portmanteau belong-
30


ing to Mrs. R . The mistake arose through my thinking
it G ’s, and G thinking it mine. Fortunately, I know
Mrs. R ’s husband’s town address, so sent a note over, but
as yet have no answer. By the time we had dressed the
dinner-bell rang, and we went down to a tip-top dinner.
Oh! such a treat after the rough sort of feeding we have
been having for the last seven weeks. After looking at the
wine list, I came down to a pint of beer—champagne being
ys. the pint! Not for me! Opposite to us sat a tall, good-
looking man, who is here on furlough from India on account
of his wife and children’s health. He had been 15 years
out, and in Scinde —the nearest place to the infernal regions.
He is a great sportsman, and gave us some amusing
anecdotes of his tiger-shooting. He turned out to be a
Dr. L and an old “ Rug.” He also knows General
McL , whom he met during the war in Abyssinia. After
yarning for some time we went to the Theatre (Academy of
Music) to hear “ H.M.S. Pinafore,” and found that the whole
or a large portion of the officers and crew of H.M.S.
“Cerberus ” (a turret ship belonging to the Victorian Govern-
ment) were there, the upper circle being filled by blue jackets,
and the Governor’s box by the officers. It was beautifully
put on the stage, and the different parts well acted, espe-
cially Mrs. Lingard’s “Josephine.” Here we met M ,
who introduced us to Mr. S , a member of the Press.
The theatre is the coolest I was ever in, and beautifully
decorated ; the dress circle is the best part of the house,
and only 4s. Afterwards, we all adjourned to the Victoria
Club, where we had a bottle of champagne and some
biscuits. We went all over the club, which has
a hoist, thus saving a lot of leg work. At dinner
to-night I got a letter from the Melbourne Club,
saying I had been elected an honorary member of it ;
J. G whom we had met at the Customs shed, has also
put us both down for the Athenaeum —so we have a choice.
The Melbourne is the swell club, mostly squatters ; the
Victoria, commercial; the Athenaeum, general; and the
Yorick, Bohemian. Later on in the evening we all re-
visited “ Heard’s,” and afterwards walked home with Mr.
S , but not before going up into his den in the office of
the Daily Telegraph, the strong Conservative paper here ; so
we are in good hands. Our way lay through the Treasury,
Spring and the Fitzroy Gardens, alongside of which are
31


built the Treasury and all the public offices. The night,
too, was grand, freezing slightly, and a full moon, which lit
up to perfection all the trees and plants, of which the gar-
dens are full. It seemed like walking in fairyland. It
certainly is a splendid climate, and at this time of the year
one in which you can do anything. It is now striking five
a.m., and time I was in bed, if I intend to get any sleep at
all.
3 rd July . —After breakfast we dropped into the Melbourne
Club, which is most comfortably near, being only across the
road. We had an appointment with Mr. S at eleven
o’clock, as he had kindly offered to take us over the Town
Hall. There he introduced us to the Town Clerk, and to
the Assistant Commissioner of Police, who were politeness
itself. We went over the building, from basement to
the dome of the clock tower, from which we got a most per-
fect bird’s-eye view of Melbourne and the country round.
We were fortunate in finding Mr. L , the city organist,
performing on the organ in the large hall used for balls and
concerts. We were introduced to him, and he most oblig-
ingly gave us a special performance in order to show off all
the stops and beauty of this magnificent instrument—the
fourth largest in the world. After lunch at Gunsler’s, we
took the train out to St. Kilda, and called on Mrs. C. R
but found her out, so walked home through the Botanical
Gardens, and then along the banks of the Yarra-Yarra, the
river of Melbourne. We reached Melbourne again in time
for the organ recital in the Town Hall, and for dinner after-
wards with friends at the Victoria Club, at which I was
introduced to a Mr. B , for a long time a resident in Fiji,
and well-known in Melbourne. From him I got some
information. Later on, we went to the opera-house to see
“ Friends.” The scenery is the same as that used in
“Peril ” at the Prince of Wales’s Theatre, but the dialogue
is not quite so refined.
4 th July. —l met Mr. B at the Victoria Club, and
he showed me all sorts of Fijian curiosities, which gives me
some idea of what I can purchase there. He also gave me
charts of the whole of the Fijian group. There was a Fijian
chief named Ratu-Lala in the club. He has been in Sydney
for two years learning English and European customs, hut
now has to return, owing to the death of his father, he being
the eldest son. He is only awaiting the arrival of Sir
32


Arthur Gordon, the Governor of Fiji. In the evening I had
friends, including the Fijian, to dine with me at my hotel,
and we afterwards went on to the Theatre Royal.' Between
the acts we adjourned to the buffet for a cigarette and a cup
of coffee; we noticed a caricature of De Belleville hanging
there. One of the actors asked the barmaid by whom it was
painted. She said she did not know* but that it had been
sent out from England. I recognized the signature, and told
in her hearing that it was by a Manchester artist;
the barmaid, a dame of some forty summers, immediately
asked me if I knew Manchester. I told her it was my native
town. Her next question rather astonished me. Did you
know a Qr. Partington there ? A curious coincidence, and
one that proves how small the world is. She had been one
of his patients, and my mother previous to her marriage had
taken her up jellies and such like when she was ill.
s th July. —C. R called on us after breakfast, and
invited G —— and myself to dine with him at the Mel-
bourne Club on Monday. I went out by train to St. Kilda
and lunched there as arranged- In the evening G and I
dined at the club, and went again to see “ H.M.S. Pinafore.”
6th July. —ln the morning we walked out to St. Kilda,
starting through the Fitzroy Gardens, and working
round by the Botanical Gardens, returning by train,
tired out with our first long walk since landing. I never
saw such weather—it is really like an English summer,
with the exception of the mornings and evenings, which
are cold. G is still far from well, so I dined alone,
and did some writing in the evening until Eatu-Lala came
in to look me up, followed by M , who came to carry
Y and myself off to S ’s, to an evening “ at home.”
We drove out to his house at Fitzroy, and had one of the
jolliest evenings imaginable, mostly music, as Madame
Tasca and her husband, Alfred Plumpton, formerly con-
ductor at the Theatre Royal, Manchester, and other musical
people, were there, besides Marshall and Roberts, of the
London Comedy Company, at present here acting in
“ Friends.” They are well known on both Dublin and
London stages. Roberts sang some most amusing Irish
comic songs, and we ended up with a champagne and oyster
supper, followed by several very amusing speeches. I was
weighed at the club to-day, and found that on the voyage
out I have lost 7 lbs.
D
33


7 th July. —As we were both late last night, we were not
particularly early this morning, and only got down in time
to go and see Mr. C off to Sandhurst; afterwards I paid
my first visit to the Oriental Bank, and then went to call
on N , whom we heard had been knocked down and robbed
the other night. We found him with his face plastered and
in the hands of a professional nurse. W is showing
himself now in his true colours, and we strongly advised
N to get rid of him at any price. On Saturday night,
when passing up Bourke-street, hearing a noise in the
Theatre Royal bar, we looked in and there he was, dead
drunk, dancing a can-can and singing “ Rule Britannia ”to
an admiring crowd. A good sort of a man to be in charge of
a dipsomaniac ! I cannot understand anybody who is given
to drink in England being sent out here, where they hand
you the brandy bottle to help yourself to a sixpenny B. and
S. I again called on McEwen and Co., as I have thoroughly
made up my mind to start for Fiji on the 7th of August,
and they were very polite in offering to telegraph, wherever
I might be, the date of the “ Suva’s ” sailing. I have made
up my mind not to go to Sydney now, but instead to take
this opportunity of visiting Adelaide. Mytrip to Ballaarat and
Sandhurst is given up for the present, as M cannot get
away. At lunch at the club we met C. R and J. G ;
the latter asked both myself and G to a dance at his
mother’s house to-night. We then both set to work to
write our English letters, as the mail goes out on Wednes-
day. We had a very pleasant dinner with C. R ,at
which a Mr. M , also a Queensland squatter, made up
the quartette. At eleven o’clock we went on to the dance,
which we both enjoyed immensely ; the house was large,
the rooms good, and the girls danced well. During the
evening I was introduced to Mr. S. M , who invited me
to a large ball they are giving on the 31st. We got back to
our hotel about 2.30.
B th July. —Attached to the Melbourne Club is a racquet
court, equal to any I had ever played in ; so efter lunch we
—that is to say, G , myself, and two other members of
the club —had a game. In the middle of one of the games
I suddenly recognized an old friend, one who was at Rugby at
the same time as myself. This is the second O. R, that I have
met in Melbourne, and, curiously enough, both of the same
name, and yet not relations. Dinner, as usual, at the club,
34


a t which Captain S , a well-known man out here, joined
He was formerly on the Lord-Lieutenant’s staff in
Ireland, and in the Artillery, and he is now Chief Commis-
sioner of Police here. At dessert I tasted passion fruit for
the first time. Squeezed into a claret glass, with a tea-
spoonful of port or sherry, it is delicious.
gth July. —At breakfast this morning I sat next a young
American, and in conversation I found he, too, was anxious
go on to Adelaide overland, so that much of my tour is
■settled, and next week so far is arranged. Lunched at
-Grunsler’s, and afterwards went on to a photographer’s and
•was “ done.” Curiously enough, recognised in the photo of
Bishop Perry, late of Melbourne, the man with whom I
had travelled for a short time two years ago on my way
drom Merklands to the Isle of Skye. In the afternoon
and I called on Mrs. G and I on Mrs. S ,
but found only Miss G at home. In the evening I
dined at the club, and afterwards drove out to a dance at
Mrs. K ’s near Windsor which I enjoyed immensely. I
really am beginning to wonder when I shall get away from
Australia, especially if I find the rest of it is at all equal to
Melbourne for its hospitality and kindness to a poor lone
bachelor. Melbourne itself is a curious place ; some of its
shops would indeed vie with any of our best in London.
Here there is a bootmaker who calls himself “ Ezywalkin,”
and has the same trade mark as our “ Waukenphast five
miles an hour easy.” But of everything connected with
Melbourne the most ridiculous part is the names given to
the different suburbs ; for instance, to get to Brighton you
drive through Windsor and Balaclava, and to get to Heidel-
burg you drive through Ivanhoe. Such is the conglomera-
tion of names.
10 th July. —To-day has been unusually wet, and one
has done very little. G rode out to some training
•stables, and I called on my Manchester friend of the
theatre, and had a yarn with her, when I found she was the
wife of a veterinary surgeon in Manchester who had de-
serted her. Her brother was in my grandfather’s employ, and
is now a hay and straw dealer in Withington. In the
evening G and I went to see “ H.M.S. Pinafore,” and
shared a box with two men from the club, one a Ceylon man
and a friend of Mr. R , the other a Mr. T , from Acheen
in Sumatra. There were some other friends of mine there.


Before I left we had arranged a drive put to Heidelburg
to-morrow to lunch.
nth July. —l was not up this morning when young S
came round to see me about our drive, so I got him to go
and order a wagonette and pair of horses; and at 12.30 we,
that is, Mrs. S , her son and little girl, the two Misses
J— — and Y , started for our expedition. The day
was lovely. It was my first experience of Melbourne
suburbs. Before we had got two miles from the town we
had lost our way, and coming to impassable roads had to
retrace our steps; but we hit it off at last, and after a
beautiful drive reached the “ Old England Hotel ” at
Heidelberg, where we ordered lunch, and wandered about
its tumbledown gardens until it was ready. The cham-
pagne we brought out from the “ Oriental,” not daring to
trust to the liquor of so countrified a place. It reminded one
exactly of some old English public-house. At five o’clock
we started back, but not until I had had some difficulty
with one of my horses, which did not at all like leaving his
warm stable; he jibbed tremendously, but finally all went
well, and we got back to Melbourne about 6'30, having had
a most enjoyable afternoon. In the evening a few of us
dined together at the Club.
12th July. —I lunched to-day with several others at Gun-
sler’s, and afterwards went on to the performance given at
the Theatre Royal for the benefit of the widow of Bates, the
actor, who was murdered here some short time ago. All
the principal actors and actresses in Melbourne took part
in the different pieces. The first was a selection from “ All
is not Gold that Glitters,” in which Fred Marshall as
“Toby” excelled himself. The H.M.S. Pinafore Company
did their part, and were followed by the masque ball scene.
Roberts, during the entr’acte, sang the two songs, the “ Irish
Gentleman ” and the “ School Girl ” —the latter in falsetto
and in imitation of a young girl. I dined with G at the
Clubhand then went onto the Union Club Hotel to hear
the” betting on the Waterloo Cup, which comes off next
week.’ There I met Mr. McC , who has a dog running.
After Wards I adjourned to the theatre to meet some friends,
apd. we ended up the evening by an oyster supper at
Heard’s.
13 th July. —G had to go out to Windsor to lunch, so
I lunched at the Club with R and T . The latter


■Jcnows P , whom I met two years ago in Ireland, and
who is Commissioner of Police in Penang. After lunch I
went out to St. Kilda with T , and walked over to
Windsor to call on the K s. Dined at the Club with
•Captain S and Lord H. P , the Governor’s son.
The Governor is the Marquis of Normanby, whose eldest
son is Incumbent of Worsley, near Manchester. G
turned up after dinner.
14th July. —G had to go out again to Windsor. It is
really very good of him to go through all this trouble for a
perfect stranger. Poor N has gone utterly to the bad,
so much so that he has, by his own free will during his sober
moments, been got into an inebriate asylum near here, and
the great W has been sacked and sent back to Londori.
How wonderfully sly men in N ’s state are! Even while
with G he managed to get two drinks, one by making
the excuse of going to run into a chemist’s to pay a bill while
G was talking to me; the other, pretending to go arid
wash his hands before lunch —and this last one finished him.
Mrs. S and the two Miss J s came in to lunch
with me to-day at Gunsler’s, at which Mr. S , his son,
Y and M joined us. Afterwards the lady party, with
Y and myself, went on to the Public Library and Picture
Gallery, in which are some capital pictures, the most remark-
able of which is Long’s “ Esther,” the replica of which is in
this year’s Academy. The fact of its being a replica I have
never heard mentioned in London. Among the collection are
two very good historic pictures by Folingsby, one of the
passengers of the “ Kent,” in fact the second picture he brought
out with him this time. He has obtained some appointment
•out here connected with painting. B|uvelot’s pictures are
very good indeed ; he is an artist resident here. There is
also a good collection of the works, both of painting and
sculpture, of a deceased colonial artist. After seeing the
ladies on their way home, and saying good-bye for a fortnight,
I joined G at dinner, and in the evening went as usual
to a theatre, where I was introduced to a Mr. T his
wife and daughters.
15 th July. —Joined Mr. S ,an American staying at the
Oriental Hotel, in a two-berth cabin in the “ Victorian,” bound
for Adelaide. S and Y came down to see me off.
•Owing to the time of year, and the roughness of the roads, we
diad been choked off going overland, and dared again the
37


dangers of the deep; but, fortunately, it is only a forty hours’
passage. She is a fine little boat and beautifully fitted up.
We left the Queen’s wharf at one o’clock, shortly after the
Tasmanian boat, on which were R and T . The
river Yarra is beyond description. Its banks are lined with
fellmongers, and wool-cleaners, and general stinkers. I
never before smelt anything to equal it in abominations. After
leaving this loathsome river we passed the “ Cerberus ” turret-
ship, the “Nelson” wooden ship, and the Government gun-
boat, and before we were a mile out in the bay had overhauled
the Tasmanian boat. Unfortunately, unless the sea is
merciful, we shall have little quiet, as we have the Geelong
“Footballers” on board, bound for Adelaide to play a series
of matches, a most rowdy lot.
16 th July. —Sea merciful; comparatively quiet day, but did
not move out of my cabin.
i yth July. —We arrived off the Semaphore about seven
o’clock this morning, where we took on board the Custom House
officer, who was most polite, and took my word for everything.
Landed at the port at about 9.30, and got up to Adelaide as
soon as possible, the town being about six miles inland, and
connected by railway. Everything is looking most deliciously
green and bright, and I was charmed with my first view of
the town. It is small and compact, and very clean, and has a
much more homely appearance than Melbourne. After break-
fast I went out to hunt up friends, and deliver letters of intro-
duction. I called first on the Hon. R. B. A , Crown
solicitor; he was out. Next hunted up W. G ; found
him in, and he told me Eustace G ’s address, whom I had
supposed to be up country at Mount Gambier, and had given
up even hoping to see. Afterwards wandered about the town,
from its length to its breadth. All the streets are built at
right angles, King William-street being the broadest, and
containing all the banks and public buildings, and crossed by
Rundle-street, the principal shop street. You can imagine
Eustace’s surprise on my walking into his office. I have, of
course, altered in the last few years. He certainly was most
kind and hospitable, and only regretted his inability to put
me up, owing to his house being full of visitors. They have
a capital plan out here of announcing the arrival of any
steamer by flying its colours at the flag-post, generally of the
Post Office; and in Melbourne they announce where the mail
is, by “ A.” for Adelaide, “C. 0.” for Cape Otway, and then


a peculiar flag for when it is in. After dinner at the hotel,
where I met a man who had lately come from China, and
knows nearly all the people I have letters to there, I drove
out with Eustace to the house of a friend of his, where I was
introduced to his wife, and a Mr. B , from Manchester,
and with whom I had a long yarn. He knows all the Whalley
Range people well. I was also introduced to Capt. H
formerly one of the A.D.C.’s here. We had a most pleasant
evening, at which I was made to taste all sorts of Australian
wines. On my way home I called in at B and Capt.
H ’s rooms, and had another long yarn about Manchester.
On leaving I chartered a wagonette that was passing at
the time, and on going to pay was informed it was a private
carriage. Wise man for taking me, for I could not offer
another man’s coachman only a jarvey’s fare !
18 th July. —While I was at breakfast this morning, Mr. B.
A called on me and told me that he had made me an
honorary member of the Club, and he regretted much his house
being in the hands of builders, otherwise he would on no account
have allowed me to be in an hotel here. After breakfast I
went into the Club and got what latest news there was
between mails, which is at present very little, owing to the
cable being broken. I then went on to the Botanical
Gardens. There is nothing I have enjoyed so much since
landing in the colonies as wandering about these lovely
gardens. They are here particularly pretty, and in them you
meet loafing about all sorts of curious birds, as the gardens
are partly zoological; and then in some odd corner you
come across a cage containing some animal or other, but
mostly of the domestic species. In one place there was a
large aviary of parrots, and it seemed so curious to hear them
saying “ Pretty Poll.” Some were very fine birds, being en-
tirely black, with the exception of the underneath tail feathers,
which were bright scarlet. After leaving the gardens I walked
on to Eustace’s office, and found he had been trying to find me.
He took me on to the Supreme Court to introduce me to the
Chief Justice, who was most polite. After arranging to meet
Eustace at the theatre in the evening I took the train
out to call on the Rev. W. B. A ,at Norwood. The
road there is very pretty, as it passes along the Park lands—
land set aside by the town authorities never to be built
upon, and extending in a belt all round the town. Mr.
A was out, but I found his wife at home. Returning


to Adelaide I drove out to call on Mrs. B. A , but
unfortunately she was out. After dinner at the hotel I went
to the Theatre Royal to see Rignold in “ Henry V but in
comparison with what I had seen at the Prince’s Theatre
in Manchester, when Mr. and Mrs. Charles Calvert produced
it, did not add to it on the occasion. Rignold is not a born
actor, and the rest of the company were very poor. On
returning to the hotel I had supper with S , and then
went into the smoking-room, where Rignold was in persona.
ig th July. —Met Eustace and his wife at 9.30, and
drove with the latter to call for a lady who was going
up to Woodhouse. We are all going up into the hills,
about twelve miles from Adelaide, to spend the in-
evitable “ from Saturday till Monday ”at Lady H ’s.
The drive up was delicious, the view magnificent, and the
day most perfect. The road is very steep, and winds in and
out of the hills. At one place we turned out and walked
over the hill, getting a magnificent view of the waterfall
gully. Our fellow-companion is the most extraordinary
specimen of a woman I ever saw ; she is known here by the
nickname of “it,” as they are not quite certain of her sex
In her dress she is as near to a man as it is possible for a
woman to reach. “ Woodhouse ” was reached about lunch
time —a most lovely place, almost too lovely for description;
a beautiful house with verandah, surrounded on all sides by
thickly-wooded slopes, at the foot of which flows a winding
creek. I found a houseful of the kindest people possible. Lady
H and her three daughters, and Mrs. R , their aunt.
After lunch I was taken out for a ramble round the grounds,
and to hear the echo in the woods. The gardens are full of
all sorts of trees; the camellia trees covered with buds gave
me some idea of what the place must look like in summer.
Eustace and W. B came up in time for dinner, after
which, the furniture of the drawing-room having been stowed
away in all possible corners, we had a most enjoyable dance.
20 th July. —At breakfast this morning there was a very
vexed discussion as to what was to be the order of the day—
“ Church” or “Mount Lofty.” It was decided by Miss
H giving orders for Mount Lofty, and of course laid the
blame on my shoulders, as I ought to go there, and this was
my only chance. Eustace, poor fellow, evidently thinking it
was to be church, had got up a tooth-ache, and remained in
bed. Having first visited the apple store and provided our


selves with refreshment for the way, we started, part of the
party driving in the “ Spider ” and the rest on foot. It was
a most lovely walk the whole way, and we got a grand view
of Mount Barker and the surrounding country; but what a
view met my gaze from the top of Mount Lofty! The day
was wonderfully clear, and we could see for many miles
round. The “ Hummocks,” two well-known hills, were quite
distinct, and they are over ninety miles away. York
Peninsula, too, could easily be seen, while the whole of the
plains of Adelaide lay at our feet, and the beauty of the view
was enhanced by the lovely blue haze beyond. We returned
home by a short cut through the woods, and on our way ran
right against Mr. S , who takes the service, and the
Governor. Here, too, English names are given to villages. We
passed through Piccadilly on our way home. In the afternoon
we had arranged to go to Drummond’s for a tea pic-nic ; it is a
lovely glen just behind the house, but, unfortunately, as we
were starting, it began to rain, so we had afternoon tea in the
morning-room. W. B and myself had charge of the
tea-pot; tea was served in antique china. After tea we
walked to Drummond’s, as the rain had stopped, and gathered
watercresses.
2i si July. —Breakfasted at seven o’clock, as Eustace, his
wife, and W. B were going to catch the early coach for
Adelaide. Lady H had kindly asked me to stop till
to-morrow, which invitation I eagerly accepted, as the whole
place is so enjoyable. After breakfast, I amused myself
wandering about the gardens, sketching. Go where you will
there is always some lovely view or peep of the house —-there
is one in particular from a rustic bridge over the creek. The
house is reflected in the still water, which is lined with clumps
of flax bushes and weeping willows, with a lovely background
of thick bush scenery. About n o’clock we all started,
supplied with apples, for a walk to Bridgewater, where
there is a lovely piece of water, and on which we expected
to find a boat, but unfortunately it is removed during
the winter months. It is, however, very difficult indeed to
imagine that this is winter, for the days are hot and
lovely, and wild flowers are in profusion ; the most beautiful
by far is the heath, growing in quantities in the woods,
more beautiful than the plants we buy in London for table
decoration, and out here I have seen them over six feet high,
both red and white. One thing I especially noticed, and that


was there were few singing birds. With the exception of the
laughing jackass (from the French jacasser to chatter) and the
magpie, you hardly ever hear a bird. The jackass is shaped
like a kingfisher, but very much larger, and of a dull grey colour,
the enemy of snakes. Its laugh is almost human, so much
so that when you hear it you become infected yourself.
The magpie, or as it is often called, the whistling crow,
really resembles more a jackdaw, but with a great deal
of white. Bridgewater was so lovely that we loitered
about, and finally had to hurry home for lunch ; but the
way we returned was even more lovely than that by
which we had come, as it was through deep and thickly-
wooded glens. We were just half-an-hour late for lunch.
In the afternoon we again turned out into the woods armed
with axes and long saws, and amused ourselves for a couple
of hours cutting down trees. I was persuaded by Miss H
to taste the gum which oozed out, and I have vowed
vengeance against her ever since—it was so fearfully
astringent. To-day we had afternoon tea in the old nursery,
and then went to the apple store as usual to get a supply
to take down with us to-morrow, as Miss H is going
down, too, to stay with Eustace and his wife. After this
we went up to the summer-house, a building differing not
one jot from summer-houses in general, but full of earwigs.
From it, however, we got a perfect view of Woodhouse
and its surroundings. In the evening we danced as usual
until bedtime. During the night I had a fearful
nightmare—a female figure crossed the foot of my bed and
touched me on the shoulders, when I awoke with a howl.
22 nd July. —We had arranged to go down by the early coach,
but on coming down to breakfast it was raining, so we were
with little difficulty persuaded to wait until the afternoon
coach. I did not at all regret this, especially as it cleared
up entirely after breakfast. On relating my nightmare they
said that the room was supposed to be haunted! This morn-
ing I got several mementos of my visit here in the shape of
some photographs of different peeps in the grounds. , Before
lunch we walked to Uraidla, formerly a small clearing, and
used as a market garden, but which had been completely
destroyed in the bush fire of last year, the same which nearly
burnt up the whole country round. Woodhouse had suffered
tremendously, too, the fire having come within 100 yards of
the house, and it gives a most weird look to the woods, as the
42


stringy barks remain black, while the gum trees regain their
former cleanliness, owing to their shedding their bark twice
a year; on this account they are the most untidy of trees, as
the bark hangs from them in long shreds, and is scattered
all about the ground at their roots. These trees are most
ghostly on a moonlight night, as then they look as white as
if they had been whitewashed.
The time at last arrived when I was to say good-bye to
Woodhouse, after one of the pleasantest of visits, especially
as it was my first taste of Australian hospitality. The word
as used at home hardly describes the meaning of it out here,
and I certainly can say that if any Englishman wished for a
visit of thorough enjoyment he should come to Australia.
Miss H —— and myself drove down in the “ Spider ” to meet
the coach at Stirling East (another name), where the two
coaches stop to change horses, one coming from Mount
Barker and the other from Strathalbyn. Both had only one
seat vacant on the outside, and the inside was too horrible,
being filled with fat, greasy women and squalling children. I
managed to get the box-seat on the Mount Barker coach for
Miss H , and one for myself on a sack on the top. It was
a little rough at times, as the roads are not always of the best,
but from my elevated position I saw the country to advantage.
On our way we passed a trooper riding along ; there are two
told-off now to watch the drivers of the different woodcarts,
&c., and to take them up in case they catch them asleep, as
so many really bad accidents have occurred. The road is
fearfully steep, and of course a heavily-laden coach coming
down has little chance of pulling up. They are now so
particular that if a man is caught on the wrong side of his
road, even though no other vehicle be near, he is fined £1 and
costs. The former average, before the road was altered at its
worst point and these precautions taken, was a “ spill ” every
three months. We got back to Adelaide about five o’clock,
and immediately drove out to Medindie, Eustace’s house at
North Adelaide. The day had completely cleared up, but
still there was no sun. W. B came in' to dinner and
Capt. H —— afterwards, so, as usual, we danced.
2 3rd July. —We went into Adelaide early this morning in
order to try and find Lady H , whom we expected would
have come in by the early coach. It was, however, twelve
o’clock before we came across her in King William-street, on
my return from taking my berth in the “ South Australian,”'
43


sailing on Friday next for Melbourne; and sorry, too, I shall
be to go. We lunched, and then took the train out to
Kensington, and walked over from there to call on the D ’s,
who live about two miles away on rising ground. Mr. D
is a large olive and vine grower, and he showed us over his
olive press and wine stores. The manufacture of oil is most
interesting, and a thing in which there is little or no waste.
Surrounding his house is a most lovely garden, in which are
mignonette trees, native lilacs, roses, jessamines, and many
others of which I did not know the names. There was a
Mr. and Mrs. B calling, and they gave us a lift back to
Adelaide in their carriage. W. R came in to dinner and
stayed the night. He is a beautiful musician, and stocked with
many curious songs. He also plays dance music beautifully,
so of course we again spent the evening dancing and singing.
24 th July. —We spent this morning in paying calls, and in
the afternoon we all went down to Glenelg by railway. This
railway is very American, as it runs through the streets. A
village, a short way out, called Goodwood, was built by a
Building Company; all the houses are exactly alike, and the
streets are at right angles one to the other. Hard work for a
man returning home after dark, drunk, to find his own house.
The Newmarket racecourse is close to this. Sir Thos. Elder
was the originator of it, and keeps his stud close by. Glenelg
is a small sea-side place, and the landing place for passengers
by the mail steamers. Returning home there was a most
lovely sunset. We had a very jolly dinner at the 8.-A ’s
in the evening. Their son-in-law amused me by telling me he
had never seen snow. They had some in the hills last night,
which caused quite an excitement in Adelaide. This morn-
ing it was exhibited at the different fishmongers, and at the
coach office.
25 th July. —Walked in with Eustace, and at the Club I got
letters from G and Ratu-Lala; the latter enclosed his
photo. Poor N has become a nuisance, and G cannot
get away, as he does not like to leave him before he sees all
settled. I fetched my luggage and sent it down by train to the
steamer, as she is advertised to stop at Glenelg this journey at
seven o’clock, which gives me three hours longer in Adelaide.
I lunched with Eustace, and afterwards met Mr. A , who
had come down from Norwood to see me off. I left Adelaide
by the 5.15 train for Glenelg. Eustace and his wife came
down to see the last of me. There was a steam launch to
44


take us on board. The Geelong Footballers are returning,
most of them fearfully uproarious. This is indeed bad luck to
have to travel twice with them. On my way down in the
train I was introduced to the Chief Secretary of South
Australia, who is also on his way to Melbourne, and on
getting on board I found he and I were to share the same
cabin.
26th July. —A calm day, but for fear of accidents kept my
cabin, as there was so little to entice me on deck.
27 th July. —We were inside the heads before I was on deck
this morning, and it was twelve o’clock before we were once
more at Queen’s Wharf. The river smelt as bad as ever.
There is some plan on foot for cutting a canal, but with little
chance of being carried out, as the Government is opposed to
it, or rather to the Harbour Board. Found a letter waiting
for me at the Club from G . He waited over till Friday
to try and finish up N ’s affairs for him, and after all the
trouble he has taken N finally gave him the slip, and
wrote to him, but gave no address ; so I suppose now he must
go his own way, as G has left for Sydney.
28 th July. —Met Mr. W. G , one of my fellow-passengers,
and went with him to call on his wife at their hotel,
and then we all went out for a stroll and took tickets
for to-night for “ The Sorcerer.” Lunched at the Club, and
played racquets in the afternoon. A horrible murder
was committed here to-day—the Secretary of the Hobson’s
Bay Railway was shot dead by one of the employes.
Dined at the hotel, and met Mr. and Mrs. W. G at the
Academy of Music. “The Sorcerer ” was very well put on.
29 th July. —Caught the 12.15 train for Sandhurst. The
line is interesting the whole way, showing to advantage the
character of the country. It is wooded everywhere. Before
reaching Sandhurst the line crosses the Kangaroo Flat, well
known in the early days of the alluvial diggings. I arrived
at Sandhurst at 4.30. The difference which first strikes a
stranger between this and other colonial towns is the redness
of the soil. Most of the large buildings are built of brick, as
stone out here is very costly, and even then not good for
building purposes. Names of places, as usual, absurd.
There is a Charing Cross, and Pall Mall is the principal street
leading out of it.
30 th July. —After breakfast I went over the gaol, and was
introduced to the governor, who asked me if I had had any
45


experience in gaols. Of course my companion roared, and
declared there was a look about me as if I had. • The villages
about Sandhurst have the most curious names, such as
Jackass Gully, Dead Horse Gully, Murderer’s Flat, &c.,
which rather astonishes a stranger if he should ask an
inhabitant where he lives—as in talking the inhabitant drops
the word gully.
After an early lunch I started in a buggy for a bush
drive—goodness knows where we went to, as roads became
of little consequence; and finally finding ourselves in a cul-de-
sac, we had to turn back. There is certainly some excitement
while driving in the bush.
3isi July. —l put off my going as late as I could, and caught
the 3.20 train for Melbourne, being due at a large ball at the
M ’s at ten. Dined and went over to the Club, and then
drove out with R , who has just returned from Tasmania,
and is rather crippled from an accident he met with there.
He was driving in a buggy, when the horses bolted with him,
and in trying to pull them up, the reins smashed, and he was
left at their mercy. They carried him against a verandah,
and smashed the buggy to atoms, pitching him thirty feet
forwards. He was picked up insensible, and carried to the
hospital. A cut face and bruised wrist was, however, all the
damage he sustained beyond the shock. We did not get to
the house till after ten o’clock, so most of the ladies whom
I knew had their cards full. Y introduced me to the
Misses R , whom later on in the evening I got
several dances with, and they certainly danced perfectly.
The ball room was the best private one I have ever seen,
with organ and balcony at one end, and at the other glass
doors leading out into lovely gardens lighted up by lanterns.
The supper was very good, but the dance was not kept up
half late enough. I was just beginning to enjoy it when
time was called, and “ God save the Queen ” put an end to
everything.
Ist August. —l was not up too early after the exertions of last
night. Lunched at the Club, where I met B , who asked
me to go with him up to Lady S ’s, the wife of the Chief
Justice here, for lawn tennis. Here I found Y and the
Misses R , and many other people. I had some capital
games, and drove back in time for dinner. After dinner I
went to see “ The Girls ” at the Opera House.
46


CHAPTER III.
Flight to Fiji—Another Bit of Life on the Ocean Wave- Grand Enter-
tainment by the Suva Howlers—First Sight of Fiji—A Chiefs
Home —Levuka—Native Sights and Amusements —Fijian Justice
—A Picturesque Scene—Sir Arthur’s Hobby—The Cruise of the
Bella—Up with the Lark —Chip’s Home in the Hills—Duck Shoot-
ing and a Ducking—Eaten by Sharks : A Fearful Fate—The Botany
of Fiji —Native Builders at Work—The Future of Fiji —A Question-
able Governor—A Fijian Ball and War Dance —Feats by Islanders,
Fishy, but True—Types of Beauty in Fiji—A Native Church and
Well-behaved Cannibals—A Description of Fiji, chiefly Geographical.
14 th August. —There are skating-rinks in Australia also, so
this afternoon I went with R to the one here. It was
but poorly patronized, and the skating was decidedly weak.
15 th August. —The latest excitement here is a football
match by electric light, to which we adjourned after dinner at
the Club. It was held on the ground of the M.C.C., which
was lighted by huge lights hung upon poles at regular intervals
round the ground. The whole effect was most ghostly.
16 th August. —In the afternoon, after finishing my pack-
ing, I went on board the S.S. “Suva.” F. P ■, a Fiji
coffee planter, whom I had met at the Club, and R
came down with me, and introduced me to W and
R , coffee planters from India, who were to be fellow-
passengers. The weather was certainly most unpro-
pitious, for the rain came down in bucketsfull, and there
was every sign of bad weather waiting for us outside.
Mr. T also came down to see us all off, and to wish us
bon voyage. The “ Suva ” is a small steamer, built in
Glasgow expressly for this trade. She is only 176 tons
register, but a smart little vessel, and commanded by Captain
J. Garson. Besides the two that I have mentioned we had
on board a Mr. and Mrs. B . He was going out as a
surveyor in Government employment, and the wife had a
baby with a native nurse, the most awful looking female I
ever saw; a Mrs. L and four children, and native Fijian
servant; a Mr. W , who I should say was a bagman,


and one in the steerage. It was dark before we got out of the
river, and the motion in the bay gave one a foretaste of what
it would be outside the heads ; so I soon turned in. The
next three days were spent in abject misery, for our small
boat was like a cork on the waters; even our second steward
was ill, although he had been at sea for fourteen years, but
not in so small a steamer. As he well expressed ,it, “We
might as well be at sea in a bucket.” R , who alone
shared the cabin for the first two nights, was also fearfully
ill, so we were a lively couple, waited on by one still more
lively. After the second night R tried the saloon for a
change, so for the rest of the voyage I was left in sole
possession of the cabin, with the exception of a little black-
and-tan terrier, bound for Suva, who took possession of
R ’s deserted bunk.
The last few nights those who were well enough had
amused themselves by singing, and W , the wit of the
party, drew up the following programme :
THE LONG-EXPECTED TROUPE COME AT LAST !!
The services of “ The Suva Howlers ” have been engaged, and they
will give their first performance this (Wednesday) evening, under the
patronage of Captain Garson and the ship’s company—wind and weather
permitting.
Notwithstanding the enormous expense at which the company have
gone to in holy- stoning and dec(k)orating (a most un holy pun), to the
poop, the admission to the public will be as before, viz. .-—Reserved
seats, free; gallery, half-price. Not more than one dozen allowed up the
rigging. Dogs, cockatoos, magpies, and members of the press, one guinea
each. Gangway open at 6 p.m. Performance to commence in due time
The Refreshment Department has been entrusted to Messrs. Steward,
Cook and Co.,' Who have already sufficiently gained the confidence to
(k)need no further recommendation in puffs. Tropical delicacies will be
added to the already extensive bill of fare, in the shape of boiled
cockroaches ; but on account of the approaching heat of the season, and
the distance from any broad wood , the piano-for-iea has been dispensed
with. •
The aid of the mews (Muse) has been invoked for this special occasion,
when (horse) hoarse strains (not caterwauling! will be produced by Mr.
R on his new instrument, the ocarina. No whisper will be heard
during the first performance.
Mr, W , the humorist, will amuse the company by balancing himself
on the edge of the swing-tray, and by standing on his head in front of the
mirror.
Mr. P ,if able to tear himself from the seclusion of his cabin, and
the exclusiveness of his own society (sic), will enchant his hearers by
blowing a sweet strain through his fingers, and making other melodious
sounds so well known to the divinities of the gallery.
48


Mr. B , senior, will appear for the last time as “ Chawles,” in his
celebrated glossy ’at; while Mr. B——, junior, will deliver a lecture on
the blessings of matrimony in his own well-known tongue,
Mr. Steward, junior, late of the Cornstalk Minstrels, S.A., has been
expressly engaged for this occasion.
The Canary will perform his inimitable swing.
The rest of the talented company, the dusky maidens, Mariam and
Lillieta, and their pale-faced foe, Mr. W , will also add to the gaiety
of the evening. _ (
The whole performance to conclude with a pleasant trick with knives
and forks.
No spoon r or cutting remarks admissable on any pretence.
Boats may be ordered for 5.30 a.rn. Programmes 10s. 6d. each.
The belle of the ship will announce the commencement of the entertain-
ment, Long may she ring (reign).
Tickets to be obtained on application to the Clerk of the Weather.
N.B. —Father Neptune has signified his intention of attending with his
finny suite.
And so the voyage dragged on, and not sorry was I when
we began to get near its end.
25 th August. —Hunter’s Island, which had been in sight for
some considerable time, we passed at one o’clock p.m. We
were about three miles off it. It is little more than a barren
volcanic rock, three miles in circumference, and about 976
feet high ; but no surveying party have ever been able to land,
owing to its precipitous sides and the heavy draw of the sea.
2 Jih August. —It was long past sunset before we were abreast
■of Kadervu, our first sight of Fiji. This island forms a most
prominent land-mark, having Mount Wellington in the centre,
which reaches the height of 3,500 feet. Kadervu is the most
southerly of the group, once a station for the San Francisco
mails, but discontinued owing to one of their large boats
meeting with an accident there. It is now used principally
by whalers. There are about 10,000 natives dispersed among
its 140 villages.
28 th August.—l had rather a bad night of it, as the engines
kept stopping and going on again, owing to the night
being very thick. The captain at last had to lay-to till
daybreak. On coming on deck we were running just outside
and parallel to the reef bounding the island of Yeti Levu,
■on which is Suva, our first port. The morning was hazy,
but by degrees the clouds lifted and left a magnificent range
of the wildest hills exposed, covered with vegetation of
the brightest green. On entering the harbour we fired
off a cannon to give them warning of our arrival, and
E
49


hoisted the flag for the doctor to pass us. We were rather in
fear and trembling lest we should be quarantined, for Mrs.
L ’s children had the whooping-cough, but fortunately the
doctor passed them as not having it. At nine o’clock we
were alongside an old hulk, and anchored within the reef.
Suva itself is hardly worthy of the name of a town, being only
a few buildings with a large store belonging to McEwans,
but most beautifully situate in a lovely bay. At ten o’clock
we were on shore, and the only men in the place took us up
to their bachelor quarters, wdiere we revelled first in a bath
and then in a general look round. As it was their busy day,
on account of the steamer coming in, they left us in possession
of the bungalow, with an invitation to dine with them at one
o’clock. Afterwards Mr. and Mrs. B and myself went to
call on Mrs. J , to whom we had letters of introduction..
They have a very pretty bungalow above the town, buried in
citron and other tropical trees. We returned for dinner at
onq o’clock, and numbered in all nine, quite a large dinner
party ; three Fijian boys from Kadervu waited on us. After
dinner We went for a walk over to the native town, and called
on Tui Suva, the chief, and sat talking with him in his house
for some time. He is half-brother to Lala, and has also been
in Melbourne, and talks English fairly well. His house,
rather larger than the rest, is built entirely of palm leaves and
bamboos, and is composed of one big room, the sleeping portion
being partitioned off by a curtain. You lie about on mats, of
which there are any number. In one corner there was a fire
burning, and curious native earthenware jars over it. In
another was his wife and child entertaining some lady friends,
really nice-looking girls. The house is surrounded by cocoa
palms, bananas, and bread-fruit trees. The latter I had
never seen before. Some of the flowers are most gorgeous,
especially the hybiscus. On our way back we walked along
the sea shore, which was covered with lovely shells. We
called in at a joiner’s shop, where I bought a stick made of
cocoa-nut wood, with a whale’s tooth as a handle. H
gave me an old Fiji war club, as a remembrance of Suva,
before parting. At 5.30 we said good-bye to our friends,
though of so short an acquaintance. H was formerly in
the West Indies, and knew some friends of mine from there.
Mr. E came over with us in the “ Suva.” The sea was
rough, but this time I escaped and enjoyed a good meal. I
was up on deck to get our first glimpse of Levuka, which we


reached before n o’clock. After some trouble with the
Custom-house officer, we hired a boat and went ashore, but
not before we had disturbed the whole place by whistling.
Sturt’s hotel was full, but we fortunately met a member of the
Club, who got us rooms there.
29 th August. —Chip has left no message for me, so I doubt
his having got my letter. I met St. P , to whom I had
a letter from his brother in Ballaarat, and he got me properly
put down for the Club. He is also the agent for the “Go-
a-head,” 25 ton steamer, running to the river Rewa in Veti
Levu, and where we intend going in her. She was adver-
tised for to-day, but has been put off till Sunday. They have
a very good idea here—the hotel is quite close to the Club
house, so instead of feeding in the Club, they have their
private dining-room in the hotel. After lunch to-day we all
started for a walk along the sea coast. On our return we got
some natives to climb a cocoa-nut tree and get us each a cocoa-
nut. It was a wonderful sight to see the native walk up the
tree, holding on like a monkey. The fruit was delicious, and
the milk refreshing, though sweet. The views are most lovely
to those who have never seen tropical scenery before. Levuka
lies at the foot of a very precipitous range of wooded hills,
with deep ravines and bold rocky tops. It is situated on the
south side of the island of Ovalau. The wind was so strong
that my chief employment was chasing my sun tope along
the beach; fortunately for me it was a sea breeze. After
dinner we went to see an amateur performance of the
“ Octoroon,” the most amusing part of which was the audience.
Such a wonderful mixture, the dress of ladies marvellous,
from the European to the native (almost naked) Fijian. The
smell of the cocoa-nut oil nearly did for me, for “a coat of oil ”
is about all the dress suit they go in for, so I did not stay
long, but came back to the Club to write up my diary.
30 th August. —The weather is still too boisterous for the
“ Go-a-head ” to go out, so we wandered about all morning
doing our shopping. Mine consisting principally in hunting
for curios, of which I got a considerable quantity. The
tradespeople here are terribly independent. We wished to
have a group photographed on board the “ Suva,” and the
photographer was to come down at 12 o’clock to take us;
but instead of coming he sent word to say that he was too
tired after his hard work in connection with the amateur
performance of last night. After lunch, for which W
51


amused us by putting on a black coat, declaring he wished
only to wear out a very old one, we went for a walk in the
other direction along the coast as far as Nasova, where the
Government House and buildings are situated. They are
very pretty, and the gardens are kept in beautiful order. On
our way there we passed a number of the natives amusing
themselves by throwing a sort of spear, though instead of a
sharp head it had a heavy blunt one in the shape of an
elongated potato. We got back in time to see the “ Suva”
sail. The steward and crew have dreadfully misbehaved
themselves by getting beastly drunk, so much so that the
captain had to remove all the spirits into his own cabin. The
Custom House here take great precautions against smuggling,
as the officer comes on board at Suva, and seals up all except
what is just enough for the few days, and the stores remain
sealed until the vessel returns to Suva. I sent off letters to
Melbourne, and Fiji papers to England. We then walked
on to see the cricket match; the ground is about a quarter of
a mile along the coast, a most picturesque site, being a perfect
amphitheatre fringed by cocoa-nut trees, and surrounded by
lofty mountains. It would certainly be too small for English
cricketers, as the ball often went into the sea. 1 pitied the
unfortunate fielder, who had to wade in after it. At one end
of the ground there is a lawn tennis ground, which I should
say, judging by the play, was in its infancy. Mr. G ,
the Chief Justice, seemed to be the chief performer, and the
most noticeable for his bad play. L , a retired naval
officer, whose small nine-ton cutter had been beached,
managed to launch her to-day, with the assistance of 200
natives. The living here is of the roughest description,
although it is said when a planter “ comes to town,” he is
very often made ill by its richness, salt junk and such things,
I suppose, being the natural food. After dinner to-night we
went round with L to Tui Levuka’s house ; he claims to
be the chief of this island, although he is not recognized by
the Government. We took with us some of the yaqona
root, and had our grog made for us there. Generally
this is made by the women, who chew the root until it
is the consistency of strawberry jam, when it is mixed
up with water in the big grog bowl, strained through fibre,
and dealt out in cocoa-nut shells. You are supposed to drain
the amount dealt out to you to the last dregs, and on doing
which the natives shout “ A ma va, ” which means empty,


clapping their hands at the same time. The house is one
big room built of beams filled in with palm leaves; one end
is raised for the use of the chief and his family. It was a
weird scene the room hardly lighted, ourselves at one end
with Tui Levuka reclining on mats, smoking and dressed in
an old jersey and a piece of cloth wound round his waist.
In the centre of the room a group of dusky savages, preparing
the yaqona, and in a distant corner the small fire with a few
more natives gathered round it, and a few more squatting
about the room. One old fellow in particular was pointed
out as having been a regular old cannibal. Close to where
I was sitting, a little child was lying fast asleep ; suddenly it
awoke and sat up. To gauge its feelings, imagine an English
child fast asleep in its bed suddenly wakingto find three blacks
sitting round it. I never saw a face so frightened in my life :
after a good howl it made tracks for its mother, who was sitting
over the fire at the other end of the room. The floor of
the room is strewn with palm leaves, covered with layers of
matting. The yaqona tastes very like weak Gregory’s powder,
and is supposed to be very good for you, but a little goes
a long way, at all events until you get to like it.
31 st August. —Mr. J , of Suva, arrived during the
night, so at our tea this morning—for there is always tea and
rolls at 7 o’clock—l had a chat with him. He has just missed
the “ Suva,” having been up for a trip in the North. He was
at Chip’s, and told me that Chip was expecting me. J is
very anxious to get on to Suva, so has gone to put pressure on
the agent of the “ Go-a-head.” We have decided to go with
him to Suva, and then work up the coast to the Navua river,
and so across to the source of the Rewa, and down to meet
the next journey of the “ Go-a-head.” At n o’clock we
went to the English church, which is extremely nice, with a
surpliced choir and full choral service. The rain prevented
us moving out in the afternoon, except to get as far as the
hotel and back for our meals. Levuka has thoroughly been
eaten out to-day. We have been reduced to captains’
biscuits for supper, and even then a rat walked off with one
of mine, a portion of which I found in a corner of my
bedroom. This morning I felt so far from well, owing
to the effects of my severe sea-sickness, that I went up
to see Dr. C , and he is fattening me up on steel
drops. It is a fearfully wet night and blowing hard;
as I write the noise of the rain on the iron roof, the
53


rattling of timber, and dashing of the waves against the
foundations make the place a perfect pandemonium. The
Club is built out into the water, and just at the mouth of a
small stream ; my window looks over it, and away up the coast.
On the other side of the stream is a native village, backed by
a precipitous rock, which overhangs the road, and surrounded
by cocoa-nut trees, plantain, and other tropical vegetation.
The water is so close to my window that I can touch it with
a walking-stick. L amused us to-day by his description
of how he had to administer justice. Some short time ago his
first batch of foreign labourers, 15 in number, arrived. They
can neither understand nor be understood. He has native
servants, and he himself knows very few words of the Fijian
language. There was some complaint brought to him by the
Fijians against the foreign labour boys. Plaintiffs, defendants,
and judge were all unable to understand each other, but after
some trouble L made out that the foreign labourers had
tried to poison the natives by putting some poisonous plant
into their cooking-pot. Tableaux ! Foreign labourers ordered
to stand in a row. Rifle sent for and loaded slowly before
them. Consternation and giving way at the knees noticed.
One singled out for execution. Rifle pointed at him, upon
which he drops through fright. Weapon changed from rifle
to belt with buckle. General consternation and flight of
foreign labourers, pursued by L !
Ist Sept. —Still weather-bound, but this morning heard of
the “Bella,” a nine-ton cutter belonging to Heyward & Cooper,
of Savu-Savu Bay, which is advertised to sail to-morrow.
We immediately hunted up Heyward, her skipper, and
chartered her for £1 10s. a day for as long as we might wish
to keep her, the charter to commence after arrival in Savu-
Savu Bay, to which place we were to be conveyed free of
charge, but to find ourselves in provisions. The means of
advertising the starting of steamers and sailing-vessels here
is most original. To Sturt’s Hotel there is a large verandah,
which is the general meeting-place for everybody, and the time
of such sailings is written on the floor and walls in chalk.
After a final raid on the curio shops and the purchase of
provisions—for we are to sail at daybreak to-morrow—W
and myself started for a scramble up to the top of one of the
peaks behind Levuka. The town is built on a level piece of
land, which can hardly be more than 200 yards wide between
the sea and where the mountains behind begin to rise. It is


•a most unfortunate site for a town, and especially for a
capital, as it can extend in length only, which makes building
land scarce, and increases rents enormously. The origin of
the town was this: —In the old days, Tui Levuka was the chief,
and most friendly to the whites; he encouraged them to settle,
and so a town sprang into existence. At one time old King
Cakoban tried his best to oust them, and attacked them with
great force, but the white population fortified the place and
effectually resisted him. There is now a great deal of talk
about removing the capital to Suva, and everyone is anxiously
awaiting the return of the Governor. The peak we had
■scrambled up stood out from the range well into the valley,
so that from it we got a magnificent view of the wildest
valleys behind and of precipitous rocks and mountain gorges,
while beneath us lay the town of Levuka stretching along
the beach, and away on either side extended the coast,
lined with cocoa-nut groves and lovely vegetation. Beyond
was the deep blue sea, with the breakers on the coral reefs
glittering in the sunshine, and in the far distance outlines of
•other islands. All was silent as we lay at rest on the edge
-of this bold crag. Around us everything was of the brightest
green, and ferns were in abundance —some of them old
friends in our greenhouses at home ; guava trees there were,
too, in any number. On our way down we noticed remnants
•of old cotton plantations, out of which fortunes had at one
time been made here, but which latterly ruined so many on
the sudden fall in the price of sea island cotton. In those
days sea island cotton was little known, having been only
used by a few French buyers, but now it is getting better
Lnown, and has again gone up in price. There are a few
planters in Fiji who have stuck to it throughout, such as
Mr. M'lvoy and the Ryder Brothers on Mago Island.
Fallowing a creek we came upon a lovely bathing-place, and
-only a few hundred yards from the Club.
2nd Sept. —l was up at daybreak expecting to start, but we
•did not finally get off until after 2 o’clock, as some repairs
had to be done to the “ Bella ” owing to her having been run
dnto by the “Suva,” which carried away her topmast and
crosstree. Very soon after getting outside the reef the wind
fell, and the heat became intense as we lay at rest upon the
water, at sunset we had only got as far as the island of Wakaia,
which belongs to Olive and Langdale, and which lies exactly
•opposite Levuka. Olive is one of the early inhabitants, and is


worshipped by the natives. Some years ago he was raised
to the dignity of a “ Roko,” which is the highest title a chief
can acquire, and he has been the only white man who has
ever sat in the council of Fiji chiefs. When it was time to
turn in, one look into the cabin was sufficient, for it was black
with cockroaches. It was, however, a lovely moonlight night,,
so we all slept on deck. I took up my quarters on a quantity
of oars, not perhaps the most comfortable of beds, but for all
that I slept soundly.
3 rd Sept. —At daybreak we were off Namana, a picturesque
island, but of no use, owing to there being no water on it.
Besides ourselves and our skipper there was on board D.
S ,of Balaga, on Savu-Savu Bay, Louis, the half-caste and
chief officer, two Fijians as the crew, one of whom was called
Enochi, and nine Solomon islanders, foreign labour boys, just
assigned to Chip. The labour question is at present a very
vexed one in Fiji. Fijians will not work in their own island,,
and have to be recruited from a distance, formerly from
a different island, to prevent their running away, but since
annexation that is not necessary, as they can now be brought
back and punished. The Kadervu islanders are supposed to-
be the best. Contracts can be entered into by going to the
chief of some town or the buli (chief native magistrate), of
a district, who will send down a given number of men for
the price stipulated, he, of course, receiving a bonus. The
payment to a Fijian amounts to about £lO per annum, which
includes his food, and his engagement is only by the year.
There are a number of schooners engaged in recruiting labour,,
principally from the Solomon Islands ; each vessel carries,
besides its skipper a Government agent. Foreign labour
boys are engaged for three years’ service, and are drafted off
to the planters on application. For each so drafted the
planter has to pay to Government the sum of £9 for his.
passage money, besides £3 a year for each, which is paid to
Government half-yearly; add to this the price of their food,
and it is estimated that each boy costs the planter about yd~
a day. Then comes Sir Arthur Gordon’s hobby, “ the coolie
labourers,” the greatest of all absurdities; for why go to the
extra trouble and expense of bringing labour all the way from
India, when it is so much better obtained closer at home, and
also men more suitable to the particular kind of work required ?
With the Indian coolies too, their food has to be brought as
well, as there is no rice grown in the islands. And further.
56


who cares to pay passage money of £l3, besides wages,,
although payment is extended over the period of his service,
but which has to be paid even if the man should die ?
While writing on the labour question the “ Bella ” has been
making but little way, for it is almost a dead calm. It was-
late in the afternoon before we were inside the reef which
protects Savu-Savu Bay, which we entered at its eastern
extremity. We moved slowly along close into the shore,,
past Captain B ’s place (of him more anon), until we
anchored off Balaga, at the farthest extremity of the bay.
There we anchored for the night, as there was no wind to
help us on our way, and we preferred being in comfortable
quarters ashore. Immediately we landed we all went to
D. S ’s bungalow, and indulged in cold baths before
our evening feed. The bay is one of the finest, I think, I
have ever seen, bound as it is on all sides by high ranges of
mountains, and from D. S—-—’s house you get one of
the best views of it, as you see it to its full extent. R
was very ill all the evening, having evidently been caught by
the sun.
4th Sept. —Up with the lark ! This, curiously enough, I
can say, for singing-larks have been introduced into this
group, and there are now any quantity. The difference
between the Fijian bush and that of Australia is most striking;
while the latter is solitude and silence itself, that of Fiji is
alive with life and song, both of bird and insect, and further,
has the advantage of possessing no venomous snakes..
Before making a start for Chip’s plantation we had
a stroll. The place was full of lime trees, and pine-apples-
were so abundant as to be almost a weed. We left
Balaga about 7 o’clock, but with so little wind that
we had to row, so I acted as slave-driver, and got all the
foreign labour boys at work at the oars. By lunch time,
having got a slight breeze, we had arrived at Heyward
and Cooper’s place, where we lunched off a mixture
of rice and marmalade, that I had prepared in the billy, and
I was not ashamed of my cooking. After lunch, as there
was scarcely any wind, and as we were only six miles away
from Chip’s, with a good road, we decided to walk ; so having
mustered our foreign labour boys, whom we made carry our
baggage, we started with a guide provided for us by Heyward.
It was a most lovely walk, first along the sea shore, then by
a path cut through the bush—not an unacceptable shade, as it.
57


was very hot. The creeks were spanned by cocoa-nut trees,
and in some cases these were broken down, we then followed
the creek down to the sea, where it is generally more easily
crossed. We were caught in a regular tropical shower before
we could hope for shelter, except what we got from the trees
above, laden as they are with arborescent ferns and creepers
of all descriptions. After crossing a river we came to a
house in which a white man lived, with whom we stayed
till the worst was over. We had some most interesting
yarns with the old fellow, as he has been in the country
over 40 years. Further along the coast we came to
the native town of Wai-Levu, a most picturesque place,
surrounded by its cocoa-nut, banana, and lime plantations.
It is built in an oblong form with a huge house in the
centre, reserved forTui Cakau when he came here; it is
noticeable for its extraordinary high roof. We walked on,
not knowing in the least where we were to arrive, as we
could not speak a word to our guide, but after a time we
•came to a boat-house and a tramway running inland, at the
-extremity of which we could see houses, &c. Up this we
followed our guide, and were met by a white man, who turned
out to be Mr. Wiseman, Chip’s manager, so we had arrived,
at our journey’s end at last. Chip was out, but we found his
cook-boy could speak a little English, so we were not long in
making him understand that we wanted something to eat, and
while it was being got ready we divested ourselves of our wet
clothes. After our feed we lounged about in the verandah, not
-sorry for the rest after our walk. All signs of rain had passed
and it was now hot again. Chip’s house is built on the top of
a hill, about 100 feet above the sea, which stands out from
the centre of a perfect horseshoe of high mountains, covered
with tropical vegetation; and below are the works and sugar-
cane fields, with the sea about a quarter of a mile distant.
Away to the right extends the Needle Peak Range, taking
their name from a needle-shaped mountain which lies in their
midst, with a lovely view of undulating land, covered with
vegetation, lying between them and the sea. The coast line
ds very broken, and the different shades of colours in the sea
caused by the coral reefs are most charming. Chip came up
in time for dinner, and delighted indeed was I to see the old
man. He has altered a good deal. We laughed at his first
appearance, for he had just come from a long day’s work up
the Race, his works being driven by water; he was covered


with red mud from top to toe, and had left the best portion
of one boot behind him. How we did yarn in the evening
over old friends in Manchester! It is now nearly five years since
he was at home, so you can imagine we had a good deal to
talk about. His house is almost all verandah, but the inside
portion consists of two rooms, divided only by a partition
half way up for coolness —one the dining-room, the other a
bedroom, and on each side opening on to the verandah, are two
•smaller bedrooms, while behind are the store rooms and pantry.
The kitchen and cook-boy’s house are separate little buildings
behind the house. The house itself is deliciously cool, being
roofed with a thick thatch of came leaves, and is nearly all
•composed of either Venetian doors or windows.
sth5 th Sept. —ln the morning before breakfast we found our
way down to the most perfect bathing hole in the creek at
the back of the house. It is the bed of a waterfall, a circular
basin 14 feet in diameter, and 10 to 12 feet deep. A board
crosses where the water falls out, which makes a grand
spring-board, from which you jump in, and Nature has been so
kind as to form steps in the rock, so that you can get out
with ease, it being water-worn, there is no fear in jumping
in of coming against any rough corners. It was, as I feared,
near Chip’s time for crushing, so there was no possible chance
•of his being able to get away ; so I had to give up the idea
of going on with W and R , who were leaving in
the “ Bella ” some time to-day. After breakfast we started for
a scramble up the hills behind the house, to see some coffee
•Chip had planted there from seed he had brought from
Ceylon when he first came here, but which he had not
cultivated. W was anxious to see them, and to give his
•opinion as to whether the land was suitable for coffee growing.
It was a most lovely walk, and from the high land we got an
extensive view of both sea and land. On getting back we
found ourselves covered with a species of burr, called by
people here the “ Irish blackguard,” or by others “ the
Spanish needle.” It defies all brushing, and requires to be
scraped by a knife to get rid of the best part of it. We got
hack to lunch and found Heyward and his cutter had arrived,
but it was late in the afternoon before they finally got off, as
W delayed them, as usual, writing some letter or other,
which he gave me to post in case I should be in Levuka
before him—but there is little chance of that. I am writing
up my journal from notes now five weeks after, and his letter


is somewhere in my portmanteau. W promised to pick:
me up on his way back from Taviuni, inorder'that I might
catch the “ Gunga,” the Sydney mail-boat, which promise he
did not afterwards keep, although he arrived back in Levuka
two days before the “ Gunga ” sailed, and Savu-Savu is very
little out of the direct course. In the evening we adjourned
to Wiseman’s, Chip’s manager’s house. It is only about
ioo yards off; he is a married man, and hails from
Aberdeen, but has been out here only a short time,
having spent the greater part of his life in the West
Indies. His wife is a native of St. Vincent, and with her are
staying two girls, one a Miss H , a quadroon, and
extremely nice, the other a Miss B , daughter of a man in
Taviuni, who thinks herself no end of a grand lady, which
afforded me a considerable amount of amusement. Chip hates
her like poison, but being his manager’s guest he has to be
polite, while he grinds his teeth and mutters “ Not for £IO,OOO
a year and a deer park.” We were late before we turned out
from there, and still later before we parted for the night, for
we had much to yarn about. Arrangements had been made
for a duck-shooting excursion to-morrow.
6th Sept. —We started early in an open boat, rowed by
four Fijians, the party consisting of Wiseman, Chip, and
myself. It was a lovely row, within the reef the whole time,
and generally in shallow water, which was as clear as crystal,
and one could see clearly the coral and all its funny little
inhabitants. The fish, too, are very pretty, some blue ones,
of every possible shade, being the most beautiful. We
rowed straight ahead for about twelve miles, and landed first
on an island, but found no duck; we saw some near some
trees a little distance off, and so took to the water, which
was not more than half way up to our knees, to stalk them,
which we succeeded in doing. Sending our boat round to
the mouth of the river to await us there, we walked on in
the water and along the edge of a large mangrove swamp;
but the tide as yet was not low enough for duck, so we
made for our boat, and started up the river. It is thickly
wooded on each side, and we followed up its winding course
for some distance, getting an occasional shot. One of our
natives acted as a sort of retriever, taking to the water
after the birds regardless of sharks, and when birds were
wounded diving after them. When we had got up as far
as we thought there would be any chance of duck, we lunched.
60


rowed quietly down again, and then started for another river
farther along the coast; but in this, as we afterwards found
out, we made a mistake, as far as sport was concerned. To
get to it we had to go outside the reef, and as it was roughish
and I was in her bows, I got a thorough ducking. After our
day’s sport we had a long row home, and it was nearly ten
o’clock before we got back. Rowing in the dark at first is
not a pleasant sensation to a novice, where you have con-
stantly to be on the look out for reefs, and knowing that
although you might not be drowned there is the chance of
being food for a shark’s supper. There was a most fearful
boat accident the other day— 23 out of 25 natives were eaten
by sharks; the two who escaped, a man and woman, managed
to get hold of something with which they swam to a reef
some distance off, followed by a shark too satiated to eat
them, but taking an occasional bite; they were both badly
bitten, but managed to reach the reef before the shark had
so far recovered his appetite as to desire more than a nibble
at a time. The natives have put this down to Tui Cakou,
who died some short time ago, and at whose obsequies no
natives were killed, as was formerly the custom with big chiefs,
when they used to bury his wife or mother, as the case might
be, alive with the dead chief. They have very little regard for
human life, which is not at all extraordinary considering they
were cannibals. If a chief’s canoe was to be launched, men
were used as rollers for it to pass over. They scarcely feel
pain, and it is no uncommon sight to see a man with cuts all
down his back for mere ornament. They would have their
leg cut off without a flinch, but should they get a stomach-
ache they think they are going to die on the spot, and make
a fearful fuss about it. They are very skilful with the use of
the knife, and are consequently good operators. Among
them they have some extraordinary medicines, which, if
known to European medical men, would make their fortunes.
Most of them are composed of herbs, and are decocted by the
women chewing them in your presence, No Fijian ever has
more than two children, indeed generally it is only one.
They have many diseases peculiar to them. At the head of
all comes “ coke,” a most foul disease; the body becomes one
mass of running sores, and no Fijian is considered healthy
until he has had it, so the}'inoculate their children. Calomel
is about the only cure. A great curse to the whites are the
Fijian sores, which break out after one has been in the country


six months, and eat away into the flesh. Except for these
afflictions, it is one of the healthiest of climates. . Ordinary
precautions will protect one from dysentery, of which there is
very little, and being situate in the belt of the S.E. trade
winds, there is nearly always a cool breeze, which makes it
the coolest of all tropical countries.
yth Sept. —After our usual morning bath and break-
fast, we started for the Race, a most wonderful piece
of engineering skill for an amateur. Chip’s first water
supply failed him, so he had to seek elsewhere; therefore
the Race, which was cut to strike a stream, and runs nearly
for two miles, twisting and turning about, now along the side
of some steep mountain, now being led over a ravine in flumes.
The walk along the banks was most lovely, displaying views
which one could not otherwise have got, and admitting of a
walk through the very heart of the bush without the trouble
of scrambling, and of course always being on the level. The
head of it, where it strikes the stream, is most lovely,
something resembling a wild Scotch mountain torrent with
the addition of tropical vegetation. Of the Race, Chip is
very proud, and well he may be, and he certainly well deserves
his Fijian name, which means “ King of the Waters.” This,
of course, first originated from his having been in the Navy.
Amongst the natives he is known by no other name. While
I was sketching Chip went on an exploring expedition further
up the hills, and was successful in finding a useful land-mark,
as he intends extending his Race to meet the river in case
this supply should ever fail. Although the day was hot it was
a deliciously cool walk on account of the shelter from the trees,
which are thick with vines and ferns; there are, too, some
lovely flowering creepers, bearing a large white flower like a
double convolvulus. There are also any quantity of convolvuli.
There is a tree which bears a flower something like a Cape
jessamine, with an equally beautiful odour. Dilu, another
shrub, I believe the same as the wax flower of our hot-houses
and of two colours. There is the Hoya, of which there are
three varieties. Then there is a flower like a small gladiolus,
known as Indian shot, on account of its seed. The Fijian
name for it is duck shot. Then there is a white Poinsettia,
the Fijian name for which is bova-bova. Another tree
hears a most lovely flower, like a passion-flower, only with
smaller petals and hundreds of bright-coloured stamens ; the
seed is a triangular cone, or rather a pyramid, and is used as
62


floats for fishing nets. Amongst the natives it is used for
poisoning the water for catching fish. The Fijian .name for
the tree, which grows to the size of a forest tree but never
far from the sea, is vutu-niwai. Of course the bush is full
of all sorts of most lovely flowering plants, but this is the
wrong time of the year to see them in flower. In the
afternoon I was interested watching a house being built:
this and the clearing of land is a Fijian’s tavi (task), which
means their own peculiar work, and in which they cannot be
beaten. One description I have heard applied to a Fijian
house is “ a disembowelled haystack.” To start with, there
is not a nail used in the whole building, and the materials
are all gathered in the neighbouring bush ; the beams,
rafters, and uprights are all lashed together by vines, which
are stronger than any rope. The sides are built of nicely
trimmed reeds, and tied together with magi-magi, strings
made out of cocoa-nut fibre, and when the wall is finished it
looks exactly like basket-work. The rafters are of bamboos,
which polish with age; the whole is then thatched over
neatly with sugar-cane leaves, and when finished is one of
the most cool and comfortable of houses, with a sweet
fragrance. In a Fijian’s house the sleeping portion, or vata,.
is raised slightly, and divided by a screen of tapa. The
floor is covered with mats, the finer ones being on the vata,
the fineness and number depending upon the position and
wealth of the householder; a big chief will sometimes have
as many as one hundred mats to sleep upon. There is one
sort of mat of very fine manufacture, called a tabukaise,
which means forbidden to slaves, and therefore can only
be used by chiefs. With regard to the privileges of chiefs,
the old fellows knew what they were about, for their
portion was always the best of everything, and such portion
it was death for a “ kaise ” to eat. Turtle and the better
class of fish are sacred to the chiefs. The head, breast, and
fingers were the chiefs’ portion at a cannibal feed. It is also
death for a kaise to touch a chief, and this was carried so far
that he dare not even kill him in battle. Through this custom
Tui Cakau nearly lost his life. He got upset from his canoe
when drunk, and none of his men dare touch him to pick
him out; they, however, kept him afloat by diving underneath
him until some whites came to his rescue. Contrary to our
custom, a man sits in the presence of a chief, and always
passes in front instead of behind. This originated from their
63


cowardly practice of always sneaking behind a man if they
wished to knock him on the head. If a chief,- when out for
a walk, gets a fall, all who are with him must fall too, and
he has to give a present to each, but with regard to all
customs it must be remembered that each chief has his own.
My evenings were now principally spent in curio buying, for
Chip had given out that I was a would-be purchaser. The
town of Koro-Navudi came down en masse; I believe I
bought this town out almost of house and home, for the last
night they actually brought the doors of their houses. I
have been very lucky in fishing up some really good curios,
as Koro-Navudi is a hill town, and out of the ordinary
run of curio buyers. It used to be a very amusing sight,
myself and Chip seated at a table with a pile of shillings and
about fifty natives all squatting on the floor, each with the
-different articles for sale. The shilling is the principal coin.
Even if you have to pay natives £2O it has all to be in
shillings. The silver coin is a great nuisance sometimes, as
the natives will only sell one article at a time, which they
know will prevent you making any great bargain in your own
favour. Except in the towns, where they have learned
rascality, the Fijians are very honest, especially if put in
charge of anything. Chip, when recruiting labour, has taken
out his bag of shillings and emptied it out on the floor to try
and tempt them to come, and he has gone out into other
burls (houses) to seek labour and never lost a shilling,
although perhaps all the women and children of the village
would be in the house, counting it out and playing with it.
A letter they carry in a split reed, and should rain come on
they wrap it in a banana leaf.
Bth Sept. —Chip began his crushing, and I was glad to
be with him, to see the process from the time the cane was
cut until the sugar was bagged for markbt. In fact, when I
left, I took his first supply with me. The average profit
per acre in Fiji is about £lO to £l2; the value of a ton of
sugar is from £22 to £24. Each acre ought, under good
auspices, to produce forty to fifty tons of canes, which would
produce about three tons of sugar; this is about what is being
realized at the present day from the best lands in Fiji.
Another of Fiji’s great productions is copra, the dried
kernel of the cocoa-nut; this has the largest export.
A cocoa-nut tree, when cultivated, ought to bear 60 to 80 nuts
a year, and about 6,000 nuts go to a ton of copra, which is
64


worth about £l4 a ton in Levuka. Of course, anybody going
in for cocoa-nuts has to wait from four to five years before
they even begin to bear, and from seven to eight till they are
in full bearing, and in that case he generally combines some
other business with it. Cattle grazing does well, as it assists
in keeping the ground clear under the trees. Coffee is as
yet in its infancy, as is also cinchona (quinine), cocoa,
and tea. The manufacture of rum is carried on to some
extent, the Rewa Co. alone making 35,000 gallons a year,
which fetches 2s. fid. a gallon in bond in Melbourne, and
the rum is equal to, if not better than, Jamaica rum.
There is no doubt that there is a magnificent future for Fiji,
if it only gets a better government. The present one is
rotten to the core, principally due to the stubbornness of Sir
Arthur Gordon, the governor, in still continuing his pet hobby
“ the native taxation scheme,” which no doubt is a curse to
the white settler, and most oppressive to the native. Not
only has the native still to keep up all the old feudal system
and the consequent right attaching thereto, due to the chief,
which is known as the lala, by which a chief can send a
demand to a town for whatever he wants, and such demand
must be obeyed; but they have now under this scheme to
work out their taxes for the Government, not being allowed
to pay them in money, and in fact to be at the beck and call of
the Government for whatever they may want, such as road
making, &c. The district and not the individual is taxed.
By this means it falls heavily on a few, and it greatly
enhances the power of the chief, as he can make his men do
almost anything under the guise of its being done for the
Government. Sir Arthur follows out the Exeter Hall idea,
that Fiji was annexed for the benefit of the Fijian, and not
for the white settler, and the mention of Exeter Hall is
sufficient to need no further comment. Great indignation is
felt out here with the way Sir Arthur has been received in
England, considering that his assertions were for the most
part utterly untrue, and had only one contemptible object,
namely, of making himself appear a hero in the eyes of people
at home who know little or absolutely nothing about Fiji.
His policy, as cracked up by himself, he of course makes out
to be perfect; but in reality it is just damning the country
and throwing its advancement back for years, for he in
everything takes the part of the natives, for which they do
not thank him, and which brings to them universal discontent,
F
65


unhappy and unpaid-for drudgery, and ruin to the settlers.
In his Aberdeen speech, in order to curry favour with the
Aberdonians, he instanced as the last man he shook hands
with on leaving Fiji, an Aberdonian, whom he said was
a “ large landed proprietor and owner of several trading
vessels,” whereas he is in reality a scamp who came out
here as agent for a rich man, and he has feathered his own
nest at the expense of his employer. “ The several trading
vessels ” consist of a 14-ton schooner, which he obtained
from hjs employer by fraud, and a 2-ton boat. Then again,
Sir Arthur tries to make himself out a martyr, by saying it
is unsafe to be here. Chip’s late manager and a Mr. Pringle
were lost here in a boat accident some months ago, and
neither they nor the boat have ever been heard of since.
On Pringle’s people applying to Sir Arthur in England he
answered that it was his impression that they had been
kidnapped. There was more chance of people being kid-
napped in the English Channel than here. People have much
greater confidence in their safety than they certainly would
in our large cities ; here we are with doors and windows wide
open day and night, and although the house is deserted in
the daytime, Chip has never lost a thing.
9 th Sept. —I see little of Chip now, except at an occasional
meal, and in the evenings. lam at present busy making a
series of sketches for him to send home, to give his people
some idea of what his place is like. At present there are a
number of men down from some hill town executing a contract
for clearing a piece of land which is to be put under sugar, so
Chip has arranged a grand meke for this evening. On a
plantation here you have to be able to turn your hand to
anything. T o-day I have been at work with Chip at the mill
putting up a new cooler. The great difficulty was the boring
of the holes through the planks. The holes had to be right
through them cross-ways, and the planks were 1 \ inches thick
and 2ft. 6in. broad. He has a capital Fijian blacksmith. In
the afternoon I went for a ride along the shore to try and get
rid of a head-ache, as to-day has been most fearfully hot. Our
dress on the plantation is certainly not cumbersome—shoes,
flannel trousers tucked into one’s socks, to keep out insects,
flannel shirt with sleeves rolled up above the elbow and open
at the neck, either Tokolau straw hat orhelmet, bright-coloured
waist-band as preventive of dysentery, and a belt with pouch
and bowie-knife. The ride was one of the most perfect I
66


bave ever been, the sea tumbling in at the horse’s feet on one
side, rich tropical vegetation on the other, with, beautiful
hard sand to ride upon. I had to keep a sharp look-out for
overhanging branches, for Jackie was left like a monkey in a
tree the other day, and the little mare, when you once get
her into a gallop, is hard to pull in. On coming round one
•corner I saw a tree only a few yards ahead, when I turned
the horse’s head into the sea with some difficulty, and so
escaped a similar fate to Jackie. Natives, too, always set up
a series of the most frightful howls as you pass, and many
accidents have occurred through this practice. In the
evening while we were at dinner we heard preparation going
■on for the meke, evidently, from the noises, they were practising.
No description that could be written would give any adequate
idea whatever of this wild savage entertainment. Weird and
terrible did it look, the dusky forms of the savages decorated
with huge head-dresses made out of tapa, and shaped something
like enormous ostrich feathers ; besides this their only dress
was a sulu or liko of either bright-coloured cloth, or tapa
(sulu), or of grass dyed black (liko), or some even only with a
•creeping plant wound round their loins. The first performance
was to be a war dance, so they were all armed with clubs,
and their faces in full war-paint, being daubed over with
red and black stuff in curious devices, which gave them a most
diabolical look. So weird was it, that one could almost see
back some ten years, when in the midst would have been the
body of a slaughtered foe, roasting over a huge fire. The
•darkness of the night, and the light from their bamboo torches,
gave an additional weirdness to the entertainment. One
thing which struck me most forcibly was, that here were we,
•only six whites, three of whom were ladies, in the midst of
over ioo wild savages, who as late as 1876 were cannibals,
and really at heart are still so, as in talking with them they
smack their lips at the mere mention of human flesh. Pig’s
flesh is the nearest approach, but not nearly rich enough.
The music is more monotonous even than that of the Arabs,
which it somewhat resembles, without the advantage of
musical instruments, their only ones being pieces of bamboo,
which are beaten on the ground, so producing a dull humming
noise; the band is composed of small boys, who crouch on
the ground in a circle, while in the centre stand two, one
holding a tali, upon which the other beats, and so acts as
conductor. The tali is of all sizes; some are enormous, being
67


the trunk of a tree hollowed out, and can be heard for miles,,
entirely taking the place of bells. It is beaten in a peculiar-
manner for each particular thing for which it is required, as,
for instance, a summons to war, the death of a person,,
church, school, dancing, &c., and on a plantation different
sounds for different meals and cooking times. To beat it is
an art. The club dance is about to begin. From a group of
crouching figures springs a boy, armed only with a noddie or
small club, while singing something to the tune of the music,
he throws himself into the most curious attitudes, evidently
as if he were fighting with some imaginary foe; finally, crouch-
ing on one knee, he throws his head wildly from side to side,
but every movement is in perfect time to the music. At a sign
from the boy, and as he bounds forward, another figure
springs forth, this time a warrior in full war-paint, armed
with a huge war club, which he brandishes in the wildest way,,
and goes through (only on a larger scale) all that the boy has.
done. Finally, both himself and the boy, springing forward
a couple of paces, are followed by another, and so they go
on, until they are all in one long line, dancing wildly and
brandishing their clubs, but there is not a movement that is.
not in the most perfect time to the music. Next came the
dance of the Mallicolo boys, from one of the islands of the
New Hebrides ; these men are peculiar for their pointed
heads, which are so formed by being pressed between two
boards when children, the weight being put on the forehead ;
while a Fijian has the back of his head squeezed in to give
it breadth, which is to them a type of beauty. Amongst
these the Santo Islanders, which is another island of the New
Hebrides group, and the Tokolaus, the islands on the line,
there is no such thing as either modesty or virtue; but the
Tokolaus are the worst. They are noted for their skill in
the water, and are most daring in their attacks on the
sharks, which they follow armed with knives. They have been
known to be in the water for five or six days at a stretch, and
of course are magnificent fishermen ; on fish they principally
live, combined with cocoa-nuts. The fish they cook in the
sun, as no such thing as fire was at first known in their
islands. They have neither wood nor water on the island,
except what the cocoa-nut produces, and what is washed
ashore, out of which they make their canoes. These islanders
have never been cannibals, but are dreadful creatures for the
use of the knife, especially when their jealousy is aroused.
68


Their own weapon is a lance edged with shark’s teeth, and as
a protection in warfare they wear coats of mail made out of
sinnet. To return to the meke. The dance of the Mallicols
Islanders was noticeable principally on account of the noise
they made. They danced in a circle with two in the centre ;
they had the disadvantage of not being able to muster enough
fora really good meke. The next men who meked were the
hill men, down for the clearing. The dancing in this was
the most peculiar of any, as they threw themselves into the
most extraordinary positions. At one moment they would
be dancing wildly, all forming hands, at another they would
be throwing themselves on to the ground, touching it with their
heads. They danced in two long rows, each row taking it in
turn to be the front one, and in a series of figures like a
quadrille. The way they end each figure is curious, as they
all clap hands, and in such perfect time that it might be a
clap as by one man, and how they can do it in the darkness
is wonderful. Meke- ing with them is like the alphabet is to
us. The entertainment ended with a spear dance, a most
graceful one, considering their spears were over fourteen feet
long, and that never one clashed. We ended about 12 o’clock,
and had it not been crushing time, they would have kept it
up all night.
10 th Sepl. —To-day I made an attempt to get a boat to
take me to Levuka to catch the “ Gunga,” but I could not, so
I lived on in the hope of the “ Bella ” coming back to pick
me up. In the evening, as there was a chance of it being
mylast night, we had a small dinner party, consisting of
• ourselves and the Wiseman party. The dinner was delicious,
all being productions from the plantation. Boiled mammy
apple, exactly like a vegetable marrow, yams, taro, bread-
fruit, and cocoa-nut salad —this last is a delicacy ; to make it
,a tree has to be cut down. It is made from the heart of the
tree, where the young leaves spring from. A tree is worth
from £t to £1 10s. The evening’s entertainment ended up
by singing in the verandah. It was a lovely moonlight
night, almost as light as day, and to read was perfectly easy.
The cocoa-nut trees look most lovely. Their leaves are
naturally glistening, but in the moonlight they shine like
silver, and reflect back the rays of light. We are never late in
retiring to rest, as the mosquitoes make it almost impossible
to do anything after sunset with comfort; smokers even they
■defy, and one longs to be under the shelter of one’s muslin
69


bed-curtains. This afternoon I was surprised when awaking
from my siesta to find seven girls in native Costume in the ;
room. They were the fishing girls, and had come to me with
shells. Jackie acted as my interpreter. I amused myself by
giving them a dose of Eno’s Fruit Salt all round, which they
seemed to relish. Tattooing used to be a very common thing
amongst the Fijian women, but it is rapidly dying out. It
was generally done on the lower part of the body, and circles
at the sides of the mouth, which gives them a peculiar ex-
pression. Girls allow their hair to grow, and they plait it in
tufts, which they call a “tobithese are cut off upon the
girl getting married, and from that time the hair is kept short,
except in times of mourning and child-birth, when it is
allowed to grow. With the men the hair is allowed to grow.
They take great pride in it, and dress it in the most fantastic
way with lime and red clay. Hair-dressing is one of their
national arts, but the missionaries have put a stop to it, and
compel the men on becoming Christianized to cut it short.
Sir A. Gordon, however, is encouraging it again. Contrary
to our notions, size is a Fijian type of beauty, with a low
forehead and broad nose. The old women have their ears
most fearfully cut, the lobe hanging down in a loop, quite
one and a half inch long; in this they used to wear leaves as
a decoration. The men bore their ears, and in the hole
carry either their pipe or tobacco. Before turning in to-
night we saw a most lovely meteor; it was of bright
green, and moved slowly across the sky, leaving behind it
a fiery track like a comet.
it ih Sept. —This morning an attack of inflammation set in,and
I felt far from happy, knowing there was no chance of getting
a doctor here. Fortunately I had had it two years ago, and
knew that there was little that could be done for it but to lay
up and take warm baths. For the first day I tried the
verandah, but finding I got worse I took to my bed, and it
was nearly a week before I was well enough to turn out
again. Mrs. Wiseman and her two visitors have been kind-
ness itself, and have fed me on all sorts of little delicacies.
I have lived almost entirely on milk. My time was principally
occupied in reading novels, of which Chip had a goodly
supply, and I had also brought him up some when I came.
An occasional visit from a Fijian with some curios for sale
helped to pass away the time. One man brought me a couple
of Kula birds, a species of paroquet. They have a dark blue
70


head, fringe of the brightest emerald green, cardinal breast,
and back of different shades of green, and long green and
yellow tail. They are exceedingly delicate, a fact I did not
know until mine had died on their way to Suva. I believe
they have never been able to get them even as far as Sydney.
In Samoa they are worth £3 each. On account of their
feathers they pluck them and turn them loose again; by this
means it is said they get two crops a year. My little pair were
christened “ T’other ” and “ Which.” Like the two Dromios, it
was difficult to tell the difference between them. They were
at first tied by a leg to a stick, but on finding that they were
nearly quite tame, they were released, and allowed to wander
about at pleasure. In this way they lived for over a fortnight;
and although doors and windows were always wide open, they
only once wandered out, and were found in the kitchen house.
lam by degrees picking up something of the Fijian language.
It is very pretty, but very defective, as one word has to do
duty for so much; for instance, “ cula ” means anything
with a point, a fork, a needle, a tooth-pick or anything pointed,
what is meant can only be gathered from the context.
The sound of the language is particularly soft; as k is the
only hard letter, b is pronounced as mb, and d as nd and g as
hg soft, as in the word singing, and q hard, as in going;
and in writing no two consonants ever come together, and
every word ends in a vowel. Of course, since the settlement
of the whites they have had to Fijianize many English
words; for instance, a cow is bulmnakau, a horse is orsi, as they
have no h. Since being Christianized they have a great
fancy for christening their children with the most extra-
ordinary Biblical names. As baptista does not take place
until they arrive at years of discretion, they generally choose
their own names; some have been known to be christened
Golgotha, and some Satan and Beelzebub. This evening
Jimmie, Chip’s blacksmith, came up to show me how they
procure fire in the bush by friction. A dry branch of soft
wood is cut down, and with a short stick of hard wood about
the size of a carpenter’s pencil they have all that is necessary.
Placing the stick on the floor and keeping it perfectly steady,
with the assistance of Chip, Jimmie took the short stick, and
commenced to rub it quickly backwards and forwards, until
a small groove was formed in the soft wood. Verjr soon a
small heap of dry dust which had been formed at one end
of the groove, began to smoulder, and presently, after more
71


vigorous rubbing, a tiny spark appeared. This spark was
nursed by gently blowing and adding fresh bits of fuel in the
palm of the hand, until a small flame rewarded his efforts.
And so the time wore on, when, just as I was all right, a
message came that a doctor had arrived in the bay, sent
down by the Government, and was at Captain B ’s.
The Wisemans were also anxious to see him, so we sent a
boat over for him. It was now Chip’s turn to be ill, for an
illness he has once every three months began to show itself;
it is an abscess on the leg, and in the most painful position ;
so I had now my turn of nursing.
2 Jtli Sept. —The doctor has arrived, and turns out to be a
moral * Aberdonian, and a man rather fond of his glass, so
much so that we had to manoeuvre to keep him sober.
Fortunately, he did not go down to the Wisemans in the
evening, but went quietly to bed. He was full of his love for
the author of “ Coming through the Rye,” but after a time it
got a little weary. Miss H was now my constant
companion in walks and boating excursions. One day we
walked to the top of the Race, then followed up the stream for
some distance, scrambling over rocks until we came to the
most delicious waterfall tumbling over wild rocks into a
crystal pool beneath. Another day we took the dingy out to
the reef, for nothing I enjoy better than examining these
wonderful formations and all thier finny occupants. The
coral itself is of the most lovely colours, but dies on being taken
out of the water. The coral as seen in England is only the
skeleton ; in the water that is covered with a sort of filmy
skin, which has the lively colours and is the animal itself.
In the afternoon I went over to Mrs. T ’s, to make a
sketch of her home for her to send to friends in England.
z&th Sept. — Sunday, and at last lam well enough to start
on a longer walk, so with Miss H as my companion, I
started for Wai-Levu to see a native church; the walk is
along the sea shore, and although a baking hot day, there
was a cool breeze. I forgot to mention the way we dressed
up Jackie for church last Sunday. He had on a pair of white
trousers, too short, so showed a piece of black leg between
* There is a great joke out here. Sir Arthur, in one of his speeches in
Aberdeen, asked the Provost if he could not send out to Fiji some moral
young men with money. The Provost replied, he could send out men
whose morality was undoubted, but whose money was doubtful.
72


them and his boots, which were too large for him ; a shirt
with bright red stripes and collar of a different pattern, white
tie, dove-coloured waistcoat, ever so much too big, a tall hat
with scarlet band (to make the hat fit at all we had to
stuff it), gloves, with fingers too long, a prayer-book, a yellow
and white umbrella; in this costume he went to church, the
admired of all observers. His dress so excited the envy of
Billy Barlow, that he refused to go to church until Mrs.
Wiseman dressed him up too; and they looked a fine pair, I
can tell you. The day was very hot, and I was not sorry
when we arrived at the town ; the church is the only erection
built of stone, and is deliciously cool inside. The floor is
covered with mats, on which the people sit, but we were
provided with a bench behind the black missionary, who,
when we entered, stepped out of his reading-desk to show us
where to sit. It was a most interesting service, and very
impressive, for they sang and chanted well; the chanting
was very similar to what the priest sings at mass when there
is no choir; the sermon was a long one, and the preacher
compared them all to dry bones; after which there was a
prayer by another missionary, in which he prayed for the
Marama (lady), and the papalangi (white man.)
I never saw such a well-behaved congregation; the children
■even were perfectly quiet, although they crawled about at
pleasure. One child came right out in front of everybody
and squatted down before us exactly like a little monkey.
The men and women sit on different sides, and in rows.
When they pray they look exactly like a lot of Mahommedans,
as they touch the ground with their foreheads. The building of
the church was very peculiar, all the upright beams and cross
timbers being lashed together by different coloured sinnet, and
worked into a pattern. Sinnet is a string of various strengths
made out of cocoa-nut fibre; this the natives dye various colors.
After service, we went and sat in the chief’s house, and had
a chat with his wife and daughter. There were many others
there too; a chiefs house is a sort of gathering place. They
got down their yaqona bowl to show me ; it was a very large
■one and beautifully kava’d. After a vessel has been used for
yaqona drinking for some time it becomes coated with a
bluish substance, which, when polished, almost resembles
enamel. Kava-kava is another name for this plant, hence
the term. The name in English medical lists for it is Kava
methystico. From the door of the house I got a capital
73


sketch of the town, which, with its queer-shaped houses built
underthe shade of cocoa-nut and bread-fruit trees and backed
by the blue sea, made indeed a lovely picture. We then
went into the large house in the centre of the town, to see the
fishing-net which the women were making as a present for
old King Cakobau (pronounced Thakombau). They have
just finished a mat 2,000 feet long, which is also to go to Bau,
the native capital. This net was in the canoe-shed, where
they were building a huge canoe. It was interesting to see
how beautifully they join their timbers together. The bottom
of the canoe was made from two trees hollowed out, and
joined in the most marvellous manner by sinnet only; the
sides were fastened on in a similar manner. Their only tools
are either flat irons from a plane, or axes and old chisels. These
they fasten on to a handle sideways, making them like
adzes. When the canoe is finished, it has an outrigger, and
resembles those used at Point-de-Galle, but I believe much
bigger. The Fiji canoes carry a queer-shaped sail made of
matting, and can sail much closer to the wind than can a
white man’s boat. On our way out of the town we passed two
chiefs’ graves, and on them was spread some tapa. Curiously
enough, the natives would not mind a stranger taking this,
but for one of themselves to do so is a fearful sacrilege. The
grave was built of stones of a pyramidical shape, and sur-
rounded by variegated plants. The walk back was hot but
very pleasant, and the view of the bay most lovely. I noticed
on some of the cocoa-nut leaves specimens of native art in
the shape of drawings of ships, fish and turtles. Heyward
arrived in the “ Bella ” in the evening.
29 tk September. —To-day I have devoted to finishing off
the packing of my curios, for we are to start in the evening.
Chip and I had a long talk last night, which ended in
our deciding to join in giving Mrs. Wiseman a present of a
piano, and as we had heard John Dodds had one which he
wished to sell, we sent off a note to him by a native. Dodds-
lives at Balaga, fifteen miles off, and to which there is a very
rough track, and also several rivers to be crossed. It was.
ten o’clock before our messenger left, and at five o’clock he
was back, having done the 30 miles in seven hours, counting
the time he would wait for an answer, and he had had no
food. The piano was not for sale. On Saturday I had sent
Jimmie out to buy me mats, and he came back with a supply
of really good ones; to-day Jimmie was busy, so we sent
74


another man, and he brought back a miserable lot, and
as he had been away too long he got a fearful wigging
from Chip. Miss H gave me as a “ loloma ”
(present), a most beautiful piece of tapa, almost resembling
a fine Indian shawl, so beautifully is it painted. She also
gave me an old Fiji axe-head. Chip and I went down to tell
Mrs. Wiseman of the coming present; you can imagine her
delight, as she is very fond of music and a capital pianist, at
again having a piano, after being without one for so long.
Presents are flying. Chip has compelled me to accept his
large yaqona bowl. It is about the finest in the country, and
was bought by him in the heart of the Yeti Levu mountains*
Sir Arthur Gordon, who is a great curio collector, was
very envious of it. Chip also gave me a huge war-club and
two cannibal forks; these were bought by him at the same
time as the bowl, and within two miles of where missionary
Baker was eaten. A curio dealer in Levuka, when he chances
on a fork, no matter where he gets it, always declares that it
was used at this particular feast, and for some time after
Baker’s death, the natives used to try and sell their clubs as
being the one which actually killed him. My largest case of
curios was about 15 feet long, and it was a curious sight to
see the natives carrying it down to the tram. It took
eight of them, and when it was going down looked like a
huge centipede. The Doctor is again here, having arrived
last Saturday. This time, unfortunately, we could not hide
his failing from Mrs. Wiseman. He had not been long
enough in the house for us to get him sober before she
saw him. To-night we had quite a large dinner party.
There were Mr. and Mrs. Wiseman, Miss B and Miss
H. the Doctor, Heyward, Chip and myself. I feel
quite down in the mouth at going, and Chip is worse, for I
have been here nearly a month, and I never spent a happier
one in my life. After dinner we all went out in the verandah
and sang songs; this time we persuaded Miss B to sing,.
and we feel certain she must have been very angry with us
for not pressing her more on the last occasion. She tries to
do the sentimental, and during the last week after dinner has.
taken herself off to some solitary rock, where she used to sing
“ Only a face at the window.” She got, I believe, very angry
with me because I used to do the echo from our verandah.
Latterly, I really believe she has got to hate me, because of
my making such fearful fun of her and preferring Miss
75


H. , whom she considers so far beneath her, to herself.
It was now (n o’clock) nearly time to be off so we started
for the beach, and took with us a loaf of bread and a pot of
marmalade, as other luxuries were on board. I also took
with me the two kula birds and some sugar-cane for them.
It was a most lovely night, being almost full moon. The
“Bella ” was lying about a mile away, so we had a jolly walk.
Chip could not manage the whole distance, so I said “ Good-
bye ” to the old man, with a faithful promise, if ever I had
the chance, I would pay him another visit. While we were
sitting on the beach waiting for the dingy to come off to us,
“Nat,” a neighbour of Chip’s, arrived to say he had heard I
was going and had not had time to write, but would I mind
calling on Miss Codlin in Melbourne and tell her that I had
seen him and that he was all right. It is the queerest
commission I ever had in my life, and one I do not intend to
carry out. I was very tired, so soon after getting on board I
turned in and slept soundly, in spite of the smell from the
sugar and molasses, and quite regardless of cockroaches.
30 th Sept.. —This has been a fearfully hot day. Two very
large whales played about us for some time. We had only got
as far as Mokadraga at midnight, where we cast anchor,
Ist October. —Up at sunrise, and despatched the dingy to
fetch off Mr. Hennings from the neighbouring island of
Mokagai. He came off presently, bringing with him some
foreign labourers who were returning home. The name of
Hennings is well known in connexion with Fiji. Whatever
part you go to, you will find they are owners of land. They
are rich now, but I believe were heavy sufferers at the time
of the fall in cotton. Just as we were nearing Levuka you
can imagine my disgust at seeing a steamer go out, about
which there could be little doubt but that it was the “ Suva,”
although she had been advertised to sail on the 4th, and here
it was only the Ist. As we were entering the reef surrounding
Levuka, we met D. S , who told us that it was the
“ Suva,” and that R had sailed in her for Suva. Directly
I landed I went to the Club and found W there, then
rushed off to Billy Anslow, the boatman, and chartered him
for the stern chase, as the “ Suva ” will remain at Suva till
some time to-morrow, the agents suppose about evening,
hut that I dare not rely upon. Within hours of
Handing, I was again off in a small four-oared skiff, with Billy
.Anslow and two Fijians. I left the Club Pier at four o’clock.
76


There I saw F- P , who had returned by the last
“ Gunga,” and St. P , with whom I left the moneyfor the
piano. Fortunately for me, the bank manager here was
unusually polite in allowing me to draw cash after the bank
was closed, otherwise to use a nautical expression, “ I should
have been in the dirt-tub.” To begin with, we had a slight
breeze but not enough to allow the men to stop rowing; the
Fijians had an oar apiece and Billy a pair of skulls. The
boat also had a centre board for use out in the open and for
raising when crossing reefs. Unfortunately, just at the most
critical part of our journey, darkness came on, and we had to
be most careful. Fortunately there was nothing of a sea on,
and as Billy said, we must risk it; but our Fijians kept a
sharp look out, and I was not sorry when one of them sang out
something, which being translated was,“We are past it.” We
had now nothing but steady rowing, sometimes aided by a.
slight breeze, but really nothing to do us much good. I had
heard of the wonderful endurance of Fijians, and I was now to
have a personal test of it. They had begun at four o’clock, and
before they had an ease at all it was one o’clock, nine hours on
the stretch. At one o’clock we landed on a small island called
Tambaroo, (?) at the mouth of the Rewa River, to wait for the
tide to rise, as it was low water, and too shallow to cross over
to the channel. Here I experienced one of the most weird
scenes possible. It was a wild night, clouds scudding over
the moon, which was now at its full. We had landed, as I said,
on a small island, on which, under the shelter of a clump of
palm trees, had been built a buri, used by the fishermen. It
was built entirely of plaited cocoa-nut leaves, and the floor
strewed with the same. After clearing a space to prevent the
chance of burning down the place, we kindled a fire. The
effect was most weird. The old tumbledown buri, buried in
darkness, the wind swaying about the cocoa-nut trees, the fire,
over which sat a Fijian, and stretched at the other side of it
lay Billy, and just below us in the boat sat the other Fijian,
singing some incantation song to keep off the devils, as this
was a devil island., After an hour of this kind of thing, the
tide having risen, we started again, and wrapped in my big
coat in the stern sheets I managed to get some sleep.
2nd Oct. —It was between four and five when 1 awoke, and
we were on the Rewa River, one of the finest rivers in the
group, being navigable for boats upwards of 40 miles, and it
is on its banks that the finest sugar plantations are. There
77


is something very impressive about Fijian rivers ; their
wonderful solitude, broken only occasionally by the screech of
some parrot, the rich tropical vegetation which lines their
banks, picturesque villages there are % too, buried away amidst
.groves of bananas and cocoa-nut trees. It was six o’clock
by the time we had reached “ Harry Smith’s,” a river-side
■“ hotel,” where we had a wash and breakfasted, after
which we again started for Suva, now distant only about
a three hours’ row. We made our way some little distance
further up the river and then passed into another of
its mouths, for there is here a regular Delta. After cross-
ing a creek through mangroves, we entered an open bay,
where we had hoped for a fair breeze to help us along, but
unfortunately for our rowers we got a head one. We landed
in Suva a little after twelve o’clock,-having been only twenty
hours on the journey, with three hours rest. That makes 17
hours rowing a distance of nearly 70 miles, giving an average
of over four miles an hour. Billy had been an amusing compan-
ion. He had gone out to the Colonies at the first gold rush,
and he gave me some of his experience. My kula birds died
in the night of cold, and I regret tremendously having
attempted to bring them. Had I known at the time that several
attempts had been made to get them to Sydney and that
all had failed, I should have left the poor little things behind
me. I was not sorry to get on shore after nearly four days
in the open. In my hurry I found I had left a good many
things behind me in the Club at Levuka, so I sent a note back
by Billy. R- met me on landing, and after lunch, we went
for a walk along the shore. At one place we came to a piece
•of yam, which was being carried off by hermit crabs, and it
was an extraordinary sight to see the shore alive, for these
funny little animals occupy all sorts and sizes of shells. In
another place the sand was strewed as it appeared with yellow
objects, which as we approached disappeared into small holes.
They were a species, I believe, of crab, with one huge yellow
•claw, about four times as big as themselves. Before leaving
Fiji I must give some idea of its size, for I think people at
home, like myself until I had been here, know very little of
its actual size—for take up what map you may, Fiji is repre-
sented only by a few dots. Draw a line right round Fiji, and
it would form a circular figure, of which the spaller diameter
would be over 260 miles, and the longest over 370. A steamer
passing along the line at 10 miles an hour would be nearly
78


five days and nights on the voyage. There are more than 80
inhabited islands, one half as large as Jamaica and much
larger than Cyprus ; a second would contain Mauritius three
times over, and Barbadoes ten times, and the aggregate area
of the whole is greater than that of all the British West
Indian Islands, Jamaica, Trinidad, and the Windward and Lee-
ward Islands. There are upwards of 7,000,000 acres of land
in the Fiji group, of which one-seventh is claimed by
white settlers. The group is situate in the South Pacific,
between long. 176 E. and 178 W. and lat. 16 0 and 21 S. It
is 1,175 N. of Auckland N.Z.; 1,760 N. from Sydney, N.S.W.,
and 725 miles E. from New Caledonia. The Islands of
Western Polynesia, which includes the Solomon Islands and
the New Hebrides, and from which the labour is recruited, lie
at a distance of from between 500 to 1,500 miles. There
are about 120,000 natives in the group, and 2,000 white
settlers, of which nearly half reside in Levuka. I have
somewhere heard them described as “a society of impoverished
gentlemen.”
79


CHAPTER IV.
Sea-sickness Conquered—The Banks o’ Yarra—Womanly Girls and
Unmanly Larrikins —Off to Ballaarat: Glimpse of its Beauties —A
Visit to a Gold Mine —Exciting Yacht Race—Oh ! the Roast Beef
of Greater Britain, three-half-pence apound—Some Wonderful Sheep
on the Track —An Australian Sheep Farm—Cobb’s Coach and its
Customers —Adelaide—Sights of the Continent—River Murray—At
Woodhouse again—A Fearful Storm—Grand Doings at Adelaide —A
Successful Pic-nic —A Plague of Egypt—A Right Merry Christmas —
Slightly Sentimental, but Heartily Happy—Good-bye to Woodhouse.
BIBBSE did not sail from Suva until 8.20, when I said
RuQfl good-bye to R . The last passenger to come
on board was a Mr. L. S —-—, living on the Rewa,
and an Irishman. He has been here for eight years,
and may be called the pioneer of sugar-growing in Fiji. He
came from the West Indies, and was the first to bring sugar
into serious notice in Fiji. Besides him was a Mr. G , a
surveyor, who shared my cabin, Adolphe J , from Suva,
going down to Melbourne for his health, and two ladies, who
were so ill the whole way that we hardly saw them. One was.
a girl I should say between seventeen and eighteen, going to
Melbourne to be educated, as up to the present she had been
living almost the life of a Fijian, dress and all. On this voyage
I was determined to make a fight against sea-sickness, and
I am thankful to say I succeeded with, I believe, the assistance
of wearing a tight belt both day and night. We had a most
amusing time of it, L. S being the life of the party,,
and it is wonderful how quick the time has passed. We have
had a wonderfully quick voyage, only ten and a half days from
Suva to Williamstown, which lies at the entrance to the river
Yarra. We should have done it quicker, only unfortunately,
after rounding Cape Howe and Gabo Island, on which is a
lighthouse and signal-station, we had a strong head-wind
with heavy sea, which greatly delayed us. We passed
Wilson’s Promontory at 10.30 on the night of the 13th, the
light on which was almost over our heads, and so close that it
threw shadows on the deck. You can pass so close to the


rock as almost to be able to touch it with a stick. Our next
place was The Stacks, which is a bold headland, with some
fine rocks standing out of the water, on which the surf was
breaking magnificently. The water ahead of us was one
black mass of mutton birds. We succeeded in getting
signalled here. It was past mid-day, however, before we were
through the Heads. Although there had been a heavy roll on
outside, the Rip was quite smooth. This is the fifth time I
have passed there in three months. We picked up our pilot
inside. It seems ridiculous that we should be obliged to take
a pilot at all, considering Captain Garson has the free entry
to all ports, and is known to be the best coaster in these
parts. On arriving at Williamstown, we had to take
another pilot for the Yarra. I don’t believe anybody
knows what a smell is until he has been up this river. We
were alongside the Queen’s Wharf about four o’clock, and I
at once got my things ashore. The Custom-house officer
insisted on opening my portmanteau to an admiring crowd of
larrikins. Some of the Fiji curios bothered him, especially
the tapa, as there is duty on cloth. The first place I had to
go to was a hatter’s, as mine had been sat on by one of my
Fijian boatmen coming from Levuka. L. S left his traps
on board and came up with me. I returned to my old quarters
at the Oriental hotel. We called on T , and I got an
invitation to a large dinner party at his house to-morrow night.
In the evening L. S— — dined with me, and we afterwards
went to see Marshall as Chrysos in “Pygmalion and Galatea.”
L. S is going through to England by the next mail, partly
on business, but principally to bring out a wife, to whom he
has been engaged for over fourteen years. He was returning
home some years ago from the West Indies with the same
intention, when he heard he had lost his all through a hurri-
cane. G was married at nineteen to a girl of fourteen.
This reminds me to mention what a striking thing out here
is the rapid development of girls to woman’s estate. At so
early an age as fifteen you will see a girl here look as old
and as “ grown up ” as a girl of twenty-one or twenty-
two in England. They also lose their figures much
more rapidly than do our English girls. Larrikins are the
curse of nearly all Australian towns. They are youths of
what in England we should call the hobble-de-hoyhood,
who never have had any home training, or who are so
rebellious as to have thrown off all home restraint. They
G
81


somewhat resemble the Constantinople dogs, as they are the
greatest of curs, and fearful cowards except when' in packs.
They come out at dusk, after their day’s work, if they have
any, is over, and herd together in the streets, obstructing the
pathways and insulting and annoying peaceable citizens;
always ready for a row, but only when they know they are
superior in numbers. The authorities are trying to put down
“ larrikinism ” by means of the lash, in which they are
succeeding, for, like all physical cowards, they cannot bear
pain. Formerly it was imprisonment, and on their time
being up, the offenders were received as a sort of heroes, by
their brother larrikins. Girls who are fast and assume the
airs and ways of men, are called “ Larrikinas.” After the
theatre we went with a friend, whom I had met there, and his
wife and another young lady to Heard’s for an oyster supper
—a great treat after being so long without these delicious
bivalves.
15 th Oct. —In the morning I went in to see C. R , and
found him and Captain R busy over some water-colour
drawings of flowers, painted by the wife of the latter. They
were all New Zealand flowers, and I have never before seen
such wonderful flower painting, even in some respects excelling
that of the Miss Mutries. Lunched with C. R at the
Club. It is most amusing, as nearly everybody has
to look twice before they recognize me with a beard.
In the evening I went out to dine with Mr. T , at North
Brighton, which is about seven miles from Melbourne. I met
a man on his way to dine there. He too is globe-trotting. I
never before saw, even in London, more lovely flowers on a
dinner table. Besides a few native ones, there were nearly
ail our English flowers, but grown to a much greater state of
perfection on account of the climate. The flower which was
most prized as being the hardest to acclimatize was the Lily
of the Valley.
16 th Oct. —I went into C. shortly after breakfast,
and found him preparing for a wedding feast. He was to be
groomsman, and was in a great state of mind over a speech
he had been asked to make, that of returning thanks for the
bridesmaids. He[afterwards introduced me to the bridegroom
elect, and got me an invitation for the ball to-night. A word
about C. R , as he has done what few others either have
the chance or good fortune to do. He was one of the medical
men sent out to theßusso-Turkish war by the Stafford House
82


Committee, and was the only Englishman who was all through
the memorable siege of Plevna. He was afterwards oneof the
two survivors of 27 doctors out of 32 who caught the fever in
Erzeroum. He has gained in all four Turkish medals, among
which is the Medjidie. Thedancein the evening was a great
■success. We assembled at C. R ’s, five of us in all, one
man I had met before, but had not known his name. It was
Dick A , the son of the poet. I had been told to look out
for him here, and had actually been one of a quartette with
him at supper at a former dance without knowing his name.
1 Jth Oct. —I went down to the “Suva ” in the morning to
bring up some coral, a large bunch of bananas, and some pine-
apples which I had brought with me from Fiji. Afterwards
went down to M‘Ewan’s and got a little spirit barrel made of
light wood, with silver bands, to send out to Chip to-morrow by
the “ Suva.” This evening I drove out with C. R and a
Dr. C to a dance some distance out from Melbourne. Dr.
C is from Ceylon, over here on leave for his health; he
was at Guy’s with Jack E , and knew him well. He
is a capital fellow, and has asked me to come and stay with
him on my way through Ceylon ; he lives near Candy. The
dance was one of the most enjoyable I have been at in
Melbourne, and I met some old friends, Miss R
and Miss H . The nights here are so lovely that between
the dances everybody turns out of doors to wander about the
gardens. To-day and yesterday I have had my first taste of
the hot winds. They certainly make one feel fearfully
languid. I did not get to bed till after five o’clock a.m., and
as I am off to Ballaarat to-morrow I had a lot of packing to
do before turning in.
18 th Oct. —C. R drove down with me to North Mel-
bourne to catch the Ballaarat train, as I had decided last night
rather suddenly to leave for Adelaide overland and to stop at
Ballaarat for a day or so. I got there about four o’clock and
went up at once to call on Dr. P , the brother of C. P ,
whom I had met in Levuka, Fiji, and to whom C. R had
given me a letter. He insisted on putting me up ; a thing which
lam not at all sorry for, as I am dreadfully down in the
mouth. He is a bachelor and has a very good practice here. In
the evening we went down to the Club of which I was made an
hon. member, and then on to Mr. 0 ’s, the manager of the
Union Bank here, where we had some music, &c. There
was a simple youth there, who upon being told by Mr. 0
83


to make use of the Club to see the papers, &c., said, “Thank
you, I have brought the Argus up with me.”
19 th Oct. —lt is quite a different climate up here to that of
Melbourne, Ballaarat being 1,437 feet above the sea. It owes
its present position as the second town in the colony to its
gold-fields, which were first discovered in 1851, and in 1854
Ballaarat became famous for what is known as the “ Eureka
Stockade,” which was defended by the miners who had risen
in arms against an “ unjust” tax. There is a monument in
the Cemetery to those who then fell both on the side of the
rebels and the troops. Ballaarat is also known as the “City
of Gardens,” for not only has every house and cottage got its-
garden, but the streets, too, are all planted. Sturt-street,
which is the main street, is planted both by trees along each
side and gardens down its centre ; from pavement to pavement
this street is twice as broad as Collins-street, and considerably
broader than Regent-street; it is what is called a three-chain
street, that is»66 yards in width. The gardens are full of
flowers and flowering trees, among which are our English lilac,
and Laburnum and the Cape broom, which we have in our green-
houses, but which grows here like our English broom. In
the morning I went to church, as I heard that there was a good
choir there, in which I was not deceived. In addition to the
ordinary choir of men and boys, the two front pews in the
nave were filled with women. One girl in particular sang
a most beautiful solo.* One thing struck me here, as it has
done all through the colony, that you scarcely ever hear the
poor little letter H abused. It may be on account of there
beinghigher education here than in England; in fact, education
is almost carried to too great an extent in so young a country.
It is conducted in State schools, of which in Ballaarat there
are no less than ten. The schools are free and the rate-
payers are taxed. The fault, I think, lies in teaching the
higher branches of education to the children of the poorer
classes, so robbing the country of artizans; for children who
are taught French, German, music, &c., will seldom care to
follow their fathers’ trade, but aspire to become bank clerks
and such like, and so flood the country with that one
particular branch. In the schools, girls and boys are
mixed together ; whether this be good or not I cannot judge.
* I never liked to see women in the choir stalls, and this seemed an.
excellent way of avoiding the difficulty.
84


but I should certainly fancy it would have the advantage of
making the boys work, as they would hardly care to have
a girl above them. In the afternoon I went over with S ,
who had come up to lunch, to Wendoree Lake, only about
ten minutes’ walk from the town. This is a most wonderful
piece of water, considering a few years ago it was only a
swamp. It forms a grand lung to the city, as upon it there
are numbers of private yachts and several small steamers,
which ply between the near shore and the Botanical Gardens
on the other side. To these we went. They are very
prettily laid out, and in them there is one avenue a mile in
length. I noticed numbers of our English flowers growing in
great profusion. There is also an avenue of Wellingtonias;
these are the trees which grow to upwards of 400 feet high in
California. In the gardens are several cages of birds and
.animals. I w 7 as shown the wild dog (dingo) of Australia, the
enemy to sheep farmers ;itis a mixture of fox and wolf. At
dinner to-night we had bread and butter fritters, a capital
dish; they are slices of bread and butter, made with some
■sort of jam between them.
20 th Oct. —This afternoon Dr, P took me for a drive round
■Soldiers’ Hill, where the troops were encamped at the time of
the “ Eureka Stockade,” and from there on round Lake
Wendoree and through the Botanical Gardens. At one part
it was exactly like Regent’s Park. The lake looked lovely
with all its yachts, three of which were having a most exciting
race. The Botanical Garden side is all embanked and
planted with willows, the light green of which contrasts
beautifully with the darker colour of the other trees. We
afterwards went up the tower of the hospital, from which one
of the best views of Ballaarat is obtained. It was curious to
«ee it from a height, for it almost looked like one mass of trees
with the houses and roads dotted about. I afterwards went
•over some of the wards of the hospital, which are deliciously
clean. The building is picturesque, and the grounds
beautifully laid out. Dr. P , who has been a great deal in
England, in fact educated there, said the only other hospital
he knew which could compare with this for cleanliness and
comfort was the Infirmary in Manchester. So much for
that poor maligned building.
2,lst Oct. —As arranged over night, I breakfasted with
W at 7.30, and then drove out to the Koh-i-noor
Gold Mine, of which he is a large shareholder. We were
85


dressed in miners’ clothes, and you never saw two greater
looking ruffians than we were. It was a most curious
sensation going down, for it was all we could do to stand 1
three in the cage, the manager being with us. I did not
feel that curious sensation which some do, as if the top of
one’s head was coming off. The cuttings, I suppose, were
exactly like anv other mine, and I was particularly struck
with the fine-looking appearance of the miners, but this is
due to their being a much more provident set of men than
our English miners. The adit is driven along the quartz
reef, the whole of which is carried to the surface and
crushed. We worked for a little time and succeeded in finding;
a small piece of gold, but you can imagine how small when
they are getting here about six dwts. to the ton. The most
paying gold mine here, I believe, is yielding about three oz. to
the ton. At one place in the mine the air was so bad as nearly
to put out our candles, but with this exception the mine was
particularly cool and pleasant. We first descended to the
lowest level. Fortunately for us there was not much water
in this mine. Some of them are fearfully wet. It was a
delicious feeling on coming to the surface again and breathing
once more the fresh air. Afterwards we went into the
Batteries, at which there are twenty-four stampers at work.
The noise was something fearful. They consume eighty tons
of firewood daily. In the afternoon P and I went down
to Lake Wendoree for a sail in the “Victoria” yacht. It
belongs to Owen E , a Welshman, and Commodore of the
Club. There was a capital breeze blowing, and we were for-
tunate in finding the “Vagabond” ready for a race. She is.
the fastest yacht in the Club. The lake is scarcely in any
place more than about six feet deep, so that these land
“ yachtsmen ” can dare much more than those at sea. I was
surprised at the size of the canvas for such a small craft.
We had a most exciting race. The course is twice round
the lake, an island at one end giving it a certain amount
of difficulty. We led slightly for the first round, when
some stupid old man, taking his family out for a row,,
got in our way and we had to luff. The shrieks from the
women were amusing. It was a wonder that we did not
run them down; the worst that could have happened if we
had would have been a good ducking for their stupidity. The
“ Vagabond ” took advantage of this, and pulled slightly ahead
of us. By keeping to windward it kept taking the wind out
86


of our sails. At one time we were running neck-and-neck ;
so close were we that I laid my hand on their boom ; but we
managed on rounding the island to pull away, and won by
about five lengths. We owed our victory to a strong breeze,
as the “ Vagabond ” was carrying too big a sail for the strength
of her boom, which bent like a bow, so bellying the sail and
impeding her way. The Commodore was delighted at his
victory, and said it had been the most exciting race he had
ever had. We had some little difficulty in taking up our
moorings, as the breeze had risen, and poor S , who had
at first come on board, was kept waiting on the bank, as his
hat was locked up in the boat-house and he had only an old
one on, borrowed for the occasion. I fancy he did not like the
look of things, so made the want of a walk the excuse.
He had therefore landed when we put into the pier, before
starting for the race. After dinner we went out to a musical
evening at Mr. B ’s, the well known Lincoln sheep breeder,
where we had great fun, as he insists on songs with choruses.
It reminded me of some of our old evenings at the Polygon.
I had to add my quota, as it was taken for granted that
everybody must sing something.
22 nd Oct. —This morning I have been devoting myself to
working up my diary, and to letter-writing. After lunch we
all went down to a photographer’s, to inspect a collection which
has just come out of English beauties. Amongst them I
was amused to see Miss Sheridan. Manchester knows her.
23rd Oct. —At lunch to-day I was introduced to Dr. H ,
and in conversation found that he had been with a doctor in
Altrincham and had known my great-aunt well, about whom
he told me some amusing anecdotes. After lunch I drove
down to the Union Bank, as I had arranged to join a party
there who were going over the woollen factory. We drove
out to it, and as the manager was out, Mr. O acted as
our guide. The machinery in many respects is similar to that
in a Manchester cotton mill. The earlier stages were objection-
able, owing to the strong smell from the wool and the dressing
of it. On our way back they dropped me at the School of
Mines, where Mr. O left me in charge of Mr. B ,
who took me over the laboratory and test-houses for testing
the gold, and also over the museum. In the library there was
a small collection of Fijian curiosities.
24th Oct. —This morning I went for a walk with S
over the Black Hill. On our way up we came upon a man
87


who was digging for gold in worked-out ground ; they are
known by the name of “ Fossikers.” They only'have to pay
a miner’s licence, and can dig at pleasure. This man had
struck a small quartz reef, and he gave me two pieces of
quartz with gold in them. I daresay what I gave him in
return might be all he would earn in that day’s work. They
get their quartz crushed in one of the public batteries at five
shillings per ton. The view from the top of the Black Hill
is perfect, as it takes in the whole of Ballaarat and shows its
wonderful extent. The Black Hill itself stands out alone in
the plain, and has nearly been cut away and crushed, as in it
there was a rich gold claim, and in fact still is. On our way
down we went into the crushing mill belonging to the Black
Hill Company ; it is the largest in the Colony and has sixty
stampers, all of which were at work. We got back in time
for lunch, and in the afternoon P took me for a drive to
Gong-Gong, the reservoir which supplies Ballaarat. It
really consists of two most beautiful lakes, the Gong-Gong
proper and another, which is by far the prettier, as the
banks are laid out with winding walks. We took the mare
out of the buggy and left her tied to a tree to graze while we
walked round it. The afternoon was perfect, and the views
delicious; the woods are filled with ferns and wild flowers,
which formerly were far more abundant, but unfortunately
a bush fire has robbed them much of their charm. Among
the flowers I noticed the sarsaparilla growing in abundance.
On our way back it came on to pour, but had cleared up
again by the time we reached home. In the evening, we
went to the Theatre Royal, as it was the benefit of Mr. and
Mrs. Hall, the former known in Melbourne as “ Dick Dead-
Eye.” He took that character in “ H.M.S. Pinafore.” The
first piece was “Nan,” which was amusing and well acted,
followed by selections from the “ Colleen Bawn.” Two local
celebrities came on next in a scene from “ Ali Baba.” I never
sawsuchapoor exhibition. The performance ended with what
will always amuse a house here, called “The Professor,” but
better known to us at home as “High Life Below Stairs,” the
favourite piece of the Yokes Family. Present were five French
officers from the man-of-war at present lying in Hobson’s
Bay, on her way to New Caledonia. I wonder what they
thought of the performance.
25 th Oct. —This morning I went for a walk through Old
Ballaarat, and on to the Chinese quarter, full of filth and bad
88


-smells. On my waj' back I looked in at a butcher’s shop, and
was surprised at the price of beef, and 2d. a pound, legs of
mutton is. and is. 3d. At 12.30 I called for S ,as we
had promised to go out to Creswick to lunch with Mr. C ,
the manager of the Bank of Australasia there; but owing to
some stupid mistake on the part of “the man” who had
looked at the railway guide, we missed the train, so went
back to P ! s to lunch, and then all went out by the three
o’clock train. On arriving at Creswick we went for a
walk, first to the Hospital, which is built in a splendid position
on the side of a hill, and from which you get a magnificent view.
We then went on further up the hill, and returned in time for
P to catch the six o’clock train, as he had some patients
to attend to. We, however, waited for dinner. Mr. C is
noted for some milk-punch, which we tasted,. After dinner
we went over to Mr. S ’s house, where we had some
capital music, and left just in time to miss our train, the last
■one back to Ballaarat, owing to its starting three minutes
before its time. The poor man in charge trembled in his
shoes, and I know looks forward to a wigging. The next
thing was to see if we could hire a buggy, and as it was
half-past twelve we had the amusement of knocking up all
the livery-stable proprietors, but without effect, so there was
nothing for it but to return to Mr. C ’s and beg for beds.
I got a shakedowm on a wonderfully comfortable sofa.
26 th Oct. —Fortunately for us, there was a Sunday coach
started from here to Ballaarat last week, so by it we were
able to get back about half-past eleven. The drive is lovely,
as the road crosses the Sulky Gully Ranges, from the top of
which you get a magnificent view of the plains below and
of Ballaarat. P and W —— had quite given us up, and
were just about to start without us, as we were due to dinner
with the B- ’s at their country place at Learmonth, about
twelve miles out. The drive there is lovely, as.the road lies
through some rich pasture country, over a common dotted
here and there with trees. It is curious here how the richest
part of the land seems to be on the tops of the hills, which
gives a curious appearance to the country. Mr. B ’s
place, known as “ Series,” is charming. The house is very
English, and so are the gardens. At dinner we were a party of
fen; and afterwards some went to church, but I preferred a walk
to the top of Saddleback, from which there is a magnificent
view of Lake Learmonth on one side and Lake Burrumbeet
89


on the other, both backed up by a long range of hills. Above
Lake Learmonth stands the Black Hill, at the foot of which
is the village of Learmonth, and with the lake in the fore-
ground makes a beautiful sketch. It is curious how in a
country walk the separate couples can never manage all to
walk the same pace. “My couple” got utterly lost, but we
found our way to the top, but too late to find the others there,
and did not see them again until we met at “ Series ” just before
tea. I must not forget to mention “ the famous Lincolns.”
They certainly were wonderful sheep. Some of them wore
coats to keep their fleece clean for showing. It was a lovely
moonlight night, so we had a delicious drive home. The
nights even now are cold, and as I had left my topcoat behind
me I had to purchase one here, which has turned out even a
greater success than my Florence purchase of last year.
28 th Oct. —Yesterday one did very little but boodle, and
write a letter or two to go home by the “Durham.” In the
evening S came up to dine with us, and we afterwards
adjourned to the Club for billiards ; but we little knew what
was in store for us, for on arriving at home P found
a telegram waiting for him, asking him to come at once to
attend on the wife of an old friend, who was dangerously ill.
The distance was seventy-five miles, ten miles beyond Ararat,
and as there were no trains there was nothing for it but to
drive. I volunteered to go with him, and at one o’clock we
started in a buggy and pair. It was a lovely moonlight night,
and when we got as far as Lake Burrumbeet the moon was
shining behind it, giving a most beautiful effect. At four
o’clock day began to dawn, and very cold we felt it, but
fortunately had with us a “wee drap of the cratur,” which
kept it out. Past Burrumbeet the road winds on through
Trewalla, famous in the old coaching days for its fruit gardens,
and then on to Beaufort, where there is a capital hotel, and
where we were able to change one of our horses for one
which had formerly belonged to P , who had once
practised here, and on that account knew his way into the
hotel. While he was writing telegrams to hotel-keepers
forward for fresh horses, I was rummaging in cupboards for
something to eat, and my efforts were crowned with success,
for in one I found a loaf, butter, and marmalade. Beaufort
is twenty-eight miles from Ballaarat, a fair stretch without
drawing rein. Our fresh horse “Georgie” was a splendid
fellow, and took most of the work on himself. Our next
90


stopping place was Buangor, some distance further on the,
road, where we turned out our original horse and took in a
fresh one which we christened “ Miss Waugh ” after its owner.
After a cup of tea, we started on our road again, which was-
now so rough as to deserve the name given to it of “ The Bay
of Biscay.” It was a wild bush road and very lovely. They
were certainly wise when they first surveyed the colony irr
setting aside broad spaces for roads; the one we were travel-
ling on was a three-chain road, the middle portion being used
the most, while the rest is left with trees growing here and
there along it. From one part of the road we got a magnifi-
cent view of the distant ranges of the Grampians and the
Pyrenees. The day, too, was perfect for hill scenery, being
one of those white cloudy days. The highest peak of the-
Grampians is Mount William, the second highest mountain in
Victoria. The last two miles of our journey was very rough,
along a mere track over the paddocks. There are no such
things as “ fields ” out here, they are all “ paddocks,” and may
be thousands of acres without a fence. We arrived at
Lexington at 9.30, and were greeted at the door by “ Doctor, I
fear you are too late.” I was glad I had come, for apart from
having enjoyed a lovely drive, I felt I was some use in this
house of sorrow, for Mrs. Holland was not expected to live the
day out. There was just one shadow of hope. There were two-
other doctors there, so after doing all that was in his power,
P was ready to start back again at three o’clock. The
day turned out very storm}-, with one or two tremendous;
squalls, which fortunately came off before we started. I
noticed on the way back the “ ringing” of the trees, which of
course saves the labour of cutting them down ; the bark is cut
through all round about a couple of feet from the ground, and'
as the sap passes up through the bark, this gradually kills
the tree. After a time its smaller branches drop off, and are
collected and burnt. The tree itself is cut down as it is
wanted for firewood, or it is left to decay away. “ Georgie” did'
his work well, and we drove at a tremendous pace, both to and
from Ararat, for the horse we had got to go with him was.
very fast too. At Buangor we had some tea, and telegraphed
on to Beaufort for supper to be ready for us, and when we
arrived there we were both so tired and the hotel so>
comfortable that we decided to stay the night. We had a
tremendous feed, after which who should turn up but G
the doctor who had been our doctor on the “Kent,” coming.
91


out. He has now commenced practice in Beaufort. We
got to bed between eleven and twelve.
2 gth Oct.— Up at four o’clock and away, as we wished to
be back in Ballaarat for breakfast, being due at Carngham,
fifteen miles away, for lunch. This station belongs to the
Hon. Phillip Russell, and is one of the most celebrated in the
colony. He gives a big lunch every year at the time of the
sheep-shearing, and I was fortunate in being here just at the
time. On getting back we were not at all pleased to find
that we had to start in half an hour, as Dr. H was driving
us and one or two others out in his four-in-hand. We had
looked forward to at least an hour’s sleep, but there was
nothing for it but to freshen ourselves up by a cold bath
and breakfast. We had driven one hundred and fifty miles,
-including all stoppages, in thirty hours. One horse did his
seventy miles in the day, and came in as fresh as paint.
This was “ Georgie.” The drive out was not remarkable.
Mr. B held the ribbons. The last two miles was
roughish work, and it was across a paddock to the wash pen.
The washing was most interesting; first the sheep are herded
in pens, and three by three are tossed into a round hole of
warm water to soak for a short time. They are then passed
through a trap door into a canal, just broad enough to allow
them to swim along, and four feet deep, too deep to allowthem
to touch the bottom. The temperature of the water is no°,
and is kept at an even density by soap made expressly for
this purpose. Along the side of this canal stand about six
men, who knead the wool, the last two using curry-combs.
They are then passed through a trap door and allowed to
drain for a short time, when they are sent through a shoot
into cold water below. They are then held by two men, who
stand in tubs to keep themselves dry under the comb-shaped
spouts, the water for which is brought in races for over nine
miles, and which rushes on to the sheep with great force.
These spouts, of which there are three, are capable of washing
1,000 sheep daily. The quality of the water is of great
importance. It should be pure rain water if possible. The
sheep are held under the spout for several minutes until
they are as white as snow, and then let loose to swim to a
landing-place, guided by a boy with a pole. This is the most
trying time for them, for often they are so weak as not at first
to be able to stand. Sometimes they may lose a sheep. After
landing they are kept enclosed in a long drying pen, and finally
92


let out into drying paddocks, after which they are driven
by slow degrees to the shearing shed, which is at 'the station
three miles away. The dam below the spouts is so arranged
as always to allow the surface water, on which the dirt and
scum floats, to escape, so that the sheep shall not carry it out
on their backs. The density of the soap is kept up by adding
so much to make up for what the sheep takes away. After
thoroughly inspecting everything, we drove to the home station.
The house itself is built on three sides of a square, with
splendid stables and out-houses attached, and lovely gardens
full of flowers and fruit trees. We went at once to the shearing
shed, in which there were ten shearers at work, five on each
side of a sorting-table. A good man shears from eighty to
hundred a day, and there was one man there shearing his one
hundred and tenth ; they get paid by the hundred. The price
differs on different stations; here, I believe, it is fifteen shillings
per hundred. As each sheep is sheared, it is turned into a
pen, each shearer having his own, in order to keep tally of the
quantity he shears. The fleece when cut is gathered together
and then thrown on the sorting table, and then comes the
most important part of the whole thing—telling of what
quality the wool is. The man who does it is so quick that
while he is picking out any dirty pieces, which is called
skirting, he decides its quality. It is then put into different
compartments or bins, and afterwards packed and carried off
on large bullock wagons for shipment to England, and so
beautifully does this new process of spout-washing clean the
fleece of all impurities, that it is ready at once for the
manufacturers’ hands. On this station there are 25,000 sheep,,
all of the finest merino breed. Each fleece is worth about
at the present prices 3s. 6d., and this is supposed
to be the finest in the colony. After seeing all that
there was to be seen, we strolled along the creek side,,
on which there was a boat, to the marquee, where luncheon
was spread for over 60 people. There were some of the most
notable men in the colony present, Sir Wm. Mitchell, Sir
Charles Sladen, a good old Tory, and the finest gentleman
in the country, Sir S. W , a perfect specimen of a snob
(but to give the devil his due, he has done much good to
the country in helping to introduce salmon trout, and in
spending money on the university, for which he received his
knighthood), Mr. Cuthbert, Mr. William Lewis, Mr. Hopper,
and Mr. Gaunt. Mr. Russell himself filled the chair, and
93


nis son and Mr. Simson the vice-chairs. After dinner came
the speeches, which were of course nearly all political, for the
farmers are under the present Government being dreadfully
crushed down by the new land tax. Sir Charles Sladen
spoke out and condemned some of the tendencies of the
Ministerial party as Communistic, and that the present
agitation was only kept up to keep particular persons in
power, regardless of the colony’s welfare and interest. Mr.
Gaunt replied to the toast of “The Farmers.” He was one
of the victims of Black Wednesday, when the present Ministry
turned out from Government employ all the servants of the
late Government. He said he had served the country for
twenty-six years, and had been kicked out at the last like a
mangy cur. He was a candidate for the next election, and
if we would only step across the creek outside he could
address us, he said, as the electors of Ripon and Hampden.
Jimmie Russell, towards the end of the luncheon, proposed
the toast of “ Our noble selves.” As we had to get back to
dinner with Dr. H , we left soon after four o’clock, the
Doctor himself driving us home, where we safely arrived.
We had a bachelor dinner, and through which I could hardly
keep awake, so directly it was over, seeing P nodding
too, we made our excuses and bolted straight to bed, thoroughly
knocked up.
30 th Oct. —To-day I went out to Clunes by train, but the
day was miserably wet. Here there are some thriving gold
mines, and also some of the finest crushing machinery in
the colony. I had a tremendous run for my return train, but
fortunately for me it was late in starting.
31 st Oct. —To-day we all went in a body to the Agricul-
tural Show, at which there was some amusing leaping. I
was particularly struck with the orderliness of the crowd, for
if there was a policeman there I did not see one. We met
the Misses F , Mr. B ’s nieces, and after wandering
about for some little time and seeing all that there was to be
seen, we persuaded them to walk round the lake, and I must
confess they fairly walked us off our legs. It is most
wonderful how in so short a time a desolate swamp has been
turned into a picturesque lake. There is a similar sort of
lake in Albert Park, near St. Kilda. An accident happened
there to a yacht. A cow was standing in the water on a
hot day, when it was run down, and they say the yacht got
the worst of it.
94


ist Nov. —To-day we have been victims to the photo-
grapher, and have had a group taken, in which P ’s bull-
terrier “ Grip ” prominently appears. I watched with some
curiosity the way they test a horse’s strength before buying
him. He is put into a cart filled with hundred-weights (the
number, I believe, at the purchaser’s wish), he is then taken
into the town and made to drag the heavily-laden cart up a
hill. In the evening we promenaded the town, as one of the
sights of the place is to see the crowd on Saturday night; not
only the footpath but the streets are filled with people. In
olden days they used to exhibit on the window's of the different
banks the yield of gold for that week, but this is gradually
■dying out. I noticed one enterprising man had over his shop,
“The largest lollie shop on earth.” We afterwards went
in to see a panorama of the Russo-Turkish w 7 ar, which was
not at all bad.
2nd Nov. —As usual, on Sunday afternoon we went by
steamer across the lake to the Botanical Gardens, which were
filled with people. This is indeed a wonderful lung for any
•city to have, and so near, being only ten minutes’ walk from
the town. It was a lovely day, and the gardens looked most
delicious, as they are now one mass of flowers.
3rd Nov. —I left Ballaarat by the 11 o’clock train for
Hamilton. The line runs across the country through which
I drove with P the other day as far as Ararat, where
it branches off. Knowing that I was to have a night of it on
the coach, I slept as much as I could. We arrived at Hamilton
at about five o’clock, and while waiting for the coach I saw the
funeral of two little girls who had been drowned while bathing
on Saturday. The coffins were in an open hearse, which was
followed by all the school children in the town, quite I should
think three hundred, each bearing a bouquet of flowers. After
some food we started, six altogether, in one of Cobb’s
coaches. These coaches run all over the country, and
still bear the name of the man who was the pioneer of coach-
ing in the colonies, and who only died a very short time ago.
Of course, now they are owned by many different companies
and individuals. I am now bound for Beachport, on Rivoli
Bay, in South Australia, and I have looked as far as Mount
Gambier, where I shall get a railway to my destination. To-
night I can only get as far as Casterton, about forty miles
from Hamilton. We had a splendid sunset, after which all
the rest of the passengers, four in number, went inside the
95


coach; but I preferred the outside, and yarning with the driver,
who was a most amusing man, having been for several years a
sailor. He knew Constantinople, and was there over twenty-
eight years ago, so we could compare notes. He related
to me some of his coach experiences, accidents, and marvellous,
escapes. For some time he had driven the Lancashire Bell-
ringers about the country, and at another, had acted as
assistant to a conjuror, so he explained to me many of their
tricks. On our way we passed a man looking more dead
than alive, evidently from drink. We got to Coleraine
about 8.30, where we had a nasty accident to one of the
horses. It was dark, and while the man was leading the
horses between the two coaches, one shied and got his leg
over the splinter-bar, and between the wheel. I never
heard a horse make such a piteous noise before. Fortu-
nately, although he drew blood, he was able to go on.
When the accident occurred, the wheelers broke loose and
galloped away. A man was sent after them on horseback,
and, much to everybody’s surprise, brought them back. After
a cup of tea we made a fresh start. The night was pitch
dark, and it was wonderful to see how well the driver knew
the road, being able to tell exactly where to turn off the track
on to the grass to escape some bad rut or hole, for the roads
here are fearfully cut up by the wool drays. It was only a
bush track at places, so no easy matter to hit off, especially
in some of the queer places. We carried five big lamps, one
in an iron socket right above our heads, which threw the light
right away ahead of the leaders. We arrived at Casterton at
about twelve o’clock without any further accident, and I was
not long in turning in.
qife Nov. —Breakfast at six, and at seven o’clock I was once
more on the road, this time in a smaller coach, and in the
hands of a different driver, although our party was the same,
for we were all bound for Mount Gambler. Our coach of last
night had, after changing horses, gone on to Penola, on its
direct overland journey to Adelaide with the mails. The
drive to-day has been one series of new sights for me, for soon
after leaving Casterton we turned off from the mail road and
took to the bush. It was a case of picking one’s way, dodging
in and out of stumps and fallen trees, now going over some
log with a fearful bump, then diving into a rut, or plunging
at full gallop through some creek or boggy ground, the
horses lunging and plunging, and the coach swaying about
96


in the most frantic way. On crossing our first ridge we got
a magnificent view, and only such a one as can be seen in
Australia —a dead level plain to the horizon, covered with
nothing but timber; into this we descended, and as we drove
along, frightened from underneath our horses’ feet kangaroos
of all sizes, from the “ old man ”to the tiny child. We passed
flocks of native companions, a bird about six times as big as
a heron. They are noted for their peculiar movements, and
can be watched with great interest. They go through a
regular quadrille, advancing and retiring, bowing and setting
to partners. There were thousands of paroquets too, which
kept us alive by their shrill cries, and cockatoos in any
quantity, also plovers and wild geese on the swamps. How
I longed to have had a gun with me ! We passed a most
primitive post-office. Simply “P. O.” cut upon a tree
under which the letters were thrown. Up to the last stage
we had only had two horses, but for that we had four. The
beginning of it was most exciting, as we had no sign of any
track, and the driver had to pick his way as best he could.
Soon after starting, we crossed the boundary line between
Victoria and South Australia, and then leaving the road
we made for some station for which we had parcels. We
reached Mount Gambier about three p.m., where I was not
sorry to find there was a capital hotel. After getting settled
I hired a wagonette and pair, and drove to the Blue
Lake, for which this part of the world is so celebrated.
The road ascends by a gradual rise to the top of an extinct
volcano, in the crater of which is this large lake. The
sides of the water rise perpendicularly to the height of about
three hundred feet, and are covered with trees. The water
is of the deepest indigo blue and looks most uncanny. On it
are one or two boats, which are reached by steps cut in the
cliff’s side. There is a drive all round it, which forms
the principal Sunday promenade for the good people of
“ The Mount.” Besides this there are two other lakes ; one
large one called “The Leg of Mutton,” from its likeness in
shape to that joint, and the other of rather smaller dimensions.
I returned to the town, where I purchased some photographs,
and reached my hotel in time for a most substantial tea, to
which I did justice, having had nothing since leaving Strath-
downie at ten o’clock this morning. A stroll afterwards, and
early turn-in ended the day. I find that Eustace is not at
Beachport but in Adelaide, so I misunderstood his telegram,
H
97


but now that I am here I shall go on and see Beachport, as I
hear it is very well worth a visit.
s th Nov. —Breakfast at eight o’clock, and then caught
the 8.30 train for Beachport, situate on the east side
of Rivoli Bay. This line was only made with the intention
of making Beachport the principal harbour, in order to cut
out Macdonell Bay, over which it has a tremendous advantage
in its safer moorings. The train was crammed, owing to
there being an Agricultural Show at Millicent, a town half way.
Just as we started, a sheep which was in a truck jumped over-
board, and as it was tied by the neck nearly got hung, but there
was a man in charge, and he managed to hold on to it until
someone scrambled from our carriage to his assistance. The
line passes over several swamps, and along the shores of
Lake Frome. On the way down I got into conversation with
two men, one of whom turned out to be the engineer of the
line and a capital fellow, and who offered to be my guide, and
hearing that I sketched took me to the top of some sand hills
from which we got a magnificent view of the bay and the town
below. The land was only sold for the town some 15 months
ago, and it is surprising to me what prices the lots fetched,
the average being from £lOO to ■£l2o an acre, some even
reaching over £3OO. The town is named in compliment
after Sir Michael Hicks-Beach. After a sketch from the top
of the sandhills, my cicerone asked me if I was game for a stiff
walk of two miles to Pleasant Cove. I was only too glad, so off
we started over sand hills, having to keep a sharp look out for
snakes, until we reached the shore on the other side of the
promontory which forms the eastern side of Rivoli Bay, and
at the head of which is an island on which is a lighthouse.
The walk along the shore was something fearful, as we sank
above our ankles in the soft sand. The Cove was a lovely
little place, with a natural arch on each side. Here they
sometimes have a tremendous sea, as it faces due south, with
nothing between it and the South Pole. The sand hills
are covered with flowers, some of which we know at home.
We got back to the hotel at one o’clock, and did justice
to a very fair dinner. Afterwards I went for a stroll
with my new-made friend and his little children along
the beach. They are at present building a jetty, which
is to run right out into the bay for the convenience of the
steamers calling here on their way between Adelaide and Mel-
bourne. We walked out to the end of it, and got a magnificent
98


view of the whole bay. The train, which was to have started
at four o’clock, did not get away till 6.30, having to wait the
arrival of the steamer. Before starting I had a cup of a tea,
and my bill for dinner was two shillings. The charge over
the whole of the south-east is two shillings a meal, bad or
good. We had a long, weary journey back, the train crammed
to excess. They had put on some of the most primitive
carriages I ever saw, simply trucks with seats nailed across
them, and as it was late naturally people objected to travelling
.in them. We were packed like herrings and narrowly escaped
a nasty accident. On our way down in the morning we had
left two trucks to be loaded with wheat, and as it was a single
'line, we ran into them on the way back, the engine-driver
evidently in the dark having miscalculated the distance. We
fortunately escaped with a good bump. The wheat, which was
in bags, suffered the most, as some of the bags were thrown out
and burst. We reached the Mount at about 9.30, instead of
at seven, when I got something to eat and turned in. I forgot
to mention that my friend of Beachport had taken down
fireworks to amuse his children, so we kept up the fifth of
November in proper fashion. The boys of the “town ” took
round a Guy Fawkes in a wheelbarrow, and on our way back
we passed several bonfires. In the post-office at Beachport
.1 found a telegram from Eustace.
6th Nov. —I had half intended driving to Macdonell Bay,
but there seemed such difference of opinion as to its being
worth it, that I decided to split the difference and drive half
way. I got the same wagonette and pair I had the other
day. The country all about Mount Gambier is very rich and
a great deal of it under cultivation, potatoes appearing to be
the principal product. We drove nine miles out to the
foot of Mount Shank, an old volcano, and stopped to water
the horses at Bellum Bellum. I got back in time for dinner,
for here they dine in the middle of the day, after which I
hired a jingle, an Irish outside car, with a cover, and sat side-
ways, so that you sit facing or back to the horses. Taking
with me the head waiter here, who is a bright little fellow,
and two splendid kangaroo hounds, “ Trojan ” and “Juno,”
belonging to the owner of the hotel, I drove about seven miles
along the Penola road and then branched off into the bush in
search of kangaroos. We were not long in turning one out,
and had a magnificent run, as he worked in a circle; but this
we failed to kill owing to the thickness of the under-growth
99


of fern. We had several splendid runs, and succeeded in
killing two kangaroos and one wallaby. The tails of the
former and the hind-quarters of the latter were all we took
away. At first I kept my eyes about me for snakes,
which always for me take the gilt off the gingerbread, but
directly we found game snakes were forgotten in the excite-
ment of the chase. After being in the country a little time
you get accustomed to them. My driver was the most
extraordinary man I ever saw, as every time we stopped for
a drink he took a different one. Peppermint and lemonade,
gin and peppermint, rum and aloes--talk about mixing your
liquors ! ! We got back to the hotel at about 6.30 for tea,
and now I am off to bed, as I have to start for Adelaide at
two o’clock to-morrow morning.
>jth Nov. —Shortly after getting to sleep last night I was
suddenly awakened by a man striking a match in front of my
looking-glass. I fancy he was as much astonished as I was.
It appeared that he had arrived by the late coach, and had
been told at the bar that he might have his old room, they
forgetting that I was in it, and I had not locked my door, a
thing never to be forgotten out here, as should you get a
drunken man in he is sometimes difficult to get out; as it was
this man wanted to get into the other bed, for it happened to-
be a double-bedded room, and seemed rather astonished at
my objecting. I had hardly fallen to sleep again after this,
little episode when boots arrived —“ awake up, sir, half-past
one.” Fortunately for that man I had no boot near or he
would have got it. I don’t think it possible to find a more
miserable time to start on a journey than two o’clock, and to
make matters worse I was the only passenger. As day was
breaking we were crossing the “ Dismal Swamp.” Now
there is over it a metal road. Formerly there was only a
“ corduroy” road made by laying logs alongside one another—
the effect you can imagine. At the end of our first stage,
I was not sorry to find that the groom’s wife had
some hot coffee ready for us, and that with some bread
and jam was most acceptable. Here we took up four
ladies not remarkable for their beauty, otherwise I should
have been disappointed at their going inside. At
Penola we had a most miserable breakfast, and I sorely
begrudged the two shillings for it, after our capital ones at
Mount Gambier. Through all this country I have refrained
from drinking water, although they make a point of only
100


giving you rain-water or else boiling other water, on account
of the “hydattites,” which are small animalculse,' invisible
to the naked eye, and which grow in your inside to be small
animals shaped like a fluke, causing death. The country
between Penola and Narracoorte is pretty, as the first part of
it runs through some large stations looking like English parks.
These have been carefully cleared, leaving only the better
class of trees standing, such as white gums, she-oaks (so
called from the noise the wind makes in them), native cherries,
blackwood, and honeysuckle. This last is also known by
the names of Banksia and Beefwood, the latter from its
lextraordinary red colour when cut. The finest of these
stations, Struan Hall, belongs to Mr. Robertson, and it
certainly was most extraordinary to find so grand a house so
far from civilization. It seemed to me a great waste of money,
especially as the house itself stood in a wilderness, and only a
tumble-down fence divided it from the road. All the country
was at one time filled with swamps, but of late years they have
been drying up, but to obtain water it is only necessary to dig
about four feet below the surface. This is evidently a large
horse-breeding district, from the large herds of horses we saw.
After passing Struan, the metal road ceases, and once more we
had a bush track over a level plain ; and it was here that I saw
the mirage for the first time, both of water and mountains,
although neither were in the direction in which they appeared.
It is the mirage which has deluded so many poor travellers
when in search of water. We arrived at Narracoorte about
twelve o’clock, and I was just able to get a mouthful of
lunch before the train started for Kingston, fifty-two miles
away. This used to be the roughest part of the journey. At
■lunch was Mr. M -, the traffic manager of the line, and
Captain M , an old friend of Lady H , and command-
ing the “ Gateside, ” a large wool ship lying loading at
Kingston. On our way down to that port we passed through a
bush-fire, which was blazing away quite close to the line. At
Kingston I managed to get a miserable meal off salt junk,
stale bread, and weak tea, and there I proved my nationality
by using very plain Saxon to the clerk at the booking-office
for charging 7s. fid. overweight for my portmanteau, which
was very absurd, considering I was the only passenger. We
left Kingston about four o’clock, and I had now just twenty-
four hours more. The first ninety-two miles is the roughest
•on the whole road, and to be done during the night, now with-
101


out any moon. The road lies at first along a level, with only,
a low-lying range of sand hills between it and the sea, and on
its other side a series of salt lakes, being the continuation of
the Coorong. These lakes in the summer dry up, leaving the:
ground covered with a coating of salt, making it look as if it
were covered with snow. At present, however, there was
plenty of water, on which were any number of wildfowl and
black swans, ducks, pelicans, &c. The Coorong is an inlet,
from the sea, forty-two miles in length, and on an average
about three miles broad, divided only from the sea in its
whole length by a narrow strip of land. The road runs
along its shores, and it depends upon the wind whether
you have a dry road or have to drive through the water.
The smell at times is most fearful, from the decaying stuff,
lying on the shores. Leaving the water’s edge the road
becomes most fearfully rough, passing through Ti-tree scrub,
and over sand hills, indeed a most fearful road, but nothing
to what it used to be, for over the worst parts so-called roads-
have been made. A hot cup of coffee at Coolootoo, where we.-
stopped to change horses, was most acceptable, and helped to
keep one awake, for it was a wonder I had not fallen off the
coach. Fortunately, I had generally fallen against the driver
and saved myself. For a short distance I tried to sleep inside,,
amongst the mail bags, but it was too awful, and I preferred
the risk of breaking my neck by tumbling off the box to being,
thrown about inside. I was the only passenger all
It was a perfect wonder to watch the driver finding his way,
assisted, of course, by his horses. It is on moonlight nights
that he makes his road, and can then remember it on the;
dark ones. He knew every stone and rut along the road and
amused, as well as astonished me, by telling me when to-
expect the bump. He has now been on this road for nearly
three years, and has never seen it by daylight. Some short
time ago he had a fearful accident, killing two horses and
smashing up the coach, but fortunately with no damage to-
himself or the passengers.
Bth Nov. —Just about daylight we were entering what is,
known as “The Desert,” being a huge sandy plain of over
ninety miles long, covered with nothing but mallee scrub —
a species of eucalyptus, and a low lying-bush. About
nine o’clock we arrived at Meningie, a small township*
on the shores of Lake Albert, where a steamer-
called the “ Despatch ” was waiting, for us and the.-
102


mails. As neither Lake Albert nor Lake Alexandrina have
much on them or near them worth seeing, I was not sorry to
take this chance of a sleep, awaking up only to have some
breakfast. It took us three hours to cross the two lakes,
which are joined together by a long reach, and are principally
notable for their wildfowl. The River Murray passes through
these lakes. This is by far the most important river of the
Australian continent. Flowing almost from east to west of the
land, it takes its rise in the Australian Alps, and divides New
South Wales from Victoria for nearly 800 miles, when Renters
South Australia and finds its way to the sea, through these
lakes, 48 miles S.S.E. of Adelaide, having passed through 9 0 of
longitude. In its course it receives no less than eleven im-
portant rivers, amongst which are the Murrumbidgee,Lachlan,
Darling, and Loddon. It is navigable for steamers during the
winter months as far as Albury, and its lower part is a noble
river. Its total length is 1,060 miles. Unfortunately, its mouth
is shallow and has shifting sandbanks, making it impossible
for large ships to enter. There is railway connection now
between Morgan, on its banks, and Adelaide, as also by train
between Goolwa and Port Elliot. At Milang, on the shores
of Lake Alexandrina, another coach met us, and there there
was nothing of any importance, except a native encampment,
until we got to Strathalbyn, where we had time for some
lunch at Hooper’s Hotel before starting on the Adelaide coach.
There were sixteen passengers outside, which made the
chance of an upset very great, but we were in the hands of
one of the best whips in South Australia. The country the
whole way is most lovely, as you wind in and out of the hills
which stand above Adelaide. At Stirling I half expected to
meet some of the party from Woodhouse. I thought Eustace
would be up there, as Monday was to be a holiday, being the
Prince of Wales’ birthday. Shortly after leaving Crafers,
where the road turns off to Woodhouse, we met a wagonette
and pair, in which was Eustace, his wife, and Capt. H , so
I had not been wrong in my conjecture. They had timed it
so as to meet the coach. I soon transferred my portmanteau
to the wagonette. It felt almost like getting home again to
be once more at Woodhouse. Mr. and Mrs. R were also
staying here, so we had a large party in the evening, and as
usual danced. My pupils I found had improved in my absence.
We ended up with a bonfire, which was lit over the stump of a
huge tree cut down that afternoon. The bush lighted up
103


looked magnificently grand, the white stems of the gum-trees
standing out in the lurid light. I was not sorry to turn in
after 40 hours’ journey, mostly by coach, and over the roughest
of roads.
g th Nov.— How I did sleep, after so many hours without
any! This morning there was great excitement, as the old
tree which had been cut down yesterday had caught fire in
the night, owing to a change of wind, and it was wonderful
to see how quickly a tree would burn. The trunk, which was
hollow, was like a furnace, and every branch was alight.
While we were all watching it, a small girl came up to ask
us for a match to burn out a snake she had nearly trodden
on, so we all adjourned to the creek where it had last been
seen. We set fire to the bush, and all stood round armed
with sticks. Presently it made its appearance, driven out
by the fire, and was immediately killed. It turned out to
be a black snake, one of the most venomous species. In the
afternoon we had tea at Drummonds, a beautiful spot in the
bush on the side of a creek a little way behind the house. It
was here we had arranged to have tea when I was last at
Woodhouse, when we were stopped by the rain. This
afternoon I was more fortunate. Having rigged up a gipsy
kettle and made tea we thoroughly enjoyed the beauty of the
scenery and the fineness of the afternoon. As you can imagine,
no small amount of fun went on, and to commemorate the
event I got a sketch of the place. In the evening we tackled
a new book of acrostics, specimens of local talent.
10 th Nov. —lt is quite a treat to be once more in a land
where there are English fruits. This afternoon we went for
a walk in search of strawberries, and having ordered pounds
innumerable, we carried off some into the bush, which we
thoroughly enjoyed. We got back to Woodhouse for
afternoon tea on the verandah, from which we were driven
by a most fearful thunderstorm, attended with a downpour
of rain, which was blown about in all directions by the wind.
It was the worst storm I have ever seen. The lightning was
most vivid, the flashes almost continuous, the thunder
rolling along amongst the hills. I never saw such rain. In
one minute the whole place seemed to be afloat, and the creek
a roaring torrent.
11 th Nov. —The description in to-day’s paper of yesterday’s
storm was terrible, both by land and at sea. Cobb’s coaches
escaped with only one accident, and that to the Mount Pleasant
104


•coach, which was upset by a branch of a tree falling and
cutting away the leaders. Fortunately, no one was killed.
As the paper described it, “ branches of trees were whirled
about by the wind like straws in the air.” The falling of
branches, no doubt, is the cause of most of the accidents
here, as the gum trees are most treacherous, giving no notice
at all of a falling branch. On this account they have to keep
the mail roads clear of overhanging branches. To-day we
have had experiments in the blowing up of trees by
lithofracteur.” It is a mixture of nitro-glycerine and
clay. The effects were most wonderful, not only rooting up
the tree, but grubbing up the ground to a tremendous extent.
Of course the first charge does not always bring the tree
down. You begin by clearing the soil away, and cutting a
few of the biggest roots ; then bore a hole with an auger into
the heart of the tap root, into which you place a charge
varying from a quarter lb. to two lbs. The value of the stuff
is two shillings a lb. In this way a third of the cost in
grubbing a tree is supposed to be saved, at the same time
doing it more effectually. One tree we tried measured
thirty-six feet in circumference, and the effect on it by the
first charge was marvellous. It split the tree almost in half,
and made a hole beneath its roots big enough to allow a man
to get inside. It had also slightly lifted the tree, as all the
•outlying roots had been moved. Heavy rain coming on put
a stop to any more experiments as well as to our going
down to Adelaide. Music, singing, and dancing filled up the
evening. A letter came in the evening from Walter R ,
which relieved Mr. R ’s mind as to his safety, as the
vessel he had come over from Edinburgh in had been
reported lost.
izih Nov. —It was not until within 10 minutes of the time
that we-had to start to catch the coach for Adelaide that we
made up our minds to go at all, as the day had been fearfully
wet. The morning we occupied in framing some pictures
for the Children’s Hospital, quite in an original style ; but I
must say our efforts were crowned with success. At 3.10
Mrs. G and I made a start in the spider to meet the
-coach at Stirling stables, where we were fortunate in getting
an outside seat, as that is preferable, even on a wet day, to
an inside one. We only had one heavy shower on the way
down. All along the road we saw the ravages that the late
storm had made. Huge trees shivered to pieces by lightning,
105


others torn up by the roots, and branches lying about in all'
directions. At one of the hotels where the coach stops on
the way down, there is a large Newfoundland dog which
barks lor pennies. On having one thrown he goes in and
buys a biscuit, which he brings out and eats. In the last
two years this dog has spent £2O in biscuits.
Nov. —To-day I have devoted in looking up old
friends. In the evening Eustace and I dined with B ,
where we met Cates the actor. He is the grandson of Lady
Charlotte Bacon. Afterwards we went on to the theatre.
Cates took the part of Theodore the Seraph in “ Friends.”
There was a very poor house. Many of the Adelaide people
are too easily shocked, so refuse to allow their families to go-
and see it. This is most absurd, considering that it is acted
here as it wasat the Prince of Wales’ Theatre under the title
of “ Peril.”
14 th Nov. —I met the Misses H -, who came in by the
early coach on a visit to Mrs. T , who, curiously enough,
is a niece of John D- ,of Manchester, whose brother is a
large millowner out here. After depositing their luggage
we went on to the Botanical Gardens to see the rose garden,
which is now one mass of flowers, and also to see the yucca,
which is now in flower, and is a wonderful sight. The tree
has been planted fifteen years, and this is the first year it
has flowered. It is fifteen feet high, and the spike of flowers
five feet long, which are one mass of cream-coloured bells.
In the afternoon Mr. G and I went to Mrs. T o<Ul ’s for
lawn-tennis ; her husband is the Postmaster-General here,
and head astronomer at the Observatory, where they live. In
the evening, as Eustace was dining out, Mrs. G and I
went down to see “Friends ” again, where we met the Misses
H and Mrs. T •.
15 th Nov. —-On my way into town this morning I called at
Government House, and afterwards I made all arrangements
for a pic-nic this afternoon. We had arranged it yesterday
with Mrs. T— —. At one o’clock we started in a four-in-
hand for the Waterfall Gully, one of the show places near
Adelaide, and about eight miles away. The drive out
there is lovely, the latter part, however, very rough, in
some places steep and dangerous ; but we had a capital-
driver, and four good horses. On our way out we bought a
“ Billy ” and some tea, which we had forgotten, and stopped
at a farm for milk. The Gully is a narrow gorge in the
106


Mount Lofty range, up which there are a series of water-
falls. We drove as far as we could, a good deal farther than
one would think of taking a four-in-hand in England, and then
carried our provisions to the foot of the first fall, and while the
ladies spread the cloth we made a fire, I afterwards acting as
cook. My chops were pronounced by the assembled multitude
to be perfect. We had taken with us twenty pounds of ice
well wrapped in a blanket, which made the champagne cup
a most acceptable drink. We had a most enjoyable meal, and
although the day was hot, we were all too merry to notice it.
After lunch some of the party scrambled up the top of
the waterfall and on to the one above. Before leaving
we had afternoon tea, and on our way back made up
a party for the theatre of those who had no other engage-
ment, and we mustered seven in all. We got back
just in time for a cup of tea, for that was all we
cared for. How I pitied those who had to go out to dinner !
“ Smiling ” would be all they could manage. The piece to-
night was “ Blow for Blow,” and Marshall was inimitable as
“ Charley Spraggs.” So ended a most magnificent day.
16 th Nov. —After all the excitement of yesterday, and com-
bined with the fact of it being Sunday, we did not have breakfast
till nearly one o’clock, or perhaps, in ordernot to shock people,
I ought to say dejeuner. In the afternoon we went over to
tea with Mrs. D ; she had been one of our party of
yesterday. Fortunately for us, there was nothing to do to-
day, as there has been a hot wind, and I feel like a limp rag.
On waking in the morning I got up and opened my window,
and before long my room was like a furnace. When these
winds blow every door and window is kept tightly closed, and
by that means the house is kept cool. On going out it is
like passing into a furnace. The wind changed in the evening,
when we immediately carried out the chairs into the verandah
and sat smoking there till late.
T'jth Nov.— Met Captain H , and with him hunted
up Eustace for lunch. Adelaide is a most difficult place for
a man who only wants a small lunch —he either must have
“savages’’and tea or coffee, or else a beefsteak and beer or wine;
but to-day we were more successful at the Globe Hotel, where
we persuaded the barmaid to let us have bread and cheese
and beer in the “ Parlour.” In the evening I dined down at
the Bay with Mr. and Mrs. G ,of Pusey Vale. They
are at present staying in lodgings at Glenelg. If you
107


remember, they were fellow-passengers of mine on my way
back to Melbourne from here, on my last visit. After
dinner we sat out on the balcony smoking until driven in by
the cold, so sudden sometimes are the changes here.
18 th Nov. —ln the afternoon I went for a drive with Mrs.
G , Mrs. T , and the Misses H , out as far as
Paradise, a suburb of Adelaide. In the evening I went to
my first dance in Adelaide at Mrs. N -’s. She was a Miss
W —- —, of Melbourne. Adelaide girls all dance well, which
is more than can be said for the men. One man in particular
reminded me of a romping Kangaroo from the pace he danced.
The evening turned out fearfully wet, and as I had not ordered
a cab to fetch me, I was afraid I might have to walk home, two
miles, but fortunately, after seeing the Misses H home, I
got a hansom. Just before starting for the N ’s dance,
I got an invitation for Lady Jervois’s dance at Government
House to-morrow night, as also did Eustace and Mrs. G ,
so we determined to keep the fact of our going a secret from
the Misses H , and about which I had a good deal of fun
•during the evening.
i gth Nov. —Just before we were going to dress for dinner
to-night, Eustace got a letter from the Chief Justice, who
had been to Government House to ask for an invitation for
me, when he, of course, heard that one had been sent. Now
the cat is out of the bag, as the Misses H are staying
with him.
20 th Nov. —It was a most enjoyable dance, a perfect room
and good floor, music decidedly bad, but the best that can be
got in Adelaide; “no time —-no tune ” sums it up. Both the
Governor and Lady Jervois were charming. Mr. Jervois, the
A.D.C., asked me to come to-morrow to the garden party and
play lawn-tennis. An amusing thing occurred yesterday. I
wrote my acceptance to the dance in the writing-room of the
Club, and in the same room with me was another man. As I
left the room I gave the letter to the hall porter and asked him
to send it over to Government House. All he had to do was
to go back to the room I had just left and hand it to the
other man, who was Mr. Jervois himself. It has been a lovely
day, and the garden party was most enjoyable, as I knew a
good many people there, and, besides, I managed to get some
capital games. I was particularly struck to-day by the
absence of all loud dressing, everybody being dressed well
and in good taste, and far in advance of Melbourne in the
108


latest English fashions. After dinner at home we went in a.
body to Kent House, to assist in polishing the floor by dancing
upon it, as we are all going to a dance there to-morrow night.
Kent House is a nest of bachelors, who board with Mrs.
D — , in whose name the invitations have been sent out.
Here I had another extraordinary meeting with a man who
was in the same house with me at Rugby for over three years.
He had not altered in the least, and I, of course, remembered
him at once, but he declared he would not have known me
again. He is at present on an up-country station.
21 st Nov. —After lunch at Medindie I went on with the
Misses H to the T ’s for lawn-tennis, and as I was to
stay dinner there, I took a portmanteau with me to save
coming back to dress. We had some capital games in spite
of the wind, which was very strong. At dinner I revelled in
some tinted Madeira. As luck would have it, our cab did not
turn up, so we were late in getting to Kent House, but I had
taken the precaution of booking some dances beforehand. It
was a most enjoyable dance, good floor, good partners, and
strawberries ad lib. My portmanteau, which I had carefully
left in the verandah, I forgot all about.
22 nd Nov. —This morning I was occupied in making pre-
parations for a small pic-nic amongst ourselves. I got a large
buggy and pair of good horses from Hill and Co., and laid in a
supply of strawberries, &c. Picking up Eustace at the office,
and with Miss L , we drove out through Paradise to the
Hope Valley reservoir and on to the old weir. The latter
part of the drive was very pretty, as it was up into the hills.
The spot we chose for our luncheon was wonderfully
picturesque, being on the spur of a steep hill, on one side
looking up the valley which we had driven down, and on the
other a valley filled with water, a regular double view; while
in front of us was a rugged precipice, with the stream
tumbling over rocks at its foot. After lunch we scrambled
about for a short time hunting for ferns and everlasting
flowers, and then drove home in time for dinner. In the
evening we went to see “ New Men and Old Acres ” at the
Royal, where we met Mrs. and Miss S , B , and
T , making in all a nice little party of ten. The theatre
was crammed and the scenery splendid. When the curtain
rose for the second act (the old Abbey), I thought the house
would never stop applauding. The acting throughout was
capital. This is a most badly arranged theatre in one way,.
109


the staircase leading to the gods is a wooden one, and every
step can be heard, and just before the close of the piece there
is always a rush from above, which makes the final part
perfectly inaudible.
23 rd Nov. —This morning I went to the Cathedral with
the Misses H . It is a new building, at present only
partly finished. Over the choir there is a fine lantern tower.
The choir and music were very good. B is the organist,
and has the whole management of the choir. The rest of
the day we spent in the verandah or watering the garden,
sometimes even ourselves, much to the astonishment of our
neighbours, who looked on with holy horror “ at sich goings
hon” on Sunday.
24 th Nov. —I had arranged to go up with the Misses H ——
to-day to Woodhouse for a day or two, and then on for a
trip to Port Elliot; but on going to the Club for letters, I
found one from J. G , asking me to come and stay with
him for a few days at Robe, so, as the steamer goes to-morrow,
I decided to go by her, as she only goes once a week. I
telegraphed J. G to that effect. In the afternoon, how-
ever, I went up with the Misses H as far as Stirling,
and caught the return coach for Adelaide; we were lucky in
getting the box seats, as the coach was crowded. The day
was lovely but blowing.
25 th Nov. —I had forgotten to tell a cab to come for me,
and as is always the way, this morning breakfast was later
than usual, and we had a tremendous run to catch the 10.15
train for the Port. The “ Coorong,” one of the steamers
belonging to the Mount Gambier Steam Ship Company, was
lying at the Prince’s Wharf, some little distance from the
station. The day looked anything but promising. It was 12
o’clock before we got under weigh. I was fortunate in having
a cabin to myself, for it was not long after leaving the river
that I had “ to seek the seclusion that the cabin grants,” and
so did many others, especially the aunts. I remained there,
hanging on sometimes for grim death, for we had a very
rough night of it, and I was not sorry when I heard the
engine stop.
26 th Nov. —On coming on deck I found we were just
casting anchor off Kingston. There was a big sea running,
so that it was some little time before a large lighter under
sail could come alongside. After discharging cargo we,
about ten in all, were discharged also by being lowered into
110


her in a tub, a most comical arrangement, especially in my
case, when the men in the lighter missed catching hold of the
tub as it was lowered, and I came back with a bump against
the side of the steamer. The wind was a fair one, so it was
not many minutes before we were safe ashore. I went at
once with a man whose acquaintance I had made on board,
to the Jetty Hotel, where I had a wash and breakfast before
starting for Robe, twenty-seven miles distant. J. G had
sent in a buggy and pair of beautifully matched cream-coloured
ponies to meet me. I reached Rohe at about 12.30, after a
rather uninteresting drive. Robe itself is pleasantly situated
on a promontory looking out on to a lovely bay, formerly
the harbour of this part of the world; but owing to the railway
having been built, both at Kingston and Beachport, both
those places are now cutting it out. It has been an awful
day of rain and wind. I found Mr. and Mrs. J. G and
“the baby” flourishing,the latter having grown tremendously
since I saw him last on board the “ Kent.” They have a
wonderfully pretty place here, and filled with reminiscences
of their tour round the world. Mrs. G ’s brother is
staying here, so we are a nice little party of four.
2 jth Nov. —After breakfast we went to the Obelisk, which is
a beacon built on a projecting rock. The coast is wild, and
as far as I could see one sheet of foam. After scrambling
about on the rocks for some time, we came back over the
sand hills, which are covered with wild everlasting
flowers. Lunch over we started for a drive in a double
buggy with a pretty pair of chestnut mares. One, how-
ever, was a jibber, and we had not gone many yards
when she jibbed, and springing forward smashed the
swingle-tree. Fortunately, we were quite close to the stables,
so we put them into a small break instead, in which they
could play what pranks they liked. We drove over the sand
hills and along the beach, which is composed of hard sand,
and with a stretch of over eight miles, such a glorious place
for a gallop! In returning over the sand hills the horses
again jibbed, and refused, either by coaxing or thrashing, to
move an inch, so there was nothing for it but to take them
out, tie them to a post, and leave them in charge of Mrs.
J. G , while we three set to work to drag up the break, and
hard work it was on account of the depth of soft sand. With
our united strength, we could not move it more than three
inches at a time, but we managed it at last, and got home
111


safely in time for dinner. After dinner Mr. F came in-
to spend the evening; he is celebrated for having saved so
many lives at the wreck of the “ Gothenburgh,” on the
Barrier Reef, on her way down from the Northern Territory,
with over one hundred passengers, of whom only fourteen were
saved. He was presented with a gold watch by the South
Australian Government.
28 ih Nov. —To-morrow is mail day, so I spent the morning
in writing my English letters. In the afternoon, we went
for a drive first to a fellmongery, where the locks and pieces
of dirty wool are washed and dressed; should they be sent
home in their dirty state the weight of the dirt would
increase the freight. Afterwards we went on as far as Lake
Robe, which was covered with ducks and black swans. How
we longed for a gun ! Just beyond the lake is a curious
sand hill, without any vegetation whatever on it, which
is known as “The Bishop’s Pate.” This morning the
coachman who was sent out to shoot some goats which were
trespassing in one of the paddocks, not being able to get at
them, shot seven of the policeman’s ducks instead, which
happened to be on the pond in the paddock. J. G had
given notice in the paper that all things found on his land
would be shot. Otherwise all the goats in the town would
feed on his paddocks, and the geese and ducks make the water
in the ponds undrinkable for cattle and horses.
2 gth Nov. —After lunch to-day we started for a drive, going
again to Lake Robe, this time taking a gun with us on the
chance of a shot at a black swan. When we got there, I
tried a stalk, but they were a great deal too wide-awake.
We drove round the lake, following only a track on the.
chance of finding some way back along the other side, but
we were finally stopped by wire fencing. While J. G
was ahead looking out for a road, I took the gun and went
in search of a kangaroo, of which there were any quantity.
I managed to shoot one small one and wound a second,,
but having no dogs I lost him. Lake Robe, at its upper
end, is very pretty. Its shores are covered with thick scrub,
and there is a large island. There are many evident proofs
of all this country at one time having been under the sea, from
the number of shells. About three inches below the surface
there is a mass of oyster-shells. Oh ! that they would
come to life again, what times we should have !
30 th Nov. —This morning we attended service at the little;
112


church here, which was taken by a lay reader. Afterwards
we went for a walk across the sand hills and along the shore
south of Robe, where there are some fine rocks and caves,
one being called “ Evans,” from a man of that name who
was drowned there.
ist Dec. —At eleven this morning J. G , with P ,
his brother-in-law and myself, started for Gillap, one of his
sheep stations. It is about thirty-two miles away in the
direction of Penola. We took a buggy and pair and one
horse, which J. G rode to begin with, and I drove. About
seven miles out the road skirts Lake Eliza, a very large extent
of partly salt water, and then crosses a range of hills, from
the top of which you look down upon Lake Eliza and Lake
St. Clare. Lakes abound all round Robe, as from one point
you can see as many as seven at one time. After crossing
the hills, the road skirts what in winter is a lake, but which
was now a huge swamp, a dead level to the horizon. When
we had crossed a part of this, J. G overtook us. There
are any quantity of kangaroos, and it was not long before we
spotted one. J. G made a successful shot. On one
station alone near here they destroyed last year 32,000, a
serious number when grass is scarce. At the nineteenth
mile post we pulled up at a well and lunched. When we
started again P —~ rode and J. G took the reins. We
reached Gillap at about five o’clock. Before dinner P
and I started for some parrot shooting, and I must say
although they are good to eat, and are here in thousands, it
seemed to me almost a shame to shoot such lovely birds.
After dinner we went out to try and get a kangaroo, but it
was too dark to see one.
2nd Dec. —After breakfast we started for the Avenue shed,
about eight miles away, where they were hard at work
shearing, and in returning P and I got bushed, going
quite two miles in exactly the opposite direction to that we
wanted to; fortunately we found out our mistake, and retraced
our steps. We got back to the station to lunch, and after-
wards went out to the Gillap shed, four miles away, where
we inspected the shearing and had afternoon tea in the
men’s hut, provided for us by the cook. The tea is made in
buckets, and we drank out of pannikins (small tin cups).
On our return, we went out kangaroo shooting, and I
managed to get two. I was using BB shot out of wire
cartridges.
1
113


3 rd Dec. —We made a start for home shortly after
breakfast, watering the horses at the fourteenth mile post,
and reaching Robe at about 4.30. P , who rode the last
half, did not arrive until quite an hour after we did, not being
quite as comfortable in the saddle as he might have wished ;
it is our firm belief that directly we were out of sight he got
off and led his horse.
4th Dec. —I heard by telegram to-day that the
“ Penola ” would sail from here on Saturday, calling at Victor
Harbour. I have decided to go by her, as this will give me
the chance of seeing Port Elliot and then going overland to
Adelaide via Willunga. To-day has been an idle one, as
both the horses and ourselves wanted rest. In the evening
the bank manager here and his wife came in to dinner, and
we had some music.
sth5 th Dec. —In the morning I amused myself by sketching.
In the afternoon, we went for a ten mile drive along the
beach, taking the gun with us and shooting some sea-snipe,
which are well worth eating.
6 th Dec. —The “Penola” was expected in about two
o’clock, so you can imagine how we were startled by her
making her appearance directly after breakfast, and as there is
never any telling how long she may remain, I had to tumble
my things into my portmanteau as best I could. We finally
got off about eleven o’clock, the sea promising to be kind to
us. P had decided to come with me, as the “ Penola ”
after loading at Victor Harbour, was going to Melbourne, but
calling on her way back at Robe. In about two hours we
passed Cape Jaffa, the most dangerous part of this coast on
account of the reefs. There is a lighthouse, built entirely of
iron, standing out of the water about four miles away from
the land. We arrived in Kingston about four o’clock, and
there discharged all our cargo, and from that time, being
empty, we had a fairly lively time of it, as it came on to blow
pretty stiffly about midnight.
Jih Dec. —l slept very little and longed for daylight, but
it was 8.30 before we were at anchor in Victor Harbour.
This harbour is formed by an island lying about half a mile
from the mainland. They are at present hard at work
making a huge breakwater, which is to cost a quarter of a
million. We went ashore immediately after breakfast, and
as the “ Penola ” will not sail till late to-morrow, P has
decided to remain on shore, so we got rooms at “ The Crown,”
114


not an uncomfortable hotel. Having failed to get either a
buggy or horses, we walked to Port Elliot, four and half miles
away. We were advised to follow the tramway, which runs
from here through Port Elliot to Goolwa and Strathalbyn.
Port Elliot is at the other extremity of the bay, round which
the tramway runs. As we were waiting for lunch at the
hotel, Jervois came in. Lady Jervois and the Misses Jervois
have a cottage here at present. After lunch we went for a
scramble on the rocks, for which Port Elliot is noted ; they
are huge round boulders of granite, upon which the sea
breaks with great force. On our way back we again met
Jervois, and went in to call on Lady Jervois, afterwards we
walked back to Victor Harbour, Jervois coming nearly all the
way with us. After last night’s tossing, we were not late in
turning in, especially as I have to leave by the early coach
to-morrow morning.
Bth Dec. —I had to bolt in the middle of breakfast to catch
the coach, which left Victor Harbour at 8.30. I had at first
to be contented with an inside seat, but I was not long in
persuading one man, who was outside, and who had evidently
begun the day early, with thinking he would be better inside.
Not many miles out from Victor Harbour you get a magnificent
view of the Hindmarsh Valley. Up to this we had only
two horses; here we put on a leader, which caused a good
ffeal of trouble before he could be got to start. Fortunately,
I had the inside seat on the box, so escaped the pleasure of
continually jumping down to put him into his traces again.
One time he got the splinter-bar off, and then I too had to get
down, but when once fairly started he went off like a rocket.
Leaving Hindmarsh Valley to our left, we went over the
range through what is called the Cut-hill, the road being cut
out of the side of the hill and walled in on the other side, as
it is steep and dangerous. After crossing the range, we came
down upon a sandy scrub, over which we had to toil for
several miles until reaching a cottage, only the second we
had passed since getting clear of Victor Harbour. Here, as
the signboard told us, were cordials for sale “For cash only,
no tick given.” Fancy “tick” in such an out-of-the-way
place ! My cordial was rum punch. We had six miles more
into Willunga, and on starting our lively leader nearly upset
the coach, and we had some difficulty in getting away.
Another three miles and we were on the top of the range
looking down upon Willunga and the plains stretching away
115


to the sea. This range is a continuation of the Mount Lofty
range. The road down to Willunga was steep and good,
passing through bush, which showed signs of a fearful fire
which occurred here last year; but it is wonderful how soon
the trees and undergrowth revive again, stronger than before.
We arrived at Willunga at about twelve o’clock, the horses
fairly tired. The wheelers had come the whole distance,
twenty-four miles. Willunga is noted for its slate quarries,
but the day was too hot and I was too lazy to visit them.
At i o’clock we sat down to a substantial meal, the driver of
my next coach taking the head of the table, the landlord the
other end, and my next-door neighbour was the ostler in his
shirt sleeves. We started for Adelaide at three o’clock, I
getting the seat next the driver, and with a man and his wife
just out from home on ,my left. The rest of the passengers
from Victor Harbour were on the seat above, with the man
who had begun the day so well, now getting rather incapable,
safely stowed in the middle. The scenery was quite of
a different character, consisting of cultivated land. Our first
change was at Noarlunga, on a bend of the river Onkaparinga,
known as “ The Horseshoe Bend,” the church having as
its weathercock a horseshoe. We got to Adelaide without
further adventure at 6.40, where Eustace met me.
gth Dec. —To-day I have received another tremendous
batch of letters forwarded here from different post-offices.
This morning I was at work on my pic-nic, which I had
intended giving next Saturday, but find there are two others
on that day, which will take away a good many of my
particular friends, so there is nothing for it but to postpone
till the Saturday after. In the afternoon I called on Mrs.
N , and inspected some of her oil-paintings. She is the
best untaught amateur I have ever seen. From there I went
on to call on Mrs. T , and managed to get there between
the showers, as it was raining, with a heavy thunderstorm.
I was detained there by the rain until nearly six, and finally
had to ask Mr. T to telegraph to the town for a cab for
me, as he has a private wire. It has been a fearful thunder-
storm, with most vivid fork lightning, which has had the
effect of cooling the air, so in the evening we revelled in the
cool breeze after the day’s heat.
10 th Dec. —A bright idea was started by Eustace
yesterday, that we should ask Lady H to let us have
the pic-nic near Woodhouse, and take up the carpet in her
116


sdrawing-room for a small dance afterwards. Acting upon
this idea, and as Miss H was returning home,-we went
up to Woodhouse by the afternoon coach, having a tremendous
scramble for an outside seat. Mrs. R , too, was going up.
On the box-seat was a man who talked in a very loud voice
about the “ ’op picking in Hingland,” and on passing Benacre
said, “Hif hi was ’Enery Scott I would keep hemus.” At
the Devil’s Elbow, some of the passengers got out and walked,
taking the short cut over the hill. We got a magnificent view
of the Waterfall Gully, and the spot where we had had
one of our pic-nics. The ridges on the two sides of the
gully fit into one another like cog-wheels, forming at the
bottom a wavy line, up which the road runs. Beyond the
gully you look over an extensive plain, with a portion of the
gulf and river shining in its midst, right away to the
Hummocks, two hills ninety miles distant. This view is one
of the finest in the colony. At the “Eagle on the Hill,”
where, to verify their name, they keep a wretched eagle in a
cage, we waited for the coach, and while taking refreshments
were amused by the vain efforts of an equestrian to
mount his steed. When he at last succeeded, his riding
showed how unaccustomed he was to horse exercise. Lady
H — was surprised to see me, not knowing I was coming,
and as she was dining out, I deferred making my pro-
position until to-morrow.
nth Dec. —After breakfast, with fear and trembling, I
broached the subject to Lady H . I was most fortunate,
the idea entirely meeting with her approval. In fact, she
said she had intended asking me to give one of my pic-nics
at Woodhouse. Directly this was settled, we all went up to
Drummonds to choose a place for the pic-nic, and finally
settled upon an open glade sheltered by huge white gum
trees, and in its centre one fallen monster. The remainder of
the morning we spent in wandering about the gardens and in
the woods, watching the tree-clearing and wood-splitting.
In the afternoon we all went up for tea to Drummonds, and
afterwards amused ourselves setting fire to a quantity of
rubbish.
12 ih Dec. —Mr. R was going to Adelaide to-day, so
“we started at about 7.30 to catch the early coach at Crafers,
but when it came up there was only one place left, which Mr.
R took, I waiting for the Strathalbyn mail. During the
morning I called on the Chief Justice to invite him to the
117


pic-nic, and to ask his advice about a caterer. Afterwards I
called on Dr. G and went for a drive with him in his
victoria. In the afternoon I went to lawn-tennis at the
T» ’s, taking my dress things with me, as I was to dine
there afterwards. It was a baking hot day, but nevertheless
we played hard. After dinner, for which Miss L also
stayed, we had some dancing, and then went out into the
observatory and looked through the telescope at Jupiter,
Saturn, and Mars. On Jupiter at present there is a curious
red patch. After the observatory we inspected the transit
room, by which the time is regulated each day. Here, too, are
his telegraph instruments, and when it was time to go a cab
was telegraphed for.
i sth Dec. —I have been hard at work this morning on my
pic-nic, and went with Eustace to see Mcßane about the
catering, as the Chief Justice had recommended me to go to
him ; he is to send me an estimate on Monday. In the
afternoon Eustace, his wife, and I went down to Glenelg and
revelled in the cool sea breeze on the jetty, afterwards calling
for “The Wadd,” who is at school there; we dined at the
Pier Hotel and took her back with us until to-morrow.
14 . th Dec. —This morning we went to the Cathedral and
only just managed to get seats, as there was a church parade.
Dr. Dendy preached a magnificent sermon on the scepticism
of the present day. In the afternoon Eustace and I went a
round of calls, getting back in time for me to take “ The
Wadd” back to Glenelg by the eight o’clock train. I
returned in time for supper, for which B came in.
15 th Dec. — Lunched with Dr. G , and dined with
them in the evening, and went to the theatre to see “The
Old Story,” in which Marshall, as usual, was splendid,
followed by the “ Happy Pair,” well acted by Mr. and Mrs.
Garner.
16 th Dec. —Hard at work all morning making arrangements
about the pic-nic, and hunting for Lady H ■, whom I at
last found. The subject of catering is now at an end, as she
has kindly offered to do the cooking part for me at Wood-
house, so we went to Beache, the confectioner’s, and ordered
turkeys, ducks, chickens, jellies, See. After lunch I went in
to see Dr. G , and then went with Eustace to taste
wines for the pic-nic at Mr. Benham’s. Heat fearful, 99 0 in
shade, 132 0 in sun; one man told me that the thermometer in
his office stood at 103°. Fancy having to work in that heat t
118


17 th Dec. — After a hard morning’s work upon the arrange-
ments for the pic-nic, I caught the three o’clock coach for
Woodhouse, Mrs. G and “TheWadd” having gone up by
the previous coach. In the evening we set to work to polish
the floor. The heat to-day has been something tremendous,
and at twelve o’clock I was particularly struck by one’s
shadow, the sun being almost perpendicularly overhead, so
that with an umbrella up you saw nothing but its shadow.
In the hills, even, the thermometer stood at 92° in the
shade.
18 th Dec. —To-day we hardly moved out of thehouse, as the
heat has been something tropical, and you can imagine how
glad I was to be up here when we heard from Eustace that
the thermometer had stood at 108° in the shade, and 152 0
in the sun in Adelaide. At four o’clock the change came,
the wind going round from the N. to the S., so we all turned
out to drink in the cool breeze. In the evening it got so
cold that we could hardly sit with any comfort in the verandah,
so went in for further polishing of the floor and music.
About six o’clock a dray arrived with the cases of wine and
crockery for the pic-nic.
ig th Dec. —Miss H and I caught the early coach, leaving
Mrs. G and Miss E. H to help Lady H with the
flowers. The morning we spent in shopping, Christmas
presents being the chief objects. It is like being at home,
except for the climate. In the evening everybody went to
hear Camilla Urso, the violinist, but not being sufficiently
appreciative, I remained at home to write my mail letters.
20 th Dec. —At last this long-looked-for day arrived, and
had we been asked to choose our day, we could not possibly
have had a finer one. We all met at Mrs. N ’s at
11.30, where a portion of our provisions had been sent, the
rest having gone up yesterday to Woodhouse. At twelve
o’clock the vehicles arrived —one large wagonette and four
horses, holding twelve ; two wagonettes and pairs, a double
buggy and pair, which I drove myself, and in which, of course,
I had my own select party. The cavalcade ended up by a
single buggy and pair, driven by Eustace, and with him were
Mrs. D and Marshall. The Chief Justice drove up in his
own victoria. We arrived at Woodhouse fortunately without
an accident, although we very nearly had one, as one of the
wagonette horses put its foot into a hole and came down,
luckily remaining quiet, so no damage was done. The only
119


thing for which I was most sorry was that it should have
been the very one in which Mrs. T was, as she is nervous,
and had got into it as having the quietest-looking horses.
We drove by a back road straight to the ground chosen for
the pic-nic in “ Drummond’s” where the rest of the party
were waiting for us. My party consisted of about forty, and
with the rest we were between fifty and sixty. The spot
chosen was most beautiful —an open glade surrounded by
large timber with a creek skirting it, and two large gum
trees in its centre, under which on tables were spread the
provisions, and under the shade of the surrounding trees were
logs upon which the people sat in groups. On one side was
rigged up a gipsy kettle. The men of the party soon set to
work with the assistance of about ten servants and got
everybody to work, and a jolly feast we had ; and, to add to
our comforts, it clouded over, for even at the best of times
gum trees do not give much shade, as their leaves hang
straight down during the heat of the day. After all the
feasting was over, the ladies left us to smoke and pass the
flowing bowl. Marshall kept us alive, and before we left to
join the ladies he proposed my health with “ He’s a jolly
good fellow.” Leaving the servants (for, including drivers,
there were about fourteen) to have their dinner off the ghosts,
we all sorted ourselves for a ramble. At five we met again in
the verandah, for afternoon tea and strawberries and cream.
At 6.30 we commenced dancing. B and Miss G ,
assisted occasionally by others, very kindly presided at the
piano. The floor was perfect, and it was so delicious turning
out into the garden between the dances. Everything looked
most lovely under the crimson rays of the setting sun. At
nine o’clock we adjourned to supper, at which thefunflowed as
well as the champagne. After supper was over some of the
elder population left, and we continued the dancing. It was
eleven o’clock before we fairly started for home again, and
it was nearly one o’clock before we reached Medindie, as our
buggy went round by a longer road in order to drop Miss
M , and W . Marshall’s buggy we left behind
us, he having had a lift down in Dr. G ’s victoria. He
had driven up in the afternoon to fetch his sister down,
fearing an accident at night. We had a most perfect drive
down, as the moon was well up. So ended one of the jolliest
days of my life. Apart from enjoying it so myself, it was a
great thing to have been host at an entertainment where all
120


■enjoyed themselves so thoroughly. The fun never flagged
for an instant, and there was not a hitch throughout. But I
must say that the great success of the pic-nic was due to the
kindness of Lady H in allowing it to be at Woodhouse,
and so materially helping me in every respect.
2i st Dec. —This was, indeed, a day of rest, after all our
exertions of yesterday ; and being a wet one we all felt how
lucky we had been. In the early part of the morning
we all met at Manning’s, and had photographs innumerable
taken as mementoes of the jolly party at Medindie.
22 nd Dec. —The Misses H had arranged to return
to Woodhouse to-day, but at lunch we decided instead
that all of us should go to see “ Our Boys.” Every seat in
the house had been taken, but by a litttle persuasion we
managed to get the manager’s box- Marshall was perfect
as the Butterman, and the performance, taking it all round,
was quite equal to that as acted at the Vaudeville.
2 3rd Dec. —Up early and walked down with the Misses
H to catch the early coach, and went up by it as far as the
stables, where we met Lady H . There I had some coffee,
and returned to Adelaide by the Strathalbyn coach, arriv-
ing at ten o’clock. To-day the locusts arrived in thousands, and
the lawn and flowers are fast disappearing under their voraci-
ous appetites. They look like snow up in the heavens, their
white wings glistening in the sun. The lawn is one brown
mass, and as you walk across it they rise in thousands. In
the evening Robert M and his sister came in to dinner.
The town is beautifully decorated with green branches and fern
leaves in honour of Christmas-tide.
2 4th Dec. —In to Adelaide early to finish off buying one’s
Christmas presents. Met and was introduced to Mr. Hardie,
one of the principal vine-growers, and he asked me to come
down and see his vineyards at Bankside. At four o’clock
we started for Woodhouse, picking up in town Walter B ,
and calling at Kent House for Walter R and a Swede
who has only just come out here, and can only
speak a few words of English. His name is Leijonhelfin,
and he was in the Swedish cavalry. It was a lovely day,
and we had a pleasant drive up to Woodhouse, at which we
arrived rather late on account of the heavy load, for we had a
fair amount of luggage. We had dancing in the evening,
and remained up till after twelve o’clock, in order to wish
■one another a merry Christmas.
121


CHRISTMAS DAY.
25 th Dec. —Before breakfast we turned out for a bathe in
the creek. This is my first Christmas out of England, and
with the thermometer between Bo° and 90° it is rather
difficult to believe that it is really Christmas. It was not
till after breakfast when on going on to the verandah I saw
a table covered with the presents that it was really forcibly
brought home to me. Everybody has been most kind, and I
have received some delightful mementoes of a Christmas day
spent in the Antipodes. We are a very jolly party here. The
carpet is still up in the drawing-room, so the day was spent
in singing and dancing; in the afternoon, we all sat out in
the garden under a cherry-tree and refreshed ourselves with
the fruit. At dinner we were fourteen, and of course there
was turkey, roast beef, and plum pudding, but besides these
there was a raspberry tart; strange to me at a Christmas
dinner. After dinner the toast of absent friends was drunk,
and I need hardly say how I drank it, thinking of all
those at home and in Manchester, who would be drinking it
too and thinking of me. We then danced until we could
hardly stand. We had a narrow escape of a nasty accident
by the upsetting of a kerosene lamp, but fortunately only the
globe was broken. After the ladies had retired, we adjourned
to the smoke-room, ending up the evening by singing, the
Swede reciting in his own language “ The Swedish Christmas-
Ode.” On saying good-night to the ladies he raised their
hands to his lips, which rather took them by surprise. Before
we separated for the night he proposed the health of Queen
Victoria, and we responded with that of the King of Sweden.
So ended Christmas Day.
26 th Dec. —I was most fearfully tired, so did not get up to
breakfast. Before lunch I went out with Mr. R to help
him in planning an avenue, which he is about to cut through
the bush facing the house, and we found it very hot work
cutting down some of the saplings. Altogether it has been
a very slack day—the effect of the re-action after all the festivi-
ties of Christmas. Dancing as usual in the evening. I feel
sure if anyone ever reads this diary they will indeed think
that we are dancing mad. I am sure I am; but it is not
to be wondered at. Pretty girls and a good floor, I think
would be an excuse for anyone being so.
122


2 yth Dec. —To-day has been fearfully wet, and so it has
been spent in the verandah. Fortunately, Walter R has
with him one of the American air saloon pistols, with which
we have amused ourselves. In the afternoon some of the
party left and others arrived. Dancing as usual in the
evening.
28 th Dec. —In the morning we went up to inspect the
avenues. The one which is being cut so as to form a view
from the verandah is to hand my name down to posterity,
and is to be called “ The Partington Avenue,” as I first
conceived the idea. In the afternoon we had tea in Drum-
mond’s. To-day is the celebration of the founding of this
colony.
29 th Dec. —Mr. R and myself spent the morning burn-
ing rubbish from the felled trees, and at work upon “ The
Partington Avenue the rest of the party went out fishing in
the creek, and succeeded in getting one hundred and twenty
fish. They are very small, the largest being about six inches
long, but delicious eating. In the afternoon we had more
bonfires and tree-splitting by means of litro-fracteur. A host
of people came in to call, among whom was the Chief Justice,
who asked us to dinner on Monday and the theatre after-
wards.
30 th Dec. —The early bathing in the creek is a great treat
each morning. To-day is high festival, being Eustace’s birth-
day, but I am sorry to say the last I shall spend at Wood-
house. I hope that it may not be for ever, for, should it be
possible, I shall most certainly try and visit Adelaide again,
where I have made so many friends. I can indeed endorse
the sentiment expressed in some lines written in a book which
is here, and which run :
Lying embosomed ’midst the wooded hills
Hard by a stream, o’er which the willows bend ;
Gratefully kissing it for those cool rills
On whose life-giving moisture they depend.
Oft in the future will my thoughts fly back
On memory’s wing to those bright happy days
Passed in the peaceful home which ne’er shall lack
The humble tribute of a wanderer’s praise.
Woodhouse. G.T.
The weather now is perfect; sky cloudless, and with a cool
breeze. It is delicious to sit in the verandah and listen to the
123


•sounds which come from the surrounding woods. There is the
whistling note of the magpie, broken by the occasional laugh of
the jackass: in harmony with these are the sicardas and crickets.
The former live principally in the gum trees, and make a noise
somewhat resembling a premature policeman’s rattle, broken
occasionally into a peculiar croak. On a very hot day the
noise they make is almost deafening. Then, too, there are
the toads, which keep up an incessant croaking in the creek;
the distant tinkle of the cattle bells, and at night time the
wild cry of the curlew, all helping to add to the thorough
liveliness of this sweet spot. At times it reminds me of
Merklands, buried as it is in its woods. As there will be
little chance of seats in the coach to-morrow, to-day being a
public holiday, we have telegraphed to Hill and Co. to send us
up a wagonette. To-day has been most enjoyable, from the
fact that we have done nothing in particular; yet still have
found plenty to do to amuse ourselves, from blowing up stumps
with litro-fracteur, and burning rubbish, to wandering along
the creek sides, gathering maiden-hair ferns and wild flowers,
stopping occasionally to rest under the shade of some black-
wood tree. And so the day passes, with now and then a visit
to the raspberry bushes, with which the gardens here abound,
as well as in all other kinds of fruit. We have almost
lived on raspberries and cream for the last week,
strawberries being over. We had a very merry party
at dinner, after which I proposed the health of Eustace,
to which he replied in a neat and touching speech.
Directly after dinner, we all went up to the Echo Hill and
shouted ourselves hoarse, returning to the verandah in
time to see the moon rise over the opposite hill, looking most
lovely, as it showed through the stems of the gum trees. We
then came in for some singing, which grew wilder and wilder
as song followed song, until we had exhausted all we had or
knew, especially those with choruses. We next danced, and
afterwards adjourned to the dining-room to sing “ Auld Lang
Syne,” and drink a glass of punch to absent friends. The
moon is now at its full, so the next move was to the verandah,
where we sat for some time until time to retire, more from
■exhaustion of subject than of body.
31 st Dec. —The wagonette arrived at 10 o’clock, and
Eustace, Miss H , Walter R and myself returned to
Adelaide. Good-bye to dear old Woodhouse ! I lunched with
Dr. G , and afterwards met Miss H and left for
124


Gawler by the 4.45 train. Miss M and Walter B
joined us at the station, On the way down, Gawler being
about twenty-five miles from Adelaide, W. B produced a
Manchester Guardian, which he had received by the last
mail in to-day ; you can imagine how I jumped at it and
devoured it. Mr. M , a Manchester man, with whom
Miss H , Miss M , and myself are going to stay, met
us at the station, and we drove up at once to his house. Dr.
and Mrs. P came in to dinner. We, of course, sat up to see
the New Year in and wish one another a happy one. It was
a bitterly cold night, the thermometer being as low as 63° and
with an east wind, which means a hot day for us to-morrow.
After watching some fireworks, we were visited by the drum
and fife band of the volunteers, of which Mr. M is
captain. After playing one or two things they all came in to be
refreshed. There is a superstition here, as at home, that if
a dark person or creature is the first to enter the house on
the new year it brings luck, and as none of us were dark, we
turned out the dog, which is jet black, and as soon as twelve
o’clock had struck called him in.
125


CHAPTER V.
A Happy New Year—Fast Friends at Adelaide—Once More on the Wing
—Back in Melbourne —More Lotus Eating—An Antipodean Paradise
—A Touch of Illness —The London of the Southern Hemisphere—
Cock-a-doodle-doo —A Trip to Tasmania—lmpressions of Laun-
ceston and Hobart Town —Lengthy but Interesting—A Convict
Settlement —More Trips and no Tripping—On Board the “ Mangana”
—Port Philip—A Southerly Buster—Bad News about Chip—Across
the Blue Mountains—Bathurst —-Queen’s Birthday, Bunting and Big
Guns —Something about Sydney,kits Shops and Shopmen—Another
Flight to Fiji—More about Chip, and a little more about the
Exeter Hall Chadbands —A Rather Bloodthirsty Chief —Curio Buy-
ing—Honourable Acquittal of Chip—Another Sail —More Views of
Forms Unfashioned, Fresh from Nature’s Hand —Tongan House
Architecture —Our Brethren Beyond the Seas —A Very Pretty
Quarrel as it Stands.
ist January, 1880.
' SafaiAST night’s forebodings proved correct, for the thermo-
C jaga meter was 94° in the shade at nine o’clock this
morning. We have passed the morning in moving
about from room to room as each got too hot,
and in eating fruit. We lunched with the D s, who
have a house near. At lunch we were a party of ten. It
was most refreshing on coming out afterwards to find that
the wind had changed to the west. After a smoke we
started for Para-Para, Mr. D ’s place. Para-Para, both
inside and out, reminded me somewhat of Manley Hall, Sam
Mendel’s old place. Soon after arriving there the great event
of the year took place, a cricket match, “ Married v. Single,”
in which everybody plays. We had a most exciting match,
the married coming off victorious by three runs. Some of
the ladies played uncommonly well, Miss H ’s fielding,
Mrs. T ’s scudding, and Miss M ’s batting were
remarkable. The lady who fielded long-leg reminded me of
the pelican in the wilderness, standing as she did on one leg
•with sunshade up. Fortunately, we were very evenly divided,
there being three men on each side and all about equal.
We got back to the house in time for a bath and to dress for


■dinner, to which a party of twenty sat down. Walter R
turned up in time. He had missed the early train; owing to
his dissipation of last night at Marshall’s supper and dance,
which they kept up till after four o’clock. Eustace was
at it too ; I also was invited, but of course could not go.
Unfortunately, Mr. D , who is a great invalid, was not
well enough to come down to dinner. After dinner we had
various speeches, Dr. T- proposing the health of Mr.
and Mrs. D . Walter B also distinguished
himself on his legs. Then came the event of the evening—
The Flutter. This is a distribution of presents. They are
-drawn for by means of two packs of cards ; so many presents
being put on the table, and on each is placed a card from one
of the packs. The other pack is then handed round and you
draw in turn a card, and the person who draws a corresponding
card to any on the present takes it. After all have thus been
drawn, those who have got more than two presents return
all but two, taking, of course, their choice which two they
keep. Then those who have not got two go on drawing
until they get them, after which there is a general flutter of
the remaining presents, in which you keep any you get. In
the end nearly everybody had three, some more. I got at
first six, out of which I kept a pipe and a J apanese tobacco
box, inlaid with gold; and in the general flutter afterwards I
got an album. There were some beautiful presents, and of
course the excitement over the drawing was intense. Owing
to Mr. D ’s state of health, we could not dance, as they
have done in former years, in the hall, which is very large
with an open corridor running round it, and lighted by
hanging lamps with different coloured globes. We got back
to Mr. M’s at about twelve o’clock.
2nd Jan. —After breakfast this morning, the thermometer
was g6° in the shade. We left Gawler by the mid-day train,
and as we neared Adelaide saw some wonderful mirages, one
in particular, in which the houses of Port Adelaide stood out
as it were in the centre of a lake. In the evening we had a
dinner party at Medindie in honour of Mrs. D , who is
leaving for Sydney.
yd Jan. —The heat is something fearful, and although I
have known hot weather, I have never before felt such sun
heat. After lunch, we all (for the Misses H are both
staying here) went down to the bay and thoroughly enjoyed
the cool breeze, getting back here in time for supper. The
127


heat is fearful, so I moved my bed on to the verandah, where
I slept, much to the astonishment of the milkmaid in the
morning.
4th Jan. —Sunday; but church is out of all question. I
think we all of us have slept more than anything else to-day.
A scorching day without a breath of air. At dinner a flicker
of the candles was hailed with delight. This is the second
day running that I have lived only on salad, bread, and fruit.
After dinner to-night a cool breeze sprang up, so we put out
all lights in the house, and opened every door and window.
Mosquitoes are beginning to get bad. The Misses H
heard from their brother yesterday, he is further north. The
in his tent was n6°.
sth5 th Jan. —I ought to have lunched with Mr. A at
Norwood, but the heat was too great, and I had hardly energy
enough to do all I had to do consequent on my leaving
Adelaide to-morrow. In the evening we, that is, Lady H ,
the Misses H , Eustace and his wife and myself, dined
with the Chief Justice. We went early, as the Chief was
anxious to show me over his house and grounds, which are
beautifully laid out. The lawns, which are of buffalo grass,
are like velvet. On one side of his garden is a lovely grotto.
The ferneries are charming, and on a hot day must be some-
thing too lovely. Native birds, of various descriptions, wander
about the garden at pleasure. The views of the surrounding
country, look which way you will, are most beautiful, and are
ever varying under different conditions of weather. On one
side the hills cover the valley in which Adelaide lies, nestling
among trees ; on the other the plains stretching away to the
sea. The house itself is one in which there is every comfort,
reminding me of that picture of Nicols, “ When a man’s
single he lives at his ease.” After dinner, which was by far
the best I have been at since being in this country, and at
which I took the opposite end of the table to the Chief, we all
adjourned to the theatre to see “ Friends.” We were in all
a party of eleven, so well filled the Governor’s box. The place
of honour in the centre was given to “The Wadd,” and I never
saw anybody enjoy anything so much in my life. In fact I
think watching her was more enjoyment than watching the
play itself. After the second act we all adjourned to the
anteroom for coffee and ices, and after the third act Eustace
and I went behind the scenes for me to bid adieu to Marshall.
As we are both wanderers I am nearly sure to come across.
128


him again somewhere. On goingback to Medindie everybody
gave me a helping hand with my packing.
6th Jan. —The day of my departure has at last arrived, and
I was never so sorry to leave any place as I am to leave the
hospitable roof of Eustace and his wife. I came for a week,
and have stayed two months ! Indeed, I feel that here in
Adelaide I have made some true friends, and I am now
beginning to feel that the one, and only one objection to travell-
ing so slowly as I am doing is, that one remains in a place to
make friends only to leave them. I console myself with the
intention of returning again before finally leaving the colonies.
There was quite a large party at the station to see me off, and
Lady H , the Misses H , Mrs. G , Walter B ,
and B , all came down to the Port to see the last of me.
This was indeed a proof of their kindness, when you consider
the thermometer stood at nine o’clock at gg° in the shade. We
had a crowded boat, and the heat on board as “The Coorong ”
lay at her berth in dock was something awful; but on
getting out into the river a S.E. breeze sprang up, which
soon cooled us. We sat down over thirty to dinner, but the
breeze freshening soon set many of us toes up. As we went
through Backstairs Passage, which is the channel between
Cape Jervis and Kangaroo Island, it was blowing a stiff
breeze. I was not long in turning in, for it was too cold to
remain on deck with any comfort. Such a change after the
last few days in Adelaide !
7 th Jan. —On getting up this morning we were just casting
anchor off Kingston, which is at the head of Lacepede Bay.
Here we remained about three hours discharging cargo. The
falling off at breakfast was something fearful. We left
Kingston at about twelve, and at 1.30 we had rounded Cape
Jaffa lighthouse. At dinner we were reduced to five, and
this time I was really proud of myself, for it has been the first
voyage in which I have showed up at all meals. As we were
entering Guichen Bay “The Glenelg,” which left the port
about three hours after we did, passed on her way to Tasmania
and Sydney. Mrs. D is on board, on her way to the
latter port. At two o’clock we were at anchor off Robe ; and
once more lam with the J. G ’s. Miss G is staying
here.
Bth Jan. —To be once more in a cool climate is, indeed, a
great treat; and so cold was it in the afternoon when we went for
a drive that I could have comfortably worn an overcoat. We
K
129


drove past Lake Robe, this time taking the Beachport road,
which skirts Lake Eliza, now drying up fast. It then passes
through some very prettily-wooded country, and skirts several
small lakes. A great many of the trees are in blossom, one in
particular being a mass of white flowers. We got back about
seven o’clock, and it was so cold that we thoroughly enjoyed
a fire which was lighted in the dining-room; and, from sleep-
ing with no bed clothes, to-night I found a double blanket and
a thick counterpane not a bit too much.
g th Jan. —This morning, Miss G and I went for
a walk as far as the Obelisk, where I made one or two
sketches. There was a stiff breeze on, and the sea was
breaking well over the rocks. What a pity that this
place is not nearer to Adelaide! In the afternoon, J. G
having got two rifles, we started for Lake Robe, where we
succeeded in shooting two black swans, and with the gun
I managed to get sixteen small birds, something between a
lark and a snipe. If one only had a flat-bottomed boat, what
magnificent sport one might have, as the lake is covered
with both swan and duck!
loth Jan. —In the afternoon we went for a drive along
the beach, taking the gun with us, and as we were returning
came upon two emus, which we first mistook for men, walking
majestically along the shore. I tried to get a shot at them,
hut failed.
nth Jan. —We went to church in the morning, the butcher
of the town officiating. At four o’clock J. G and I started
for Kingston, as I wanted to catch the early train for Narra-
coorte to-morrow morning. We had a very pleasant drive,
but rather hot, and arrived in Kingston about eight o’clock.
12 th Jan. —After all I missed the train this morning, owing
to the difference of the time between the hotel and the station
clocks. Before breakfast, J. G and I went down to the
jetty to see the steam launch which so narrowly escaped
being burnt to the water’s edge, owing to some, of her timber
on which the boiler rested catching fire. Fortunately,
there was a hall here the other night, and J. G ’s manager
noticed smoke coming from her as he was returning home,
and with some help managed to put out the fire. I spent the
afternoon on the jetty for coolness’ sake. Towards sunset
some most peculiar clouds came up, at first looking like a
huge waterspout rising in the east, which finally spread out
into a rainbow-shaped cloud, extending right across the sky
130


from east to west. In the evening I went into J. G ’s
manager’s, to have a rubber at whist, and had a run of fear-
fully bad luck.
13 th Jan.- —Caught the train for Narracoorte, and until
actually arriving there I was undecided which way to go,
whether by the direct mail route or by Apsley, or remain in
Narracoorte and visit the caves. I finally decided in favour
of the direct mail route, as the coach which met the train had
on it my old driver “ Dick,” so I secured the box seat, much
to the annoyance of the landlady of the hotel where we booked,
as she had promised it. The driver said I had secured it two
months ago. My companion on the box seat was a pretty and
amusing girl. We left Narracoorte at twelve o’clock, arriving
at Penola half an hour late, owing to our wheel getting heated
when about six miles from there. Fortunately, the driver
happened to have a small bottle of water, which he had put in
for drinking, otherwise we might have had to remain some
time till the wheel cooled. I had to hold the reins while
the wheel was being taken off, and fortunately the horses were
quiet. Had they moved, the coach would have been smashed.
The drive from Penola to Casterton was new to me, as
on my journey to Adelaide I had gone round by Mount
Gambier. Up to the border there is a splendid metal road,
but on entering Victoria, “good-bye to good roads.” The
fellow occupant of the box seat with me was a capital
travelling companion. He told me that he was the son of a
Brighton doctor, wild in his youth, having ’listed in the
“ Cherubims ” (nth Hussars), in which he served three and
a half years, and then came out here for his health, where
he has settled down to business. At our first stage, the
ribbons changed hands to “George,” my old driver. We
arrived in Casterton about twelve, after a very heavy road,
principally sand, and through thick bush land. At what is
known as the “ Ten Miles’ Tree,” an old stringy bank, we
stopped to “blow” the horses. It was a thorough bush
scene, the arms of the old trees almost touching the ground,
and the lamps lighting up the stems of the white gums ahead.
The horses looked like ghosts, covered as they were with
the sand. The road is a disgrace to Victoria. I suppose
their motto is “Meddle not with Nature.” On arriving at
Casterton we found the hotel full, as also the other hotel,
so we had to put up with a shake down on sofas, and were
kept awake by the rats.
131


14 th Jan. —We were to start at five o’clock, and on waking
and looking at my watch it was twenty minutes to six; I
jumped up and rushed into the yard. No coach! I came
back and told my companion that the coach had gone, but
on his going out he met it coming down from the post-office,
where it had been for the mails. All this only took one
minute, for at nineteen minutes to six we were off —rather a
sudden jump from sleep to activity. It appeared that the
groom, who is supposed to sit up, had gone to sleep and
overslept himself. Our fellow-passengers along the whole
way were a newly-married couple, who travelled inside, and
they must have enjoyed themselves, for they were never
without some drunken man or other as companion. I never
saw so much drinking in my life. The shearing is now over,
and the men are all “ knocking down their cheques.” We
arrived in Hamilton about twelve o’clock; I lunched at Mill’s,
by far the best hotel there, and left by the 12.45 train for
Ballaarat, where I arrived at 6.30; fearfully slow work, six hours
to do 119 miles. Dr. P had written that, owing to his
sister staying with him, he could not put me up, so I drove to
Craig’s, where I dined, and spent the evening at P ’s.
His sisters are both very good musicians.
Jan. —I am sorry to say that both S and W
are away in Tasmania. I went for a drive with P
through the botanical gardens, which now look most lovely,
as nearly all the English trees are in full leaf. After dinner
we went for a moonlight trip round the Lake Wendoree, on
one of the small steamers.
16 th Jan. —Did nothing.
17th Jan.— After lunch, we went down to the lake and
had a delicious sail in Mr. Owen E ’s yacht, the
“ Victoria.” He has been most fortunate lately. He carried
off the principal race at Colac, another town in Victoria
possessing a similar sheet of water, and to which he had taken
his yacht for the regatta. Mr. E came in to dinner,
and we ended up the evening with any amount of music.
18 th Jan. —P was taking his sisters down to Melbourne
for Madame Urso’s concert, so we all went together. The
Victorian railways are the most troublesome and the officials
the most officious of any I have ever travelled by. For
instance, in Melbourne you cannot see a friend off from the
platform without paying sixpence to go on. To-day we had
with us a small box containg two fern roots. We were not
132


allowed to take it in the carriage with us, it not being
“ personal luggage,” but had instead to book it through as a
parcel, so that when we arrived at our destination it took us
at least ten minutes to get it out of the parcel office, besides
which we had to pay two shillings for it. The other day a
lady was travelling with her child. The latter had a nine-
penny toy, this they would not allow to go unless paid for as
a parcel; it would have been eighteenpence, but rather than
pay that she broke it, and asked the porter to send it as a
present to Mr. Woods, the minister of railways. There is a
tale, but for the truth of which I cannot vouch, that they
insisted on a labouring man paying for his tools. You can
imagine how glad I was, on arriving at the Oriental
Hotel, to find that G was again in Melbourne. I had
intended going to hear Camilla Urso, but I found that a
number of men were dining together at the Club, and they
were going to see “ The Happy Land.” It was the first
performance here, and the words have been altered to suit
the present Berry Ministry, and a row is expected, especially
as Berry has taken upon himself to prohibit the topical
portions. The three leading characters who were to have
been dressed to represent Berry, Major Smith, and Woods,
wore only ordinary clothes, and to start with announced
that they represented no one in particular ; but of course
it was very evident for whom they were meant. The house
was crowded, and everybody was unanimous in their cheers
at the jokes against any of the Ministry. This only shows
how they are hated ; and well they maybe, for I don’t suppose,
take the world over, you could find more unprincipled
politicians. When they came to a part of the dialogue that
was particularly offensive, one of the party would rush up
and put his hand to the mouth of the speaker, and say,
“ Prohibited.”
i gth Jan. —Sunday.
20 th Jan. —Played racquets in the morning, for attached to
the Melbourne Club is a splendid court, built by some of the
members. In the evening I dined with G at the
Australian Club, of which we both have been made honorary
members. The Club has only just been opened ;it possesses
a magnificent house and the best cook in Melbourne. All
the internal arrangements are very good. We got a capital
bottle of dry champagne, a treat out here, as the taste for
champagne is decidedly sweet. We afterwards went for a
133


second time to see “ The Happy Land,” and there met
M This, I believe, is to be the last performance, as the
Ministry have prohibited it altogether. But they have issued
circulars stating that they intend to perform it in spite of the
Ministry, and for that purpose a steamer has been chartered
which will convey passengers to a place to be named after
the vessel leaves the wharf, and that it will take all stage
requisites, &c., with it.
21-2 gth Jan. —I must have caught cold on my overland
journey, for I have been ill and in the hands of Dr. Fitzgerald,
and confined to the house most of the time.
30 th Jan. —G and I went for a row up the Yarra River.
The day was glorious, and as I am still supposed to be an
invalid G did the rowing. We got up as far as Hawthorn,
a distance of nine miles. The river in places is certainly
charming, being lined with willows, under the shade of which
we rested and refreshed ourselves with fruit and a smoke. I
had taken with me an American air rifle, and we amused
ourselves firing at the shags.
31st Jan. —Too hot almost for anything, although I never
felt better in my life, owing to my having had to live on fish for
the last week, which exactly suits me in this climate. In
the mornings, we generally drop into some fruit shop, and
devour peaches out of an ice chest. I am busy at present
making up a case to go home. I have made a collection of
a few of the principal birds of Victoria ready for stuffing.
Ist Feb. —A new month has commenced, and I am still
in Melbourne in spite of the heat, which I find I am much
better able to bear than the residents here. In fact, Ido not
feel it half as much as I have done some summers in London.
4 th Feb. —The last two days have been spent at Mrs.
M ’s. She has a capital lawn tennis court, and is most
hospitable. I played one day, and got into disgrace
with Fitz for so doing. One night we remained for
dinner, and we sat down to the best dinner I have
had in this colony, and to one of the most elegantly
appointed tables. I liked the idea of a centre covering of
pale blue silk and afterwards doyleys to match.
s th Feb. —G and I commenced this morning going
down by the early train to St.Kilda to bathe. We can easily
get back to our hotel by nine o’clock. This has entirely
changed our way of living, for up to this we have generally
got up about nine and had our tea and toast in our rooms;
134


but we never thought of dressing much before twelve or
one o’clock, at which time we went over to the' Club for
lunch. We have breakfast on our return from our
bathe at about eleven o’clock, and lunch off iced fruit,
as most of the fruiterers here always keep some in an
ice chest. This, they say, is an exceptional summer in
the long spell we are having of hot weather. There is
great excitement here over the arrival of the “ Strathleven ”
in London with her cargo of fresh meat, and for its
wonderful sale at sevenpence a pound. This opens a new
market for their cattle here, and has already raised
the price of cattle £1 per head. Melbourne beats
Cologne in smells; here there are no such things as
underground drains, but the surface water is carried off
by means of open channels running along each side of
the streets and crossed by wooden bridges and culverts.
The town is built in a valley with rectangular streets of one
mile in length and ninety-nine feet wide, principally named
after Australian celebrities, and are intersected by smaller
streets, which bear the name of the larger streets with the
prefix of “ Little.” Elizabeth-street runs in the valley, and
being very low, in rainy weather becomes an angry torrent,
impassable tofoot passengers. Collins-street is the fashionable
street, and contains some fine buildings, the finest of which
are the banks, and in looking at the whole it is almost impos-
sible to believe that it is only forty-two years old. Parallel to
Collins-street is Bourke-street, the Oxford-street of Melbourne.
The upper end of Collins-street is inhabited principally by
doctors; to have a house there is their ambition. At the head
of Collins-street, looking right downit,stands “The Treasury,”
in the neighbourhood of which are all the public offices and
Houses of Parliament, the latter being still in an unfinished
condition; adjoining the Treasury are the Treasury Gardens
and the Fitzroy Gardens, both very prettily laid out, and a
delicious place on a hot day, as they are one mass of trees
with shady walks. In the upper end of Collins-street are two
fine buildings, viz., the Scotch Church and that of the Wesleyan
community, and at the junction with Russell-street stands
the monument erected to the memory of Burke and Wills,
who lost their lives in Australian exploration. Melbourne
has some considerable suburbs, the principal of which are
Fitzroy, Collingwood, N. Melbourne, E. Melbourne, Carlton,
&c. These go to form Melbourne, but beyond are some
135


pretty spots, where most of the residences are, Toorak, St.
Kilda, South Yarra, &c. Melbourne is supplied .with water
from the Yan-Yean Reservoir. The price of gas is ten
shillings a thousand feet. Edison ought to do well here with
his electric light, gas being a monopoly. The Botanical
gardens are very picturesque and are beautifully laid out, and
adjoining them are the gardens of Government House, which
stands on high ground overlooking the town.
6th Feb. —l was reminded this morning of the fact of its
being my birthday by the reception of various cards from
unknown well-wishers, otherwise I certainly should have
forgotten it.
******
I am still an invalid, and therefore not allowed to do
much, most of my time being spent at the Club. The
London Comedy Company have returned from Adelaide, and
G , Captain S and myself went to see them in “Dearer
than Life ” and “ Withered Leaves.” The night following I
went to the circus, which was well worth seeing, ending up
with a performance with Bengal tigers.
isth Feb. —Drove out with C. R to a dance at Toorak.
It was perfect in every respect, good music, good floor, and
good partners. There were quite three hundred present.
The gardens were beautifully lighted up by different coloured
lamps. I was introduced to Miss N , whom I had been
particularly told to look out for by some of her old school-
fellows in England.
14th Feb. —Left Melbourne by the twelve o’clock train
for Macedon, on a visit to the R s, with Mr. R and
Admiral B . Macedon itself, which derives its name
from Mount Macedon, and which forms part of the Dividing
range, is about forty-three miles N. of Melbourne, and is
about 1,600 feet above the sea level. At the station a
wagonette was waiting, which drove us about three miles
further up the Mount and landed us within about half a
mile of Derriweit Heights, the name of Mr. R ’s house.
Oh! what a lovely spot this is ! Built on the slopes of
Mount Macedon, with one of the most extensive of views,
gardens sloping away from the house, terminating in two
picturesque lakes. On one is a miniature island, the home
of swans and ducks. Beyond wild bush, only by contrast
adding to the beauty of the garden, the portion near the
136


house being in two terraces and covered with the most lovely
flowers. The house itself is most picturesque, with its gabled
roof and verandah covered with creepers, beneath which grow
masses of fern trees. All this is backed by Mount Macedon
itself, covered with timber. Formerly, the bush was so thick
here that men had to cut their way through it, but three
years ago there was a fearful bush fire which considerably
thinned it. Six years ago all was alike, for it was then land
which had never been taken up, and it shows great fore-
sight in Mr. R in picking out such a lovely spot
for his home. The inside of the house is most comfort-
ably arranged, and for a country house has a capital idea,
the dining room and drawing room being divided only
by curtains. Here, for the first time in this country
have I come across old English engravings, some of which
were Sir Joshua’s, viz., “The Mob Cap,” “ Robinetta,” and
some old china. Besides myself, Admiral and Mrs. B ,
their daughter, a girl of fifteen, and a Miss C are staying
here ; they leave for England by the “ Lusitania ” on Friday
next. The home circle consists of Mr. and Mrs. R , Mrs.
R n, their eldest daughter, and wife of Captain R —n,
who served through the Maori war and since retired, Miss
M. R and “ Puck,” Mrs. R n’s little boy. The two
elder Misses R are at present in Tasmania.
15 th Feb. —This morning Mrs. R took me for a walk to
show me the beauties of the garden. The gem of all is a
winding gully, down which a small stream runs, and which is
filled with all sorts of ferns, collected at different times, both
here and in Tasmania, and New Zealand. In the gully
are the most beautiful little dells and miniature waterfalls,
and one spot in particular, even in the hottest day, would
be charmingly cool, shaded as it is by magnificent tree ferns.
16th Feb. —Mr. and Mrs. R went down to Melbourne to-
day, and I have spent most of my time wandering about the
gardens or sitting watching Mrs. paint flowers on satin
for a large bazaar, which is coming off soon in Melbourne in
aid of the College. She is certainly gifted with a most
wonderful talent for flower-painting. The flowers seem to
grow under her brush, for she never uses a pencil or makes
any design beforehand.
1 yth Feb. —This morning I walked down to the post office,
and returned by the waterfall,which, like many others, has been
spoilt by wretched pic-nickers having completely despoiled
137


it of all its ferns. In the afternoon, the whole valley below
us was buried in smoke from a bush fire almost- three miles
away. The smoke gave a most curious effect to the
sunset.
18 th Feb. —To-day I have devoted almost entirely to
sketching. There is a delicious little room leading out of a
fernery, into which the dining-room leads. In this Mrs.
R n does all her painting. A great deal of the decoration
of this room has been done by herself; as a sort of frieze there
are figures of cats and frogs, one of the latter supposed to be
the exact image of a friend of mine. In one corner there is
a notice that “Smoking is Prohibited” —I am afraid on one
or two occasions, however, I was blind to it.
ig th Feb. —The Admiral left us this morning. He has
given me letters of introduction to both Hobart Town
and Brisbane. In the afternoon, Mrs. R n and
I went for a scramble up the hill behind, from which
one gets a magnificent view. We had to keep a
sharp look out for snakes, there being any quantity about
here, and several deaths have occurred lately. The fear of
these reptiles when out for a walk goes a great way to take
away the pleasure. We came down in time for afternoon tea
at the spring. The water comes out of the solid rock, and is
as cold as ice. It is quite sufficient to keep all wines and
liquors as cold as if they had been iced. I found it out the
first morning here at my shower bath. It is a most fortunate
thing having water so near the house. There are dreadful
accounts of the want of water further north. In some places
they are carrying it twenty miles.
20 th Feb. —Left Mount Macedon, together with Mrs. and
Miss B and Miss C ,by the 9.15 train. As I
arrived at my hotel I had another of my attacks and rushed
off to see Fitzgerald. He says I must have got a chill
somehow, so after executing some commissions for Mr. R
I retired to bed, and never passed a more miserable day in my
life, for I was not a moment without pain.
21 st Feb. —Fortunately I have slept well, so am better this
morning, but still I must stick to my bed.
2,2nd Feb. —Still in bed, but several men have been in to
sit with me, among whom was one of the R ’s, of Colac,
who was at Rugby and in the same house as myself, but long
before my time.
23 rd Feb. —I got up and went down to see Fitzgerald. I
138


tried to remain up, but had to retire to bed again, where I
intend to stick until I feel I can get up with some comfort.
It is indeed most “ riling ” to be suddenly thrown back again
just as one was all right. This makes me give up all idea of
Tasmania and New Zealand for the present.
3rd March. —Town life, wherever you may be, has a certain
amount of similarity; therefore it is next to impossible to keep
up a daily diary. We went one night a party to Marshall’s
benefit at the Opera House. As the papers described, “It
was indeed a triumph.” The house was packed. Fortunately
for us we had the Club box. The heat was intense. The piece
performed was “Little Nell,” dramatised from Dickens’s “Old
Curiosity Shop,” Marshall taking the part of Quilp. I have
never seen such realistic acting, Marshall literally excelling
himself. His make-up was perfect ; the deformed limbs,
diabolical face and shaggy hair, gave one a living picture of
Dickens’s description. Between the scenes, I went behind to
congratulate Marshall, and found him fearfully exhausted, as
he had been at work ever since 8.30 this morning and had
only had one dozen oysters.
4 th March.- Second day of the races of the Victorian Turf
Club. I was lucky in getting a seat on the C ’s drag, the
only other drag being that of H.M.S. “Wolverine,” which
came in last night from Hobart Town. She is the flag ship
of Commodore Wilson. The “ Emerald ”is also here. The
Flemington racecourse is the finest in the world for seeing
the races, as it is surrounded by lowlying hills. The races
were good, and we generally had great fun. One heavy
shower fell while we were at lunch, which is supposed to
have altered the finish of the Australian Cup. It has been
a good day for the bookmakers. I heard one man acknowledge
to having won “ three monkeys ” (£1,500). Fortunately, we
had no dust, as the road the whole of the way, three and a
half miles, was kept well watered, whereas on Tuesday it had
been very dusty. I heard one man afterwards say, “ Confound
thatdust; it has made me drunk!” and he certainly looked it.
In the evening, I met M , of the “ Wolverine,” brother
of Charlie M , who used to be an old friend of mine at
Rugby, now in the Gunners.
s thMarch —.After lunch to-day we f.e.,W.G ,Captain
D , of H.I.G.M.S. Bismarck, and self went over the
Exhibition Buildings, which are very fine. The nave is five
hundred feet, and the central avenue one thousand feet in
139


length. I climbed to the top of the dome and got a
magnificent view of Melbourne.
6th March. —Just as I was starting to meet the drag it
came on to pour, and looked so like a settled wet day that I
gave up all idea of going down to the races, for I am still very
nervous about catching cold, and I am very anxious to leave
here next week, with G -for Sydney. I met Mrs. Marshall
and went down to the theatre. They were rehearsing
“ Caste ” for Monday next. Having nothing to do, in the
afternoon I went down to St. Kilda with the intention of
bathing, but found a regatta going on, so stayed to' watch it.
Got back in time for dinner at the Club, at which we were
greatly disgusted by one of the “ Wolverines ” declaring that
“ You Victorians are but a Brummagem lot.” Fortunately,
out of seven at our table, there was only one member, all the
rest being strangers, and he kept his temper admirably. We
certainly had one good laugh at the waiter saying, in answer
to a complaint, when the cheese was going round that the
plates were hot. “ But shure the butter is very hard ” —no
mistaking where he came from.
7 th March. —G having gone out to Toorak to lunch I
was at a loose end, when I fortunately met D C
and we decided the best thing to be done was to go for a
drive, and that the Beaconsfield Tower at Doncaster should
be our destination. The road there is through Richmond,
Hawthorn, and Kew, and the distance which we at first
supposed to be six miles turned out to be ten. The day was
perfect, being one of those when one really thinks that life is
worth living, and more than mere existence. The tower, which
is built of wooden scaffolding, with a staircase of two hundred
and forty steps, is situate on about the highest piece of land
between the dividing range and the sea, being six hundred
feet above the level of the sea, and the tower itself two
hundred feet. We got a magnificent view of the whole of the
surrounding country, with Melbourne, as it were, beneath us.
We could see as far as the Heads and the You Yangs; Mount
Macedon, too, was unmistakable. We got back about six,
and after something to eat at the Club went down to St.
Kilda for a blow. We missed the last train back, and had
the pleasure of driving over one of the worst roads in the
colony. Some time ago they abolished tolls and made no
provision for repairing the road, which is in as rough a state
as it is possible to be in, and a disgrace to any town, and
140


especially to Melbourne, which considers itself “the London
of the southern hemisphere.”
Bth March • —Went out to Mrs. M ’s and ventured upon
a game of lawn tennis. At the challenge of Miss W who
could refuse ? I got horribly bullied by G on my return,
for being so mad, foolish, &c., and I believe I am in thorough
disgrace with Fitz, who heard about it, and told G I was
exactly like a schoolboy, and unless I was very careful I
should never be well. This is far from pleasant ; and in order
to keep myself from temptation, I have decided to get
away from Melbourne. In the evening I went to see “ Caste,”
Marshall, of course, taking the part of “Eccles,” which was
quite an original conception, as he had never acted in it
before or seen it acted. He was perfect.
gthMarch. —This afternoon I went outto the A ’s, it being
their day for lawn tennis. There were over fifty people
present. They have five lawns, so there was plenty of play ;
but to me, who am so fond of the game, it is highly tantalizing
not to be able to play, but still, for all that, I passed a very
pleasant afternoon ; as there were plenty of people to talk to.
Lady S and Miss S were there. I had not met
them since my return from Fiji. Miss W had given me
her purse to take care of while she played. I left forgetting
I had it. Fortunately their brother-in-law saw them to the
station and took their tickets. I got back in time for dinner
attheClub, andafterwardswenttosee “ Pinafore ” with C
F and S (from China). We got the stage box. The
theatre was crammed, as it was a “ coat and epaulette ”
night.
10 th March —Miserably wet day; in the afternoon went in
to call on the W ’s. Mrs. A was there, and in conversa-
tion I mentioned that I should only be here about a month at
time of the races. She said, “ Oh, you ought to give two
months to the race week.” She is evidently related to a
Pat. In the evening I dined with D C , at the
Australian Club. G and B also dined. At the
Melbourne Club there is a big dinner on to-night, given
to the officers of the Emerald. They are not in great
favour here, owing to the treatment of the Bohemians (a
Melbourne cricket team) when they were over playing in
Hobart Town; in fact, nearly all of them have refused to
assist in giving the dinner, or at all events to be present
at it. The mail this time is late, having been detained in
141


quarantine, at King George’s Sound, on account of measles
on board.
ii th March. —G ill in bed with a bad cold. I have at
last decided to go over to Tasmania, as that is about the best
place for an invalid at this time of the year, so to-day I have
taken my passage for Launceston by the “Mangana,” which
sails on Monday next. In the evening drove out to South
Yarra, with C , R , and Major B , to a dance at
Dr. L ’s. “The Major” is rather a joke, as he is no
older than I am, and is only a soldier of fortune, having been
for a time in the Turkish army. He looks anything but a
military man.
i sth March. —Met Mr. S of Adelaide. He too, with his
wife, is going by the “ Mangana” on Monday. In the afternoon
drove out to say good-bye to the A ’s; met the colonel
trying a new charger prior to going out to parade. After-
wards walked through the botanical gardens, where there
was an open-air concert, and on to the Melbourne cricket
ground to watch the match, the M.C.C. v. East Melbourne
C.C. Dined at the Club and turned in early to pack.
To-night I was told how blood oranges were obtained. I
had always thought they were a species of their own, but it
is not so, but by means of grafting an orange tree upon a
pomegranate. B has asked me out to lunch to Toorak
for to-morrow.
March. —Where he lives with his father he has a
most lovely place, with gardens sloping away from the house,
and a magnificent view beyond over Melbourne and across
Hobson’s Bay. There were one or two others to lunch, and
Lord H P , and Captain Le P turned up after-
wards. The lawns here have quite a different appearance to
ours at home, owing to buffalo grass being used. This stands
the heat very much better than our English grasses. It is of
a bluish green shade, and very soft to walk upon.
15 th March. — There is a rule in the Melbourne Club
that one can only be an honorary member for six months in two
years ; so, this being my fifth month, I am anxious to leave
in order to have one left to me for the races and exhibition,
when I intend to return. Punctually at two o’clock the
“Mangana” left the Queen’s Wharf. She is an iron ship of 428
tons, running between Launceston and Melbourne only, and
has, what I always prefer, a flush deck, thus allowing a greater
amount of space for exercise. Mr. and Mrs.S ——, from Ade-
142


laide,were passengers by her, also Col.S. , R.E., going over
on some Government service. Having two other men in the
cabin with me I turned out, and succeeded in getting a cabin
to myself. The River Yarra was less smelly than usual,
and as we passed down we were greeted by some sweet
language from the mouths of the navvies at work on embank-
ments. At about six o’clock we passed through the heads, and
at once changed from a calm sea to a ground swell, which
considerably upset some of us. Much to my surprise, I did
not feel it in the least, and thoroughly enjoyed a hearty meal
in the midst of it all. Soon after eight o’clock it got very
chilly on deck, so after passing Cape Schanck I turned in.
16 th March. —At seven o’clock the steward brought me a cup
of coffee, after which I turned out for my bath and discovered
a room filled up with a delightful marble bath. What a luxury!
On coming on deck, after breakfast, I found we were bowling
along under sail, with a fair breeze on our quarter. Dead
a-head, we could just make out the outline of the Tasmanian
coast. At eleven o’clock we passed the lighthouse on Low
Head, and crossed the bar at the entrance to the River
Tamar, Launceston is about forty miles up the river, which
winds about through the most wonderful scenery. At one
time you could imagine yourself on the Dart, in Devonshire ;
at another, on Loch Ness in Scotland, so beautiful is the
foliage and so lovely the distant hills, the highest of which on
one side is Mount Arthur (3,668 ft.), and on the other Ben
Lomond (5,010 ft.), the second highest mountain in the island.
Exeter and Windermere, with its old-fashioned church,
nestling in trees at the water’s edge, were two of the prettiest
parts. Brandy Creek, known for its gold diggings, we also
passed. At the entrance to the river is Georgetown, a small
settlement; and here there came on board one of the biggest
snobs I have ever had the pleasure of meeting. At 2.45,
when within 300 yards of the wharf, we stuck in the mud, but
fortunately there were plenty of watermen, so we were soon
ashore. I had heard that the customs of Tasmania were
very strict; two days ago, on suspicion that smuggling
was going on, they seized the steamer “ Esk,” plying
between Launceston and Sydney, and discovered 270 lbs. of
tobacco. To-day, however, I have not seen such a thing as
a custom-house officer. I drove at first to the Brisbane
Hotel, but finding it full on account of the Governor and his
suite staying there, I drove to the Launceston, where
143


I got a room. Mr. and Mrs. S are also here. I called
on Colonel H , but found him out, so left my letter of
introduction. I met him afterwards in the street. He is
with the Governor’s party, and had to go on to a reception.
Mrs. S is knocked up after her passage, so S —- and
myself chartered a boat and went up to the Cataract on the
South Esk river. The boatman told us no tongue could
describe it. It is a wild mountain gorge, with precipitous
rocks on either side, coming sheer down into the water. The
entrance to it is spanned by a very pretty iron bridge, which
was placed in position by means of a floating dock. The
time, of course, to see it is in the winter or early spring, when
there is plenty of water. Then it is impossible for a boat to
go up. Along one side runs a wooden mill race, originally
put up by “ two mad Scotchmen,” as they were thought when
they did it, partly for feeding a flour mill and partly for
supplying water to the inhabitants, which they sold at three
shillings the quarter-ton. Out of this they made so much
money that it turned their heads. One shot himself, and the
other cut his throat. “ Those were days, indeed,” said our
boatman; “ a man had to be both smart and good-looking, and
be able to fight a bit too, before he could even look at a girl.
As it was nearly every woman had five or six husbands, so
scarce were they.” Those were days indeed ! We got back
to our hotel in time for dinner, and much to our surprise had
a very good one, after which we turned out to do what the
rest of the inhabitants seemed to be doing, walking up and
down Brisbane-street, smoking. Launceston is prettily
situated, at the junction of the north and south Esk rivers,
which open out in a basin of water, making a fair-sized
harbour. Their waters, after being so united, flow on under
another name, the Tamar. The population of the town is
10,668. The name “Mangana” is the Tasmanian for sea-
gulh
zyth March. —At g. 30 we started in a wagonette and pair
for Corra Linn, about eight miles away. The scenery along
the road reminded me much of England, hedges of wild roses,
which here grow to such an extent as to be a great nuisance.
About half-way we passed through the small township of St.
Leonards. Corra Linn is a wonderful rocky defile, down
which flows a stream of some considerable size. It is crossed
by a picturesque wooden bridge, the height from the water
being quite one hundred feet. Leaving the carriage on the
144


bridge, we scrambled down and along the rocky bed of the
stream to where there is a sudden bend, and from which we
got a magnificent double view up the stream with its bridge,
and down with some wonderful perpendicular rocks, standing
out of the water like pulpits. We met the Vickers, a French
family, who had crossed in the “ Mangana” with us. From the
bridge, looking up the stream, it is exactly like a Scotch trout
stream. Having seen all there was to be seen and wandered
about, we drove back to Launceston in time for a very good
dinner at the Launceston Hotel before leaving to catch the
3 p.m. train for Hobart Town. At the station there was a great
crowd, a band, &c., as the Governor was returning by the same
train. The country presents an extraordinary appearance at
this time of the year, as after the crops are gathered they burn
off the stubble, before preparing the ground for a fresh sowing.
The line, which is a narrow gauge one (3J ft.), has unfortunately
put a stop to the old coaches, which used to be run here on the
good old English style. The road, too, the whole way was very
good, having being made entirely by convict labour. In one part
of it there is a dead straight line of eleven miles. The construct-
ing of the line must have been one of great difficulty, requiring
a great amount of engineering skill, as it goes up and down hill,
and winds about in the most extraordinary way; some
of the curves were something fearful, how the carriages keep
the rails is a wonder to me; now they have American
carriages, but not on bogie wheels. Formerty, when they
had the old carriages, and before the permanent way was
settled, they were constantly running off the line. Unfor-
tunately, the latter part, where the worst curves are, was
passed after sunset. Some of the stations along the road
have the most wonderful names. I give a few of them. The
Lake of Tiberias (the Home of the Famous Bunyip), An till
Ponds, Corners, Epping Forest, Snake Banks, Jerusalem,
Jericho Flat, Top and Breadalbane—a curious mixture. The
island is divided into counties, which bear names of those in
England and Wales.
A TURN IN TASMANIA.
By onit own Teampist.
The population of this charming island is about half that of Melbourne, and
consequently one is not liable to any troublesome jostling in getting about the
country districts. Launceston is so quiet a town that I had been told you might
hear a pin fall in the streets. This is true. I heard a number of pins fall, but I
L
145


think they were nine-pins. Launceston is not an aboundiugly cheerful place for a-
stranger on a wet Sunday, when there are no boys playing cricket in the streets,
and no beer and no skittles. But the country around is steeped in natural
adornments, and then one must bear in mind that
“ God made the country and man made the town,”
and the town of Launceston is just what might be expected from its maker and
nothing more. The railway to Hobart Town is famous for its sharp turns. “ One
good turn deserves another ” must have been the maxim with the engineer, and
though there is nothing to fear, the passengers tremble a good deal on the journey.
A gentleman who was eating mulberries when the jolting was at its liveliest, hit
his nose and chin so frequently in trying to find his mouth that he presently got
to appear like a man badly punished in a prize fight. However, the railway winds
through a sweetly diversified and charming country, and curls gracefully into
Hobart Town.
The population of Tasmania is by no means dense in any respect. Probably,
the whole island might carry just now about one human creature to the square
mile. In Hobart Town and Launceston men play cricket with skill and vigour,
and one of the former lot has sent a ball halt a mile at a time; but then they play
on the small top of a steep hill. At one of the railroad stations in the centre X saw
some young fellows with cricketing gear, and was told that they occasionally
muster enough men in the district to make up two elevens. But then travellers are
asked to believe so much.
Hobart Town has about twenty thousand inhabitants, and I had wrongly imagined
them to be mostly whalers and sailors. It is a truly rural township, with tooral-
looral serpentine roads and blackberry hedges round it. The people are hospitable
and entertaining, especially the innkeepers; and they boast a little of their fish, and
of course there is natural temptation to blow when you only pay a shilling for
trumpeter. There are some curious inns for visitors and some beautiful “ outs,”
and when you have seen the inns and outs of the Tasmanian metropolis you are
done. They are also proud of a waterfall, and their Cascade beer. The former
comes down handsomely in winter, and the latter goes down sweetly in summer.
Then there is a mountain. Hobart Town is like Mahomet, always mixed up with a
mountain that has to be gone to. Mount Wellington is very tall—say about a
thousand times as tall as Mr. Mirams, M.P. “ See Mount Wellington and die,”
said a Hobartonian, with an epigrammatic solemnity. “ Can’t one see it without
dying? ” I replied. He considered it improbable. Now, as a matter of fact, I got
to the mountain top and am not dead yet; and, as a matter of imagination,
I feel like living all the longer for the performance. At starting I swallowed a
basin of goat’s milk, and at the half-way hut took a drink of raspberry vinegar
which turned it into a cheese, and stayed my appetite till we reached the summit.
And so I went up and I came down, and it may be that a long familiarity of the
ups and downs of life contributed something to my pleasant success. —Mdimrne
Punch.
We reached Hobart Town at 8.45, and I drove to the Ship
Hotel. In showing me to my room the landlady apologized
for not having a better one, but that I should be changed to-
morrow’, and that there were three beds, but that nobody else
would occupy the others. This gave me some idea of what it
must be here in the season. After my railway journey I
was not long in turning in, but not to sleep for some time.
There was a piano near, and as “Pinafore” had been
performed that night, some musical geniuses were loudly going
over it again.
18 th-March. —C. R e came round to see me, and I went
146


with him to the tennis court, he was playing with the
manager; it being the first time I had ever seen the game
played I sat watching for some time. The court was built by
a Mr. Travers, a resident here, and he put in it as manager the
former marker at Oxford, whom he brought out to this colony
for that purpose. I afterwards met S , who introduced
me to Mrs. L and two of the Hobart Town belles. I
lunched with the R s, and afterwards went for a drive with
them as far as “The Bower,” a most charming fern tree creek,
up in the hills near the foot of Mount Wellington, which
rises just behind the town. It is a fine mountain, whose top
has a sheer facing of rocks, and from their appearance
are known as “The Organ Pipes.” After scrambling about
the creek for some time, and up as far as “The Silver Falls,”
we returned to our carriage. So hilly is the road, that what
had taken us an hour to come up we did in twenty minutes
on our return. Along the road there are some beautiful
views of Hobart Town and the river Derwent, on the banks
of which it is built. We got back in time for afternoon tea.
I dined at the hotel with the two H s, of Adelaide, who
are staying here, and we afterwards went to the Tasmanian
Club for a smoke. Later on we had a special invitation into
the landlady’s sanctum, where I came across my friend the
piano of last night, but this time in gentler hands, those of
the landlady’s fair daughters.
i gth March. —l met S at the Club, and went with him
to take seats for an amateur performance to-night of “ H.M.S.
Pinafore,” at the Theatre Royal. Afterwards walked out
with him to lunch with Mrs. L . In the afternoon, I
drove out with Mr. and Mrs. S— — to call at Government
House. I afterwards met the Misses R and their married
sister, Mrs. S , with whom they are staying, and arranged
to go out to their house at Sandy Bay on Sunday next. Later
on I met Miss C and Miss R , and went with
them to Badminton. At Mrs. L ’s I was introduced to
another Miss R , and the two together are exactly like a
couple of bullfinches. I dined with Mr. and Mrs. C. R e,
and afterwards went on to the theatre. It was an awful
performance, but evidently pleased the audience, who I
should say were friends, for men as well as women received
quantities of bouquets. The motto over the stage is very
fine, it is “ Mundus universus exercet histrioniam ; ” can this
be translated, “The whole world is a stage ? ” The motto is
147


certainly peculiar for its ugliness. Economy in street lighting
is the thing here, there being only lamps at the street
crossings, and then but one. I noticed this also in Launceston.
20th March. —Went to Omant’s to choose an opossum skin
rug, as this is the best country for them. The black
opossum is the best, and only to be got here. I ordered
one to be made for me, and to be lined with maroon cloth.
I lunched at the hotel with Mr. J , an invalid from India,
and afterwards walked up to Mrs. L ’s, to meet the Misses
R , as we are going to a walking party given by Mrs.
D ,at whose house we were to meet. These seem the
great things here for Saturday afternoons. I should say in
all we were nearly fifty, and started off for the mountain lake,
about three miles away. The way is along the Huon-road,
which is very steep, and up which Miss R and I got a
lift in an empty wood-cart. About two miles up the road we
branched off into the hush, where everybody wandered at
pleasure. We followed a race past the mountain lake, in
which Mount Wellington is most beautifully reflected, on to
an old mill, where we sat down to rest while I made a sketch.
It seemed the great thing to hunt for berries, of which there
are a great many varieties, one a most beautiful blue purple,
another known as the coffee-berry. At six o’clock we all
began to gather together to one spot, where there was a fire
blazing and various billies on it, boiling both tea and coffee,
which, with sandwiches, cakes, bread and butter, jam, and
fruit made up quite a substantial meal. After tea, it being
then quite dark, we sat and stood round the blazing fire, and
listened to some capital glees and songs, until it was time to
go home. For me, this was quite a novel entertainment,
and certainly a most enjoyable one. How pleasant is an
outdoor life in a climate like this ! To-day has been lovely,
with Mount Wellington and the surrounding country extend-
ing away to the river Derwent clothed with a thin veil of
blue transparency. We got back to Mrs. L’s at nine o’clock,
and this being my first walk for so long, it was not many
minutes before I was off to the “ Ship” and to bed.
21 st March. — Sunday. —In the morning I went to the
Cathedral, which is unfinished. It can never be particularly
fine inside, owing to its rough state and second-rate coloured
windows. The sittings were common and uncomfortable.
Dined at Mrs. L -’s, and afterwards we all drove out to
Newtown to call on the R s, and arrange our drive to
148


New Norfolk for to-morrow. They have a capital fruit
garden, and I did justice to the oranges.
22 nd March. —Miserably wet day. Drive postponed.
23rd March.— Most lovely morning, so at 10.30 we started
in a wagonette and four horses for New Norfolk. We stopped
at Newtown to pick up two of the Misses R . The road
follows the river Derwent, of which you get the most beautiful
view, winding about as it does, and here and there dotted with
islands, backed up by splendid mountain scenery. The
distance is about 23 miles, and we reached our destination
(the Bush Hotel) at about one o’clock, and found a
substantial meal awaiting us, for which we had tele-
graphed in the early morning. After lunch we went
on the river, and some of the ladies excelled themselves
in their aquatic performances, one in particular, who
afterwards bitterly complained of the state of her hands.
From the river we got a capital view of the wild range of
hills, the highest peak in which is Mount Dromedary (3,245 ft.)
Its highest points exactly resemble the back and humps of
that animal. Close to New Norfolk, but which we had not
time to visit, are the Fish Ponds on the river Plenty. The
first trout was hatched in them on 4th May, 1864, and the
first salmon sth May, 1864. The first salmon was caught
on the 4th December, 1873. Near here is the lunatic asylum,
described in the guide books as containing “ three hundred
persons —each mad on a certain subject, but not more so
than their fellow-men outside.” After some dancing, we
started on our homeward journey about five o’clock. At one
point on the road there are some wonderful hawthorn hedges,
quite forty feet high, and at this time of the year one mass
of red berries. The sweetbriar, too, grows to an enormous
size, and the two together when in flower must look indeed
beautiful. In the evening I went up to Mrs. L ’s to
arrange about to-morrow, for should it be fine we are going
to the Huon River, where we should have to stay the night.
24 th March. —I awoke at about 6.30 this morning, and on
looking out quite made up my mind that the S s would
not venture, for it was raining, and Mount Wellington was
enveloped in clouds. However, S came round to see me
about ten o’clock, and, as the day had improved slightly, he
had determined to go, and had accordingly ordered the carriage
to be round at the Barracks at eleven o’clock. When that
time arrived no Miss R s. There was nothing for it but to
149


take a wagonette and drive out with Miss C to Newtown,
two miles away, to fetch them. When we arrived there, we
found they had gone to call somewhere, so we followed,
and fortunately met them, and at once carried off
Miss F. R , Miss M. R staying behind to take
care of her father. The reason they had not come was
that they had very much more rain than we had.
After laying in a supply of lunch from the hotel and from
Arnold’s the confectioner’s, we finally got away about one
o’clock. We all regretted very much Mrs. L ’s not
being able to come, on account of Mr. L having arrived
that morning in Launceston from Melbourne. He ought
to have been here last night, but the boat was delayed
by the lateness of the English mail. The road for the first
seven miles is one long hill, winding round the mountain,
from which you get a magnificent view of Hobart Town and
the Derwent. At the Half-way House, we stopped to bait the
horses; and carrying the provisions we had brought with us
into the bush, had a most enjoyable little pic-nic. After lunch
some of us started to walk on, in order to gather ferns and
berries, of which there are many different varieties. Some
are of a most beautiful purple colour, while others resemble
pink cornelian beads. Then there is a white berry growing
in clusters, exactly like so many snowballs. One fern in
particular took my fancy, called the coral fern. To look at
it resembles a skeleton fern, but on closer examination it is
exactly like coraline in form, being a series of segments. The
foliage, too, along, the load was more varied, which added
greatly to the beauty of the scenery. The gum trees here are
of a great height, some being quite three hundred feet. The
sapling of the Tasmanian gum is quite different to those in
Australia, being much larger leaved, and having a beautiful
purple bloom all over them. The sassafras tree is a particu-
larly pretty small-leaved tree, of a rich green, with a very bitter
bark, used in medicine. The silver wattle, one of the acacias
well known in conservatories in England, is famous for its
bark, which is used for tanning; the gum which oozes out of
these trees is most delicious to eat. The musk tree
derives its name from the scent of its leaves, which are
of pale green colour on the top side, but with the under-
neath part quite white. Besides all these there are
many other smaller flowering shrubs, which all go to add
to the beauty of the foliage; and, last but not least,
150


come the fern trees, which line each gully, and at one
part the road passes through a perfect forest of them. They
are indeed the most graceful of trees, and their leaves look
like so many feathers. A tree with none of its fronds broken
or dead looks exactly like a shuttle-cock, in such perfect
symmetry do they grow. The fronds reach seven and eight
feet in length. After leaving the hills, the road runs across
the Huon Plain and past Ironstone Creek, which is by far
the most uninteresting portion of the drive, except for the
beautiful view of the mountains, the most noticeable of which
is “ The Lady of Huon.” The sky-line forms a perfect face
of a lady. We reached the Pic-nic Hotel, Victoria Huon, at
six o’clock, and found it to be very clean and comfortable
looking, situate on the banks of the River Huon, which is here
spanned by a wooden bridge of five arches, one of which is
moveable to allow the wood and fruit boats to go up and
down. The day, from the moment we started, had gone on
improving, so we have been exceptionally lucky. The river
was like a mirror, with the reflections so perfect, that you
could hardly tell where the water and land met. We had a
most enjoyable little dinner, after which we had some dancing
and singing, as I had taken some songs down with me. We
ended up by a game of 100, and I found that my luck of last
night had not yet deserted me. Before turning in, S and
I smoked our cigar on the bridge, under a most lovely moon,
which lighted up the surrounding country, reflecting every-
thing, including itself, in the water with a silvery light.
25 th March. —Up early and out to sketch before breakfast.
I had intended bathing in the river, but the landlord told me
I must not jump in on account of the snags, and to creep
in on a cold morning is anything but nice, so I contented
myself with a sponge in my bedroom. After breakfast it
came on to drizzle slightly. However, we started for a walk,
from which we soon returned, as we felt too lazy, preferring
easier exercise. We took a boat and rowed up the river, and
as the rain had passed and the sun came out, we thoroughly
enjoyed it, especially coming down again, for then we allowed
the stream to carry us where it liked. The river here is about
two hundred yards broad. At twelve o’clock we started for
Hobart Town again, getting out of the carriage when we came
to the Fern Tree Gully, in order to go into the bush to gather
berries. This gave me some idea of the thickness of the
bush here and the difficulties of progression. The under-
151


growth was fearfully thick, and interlaced with creepers and
fallen trees, over which you had to scramble. We lunched at
the same place again as yesterday, and left about four o’clock,
but when within a mile of the Fern Tree Hotel, the tire of
our wheel broke, so we had all to turn out and walk. This
was the third mishap we had had, and likely to be the worst.
The others were the splinter-bars breaking away from the
pole, but, fortunately for us, the leaders were both very quiet,
perhaps accustomed to it. When we reached the Fern Tree
Hotel we had some delicious tea while they were tinkering
the trap ; but it could only be mended enough to allow of it
going down at a walk, so we all started to walk, much
preferring that to so slow a drive. It was a most
lovely evening, the sun setting behind Mount Welling-
ton, and I for one did not regret the accident, as from
where the tire broke to Hobart Town was only six miles.
On getting backtothe“Ship,” I found H hadreturnedwith
his brother, a doctor in Launceston, and I sat up yarning
with them till after twelve. Got an invitation to a ball at
Government House on Wednesday next. It is to be a fare-
well one, as Mr. Weld, the Governor, has been appointed to
the Straits Settlements.
26 th March. —Being Good Friday, I went to Church in the
morning, with B and J two N.S.W. men, staying in
the hotel. After church, I walked home with Mrs. L ,
and stayed to luncheon. In the afternoon we went for a
drive along the Browns River-road, which follows the course
ofthe Derwent, passing the Shot Tower and getting magnificent
views of the river, and of Iron Pot Lighthouse, which stands
at its mouth. Dined at the hotel, and then went over with
the H s to the Club and played billiards. This may
sound dreadful to people at home, but out here it is not con-
sidered so, it being treated solely as a holiday. My stay
is likely to be prolonged, as H has asked me up to stay with
him at Launceston, and has promised me some deer-stalking,
and also to go out with him on the twenty-first of next month,
being the first day of quail shooting. I also saw Mr. William
D to whom Admiral B gave me a letter of introduc-
tion at the Club, and he has kindly offered to take me up the
country. I had a long talk with him, and he knows the
P s very well. The P s were Australians that I had
met at Kilkee, in Ireland, when there in 1878.
2 yth March. —A most lovely morning, so got up about seven
152


and went for a walk with J before breakfast. After-
wards met Miss Amy R , who asked me to- go for a
boating pic-nic this afternoon. Bought two more opossum
skin rugs, and some fur for jacket trimmings. Drove out
to Newtown to the C. R s, and started in their brother’s
yacht, the “Irene.” We picked up Mr. L and Miss
C at the Cattle Wharf, then went across the river
to Kangaroo Point, and cruised about until about five
o’clock, when we landed at Smelting Works Bay, and cooked
our own dinner, Mr. L acting as chief cook, assisted by
the two Misses R . After dinner we commenced fishing
for rock cod with only partial success, and finally reached
the wharf again about 8.30. There was a most lovely moon,
and the water was like a sheet of glass.
28 th March. —Easter Sunday. —In the morning went to
service at St. David’s Cathedral, which was very nicely
decorated. Dined with the R —-—s, who are leaving to-
morrow, and then went out to Newtown. The R s have
a most wonderful fruit garden. In a good year they
average 800 bushels to the acre. Fruit and jam is one
of the principal exports of Tasmania. Miss R gave
me some seeds of a climbing plant which bears such
a beautiful purple berry. These I intend sending to
England, to see if they will grow there. The longer I remain
in Hobart Town the more I like it. In some respects, the
scenery reminds me of the South of Ireland, especially that
about Bantry Bay and the Kenmare River, principally on
account of it being well wooded to the water’s edge. The
climate, too, is perfection, neither too 'hot by day nor
too cold by night, bright sunshine and cool breezes. The
harbour formed by the estuary of the Derwent is thought
by some to be even finer than that of Sydney; but of
that lam as yet no judge. Certainly, I cannot imagine
anything finer than the Derwent, with its promontories and
bays, and stately background of densely-wooded mountains.
The town itself, nestling on the water’s edge, with its clean
streets, resembles an English town more than any other in
the colony, and over it, go where you will, Mount Wellington
stands as guard, and up to which one and all of the inhabit-
ants look, as it were, for protection. One of the chief
attractions, however, is its ever-changing appearance. At
one time, standing out bold and clear against a cloudless sky;
at another, clothed as it were by some thin drapery, almost
153


appearing - to be the birthplace of clouds. .Hobart Town
contains some fine buildings, at the head of which comes
Government House, standing in the domain overlooking the
Derwent, and adjoining the Botanical Gardens. Castellated
in form, and more worthy the house of a governor than the
overgrown factory at Melbourne. Here, too, the gardens
are kept in beautiful order, while in Melbourne they are a
disgrace to the colony. The principal streets are Macquarie-
street, containing most of the public buildings, Collins-street,
Liverpool-sfreet, and Elizabeth-street, containing the shops,
and Davey-street, the residential portion. All are most
picturesque, terminating as they do either in some distant
view of mountain or river. An old schoolfellow of mine has
turned up at the hotel, by name W . He is travelling
for his health.
2gth March. —Up early, as last night we had arranged a
party to go by the “ Southern Cross ” on an excursion to Port
Arthur ; but, on going down to the steamer, there was such an
awful crush —there being quite 800 people on board —that
we decided not to go. The day was most perfect—how
different to what Easter Monday generally is at home ! and
we pictured to ourselves a most dismal day of wet and misery.
Returning to the “ Ship,” W and I went on to some
livery stables and got a four-in-hand, as we had decided to
drive out to Brown’s River, which ranks next to the Huon in
Hobart Town drives. Our party was made up of J ,
invalided from India, and in the Civil Service there ; C ,
lately arrived here, and who can tel! a capital tale, having
been about three times round the world, and seen life in
various forms—on the gold field, and as a squatter in
Australia; G ,from Manchester; B from Birmingham,
whose father was a doctor and studied hisprofession as a pupil
of my grandfather; a German here on business connected
with the Sydney Exhibition , and myself—all of us, from
different places, meeting in this out-of-the-way part of the
world, and yet how small does it prove the world to be ! Two
miles out of the town the road passes Sandy Bay, a thorough
English suburb, with English trees and orchards full of
English fruits, and then winds round the slopes of Mount
Nelson, on the top of which is a signal station. About seven
miles out is a shot tower, the only one in the colonies,
prettily situated in a well-wooded valley. On reaching the
highest part of the road and looking back, the views are most
154


beautiful, as inlet and point succeed one another until the
broad Derwent spreads itself out into an almost land-locked
lake, with the town gradually rising from the water’s edge.
On your right, Kangaroo Point, with the dark woods of
Rosny, and still further up the river, rise Mount Direction, and
behind it the vertical peak of Breakneck Mountain. We turned
our horses’ heads once more onward, and at every bend in the road
we viewed the grand river under some fresh aspect. At its mouth
stands on a solitary rock the Iron Pot Lighthouse, guarding
its entrance, and away in the distance looms out Tasman’s
Peninsula. Upon this was formerly the convict settlement
of Port Arthur. Beneath us in the valley lay Kingston, on
Brown’s River, really little more than a rivulet, flowing down
the centre of the valley, at the head of which stands Mount
Wellington. Leaving our horses at the hotel, we wandered
down to the beach, noted for its pic-nic parties, of which there
were no lack to-day, a most beautiful bay, with shady glades,
almost touching the water, and under which were gathered
many a happy party. We pushed on to the next bay, known
as “ Blackman’s Bay,” to see the caves and the blow-hole, but
having no guide we did not succeed in finding them, and
returned to our hotel thoroughly content with the walk, and
with a capital appetite for our dinner. All too soon is it
time to go home, and the same scenes are spread out before
us, but under different aspects and different lights. In the
evening, while sitting in the verandah of the hotel, we saw
two very large meteors, one, I think the largest I have ever
seen.
30 th March. —W wanted to call at Government House,
so he and I walked up there in the morning. After lunch, I
met the Misses R and walked out with them to Lady
S ’s. Sir Francis is the chief justice here. It was her
afternoon at home, and there were any quantity of people there.
Lawn tennis was the chief attraction. I noticed here they
allow playing up to the net, which I think spoils the game.
I pleaded being an invalid, so avoided playing, but W
was thoroughly victimised. C ——•, W ——, J and
myself sat up to a late hour yarning. C is a most
amusing companion, and has with him his collection of curios,
some of which he shows us from time to time.
3 1st March. —A thoroughly wet day. Went down with
W to the P. S. N. Co.’s office, to see about the
steamers for Sydney, as we intend going on together, and I
155


am in hopes of persuading him to come on to ’Frisco and
back with me. We have had some long yarns about Rugby
days. I find he knows a good many of my acquaintances.
I forgot to make a note of S ’s idea of Adelaide. When
in Melbourne, I asked him if I should give him a letter of
introduction there. He replied “ Shall I want one ? It is
only a small bush town.” I should have liked to have seen
the face of a “ Corn Stalk ”if he had heard this speech. To-
night is the farewell ball at Government House.
ist April. —The ball last night did not come up to my ex-
pectation, especially after all I had heard of the dancing of
the Tasmanian girls. They dance well, but it is the dancing
of school-girls who do their steps, but without any go in them.
I cannot say I enjoyed a single dance, except perhaps a polka,
for there at all events one meets on mutual ground. There
was also a certain amount of larrikinism amongst the youth-
ful members, who amused themselves by running into people
and trying to dance the wrong way round the room. Although
annoying it was a new experience for me. Some of the
costumes were most extraordinary, short dresses predominat-
ing. I noticed one girl, in a dress of dead gold and black,
which reached only to her ankles. This might have been
excusable had she had good ones. Then there was the other
extreme. An elderly female, young in her own imagination,
dressed in black velvet, with a train quite three yards long. The
Misses R were by far the nicest-looking and best-dressed
girls in the room, bar “the bonnets.” “ Bandbox B -,”
the acting A.D.C., was there in great form, but after twelve
o’clock I was dancing with Miss R , and she told him
the Governor wanted him. He immediately rushed off. We
followed to see the fun, and to remind him what day it was.
The end of the evening hung fearfully, and the music was
most miserable. Of course the fair sex preponderated to a
fearful extent, and many girls sat through the whole night
without ever moving, while many others danced together.
Boots came to my room at seven o’clock this morning and
awoke me to know if I had rung. It turned out afterwards
that the chambermaid had been making an April fool of him;
but it was rather hard to have to suffer also. W and I
have quite made up our minds to go over to Tasman’s
Peninsula by water, as we find it to be impracticable by land.
In the afternoon, along with C , we went over to Kangaroo
Point, in one of Messrs. May Bros.’ steam launches, and found
156


that they could be chartered at £3 per day. Landing at
Kangaroo Point, from which you get one of the best views of
the position of Hobart Town, we wandered along the coast
for some considerable distance. This is described in the
guide-books as being “The Brighton of the Tasmanians.”
We just managed to miss the steam launch returning, so had
to wait for half an hour for another belonging to a different
owner. They have a very cute dodge of only issuing return
tickets, so this time we were let in. We tossed odd
man out who pays, and C lost both times. The
“ Kangaroo,” the steam-ferry built by Government at enor-
mous cost, also runs between the wharf at Hobart Town and
Kangaroo Point. She is a twin boat, with one paddle-wheel
in the centre. How they all manage to pay, if they do, is a
wonder. On landing at the wharf we saw a fishing ketch
of about seventeen tons, called the “ Rachel Thompson,”
lying alongside, which took our fancy on account of her being
spotlessly clean. We hear she is to be chartered for £2 per
day. Dressed and drove out to Sandy Bay, to dine with Mrs.
S . Her house is approached from the main road by a
very narrow and steep lane. When half way up this our
horse “jibbed,” and had it not been for a strong bush, we
should have gone down a nasty bank. As it was, we were
very nearly upset. W managed to scramble out. There
is a peculiar kind of vehicle here, not unlike an Irish inside
car. They are decorated in the most extraordinary fashion,
generally white with gorgeous illuminations, and each vehicle
has its distinctive name—ours is called “The Emerald,” and
has an Irishman as a driver, who kept up the character of
his countrymen by being certainly very drunk. A lovely
night; the river, lighted up by the rising moon, looked most
beautiful.
2nd April. —W and I made all our arrangements with
Jones, the owner of the “Rachel Thompson,” to start on
Monday morning. J and C are still undecided, but
I think it will end in their not going, as J is afraid of
missing the mail, which leaves Launceston on Monday, and
his leave is up ; and C because of his lameness, as he is
afraid we may have to do some walking. He. met with a
severe accident a few years ago. A tree fell on him when in
the bush, pinning him to the ground for nearly two days.
He was eventually discovered by a boundary rider who was
attracted towards him by the barking of his dog. C
157


must have suffered fearfully, lying for two whole days with a
tree on his broken leg, with doubts as to his ever being
discovered alive, and tormented by ants and mosquitoes ; not
such ants as we know, but the bull-dog ant, whose bite is
torture. They in fact began to carry him off piecemeal, for
when discovered his neck was perfectly raw. In the evening
we went to see “ The Froliques,” at the Theatre Royal, which
were most amusing, beginning with a Christy Minstrel enter-
tainment, and ending up with songs and a comic performance.
Amongthem was a Miss Lottie Elliot, a skipping-rope dancer.
All the troupe were Americans, and some of their queer
repartees added zest to the entertainment.
3 rd April. —The morning we devoted to laying in our sup-
plies and getting all ready for an early start on Monday. In
the afternoon we joined the walking party given by Lady
S , and went up as far as the Waterworks, thence crossing
the hill to the mountain lake for tea. Mr. S also gave a
pic-nic at Sorell, but unfortunately we could not manage both.
We returned in the evening to Mrs. D ’s for a small dance,
which we kept up till eleven, but the night was too close,
there not being a breath of air.
4th April. —W and I walked out in the afternoon to
the R s, where we stayed till about 7.30, and drove in
with the S ——s.
s th April.— As I expected, neither J or C could
come, so our party consisted of W and myself, the skipper,
his brother David, and two boys. As arranged, Anson, the
photographer, came down, and took us in a group on the
quarter-deck. It was nine o’clock before we got under weigh,
and by that time it was raining and the day looked far from
promising. We started with all canvas set, but when opposite
the Shot Tower, warned by the looks of the weather, we had
just time to shorten sail, when a strong sou’-wester set in,
with heavy squalls of wind and rain. We were much amused
to see one after another of the craft in the river turning tail
for home again, and we soon found ourselves the only boat
to venture outside the Iron Pot Lighthouse. Finding it
hardly feasible to reach Port Arthur, which had been our
first intention, we ran for Wedge Bay, a safe anchorage
on the west coast of Tasman’s Peninsula. The “ Rachel
Thompson ” came up to our expectations, behaving splendidly
in a heavy sea; for we had to cross Storm Bay, which is
open to the swell from the Southern Ocean, occasionally
158


running with 3! of her planks under water. The “ Rachel
Thompson,” before I proceed any farther, requites some
description. She is a seventeen-ton ketch, that is, carrying
mainmast and mizen, unlike a schooner, which carries fore-
mast and mainmast. Her after-cabin is fitted with five bunks,
and amidships, in the place of a hold, she has a well, in which
she carries her fish alive to Melbourne, principally trumpeter,
supposed by Tasmanians to be finer than salmon. The
advantage of this well in heavy weather is enormous, as
should she ship a sea, it passes through her like a sieve.
We reached Wedge Bay at about five o’clock. On entering
we passed the “ Foam ” lying in Badger Cove, She was an
open boat, with a tent stretched across her, not an enviable
place to spend so wet and boisterous a night in, but we
envied her in having a fine kangaroo hanging at her mast-
head.
6th April. —Sunshine after the storm ; but in spite of all the
wind and rain we had passed a quiet night, so land-locked is the
bay. To all appearance we were lying in a circular lake, with
no perceptible outlet. On board the “ Foam” it must have been
dampish work, judging from the amount of things hanging
in the rigging to dry. After a cup of tea we went ashore to
inspect what is left of the old convict settlement. This was
principally used as a military station, on account of it being
a likely place from which convicts would escape. Before
returning to breakfast, we walked over to the adjoining bay,
and climbed the hill, on the top of which was a semaphore.
By means of these semaphores there was complete communi-
cation all over the Peninsula. On returning to our boat we
bagged our first kangaroo. After breakfast, we started to
walk along the old track to Port Arthur, a distance of about
seven miles, taking David with us to carry our provisions.
The boat we sent round to meet us in the evening at Port
Arthur. The road for the first few miles was through ordinary
bush, but with regard to the latter portion we both agreed
to it being the finest walk we have either of us ever taken.
Tree ferns and native laurels, with their bright green leaves
and red stalks, mixed with gigantic grasses and other shrubs
unfamiliar to us, walled us in on either side, and meeting
overhead obscured the light of the sun, thus forming a
continuous arch of evergreens. Here and there, to add to
the picturesqueness of the scene, lay some fallen “monarch
of the forest ” across our path, overgrown with mosses, while
159


others still stood towering in their majestic height. We
measured one and it was forty-five feet round. In one place
we lost the track for a short time, and it was with the
greatest difficulty that we could force our way through, so
thick were the bracken ferns reaching far over our heads.
It was only by crawling along a fallen tree that we got
through at all. On suddenly emerging from the bush, Port
Arthur lay below us, to all appearances a thriving and
prosperous town, but a second glance at its grass-covered
streets showed us how we had been deceived. Procuring
a guide, we visited first the Penitentiary, or general prison,
with its long corridors of cells, capable of holding about
twelve hundred convicts. This is the principal building and
faces the water; in front of it was the parade ground,
through which ran the tramway from the jetty, so that every-
thing, either coming or going, would pass right under the
eyes of the various guards. On the right were the tan-yards
and saw-mills, and on the left, on a slightly elevated and
woody knoll, stood the house of the Commandant, with its
terraced walks and gardens full of English trees, which thrive
here better than in any other part of the colonies. Behind
the Penitentiary runs the street, along which are built the
warders’ houses and offices, and a little off it stands the house
formerly occupied by Smith O’Brien. We next visited the
model prison, built on the plan of Pentonville, and carried
on under the same system, that of strict silence ; no communi-
cation by word of mouth was allowed within this building,
all was carried on by means of signs ; the corridors, too, were
carpeted, so that there might be no sound. This model
prison was a prison within a prison, for as a general rule the
convicts were employed in various out-door occupations, and
were subject to no closer surveillance than are ordinary
labourers. There was nothing to prevent their escape, except
the fact that if they did they must have starved in the bush,
for the Peninsula is indeed of itself a “natural penitentiary,”
but in case of misdemeanour they were tried and sentenced to
a term in the model prison. Then again, within the model
prison were the refractory cells, in which the worst charac-
ters were placed. They are so constructed that no sound
can reach the outer world and no light penetrate in; the
more the inmate shouted the more his voice resounds,
giving him a most fearful headache. As a rule two or
three days was enough for most men, but there was one case
160


of a man remaining in ninety-nine days, and it was the
means of sending him mad. His only reply, when asked
to come out and behave himself, was, “ You put me here at
your pleasure, I shall come out at my own.” The prisoners
were never allowed to see one another, and as an extra
precaution when not in their cells they always wore masks.
The exercising ground is divided into four segments of a
semicircle, one prisoner in each at a time, and as each
entered he had to stand facing the opposite wall until all
four were in. Then they were allowed to wander about for
a given time under the eye of the guard, who stood at the
point of radius of the four compartments. We next went
into the church, which is so arranged that each prisoner had
a box to himself, in which he was locked, and from which he
cannot see anyone but the officiating clergyman and two
warders, who themselves could only see the heads of the
prisoners, all wearing masks. Underneath the lowest tier sat
a guard of six warders on one side and six soldiers on the
other, in case of mutiny; but the prisoners themselves had no
notion of their being there, as they were quite invisible to them
and never moved during service. In front of the reading
desk stood a dial, on which was telegraphed the number of
the prisoner, as each man required to be removed back again
to his cell. In one cell our guide showed us where the stone
in the roof had been removed, and through which the inmate
had made his escape ; but, owing to the roof being lined with
iron, he was heard by the warders, and retaken. Leaving
the Model Prison we went to the church of the settlement,
designed by a convict (an architect), and built in 1836 ; for
the construction of this church he got a free pardon, and is
now a rich man living in New South Wales. The church,
like the rest of the settlement, is rapidly falling into decay.
It is approached by a beautiful avenue of oak trees, and looks
more like some old English parish church than what it
really is. Its tower was blown down in a gale some years
ago ; and connected with this there is a tale told of a convict
who said that he should never get his liberty till the church
tower fell. It so happened, for within three days of the fall of
the tower he was pardoned. Above all the buildings are the
military barracks, standing as sentinels over the rest of the
settlement. Surrounding the principal buildings are the houses
of Government servants, and the gardens belonging to the
different warders. While taking us over the buildings, our
M
161


guide told us some wonderful tales of convict life, which
from constant repetition he no doubt now firmly believes.
He was himself originally a convict, but informed us he came
out to this country to analyze the water for the purposes of
brewing. He takes to himself the kudos of having been
the first to introduce the present system of the semaphore,
which he learnt, as he said, from his brother, a lieutenant in
the navy, while at the Horse Guards. (Query— Was the
brother in the Horse Marines ?) After seeing all the “lions”
of Port Arthur, we rowed across to “ Dead Island,” the
burial place of the settlement. On it is one small house,
formerly inhabited by a convict named Barron, whose duty
it was to dig the graves, of which he always had two ready,
one for a Protestant, another for a Roman Catholic. On the
tombstones we noticed some curious epitaphs, of which the
following may be taken as a specimen :
JAMES ANDREW McDEVITT.
Born 2 Jan 1838 Died 2 Deer 1840
Aged 2 yers and 10 months
in . the . bud . of . life . i . was . nipt . and .
died , my . mothers . joy . and . fathers .
pried . but . father . and . mother . though .
great . the . love . yet . greater . far .
was . his . a . bove . that . heavenly .
pearent . with . whoom . i . Be
the . Saviour . of . the . world . who
died . for . me . which . rest . in . peace .
A . men .
51K.0 . L . I
The whole island is one mass of graves, of which there are
supposed to be over 2,000. They are now, of course, being
rapidly covered with scrub. From here we rowed on to Point
Puer, on which was formerly the boys’ reformatory. All that
now remains of it are the underground cells. The cliffs here
are very wild, and of a great height, and it was no uncommon
thing for boys to throw themselves or their companions down
in order to escape captivity. It was dark and getting very
cold by the time we got back to Port Arthur, but there were no
signs of the “ Rachel Thompson.” Our provisions, too, were
finished, and as the wind, which had been light all day, had
now entirely fallen, we thought it high time to look about us for
a good Samaritan. In this we at last succeeded, for the former
postmaster and storekeeper of the settlement, Mr. M ?
162


kindly received us in the most welcome manner, and enter-
tained us with many a story of convict life, he having among
other posts held that of judge’s clerk. In his house we passed
the night. The population of Port Arthur is only forty souls ;
but it has other inhabitants who have no souls to be saved,
to whom Kruse’s Insecticide would be detrimental, but bene-
ficial to strangers visiting the place. In fact, our guide in
taking us the rounds to-day would not let us go into the old
pauper establishment, on account of its lively nature. We
were quite at a loss to understand in what category the
people of Port Arthur could be classed, for they have no public-
house, and although there is a fine church, there has never
been any service there since the settlement was broken up.
It is a great shame to see so fine a building rapidly falling
into decay for want of a little care taking. In fact, this
applies to the whole settlement. How true a prophet has
been Anthony Trollope with regard to this, when he says, “ It
must apparently all come to an end in a few years ; and the
Commandant’s house and the other houses, and all the village
and the prisons, and the asylum and the farms, and the
church will be left deserted and allowed to fall into ruins.
. . . . There can hardly be any other fate for the build-
ings than that they shall stand till they fall. They will fall
into the dust, and men will make unfrequent excursions to
visit the strange ruins.” And it is so.
7th April. —On turning out at six o’clock we found the
“ Rachel Thompson ” had just arrived, so we at once went
on board. She had been becalmed off Cape Raoul, which
must have been particularly pleasant, as there was a heavy
roll on. Bidding good-bye to our kind host, we got under
weigh, and with a fair breeze it was not long before we were
in the open. The rocky coast of Point Puer, with Brown
Mount Head on one side, looked very fine from the water, for
it was a grand morning, and one particularly adapted for
coast scenery. When once outside the bay we got a full
view of the whole of the south coast, from Cape Pillar, with
Tasman’s Island and “The Monkeys” to Cape Raoul, which
rears its stately head nearly eight hundred feet above the sea
level. It was certainly a grand sight, the huge rollers from
the Southern Ocean breaking heavily all along the coast. It
appeared as if we had indeed reached the Ultima Thule. Cape
Raoul, like its companion Cape Pillar, resembles a gigantic
Gothic ruin, with its huge mass of perpendicular pillared
163


basalt, rising 756 feet from the sea level. It was named after
the pilot of the French discovery ship “ Recherch6.” After
passing Cape Raoul we got a head-wind, so had to strike
right across Storm Bay, almost to the opposite coast.
We were now making for Frederick Henry Bay, through
which lies Norfolk Bay, our destination. Darkness coming
on, we cast anchor under Slopen Island, which lies to the
east part of Frederick Henry Bay, and off the N.W. point
of Tasman’s Peninsula.
B th April. —We made an early start, and coasting along
Norfolk Bay got first a good view of East Bay Neck, which
joins Forrestier’s Peninsula to the mainland. We also got a
capital view of Hell Fire Bluff, and of Maria Island, another
old convict settlement, but now used as a sheep run. The
island was named by Tasman after Maria, daughter of Van
Diemen, the then governor of the Dutch settlement at
Batavia, with whom he was in love. The aboriginal name
was Toarra Marra Mona. Crossing the bay, we got a view
of the old coal mines, the Cascades, and the settlements at
Impression Bay and Norfolk Bay. We then made for the
Long Reach, which runs up to Eagle Hawk Neck, and at its
extreme end we dropped an anchor and landed. Eagle Hawk
Neck, the narrow isthmus of only a few yards wide which
connects Forrestier’s and Tasman’s Peninsulas, is the
prison door to Tasman’s Peninsula. This was the only way
by which prisoners could pass to the mainland ; and in
order to prevent their escape, a number of ferocious dogs
were kept, and sentries stationed here. The guard-house
and the stages on which the dogs were stationed are still to
be seen, although in a very dilapidated condition. These
stages ran out some distance into Eagle Hawk Bay, so that
the dogs by their barks at nights could give warning in case
any prisoner attempted to swim this narrow arm of the sea.
These dogs were allowed regular rations, which consisted of
one pound of meat and one of flour per day for each. On
crossing the Neck, which is composed only of low-lying sand
hills, the rugged grandeur of Pirates’ Bay, with the great
rollers from the Southern Ocean breaking on the shore, burst
upon us. Following along the coast, we first came to
“ The Blow Hole,” interesting only as a novelty. I have
seen many such, both along our south coast and on the
west coast of Ireland, where they are known as “ Puffing
Holes.” From this we walked on along the edge of
164


these monstrous cliffs for about another mile to “ Tasman’s
Arch,” of which too much cannot be said. It is indeed a
world’s wonder. Approaching it as you do from the track,
and on account of the thickness of the scrub having no idea
of the closeness of the cliffs, which are only fifty yards away,
you come upon what at first appears to be a mere quarry-
hole ; but on reaching the opposite side, the whole magnifi-
cence of the arch, with its gigantic proportions, for the
moment bewilders you. The depth from the top to the
water’s edge is one hundred and ninety-five feet. Returning to
the Blow Hole, we lunched on the rocks at its gaping mouth,
and on our way back to the Neck, saw “ The Tesselated
Pavement,” which is a wonderful natural formation, being
masses of huge rock pavement, jointed together as regular as
if they had been laid during some former age by a race of
Titanic masons. We reached our boat at about four o’clock,
and as there was a strong breeze dead up the bay we thought
it better to beat out at once and run for Woody Island, where
we dropped our anchor for the night.
9 th April. —We turned out at sunrise and went ashore
with our guns, as the island is one vast rabbit warren, but it
came on to rain and blow hard, so we returned to breakfast,
having bagged about a dozen. After breakfast, in spite of
bad weather, we visited “ The Cascades,” another old penal
settlement. There are several buildings here which are
rapidly being pulled down for the sake of the bricks. We
had now finished all the sights of Tasman’s Peninsula, and as
the weather had turned very bad, blowing half a gale with
heavy gusts of wind, our sailing orders were homewards. We
dropped anchor for the night once more under Slopen
Island, and there being still an hour’s light left us, we went
ashore and shot some more rabbits and some parrots, not to
mention quail.
10 th April. —There being a regatta at Hobart Town this
afternoon, we were anxious to get there in time for it, so we
weighed anchor about four o’clock. It was a lovely day, but
with the wind dead in our teeth until we rounded the Iron
Pot, once more in the calm waters of the Derwent, and with
a fair wind we were not long in running up to Hobart Town.
A bright idea struck us. Why not get up a party for the
regatta? So, instead of stopping at Hobart Town, we went
farther up the river to Newtown Bay, near to where the
R s live; we just managed to catch them, so returned in
165


triumph with two of the Miss R s and their brother.
They were rather astonished to see us, and as neither of us
had shaved for a week, hardly at first recognized who we were.
It was a gloriously fine day, and I never saw a yacht race to
greater advantage, for we were able to keep alongside the
racing boats. After watching the racing for some time, we
took up a good position for seeing the finish in Smelting
Works Bay, and there cooked our dinner.
ii th April. —Church in the morning, and in the afternoon
drove up to “ The Bower.” The weather now is exactly like
an English October day, a crisp feeling in the air and a
cloudless blue sky and warm sun, and at night cold enough
to enjoy the fireside.
12 th April. —Wrote letters for the English mail, and in the
evening went to see “The Froliques.”
13th April. —Lady S held a reception at Government
House, at which we met everybody.
14th April. —Started for Frederick Henry’s Bay in a four-in-
hand, with Mrs. S and the Misses R , of Melbourne.
W and S had also asked the R s, but at the last
moment they were unable to come. Leaving the hotel about
9.30 we crossed the Derwent in the “ Kangaroo.” We had
brought food with us, and on reaching the beach We lighted
a fire, and after walking about for half an hour gathering
shells we cooked our chops and boiled our tea in a billy.
The drive is one of the prettiest about Hobart Town, as it
passes through some well-cultivated land, which is such a
relief to the eye after all the bush scenery we have been
lately accustomed to. The views, too, from this side of the
river have the advantage of the Wellington Range as a back-
ground. We recrossed in the ferry and drove our guests
out to Sandy Bay, getting back to our hotel in time for tea,
for now that the season is supposed to be over, late dinner is
abolished, but in its place is a most substantial meal. In
the evening we went to Miss Lottie Elliot’s benefit.
15 th April. —The account of our Tasman’s Peninsula trip,
which we sent up to the Mercury, appeared in to-day’s paper.
After lunch, we drove out to Mrs. S ’s, at Sandy Bay, and
started with the Misses R and their brother to climb to
the top of Mount Nelson, from which there is one of the
finest views, even better than from the top of Mount
Wellington, and with the advantage of very much less
fatiguing ascent. We strolled up under the hour, taking
166


with us a billy and some tea, and on reaching the top lighted
a fire. On the top is a telegraph and signalling station, by
which ships entering “The Heads” are telegraphedto Hobart
Town. There is a magnificent telescope by Dollond. The
view is perfect, on one side looking out over bays and headlands
to the open sea, and on the other a most exquisite panorama
of Hobart Town and the valley of the Derwent, until the eye
is lost amidst mountain ranges away in the far distance.
The signal for sunset warned us that it was time to be getting
down, and we arrived just in time for dinner.
16 th April. —Left Hobart Town by the steamer for New
Norfolk, where we arrived about seven o’clock.
xyth April. —After breakfast, we drove out to the Salmon
Ponds, which are about seven miles away on the river Plenty,
a tributary of the Derwent. Here the young fish are reared
before being turned out. Besides salmon there are salmon-
trout and brown trout. What surprises me the most is the
size they all grow to out here. A salmon-trout has been
caught weighing 28 lbs., and a brown trout between 21 lbs.
and 22 lbs. Although the fish have been introduced, the true
sport has not, for they will not take a fly, or very rarely, on
account, I believe, of the amount of feed which they have in
the rivers. The drive out is a very pretty one, as it follows
the banks of the river. In some places the road is cut out
of the side of the hill, with a clear drop into the river below,
without hedge or rail, a nice place for a jibbing horse. The
two sides of the river stand out in bold contrast one to the
other ; the one all wild bush and mountain scenery, the other
a rich cultivated valley clothed with vegetation. This is a
great hop-growing country, and reminds one very much of
Kent; and to make it all the more English, the trees are
imported ones, and are at present bright in their autumn
clothing. We got back to the hotel in time for dinner, and
while waiting for it a newly-married couple drove up. The
bridegroom, although they had come some distance, had still
on his wedding garments. C pointed to-day to a couple
of yoked oxen, and said they were the symbol of matrimony,
in that they were always ready to get away from one another.
Needless to say he is an old bachelor. After dinner we went
to see the cricket match on the village green, and so idled
away our time until four o’clock, when we left by coach
to catch the train for Hobart Town, at Bridgewater, eleven
miles away.
167


iB th April. —We went to the Cathedral in the morning, and
was greatly edified by the sermon from a clergyman, who
was lately a tradesman here. He rather astonished us by
stating that the stone used in the coronation of our Sovereigns,
and now in Westminster Abbey, is the same that Jacob used
as a pillow! I wonder where he got this idea from. In the
afternoon we walked out to Newtown, to say good-bye to the
R s, as we have decided to leave Hobart Town on
Wednesday,
igth April. —The weather now is most perfect. This is
exactly like an English summer's day. I shall be quite sorry
to leave Hobart Town and this comfortable hotel. After
lunch I went with Mr. H the hotel proprietor, and
C to see the gaol. In it is confined the famous “ Mark
Jeffries,” of whom we had heard so much at Port Arthur.
He is a great big man, of a most unpleasant countenance,
thoroughly treacherous. He has committed one or two
murders. Hanging must have been too good for him, or else
why is he here ? He is at present on the sick list with a
bad leg, and is likely to remain there, as he will not allow it
to heal. At Port Arthur he was so obstreperous that they
finally sent him to live on Dead Island, but he did not stay
there very long. He used to do all he could to annoy the
authorities; he would light a fire, which was the signal that
he wanted something, and when the warders rowed over he
would ask for a box of matches. It was a very common
thing for convicts to do something to make themselves
notorious. Mark Jeffries one day said he wished to see the
Governor, and when he arrived informed him that he wished
to change his condition. He was asked what he meant, so
turning to the Governor he said,“ You have got a fine daughter,
sir, and I want to marry her.” For this he knew he would
not be punished, as the Governor would not like to drag his
daughter’s name through the mud. We went through the
different workshops —first those of the bootmakers, tailors,
and hatters, and_ then the carpenters and blacksmiths.
One boy was pointed out who is in for fifteen years.
When he first came he was a rough, untaught creature
from the bush. Now, although he has only been in three
years, he is a capital blacksmith and a good scholar.
We saw the condemned cells and the gallows, and then
went in to the female portion, where we saw some curious
creatures. One nice-looking girl was pointed out to us
168


as being in for murdering her child. Another was very
noticeable from the rest by her hanging her head as we
passed. She is in for her first offence. On going out we
were shown one man who is gradually losing his mind through
solitary confinement. The man in charge of the warders’
house is a very old hand. He is a “three-lifer,” originally in
for burglary, but has absconded several times. It was he
who had suffered so much solitary confinement at Port
Arthur; his name was Bright. He has in his charge the
warders’ dogs, and showed us three puppies, about a fortnight
old, whose mother had died that morning. He told me that
he might keep them alive by feeding them on milk. “ I get
a pint a day,” said he, “ and bad as we may be, we won’t see
a dumb animal suffer.” He seemed happy enough, and is
certainly comfortable, for all the cells are fitted up with
mattresses and blankets, much too comfortable for some of
them. From there we drove on to the penal gaol at “The
Cascades,” in which are all that now remain of the old
convicts from Port Arthur. They are all either lunatics or
old invalids. We first went into the yard, in which about
thirty men were taking exercise. It was indeed more like
entering a den of wild beasts, for I never before saw such a
collection of fallen humanity. The first man pointed out was
the famous “ Ahern,” a man of the most revolting appearance.
He is the wildest-looking creature. In the daytime he tears
his clothes to pieces and at night his bedding; he was wander-
ing bare-footed in front of the wooden fence like a wild beast.
Next him was sittingthe famous bushranger, “ Tim Quigley,”
near whom we were warned not to go, as he would fly at us.
One day he chased Governor Du Cane out of the yard. Close to
these were four men playing dominoes, and on our approaching
them they stopped, and two came up to us, one a man about
forty years old, one of the Point Puer boys. He had been sent out
to Port Arthur when only fourteen. He came to complain
about the bread being stale ; the other, an old man in
spectacles, who came to tell us of all his grievances, how they
passed wires through into his cell at night covered with vitriol
and burned him, that they also put sulphur on his noseand lips,
which made him sneeze and splutter all night. He followed
us about the whole time we were in the prison, and he amused
me by turning to Mr. H and saying, “ I am a free
man, sir, and am as honest as you are.” This was not
flattering. We next visited the famous convict, “Blind
169


Mooney,” the man whose spirit Price, the well-known brutal
governor, had tried to break and had failed. Price used to-
lay snares to catch him, in order to have an excuse to flog
him. He would give him tobacco, and then set the warders
on and give him one hundred and fifty lashes for being found
with it. Price is the man whom Marcus Clark depicts under
the name of Maurice Frere in “His Natural Life.” He
finally met a well-deserved fate. He was murdered by the
convicts at Williamstown. This poor old man, for one could
not help pitying him, as he lay there in his now helpless
condition, came out to Port Arthur in the year 1838. What
a life ! I could well agree with him, when he told us that he
had suffered more than any other man in the world. In all
be has received over three thousand lashes. There was
another man who had formerly been a warder. He is a most
mischievous fellow, always doing something he should not.
He came up to speak to us, and told us that over two hundred
men had been killed to make five bullocks, and that they
ought to he fit for killing now, and what fine mutton chops
they would make ! The chief warder, who took us over, told
us many interesting anecdotes of Port Arthur, as he had been
there for over ten years. On leaving we were asked to write
our names in the visitors’ book, in which we noticed that
former visitors had made the remark of having had “ a pleasant
and interesting visit ” — interesting, no doubt, but how it possibly
could be pleasant I know not.
20 th April. —This morning we devoted to paying our bills
and packing, up our furs and other curios, which are to be sent
direct to England. In the afternoon we went out to
Government House, to a musical “ At Home,” where we met
everybody we knew, and so were able to say good-bye to all.
21 st April. —Left by eight o’clock express for Campbell
Town, where we intended stopping a few days for some
shooting. De G was at the station and introduced us to a
man in our carriage, who never spoke a word to us the whole
way. This time I saw that part of the line I had passed in
darkness on my way down. It is certainly very pretty,
winding about as it does among the mountains. In it, too,
are some wonderful curves, but this time we passed over
them going up hill, which was certainly preferable to coming
down. This line, I have been told, was one of Baron Grant’s
swindles, and that accounts for the curves. The line was
laid in this way to avoid the expense of building viaducts.
170


We reached Campbell Town about twelve o’clock, and drove
to Kean’s Hotel. We were not struck with our landlord,
who seemed very disinclined to help us in the way of
shooting. After dinner, we tried to get more information
from him, but without success; and on our telling him of
our intention of leaving by the next train unless we heard of
some shooting, “ Ho," said he, “ nobody wants you —I did not
send for you — I’m not paid to find you shooting—you don’t expect
me to go into the bush, do you ? you are mistaken if you expect
anybody to go with you when the grass is wet." On my
expressing my surprise that Mr. De G , should have told
me to come to this hotel, he said “ Who cares for
De G , he’s a nobody.” I was indeed glad that this
insolent brute had shown his true colours so soon.
We went out into the town and procured a cart, in
which we put all our luggage, and left for Launceston
by the 5.30 train. Arrived at Launceston, we drove first
to the Brisbane Hotel. “Full, sir.” Next, to the Launceston
Hotel. “ Full, sir.” We began to fear we should not get
taken in anywhere, but fortunately, at last found rooms at
the “International.” There is an Inter-colonial Rifle Match
on, which accounts for this unusual bustle. Before leaving
Hobart Town this morning, I bought a breechloader, one of
Westley Richards’ patent. I was surprised at finding such
a good one out here, and more so at its price. £25 was
asked, but I finally got it for £zo. To-day is the opening of
the quail shooting, but unfortunately it has been most
fearfully wet.
22 nd April. —Called on Dr. H the first thing this
morning, and he has promised us any amount of shooting, so
we have fallen in clover. The Sydney boat sails to-morrow,
so we have decided to send our heavy luggage on by her,
which will make us more independent, as in all probability we
shall go over to Melbourne and thence overland to Sydney.
While I was arranging about the luggage, W went for a
drive with Dr. H . In the afternoon we went for a walk
as far as the Cataract. It is very amusing to see the
tremendous jealousy which exists between Hobart Town and
Launceston people. It crops up in nearly everything.
There was a mess dinner here to-night, and afterwards we
had a rubber with the Colonel, the Major, and Dr. H .
23 rd April. —A cold day. At 3.30 we started with Dr.
H for some quail shooting. We drove along the West
171


Tamar road, and when about two miles out, left the car, and
before six o’clock we had got five brace. Dined with Dr. H ,
and afterwards went to a performance of “ The Trial by Jury ”
by amateurs. They did their best, but rushed it to a most
fearful extent. The bridesmaids were all pretty girls, and
afterwards we were taken behind the scenes and introduced
to them. I had with me a crush hat, and I was greatly
surprised to find that I had reached a part of Greater Britain
where there were people who had never seen such a thing
before. I was afraid for its fate, for they all wanted to see
how it worked. Tasmanian girls as a rule are gigglers.
You cannot look at one in the street but she laughs, and
yesterday I passed three very pretty girls, who all laughed.
On my meeting them a second time, one said in passing,
“ Come to the bazaar,” for there was one being held that
afternoon. I immediately turned and spoke to them, and
they asked me if I did not know somebody who could intro-
duce me to them, as their mamma was so very particular. I
left them, promising to go to the bazaar in the evening, but
found a rubber at whist at the mess of the volunteer corps
preferable. Made enquiries to-day, and find that these young
ladies are the daughters of a leading M.P.
24th April. —Wrote letters for the mail, which leaves on
Monday next.
25 th April. —Sunday. Went to Trinity Church, notice-
able for the choir having it all their own way. It
is composed mostly of pretty girls. “Launceston is
not an aboundingly cheerful place for a stranger on a
wet Sunday,” said the Melbourne Punch. Right you
are, Mr. Punch.
26th April. —Somehow it has come about that at the present
moment (6.30 p.m.) I am writing in the saloon of the
“ Mangana.” The continuous wet has been too much for
us, and in spite of all Dr. H -’s temptations, we felt
bound to go, but with a great deal of reluctance, for
we both feel that we are “ selling Dr. H a pup,” after
his having arranged the shooting for us. In any case
W would have been obliged to go and seek a more
congenial clime, as he is travelling for his health, and the
last two days have been too much like English weather for
him. We are at present lying off Rosevears, about fourteen
miles down the river. We left Launceston at two o’clock to
catch the tide and wait here for the mails, which are to
172


come down to-morrow morning. This seems a weak arrange-
ment, but then it is a Tasmanian one.
27th April. —At nine o’clock we started, but on reaching the
Heads there was a telegram awaiting the captain, telling
him to remain until the arrival of the Hobart Town mails,
which had been delayed by the washing away of part of the
line near Clarendon. It was then only twelve o’clock, and
no chance of the mails for another four hours at the least, as
they were to come down by the “ Devon ” leaving Launceston
at twelve. Finally, at five o’clock, we got away, and in passing
through the Heads it was fearfully rough and blowing hard.
zUh April. —It has been a terribly rough night, but owingto
our cabin being right amidships, we hardly felt any motion, so
I escaped being ill. The Port Phillip Heads were not reached
until nearly two o’clock. We dropped the mails there, and
very shortly afterwards passed the P. and O. steamer on her
way out. I had made the acquaintance on board of a Mr.
and Mrs. L , of Sydney, and on exchanging cards before
leaving, found that his people live in Pembridge-place. He,
too, is an old football man, and as he had been the secretary
of the Ravenscourt Club, he knew a good many that I did.
We went on landing to the Oriental Hotel, and found a good
many changes there. In the evening I went to the theatre,
to see the “ Children’s Pinafore.” It was indeed wonderful
how well some of the little dots sang and acted. There I
met Captain S , D C , and one or two others,
with whom I afterwards had an oyster supper.
2 gth April.— Looked up several people, and left with
W by the 2.55 train for Wodonga, the terminus of the
Victorian Railway on the overland journey to Sydney. We
discovered that by taking our through ticket from Cobb and
Co., the coaching agents, we saved £2 on each ticket.
There is nothing of any interest along the line, and we
reached Wodonga at about twelve midnight, a distance
of one hundred and ninety-six miles. From Wodonga to
Albury, a distance of about a mile, you go by omnibus. Here
we crossed over the Murray, which divides Victoria from
New South Wales. At Albury we had time for a feed before
starting by coach, on which I managed to get the box seat.
It was a beautiful moonlight night and not too cold. The
driver was a Swiss who has been driving out here for a long
time. He told us some amusing anecdotes. Some years
ago he was a passenger by the first coach which ran from
173


Glen Ennis to Grafton. The road was quite new, and so
rough that the driver, after getting a short way on the road,
refused to go any further. He then volunteered, and although
the distance was only one hundred and twenty miles it took
him a week to do it. In one stage he upset the coach
twenty times, and on the last one they had to abandon the
coach, swim their horses across a river, and ride on to
their destination. We were now in the district of the
Kelly gang, the noted bushrangers, who are at present defying
all attempts of the police to catch them. He told us many
a yarn about these men, and showed us the spot where the
still more famous Morgan used to “stick up” the coaches
in the old days.
30 th April. —Owing to the heavy rains, some parts of our
road were very heavy, and exceedingly rough. On the way,
my top coat was jolted out of the coach, and catching between
the brake and wheel was torn to pieces. I also got my hat
crushed in, and W lost a pair of boots. The greater
part of the way our team consisted of seven horses, two and
two, and three leaders, a novel sensation, and also a treat to
see how well the driver handled them. He nearly upset us
once —but no matter. Last week the coach was upset in
German Town, our first stopping place, which we reached at
seven in time for breakfast, and several of the passengers
badly hurt. We reached Wagga-Wagga about three
o’clock, a most beautifully situated town, on the edge of vast
plains. This is the Riverina district, and contains some of
the finest sheep-runs in the southern portion of Australia.
After the late rains, everything was of the brightest green,
and the colour of the red brick, of which all the houses are
built, stands out well in contrast. “ Shure, yer honor,” said
an Irishman the other day, “itis a grand town; there are
eight public-houses.” If that always applies, then Wagga-
Wagga is indeed a fine one. After dinner, we went to visit
the site of the Claimant’s late residence, on which is now built
a terrace of shops, called “Tichborne Terrace,” and, by a
man we met in a shop, we were taken to see an actual portion
of the old slab-house itself. This man’s name was Shaw, and
he told us he knew the claimant, Thomas Castro, before he
came to Wagga, and that he knew him to be a thorough
scoundrel, but a clever one. He also told us a tale of a boot-
maker, to whom Castro complained of his prices being above
those he had been accustomed to pay at Wapping. There
174


is at present a lunatic of the name of Creswick in the
Parramatta Asylum, who is supposed to be Arthur Orton.
At 5.30 we left in the mail train for Sydney ; we were unlucky
in not having the sleeping car, which runs only on alternate
days, but the carriage we were in was a bogie, similar to our
Midland carriages, and built by Ashbury’s, of Manchester.
The guard was about to put another man into our carriage,
and on my explaining we wanted to sleep, he said, “ Oh! but
Mr. W must have, a seat.” On looking at Mr. W I
should say he was a Minister, perhaps of railways, for he
looked a big enough cad. Mr. W , however, fell asleep,
and passed his station. I cannot say I was sorry. It was a
cold night, and I had now nothing but a macintosh, and on
this line they have a wretched habit of opening all the doors
at the stations at which they stop, which, by the way, is
every one. By this means the carriages are never allowed
to get thoroughly warm, and to make matters worse it is a
teetotal line. Did you ever hear of such an absurdity? We
were, however, warned about this, and had a soda-water
bottle with something stronger than soda-water in it. I
fancy, even should you forget to take this precaution, the
guard always has a bottle of something, a drop of which you
can get in case you should feel a little faint.
Ist May. —At six o’clock we arrived in Sydney, and I drove
to the Union Club, of which I had been made a member.
W went to Petty’s Hotel. After a bath and some
breakfast I drove out to Government House, and called on
G , and was introduced to Loftus, who is A.D.C. to his
father. I lunched there, and afterwards Loftus, G , and
myself went down in the steam launch to the Heads, and then
right up Middle Harbour as far as we could go. What can I
say of Sydney Harbour beyond what has already been said ?
In spite of that, however, my opinion differs from most, in
thinking that, as a whole, Hobart Town is finer. In coming
back, we picked up a piece of the stern of the “ Lady Emma,”
a schooner of 128 tons, which was wrecked yesterday off the
South Cape. Sydney, on our return, looked most lovely,
standing out as it did against a setting sun. I was to have
dined at Government House, but I pleaded my two nights out
of bed, so dined quietly at the Club, and went to see the London
Comedy Company, who are acting here to crowded houses.
I went at once behind the scenes and remained there the whole
piece, and afterwards returned with the Marshalls to supper.


2nd May. —After breakfast, I walked out to Government
House, the situation of which is most beautiful, looking
straight down the bay. Lying at the foot of the garden, in
Farm Cove, is H.M.S. “ Emerald.” There I spent the whole
day, wandering about the gardens, looking at the poultry,
and sitting in the verandah sketching. L was
there also, so in the evening I drove out with him to his
house/' The Hermitage,” at Double Bay. With him are at
present living two of his nieces, by far the prettiest girls I
have yet seen this side of the line. I spent a very pleasant
evening, and walked back about eleven o’clock.
3 rd May. —On going into the breakfast-room this morning
who should be there but Wilson C . I had no notion he
was out of England, so you can imagine my surprise. He
arrived in the colonies in February by the “ Garonne.”
Lunched at Government House, and afterwards took some
photographs. Loftus has bought a small camera, with the
idea of learning photography before leaving for Fiji, where
he intends going next month. An amateur photographer
came up to give him a lesson. He first took Loftus and
myself in the porch, and then a landscape, taking in H.M.S.
“ Emerald,” which is still lying in Farm Cove at the
foot of the gardens. Dined at Government House, and met
Mr.andMrs.T . He is the Colonial Secretary for Fiji. Also
Captain M , of the “ Emerald,” who is a thorough follower
and believer in Sir Arthur Gordon. Like the rest of that
clique he was thoroughly pig-headed, and in defence of his
argument said that he had been all over the world, and had
never yet met with a case of a difference between white man
and black where the former was not always in the wrong —a
fairly bold and utterly ridiculous assertion.
4 th May. —Lunched with Loftus, and drove out with him
in his cart to call on the L s. Afterwards dined at
Government House.
s th May. —Lawn tennis at Government House in the
afternoon, and dined afterwards with W at the Club.
6th May. —In the afternoon, drove out to the barracks,
with B , the Governor’s private secretary, and played
racquets in an open-air court.
7 th May. —Drove out to Bishop’s Court to call on Mrs.
B , and found both she and the Bishop out. Went to
see Marshall at the theatre. The advertisements covering
the walls of the pit do not add to the general beauty. To gaze
176


on “Johnson’s Antibilious Pills” or a “Monster Clothing
Company” is not entertaining. Formerly they let out their
drop scene for advertisements, but thank goodness they have
improved on that.
Bth May. —To-day has been a new experience for me,
“ a southerly buster,” accompanied by a dust-storm. Loftus
and I had driven out to see Mr. White’s training stables,
and on coming home, it suddenly began to blow tremendously
hard. Some little distance ahead we could see the dust
rising in clouds, and soon we were met by a wall of brown
darkness, so thick that Loftus turned round, almost afraid
to face it. In a second we were in a whirlwind of thick
dust, with darkness like a London fog. Eyes, ears, nose,
everything covered with dust. In this state driving was no
easy matter, and after some little time Loftus said, “ Take the
reins, I can see no longer.” In the evening I went to see “New
Babylon,” at the Victoria Theatre, where G joined me.
gth May. —Went down to see W off to England by
the R.M.S. “ Hydaspes,” which left at g a.m. C R
called for me later on, and although blowing hard it was a
most lovely day. We walked all around the domain, past
Lady Macquarie’s Chair, and so on into the Botanical
Gardens. Certainly, with regard to its bays, nothing can
equal Sydney Harbour. Its liveliness, too, adds much to its
beauty. Men-of-war, large vessels belonging to the “ Orient ”
and other English lines lying at anchor, and hundreds of
yachts and small craft dotted all over the bay, go to make
up as pretty a picture as it is possible to see. But what
these pictures lack is background, and in this respect Hobart
Town has the advantage. The Botanical Gardens are most
beautifully situated on the water’s edge, which here is in the
form of a huge oval basin, reserved entirely for Her Majesty’s
ships. At one end are the Botanical Gardens, with the
Exhibition Buildings looking down over them, and further
along are the grounds and buildings of Government House,
and over on the other side are the walks and drives of the
domain, while at the extreme point is Lady Macquarie’s
Chair. If once seen it is never to be forgotten. I lunched
at Government House, and as the day had turned cold
Loftus had a fire in his room, and we amused ourselves
principally with his Fijian photographs. In the evening I
dined with the J s, where I met Captain and Miss H .
He is travelling for his health.
N
177


to th May. —Lunched at Government House, and again met
Mr. and Mrs. T who start to-day for Fiji. Heard
bad news about old Chip having killed a native. Am most
anxious about this, knowing Sir A. Gordon as I do. M
came up and took some photos. We had a group taken in
the verandah. Finished letter for the English mail and
went to the bank to get my further letter of credit, which
arrived yesterday, by the ’Frisco mail, so now I am set up for
another year. After lunch I went over to Government
House for lawn tennis, and had some capital games —Loftus,
B , Col. R , G , and myself. Afterwards I dined
there, and then drove out to the barracks, with Loftus and
B ,to some private theatricals. Roberts, of the L.C.C.,
gave a sort of Corney Grain entertainment. Titheredge, of
the same company, also assisted. Later on we had a dance ;
the whole thing was a great success.
nth May. —I was to meet the nine o’clock train, and quite
forgot to enquire how long it would take me to drive to the
station. It was with no little surprise that I found at seven-
teen minutes to nine that to catch the train was almost an
impossibility. However, I got a good hansom and did it
with two minutes to spare. Loftus, G- and myself were
going down to Bathurst for the N.S.W. coursing meeting;
rather a long journey, but one of great interest, as the line
crosses the Blue Mountain by the far famed Zig-zag. We
had a carriage “ Engaged,” and with a hamper of the good
things of this life, managed to make ourselves tolerably com-
fortable. It is certainly an extraordinary railway, and one
having required a tremendous amount of engineering
skill. Instead of, as in most cases, the line winding round
the sides of the mountain, it goes up its face in a zigzag
line, up which the train is alternately pushed and pulled.
The views among the mountains are magnificent, especially
in the neighbourhood of the Weatherboard and Mount
Victoria, after which you descend, by a still more extra-
ordinary zig-zag, to Lithgow, the great coal mining centre.
After leaving Lithgow, the line runs through some fertile
land, on to the Bathurst plains. It was close on dark before
we reached our destination. Arrived at Bathurst, we at
once drove to Stirling’s Hotel, where rooms had been
engaged for us, and where we found a cosy sitting-room, with
bedrooms leading out of it, and a table laid ready for dinner.
A capital dinner, cooked by a Chinaman, to which we did
178


ample justice, prepared us for the ball in the evening, given
to the visitors. Oh ! what a miserable entertainment it was!
A room in the School of Art capable of holding at least 300
with only 80 in it, and all dancing the wildest deux temps.
You can imagine I did not do much dancing; in fact, I think
the half hour we were there was chiefly employed in sitting
before a fire in the neighbouring public library, and smoking
cigarettes.
12 th May. —Loftus had brought ponies for himself and
G , and had had one actually in the horsebox for me,
but after my late illness riding is out of the question.
This morning it was really cold, there having been 7 0 of frost
during the night, and a cold bath in the yard and water out
of a well gave us a real treat. This reminded me of the tale
of a young fellow who said that Sydney was the most
extravagant of places to live in, as his bath always cost him
ten shillings, owing to his being obliged to have it iced.
Loftus had sent on his ponies to Leeholm, seven miles
away, where the coursing was to take place, and I got
a seat in Mr. W ’s buggy, but it was most amusing
work hunting for something to take the others out
in. We finally managed to secure a butcher’s turnout,
but not until after the horse had finished delivering
that day’s dinners. We had very good fun at the coursing
meeting, and a capital luncheon, given by Mr. George Lee.
I managed to enjoy myself in spite of not being able to ride,
having had a mail phaeton lent me; by this means I was
able to drive about and see everything. It was a very pretty
sight, the day being perfect and there being no end of horse-
men and carriages. We reached Bathurst again about five
o’clock, and then went to inspect the town, which contains
some fine buildings, especially the post and telegraph
offices and Supreme Court. After dinner, one or two people
came in to smoke and yarn with us, and when tired we went
down to the station and retired to roost in the sleeping
carriage, which had been sent up for us, and were hooked
on to the mail train about midnight.
I.3th May. —Had a most comfortable journey down, and
never slept better.
*****
23 rd May. —Latterly we have been having the most divine
weather, and our time has been mostly spent in taking
photographs, both groups and views, in the grounds of
179


Government House. H.M.S. “ Wolverine ” being now in-
harbour, we have been able to get up some capital games of
lawn tennis. One afternoon Mrs. M got up a party and
took us in her steam launch for a round of the harbour,
landing us back in time for dinner. I dined one night with
Mr. and Mrs. L , the friends I had made on the Laun-
ceston boat, at their house on the North Shore; a lovely spot,
with gardens sloping down to the water’s edge. Certainly
the Sydney people are to be envied the lovely situations of
their homes. G and I managed one day to get down
to call on Mr. George C ,at Woolahra. He lives in a
wonderful house, which was begun but never finished, the
property of Sir Daniel Cooper, who now lives in England.
On my way up George-street I noticed a curious sign to a
public-house, “ The Honest Lawyer.” Is it sarcasm ?
24 th May. —To-day is the Queen’s birthday, and the harbour
looks most lovely with all the men-of-war and other vessels
decked out in bunting. At 12 o’clock there was a salute
from the Battery and from all the men-of-war in the harbour.
W e amused ourselves in the morning by playing lawn tennis,
and in the afternoon attended the Levee. We saw one
general officer going to it in full uniform on the top of an
omnibus. It is rather difficult to keep a daily diary when
settled for some considerable time in one place, besides being
very uninteresting to anyone who may hereafter read it. I
have now been long enough in Sydney to form some idea of
the place and its people. Of its situation, both from
a picturesque and a mercantile point of view, too much
cannot be said. The buildings are handsome and sub-
stantially built, mostly of stone. Its streets are narrow,
and of macadam, and not kept in the best state of repair;
but the greatest wonder of all are its pavements. The
paving is not done as in England by the Corporation, and
charged to the householder, but it is left to the householder
to pave as he likes, and on what level he likes, and never
to repair if he is so disposed. The consequence is you are
either tripping up over somebody’s pavement, which is higher
than his neighbour’s, or tumbling down into some puddle-
hole, where the paving flag has entirely been worn away.
This is bad enough in fine weather, but you can imagine what
it is in wet. In the daytime it is difficult to walk with
dignity, and at night a drunken man has the best of it.
Taken as a whole its people are not interesting. There is
180


little, if any, society. It is a “ Drop in when you like ” style,
and “You’ll find us eating.” They all eat heavily in the
middle of the day, which makes them lazy and apathetic.
They mostly have plenty of money, but want teaching how
to spend it. In dress and appearance they are far behind
Melbourne.
25 th May. —Played lawn tennis in the morning at Govern-
ment House; in the evening went to a dance given at Need’s
Rooms, by Wilson C , E. E , and De J— —.
The house belongs to a dancing-master, and has two capital
ball-rooms in it. In every respect it is fitted up as a private
house, which makes it very comfortable.
26 th May. —l danced so fearfully hard last night that
to-day I was good for nothing, and to make matters worse it
blew hard with cold rain. I had promised to go down and
lunch with C on board the “ Wolverine,” which is at
present in dock, but I was too tired.
2 yth May. —l went over to Government House in the
morning, and stayed for luncheon. Afterwards Loftus and
I went for a stroll in the town, until it was time to dress, as
we were dining at Double Bay with the L s. Telegrams
received of Fenian disturbances in Western Australia.
H.M.S. “ Emerald” received orders this morning to prepare
for sea. She will probably start on Sunday.
28 th May. —Did some shopping with G in the morning,
and in the afternoon played lawn tennis at Government
House. We had quite a large and fashionable audience,
as Lady Augustus was holding a reception. I find my
steamer for Fiji is advertised for the 7th of next month.
G will not, therefore, be able to get away by her, so I
fancy Loftus will wait and come on later. In the evening I
went to the Assembly Ball, at which I was neither struck
with the costumes nor the beauty of the Sydney ladies.
There was a certain want of fit about all their dresses, and a
want of stylishness.
zgih May. —We had intended going for a day on the Bay
in the steam launch, but the morning was cold and too heavy
for photography, so we contented ourselves with a run round
to Mossman’s Bay, where we landed, and hunted in the woods
for wild flowers, of which we got a fair quantity. This is the
more striking to an Englishman, considering it is now mid-
winter, but when you think that green peas and new potatoes
are an every-day vegetable, it is no wonder. Loftus landed us


in the launch at Double Bay, and I went up with the
L ’s to lunch. I ended by spending the rest of the day
there.
30 th May. —Met C at the Club and walked out with
him to Elizabeth Bay, as we were due to dine with Mr. John
S . It being Sunday there was, of course, a mid-day meal.
Afterwards I walked out to Woollahra to call on Mrs. K ,
Mrs. D that was, late of Adelaide, and returned to spend
the evening with the L ’s.
31 st May. —Had some magnificent games of lawn tennis in
the morning; lunched at Government House, and in the
afternoon went down to see L . Left by the eight
o’clock train for Mount Victoria, as I had taken a sudden
desire for a change. It was midnight before I reached my
destination. I put up at the Imperial Hotel, where I had
telegraphed for a room. This hotel was built on speculation
by a Roman Catholic priest, who afterwards failed.
Ist June. —Mount Victoria is nearly the highest point in
the Blue Mountains, being 3,600 ft. above Sydney, from
which it is distant seventy-seven miles. I awoke at seven
o’clock and saw a magnificent sunrise, and after a cold tub
and breakfast, started in a buggy for Govett’s Leap, a drive
of seven miles, but should I come up again I would stop at
Blackheath, the station next before Mount Victoria, where
there is a comfortable hotel, within two miles of Govett’s
Leap. This, however, would not do for non-walkers, there
being no buggies there. On our way out we drove a little
off the road, to get a view of the Kanimbla Valley. This
view is the most extensive I have ever seen. Standing on
the edge of a precipitous rock, you look over miles and miles
of one vast ocean of bush, until it loses itself in the misty
horizon, the shadows of the passing clouds looking like
huge waves. At intervals you can faintly make out a thin
curling haze of smoke, showing where some lonely wood-
splitter’s hut is hid away in some sequestered valley. Further
along the road we passed men at work clearing, evidently
some free selection ; huge log fires were burning all
along the roadside, axe and saw both busy at work, reclaiming
what seemed to me to be most uninviting ground. Suddenly
there is an end to the road and you are at Govett’s Leap.
Govett, so the story goes, was a famous bushranger, who
preferred death by leaping over this precipice to being taken
alive by the police. Indeed, it was a magnificent view.
182


Standing as I did on an overhanging ledge of rock, with this
wonderful panorama before me, I gazed on to the bed of the
Gross valley which lay stretched out at least 1,250 feet below,
and bounded on all sides by massive, frowning walls of rock,
the white and red cliffs standing out in bold contrast to the
surrounding scenery. A haze of the loveliest blue rested
over all, softening and tinting each harsh outline. The
valley is one mass of rich vegetation, gums, sassafras and
tree ferns, so thickly packed as to form a carpet of the loveliest
green. For the first time in my life, I gazed on a place
where no man has ever trodden. Many have been the
attempts to force a way up this valley, but without avail.
Nature has repelled each successive attack of man desirous
to enter into her strictest solitudes. To the right of me, as
I sat, with a clear bound of 500 feet, sprang a waterfall of
unequalled beauty; long ere it ends its fearful leap it has
become a thin veil of filmy mist, through which can be seen
the rugged face of the time-worn cliffs. To the left of me,
over a wonderful amphitheatre of rock, leaps a waterfall of
smaller dimensions, but none the less beautiful, looking as it
does in the sunlight more like a torrent of liquid silver.
From beneath, the water drips in single drops, which flash
like diamonds. As I sat perched on the rock, a feeling came
over me of the most utter insignificance. I felt like a fly.
Not a sound of any sort broke the stillness of the scene. It
was, indeed, a sight never to be forgotten. I returned to the
hotel for dinner, and in the afternoon walked down a zig-zag
road leading into the Kanimbla Valley. Some enterpris-
ing draper has tried to hand his name down to posterity
by painting on the rocks and seats, “ Seward’s Pass.” But
it Won’t Wash. I wish it would.
2nd June. —Left by the 10.30 coal train for Katomba, on
the way back to Sydney. It is one advantage of the N.S.W.
lines, being allowed to travel by the luggage trains. At
Katomba there are some magnificent falls, about one and a
half miles from the station, and as we only had an hour to
see them in before the next luggage train was due, we had
to run the whole distance. These falls are a new discovery,
and have lately been re-purchased by the Government. The
character of the scenery is the same as at Govett’s Leap.
There is, however, some very curious rock formation. One rock
in particular, of over 500 feet in height, stands out as a grim
sentinel away from the cliffs. It is known as “ The Orphan,”
183


while away in the distance can be seen successive ranges of
hills. We had a hard run back to the station, only to find
that our luggage train would be delayed for quite an hour,
owing to a special, express. This was most riling, as it
would shorten our time so fearfully for the Weatherboard
Falls. However, our train at last arrived, and a few miles
further along dropped us at the Weatherboard station, from
which the falls are distant about a mile. These again are
of a similar character, but they are better able to be seen,
owing to a projecting rock, on to the top of which a footpath
leads. These, no doubt, are the finest of all the falls in
this neighbourhood. Reached Sydney rather late.
3rd June. — Lunched with L , and then drove out with
Loftus and G to call on Mrs. L . Dined at Govern-
ment House, and afterwards went with B to a Masonic
ball. I never had such an amusing time of it in my life.
We bought our tickets at the door, and on being asked where
we came from B replied “ Government House,” at which
they were most polite, and offered to return us our money.
A big swell, decked out in all the insignia of his Order, con-
ducted us upstairs, where we were met by quite a deputation,
with whom we had to shake hands. This over, we were
conducted to the ball-room, and taken up on to the dais, and
introduced to the head swell of all. It suddenly flashed
across us “ Wherefore all this fuss ? ” for as we ascended the
dais, the band struck up “ God save the Queen.” The
Commodore and G—— arrived just as the last strains were
dying away. They thought they had come just too late, but
soon they twigged the joke. We watched a quadrille with
amusement. The first rule was thoroughly carried out :
“ When in doubt seize your partner violently by the waist,
and pirouette her round.” When walking round the room
after this dance was over, another big swell came up to
us and said that he had been requested by the committee to
ask us if there was anybody we should like to be introduced
to. I had spotted a lovely charmer in green and red, who
turned out to be a barmaid at the Royal Hotel. My cicerone
next offered to introduce me to the ‘‘ only lady in the room,”
and she, in turn, introduced me to her cousin. The pro-
gramme was a wonderful concoction, and contained the
following dances:—Prince Imperial, Circassian Circle,
Highland Schottische, Spanish Waltz, Quadrille, Masonic
Waltz, Cotillion. The Commodore, G , B , self and
184


our respective partners had some most amusing sets of
quadrilles. I quite got into the first rule, and managed the
pirouette to perfection. At twelve o’clock, B and I had
had enough, but the Commodore and G— — stayed on till
3-30-
4 th June. —Inthe papers this morning, in giving an account
of the ball, they said amongst the distinguished guests were
** The Hons. E. and A. Loftus.” Paid a second visit to a
dentist. lam getting fettled up before leaving for Fiji, as I
had a nasty twinge of toothache the other day. L and I
lunched together, and afterwards wandered about doing some
shopping, I drove out to dine with him, and then came back
to the C ’s dance, but I never succeeded in finding out my
host or hostess, and as nobody seemed inclined to take
compassion on me or introduce me, I stayed ten minutes, and
returned to the Club.
s th June. —Played lawn tennis in the afternoon, to which a
number of people came. Loftus took some capital groups.
In the evening I dined at Government House, and at dessert
tasted, for the first time, some mangoes, which had been sent
as a present to Lady Augustus from Bombay. We also had
strawberries and other English fruits. After dinner I had a
long talk with Lord Augustus about Chip, and he strongly
advised me to take down a barrister from here to defend him.
Loftus, G and I went on later to the theatre to see
Roberts, in his screaming farce of “ Stage Struck.”
6 th June. —L called for me, and drove me out to dine
with them at The Hermitage. Loftus came out later in the
evening, and drove me home.
yth June. —Went round to Government House in the morn-
ing to say “Good-bye,” and afterwards L took me round
to introduce me to Messrs. Want, Johnson and Want, the
leading solicitors here, whom I wished to consult on Chip’s
business. The}' quite agreed that a man should go down from
here, so I went with Mr. Johnson to see Major dementi, who
promised to go. But all was to be left open until I could
see Chip, and let them know by the next mail. The “ Gunga”
was advertised to leave at 4.30, and what with having left
my packing to the last moment, and getting the few things I
wanted, I have had a warm day of it, and much to my disgust,
on reaching the wharf, found the “Gunga” was put off till
eight o’clock. L and I went back and dined at the
P. 0. cafe, and then returned to the ship. We found she was
185


Capt. SAUNDERS,
S.S. GUNGA, 746 Tons.
Date.
l880.
Latitude.
Longitude.
Distance.
REMARKS.
June
8
Left Sydney 7.20 a.m., passed
The Heads 8.20 a.m.
9
32.10 s.
156.32 E.
285
Strong southerly gale and
IO
30.38 „
161. 4 „
260
heavy sea, with rain.
u
28.28 „
165.23 „
266
12
26.28,,
169.32 „
259
Moderate east winds and fine
weather.
13
2343 „
172.46 „
249
14
21.10 „
176.33 „
245
Fog. Lay-to for four hours off
Mount Washington, Kadavu.
15
No sights taken.
250
Arrived at Levuka 3 p,m.
Total miles 1
814.
again put off till to-morrow morning. L had promised
to go to the circus with a friend, so I drove out to The
Hermitage to fetch in Mrs. L and the girls, and joined
him there. Afterwards, I went with Roberts to supper
at his diggings, and reached the “ Gunga ” at about 2 a.m.
Bth June. —I did not get up till after 11 o’clock, and on
coming on deck, we were out of sight of land. We had left
our moorings shortly after seven o’clock. The “Gunga,’'
named after a river in India, is one of the oldest A.S.N-
Company’s boats. She formerly belonged to the Bombay and
Baroda Shipping Company, and traded on the Indian coast.
After that she ran between Port Elizabeth and Mozambique,
then from Foochow to Sydney, and now I think she is running
on her last legs.
9-10 ih June. —Spent in my bunk.
1 xth June.— Weather cleared up, and there is now every
appearance of a good passage. Among our passengers was
a Miss S , a young girl returning from school, who helped
to keep us alive. Is it possible to go anywhere in the world
without meeting someone one knows ? On board is an old
schoolfellow of mine, Walter C , also globe-trotting;
another of our passengers is a Mr. 0 , one of the early colon-
ists in Fiji. He amused us with many an anecdote of his early
experiences. One was a wonderful escape of himself and
two others from being killed and eaten. He was taken
prisoner by some of the hillmen, and was for twenty-four hours
expecting every moment to be clubbed to death, before he was
able to make his escape.
OUR LOG.
186


i5 th June. —At three p.m., I once more entered within the
reef, and cast anchor off Levuka. While waiting for the
health officer, the harbour-master’s boat was caught in a
squall and capsized. Measles being in Melbourne, we had
some little trouble with the health officer, and only just
escaped quarantine. F. P came on board, and gave me
a letter from Chip, who will be down on Saturday. No
room at the Club, so I put up at Sturt’s Hotel. Levuka is
just the same in every respect as when I was here last
year. There certainly is a great charm in returning to a
place a second time —so many welcomes, “How are you, old
fellow,” “ Glad to see you,” “ Hope you are going to stay
longer amongst us this time,” makes it almost feel like
returning home. There was nothing for it but to wait
patiently until Chip’s arrival, and amuse myself as best I
could. Fortunately, after a couple of days, I got a room in
the Club. C has gone to stay at Government House, he
being a friend of the Bishop of Melanesia, who is at present
staying there ; but there is also another globe-trotter here,
the son of Alderman N , of stereoscopic repute. Dr.
F , who was staying with Chip when I was at Wai-
Wai last year, has now commenced practice in Levuka ; and
one day I walked out with him to call on Mrs. C and
her three daughters at Wai-Tovu, about a mile out of
Levuka. There we spent the rest of the day, and played
lawn tennis. In the evening C , N , and myself
walked out to a native town a mile beyond Nasova to see a
young Englishman, who lives there in Fiji fashion, almost a
chief among them. We found him in his large Fiji house, one
end of which is fitted up like a European house, for in a Fiji
house there are no divisions, but one huge room. In the centre
of the room were a group of native women and children,
playing cards, and looking over his photograph albums.
We tried to get some Fiji grog, and turned out in the town,,
but all the inhabitants had retired to roost, so came back
to smoke with him. He is a son of the late Governor of
Jamaica, and was for some time in the Government service
here, but left on account of unfair treatment at the hands
of Sir Arthur Gordon. One night we actually mustered
enough at Mrs. C ’s to dance, and great fun we had.
Evening dress is minus coat and waistcoat, with a black cum-
berbund round the waist. The last few days have principally
been spent with F. P , going over Chip’s case, and the


more I see and hear of it, the more I feel how disgraceful
it is that the thing should ever have been brought against
him; but as time goes on more and more will turn up no
doubt to show the whys and wherefores of it.
2o th June. — Sunday. —Chip turned up in the Club this
morning, having come in overnight by the “Bella” cutter,
and the rest of the day we spent in going into the case, seeing
different people, and finally his solicitor.
21-22 nd June. —These two days we have spent on the case,
and we have decided to go up at once to Chip’s plantation,
and set to work upon the evidence.
23 rd June. —Started at eight o’clock with a fair breeze for
Savu-Savu Bay, in the “ Bella.”
24 th June.-—We arrived at eight o’clock this morn-
ing at Chip’s plantation, everything looking even more
beautiful than when I was here last year. The house,
perched on the top of a small hill, formerly an island,
for the sea has receded here some half a mile or so,
looks down over a rich bed of alluvial soil, which is now
planted with cane. Round this small hill runs a rippling
brook, and directly on the other side of it rises a precipitous
range of hills, covered with the richest tropical vegetation,
and capped by fantastic shaped rocks. There is one in par-
ticular, known as the “ Devil’s Peak,” from which the Devil
was supposed to have jumped to a huge rock below, over
which there is a distinct track, and from thence down to the
“ Devil’s Hole,” a huge basin worn out of the solid rock by an
ever-tumbling waterfall. This hole is now the bathing-place,
and a more beautiful one cannot be imagined—shower bath,
plunge bath, and swimming bath all in one, shaded by the great
fronds of the fern trees and overhanging vines. Various
kinds of the hybiscus add to the beauty of the scene. The
Fijians are devil-worshippers, and about this place there is
great superstition. The very hill we are now on was, years
ago, used as a native burial-place. When the top was levelled
many bones were discovered. At present there is living with
Chip an Englishman,driven awayfrom England by rheumatism,
and whom Chip took compassion on in his lonely condition
in Levuka, for at that time he could not walk ten yards. To
Chip he has been a perfect godsend, for he has been with him
through all this trouble, and has kept up his spirits. Being
a man well informed on all subjects, he is a capital companion
for a man shut out from the world, as one necessarily is here.


29 th June. —The last two days have been spent in the ex-
amination of witnesses, with a Mr. Chanie as interpreter, and
a queer tale has been brought to light. As it stands now it is
shortly this: On the 25th of March, Chip was watching
the working of the cane-cutters, and was standing near
the {ramway, where Jack, a Malacolo boy, was working
the horse and truck, and being very slow about what he
was doing, Chip gave him a half kick, half push, with
his foot. As he was wearing only canvas shoes with golosh
soles, it could not possibly have hurt him. The boy then
took up the truck to the mill, and on his return com-
plained to Chip that he was sick and that he felt giddy,
and Chip sent him up medicine, and told him to go to
his bure (native house). Two days after this the boy
was again at work, and of his own accord, and Dr. F
happening to be on the plantation, Chip asked him to make
an examination, which he did, and found him to be suffering
from lung complaint, and ordered him to be sent to his
house. A fortnight after this the boy died of lung disease.
Nothing more was heard of it until three weeks after, when
Chip was arrested for “ Wilful murder with malice afore-
thought.” In this grave charge there is serious blame
attached to the Government, for although they had received
notice of this from someone as yet unknown for certain, but
strongly believed to be Chip’s neighbour—a most despicable
cur —they swore in a young fellow lately arrived in Levuka,
in search of a Government billet, after eleven o’clock at night
as a magistrate, and sent him down, together with the Crown
Prosecutor, Attorney-General’s clerk, and Government doctor
to Savu-Savu, without giving Chip any notice, or sending
anyone to defend him on so serious a charge. There can
be but little doubt that Hobday, the Crown Prosecutor’s
instructions were to commit; for upon Chip asking that Dr.
F might be sent for, the magistrate replied that
no evidence that Chip could bring forward would save a
committal; and although against his own opinion the
magistrate, knowing nothing about law or common sense,
was bounced by Hobday into committing Chip to stand his
trial at the next Sessions to be held in Levuka, on the charge
of manslaughter. This trial before the magistrate took the
best part of two days, and was held at Wai-Levu town, and
about it there is one curious point, that in the middle of the
night intervening, the police officer and magistrate, having


first seen the Crown prosecutor, came and awoke up
Chip at two a.m. and told him he was no longer a prisoner,
and that he would be released in the morning. The
magistrate himself even shook him by the hand, and
said that after the decision they had come to he had great
pleasure in doing so. When the morning came Hobday
relented. This is a thorough case of “Take a man
after dinner and you can get what you want.” After being
committed to take his trial, you can imagine Chip’s state of
mind, being a man of a most sensitive nature, especially
after he heard all the lies sworn to by the natives, and not
knowing at that time how he was to refute them, and in a
country where it is a common saying that “ fourteen white
men’s oaths are equal to only one native’s.” How fortunate
a thing it was that Haynes was with him during the examina-
tion ! This colony is miscalled “ Crown colony.” It is really
governed from a certain well-known building in the Strand,
called “ Exeter Hall.” Now for our side of the question.
Some time previous to all this, the three Malacolo men came
up to Chip to know if their time was not nearly up. Foreign
labourers are engaged for three years. Chip told them that
it would not be up for another ten months, at which they
appeared very angry. They then went out into the kitchen
house, and Jack, Chip’s cook-boy, heard them say that the
Taraganawai was cheating them out of their time, and if one
of them died here, they would do all in their power to get
him into trouble. On several occasions the horse-boy, when
dying, was heard to tell the others," You know I am dying of
the big sickness ” (yutu yati), “ but directly I am put in the
ground go to the officer, and swear big lies that I died of a
boot, and if you don’t go you will likely get a stronger kick
yourself.” But from the time he was taken ill he never told
anyone else that he had been kicked by Chip, but always
that he had great pains in his chest and was dying of the big
sickness. But for all that I firmly believe these men would
have been afraid to have done so, had there not been somebody
to egg them on. Now this somebody was found in Chip’s
aforesaid neighbour, and this appears in the evidence of Viliova,
who says: —I remember one Sunday walking on the beach
with Massilili (one of the Malacolo men) going to Namoumon,
and meeting Mr. T near his house. “ Massilili,” he said,
" sit down here, we will have a yarn.” Then we sat down and
Mr. T sat beside us and said," Let us speak low, for fear


anyone hear it.” He asked us, “ What is the reason Jack is
dead ?” And Massilili told him that he died from the kick
of Mr. Chip. Mr. T then said, “ That will do, I shall
write a letter, then you can take it to Vunini Bua to
the officer. When I heard this, I told Mr. T it
was a lie. Mr. T then drew near us, and asked
me if I knew what Jack died from, and I said I did,
from his chest. “ You lie,” said he, “ Massilili tells me
he died from a kick.” I told Mr. T that I did not
lie, I knew very well that the only complaint Jack made
was from his chest. Mr. T then said, “ Never
mind, don’t you go to the officer. I will write a letter, we
will get Mr. Chip imprisoned ( valeniu ). Two days after
this Mr. T sent a letter by one of his men Dravu, a
Santoman (a brother to one of Mr. Chip’s men), to Vunini
Bua to the officer. The reason I know this is, that I met
Dravu on the beach and asked him where he was going to,
and he replied to the officer. “ This letter is about the affair
you had the yarn about with Mr. T ■on Sunday,” and I
asked him how he knew, and he answered, “ Oh, I do know.”
When Dravu came back I went up to the bure and found
Massilili not there, and on going down to the beach met him
with Raituba, a native policeman, who had come to tell him
the police officer wanted to see him. They went away
together, and when Massilili returned to the bure he woke up
Billy, Rimanu, Kadranvula, Taganiavu, Moto, and Navuna,
and they went away to the police office at Vunini Bua ; it was
dark and late at night. When at the office Massilili was
asked why he had not come sooner to report this case of Mr.
Chip, and the officer said, holding in his hand a letter, “This
letter tells me Mr. Chip has killed a man.”
2nd July. —Curios are coming in. The natives have not
forgotten the papalagi who was here last year, and whom I
am sure they must look upon as the proverbial fool. This
time I have come down armed with £ls of new shillings.
I heard that Buli Wai-Levu had a beautiful kava bowl, so
Chip and I rode over to see him. He is the chief of the
Wai-Levu town and buli (chief magistrate) of the district.
There we were entertained in true Fiji fashion, he himself
spreading mats for us to lie upon, and then his little daughter
brought us food; fish beautifully cooked in a lobe, and served
on fresh banana leaves ; yams, on native plates, made out of
plaited cocoa-nut leaves. We tried our best, but he would
191


not part with his bowl, but produced a very old club that he
declared he had himself killed five men with. In the old
days he was a great fighting man, and a kaise* only, but by
dint of indomitable pluck raised himself to his present posi-
tion. At one time he led an army of six thousand in some
native war. Having shot a parrot and flying fox, I have been
having some lessons in skinning from Haynes. Besides
these we have had capital sport among the wild pigeons,
which are most delicious when served up with white sauce, at
which Jack is a matai (skilled hand). Yesterday afternoon one
of the men who had gone to deliver Mr. T’s mail got badly
bitten by his dog, so we wrote to give him notice, &c. It is
a great joke at present against Chip about his house being
more like a sieve than anything else. The roof has seen its
best days and now leaks, and the past few days having been
fearfully wet, the choosing of a dry place to sit or sleep in
has been one of difficulty ; but we have been a festive party,
as the Wisemans have been up here, while their house
is being re-tihi-tihied, as it was in a similar condition. To tibi-
tibi is to thatch in Fiji fashion with trash, which is composed
of dried cane leaves. Viliova, the boy who was bitten, came
up to-day feeling very ill, and with his leg paining him. We
got him to bed, poulticed him, and gave him hot grog.
Although it is a hot day, and he in Mrs. Wiseman’s kitchen,
he complained of being cold. He is our most important
witness, so we have sent a note to the magistrate with the
hopes of catching him, for as luck will have it, he is away
from home, in order to take Viliova’s depositions in case of
accident. The sergeant of police came round in the after-
noon on business, so he went to see the boy, and says he will
summon T .
4 ih July. —Had a most wonderful walk with Chip in the
afternoon through the bush.
* * * * #
6th July. —Chip cannot settle down to anything, so I pro-
posed starting for an excursion to the other side of the bay.
After lunch we made a start for Valaga, sixteen miles away,
at the head of the bay, taking Vose, the head of the Solomon
Islanders, with us as our servant. For the first five miles
there is a good road —for Fiji—following the coast through
the towns of Wai-Levu and Dreketi. At Drekniwai, a river
* A common person, not a chief.


with two mouths, one of which is closed except in the time
of floods, old Bath lives, and to his punt you have to trust
for getting across, otherwise it is a case of swimming and
trusting to luck to escape the sharks. To-day Bath was away,
but we were lucky in finding a decked boat at anchor, which we
made use of. Another two miles brought us to Vuni Wai
Levu, Heyward and Cooper’s place, where we stopped to
refresh. After leaving this, good-bye to roads, and as bad luck
would have it, the tide was high, so in many places it was a
case of a scramble along the face of the rocks and dodging the
waves. Some of the sandy bays were most lovely, with the
sea tumbling in at our feet, and shaded by the dilo trees,
which grow to a considerable size, and spread their great
arms over the sea. We passed several malo plantations
(paper mulberry), from the bark of which they make their
native cloth ( Masi-tapa ). We crossed over Mua Point, a
headland running out a considerable distance into the bay, to
save going round a rough and rocky coast, but we had to
climb about 700 feet up a steep Fiji track, which, after the
late rains, was as slipperyas ice, and many were the tumbles we
got. As the soil was of a bright red colour, we were certainly
far from white when we reached the coast on the other side.
The view from the top is very fine, looking back over this
lovely bay and richly verdant hills. The bay itself has a
coast line of sixty-three miles, and at one time it was proposed
to make Valaga, at its head, the capital of the colony. A little
farther along the coast we came to the town of Urata, but
to reach it we had to swim a broad creek, much to the
amusement of the inhabitants of the town, who all turned
out to see us. It was really a most refreshing bathe, for we
stripped and gave all our things to Vose, who succeeded in
getting them over dry, and the sharks, too, were kind to us.
After completing our toilet in the centre of an admiring crowd
of men, women, and children, we asked for a drink, and they
brought us water in a huge bamboo, six feet long, which they
use as a bottle. We then went and sat in the chief’s house,
and I managed to pick up a very good screen from him. Two
miles further along the coast we reached our destination,
and found a ready welcome from John Dodds and his old
father and mother. It is a rule not to be forgotten when
travelling in Fiji, never to go away without a servant and
a bottle of grog, for with the latter you are welcome
wherever you may turn up, and the former is useful in so
o
193


many ways. For instance, to-day we have had a number of
small creeks to cross. Vose, although only about four feet
ten inches, carried me like a child across them, but when too
deep for that I sat on his shoulders and hung on to his head.
7 th July. —John Dodds started with us, and we rowed
over to Muani Seva, a distance of four miles by water.
Here there is a most wonderful natural dock and harbour, a
fair sized steamer can lie alongside the shore, and be moored to
the cocoa-nut trees; the island of Nawi, lying only about 100
yards off the land, 'forms one side. Captain B , whom I
mentioned in my diary before, has a store here. About fifty
yards inland, under some cocoa-nut trees, are the Boiling
Springs, most useful to the neighbourhood for cooking
purposes. There are four or five within twenty yards of one
another. One of these was perfectly still, but as we
approached it began to boil furiously. There are others
along the coast, just below high water mark. D. S ,
who when I was here last had a place near John Dodd’s,
at Valaga, has now bought a cocoa-nut plantation on the
outside coast, called Na-Seva. Overland it is only two
miles away. For his place we made a start, and found a
fair track, but with some nasty mudholes to cross. However,
Vose carried us safely over them. We arrived in time for
lunch, and in the afternoon had a game of cricket, as this
is the headquarters of the Savu-Savu Bay Cricket Club.
Although only four men, it is not quite so absurd as it sounds,
as we had any quantity of Fijians to field for us. A bathe in
the creek, dinner, yarns, and seven rubbers of whist carried
us on to the small hours of the morning.
Bth July. —Risking sharks, I had a swim in the sea. Just
opposite Donald’s house there is a most peculiar-shaped rock,
standing out of the sea. It looks exactly like the huge hull
of a ship, with two cocoa-nut trees for masts. After a visit
to the site of Donald’s new house, we started again for
Muani Seva, carrying off Donald with us. From there we
sailed across in the skiff to Wai-Levu town in order to be
present at the “ Vaka Misionari.” It was really a huge
meke, at which everybody in Buli Wai Levu’s district was
present. It consisted of spear, club and fan dances, performed
in the open space in front of the Buli’s house. At one end
of this space, under a bread fruit tree, sat the native mission-
ary, who, at the conclusion of each dance, received a contri-
bution from each performer. It was a strange fantastic


scene, as there were quite 2,000 natives present, dressed up
in their wildest attire, their hair powdered, some red, some
yellow, and others mauve, and others even blue. Their faces
were painted in true savage fashion, which gave them the
most weird appearance. Scarcely two men painted alike,
some all one colour, some half-and-half, others with spots,
bars, and other curious devices —one woman I spoke to
looked as if she were looking at me through a bright red
gridiron—their skin glistening with oil. A verse I have
heard perhaps describes some of them —
Except a shell, a cowrie rare—
A feather here, a feather there —
The South Sea Islanders wear
Their native nothingness.
Our own men meked by far the best, but then they are from
Veti-Levu, where the me'ke is more studied. They had the
advantage, too, of all being well armed, having had the pick
of all the clubs in Chip’s house. Haynes and Anderson had
ridden over from Wai-Wai, and suddenly, in the middle of
the me'ke, both horses came up through the town at a mad
gallop, scattering everybody right and left. It was a wonder
nobody was killed. Jack, who was there, was sent after
them, and when he returned riding, he looked more like a
monkey than ever, dressed in white suit with a blue sulu
round his waist, and Chip’s old tall hat well on the back of
his head. Would not Lincoln and Bennett be honoured I
In the evening, we dined with Mrs. Wiseman, sitting down
in all seven white men and one lady. After dinner we had
any amount of singing. Never before in my life have I made
a present to anyone which has given such an amount of
pleasure as this piano has given to Mrs. Wiseman, who is a
good pianist.
gth July.— Walked out with Chip in the afternoon to Wai-
Levu, to see the Buli about curios. He had promised
yesterday to try and get me some. On arriving at his house
we found a court sitting; the Buli himself sitting on his
own quarter-deck, and below him on each side about thirty
chiefs, and behind them again about thirty other Fijians. In
the centre, facing the Buli, sat a woman ; and at the Buli’s
feet were two clubs, a waddy, and an old gun-barrel. It
appeared that this woman was applying for a divorce on
account of her husband’s ill-treatment, and the articles before
195


the Bali were the instruments with which the jealous husband
intended to have avenged her infidelity. After the trial was
over, all left but the chiefs, when grog was chewed in true
Fiji fashion in our honour. The first bowl was handed to the
Buli, who courteously handed it to me as being the stranger.
No heeltaps are allowed. You must drain to the last dreg,
and then throwing the cup on the ground to show that it is
empty, the assembled crowd clap their hands, as a symbol of
their courteous respect, and say “A! tnaca,” meaning it is
empty. The “A” is strongly accented, and is used before
words of respect. After we had drunk it was handed to the
chiefs in order of precedence. We were sitting by the side of
the Buli, and after the grog was finished he ordered the
curios to be brought in, and they were placed one by one in
front of me, and I was much amused to see him pocket the
money for articles belonging to any of his own townsmen, as
also did the other chiefs who were present did any of their
townsmen happen to bring things for sale. Several clubs
were handed in that had been found in the house of the jealous
husband in the late trial, which were confiscated by the Buli,
and the money for those I chose he appropriated, and those
I rejected were immediately cut to pieces. After this, I tried
to tempt the Buli to sell me his kavabowl, which was a particu-
larly good one, by putting before him on his mat thirty brand
new shillings. Upon this he addressed the assembly, and, to
show off his own importance, said, “ This white chief offers me
forty, fifty, or any number of shillings that I want for this
bowl, but I am the Buli, and when you chiefs come to drink
with me it would not do for me to give you grog out of a
kaise’s bowl.” He then told them that if they knew of any
bowls they were to send them to me. Before leaving the
town I was again beset with curios. I fancy these were the
’cute ones, who preferred receiving their shillings to letting
the Buli pocket them. I made a sketch of the town, with
the Buli’s new house in its centre. It is about, if not quite,
the biggest house in Fiji. It stands fourteen feet above the
ground, on two raised terraces. The two king-posts are
of vest, the most durable of woods, and of sixty feet in length,
the cost of procuring which was 300 men’s labour for a
fortnight, besides the after workmanship. It is a very rare
thing to see a vest tree of this size. The men were simply
ordered to go into the bush to get two trees of the length
required, and they dare not return without them. The archi-
196


.ectural designs are of the highest Fijian art, and although
no actual money was spent, it is estimated that it cost between
£3,000 and £4,000, calculating men’s labour at sixpence
a head per day, besides food. Several hundred pigs and over
two hundred turtles were consumed, and hundreds of tons
of yams. For outsiders at that time to buy yams was an
impossibility, as the crop was very bad for the whole time the
house was building (five months), and planters were at their
wits’ end to know how to feed their men. During its erec-
tion forty-six men died through irregular hours, over-eating,
and dissipation, generally speaking. Highly coloured and
beautifully plaited sinnet covers every beam and post in the
house, all of which was done by the women as their
contribution. Standing in contrast with the coloured plaiting
are squared fern trees of nearly twenty feet in length ; these
are supposed to be everlasting, and are as black as coal. The
whole house gives one the idea of enormous strength,
combined with an exquisite display of Fijian taste. In the
whole house there is not a nail or bolt, but every upright rafter
and beam are lashed together by sinnet only. Wai-Levu town
itself is beautifully situate, divided from the sea by a band of
cocoa-nut trees. It is the centre of an immense flat, reclaimed
by coral formation from the sea, five miles long, and on an
average of a mile deep, backed up by magnificent verdure-
covered hills. The flat is covered with rich and wild vegeta-
tion, and the Buli’s house stands as it were a guardian of it all.
It is thatched with Maqita leaves, which, not being plentiful,
take an enormous time to collect. They are of a rich ruddy
brown. Indeed the whole makes a lovely picture. On
leaving the town three of the Wai-Levu beauties, thoroughly
proving the old proverb of “ beauty unadorned is adorned the
most,” came up to us and presented mewithamost beautiful
piece of tapa as a loloma (present). We got back to Wai-
Wai in time for dinner, for which there was a fowl, and
asking Jack about it he said, “ He big feller hen, but he no
make’m egg.” Times are getting very bad here. Sir Arthur
Gordon is getting more and more disliked, both by white
men and natives; the latter are asking how much the Queen
would let them have their islands back for. A year or two
ago there was an outcry in England because a lieutenant in
the navy had hung a native out this way at the yard-arm for
murder, although it was impossible to give him a regular
trial, either owing to the few officers on board such small


boats as H.M. schooners out here, or some such reason.
This is one more case showing how much harm is done at
home by people kicking up a row about things they know
nothing about. The fear of being hauled over the coals at
home for inhumanity and such like is a very frequent cause of
weak measures in out-of-the-way parts, where quick and
ready retribution is required, and the only thing that will do
any real good. For instance, lately some New Hebrides men
were fined 15 pigs for murdering a seaman on one of H.M.’s
schooners. The man was brought up here to be tried, and
after a lot of expense was returned to his island, because,
forsooth, he was acting under the orders of his chief! So
now, of course, on that island the natives will look upon a
man’s life as worth 15 pigs, and they will think murder of
little account. Within the last three months, an American
was shot in his house at night, and the American Consul has
written to the U.S. Government asking them to take some
severe retribution, as “ English justice savours too much of
pork for him to apply to them.”
10 th July. —In the morning I went over to T ’sto serve
subpoenas, and I did not meet with a very affectionate
welcome. In the evening the Solomon Islanders meked in
front of the house. Their meke consisted of music only,
played on pipes, reminding me somewhat of the music of the
Arabs, pure harmony without melody. The pipes were
wonderfully arranged, some being an exact octave, others
half an octave, others an octave and a half, while others
played on single pipes. They stood in couples facing one
another.
11 th July. —To-day has been spent in preparing to start,
and in anxiously watching for the “Bella,” as we ought to
have sailed yesterday for Levuka. It is blowing a gale, and
when sunset came, no boat was in sight.
12th July.— The “ Bella ” came in during the night, and as
it is still blowing, we have decided to go up to Heyward’s
place, so we made a litter for Mrs. Wiseman by sewing a
hammock on a pole, and with any number of niggers to carry
our baggage we looked a formidable party.
13th July. —Left Heyward’s at one a.m,, and soon after
starting ran on a reef, but got off without any damage. We
passed Namana mid-day, and Mokaghai in the evening.
July. —At sunrise we saw the smoke of the “ Gunga ”
in the distance, and we just managed to enter harbour at the
198


same time as she did, having been lolopping about all night
off Wakaya. Immediately on landing I went on board the
“ Gunga,” and a great weight was taken off my mind on
seeing Major dementi on board. The rest of the day was
spent with him and Mr. Thomas, Chip’s solicitor, on the
case. Levuka is so full that I could not get a room, so
Forwood took me out to stay with him,
15 th July. —First day of criminal sittings, and Chip’s was
the first case called, with Mclvoy and Murchie as assessors,
as in mixed cases here there is no trial by jury. I never before
had the pleasure of listening to such an unlawyer-like judge,
or one who certainly kept up the dignity of the bench less ;
but then he never has been a success. He is cordially
disliked here, and was more so in Mauritius, where he was
before, as is seen from the Mauritius papers at that time.
Well, he has made his name by Exeter Hall, and to Exeter
Hall he is likely to stick. The case not being over. Chip
was let out with a promise only to return in the morning.
Hobday has thrown up the Crown prosecutorship, so does
not appear in the case. Fancy a leading barrister in a place
putting into a paper the following advertisement: —
NOTICE.
Mr, Hobday begs to inform his clients and the public that he has
RETURNED to Levuka, and resumed practice as a barrister and
solicitor.
16 th July.— The case did not conclude until 6.30, when
Chip was “ honourably acquitted;” but the judge summed up
most unfairly, ignoring all the strong evidence for the defence
and altering some to suit the prosecution. In fact, he summed
up as if he had been the Crown prosecutor. There has been
intense feeling shown throughout this case by everybody in
Levuka, and when the verdict was given I should think there
were over three hundred people in the court, for whose
behaviour I should not have liked to answer had it been a
conviction. In the evening we celebrated the occasion over
a bottle, keeping up till an early hour. I walked out with
Forwood to stay with him.
lyth July. —After last night I felt decidedly cheap; in the
evening went in to see the C s.
18 th July. —ln the morning went for a walk with Major
dementi out beyond Nasova to the native town of Draiba,
as I wished him to see one, and we were fortunate in finding
199


Ratu Joe there, and “ Old Thak,” as Cakobau is called. We
had an audience. He is certainly a fine old man. In the
afternoon we walked out to see the Wai-Tovu falls, and I
returned in time to stand as godfather to Masse Wai Lili, as
Mrs. Wiseman’s little child is called.
19 ih July. —This morning was spent in writing my mail
letters, and in going over all the notes I had taken on the
trial, with Theodore Wood, the editor of the A rgus, for publi-
cation. In the afternoon I went in to see Mrs. Wiseman
and Dr. F . The latter is at present very ill with
dysentery. In the evening, we had a Samoan melee, got up
for us by Dr. Drawer. There were in all nearly a dozen
Samoan girls, and to say the least of it their dance is a little
peculiar. Some of the girls wore most beautiful Samoan
mats, valued at over £2 apiece.
20 th July. —Major dementi left by the mail for Sydney,
and very sorry we all are to lose him, for he is a thorough
good sort, and there is no doubt it is to him we owe the
favourable termination of this now celebrated case. I have
to-day completed the purchase of Mr. Steven’s collection of
Solomon Island curios, which were in the Sydney Exhibition.
I gave him £250 for them, and they are supposed to be the
finest collection that have ever come into this country. In
the evening Chip, Haynes, Forwood, and I drove out to
Mrs. C ’s to tea. There is now a jingle plying for hire
along “ the beach,” and most useful it is, for Levuka is now
over a mile in length. We had a small dance, intermixed
with song, and broke up about twelve o’clock. I have
persuaded Chip to come the round of the group with me in
the “Ocean Queen,” as after all he has gone through it
will be a long way the best thing for him, so we decided to go
on board at once rather than trust to waking in the morning
in time, as the “ Ocean Queen” will leave at six. Haynes,
however, would not.
21 st July. —Haynes has paid the penalty of his stupidity
by missing the steamer. It was very rough going out of the
passage, but quieted down a little when we got out into the
open. At four o’clock we cast anchor under Goro Island
until midnight, in order to arrive in Taviuni early in the
morning.
22nd July. —Reached Vuna Point, Taviuni, at about seven
o’clock, so Chip, Mclvoy, and I went on shore to breakfast
at the “ Masonic Arms,” and then went the rounds, as there


are a good number of settlers here. We went over a cotton
plantation, and left again at twelve o’clock (mid-day), coasting
along Taviuni. Vanua Levu, on our other bow, reminded me
somewhat of the Bay of Smyrna. We put into Somo-Somo,
the second biggest native town in the group, where old Tui
Cakau lived, died, and was buried. Ratu Lala now lives
there. This town is exactly in ißo° longitude. At about four
o’clock we cast anchor off Qila, Mr. Mason’s plantation, but
found him away, so came on board again. I had written
from Vuna Point to Hulton, asking him to come on here to
meet me, but he has not yet turned up (10 p.m.).
23 rd July. —Left Qila at daybreak for Rabi, but owing to
the number of reefs had to stand right over to Vanua Levu,
before we could trim up. Taviuni, although a large island,
has no rivers in it. It is entirely volcanic, with a range of
hills running along the whole extent of the island, the
highest peak being 4,000 feet. There is a large lake some
height up, formed in an extinct crater. From this, in case
any sugar mills are put up, water would have to be brought.
We reached Rabi at about ten. This island was originally
given by Tui Cakau to the Tongans for assistance rendered
in warfare, he himself taking his capital to Somo-Somo.
There is a tale told how he used to send to the hills for men
as we should for deer. The island was afterwards bought for
£2,000 by Danson Bros., a firm of drapers in Sydney, and the
“ Hon. Captain Hill,” as he likestobe called, formerly their shop
walker, now a partner, is here in charge. Cocoa-nuts are the
principal product—cotton and tea also being planted—but it
being difficult to turn a shop-walker into a planter, the island
does not pay. Soon after anchoring we went ashore for a
bathe in the creek, and afterwards went over the fibre factory.
In the afternoon I went for a walk along the beach with one
of our fellow-passengers, who now is in the police here. He is
an old Indian army man, and was through the mutiny. After
dinner on board, I had a long yarn with Dr. Hansen, a
traveller, travelling for his health after an attack of yellow
fever, caught while orchid hunting on the banks of the Amazon.
Mclvoy and Chip have gone up to dine with Hill, but I
pleaded a headache, not particularly caring about it.
24 th July. —Left Rabi soon after daybreak, and owing to
reefs had to return to Qila. There we dropped Mr. T in
his boat, which we had had in tow from Vuna Point. He is
a magistrate, and is going his round of inspection. Naviga


tion now became very difficult, owing to the many reefs and
patches. The captain himself went to the masthead. The
day, too, was against navigation, as there was not a breath
of air and the sea without a ripple, but a most magnificent
one for seeing the islands. After rounding the end of
Taviuni we came to by far the most beautiful part of Fiji,
the Volcanic Hills, sloping gradually down to the water’s
edge, a bay formed by the deeply-indented islands of Gamia
and Laucala, dotted with small islands, and its water of every
conceivable shade of blue and green, fringed by a long line
of reefs. Behind us the long coast line of Vanua Levu ; and
away in the distance “ The Ringgolds,” the most westerly of
the Fiji group. At 12 o’clock we were outside the reef off
Laucala. The ship lay to while Chip and I went ashore in
the gig to take the letters, and get some fresh provisions. It
was a four miles’ row, and we passed over some wonderful
patches. It is impossible to imagine anything more beautiful
than the coral, growing as it does in every possible shape
and of every conceivable colour. It is like looking down upon
a fairy forest, inhabited by fish of the most gorgeous colours.
On landing we found only one half-caste girl, who supplied
us with milk, and then summoned the natives by blowing a
conque shell. They soon caught us some fowls, and a turkey,
a great adjunct to our table, as at present our meals consist
of mutton. To-day for breakfast we had curried mutton,
mutton chops, mince balls of mutton, minced mutton, and
mutton cutlets, and our dinner was boiled leg of mutton, roast
leg of mutton, mutton pie, burned mutton, and salt horse.
The sheep here are so thin, that it would be quite possible to
read a newspaper through them. The day has been most
fearfully hot, so we were not sorry when in the afternoon a
breeze sprang up from the south.
25 th July. —We stopped twice during the night, once at
Mago to land the Ryder’s mail bag, and gave them notice of
our coming there on Monday to take their cargo, and again
at Cicia to land Mclvoy. He rents 1,700 acres of this island
from Maafu for £BS, and has 1,100 acres planted with cotton.
At ten o’clock we were off Kanacea, where we landed mails,
and then stood across to Vanua Balavu (Long Land), and
entered the reef by the narrow passage. When inside
navigation became most difficult from the number of patches.
The captain was again at the masthead. At one place there
was not more than thirty yards between a patch and the


mainland, and the orders, “Hard aport,” “ Hard a starboard,”
Give it her sharp,” showed how tortuous was our way.
The scenery was of the finest, deep indentations and rocky
islands covered with verdure, the wonderful colours of the
water contrasting so well with the dull greys of the rocks,
the bright yellow of the sandy bays, and the greens of the
overhanging trees. Passing between the island of Avea and
the mainland we entered the bay, at the head of which is
Loma-Loma, the capital of the Lau, or windward group, also
known as the Discovery Isles. These islands originally
belonged to Tui Cakau as head chief of Cakadrove, but were
taken by Maafu, a large Tongan chief, who came here on an
adventurous and marauding expedition, with a fleet of
canoes containing an army of Tongans. Maafu afterwards
assisted Tui Cakau in his little engagements. In fact, they
assisted one another in acquiring large tracts of land, belonging
to other native owners. Loma-Loma, the residence of Maafu,
is the second largest town in Fiji. The Tongan house
architecture is somewhat different to Fijian, in that the houses
are built either oval or with rounded ends, the walls being
formed of neatly interlaced canes. Here there are capital
roads, and the town is picturesquely built on a large flat,
thickly planted with cocoa-nut and fruit trees. Of course
there is a mixed population of Tongans and Fijians, the
former being by far the finer race, the women especially; some
being really beautiful. Each have a church of their own, and
this being Sunday they have been hard at it from morning
until night. To so great an extent do they carry their Sunday
ideas as taught by the missionaries, that if you were dying of
thirst you could not get one of them to climb a cocoa-nut tree
to get you a nut. Directly on landing, under the guidance
of the chief officer, we walked out about two miles to some
caves, most wonderful rock fastnesses. One was piled with
bones ; unfortunately, the skulls have all gone, having been
carried off in sackfulls by some Germans. There was an
adjoining cave where they kept those who were to be eaten,
in order to fatten them. The natives are very chary about
letting anyone go to these caves, so I had carefully to smuggle
away the few leg bones, &c., that I took a fancy to. I was
disappointed at not getting a skull. We dined with Captain
Sewell at “The Club Hotel.” He is an old 6ist man, and
has a large cocoa-nut plantation on this island. The Tongan
house which bears the elaborate sign was most clean, and I


almost envied Dr. Hansen his month’s stay, as he has
determined to remain here and botanize. Before dinner we
went up to see the Botanical Gardens, which are filled with
the most lovely crotons. They were originally started to test
what plants would grow in Fiji. The Government now want
to claim them, but Maafusays, “No; I gave the land for them
to the people of Loma-Loma.” I came out from these
gardens laden with ripe bananas.
26 th July. —As we were not to leave until nine o’clock, Chip
and I went ashore to have a final look at the town, and were
lucky in coming across the custodian of Maafu’s house. It
is a Tongese house, fitted up in white man’s fashion, but
what a mixture of things ! Cheap German prints adorned
the walls, old-fashioned furniture, pier glasses, clocks, teapots,
guns, saddles and Fijian articles filled up the room. Maafu
receives about £2,000 from rents, and spends every penny of
it. He buys nearly everything in duplicate. The house
stands in an enclosure, in which are several other houses.
Into one of these we were shown by an old woman, and on
the wall I saw an old crinoline hanging ; no doubt some fair
young Tongan lady’s Sunday dress. The enclosure is planted
with beautiful crotons and pointsettias. We left Loma-Loma
at nine a.m., returning the same way we had come, and
dropped anchor at Mago at about three o’clock. We at once
went ashore and met Charles Ryder. He showed us first
over his ginning-house, and copra vatas, or drying houses,
and then we went into his house and communicated with his
brother, two miles inland, by telephone. Mago, I suppose, is
the most beautiful island in the South Pacific, and one of the
best cultivated. It is owned by the Ryder Brothers, five in
all. Their principal cultivation is cotton, for which they
carried off the first prize at the Sydney Exhibition. They
also have a small plantation of coffee. For this they also
carried off the first prize against Ceylon. They also export
a large quantity of copra, and have planted cocoa-nut trees
largely in the last five years. Besides these they have a large
bread fruit plantation, and twenty or thirty acres of lemons
and limes, thousands of whichlay rotting on the ground. Aflock
of Angora goats could be seen feeding on the opposite hills.
After seeing Charles Ryder’s bachelor establishment we
started to walk over to his brother’s place by a capital road.
When about half way there we came to a thick hedge of
wild orange trees, planted as a sheep fence. The whole of
204


the centre of the island is an undulating flat (excuse this
Irishism), of which over 1,000 acres is planted in cotton.
Overlooking this fiat stands the house of one of the married
brothers, occupied by Henry Ryder, the only other brother
at present on the island, the others being on their way home
to England. Below in the valley lies “ The Big House,” a
regular English homestead, surrounded by various buildings
and labour houses. We went down, and a more beautiful
site for a house could not be imagined. It stood in the
centre of a large garden filled with tropical trees —Bombay
mangoes and other fruit-bearing ones —proving how fruitful a
soil this is. There were, too, flocks of turkeys and guinea
fowls, and thousands of poultry, which showed that the inner
man was not forgotten. From here we went on to see the
Lagoon, and passed through some of the most romantic
scenery; a winding avenue leading between the wildest
perpendicular rocks 200 feet high, covered with the thickest
of tropical vegetation. All at once we came out upon the
Lagoon, a quiet basin divided from the sea by a thick belt of
rocks with a dense covering of vegetation, with only a narrow
outlet to the sea, reminding one of where, in the old days,
would have been a pirate’s home. The entrance was guarded
by a belt of reefs, only passable at high water. We returned
to the house through the lemon plantation, and sat down to
a capital dinner, and at ten o’clock started to walk down to
the steamer, as we were to sail at eleven o’clock. It was a
pitch dark night, and for amusement the Ryders took us over a
fearfully rough road, through wild rocks and past yawning caves,
on the pretence of it being a short cut. It gave one some
idea of what the entrance to the infernal regions is like.
I was immensely pleased with my visit. The whole place
is in splendid order, not a weed to be seen, and every-
thing neatness itself, what a planter’s place should be,
contrasting most favourably, with some of the other places I
have seen. It has sometimes astonished me how men of
good breeding and education can be content to live in the
way they do here. We weighed anchor at 11.25.
2 yth July, —At daybreak we were off Selia Levu, Walter
Hunter’s sugar plantation, of about six hundred acres, and
at seven o’clock we once more anchored off Vuna Point. I had
intended leaving the steamer here in order to join the
“ Elizabeth ” schooner, bound for Samoa, but on going
ashore I could get no news of her, and not caring to waste


time by waiting for her, I determined to return to Levuka,.
and go on to Tonga by this steamer on Monday next, and
trust to getting a boat running from Tonga to Samoa ; and
by which I might be in time to catch the “ Elizabeth ”on
her return journey from Samoa. At all events, by doing this
I should get a fair breeze all round. We only remained at
Vuna Point about an hour, and then went across to Savu
Savu Bay and cast anchor, or rather we moored to the cocoa-
nut trees at Muani Seva, in the narrow passage between the
island of Nawi and the mainland.
28 th July. —We left our moorings this morning at about six.
o’clock, and anchored off Wai-Levu town at seven. Here we
were to leave Chip, and very sorry I was to part from the old
man. We had a long yarn last night as to his leaving Fiji.
Here there is now no future for him. The time has gone
for a man with only a small amount to do any good here.
What is wanted is capital, and with that there is no doubt
either a private individual or a company would be well repaid,
by preference the latter, for it is more independent. Chip
had thought at one time of New Britain or some other island
as yet untried by white men, and to go in for cocoa-nuts only,
but we had a long talk with Captain Sewell’s manager at
Loma-Loma the other night, and his description of the natives
there was anything but encouraging. As long as you are
well and have plenty of trade, they are friendly enough, but
directly you are sick and have no more trade for them, then they
will turn on you, burn your house over your head; and when
lying sick will come and grin at you, and ask you when you
are going to die, and sometimes assist you in doing so.
Fever, too, is very bad. In fact, those islands of New Britain,
New Ireland, New Guinea, and New Hebrides are not at
present fit for a white man’s country. What they may be in
the future no man can tell, for it will only be by cultivation
that they can be improved, and that at the cost of many lives.
They will at some future time be inhabited by white men,
there can be but little doubt; for where is there on the face of
this world that a white man will not settle ? After saying
good-bye to Chip we again started for Bua, on the outer
coast, where we arrived just before sunset. I went ashore
with the chief officer, and nice work we had to find our way,
for it was low tide, and in the dark we could not see the stakes
which marked out the channel, so the greater part of the way
it was, “ Out, Chinamen, and drag her,” but when once in the


river we were all right. Two miles up is the native town of
Bua, and the plantation of a Mr. Wilkinson. On landing, I
met Mr. G , who is here surveying. He was a fellow-
passenger of mine on the “ Suva ” last year, so I went up and
spent the evening with him. We had fearful work in finding
our way back to the ship; crossing reefs at night is most
risky work, as you never can tell when a blind roller may
turn up, and a spill in the dark where sharks abound is not a
consummation devoutly to be wished.
29 thjuly. —We left our anchorage at sunrise, and reached
Levuka about four o’clock. I was delighted to see H.M.S.
“Wolverine” in harbour, and on goinginto the Club founds
and D. M , and was introduced to some of the new men.
30 th July. —Went off to lunch, and afterwards called on
the Commodore.
3W July. —There was a cricket match to-day between the
“ Wolverine ” and the Levuka Club. The ground is about
half a mile from Levuka, at Vagadaci, and most picturesquely
situated, being enclosed by an amphitheatre of hills on one
side and the sea on the other. In the evening, I dined on
board with the Commodore, at an official dinner given to the
Governor. The only time I have ever had the extreme
felicity of meeting His Excellency!
Ist August. —Fearfully wet day. However, we managed to
get up to lunch with G , and spent the rest of the afternoon
there. The evening I devoted to packing and letter writing.
2nd August. —Walked out in the morning to breakfast with
Forwood, and found Haynes there. Afterwards walked on to
Wai Tovu, to say good-bye to the C s. At three o’clock
I left Levuka in the “ Ocean Queen ” for Tonga. I have
made all arrangements for the packing of my curios and
despatching them by the next sailing vessel loading for
England. There has been an amusing tiff between Seed, the
Superintendent of Police, and some of the planters, and the
following notices have appeared in the paper: —
NOTICE.
The Acting Agent-General of Immigration has the honour to inform all
employers of labourers that he declines to do immigration business in his
quarters, the Club, the streets, or the Police Office,
He is always to be found at the Immigration Office after 10.30 a.m.
WILLIAM SEED.
Acting Agent-General of Immigration,
Immigration Office, Masova.
Superintendent of Police.


To this some of th# planters have replied by another: —-
NOTICE.
The undersigned employers of labourers regret they are compelled to
decline to do immigration business with the Acting Agent-General of
Immigration (Superintendent of Police) in their quarters, the Club, the
streets, or the Police Office.
They are not always to be found at the Immigration Office after
10.30 a.m.
HENRY HOLLOW ... (Cave).
ADOLPH TREE ... (Busch).
SEEDY SAINT ... (St. Pinnock).
DON PABLO ... (Joske).
TAI LEVU ... (Scott).
COTTON COPRA & CO. ... (Hennings).
The men’s real names I have put in brackets.
The following notice has also appeared in the paper : -
WANTED, to get rid of a couple of coolies. Well domesticated. They
are active and industrious after their own peculiar manner, and warranted
to try the temper of the best of angels. Anyone taking them will have
half the coolies’ wages paid monthly by the advertiser. —Apply by letter
to Le Beau Monde, Post Office, Levuka.


CHAPTER VI.
Anchoring at the Friendly Islands —To our Muttons Again—Alone in the
World —The Burying Place of Kings—A Friendly Visit to the
Royal Family, who indulge in Grog —A Porcine Compliment—l
Play the Illustrious Stranger—An Interesting Canoe—A Cosmo-
politan Conglomeration—A Hairbreadth’Scape—A Little Man with
a Big Name—Missionary Enterprise in a New Light—Where Every
Prospect Pleases, &c. —Something about Samoa—Adventures in the
Bush —Your Own Correspondent at the Seat of War-—Some Fine
Spun Yarns—At Auckland, Civilization Once More—Beauty and
Barmaids, Oysters and Hoisting— A Narrow Escape—On the Briny
for Sydney—Should Auld Acquaintance be Forgot—A Few Excur-
sions—Overland to Melbourne —The Races —Gadding and Gaiety—
Roughing it at the Rowbotham Arms —The Gold Diggings—
December Hay-making—More Camping Out—A Short Distance in
a Long Time—Another Happy Antipodean Christmas —Up-Country
on Cobb’s Coach —Another Good Year gone Wrong.
ESSSIHE Friendly Islands, or as they are now generally
Rjg@9 called, “The Tongan Group,” consist really of
ggjsi four distinct groups and several outlying islands;
the Tonga-Tabu group, with Nucualofa as the
chief town ; the Haabai group, with Lifuka; the Va-Vau
group, with Nieafu; and the Koto group, consisting of
small islands. Lifuka, a Tongan word meaning the centre,
is the centre island of the Haabai group, and gives the
name to the settlement on it. This is where I have
come to anchor for a time. Before leaving Levuka (a
synonymous word in Fijian), I was introduced to a Mr.
McG , from Haabai, who was over there for medical
advice, and it is in his house I am at present. Hotel it is
called, but although I have only been here a few hours, I feel
at home. As a rule, hotels in these out-of-the-way places
mean low drinking shops, but this, at all events, is a glorious
exception. A more comfortable home I cannot imagine. Our
party now consists of McG , his wife, a very nice woman,
and myself. He was a servant of one of the New Zealand
governors. The house, nestling amongst the cocoa-nut trees,
stands back from the beach about one hundred yards, on, as
p


it might be called, the main road. In this respect the Tongans
are far in advance of the Fijians, as in all their islands they
have capital roads ; the main road generally follows the coast-
line about one hundred yards or more inland, so that it is
protected from strong winds and high tides, and from the heat
and glare of the sun, whereas Fijians almost trust entirely to
the beach as their main road; and when diverging inland, have
tracks only. Horses, too, are here in any quantity, and the
Tongans are capital horsemen, They ride generally bare-
back, and at full gallop. It just strikes me that the word
road would hardly convey to an English mind what they
really are. Grassy glades would be more applicable. They
have even gone as far as importing couch grass for these
roads, as being more binding in the sandy soil. Now I must
hark back a little, for at present there is a whole week missing.
On the 2nd, as I have said, we left Levuka in the “Ocean
Queen,” commanded by Captain C , a man overflowing
with kindness, and one whom, I suppose, has seen as much
trouble as most men, having lost his wife and six children with-
in a very short space of time. Besides myself, there were as
passengers, Mr. McG— — aforesaid, as the lawyers say, and
Mr. W , and Mr. K , going down partly on business and
partly on pleasure. Well, I think we can take a jump from
Vuna Point, Taviuni —where we stopped at daybreak on our
second day out, to drop Mr. W and Mr. M , who were
going up to meet the Governor —until we arrived off the islands
of Tofoa and Koa in the Tongan group, for a more wretched
passage could not be imagined, a heavy sea and head-wind
the whole way, and in one twenty-four hours we only averaged
four knots an hour. About our feeding on board there was
a certain amount of similarity, consisting, with an occasional
piece of salt horse, entirely of mutton in some shape or form.
The Tongan group generally consists of low-lying coral islands
covered with cocoa-nut trees. Tofoa and Koa, however, are
exceptions, both being volcanic, the former two thousand
eight hundred feet high, the latter five thousand feet, ending
in a perfect cone, somewhat resembling Stromboli. On Tofoa
there are a few natives only, owing to there being no reefs to
protect their canoes, and no anchorage, but the island is rich
in nuts and arrowroot. This island has on its top a large
lake, to which the natives come from all the surrounding
islands to fetch the black pebbles to place on the graves of
their friends. On Koa there are no natives, for the same


reason ; wild yams and sarsaparilla are plentiful. From its
height it is visible at a great distance, and acts as a sort of
finger-post for vessels approaching from that quarter. This
island is still supposed to be a burning volcano. We anchored
off the town of Nucualofa, in the island of Tonga-Tabu, at
about ten o’clock on the morning of Saturday, the 7th,
our sixth day out, the usual passage being three-and-a-half
days. From some distance the town looks imposing, and you
begin to wonder where you can have got to. A long extent of
European-built houses, some of two stories, and with gabled
roofs and towers. One rather bigger than the rest stands a
little in the background, with a large balcony on its roof, and
on a slightly elevated hillock is a largish church. This is
the highest point in the island of Tonga-Tabu, and is called
Mount Zion. A little further along the beach you come to
the only Tongan house to be seen, and the English flag
floating above it shows it to be the residence of our Consul.
The large two-storied house, with the tower, is the palace
of the King. It is a curious coincidence that he should live
in an English house, and that the representative of Her
Majesty should occupy a Tongan one. All natural beauties
in the shape of trees have been cleared from the beach, and
were it not for the background of cocoa-nut trees, you might
almost imagine yourself at some watering-place at home that
had suddenly sprung into existence. The houses were
imported from Auckland, and put together here. Now for
the reason of all this, for it must sound absurd to anyone
who may read this account, as it did to me who saw it.
These islands are under the Wesleyan Mission, and of course
when dealing with natives, much power is placed in the
hands of the missionary, either for good or evil. Too much
praise cannot be given to those first brave men who came
out to these islands at the risk of their lives for their faith’s
sake, no matter what that faith might be, and to those of the
Melanesian Mission, who are now at work among the canni-
bals of the Solomons and New Hebrides, and to those of the
Wesleyan Mission further north, at New Britain and New
Ireland, among whom the name of Mr. Browne stands out
for his gallant behaviour to the survivors of the late attempt
on the part of the Marquis de Ray to colonize New Ireland.
In a letter to his friends Mr. Browne says ; “ The dolts have
landed men on the south end of New Ireland to cultivate
and clear rugged, broken mountains, covered with a dense


tropical forest; no white men can ever do such work in a
climate like this.” But the Tongans are unfortunate in
having had as a missionary a Mr. B , a man who has
not hesitated to spoil the Philistines, but of him later on.
Several natives came on board, and it was amusing to see the
nose-rubbing going on between them, although this is dying
out very fast, and hand-shaking taking its place. Directly on
landing I went to the Consulate and saw Mr. B—-**, the
Consul, a friend of Chip’s, and Dr. F ’s brother-
in-law ; and from there I went on to call on Mr. who
had been one of my fellow-passengers down in the “ Gunga.”
He is at present living some little way inland, at what is
called “ The New College,” the largest house in Tonga, a
regular white elephant, built by Mr.
College for the native girls. The ladies don’t seem to turn
up, however. Mr. the head of the College for the
boys, and his place is very much better, a long, oblong piece
of land, fenced in by a moat, wild orange hedge down the
centre of it, with about ten native houses. On either
side runs a street, with gardens. At the end facing down the
street stands the house of the head native teacher. On our
way back we passed a magnificent house, standing in its own
garden. It was built of wood, with grand iron-fronted
verandahs. I naturally asked “ who lived there ? ” It was
the poor missionary (Mr. B ), who has forsaken relations
and friends to go and preach the Gospel in the South
Pacific. Poor man ! I quite felt for him, and thought how
much happier he would be in one of our large English cities,
in a small house in a slum ! The day had now changed to
heavy rain, and blowing great guns, so having got wet
through I went on board to lunch, and remained there until
it was time to come off to dine with the Consul.
Bth August. —We weighed anchor at about six a.m., and at
sunset we were off Tofoa once more, where we lay to until
daybreak.
gth A ugust. —At ten we were anchored off Lifuka, the chief
town of the Haabai group, and I at once went ashore with
my traps. In the harbour there is a goodly show of schooners,
which looks more cheerful than Tonga-Tabu, where there
was not a single craft of any sort; and what matters to me,
more like getting on. I felt rather down on my luck when
the time came for all to go on board the steamer, and I was
left standing alone on the beach, but still, in knocking


about the world alone, this is a sort of thing one must get
accustomed to.
loth August. —Mr. M , a trader here, came over this
morning, and put his horse at my disposal during my stay
here, so I at once started for a ride to the other end of the
island, along the main road, which passes through two native
towns. In the afternoon, I took my gun and went for a
walk across the island to the weather side. It was a beauti-
ful sight to see the great rollers breaking in on the reef. In
walking through the town, I passed the church, round which
as posts are several old cannons, taken years ago from an
English letter of mark, whose crew the natives murdered.
nth August. —I started this morning with Andrew, an old
sea captain now trading for Godefroy, to his place in Uiha,
the island from which the royal family of Tonga came.
There is still the family burying-ground there, and it has
lately been the scene of an enormous gathering to take part
in the funeral of the heir-apparent, Prince David Uga, who
died in Auckland, where he had gone for medical advice.
Going across from one island to the other, we had a very
ticklish time of it, as there was only one native with us, and
we had too little ballast. It was blowing very hard, stiffly
for so small a boat, and to make matters worse she carried
too heavy canvas, and without any means of taking in a reef.
We had a very nasty piece outside the reef, with a heavy
sea. It was all we could do to keep the boat from filling,
and my time was kept well occupied in putting the ballast
to rights, which kept shifting, and the natives’ in baling her
out. We managed to weather it somehow, but could not hit
off our anchorage, so landed a little lower down the coast.
Of course, the fear is not so much in an upset as being carried
out to sea. We first went to see the burying-ground, which
stands back a little from the sea, and is approached by an
avenue of hardwood trees, at the commencement of which
is a sort of mortuary chapel. The ground itself is merely a
raised platform, of about fifty yards square, bordered by
heavy slabs of concrete. On it are several graves, one with
a marble headstone, and with iron railings round it. The
late prince’s grave is most tastefully covered by black and
light green pebbles, with several coloured borders of red coral
and white pebbles. The trees round the ground are all iron-
wood trees, the same species as the she-oak of Australia.
These take the place of cypress trees in this part of the
213


world, being always planted round their burying-ground. Very
appropriate they are, for the wind blowing through them gives
a most mournful sound. These trees were black with flying
foxes. I had my gun with me, so I brought down about
twenty with two shots. This may sound butchery, but the
natives rarely have the chance of so good a feed. Afterwards
I found out that they are held sacred. We next went on to
the native town hard by, and paid a visit to the royal family !
I took with me some kava, so we immediately began to pass
the flowing bowl. There is no such thing as chewing it in
Tonga, the kava being pounded between stones. After a
talk with Alivalo, the widow, we adjourned to a trader’s to
lunch, and while there a present came to me of a quarter of
a pig ready cooked, the greatest compliment they could have
paid me. After lunch, we started for Andrew’s home. He
lives in a native town about two miles away, and he and the
man we lunched with are the only two white men in the
island. Andrew has only a small native house (fali), half of
which is devoted to a store. My people at home would have
laughed if they had seen me at tea. Tea out of a broken
coffee pot, a loaf of bread which had been in the house over
a week, and two boiled eggs; but how to eat the latter
bothered me. No spoons, and they were only half boiled.
We stood up to our tea at the counter, and after that was over
we sent word to the chief to come and drink kava with us, and
he with about six other men came down, bringing with them a
prisoner to do the pounding. After a little while we heard sing-
inginthe distance, so we got the chief to send for them to sing
outside. It was indeed a regular native night, and one long to be
remembered. We all sat on our hams in a circle round the
small room, with the grog bowl in the centre, and one little
lamp giving a dim light to this curious gathering, the crowd
of singers outside adding their quota to the entertainment:
Outside the door, there is a small space fenced in, and when
I first arrived, I certainly felt somewhat like an animal in the
Zoo, as the natives gathered round to look at me, as except
the trader, I don’t suppose they ever see a stranger here. It
was quite 12 o’clock before our kava party broke up, and we
adjourned to the bedroom, where I slept on the bed and mine
host on the floor.
12 th August . —The tapa-makers began at daylight, which
soon got me out of bed. It reminded me strongly of the tin-
workers’ quarter in Bologna, or else a goldbeaters’ quarter in
214


any of our towns, with this exception, that it is rather worse.
Just outside our house was the house evidently set apart for
tapa-making, for outside was a long rounded beam, along which
sat about eight girls all hard at work beating out the tapa.
They keep to a regular time and in some sort of tune. A girl
stands at each end of the beam and marks the time for the rest,
After breakfast, we gave a kava drinking to the girls, and
then went for a walk across the island, and took our guns with
us on the chance of a shot. I managed to get a native bird
somewhat resembling a laughing-jackass, but the size and
plumage of a kingfisher. On getting back, I skinned him
ready for stuffing. After lunch, we started to walk back to the
other trader’s, as we were going to return in his boat, as being
the less cranky one of the two. It was still blowing hard.
Before leaving I went in to see the ladies of the royal
household, and presented Alivalo with a sketch of the
burying-ground —not a cheerful subject, but to her interesting.
We got under weigh at about three o’clock, and it was dark
before we had reached the island of Lifuka once more. We ran
into the native town of Hefo about a mile from my quarters,
and walked home. On arriving at McG ’s, I found that the
schooner “ Edith” had arrived from Auckland, and that she
was sailing for Samoa to-morrow, so lam in luck. One thing
I have forgotten to describe, that is the great war canoe, which
was captured by King George of Tonga from the Fijians,
about sixty years ago. It was built by Cakobau, in Kadavu,
and launched over quite a hundred human beings. She is a
large double canoe of over eighty feet long, and is in places
beautifully carved. On the top is the regular house, the poles
of which were capped with human skulls. To give some idea
of her size, the paddle was lying beside her, and I could not
even raise it from the ground. Andrew is very anxious to
take her to England. Prince Wellington has offered her to
anyone who will ship her to Melbourne and exhibit her at the
Exhibition. The captain is a dry old stick, being a Swede,
and speaking only broken English. Hetold me some curious
yarns about the natives. One custom of theirs particularly
struck me. It is now against the law, but still practised sub
rosa, and that is, the taking out the heart, liver and lungs of
a person at the time of burial, and burning them, at the same
time fumigating themselves in the smoke. This is supposed
to prevent them, at all events, from catching the disease from
which the deceased had died.


zsth August. —I left Haabai a little after 10 o’clock, in the
“ Edith,” She is a seventy-five ton schooner, trading from
Auckland. She was formerly in the Survey service, on the
New Zealand coast. Outside the reef I soon felt that I was
on a lively craft, and I don’t think I have ever been so ill
before. However, the steward took compassion on me, and
gave me his bunk amidships in a deck-house. Besides
myself, there were six other passengers, and taking them and
the crew we are a mixed lot—English, Irish, Scotch, New
Zealand born, Australian born, American, Norwegian, Dane,
Chinaman, Samoan, and Tongan; and a happy family in the
shape of a pig, a sheep, two dogs, and a cat.
14 th August. —I was suddenly awakened in the night by
hearing, as I thought, the anchor being let go; but after that
the bustle on deck and the lowering of sails soon told me I
was mistaken. It was really the crunching of the coral, for
in the darkness we had run on a reef, and were almost
bows into the trees on the mainland. Fortunately, we were
inside Va-Vau harbour, so that we had a smooth sea,
otherwise we were bound to have gone to pieces. The
captain was at the wheel himself, and as far as I could make
out there was nobody forward on the look-out. The first
indication the captain had was hearing the ripple on the
shore, and he immediately put the ship in stays, but it was
too late. It was most absurd on coming on deck to
see how close to land we were. The trees were hardly
twenty yards from us. The question now was, when we
should get off, for as bad luck would have it, it was just high
tide when we grounded, and going as we were at six knots,
ran well on to the reef. Sleeping and eating on the side of a
house could not be called comfort, so I cleared out for shore,
and tookup my quarters at “ Mrs. Mann’s.” Nieafu was only
four miles away, so that with a little more care we should
very soon have been at anchor. The town itself is most
picturesquely situate on high banks, looking down the harbour,
and a more beautiful view cannot be imagined; in shape it
somewhat resembles Sydney Harbour, but is far more beauti-
ful, having high land all round it, covered with the thickest
tropical vegetation, the sky-line broken by waving cocoa-nut
trees. From Nieafu to the heads is about eight miles, the
greatest breadth being about five miles. About one-and-a-half
miles down there is a narrow neck of land known as“ Galloway’s
Point ” running out, leaving a passage of about half a mile, so
216


forming, as it were, an inner harbour. From the town, awayin
the other direction, the harbour extends some considerable
distance. At the entrance stands a most prominent land-
mark, a table mountain of about two hundred feet high, and
exactly opposite “ Galloway’s Point ” is a terraced hill of coral
formation, forced up by volcanic action. It was high tide, and at
mid-day the “ Edith ” was still aground, so at about eleven
o’clock at night, Mr. M and I went down to see if she
would come off, as the night tides are the higher. On arriving
she looked most comical, covered with natives. The
main boom was laid out as far as it would go, and on its end
were about twenty natives, looking like so many monkeys.
This was done in order to give her a list over. There were on
board about thirty others hauling away at a rope attached to
a kedge anchor, and like all natives, they were kicking up an
infernal din, as they can do nothing without it. With all their
efforts not an inch would she move, so there was nothing for
it but to decide to take out the cargo. The captain returned
with us, in order to see about getting men to work to-morrow,
for Sunday is a bad day out here to get anything done, the
missionaries having carried things to the other extreme.
15 th A ugust.— Sunday morning, and no mistaking it, both
by the singing and the dress of the natives, for Mr. B
has had a law passed that no native can go to church except
in European clothes. A case of civilization by Act of Parlia-
ment, besides, no doubt, something into Mr. B ’s pocket
from the traders. The dress of the women is wonderful;
imagine a thin muslin dress and a hat with every colour in
it. A word about Mr. B . He has been out in these
islands about twenty years as a missionary, and might, if he
had liked, done great things for the natives, but he has worked
entirely for his own ends. As another missionary told me,
“Heis a man of the world, sir, not a man of God.” Lately
he has been suspended, having mixed himself up with
political matters. He now styles himself Premier, Envoy,
Plenipotentiary, Minister of Lands and Finance, but his native
name is far more applicable, which means “intermeddler.”
He gave himself this name, but as meaning “ the unconquer-
able one.” He really rules the land, having old King George
quite under his thumb. He has introduced the most absurd
imitation of English customs. They have a House of Lords
and a House of Commons, but they all sit together. They
have a throne, an exact copy of ours at home, and lately


he has introduced a crown, which cost over £2OO in Sydney.
The King himself, on state occasions, wears an English
staff uniform.. Mr. Blyth, our Consul, told me some
amusing yarns about him. At the opening of Parliament
the other day, the King entered in state, B acting as
usher. The King walked up to the throne, and stooping with
his back to the people, placed his cocked hat on the ground,
and as he stooped, his trousers, which were short before, grew
shorter, and his tunic worked further up his back. Having
at last taken his seat, the usual forms as at home were gone
through. Mr. Blyth was sitting in a seat next the gangway,
tfnd on the king retiring the whole solemnity of the thing was
broken by his giving Mr. Blyth a familiar nod. The House
of Lords is composed of chiefs, and Mr. B , in order to get
their vote to some motion he wanted passed, altered the pay-
ment of members of 100 dols. a year from the Commons to the
Peers. He then found that the Commons could out-vote him by
five votes, so he raised six of them to the Peerage. On another
occasion, when the ayes and noes were exactly equal, the
Speaker having voted for the motion, the question was asked,
“ Mr. B , what are we to do now ? ” The reply was,
“ In England the Speaker would hold up both hands,” so
the motion was carried. Then came this order, that Euro-
pean clothes were to be worn on Sunday, and Mr. B
stationed policemen at the doors to refuse admittance to any
in native dress ; and this was coupled with an order that no
more tapa was to be made. But to this the English Consul
objected, and had it annulled as taking the occupation away
from the girls. Another law passed was a tax of 2 dols. a year
upon all unmarried girls, a most dangerous law, as encouraging
immorality; but I believe this has been also objected to by
the Consul. All laws that are passed are taken by Mr. B
to Auckland to be printed, and there he alters them to suit
his purposes. A case happened the other day of the English
Consul seeing some law, and on taking it to the King
he said he had never heard of it before. B ’s reply
always is, “ How do you know ? You did not take notes.”
Mr. B has, for years, been working to keep out all
Europeans, but now he is favouring the Germans, and one
of the charges brought against him by the other missionaries
was that he wears a German decoration. This he denies
in toto, but he wore it here when on board the German man-
of-war. King George (Tubou Maekafa —“ as strong as iron


rope ”) is about eighty years old. His age is arrived at by his
remembering the wreck of the “ Port-au-Prince,” which
occurred in 1806. The death of his only surviving son,
David Uga, has raised the question of succession. The man
they have nominated as “ Crown Prince ” is Wellington Gu,
the governor of Va-Vau, a son of David Uga by a heathen
wife. Another likely claimant will be Maafu, a nephew of
the King, and he would be a much more popular man. All the
natives throughout the group speak of him with great
respect, and many are the questions I have been asked when
I told them I knew Maafu. He, however, is bound down by
treaty not to interfere until after a certain period. If it
came to force of arms, there would be no doubt whatever
about the result. Wellington Gu is too European for the
natives. He is, however, a well-educated man, speaking four
languages, and is a capital musician. He has here a most
beautiful home, standing in its own ground ( hahi ), and over-
looking the harbour. The dining-room is panelled with
mottled kauri, from the north of New Zealand. A letter
addressed to him from some missionary passed through
Mr. Blyth’s hands the other day. It read, “ His Royal
Highness, Prince Wellington Gu, Esq.” His native
name is Tubou Malohi, Tubou being the family name.
The other great family in the group is that to which
Maafu belongs, and, until B- formed a constitution,
and got it agreed that the succession to the throne should
pass through the Tubou family, each of these two
families had taken it in turns to place their representative
on the throne, so that on the death of King George it
is a question whether the Tongans will not abolish the
constitutional and adopt the native mode of succession, the
only difficulty being that Maafu is not a son by the late King’s
wife, but by one of her handmaidens, and in Tonga, as in
China, the descent is traced through the mother, the reason
being, that they always know who the mother is, but not
always the father. So, in olden days, it was not always the
eldest son who stepped into his father’s shoes, but the son of
the wife holding the highest rank, which, in all probability,
would not be the first; as the chief got more power he would
marry a woman of higher rank. To return to one’s everyday
life, we went to the native church. Portions of the singing was
good, although with the usual native fault, pitched too high.
It looked a queer congregation. We walked on through the
219


town, which covers a large extent of land, and is intersected
by lovely groves of orange trees and cocoa-nuts, to the top
of Monga, a hill overlooking the harbour and the town. On
the other side we looked down upon another lovely harbour,
but of no use to shipping, there being no passage for other
than small boats through the reef. It is connected both with
the open sea and with this harbour; it is called “ Nuafutahi.”
Inland, one looks over a vast extent of cocoa-nut trees, a
country in which anything could be grown, but entirely shut
out from European enterprise, as the Government will not
sell an inch, or lease for a longer period than seven years.
The natives simply do enough work to make their taxes and
buy their clothes. They won’t work for a white man under
two shillings a day. A native chief’s daughter asked me last
night why the traders only sold rings that looked nice the first
day and dull the next. I said, “ Because you would not give
the price for a gold one, it would cost from 25 dols. to 50 dols.”
She replied, “ If I give for a piece of satin 40 dols., I would give
that for a ring.” They, no doubt, are a fine race so far as
physique goes, kindly and hospitable, but most fearful
thieves, made so, no doubt, by the missionaries. This,
perhaps, wants qualifying. A native very often has
not an idea of what stealing is, such a thing as taking
what does not belong to him would never enter his head.
The missionary comes and the first thing he begins to
do is to teach him that it is wrong to steal. I have
heard people say that they would never have a native
Christian as a servant —they are always such thieves. In
the afternoon, we went down, a large party, in a sailing boat
to the cave near the entrance to the harbour; it is called the
Aga-Peka-Peka cave, which means “ The home of the sea
birds.” It is large enough to sail into, and when inside it
resembles fairyland, and not unlike those caves one sees
sometimes on the stage in a transformation scene, the sun
shining in at the entrance and reflected by the water against
the roof and side, lit it up until the blue and green
shone again. Huge stalactites hung from the walls and
roof. On one side the cave resembled the transept of a
church, while on the other, a huge stalagmite standing in
a niche has received the name of “The Pulpit.” By taking
off my boots, so as to cling with my toes to the side, I was
able to get along into an interior cave, which extends some
distance into the earth. The view looking back was most
220


lovely. To sketch it would have been for me impossible, so
wonderful were the colours, and the sail of the boat added to
its beauty. Scrambling back into the boat, we next ate our
luncheon ; afterwards one of the natives dived into the water,
which was as clear as crystal, and although of great depth,
the bottom was as plainly visible as if it had been only a few
inches. Leaving the cave, we found a strong, fair breeze had
sprung up, so we were not long in reaching home. In the
evening Mr. M and I went to the house of one of the
village beauties to drink a bowl of kava, as also to get them
to make me a Tongan basket and some tapa. The baskets
are peculiar to this group, being black and adorned with
devices worked in sinnet. The tapa I wanted was that
worn only by chiefs, and dyed entirely black.
16 th August. —Lily, the little daughter of the house, has
quite taken charge of me, and has to-day been my companion
while sketching. There is here such a wonderful choice that
I hardly knew were to begin. To-day, I have had a present
made me of several native dresses, or sisi. They are made
of native string, twisted and tied into knots with different
coloured seeds and pods, mixed up ; others also are of bunches
of black leaves, with yellow stalks, threaded together. A
native woman brought me a ring, which had belonged to the
late governor of their group, Mate Ki Toga. It is heart
shape and made of whalebone, with a piece of tortoiseshell
inlaid in its centre. In the evening Mr. M , the missionary,
sent to ask me to come up and see him. Some three weeks
ago, when in Loma-Loma, there was a boat blown ashore
near there with two Tongans on board, and they said that
they had been blown away from Tonga in a gale, and that
one of the party had died, and that they had been three weeks
out. The question was, of course, how could they have lived
for three weeks, with only a small quantity of provisions.
One of the party was missing and he is supposed to have died
at sea. Here there is great excitement over two boats which
have been lost, and I have been the means of giving them
news, at all events of one of them. The natives are about
despatching a schooner in search of the missing men, and
only waited to hear the news from me.
i jih August. —Last night, at high tide, the “ Edith” came
off, they having taken out nearly all her cargo. At about
five o’clock she anchored off the Government Wharf, and
on the captain coming on shore he had a very long face,
221


having lost three anchors and been on the reef a second time ;
it is indeed a chapter of accidents. In the morning “ Lily ”
took me over to Nuafutahi, to go shell-hunting, and to see
and get a sketch of the burying-ground there, which is most
beautifully situate on a point of land, backed up by rich
foliage, and sloping down to the water’s edge. In the evening
Mr. M and I went round to the house of a big chief here,
for a bowl of kava, which was made by his beautiful daughter
Lavinia. I was surprised to see how much she knew. She
noticed a ring on my hand, and pointing to it said in' Tongan,
“ You have a Zodiac ring,” and then repeated all the signs.
The flowering trees here are most beautiful, the one in particu-
lar, which the natives call siela and the Europeans “ Charley,”
is, I think, a single gardinia from its shape and scent. Then
there is another white, waxy tubular flower, with no scent,
on a tree growing out of the solid rock by the shore.
Another, not unlike our white jessamine, but with long red
stamens. Then inland is the flame tree, which bears bunches
of bright red flowers, and with scarcely any leaves upon
it. When this is in flower the natives know it is the time
to plant their yams. Then there are creeping plants of all
descriptions, big white convolvuli and a small one of the
brightest red; a yellow creeper, bearing a small fruit not
unlike a green water-melon, and another with a smaller
flower, called the crocodile plant, from its reddish yellow
fruit with skin marked like a crocodile ; the seeds are red and
glutinous, and used in curries, and over all, as a rank weed,
creeps the common pea, introduced here years ago by the
missionaries. French beans grow here to be a yard long,
and are ready for eating in three days after the pod is
formed. Another tree bears a flower exactly like the little
lamp used for illuminating, not unlike the Campion
Bell, only of solid wax, with a black seed-vessel inside.
There is one great drawback to all this group, the want of
water. This is shown by nearly all the cocoa-nut trees
having hollows scooped out of the trunk near the base to catch
the rain water. White people are almost entirely dependent
on rain water collected from the roof, and for this reason they
nearly all have iron roofs to their houses. It is a rare thing
to be able to get a fresh-water bath.
18 th August. —At about two o’clock we weighed anchor,
with a strong breeze blowing, and it was a little consolation to
know that, if we were to have it rough outside, at all events
222


the passage to Samoa would be all the shorter. To English-
men this harbour is one of great interest, being the scene of
Byron’s poem of “ The Island.” At one of the entrances, for
it has three, two of which are only available for vessels, lies
the island in which there is
“ A spacious cave —■
Whose only portal was the keyless wave ;
A hollow archway, by the sun unseen,
Save through the billows grassy vale of green,
In some transparent ocean holiday,
When all the finny people are at play.
*****
And from that hour a new tradition gave
Their sanctuary the name of Neutia’s Cave.
The foundation of Byron’s poem is partly taken from Lieut.
Bligh’s “ Narrative of the Mutiny and Seizure of the Bounty
in the South Seas, 1789,” and partly from “ Mariner’s Account
of the Tongan Islands.” To enter this cave is most
dangerous, owing to the stalactites which guard its entrance.
There have been several accidents, two of which proved fatal,
to Englishmen who have tried to enter it. The entrance
itself is about two fathoms below highrwater mark. The
natives give so varied an opinion as to the feasibility of
entering, that I certainly have come to the conclusion to be
content with the description they give of its interior. It
was first discovered by a young chief whilst diving after a
turtle. Mariner himself entered it, and in his work gives a
minute description. He says it appeared (by guess) to be
about forty feet wide in the- main front, but which branched
off on one side into two narrower portions. The medium
height seemed also about forty feet. The roof was hung with
stalactites in a very curious way, resembling, upon cursory
view, the gothic arches and ornaments of an old church.
20 th August. —I am at present staying with our Consul,
Mr. H. G , at the Consulate in Apia, the chief town of the
Samoan or Navigator group. We arrived in harbour at eight
o’clock this morning, having had a very rough passage.
After leaving the heads at Va-Vau, we were not long before
we ran out from the shelter of the land, and a stormy breeze
and a heavy cross sea made it anything but pleasant.
During that night we made some w r onderful running, the log
showing as much as eleven and twelve knots per hour. The
223


next day the breeze freshened, but we could still lay our course,
although it was anything but a pleasant sensation to see her
heel over until she filled the boat hanging in the davits. At
night it was blowing a gale. We were running under double
reefed main and foresails, and single reefed main staysail,
which reduced our average pace to seven knots an hour. The
skipper had decided to run to the lee of Upolu, the island on
which Apia is, and at eight o’clock on the morning of the 18th
we were running along the land. Then came the tantalizing
part of sailing. On passing between the islands of Upolu
and Savaii (these and the island of Tutuila make up the group),
the wind died away entirely, and left us drifting about in a
nasty position for an hour or so, but when, finally, the breeze
did show up it was a very stiff one, and dead in our teeth,
with which, although we were only thirteen miles away from
Apia, we could not make port that night. To enter you are
bound to have a pilot, so there was nothing for it but to
dodge about outside all night; and as I had a berth athwart
ship this was most uncomfortable, for as the ship put
about I had to do the same. However, it was not a bad
passage, considering the distance is 280 miles, and we had
left Va-Vau at four p.m. Wednesday, were off the land at
eight a.m. Friday, and entered harbour at eight a.m. Saturday>
The harbour of Apia, although small, presented quite a gay
appearance, there being in it six sailing craft, one steamer,
and one German man-of-war. Directly we cast anchor
canoes came out to us, and we were boarded by the natives,
anxious to obtain our washing, but one of our passengers had
been beforehand, and got us to promise her this privilege.
Our heavy weather has been put down to Mr. W , one
of our passengers, whom the sailors christened “ Graveyard.”
Directly we could Mr. M (the supercargo) and myself
went ashore for a bathe. The general appearance of Samoa
is not unlike Fiji; in fact, it is said that if you have seen either
Samoa or Fiji and the Friendly Islands you have seen the
whole of the islands of the South Pacific. There are two
classes, the volcanic and the coral formation. In the former,
such as Fiji, you have high mountains, and in the latter, low
lying islands as in Tonga, some scarcely reaching an average
of above ten feet over high-water mark. The Samoans are
not unlike the Tongans—a fine race of men, and have the
advantage of not having been so overdone with missionaries.
To deal with them at all is the difficulty, as there are very
224


few chiefs who have any influence, from the fact that such
a large proportion of them are either chiefs themselves, owing
to a multiplicity of wives being allowed, or in some way
related to a chief. They have less regard for the fair sex
than have the other islanders. The young girls, however, are
beautiful. Byron gives a very ideal picture of them when he
speaks of
The gentle savage of the wild,
In growth a woman, though in years a child,
As childhood dates within our colder clime,
Where naught is ripened rapidly save crime :
The infant of an infant world, as pure
From nature, lovely, warm and premature —
Dusky, like night, but night with all her stars,
Or cavern sparkling with its native spars ;
With eyes that were a language and a spell—
A form like Aphrodite in her shell,
With all her loves around her on the deep,
Voluptuous as the first approach of sleep ;
Yet full of life —for through her tropic cheek
The blush would make its way and all but speak ;
The sun-born blood suffused her neck, and threw
O’er her clean, nut-brown skin a lurid hue,
Like coral reddening through the darkening wave,
Which draws the diver to the crimson cave.
Their native dress is very pretty, being a lava-lava of light
cloth, and round their neck a wreath of bright-coloured berries
and leaves :
Thick wreath shall form our coronals like springs,
And round our necks shall glance the hooni strings;
So shall their darker hues contrast the glow
Of the dusk bosoms that beat high below.
Their hair is short and beautiful, got up with white lime,
which adds much tc their beauty:
How lovely are your forms ! how every sense
Bows to your beauties, softened, but intense.
2i st August. —This morning, Mr. H. G and I, together
with a German named Von 0 , rode out to one of Godefroy’s
largest plantations at Vailele, about four miles away, to
lunch with Mr. B , the manager. The tide being out, we
had a grand gallop along the sands. His house, which
stands on high cliffs overlooking a lovely bay, is approached
Q
225


by two avenues, the first of cocoa-nut trees over half a mile
long, and leading off from it is another one of orange trees.
Could anything be more beautiful ? Under the trees were cattle
grazing, and the rustling of the wind through the leaves gave
a sweet sense of perfect rest. After lunch we rode inland to
another of the stations, passing through a magnificent avenue
of bread-fruit trees. Most of the labourers are from the Line
Islands, and there was quite a large settlement of them ; each
family is allowed to build a house for itself, and for the
bachelors there are larger quarters. The houses are built upon
raised posts, evidently showing that these people come from
a land either exceeding damp, or subject to tidal waves.
The Samoan houses are oval in shape, open at the sides,
with plaited cocoa-nut leaf screens to let down at night or
when wet; the floor is of black pebbles, and covered in places
with mats. Outside the house there is a band of a couple of
feet wide, and sometimes wider, of pebbles also, which keeps
the houses dry, the soil being very porous. After leaving the
latter station, we descended into a most lovely gorge, filled
with the thickest vegetation, by a zig-zag path, so steep in
places as to necessitate leading our horses. On emergingfrom
the gorge on the other side, we came upon the cotton
plantation. The Godefroy’s property on the Samoan group
is about one hundred and fifty thousand acres. It will be re-
membered that the firm qf Godefroy failed some little time
ago, and a great deal was written about it in our papers at
home; little did I think, when reading the accounts, that I
should ever be actually riding over the very plantation.
Some distance behind all this rises a fine, bold range of hills
to the height of about 1,350 feet. In Savaii, another island
of the group, the highest mountain is about 4,000 feet.
22,nd August. —Samoa has one great advantage over
Tonga, in having plenty of fresh water. There are several
streams running through Apia, and in one of these are two
capital bathing places. To one I go each morning
for a swim. Our hours here are most suitable to a hot
climate. Up as early as you like, either for reading or writing,
a cup of tea at eight o’clock; after that, I dress in flannels
and go for my bath. Breakfast at eleven o’clock, generally
a ride at four o’clock, and dinner at seven o’clock. It is a
curious thing in the morning to see the boys taking round
the milk, for here there is plenty, in bottles. Mr. G-
has told several chiefs that I want a few curios. Samoa
226


is most famous for its fine mats, some of which it would
be impossible to buy. They are looked upon as property,
and are presented to people on their marriage and handed
down from father to son. The older they are the more
valuable. Two were brought to me this morning about
four feet square. One the man wanted £l6 for, and for the
other £lO, but then they were all in holes, and he said they
had been in Samoa longer than he could remember ; not an
inducement to make me purchase. One end of them is
generally decorated with the red feathers from the kula birds
of Fiji. Clubs and spears have long since been replaced by
guns and rifles, for now they are constantly at war. In
Savaii they are at it at the present moment, and the men of
this province are, in a day or two, going to march against
those of the next. I fancy their engagements are more
destructive to property than life. If you happened to drop
across them at work, the most dangerous place to go for
safety would be up a cocoa-nut tree, as most of the bullets
go into the air. They burn towns and cut down the cocoa-
nut and bread-fruit trees. Their rifles are all good, their
favourite being the Winchester Repeater.
23 rd August.—We had intended going for a ride early this
morning, but the rain came down in torrents. Later on we
attended a sale of the goods and chattels of a man who is
going home to Germany, for nearly all here are Germans;
and I bought a very good mat from the Caroline Islands.
In the afternoon we bathed, and then went to the house of
Seumanatafa, chief of Apia and governor of this province,
and had a bowl of kava. The custom here is to have it
chewed by pretty girls.
24th August. —I wrote my English letters, as there is likely
to be a schooner going direct to Auckland some day this
week. Afterwards I went down to see Seumanatafa, as he
had some mats he wanted to show me. From him I made a
magnificent haul, as he had two new ones, and therefore not
so valuable to him. I also got a war head-dress, and his wife
made me a present of two combs and two fans. The mats
are made by the women, and generally take about three years
to make. They are wonderfully fine, and make capital table-
cloths, but the natives use them as lava-lavas (loin cloths) on
state occasions. Seumana (as he is generally called) showed
me his Winchester rifle, and told me that he had sold me
the mats to assist in paying for it. Signs of civilization —he
227


produced from his box a photograph album. There is a
photographer here, which is a fortunate thing for me, as I
have been able to get a few very fair views of this place, and
of Va-Vau. These make a good addition to those I have
already got taken by H.I.G.M.S. Bismarck. Seumana
walked back with me to the Consulate to brew a bowl of kava,
bringing with him his attendant chewers. Mataafa also
came in. He is a bigger chief, and ought by rights to be king.
These chiefs are fine fellows, and, it may sound strange,
gentlemen. Mr. G asked them both to dinner to-night.
Afterwards, we rode out and met Mr. B , and had a grand
gallop along the sand; a heavy shower came on, but we were
lucky in finding shelter in a native house. Everywhere there
are signs of war —men marching about with rifles over
their shoulders, others tinkering up their big war canoes.
These in appearance are not at all unlike a gondola without
the house, but of course rougher built. The two prows are
decorated with white cowrie shells. They got their idea for
them from the whale-boat. Seumana sent word to say he
had to attend a meeting, and could not come to dinner, and
Mataafa did not turn up until after we had finished. He
came with his wife, and after dinner we sat down to a game
of euchre. They both played uncommonly good hands.
25 th August. —Mr. G having business to do some dis-
tance up the coast, I thought it a good opportunity of seeing
the best part of this island; more especially as our route would
lay right through the very portion at present occupied by the
advancing force and followers of Maleatoa, the king. Samoan
politics are most difficult to understand, as there are so many
contending interests. The Germans have, of course, the
biggest hold here, and*do not hesitate to take advantage of
any little difficulty which may arise to egg on the Samoans
to quarrel. It appears like a puppet-show, with the German
Consul as showman pulling the string. At mid-day we started,
and being high tide had to go inland through the mangrove
swamps, the usual road being across a bay which at low tide
is nearly left dry. This island has been given up to war
now for so long that their roads have been neglected, and
they are now mere tracks through the thickest of scrub.
You have to keep a very sharp look-out for hidden stumps
and overhanging boughs and vines. Several times I was
nearly dragged from my horse by the latter either catching
my neck or feet. After passing out of the neutral territory.
228


we came to the site of the late war, which lasted for seven years,
and here riding was more difficult, from the number of cocoa-
nut trees lying across the road. They carry on a war in a very
primitive way. Forts are built which are really almost im-
pregnable, and there have been cases in which the two oppos-
ing forces have sat and watched one another for three years,
simply pouncing down now and then upon some solitary man
who has gone out in search of food. The great reason for these
long engagements is, that whatever plans are decided on by
one side is immediately made known to the other by the
women. All the people here are so closely allied, that a woman
may have a husband on one side and a brother on the other,
in which case she would let the one or the other know of any
plan of attack, or otherwise, which might be decided upon.
Then again, they have a peculiarity in their ideas of fair play.
A man in the late war had been more fortunate than the rest
in obtaining three heads, for they always decapitate their
prisoners. He came over to the opposite side and said, “ Now
I have come to fight for you, for I have been very lucky over
there, and it is only right to give you some of my luck.”
They resemble the American Indian, in the fact that, previous
to decapitation, they torture their prisoners, and finally, plac-
ing the head on a pole, present it to the chief, at whose hands
the lucky one receives great praise for his bravery, and goes
away a proud and happy man. Their forts are well built of
stone and earthworks, capped with cocoa-nut logs. When
passing a creek there are generally two roads, one which can
be crossed at low tide, and another going further up into the
bush, to be used when the tide is high. In crossing one of
these creeks, Mr. G , who was ahead, called to me to turn
down the track over the creek. I supposed that he had
missed seeing it as he passed, and that he would soon over-
take me; however, I rode on and on, and yet he did not do so,
and I knew that I must be on the right road by the number
of men on the war-path that I kept overtaking, but not
knowing a word of the language, I could not find out from
them whether Mr. G could possibly be ahead of me.
Just before I had missed him, he had said that we should
be soon out of the bush and on the beach, where we could
push on, so when I came out on the sand and seeing no tracks,
I knew at once that he had not passed. I began to wonder
where he could have got to, and, indeed, where I was going to
pass the night. Fearing that, perhaps, he might have met
229


with some accident, I harked back to where I had missed
him, nearly five miles, and there discovered how the mistake
had arisen, that there was a second track, which evidently led
further inland. Whether to turn back for Apia or go on was
now the question. It was quite four o’clock by the sun, so that
I was bound to find quarters in some native house, and not
having had anything since breakfast, food, too, must he
found. I decided to push on, and once more reached
the sandy beach just as the sun was setting. A few
miles up the coast I could see a native town, which
I have since found to be Salemoa. Reaching this just
at dusk, I rode up and made signs to some natives for a
rope, which they brought me. Having tethered my horse,
I took off bridle and saddle and gave them to a native to
carry. Making them understand that I wanted something
to drink by pointing up to cocoa-nuts, I made for the biggest
house, where I was not long without company. Presently,
one of the prettiest of little girls brought me some bread-fruit
and faiai, a thick, creamy substance, made out of pounded'
bread-fruit and juice of pounded cocoa-nuts, to them a great
delicacy. When I had eaten as much of that as I could, for
it took the water of several cocoa-nuts to get it down, bread
fruit being very filling at the price, an oldish man, evidently
the chief, brought me something wrapped in a banana leaf and
laid it before me. I opened it and found half a fish. Pre-
sently singing commenced in an adjoining house, which I
recognized as a hymn tune, and it was taken up by the various
houses, including the one I was in. It was their evening hymn.
After it was finished, the head man in the house said a short
prayer. Then the wife of the chief brought in a basket
and laid out on a banana leaf any amount of food, round
which four or five men sat. This was evidently their meal.
They invited me to join them, which I did, but previous to
eating grace was said. More bread-fruit, faiai and bananas,
and, finally, a dish which I tasted but did not relish. From
what I could make out from them it came from the sea. It
is like vermicelli, in long strings, and eaten with a little
stick. I have since been told that it is a species of sea-
worm, known as polouloo, which makes its appearance on
the reef only once a year. Presently a man appeared who
could master enough English to say, “Want sleep? ” and
then the native missionary came in, who also knew enough
to say, “ England or Scotland ? ” and on saying “ England,”
230


he turned to the rest and said, “ Bdlitania” (English), so
I felt I had presented my credentials and that they had
been graciously accepted. I sat for some considerable time
listening to the men talking, while they amused themselves
passing round my helmet and roaring at each one in succession,
as they one and all put it on. The children were playing cards,
at which they become very proficient. Soon it was time for
bed. The wife of the house came in and Spread a fine mat,
fixed up a mosquito curtain, and brought in a big roll of siapo
(tapa) for a pillow. I soon turned in, but shortly afterwards
I heard somebody asking me a question, and on putting my
head out of the screen, saw my friend, the missionary. He
said , You man? “Yes.” Great man? “That depends.” This
bothered him. You no work? “No.” That satisfied him. You
buy copra? “No." That evidently further satisfied him. He
had found out that I was not a trader, and did no work, and
therefore in his mind must be a great chief. I had with me
a few things wrapped in a macintosh, and he made signs for
me to allow him to unroll this, which I did. It was the
macintosh which bothered him, and I made him understand
it was for rain, upon which he said, “ You my friend.” I knew
the translation of that was, “Give me the macintosh.” I
changed the subject by showing him my knife, and he again
said, “ You my friend.” I began to wonder what I could raise
to give the old fellow, when I thought of the puggaree on my
helmet, which was being carefully passed round, and examined
by all, so taking it off, I opened it to its full, and gave it him
to wrap round his neck, as he had a bad cough. Having
exhausted his stock of English, and beginning to yawn, the
old boy retired, and left me to enjoy a well-earned night’s
rest.
26 th August. —I was up at daybreak and found that my
horse had broken loose in the night and was galloping about
with a young colt. I soon got together some men, and it
was quite an hour before we caught him, which they finally
did by getting him into a track in the bush, on each side of
which two men hid themselves with a rope across, while the
others went round to drive him back, and as he passed they
pulled the rope over his neck, and then, hanging on like grim
death, they managed to get a proper hold of him. On my
returning to the house they held morning prayer, but no
hymn. I gathered from the missionary that some little way
up the coast there was a white missionary, so I started at
231


once, and found about two miles further on a large mission
station. Malua is the name of it, and there are two
missionaries, Dr. T , who has been out here for a great
number of years, and Mr. M , who has only lately
come out. It was to his house I went. I found him and his
wife and another lady just about to sit down to breakfast.
They insisted on my staying, and being wet through with my
tramp after my horse in the bush, gave me dry things. On
making enquiries from the natives, we discovered that a white
man went by yesterday afternoon, so we supposed it must
have been Mr. G , and as a man-of-war, which I knew
must be H.M.S. “ Emerald,” could just be seen on the horizon,
I knew if Mr. G was up the coast he would be bound to
see her and turn back, as the Governor would be on board,
coming to ratify the treaty with King Maleatoa. I waited
and waited, and when at lunch a half-caste arrived with a
note for Mr. G from the Governor, I sent him on up
the coast to make enquiries if anything had been seen of Mr.
G . In half an hour he came back to say that Mr. G
had been lost in the bush, and had broken his horse’s leg, &c.
On making further enquiries, I found that he had never got as
far as this, and had returned to Apia, so I made up my mind to
return at once, although I had originally intended going on
to the other end of the island. Malua is the principal mission
station and college on the island, and belongs to the London
Missionary Society. From Mr. M I obtained a good
deal of information. The mission belongs to the Congrega-
tionalists, and they have lately been a good deal bothered by
the Wesleyans, who have come to these islands. It certainly
does seem a pity that these sects cannot leave one another
alone. The Wesleyans here go in almost entirely for getting
over natives from the other mission, doing a most fearful
amount of harm to the cause. For should a native be
deprived of the privileges of the mission for misbehaviour, or
other causes, he knows that the Wesleyans are only too ready
to receive him. The establishment here could supply teachers
to every town in the island at not a penny more expenditure
beyond about £6O a year, which it receives from some Sunday
schools in New Zealand, for it is entirely self-supporting,
whereas the Wesleyans are spending here about £2,000 a year.
With regard to the language, the flowery style of expression
is very similar to the old Hebrew, and in the introducing of
words. Rather than let them adopt English words, the
232


missionaries, in the translation of the Bible, have Samoanized
the word, either from Hebrew, Greek, or Latin, so
endeavouring to keep the language as pure as possible. , The
language itself is very soft, but lately there is a nasty
peculiarity creeping into it of changing the letter “ t ” to a
“ k,” as in tanata, which means a man, to kanaka, and
we have adopted the latter word in talking of native men.
The word which has crept into the language for a teapot is
kepoke from tepote. On my way back, I passed any
quantity of warriors, all armed with either guns or rifles, and
a bill-hook, or by knife and axes. I reached Apia without any
further adventure at about six o’clock. I immediately packed
up my things, for the Governor and suite were staying at
the Consulate, and took up my quarters at the Stadt Hamburg
Hotel. There I dined with the few decent white men here,
who have a room to themselves upstairs, which they use as
a sort of club. There is a report to-night that the Maleatoa
men have captured two canoes, with about sixty men, and
that they have sent in to Maleatoa to know what is to be
done with them, I saw H ,of H.M.S. “ Emerald,” and
later on G came off to see me. We have arranged to
go together to see the palaver that is to take place to-morrow
at “ The Point,” on the ratification of the treaty.
2 Jth August. —ln the morning, we walked out to “ The
Point,” which is about a mile from Apia; on it is the King’s
town of Mulenu. There, under guard, we found the chiefs
of the party which had been captured, about fourteen
in all. We went in to see them. Each man had his hands
tied, more as a sign of a prisoner than for actual use. The
guards were dressed in a most gorgeous costume, an old
naval artillery tunic, trousers pulled up to the knees, white
stockings and shoes, and a French peaked cap. After that
we were taken in by Mr. H , an Englishman who is acting
as Premier, &c., here, and introduced to Maleatoa, who was
dressed in a long frock coat and brass buttons, white trousers,
white shirt, and black tie. He looked a gentlemanly old boy.
We returned on board to lunch, and strolled back in the
afternoon. Sir Arthur Gordon told the King plainly that
England would not assist him in his war, that she would not
be drawn in as unwilling auxiliaries, and strongly advised him
to at once recall his men. We have decided to ride out to see
these bold warriors at work, attacking the bread-fruit and
cocoa-nut trees and houses of their enemies. We got hold of


Yankall, a half-caste, and then went to hunt up horses, and a
nice hard time we had of it, as we were bound to get them
all together to-night, being wishful to start not later than six
o’clock to-morrow morning. The natives are confoundedly
independent. They want first to know where you are going to,
and if they think it too far, will either ask such an exorbitant
figure that you would not hire the horse, or else refuse to let
you have the horse at all. I dined on board.
28th August. —l got up this morning at 3.30 and went to work
collecting the horses. There were three only in the hotel
yard, and I did not know where our guide lived, so I started
off for the native town, and fortunately found in one of the
houses a boy who knew a little English, and I at last
persuaded him to take me to Yankall’s house. After some
little bother and tinkering up of gear, we ultimately made a
start at six o’clock, a party in all of six. The road was the
same as I went the other day, and we reached Malua at about
eight o’clock. A little beyond this we crossed the boundary
between the Tui Ma Saga district and the Aana district and
entered the enemy’s country ; the change was most striking.
It was now a case of picking our way among the fallen
cocoa-nut trees and bread-fruit trees, although the latter now
they generally ring, which kills them entirely, for if cut down
they throw out fresh shoots. All, too, that was left of the
houses were the charred posts. It looked like a march of
locusts. We kept passing bands of warriors, some headed
by a drum. At Nofoalii, a large native town, belonging to
Saga, a friendly chief, we came upon a large gathering. A
palaver was going on between the head men of the town and
the chiefs from the Tui Ma Saga district upon things in
general. The two parties were sitting at least 60 yards
apart, and in front of one stood, with staff in hand, the chief
talking man ( tulafale —he is not of necessity a chief, but a born
orator). They deliver their speech in short sentences. We
decided to push on and stop here on our way back. On
making up our mind as to where to lunch, our guide said he
had a house further up the coast at Fasitooutai, so to that
we pushed on. After a short rest and something to eat, we
decided to ride on, as the day was yet young, but before
leaving we made arrangements to have chickens cooked for
us by the time we returned. Having got beyond the scenes
of devastation at Faleatui, we returned to our guide’s house,
and found a most sumptuous repast, chickens, bread-fruit,
234


and taro-, also evi nuts, whiph are exactly like chestnuts.
We had brought with us tinned meats, &c., bread and beer.
The food was laid out in fresh green banana leaves, and two
pretty little native girls sat alongside with fans to keep away
the flies. On our way back, we stopped first at Fasitooutai,
and went into a large house, where they were making a brew
of kava, of which we were only too glad, for when tired and
thirsty there is nothing more refreshing. There we stopped,
and had a yarn and a bowl of kava, and then rode on to
Nofoalii, and went in and sat down with the chiefs. They
immediately sent out for the girls to chew the kava, and
apologized for having nothing to offer us in the way of food,
as they were now at war, and had only yams and cocoa-nuts.
We had some amusing steeplechases over logs, and once
G , in taking a stone wall, got stuck in the branches of a
tree, but managed not to hurt himself. We reached Apia
at six o’clock, after a most enjoyable day, and one which had
certainly given us an insight into savage warfare. H
had to go on board, but the rest dined with me on shore, and
after dinner we went down and saw Seumana, and drank a
bowl of kava with him.
2gth August. —H.M.S. “Emerald” left this morning for
Levuka. I went on board to bid them farewell. We have
just heard that Sir Arthur Gordon has been appointed
governor of New Zealand. Hope they may like him !
30 th August. —The “ Edith ” keeps putting of her going from
day to day, and as the “ Active ” will sail to-morrow, should
there be a breeze, I have decided to go in her to Va-Vau and
wait there for the “ Edith.” The hotel proprietor here bought
a horse to-day for £4, so in the afternoon I went for a ride
with Mr. G , to pick up some more curios that I had
heard of. We got caught in a heavy shower, and took shelter
in a native house; the men were playing a game similar
to our game of squails.
31st August. —I have been able to do nothing all day. I
dare not go far away, as should a breeze spring up, the “ Active ”
would sail at once. In the morning, an expert tattooer came to
my room, as I was anxious to have some native work on my
arm. The needles are made out of bones (perhaps human!)
fastened on to a stick hoeways. The stick is held firm
in one hand, while with the other the needles are tapped into
the flesh with a short stick. He only took about twenty
minutes to tattoo a shark’s tooth bangle. The natives here
235


are tremendously tattooed from the knee to the waist. The
pattern is left, the rest being all tattooed; at a short distance,
a man without a lava-lava on, looks as if he had on a pair of
tight-fitting trousers cut off at the knee. Nearly every man
and woman has his or her name tattooed on the arm. The
men are done when boys, and there is what might be called
a receipt stamp, for it is a certain mark which is not put on
until they have paid the fees. The dye used is burnt candle
nut. The men being tattooed in this way is the exact opposite
to Fiji, where it is the women who are tattooed, and the
legend goes that a man was sent over to Fiji to learn what
was the proper thing; in order he should not forget, he kept
repeating to himself, “ The women are tattooed and the men
are not.” Just as he reached Samoa again, his canoe was
upset, and he forgot what he had been told and exactly
reversed the order of things. The Tongans are tattooed
exactly like the Samoans. No breeze, so here we are still.
After dinner, I went down to Seumana’s, taking some kava for
him, and a plaid shawl as a present for Fatelia, his wife, who
had given me one or two things, and she gave me a
beautiful piece of tapa.
Ist Sept. —As I awoke this morning, the sight of my gun
brought to me thoughts of partridges. How I longed for a
tramp among the turnips. Out here a gun is the most
useless of things, as there is little or no shooting to be got,
or, at all events, not enough to make up for the amount of
trouble it gives you to keep it in proper order, for the moist
climate keeps it in a constant state of rust. Still no wind.
The only excitement to-day has been a sale by auction of
goods ex “ Edith,” and some things belonging to Mr. H ,
the late Premier, to whom Sir Arthur Gordon, when here the
other day, gave notice to clear out in ten days, a thing which
I don’t think anyone will regret, but at the same time most
unjust, as I do not see what right Sir Arthur can possibly have
to interfere with a man who is serving under a King recognized
by England. It is, however, just such adventurers as he that
do so much harm among the natives, putting all sorts of
stupid notions into their heads, and at the same time advising
them so as to suit their own ends. In the afternoon Mr.
S , Mr. D , and I went far up the river to bathe.
Looking up the river at this point, were it not for the cocoa-
nut trees, you might imagine yourself in England, or some
gentleman’s park in Scotland, for the ground has been cleared.
236


and the grassy land, with occasional trees, slopes down to the
water’s edge.
2 nd Sept. —Still no wind, so I have given up any idea of
going in the “ Active,” as the “ Edith ” will be ready to sail
to-morrow. We have just received news that the natives
have destroyed a white man’s plantation up the coast. This
will mean trouble for them. lam rather amused to find that
Samoa possesses postage stamps of its own. They are of
different colours, according to the price, and have the words
“Samoa Express” upon them.
3 rd Sept. —Hanging about, waiting for a ship to sail, is
certainly most wretched work. I fill up odd times in
yarning with Mr. D , the photographer, and getting news
from him of this neighbourhood, and sketching. In the even-
ings generally in going down to some native’s house for a
bowl of kava.
4 th Sept. —Still waiting. The French man-of-war “Dagot”
came in to-day and went out again, taking with her some
priests to consecrate a church in Tutuila, another island in
the group.
sth5 th Sept. —We were the first vessel to be taken out of
harbour, and got well under weigh by nine o’clock.
6 th Sept. —We reached Keppel Island at three o’clock, a dis-
tance of about 180 miles from Apia. The native name of this
island is NuTappa Tap,and belongs to the Tongan group. The
anchorage here is very bad, and about three miles from the
shore, between which there is a reef, and many shoals and
patches. As it was low tide, we had some difficulty in wend-
ing our way amongst them. Finally, we had to get out and
walk. It is a fearfully out of the way place to live in, as so
few vessels call. The natives are very wild-looking, and flock
round you in crowds. They stare at you with their great eyes,
and some will even come up and touch you, as if they
wondered what you were made of. The missionaries bleed
these poor creatures most fearfully. Mr. B ,in a sermon
here last year at his annual visit, told them that if they did
not give largely to the collection God would forsake them, and
their cocoa-nut and bread-fruit trees would cease hearing.
There are in all, I believe, about seven hundred souls in the
island, and they managed to squeeze out of them five thousand
dollars worth of copra, and this besides a poll-tax of 7 dols. a
head on all over fifteen years, payable to the Tongan
Government. Prisoners here are allowed to buy themselves
237


off by the day; I think the amount is about one shilling. A
divorce is also very easily obtained, seven shillings and
sixpence being the price, which is divided between the
missionary and the Government. It was dark before the
captain and supercargo had finished their work, and not sorry
was I to get away, for never a bite or a drop was offered,
a very unusual thing in this part of the world. Finding our
way ashore was bad enough, but getting back was worse, and
very dangerous, as it was high tide and the blind rollers come
upon you before you are aware. However, we managed to
get all safe aboard.
yth Sept. —We weighed anchor at daylight, but had only
light and variable breezes all day. Just off Keppel Island is
a conical volcano, which, with the clouds forming on its peak,
looked as if it was in action.
gth Sept. —Soon after daybreak this morning we sighted
Va-Vau, and at two o’clock were once more at anchor in
this beautiful harbour. The “ Edith ” has had wonderful
luck in her passage; from Keppel Island here is one hundred
and eighty miles. Much to our amusement, no signs here
of the “ Active.” Where should I have been if I had gone
by her. I have again taken up my quarters at Mrs. Mann’s.
10 th Sept. —Went out with my little guide Lily curio hunt-
ing, and managed to get one or two curious little odds and ends.
I cannot imagine anything more beautiful than this place is
at present; nearly all the trees are orange-trees, and they are
now in full bloom, and with the fruit on as well the perfume
is something delicious. In the afternoon, I rowed down to
“ Galloway’s Point ” to see a native of the Cape Verde Islands,
who is very clever at carving cocoa-nut shells; from him I got
one inlaid with tortoiseshell. The “ Isabella,” from Sydney,
and the “Active” came in this afternoon. We were some
way inland when they were sighted, and the shout “ Sail ho ! ”
was passed on from mouth to mouth, so that the whole place
knows of the arrival of a vessel in a very few minutes. The
“Active ” has been becalmed for two days, outside the Heads.
In the evening we all met at a small house belonging to
“ George ” the carpenter. He has built a billiard room, and
very good fun we had.
ii th Sept. —I went on board the ‘‘lsabella” to breakfast
with Mr. J , the owner, and afterwards sailed down to
“ Galloway’s Point ” and went on board the “ Active.” From
her supercargo I got some capital curios from the island of


Neua, or Savage Island. Wellington Gu’s schooner arrived
this morning from Tonga, so on coming on shore, I
went up with Captain M to call on him. He is the
finest native I have yet seen. He talks English well, and it
is wonderful what he knows, for he can talk almost on any
subject, and still has never been out of these islands. He
has been educated entirely by Mr. M . It was amusing to
see that, although the house was European, he preferred sitting
on the floor. He was dressed in native costume, and entirely
of black, as he is in mourning for his father. This is carried
out to a great extent all over the group, which gives
the natives at the present time a most sombre look. It was
an order originating from B , and has, of course, put a
large amount of money into the hands of the traders, as
anything black has been at famine prices. During the
afternoon some girls brought me in a couple of their baskets.
They are the greatest curios in these islands, being made out
of the ribs of the cocoa-nut fronds lashed together, and
joined by a thin creeper which they find in the bush. When
finished the basket is blackened, and afterwards adorned
with different patterns, worked in sinnet. These baskets
will last a tremendous time, even when in daily use. They
are principally used by the natives at deaths and marriages,
to carry their present of cocoa-nut oil in. In the evening, I
dined with M. D , a trader here. He is a Russian
Jew, and a decent sort of a man. Wellington was there,
and his two satellites —two Englishmen, or rather colonials,
who are sponging on him. What could be more dis-
gusting ! After dinner we had some music, Wellington
playing and singing well. Besides the piano, he can play
several other instruments. He is very anxious to go to
England. It certainly seems a great pity that he should not
see something beyond this small atom of the world. He is,
too, a fair linguist, and also a good shot. To-day we have
had some little excitement. Mr. M is trading for Mr.
P , Godefroy’s agent here, and he is also a tenant of his.
It appears that this morning, when Mr. M was on the
wharf, going down to the station, Mr. P met him, and
began to blackguard him, and ended by saying he would go
up and kick his wife, family, and furniture out of the
house. They came up together, and Mr. M told him
if he dared to put his foot inside his house, he would
knock him down. P is a blustering Dutchman, and
239


thought he could carry everything before him, but he
had met his match this time in a man who quietly let a
little of his Dutch courage out by knocking him down.
In the afternoon, Mr. M having gone down to the station,
Mr. P sent up a man with two natives with a demand
to deliver up the furniture. The old pig wanted to take the
beds from underneath us! I heard that he is in a towering
passion still, as no doubt he feels he is to a great extent a
laughing-stock, both to the white men and to the natives.
However, “ it is an ill wind that blows nobody any good,” for
Mr. J has offered Mr. M a station of his on Wallis
Island, a very much better thing, as there is a good house, and
above all employment by an Englishman and not a German.
The latter out here are a mean lot. I hear P ’s Solomon
boys are delighted at the discomfiture of their master, saying,
“ Ah, ah ! massa lick us, now he get licked himself.”
12 th Sept. —Capt. L and Mr. J ,of the “ Isabella,”
and all our party had arranged a pic-nic for to-day
down the harbour. At first it appeared as if we were
going to be stopped by the weather. However, we risked it,
and three of us started on horseback to join the rest at Hihifu,
about fourteen miles down the harbour. The road for some
distance was through the ordinary bush, but after some little
time we got amongst hills, and on one side was a magnificent
piece of water, an estuary from the sea. Besides this,
Middle Harbour, the glory of the Sydney people, fades into
insignificance. A little further along, at the foot of a table
mountain, is an inland lake, evidently shut in from the sea
at the time of the upheaval of this part of the island. On
reaching Hihifu we found the boat had just arrived. We
had first intended going down to the cave, but the wind was
too strong, so we went instead to the opposite shore, where
we spread out our food on banana leaves under the shade
of a shaddock tree, covered with fruit and flowers. Returning,
I gave up my horse to Mr. N , the son of the large ship-
builder of Auckland, who came down lately to deliver over
the “ Mohi Lala” schooner to the natives at Va-Vau. When
we were at lunch, the “ Red Coat ” went up, and on our
reaching Galloway’s Point we found her ashore, so we
went on board to offer assistance, and spent half an hour
helping them to lay their kedge anchor in readiness for
getting her off at high tide, so that it was nearly nine o’clock
before we reached home again.
240


Sept .—l went down to say “ Good-bye ”toM. D .
He made his pile (£20,000) during the Crimean war by selling
grog to our soldiers. Mr. B , his storekeeper, gave me a
Tongan skull, which had been given him by Wellington.
I then went up to see Mr. M , the missionary. He showed
me a wonderful curio, the Tongan god of war. It is a
club most beautifully carved, and was formerly kept wrapped
up in a mat, and on the approach of an enemy was supposed
to move about of its own accord. It was carried at the
head of the army. At twelve o’clock, we got under weigh,
and cleared the Heads at about two o’clock. It was blowing
hard with a heavy sea, so I soon sought the comfort of my
bunk. We had as passengers Mr. M , the missionary,
and a Mrs. B and child.
14th Sept. —What a fearful night ! I never saw so heavy
a sea, except off the Cape. We shipped one or two very big
waves, but still for all that, we made a good passage, as we
dropped anchor at Haabai this morning at nine o’clock, and
here I am again in Macgregor’s comfortable quarters.
15 th Sept. —I went for a stroll through the bush, and took
my gun with me on the chance of getting a shot. The white
jessamine here is most beautiful, and that, with several
other sweet-scented flowers, makes a walk in the bush all the
more pleasant. Somehow I have managed to catch a most
fearful influenza cold, which is very unpleasant and difficult
to get rid of in these hot climates. The words in the parody
on “ Let me dream again” describe my condition:
I feel a tingling in my much-tried nose—
Must it be thus thro’ every breeze that blows ?
Cold shudders wander o’er my rain-swept brow;
If influenza, why should it come now ?
Is this a chill ?—Such sudden nasal pain,
Oh, do not check me. Let me sneeze again.
Euchre is the great game out here, and I am rapidly excelling
the “ Heathen Chinee.”
16 th Sept. —Mr. M and I started for a ride after
lunch. The horses here are roughish sort of creatures,
and their gear something awful. One of the saddles amused
us. It was of the oldest description, with string instead of
girths, and stirrup leathers ; reminding me of what one hears
of sometimes in Australia —a sack and a strip of bark, lashed
on with a piece of hide. We commenced by having a race.
R
241


There had been a wager laid upon the merits of the two horses,
which I managed to pull off. We then started for the south
end of the island, passing through the town of Hefo. This
we did at full gallop, as it is impossible, until you have tired
your horse somewhat, to get any other pace out of him. In
fact, when in the hands of the natives, they never are allowed
to go at any other pace. From the south end we rode
through the heart of the island to the north end, by a bush
track, and returned by the main road. The island is about
seven miles long and two miles broad, and at each end is
connected with other islands by the reefs, which can be
crossed at low water. There is no mistaking the track across
these reefs, as the coral has been worn quite smooth by the
constant passing to and fro of the natives. The “ Edith ”
now looks quite smart, under a fresh coat of white paint.
From the appearance of the sea on the weather side of the
island to-day, I don’t look forward to our run over to Tonga-
Tabu. It is one of the grandest sights out here to see the
breakers falling in over the reef to the smooth water inside ;
looking up the coast, the spray, as it is blown over the land,
softens the outlines and makes a most beautiful picture.
i yth Sept, —This morning, on going outside, I was rather
startled by seeing what at first appeared to be a novel
sort of animal, but on closer inspection it turned out to be
the roof of a native house, supported on the shoulders of
about fifty men, of whom only their legs could be seen. It
had a most grotesque appearance. The house was being
removed to a town some three miles up the coast, and the
men engaged in removing it were the Buleaga (prisoners),
and with regard to such there is a great peculiarity here.
Although they are made to do hard work during the day, at
night they are allowed to go to their respective houses, thus
agreeing with the Australian aboriginal’s idea of “ White man
beastly fool, he build prison put himself in.” Mrs. M ——
sent me over as a present a beautiful piece of Samoan tapa,
and later on in the day I got from her some Wallis Island
mats. The captain,' contrary to everybody’s advice, has
decided to sail the first thing in the morning, which is stupid,
as he cannot possibly get into Tonga-Tabu before dusk, and
after dusk it is impossible on account of the reefs, so we
shall, in all probability, have the pleasure of tossing about
outside all night. I am certainly beginning to get rather
sick of this ship, as the captain is a thorough poop. I know
242


of no better word to describe him by. He would, like very
much to get me on board to-night, but for me not a minute
earlier than I can help, so I have arranged with Tula,
Macgregor’s Fijian servant, to be ready to take me off in a
canoe the first thing in the morning. Fares by these trading
vessels seem to be very unfairly arranged, as the captain
insisted on charging natives the same price as white men,
who have what little benefit the ship can afford, which is
mighty small. The number of flying fish here is quite
extraordinary.
And spring the flying fish against the sun,
Till its dried wing relapsed from its brief height
To gather moisture for another flight.
The flying fish quite take the place of birds, of which you
scarcely see any.
18 th Sept. —Tula put me off in a canoe at six this
morning, and at seven o’clock we got under weigh. Although
we had a strong, fair breeze, and only eighty miles to run, the
captain would insist upon starting at this early hour. The
consequence was that at sunset we were just about ten miles
from Tonga-Tabu, outside the reef, and had the pleasure of
knocking about outside all night in a rough sea.
19 th Sept. —At daybreak we entered the passage and
anchored off Nucualofa about nine o’clock. I went at once to
the Consulate, and arrived just in time for breakfast. Mr.
has not yet returned, but Mr. S is the acting vice-con-
sul. Dr. B is here too, and as the “ Edith ”is not to sail
for two days, he and I have arranged a riding expedition for
to-morrow up country. The main house of the Consulate is
a large native one fronting the sea, and is divided by screens
into three compartments. Behind is the habi, or enclosure,
and round it are several smaller houses used as sleeping
houses, one of which has been allotted to me. The rest of the
habi is garden and lawn tennis ground. After lunch Dr.
B went with me to call on Mr. M , with whom
we stayed for afternoon tea, and returned in time for dinner.
20 th Sept. —We started at about twelve o’clock, my horse
commencing by bolting with me to the top of Mount Zion.
However, I soon got him into working order. After leaving the
town, we followed a bush road until within sight of Bea, the
place where Captain Croker, of H.M.S. “ Favorite,” was shot
when attacking the old party, who would not swear allegiance
243


to King George and give up heathenism. The verdict upon
this was “serve him right,” as he had no business to interfere.
He is said to have attacked the opposing force, leading his
men with Bible in one hand and sword in the other—a
religious fanatic, a class of men who do more harm to the cause
of Christianity than the most rampant unbeliever. There is a
tombstone erected to his memory on the top of Mount Zion,
and on it is this inscription :
KOE
MAKA FAKAMANATU
ENI
KIA
KABITENE KALOKA
KOE EIKI VAKA OE
MANOUA BELITANIA
KOE
“ FAVOLITE ’’
AIA NAE TO IHE ENE
TO KONI KIHE TAU I BEA
I.HONO AHO 24 OE
MAHINA KO JUNE 1840
Bea kno Fokotun oe
maka Fakamanatu ni
ehe Buleaga o Toga
ihe aho 4 o June 1870
koe mca ko tauhi ae
Higoa oe toko taha uae
mate koenhi naa ne of a
kihe fonua ni.
SACRED
TO THE MEMORY
OF
WALTER CROKER, ESQ,,
Commander of
H.B.M.S. “FAVORITE,"
Who was killed in an attack upon the
STOCKADE OF BEA,
On the 24th of June, 1840.
Erected by the
TONGAN GOVERNMENT
On the 4th June, 1870.
From Bea we rode on to Vae-Tonga, where the Doctor had to
call and see a patient. We were much amused at the
endeavours made to plough a field with a young unbroken
bull. The effect produced was just like a very badly-put-
together spider’s web. From Vae-Tonga we rode by cross
roads to Fulaha, a large native town, situate on the edge of
a lagoon. After leaving here, the road skirts the lagoon,
passing through some lovely scenery, similar to English park
land. At Foxholes, the residence of Mr. P ,we stopped
for dinner. His house is most beautifully situate on rising
ground, looking over rich tropical vegetation to the lagoon,
which is about nine miles in length. Late in the afternoon
we rode on to his brother’s place at Mua, passing a most
wonderful tree, a species of banyan. The extraordinary part
of it was that it had no visible main trunk, but consisted of a


number of small trunks, of different sizes, resembling a huge
bundle of faggots, in all from eighteen to twenty feet in
diameter. Its branches were of enormous size, and covered
a great area. There is said to be underneath it an entrance
to a cave, which is on the other coast, and that once a cat went
through but that it came out without any hair on. I forget
where it is, but somewhere at home, there is a cave through
which a blind fiddler and his dog were supposed to have gone.
The dog came out without any hair on, and nothing more was
ever heard of the fiddler. So tales travel. On reaching Mua,
as there were still two hours of daylight left, we walked on
to see Captain Cook’s tree. The native legend here is that
had he not left when he did the natives would have murdered
him. We next went on to see the tombs of the Tui-Tonga
race of kings; they were the old sacred kings of this group of
Tonga-Tabu. The story goes that after a time the Tui-Tonga
family became too great to attend to the affairs of state, so
deputed it to another. The present king was the man who
by his deputation gradually acquired the real right. King
George really was the big chief of the Haabai group, coming,
as I have before said, from the island of Uiha. The repre-
sentative of the Tui-Tonga family still lives in Mua, having a
language of his own, and although he has now no power, the
present king would squat when in his presence, as a proof
of his inferiority. The tombs are immense raised platforms,
with a border of enormous stones. The largest tomb is
pyramid shaped, having three tiers. The platforms at one
time were covered with white coral. The tombs are now all
buried away in the bush, and overgrown with trees and
creepers. The biggest of the stones round the tombs weighs
thirty tons, and measures 21ft. by 8 by 2. They were all
supposed to have been brought by different people attending
the funeral as offerings, and some say even from as far off as
Wallis Island. On our way back, we passed a stone standing
by the road side. It is about three feet high, and the top is
highly polished. About this stone there are many yarns. Some
say that it was a harbour of refuge in case of homicide, others
that it was the stone brought to Captain Cook, as a tribute
offering, but in all probability it was the stone on which the
brains of the victims were knocked out, there being one
similar to it at Bau, in Fiji. On returning to Mr. P ’s
house, we saw a magnificent sunset over the lagoon. In the
evening, we went round to the house of Anaice, the daughter


of a very big chief, and who is supposed to be going to marry
Wellington Gu. On our return there was a messenger
waiting for the Doctor to take him back to plaster up a man’s
head, who had fallen out of his cart when drunk.
2i st Sept. —The Doctor returned at six this morning, having
been at work all night. He found, on seeing his patient,
that he had to return to Nucualofa for instruments, &c. After
breakfast we started for Hahaki (East) to see the stones.
These are one of the great sights of the island, and the object
of our expedition. About them there are no authentic
records. They are similar to ours at Stonehenge, except
that the top stone is morticed into the two uprights, which
are about sixteen feet high, but which were no doubt origin-
ally very much higher, as they must be sunk some distance
into the ground. We scrambled up to the top, and in the
centre of the top stone there is a hollow, in which it was
said that the blood of victims was poured. The stone, being
porous, it soaked through, and dropping upon any having
disease cured them at once. There is a more likely yarn
that it had something to do with the worship of their great
god Muomi. All over the island there are evidences of the
great length of time that it has been inhabited, and of the
enormous population that it must have at one time had.
From Hahaki we rode on to the end of the island, passing
through several native towns, the largest of which was
Cologa. Every town is surrounded with a stout fence of
upright cocoa-nut logs, to prevent the pigs from straying into
the bush. These fences are a great nuisance, as, unless your
horse has some idea of jumping, which very few have, it
means getting off and pulling down a pile of cocoa-nut logs both
on entering and leaving a town. Thelastfew miles of our road
was the prettiest thing I have seen, a grassy glade shaded by
thick foliage trees, most of them in flower, or overgrown with
flowering creepers, the stately cocoa-nuts rearing their waving
heads out of this rich bed of verdure; and planted along each
side was a row of deep red crotons. The road runs out on
to a wild, rugged coast, with a heavy surf breaking in on the
reef. From a square mound, which was built to commemerate
the coming of age of George Tukuhaho, the eldest son of Tugi,
the most powerful chief in Tonga-Tabu, we got a magnificent
view both of the coast and of the island of Eooa, said to be
the most beautiful in the South Pacific. Captain Cook men-
tions it, and says that a time will come when this island will


be overrun with sheep. At the present day it is about the
only island in these regions where sheep can be reared. We
now turned our heads for home, as S had promised to
ride out to meet us. On the way we stopped for lunch at a
trader’s. Soon after leaving his house, we met a messenger
from Fulaha to fetch Dr. B , so we rode hard for Fox-
holes, where I stopped to rest and the Doctor went on, but
soon returned, owing to receiving news that his patient was
dead. S turned up also, and we had a regular race
home. As we entered Nucualofa, there was a cricket match
going on,a perfect pandemonium; wild shouts from the players,
and melodious noises from the crowd produced by beating old
kerosene tins. The natives have taken to cricket, and there
are some really good players amongst them. This club beat
H.M.S. “ Emerald,” of which they were very proud, and claim
it as a victory over the English, coupling it with that of
Captain Croker’s defeat at Bea.
22 nd Sept. —At one o’clock we weighed anchor, and before
sundown were well clear of the reef, and on our course for
Auckland.
The vessel lay
Her course, and gently made her liquid way.
The cloven billow flashed from off her prow
In furrows formed by that majestic plough ;
The waters with their world were all before—
Behind, the South Sea’s many an islet shore. — Byron.
*******
2nd Oct. —Writing at sea is impossible with me, or almost
so, and more especially in a small craft. I now am
comfortably housed in the Star Hotel, Auckland, having
dropped our anchor this evening at seven o’clock. I have,
however, thoroughly enjoyed our run down from Tonga-
Tabu, a distance of 1,128 miles, which, considering the size
of the “ Edith ” (75 tons), and that we were becalmed for
one whole day, is not a bad passage. From the time of
leaving Tonga-Tabu until we sighted Cape Brett at three
o’clock yesterday, we never saw anything beyond a sea bird.
It is, indeed, the Sahara of the seas. I have slept in the deck-
house, and so ’small was the bunk that it was not broad
enough to allow me to lie flat on my back, or long enough for
me to stretch at full length. I have worked as one of the
sailors, and we have been hard at work painting her. I
did most of the finer work for them. The hardest


part, however, was pumping her out, which we had to do at
least every watch, for she was making water fast, either
owing to her having been on the reef or her upper timbers
having started slightly. Our cooking on board has been
of the roughest description, nothing but “ salt horse,” ex-
cept two small chickens no bigger than sparrows, which
fell to my share as the invalid on the first two days
out. Our cook was a bright specimen. The first day he
boiled the radishes, and sent the carrots up raw. This
morning, at daybreak, we were passing the islands known
as the Hen and Chickens, while further away were “The
Little Barrier” and “The Barrier,” two large mountainous
islands. We were then only about fifty miles from Auckland,
and it became rather a question whether we could reach port
this night, having only very light winds. The entrance is
very circuitous, as, after rounding Teri-Teri Island, on which
there is a lighthouse, you have to bear away in order to
round the point of Ringototo, an extinct volcano. The
monotony was broken by our having another schooner as
companion, and racing her up. It was a headwind, and
although a faster sailer we beat her by a considerable time
by our captain’s better judgment in tacking. When once
the anchor was down I was not long in getting ashore, and,
as in other colonial towns, Saturday night is the great time
to see the people turn out, I amused myself watching the
crowd promenading Queen Street. The shops remain open
till eleven o’clock, and I should imagine, on this night at all
events, drive a rattling trade, and more especially its
public-houses, of which there are not a few, Auckland
being famous for its barmaids. Queen Street, the only good
street in Auckland, contains all the shops, which must be
most convenient, especially in wet weather, as there are
verandahs all along. What a pity this system cannot be
introduced into England, where we have so much rain. I
met Captain S and D , of the “ Active.” They
got in from Va-Vau four days ago. With them I went to
have some oysters, for which this part of the world is noted.
I feel the cold here more than 1 ever felt cold before. I have
thicker things on than I would wear in England in winter,
but this is on account of the sudden jump from the tropics.
3 rd Oct. —My shower bath this morning was like so much
iced water. Hearing there was a good service at St. Paul’s,
and not having been to church since leaving Sydney in June, I


thoroughly enjoyed the music, as there was a capital choir
and good organ. The church is cruciform and gothic, white
walls, and polished wooden roof. The choir was a mixed one,
and placed on a tier of seats sloping down from the organ, in
the north transept, the front row being boys in surplices, the
next ladies and behind them again men. It is evidently a
voluntary choir, and in it beauty was not wanting. As far
as I have seen, the fair sex of Auckland have good figures,
and dress well, but like the other colonials have bad feet. In
the afternoon I went for a walk through the domain, most
beautifully laid out on hilly ground, and thickly covered with
trees of all sorts. One part is left in its original state ; the
ti-trees must be of great age, as in Australia they rarely
reach more than being a shrub, while here they are a forest
tree. We returned by way of the cemetery, and there I noticed,
in many cases, the simplicity of the epitaphs—“ Our Julia,”
“ Our Mary Ann,” and such like. Nothing more. They do
not hand down much to posterity. Nearly all the graves
were fenced in with white palings, which gave the cemetery a
most substantial look. I got back to the hotel in time for
dinner. The living here is good, and after being so long
without fresh meat and vegetables, and the last fortnight on
salt horse only, I feel a regular gourmand, and in fact, I have
got such an enormous appetite, that I quite expect to see
the hotel take down its sign, as did the one in the “ Jumping
Frog.”
qth Oct. —To-day I have devoted to shopping, and seeing
about my luggage, &c., as I have taken my passage in the
“Tararua,” sailing to-morrow. She arrived from the south
to-day with but few passengers. On going on board I had
a narrow escape. As I was crossing the gangway I
heard a shout, and involuntarily ducked my head, just in
time to escape being knocked down by a huge packing case
which they were taking out of the hold. It passed within an
inch of my head. In the evening I went to the Theatre
Royal to see the Lingards in “The Vestal.” It is a large
theatre, with only a dress circle and no upper tier. All the
rabble are below, which is not at all a bad idea. For wet
and dirty weather here there is a capital idea. All the cross-
ings are asphalted, and you can get about dry-footed. On
the omnibuses, I see one of the names is the “ Khyber Pass.”
It certainly would be difficult to find where these colonial
towns will not go to get names; but, with one or two excep


tions, the native names have been adopted here. Auckland
itself is a fine town, containing some handsome buildings,
the courts and the hospital being the two finest. Its harbour
is perfect, and looking across it to the north shore reminds
me somewhat of Ilfracombe. The white, chalky-looking
cliffs also resemble the Cornish coast. Away in the back-
ground rises the volcanic island of Ringototo, peculiar from
the fact that it presents the same appearance from whatever
side you see it.
sth Oct. —I had great difficulty in getting my things off
the “Edith,” as she had gone into dock. Punctually at four
o’clock we got under weigh. In all, we are sixteen saloon
passengers, most of them being of a very second-rate descrip-
tion. However, I was fortunate at dinner in sitting opposite
a Mr. and Mrs. C , from Christchurch, both exceedingly
nice. My cabin companion is a harmless lout, on his way to
England. What he is doing in the saloon puzzles me. He
appears to me to carry his toilet requisites in his pocket.
6th Oct. —At daybreak this morning, we were off Russell,
in the Bay of Islands, and on coming on deck a most lovely
view there was. We might have been anchored in the
middle of a Scotch lake, so impossible was it to tell the way
in, surrounded too, by hills of considerable size. After break-
fast, the captain very kindly put a boat at our disposal, so
we made up a party to go ashore, taking with us the
necessary appliances for an oyster luncheon, as the rocks
here are covered with them. We first went to the Saw Mills,
the owner of which is very clever in carving ornaments out
of the kauri gum, for which the northern part of New
Zealand is noted. It is found by digging, it being at the
roots of old and long since decayed kauri pines. After
making our purchases, we rowed over to another point and
landed. Mrs. C and lat once started for a scramble in
search of ferns, only returning to find the rest hard at work
cutting bread and butter and opening oysters. At four
o’clock, we were once ,more under weigh, and as we went
down the bay we were able to see the beautiful scenery
that we had passed early in the morning. The name
hardly gives a proper idea of the place. A bay it certainly
is not, but rather a winding estuary of the sea, filled with
islands, and fringed by highish hills. On emerging into the
open a rugged and dangerous coast presents itself, which was
soon hidden from sight by approaching night.


COPY OF CHART OF
S.S.
“ TARARUA.”
8 .5
Days’
C fl aJ
Date.
Lat.
Long.
Course.
Run.
Remarks.
A -a
H
S to
1880.
*
Oct. 7
34'°5 s
iyo - 52W
N 82 W
igo
58
965
Passed Three Kings
8
33'54-S
166’oyW
N 87 W
237
295
728
at daybreak.
9
33'58 s
i6i-I4W
S 8g W
243
538
485
IO
33'59S
i5 6 '3 iW
West
23 s
774
255
II
33'48S
I 5 I ’33W
N 87 W
248
1022
10
Passed SydneyHeads
at 1 p.m.
ii th Oct. —Such is the log of our trip, and one to be
thankful for; for throughout we have had splendid weather.
Mr. and Mrs. C have been kindness itself. The former
always appearing at the right moment with champagne and
biscuits. At one o’clock, we were once more inside the
Heads, and soon afterwards got to our berth alongside Miller’s
Wharf. Hotels in Sydney are remarkable for their badness,
but as I had given no one notice of my coming I had per-
force to go to Petty’s. There you are compelled to pay ten
shillings a day, not an extravagant charge if you happen to
know no one ; but considering that I remained in the hotel
three days and only had one breakfast it became somewhat
absurd, so I removed to the Australian Club, to my mind
by far more comfortable than the Union, and where
you meet a nicer set of men, although grey heads prepon-
derate. Sydney I found much as I left it. G , too,
is still here. The L s have moved from the Hermitage
into Phillip Street; which saves one many a drive out.
One can never go anywhere without meeting some-
one. The first men I met on going into Petty’s were W.
G and F , both from Manchester. The latter has
only just arrived out, and saw J. E a day or two before
leaving. E , too, is staying here, and several others
whom I had met in Melbourne. The R s arrived from
Queensland, and Sir Francis and Lady S from Tasmania,
and Lady Jen/iM and daughter from South Australia. I was
at first afraid that everybody would be over at Melbourne,
but Lady Augustus and Lg/fatt arrived back the day I did,
and the Governor, and with him the Duke of
later. Since their arrival there have been several excursions,
to which they kindly asked me ; one day up the Paramatta
251


river—called a river, but really at first an estuary, a continua-
tion of the harbour, beautiful in its winding form, but greatly
lacking variety in its surroundings. On another occasion we
went for a pic-nic to Pearl Cove, and then on to the end of
Middle Harbour. lam in great luck to see Sydney in this
way, as no doubt a steam launch and a jolly party adds much
to the enjoyment of this harbour. Poor people ! they have
little else to talk about, and interest themselves in little else,
the first question you are always asked when introduced to
anyone here is, “ Well, what do you think of our harbour? ”
There might be no other place in the world which possessed
anything worth seeing. Before entering the river, you get a
magnificent view of Darling Harbour, surrounded by huge
warehouses, and lined by steamers and other craft, giving
some idea of the large trade that must be done with Sydney.
At the entrance to the river is Cockatoo Island, formerly a
penal establishment, where the most refractory characters
were confined. It was against the law for any boat to go
within a certain distance of it, and there are still standing
some of the old watch-towers. This river, too, has many
beautiful bays and inlets, and on its banks are some fine
residences.
20 th Oct. —I had determined this time to see the Hawkes-
bury River, about which Anthony Trollope went into such
raptures. The Sydney people seem to know nothing of it,
although it is within twenty miles of them. “ Our harbour
is enough, why see other places ? ” There are now complete
arrangements made for the trip. Leaving by steamer for
Manley Beach, you catch the coach thence for Pitt Water,
where there is now a comfortable hotel. We were a party of
twelve, so to fit us in properly was at first a puzzle. However,
there were any number of spring mattresses. The drive from
Manley Beach is very pretty, getting beautiful views both of
the coast and inland scenery. At one time there used to be
any amount of cabbage trees, but cultivation has destroyed
them. We passed one over a hundred feet high. Along the
road there are some beautiful grassy avenues, and two
picturesque lagoons, the larger of which is called “ Dewhy
Long Reef.” A little further along, there is a magnificent view
of the ocean, and the wild basaltic headlands forming the
entrance to Broken Bay. After this, the road crosses
Narrabeen, asmall lake about three miles long, and surrounded
by wooded hills sloping down to the water’s edge. Suddenly,


on topping a rise, Pitt W ater lay below us, buried amongst
hills, more resembling Scotch scenery than anything I have
seen in Australia, and to add to the resemblance, it was
raining. It is really a large arm of the Hawkesbury River,
about eight miles in length, and nestling on its banks is a
small hotel, which was to be our quarters for the night. This
has only been opened about a month, and the poor landlady
was at first very much put out at seeing so many, and especially
when some of our party began to quarrel about rooms, but at
last all was amicably settled, and we sat down, about eighteen
of us, to a remarkably good tea. Before turning in for the
night, although strictly a temperance hotel we managed to
discover a bottle of whiskey.
21 st Oct. —Alack-a-day ! on getting up this morning it was
raining hard, but each and all of us declared, the wish being
father to the thought, that it was going to be a fine day.
However, after a good breakfast, we started in a small steamer
up Pitt Water. On each side are beautiful bays, and numerous
cottages nestle along its banks, evidently the homes of some
woodmen. If some of our poorer classes in England were
to see such homes as these, how long, I wonder, would they
be before they emigrated ? At the entrance to the Hawkes-
bury, and just inside Broken Bay, stands out the bold head-
land of Barrenjoey, with its lighthouse, a welcome beacon,
no doubt at times, to the storm-tossed vessels, for this coast is
wild, and subject to very severe weather. Even now there
were seven'vessels lying inside weather-bound. For the first
few miles it is difficult to believe that you are in a river at
all, but rather in a vast lake, with many bays, and surrounded
by high and rich verdure-covered hills, rising one above
another. This is the river which Anthony Trollope raves
about as being the most beautiful in the world. At every
bend fresh beauties were disclosed, and beauties that were
ever changing. Now wild, precipitous rocks, looking as if
the mere vibration of the passing steamer would bring them
down upon the top of us. A few more turns of the screw
and you pass a patch of rich soil under cultivation, with a
small homestead, buried away amongst orange trees. At
one point, a small boat put out to us laden with oysters, and
we bought three bucketsfull for a few shillings. Fifty miles
up the river we stopped for lunch at Wiseman’s Ferry, named
after Solomon Wiseman, an early settler, whose coffin is still
to be seen in the vault of the little church hard by. The


church is now without a roof, it having been blown off
a year or two ago in a gale of wind. One thousand feet
above the river are suspended the telegraph wires, looking
like spider’s threads. The road, which is the main one
to Sydney, was made by convict labour, and there is a
rock called the Court House, as it was there that summary
justice was dealt out to the convicts. While waiting for our
steamer to start again, we were amused by watching them
swimming stock over the river, which is here very wide,
being the junction of the Macdonald and Hawkesbury Rivers.
Although after leaving Wiseman’s Ferry, the river is very
lovely, yet too much loveliness taken all at once may disagree.
I think, were I to advise anyone, it would be to telegraph for
a trap to meet them at Wiseman’s Ferry and drive to Windsor.
For another forty-two miles we proceeded up the river, until
we came to where a coach met us to drive us the eleven miles
to Windsor, which it did in forty minutes, in time to let us
get something to eat before catching the train for Sydney.
22nd Oct. —My time in Sydney was rapidly drawing to
a close, as I was due in Melbourne about the 25th of
October, in order to be in time for the Cup week, but,
as yet, I have been able to hear of no place where I
can lay my head, as every hole and corner is full,
I hear there are one hundred and forty people sleeping
in the Turkish Bath. An amusing thing has happened.
G and I were hunting for a book he wanted in
a large second-hand bookshop here, and we had made
several calls on the old man keeping it. It was a book
containing the names of all those who had been transported,
and on our going in, for the third time, to enquire if the
book was forthcoming, the old man said, “ You seem in a
hurry to know who was sent out here.” G said he
wanted to know about some man in the Guards who had
been sent out. “ What do you know about the Guards ? ”
said the old fellow. “ My grandfather was in that regiment
and on G giving his name, the old man said, “ I knew
him well, sir, when quartered at Knightsbridge.” It struck
me that perhaps this was the very man we were trying to
find out about, who had been sent out for the Cato Street
plot. His age would agree, I managed to pick up rather
a valuable book —Therry’s New South Wales —the best book
that has been written about the colony; but unfortunately
names of convicts were mentioned in it whose relations and


connexions are now well-to-do people in Sydney, so the book
has been largely bought up and destroyed.
23rd Oct. —l am to leave Sydney to-morrow, overland,
for Melbourne. It would almost appear, from the numbers
booked, that the whole of Sydney was on the move, and as
yet I have not been able to hear of any room having been
taken for me, as the Oriental Hotel has changed managers,
and repudiates all promises made by the former manager.
10 th Nov. —The journey overland is less tedious than it used
to be, as the coach journey has been reduced to twenty
miles. Any other country but this would have had the line
completed right through previous to the opening of the
Exhibition, as it is just the coach journey in the middle that
deters so many people from going. Who, if it were finished,
would not prefer eighteen hours by rail rather than forty-five
by sea, with the chance of rough weather ? I hear of one
steamer which left Sydney, full, and timed to arrive for the
Cup, being out for five days in heavy weather. Just before
leaving Sydney, I heard a case proving the despotism of men
in power out here. A man, second in power in one of the
public departments, had got his leave of absence for his
summer holiday, and was going over to Melbourne for the
races, and his name appeared in the paper amongst the
passengers booked. His chief seeing this, sent for him, and
stopped his leave until after the Melbourne Races, saying he
objected to races, and would not have any of his department
going to them if he could help it. It may safely be said that
Cup Day in Melbourne is one of the sights of the world, and this
year more especially so. The races are held at Flemington,
about seven miles out of town, and the course is connected
direct with Melbourne by rail, road and river. It is impossible
to imagine anything better arranged, even tothe smallest items.
For instance, first and second-class trains start from different
platforms, the platforms themselves being divided into sections
to prevent crushing. Then there is a separate entrance for
ladies only, or ladies accompanied by gentlemen. You can
also buy your tickets in town, which includes, according to
the price you pay, the entrance to the particular part of the
ground you wish to go to. It would be difficult to imagine a
more orderly crowd; a wonderful thing, considering that on
the Cup Day there were upwards of 120,000 people present.
The course on that day presented a marvellous sight, as the
ladies will vie one with the other as to which shall be most


striking —I can hardly say the best dressed. As a rule, some
bookmaker’s wife carries the day, in some dress that no lady
dare appear in ; it is even carried so far as the man in attend-
ance wearing ties and gloves to match the dress. Melbourne
is at present terribly full. They say that in one day over
ten thousand people came in. The amount of gaiety that
goes on is really too much, partly on account of everybody
wishing to give their entertainment in Cup week, or as near
to it as possible, in order to take in their friends from other
colonies. In one fortnight I had nine dances, besides pic-nics
and other entertainments. At the club alone nearly eighty
people sit down to dinner each night. Talking of pic-nics we
had some very enjoyable ones, especially one given by Dr.
J the day after I arrived in Melbourne, and to which the
Commodore took me. I was on the drag driven by C ——,
of the “ Wolverine,” and in which we nearly came to grief.
Driving through the bush past Beaconsfield Tower, we came
suddenly on a tree which had fallen across the road, and
before C had time to pull up we were on it. Fortunately,
I was sitting on the top of the drag between the seats, so
jumped off, and got the leaders’ heads. Had they taken to
kicking a bad accident might have been the result.
At another pic-nic given by J. R , I was again on an
unlucky drag, driven by Mr. B ,of Hay. It was to the
same place, and returning home there are some very long and
steep hills. Going down the first hill we were the second drag,
but fortunately some little distance behind the first, when,
just as we started, our break refused to act. There was
nothing for it but to let the horses go. Looking ahead, to
save an accident seemed impossible, as we were passing
through a narrow cutting, and to make the drag ahead of us
hear was the difficulty. However, the lady sitting next Mr.
R ,who was driving, remarked that we seemed to be coming
rather fast, and he, seeing what was the matter, pulled as
close in as he could, and we managed to scrape in between
them and the sides of the cutting. At the bottom of the hill
were several wood-carts, which managed somehow or other to
get out of our way, and so we reached the bottom in safety.
But in another quarter of a mile there was another long hill,
and Mr. B made a mistake in attempting it with a full
drag, but it was only a mistake in judgment, owing to his
not knowing his horses. He attempted it, however, and before
we had gone ten yards, one of the wheelers bolted and off we


went. I shall never forget that hill. It was all we could do
to hold ourselves and the ladies on, the drag swaying.from side
to side. I quite gave ourselves up for a bad accident. One
lady was nearly shot out, and only saved by my catching her
by the arm. We reached the bottom, and when we pulled up
on the opposite hill, one of our leader’s traces was undone.
We fortunately got home without any further mishap.
C has returned to Melbourne, from his trip with Bishop
Selwyn through the Solomon Islands, and he says he feels
very thankful to have got back safely. The papers are at
present full of the various outrages committed by the natives
of these islands, and their neighbours, the New Hebrides, on
whites, the worst of which has been the attack upon H.M.
schooner “Sandfly,” and the murder of Mr. Brewer, the officer
commanding her, and of some of his crew. This has, at last,
awakened our slow-moving Government, and the “ Emerald
has gone down to the island to chastise the natives. What
a farce all this seems. They will probably burn a few villages,
and cut down a cocoa-nut tree or two, while the natives are
away in the bush laughing at them. The only way to do any
good at all is by giving a very much more severe lesson,
shooting a large number of them, and after that a man-
of-war should pay regular visits to all these islands. If these
savage islanders are ever to be civilized, Exeter Hall must
have no voice in the matter, as they can only be civilized by
force of arms, not by burning down a few mud huts. It is the
fear of the revolver that brings these men to their senses.
The same remark applies to the aborigines of Australia.
« * * * *
13 th Nov. —Now that most of the gaiety is over, I feel
it my duty to begin to move about and see a little of
the sights of Victoria, so to-day I made up my mind
to see Fernshaw. I started by the coach leaving the
“ Albion ” at eight o’clock. It is a drive of forty-eight
miles through some lovely country, especially the latter
part, where the road winds about among the ranges. Vast
gullies lie on either side, the beds of which are rich
with fern trees, and towering above are immense eucalyp-
tus trees, in some instances reaching to the height of nearly
four hundred feet. From one of these trees Mr. Jefferson,
the proprietor of the Fernshaw Hotel, sent a strip of bark to
the Paris Exhibition three hundred and ninety feet long.
s


Baron Von Mueller gives the dimensions of some. He says
specimens of the Eucalyptus Amygdalina, three hundred and
ninety-six feet high, can be seen at Fernshaw and Dandenong,
and he supposes that some of them will measure four hundred
and eighty feet, eighty-one feet in circumference at the
base, and eighteen feet in circumference three hundred feet from
the ground. To give some idea of the height of these trees,
St. Paul’s Cathedral dome is three hundred and seventy feet,
and St. Peter’s, Rome, four hundred and thirty-four feet nine
inches. The butt of the trees, some feet from the ground,
would afford standing room for four hundred men, and its
top, at three hundred feet, twenty men. The average height
in the ranges where the biggest trees are to be found would
be, I should say, about three hundred feet. The little township
of Fernshaw, which contains only seven familes and twenty-
three inhabitants, lies buried away among some of the highest
hills, about four miles from the Black Spur, over which the
road to Marysville goes.
i jth Nov. —Mr. and Mrs. M , a friend of theirs,
and Miss M are at present over from Adelaide, and
we made up a party to do the Gippsland Lakes, about
which there seems to be such varied opinion. We
started by the early train for Sale, the termination of
the Gippsland line, one hundred and twenty-three miles
from Melbourne. The line passes through some pretty
country and in sight of the Dandenong ranges, and when
nearing Sale opens up a wonderfully rich pasturage
country. At Sale we made no stop, but drove at once to La
Trobe Bridge, where there is a comfortable hotel, kept by
Mrs. Thomas, and whom I found to hail from Manchester,
and one who knew my grandfather. Her tongue betrayed
her Lancashire descent, and it was quite a treat to hear the
well-known dialect so far from home. In the afternoon we
had a free fight in front of the hotel. A bullock-driver who
had had too much was bullying all the others, so they sent off
for a neighbouring squatter, who was renowned for his strength
and fighting powers ; after he came they had a fair fight, in
which the bullock-driver got a most fearful thrashing, and
went home, we hope, a wiser man —at allevents peace reigned
at La Trobe Bridge after he had gone. The hotel is on the
river. There is supposed to be good fishing, but I fancy we are
rather too early, as we got no sport. The next day we
half hesitated about going on, but finally decided, as we had


come to see the Lakes, we ought to, so started about two
o’clock in a small steamer. There is about twelve miles of
river before reaching Lake Wellington, the finest of them all,
being twelve miles broad and twenty miles long. There are
several other lakes, connected together by long reaches.
Lakes, forsooth ! Muddy swamps, varying from four to
twelve feet deep, I should think, lined by low flats, covered
with ti-tree scrub, and only occasionally getting a distant
glimpse of the ranges. Oh ! how we regretted having left
our comfortable quarters at La Trobe Bridge. Our destina-
tion was Bairn sdale, but before we reached it it was dark,
so missing, as we were told, the only pretty bit in the whole
Lakes. The last few miles was up a river winding between
banks covered with timber. The hotel at Bairnsdale was
large and fairly comfortable, with a thorough old sports-
man as a landlord. This is the centre of the snipe
shooting district. A coach leaves here for Sale, forty-three
miles away, and so disgusted were we with the Lakes,
that we preferred braving the roughness of the road to
that wretched little steamer. It certainly was a rough and
dusty journey, and I fancy sometimes the ladies of the party
-even wished for the steamer. To make matters worse, it
was the hottest day we have had this year, and with a nasty
north wind blowing. We reached Melbourne at ten o’clock
at night, and so great had been the change that we were
glad to sit over a fire in the club smoke-room, the ther-
mometer registering a change of over 40°.
Bth Dec. —For some time past R and I have been talk-
ing of a trip up the river Yarra. As we can find no one who
has ever done it, about its possibility we can learn nothing.
Many have told us that it is impossible on account of the
rapids and snags, which I think has rather made us the more
determined to do it. But still nothing has been fixed. On
my return from Sale, however, I found that R had got
another man to join, and had made arrangements to start
on Saturday, but owing to a large garden party given by Mrs.
W. J. C , of Sunbury, I could not leave to start with
them, but promised to join them somewhere on the Sunday.
• » # * »
nth Dec. —The garden party at Sunbury was a great
■success. A special train took us down. The station presented
a wonderfully gay scene, as there were at least four hundred


guests. The day was perfect, and soon after arrival at
Rupert’s Wood we sat down to a magnificent luncheon, after
which, the Governor, the Duke of M , and the Earl of
E being present, there were the usual toasts. The
afternoon was passed in playing lawn tennis, which was,
however, deserted in favour of rounders. There was a fortune-
teller, the way to which was through a fern bower, and I
fancy the ladies waited there in much trepidation to hear
what theirs was to be. There was a marquee for dancing, and
a good band. A special train took us back to town. I was
much surprised, on getting back, to find a telegram waiting
for me from R asking me to join them at Heidleberg,
and I was just starting off, when he turned up himself. It
turned out that they had started at twelve o’clock from Prince’s
Bridge, and rowed up as far as Johnson Street Bridge,
eighteen miles up the river, after which they had some
considerable difficulty in getting the boat over Dight’s Falls.
Towards evening they pulled up at a riverside boat-house,
enquired for the nearest public-house, and were told of
the “ Early Worm,” but on coming out on the road they saw
a mile-stone with “ three miles to Melbourne ”on it. So
that after rowing twenty-five miles they were almost as near
Melbourne as when they started. They wisely determined to
return for the night.
12 th Dec. —We made an early start, and drove out
to where the boat was left. We stopped in the middle of the
day at Darabin Bridge Hotel, where we had a rattling good
dinner for a shilling a head, and reached Heidleberg in the
evening, the river the whole way being one mass of snags, as
it runs through a cultivated district, and the farmers, to get
rid of the trees, have thrown them into the river.
13 th Dec. —l had left, of course supposing that R
had made all preparations for an excursion, of which we could
learn but little ; but on inquiry I found that he had got
nothing with him but a change of clothes, and B the
same, he trusting entirely to R , who, unfortunately,
has the failing of always, to use a colonialism, wishing to
“ boss the concern,” and he certainly had made a nice mess
of it this time. There was nothing for it, therefore, but in
the morning for B and myself to return to Melbourne,
which, by the way, is only eleven miles away, although by
the river it is over thirty, to make our necessary purchases,
in spite of opposition on the part of R , who scoffs at the


idea of our not finding accommodation, whenever we should
want it. Our purchases consisted in, first a tent, then a thing
never to be gone anywhere without, a billy, an axe, a lantern,
and provisions, with rugs, &c., as there was every possibility
of our finding no quarters other than the open air, or, as we
called it, “The Rowbotham Arms.” It was twelve o’clock
before we once more got under weigh, and our work was one
of considerable difficulty, and gave us some idea of what we
might expect. Before we stopped for the night, we had had
to get over ten rapids, three of which only we could row over.
For the rest, it was either a case of wading up with the boat,
or when the water was too deep and rapid, of landing and
working our way through the thick scrub which lined the
shores, and letting a rope down with a float attached to it,
and so dragging the boat up. There had been one fatal
mistake made in having an outrigged boat, as the outriggers
were one incessant nuisance, catching on every possible snag
and overhanging branch. At five o’clock we were at Temple-
stone, two miles by land from Heidleberg, and here, owing to
the public being full, our tent first came into use. This was
my first experience of camping out in Australia, and I don’t
think we were any of us very expert at first at making
ourselves comfortable. I had the advantage in having
an opossum rug, as with that alone one can be fairly
independent.
14th Dec. —To-day, before making a start, we examined
the river, and found so many impassable rapids on ahead,
that we at once decided to cart our boat to Anderson’s Creek,
six miles away. is peculiar from its being entirely
an Irish settlement. We at last managed to get a cart, but
in getting the boat in we nearly came to grief, as the horse
would not stand the boat over his head, so there was nothing
for it but to take the horse out and see if we could get one which
would. We found it in the possession of one Pat Conolly,
a thorough specimen of an Irish car-driver, and possessing an
Irish car-horse. Considering our boat was twenty-fivefeet long,
it was with some difficulty our journey was made, and I don’t
think we should ever have accomplished it had it not been
for the timely assistance of a wood-carter, who kindly lent
us his two leaders to help us up a steep hill, at which our
worthy animal had jibbed when half way up. Our entrance
into Anderson’s Creek was one of great excitement to the
.natives, as only once before has a boat been up the river.


Anderson’s Creek is a gold mining locality, and famous from
the fact that it is the first place where gold was found in
Australia. “ Geoffry Hamlyn,” written by Chas. Kingsley,
describes this particular part of the world. We got very
comfortable quarters at the Union Hotel, which is, as yet,,
without a licence, which was a lucky thing from what little
we saw of the other publics in the place. The digging
population is not always the quietest, neither is it teetotal.
15 th Dec. —A pouring wet day, and I don’t think either of
us was particularly sorry, as it gave us a good excuse for a
day’s rest. Most of it we spent in wandering about amongst
the different diggings. Here they are principally alluviaL
In one case they got gold just below the surface, averaging
about thirty ounces to the ton, but of course this is wonderfully
exceptional and would not cover a great extent. We stood
by to watch three young fellows wash out a dishful, and
afterwards walked home with them, and saw them weigh the
gold. There was just over eleven shillings worth.
16 th Dec. —As there was a long rapid about a quarter of a
mile up the river, we got our boat over first and then returned
for our baggage. We then had fairly open work for some
considerable distance. At one point we saw some cabbages,
growing, and thought they would be a good addition to our
bacon, so landed. There was a large farm, and the men were
hard at work hay-making. They offered us£i a week and
our tucker. Hay in this country is not made from grass, but
green oats. At about five o’clock, seeing signs of habitation,.
B —— and I landed, and went on a foraging expedition, as
after yesterday’s rain we were not particularly anxious to-
sleep out if we could help it. We were fortunate in finding a
small selector’s hut. His wife was at home, and said we
cOjUldhave a small hut, at which we jumped, and on inspection
found really comfortable quarters, into which we at once moved 1
all our belongings. The hut contained a rough bedstead and
table, all made of split timber. Our landlady, as we might
call her, was going into Anderson’s Creek, only three miles,
away, so we got her to bring us out some bread, and to go on
with she gave us some eggs and scones. With our bacon
and marmalade we had quite a sumptuous repast. I had with
me a hammock, so the other two drew lots for the bed, which
had been made by driving four posts into the ground and
laying split timber across. On it were spread some sacks ;in
one corner was a sack of chaff, which we divided into two.
262


bags, and so made up a third bed on the floor. I think I
certainly had the best of them, as an opossum rug and a
hammock make a good enough bed for a duchess, and besides I
was out of the way of snakes and creeping things innumerable.
The noises that go on at night in the bush are not enlivening;
for some time we were kept awake by the gruntings of the
opossums, the growlings of native bears, and the dismal note
of the curlew, like a child’s cries when in pain. The native
bear is a most peculiar-looking animal. It has no tail, and
like the opossum, lives in the hollows of old gum trees,
coming out only at nights.
i yth Dec. —I think at the finish of this day’s work we
confessed it was the hardest any of us had ever done. The
greater part of the day was spent in the water, getting the
boat up tremendous rapids, until at about three o’clock we
came to an impassable fall. There was nothing for it but to
take the boat through the bush. At one place on the river,
we were greatly amused at the evident consternation of an
old man fishing. We came upon him rather suddenly round
abend in the river, and having just dragged the boat up a
rapid had not on too much clothing. He took to the bush,
evidently having thoughts of Yarra Bend, the lunatic asylum
some distance down the river. To return to our impassable
fall, B and I went on ahead to prospect, and finding that
above it were other rapids, determined to camp, as there was
a suitable place, and it would at least take us a couple of
hours to get the boat through the bush, as it meant cutting
a track for it for at least two hundred yards. We first
carried our things through, then B and I set to work to
pitch our camp, while R felled the scrub. Poor
R ! he is a most irrepressible man. He always has
some idea of townships on ahead, and will not be convinced
that he knows as little as we do about the river. lam now
getting quite an artist at pitching a tent, while B is an
Ai cook, and R does not make a bad looker-on. We
could not have pitched on a more beautiful spot for our camp.
A slightly elevated bank, with a sandy slope to the water’s
edge, making a lovely bathing place, while behind the ground
sloped up to some height, being all open bush beautifully
timbered, a broad winding river, and the noise of the tumbling
fall, while across it was dense scrub, the river lined by some
flowering tree, somewhat resembling hawthorn, and on all
sides thickly-wooded hills.


xß th Dec. —As soon as the sun had dried our things, for
there are heavy dews, we struck camp, and once more'forged
ahead. The same sort of work in and out of the boat, and in the
middle of the day another big fall, but this time over a quarter
of a mile to take the boat through the bush. We had also
the pleasant feeling of knowing, if we did not get to some
habitation, we should have to go to bed supperless. Yester-
day, I sprained my foot rather badly, but being constantly in
the water had stopped it swelling. To-day, however, in
cutting our way through the bush, my axe slipped, and had
it not been that the point caught in the sole of the shoe, I
might have had a serious accident, instead of a nasty cut.
When we had once more launched our boat, there seemed to be
some hope of at last a long reach without any more rapids, and
the river at this point is as big, if not bigger, than at Prince’s
Bridge, and we must be now nearly one hundred miles
up it. Fortune favours the brave, for just about five
o’clock we came upon an old man and a Chinaman fishing.
From them we learnt that the nearest point where provisions
could be procured was Watson’s Creek, four and a half miles
away, so had it not been for these men fishing, where should
we have supped ? The old man offered to act as guide, so
R started off, while B and I pitched camp on
high ground above the river, and then went for a walk in the
bush with our guns, with the hope of getting something for
supper if everything else failed. The scenery here is most
beautiful, as we are thoroughly buried away amongst the hills,
and regularly in the heart of the bush. The sun had set, and
we were anxiously waiting R ’s return, wondering how
biscuits fried in candle-grease would taste. R and
the old man at last turned up with, as we thought, all the
luxuries of this life, the greatest of all being a billy of fresh
milk. The old man is a regular curio ;he came out here at
the time of the gold rush to Bendigo, and made in one year
£4,000, and was one of the few who kept it. He has now
here a small farm, and still, I fancy, fossicks after gold. He
is a regular old sportsman, and when we had finished our
meal, we all went out opossum shooting. The moon was
already full. You wander about, until the dog trees the
’possum, and stands barking at the base. You then get the
tree between yourself and the moon, until you find where the
’possum is, and getting him exactly between yourself and the
moon, fire. This is called mooning him. We found out that


where our camp was pitched was not more than 200 yards
from where we were last night.
1 gth Dec. —To-day was very hot, and I think made all
of us feel lazy, for it was ten o’clock before we were
ready to start, and we had not gone two miles, in which time
we had crossed two rapids, before we came to what made us
exclaim, “ This stops us !” for to get over it would have taken
us at least a whole day, and both B and R felt they
had been away “quite long eno’.” We got our boat out of
the water and cut a track for it through the bush into open
country, then left and walked over to Watson’s creek, where
there is a small hotel and store. Watson’s creek is on the
main road to Melbourne, and the coach from Yarra Flats
passes every morning, so we decided to return to Melbourne
to-morrow, and send the boat back by road, giving it in charge
of our old friend of yesterday. We had in all, in our trip up,
smashed three oars and two sculls, and when we look back
it is a wonder that the boat is still without damage. I think
the various people along the river will long remember the
trip of “ The Maritana.” Along the road we were taken for
all sorts of things, lunatics escaped from Yarra Bend, a
detective and two officers in search of runaway sailors,
surveyors, and it was amusing to find how our fame preceded
us, for in several places Detective B ’s name was known.
The spot where we had left off was within three miles of
Lilydale, which is only twenty miles from Melbourne, whereas
by river we calculated we had come quite one hundred and
twenty miles.
20 th Dec. —We cut but sorry figures this morning,
driving in on the top of the coach. We were in white things
and the day was fearfully hot, and the roads thick with dust,
and to add to our general appearance, we had not shaved
since leaving Melbourne.
23rd Dec. —I had had a long-standing engagement to spend
Christmas Day with the G s. They have a most lovely
place near Schnapper Point, on the Bay, about thirty miles
from town. We were evidently to be a large party, and
M , who was taking his drag down, had kindly offered
me a seat. We left town about eleven, and on our way
stopped at Mordialloc for lunch, for which, by the way, we
went odd man out, and I was let in. Mordialloc is an hotel
on the Bay, celebrated for its honeymoons. We reached
Manyung in time for dinner, and sat down in all a party of


twenty-six, the rest having come by steamer ; and as, with
the exception of our host and hostess, we were all young
people, it may be said that the fun was fast and furious. The
house is on high ground, overlooking the Bay. The men
had a separate house to themselves, known as the Barracks.
Our party was equally divided, so that no one could possibly
feel he was out in the cold. One room in the house had been
set apart for dancing.
2qi/t Dec. —Up to lunch a general romp, after which all
hands were piped for a drive round. We went down to the
Point to see the steamer arrive, and then along the coast.
From the road we got a capital view of Mount Martha and
Arthur’s Seat, of which I got a sketch.
25 th Dec. (Christmas Day). —Some of the party went to
church, others of the party did not. In the afternoon we all
drove round to L ’s, who has a small house here. He
married Miss A ,whose people live close to us in London,and
staying with him at present are her two brothers, one of whom,
is an amateur photographer. We had some most amusing
groups taken. In the evening we had the usual Christmas
revelries, not forgetting the mistletoe-bough. It being Leap
Year, we had some most amusing proposals, and the forfeit
for a refusal was to be two silk dresses. I was most
beautifully let in. Miss May G , while the speeches were
going on after dinner, proposed to me, and of course I could
not do otherwise than accept such a flattering offer, when she
immediately called upon me to return thanks for the family
whose health had just been drunk. Christmas cards are
as much the fashion here as at home, but it does seem
ridiculous to see snow scenes when the thermometer is
registering 115 0 in the shade. How I thought of them all at
home, and more especially so when Mr. G , after dinner,.
produced a bottle of good old port. This was indeed a treat,
as out here such a thing is very rare. The following piece of
poetry appeared in to-day’s “Leader”: —
A REMINISCENCE.
Where the dusky grove of myrtle
Casts a shadow deep and drear,
Where, midst mossy banks enshrouded,
Hides the streamlet bright and clear,
Where the Fem-king holds his revels
In his hidden courts of green,
And the wire-grass weaves a curtain
To enshrine the mystic scene.
266


There I linger’d in the gloaming
Of a sunny Christmas-tide ;
There I linger’d midst the shadows
When the daylight waned and died ;
There I mused, and dreamed and pondered
Of the happy days of yore,
Ere my errant-feet had wandered
To this sunny Austral shore.
O’er me swayed a leafy curtain
Of the wild clematis sweet,
Mossy cushions, soft and silent,
Coyly clasp’d my lingering feet,
Pendulous creepers swung beside me,
Fluttering leaves around me played,
Gently dancing to the music
That the wandering zephyr made.
High above me, gently swaying
As the light breeze wander’d by,
Giant champions of the forest
Stretched their arms towards the sky,
Tall and straight and bare, their columns
Caught the sunset’s fading beam,
Till their gold was turned to silver
In the moonlight’s paler gleam.
Flew my soul, on wings of fancy,
Far across the rolling main,
And in thought I wandered gaily
Midst familiar scenes again.
Plain I saw the dear old homestead,
Gabled, thatched and diamond-paned,
Where, enthroned midst sweet contentment.
Peace and Love together reigned.
All the old familiar landscape,
In its wintry garb of snow,
Glittered in the frosty starlight
And the casement’s warmer glow.
There the pond where off I skated,
There the gate where oft I swung,
In the days when life was golden,
In the days when I was young.
Rose the fair old home before me,
Where my boyhood passed away,
Rose the dear old friends around me,
Dear old faces gone for aye.
Voices hushed seemed sounding near me —
Loving voices, whispering low,
Whispering of the love that cheered me,
And a Christmas long ago.
267


25 th Dec. —Sunday, and fearfully hot, with a strong north
wind blowing, which made us all feel good for nothing, and I
don’t think any of us got further than the cool side of the
verandah. However, in the afternoon, the thermometer
dropped to about 50°, and we turned out in force for after-
noon tea on the beach. I have revelled in the bathing here,
although there is a certain amount of risk on account of the
sharks, so one has to be careful not to venture out too far.
2 yth Dec. —We had intended leaving, but a dance had been
arranged for this evening, to which all the neighbours had
been invited. In the morning we had a most exciting tug
of war, one side of the table against the other, and afterwards
athletic sports of various sorts, in which the ladies joined.
In the afternoon we drove over to Annesley, belonging to the
Hon. T. J. S , in which there is some magnificent carved
ebony furniture. There we had afternoon tea.
28 th Dec the men, all returned, the ladies coming
as far as the church to see us on our way, but we positively
refused to enter. The drive back was dustier than ever, and
on reaching Melbourne we all looked like a party of Red
Indians. So ended one of the jolliest Christmas times pos-
sible, and many thanks to the ladies of the party for having so
greatly contributed, and I am sure that on many of our hearts,
if examined, might be found the names “Tottie” and
“ Lula” deeply imprinted. In the evening I went to see
“ LaFille du Tambour Major” at the Opera house, in which
Miss Pattie Laverne and Mervin, whom I so well remember
coming out in the “ Sultan of Mocha ” at Manchester, were
the chief performers.
29 th Dec. —Up to three o’clock I had hard work packing,
which after one has been settled for some time is no joke, and
making all arrangements for saying “ good-bye ” to Mel-
bourne, as in all probability I shall only return just in time to
catch the Tasmanian boat; my departure, too, is rather sudden,
as I had no intention of leaving Melbourne for another week,
having my passage booked for Tasmania; but while at
Manyung, M has asked me to be his guest, and go down
with him and his brother to his station on the Murray.
His invitation I gladly accepted, for S. M is a man that
everybody likes, an Ai companion and capital sportsman.
He was nicknamed while at Manyung “ the best man of the
crowd.” I am also glad, because I shall see some real
.up-country station life, also that great river, the River
268


Murray. We left Spencer Street Station at 3.30 for
Inglewood, one hundred and twenty miles north, which we
did not reach until ten o’clock.
30 th Dec. —We left Inglewood last night at eleven o’clock in
Cobb’s coach, Arthur M and myself getting the box seats,
S. M preferring to be on the floor of the coach and sleep.
We three were the only passengers. For the first few miles we
passed over slightly hilly country, winding in and out among
the trees, that have a strange, weird look, as the glare of the
five lamps on the coach lights them up in part only, throwing
the rest into deeper shade. It was past midnight before the
first change was made. Our road lay almost due north. I
slept on and off all through the night, but unless provided
with a strap, this is not as a rule a safe thing to do when on the
box seat. At daybreak (3.30) we were at Durham Ox Plain,
at one time a large sheep station, but now cut up into three
hundred and twenty acre blocks by selectors, and the little
huts scattered about all over the plain give it a mdst
comical appearance. Wheat is the pi incipal product. Along
the road I got some shots at wild turkeys, but never managed
to get close enough. They are very shy, and are generally shot
out of a buggy, or with a stalking ox. On once more, and
the further we went the fewer trees we saw, and after passing
Durham Ox, it was an utterly treeless, uninteresting region,
on all sides, as far as the eye could reach, perfectly flat, and
at this time of the year not a blade of grass. The only guide
the coach driver has at night is the Southern Cross. We
reached Kerang at about nine o’clock, where we breakfasted,
and from which we sent a telegram to Manyung, wishing
them all a Happy New Year. The town, which until
recently consisted of five or six buildings, is built on slightly
elevated ground on the banks of the Loddon. A railway to
this place is talked of. Here we changed into a smaller coach,
and shortly after leaving, passed Lake Charm,formerly known
as “The Murdering Lake,” on account of having
been killed there by the blacks. Shortly after this we passed,
as we supposed, along the shores of another lake about three
miles long, and on my remarking to the driver how cool and
refreshing it looked, he replied, “ Why, there is not a billyfull
of water in it,” and so it was. The dried-up clay was of the
colour, and had shades in it so resembling water, that although
we were within two hundreds yards of it, it was not until we
could make out some tracks across it, that we could bring
269


■ourselves to believe that it was not a real lake. Our course
was still due north, now across plains, without a .blade of
grass on them, then passing through a belt of scrub. Here and
there we saw some wonderful mirages, one so close, with the
trees reflected in it, that you could have declared, without
doubt, it was water. The heat was something awful, with a
strong north wind blowing, like blasts from some furnace.
The thermometer registered about 115 0 in the shade, so you
can imagine what it felt like on the box seat of a coach. I
had on, however, a bushman’s hat, a thin felt one with very
broad brim, which for this country are much better than hel-
mets, which are either always being blown off, or tumbling off,
when riding, and are very apt to give one a fearful cold when
the sudden changes occur. At Lake Boga, we stopped to
change horses. The lake is about twelve miles round, and
covered with wild fowl. The home station of Murrabit is on
its banks. The rabbits here are so numerous that they have
had to adopt rabbit-proof fences. There being now no
grass it is a perfect wonder what the rabbits live on ; nearly
all the trees are barked as high as they can reach. It
was nearly four o’clock when we reached Swanhill, on the
banks of the Murray. Here everything was hot; but Garden’s
Hotel is one of the most comfortable I have seen out of
Melbourne. M had a buggy to meet him here, so we
just had time to have something to eat and make a start, as
we had thirty miles still to go before sunset, if possible. Our
road lay through mallee scrub and over box plains, following
the course of the Murray. There were rabbits innumerable,
and the billabongs, meaning in the black’s lingo backwaters,
were covered with wild fowl. It was dusk before we came to
our journey’s end, and at one place we missed the track and
got bushed, and had great difficulty in re-finding it, much
to the consternation of Arthur M , who evidently did not
relish the idea of a night in the bush. However, before nine
o’clock, we saw the lights of the home station of Piangle,
belonging to two brothers, named McC , who gave us a
hearty welcome and refreshment for man and beast.
31 st Dec. —In the middle of the night, the wind suddenly
changed, and came up a regular southerly-buster, but in these
higher latitudes without rain. By daylight, I could see what
a lovely little homestead this is, situate on the high banks of
the Murray. Large log huts, with verandahs, trellised over
by vines, under the shade of enormous gum trees. All the


houses here are built of pine logs, with the crevices cemented.
The inside is lined with hessian or calico and then papered; the
roofs are either bark or shingle. By nine o’clock we were once
more under weigh, as to-day we had seventy miles before us.
M had telegraphed from Swanhill for horses to meet us
halfway. We stopped for lunch at the shearing shed, and then
drove on, but no horses met us. About twenty miles from Bum
Bang, our destination, we met the manager riding, and as one
of our horses showed signs of distress, we exchanged, although
his had been ridden that day about forty-five miles. Along
the road we saw any amount of wild fowl, and I managed to
shoot some duck. Kangaroo and emus, too, there were. I
brought down a full-grown kangaroo, going at full pace, at
sixty-five yards. This was a good test of a choke bore, as I
was using only brown cartridges, with number three shot.
Rabbits were not worth wasting powder over, except one
could get three together, looking upon them as vermin.
Arthur M , seeing four together, wished to draw his first
blood, and taking steady aim missed the lot. The powers of
endurance of Australian horses certainly astonished me, for
neither of these seemed knocked up, and both must have done
seventy miles that day, and both of them, as is the general
custom, grass fed, that is, at night simply turned out into the
paddock. Before sunset, we were comfortably housed in the
pretty little out-station of Bum Bang, and being the last day
of the old year, we sat up, tired as we were, to wish one
another a Happy New Year, and the same to all absent
friends.


CHAPTER VII.
A Race Meeting in the Bush—A Giaphic Though Ungallant Picture-
Life on an Australian Stock Farm—A Day’s Kangaroo Hunting—
Poisoning Wild Dogs: An Interesting Occupation—A Plague of
Rabbit; —The Tramp Nuisance in the Desert —Another Look at
the Murray—A Home in the Bush—Miseries of a River Steamer-
Arrival at Adelaide—The Best Hotel in the Colonies —Farewell to
Victoria —Regrets —On Board the “ Rotomahana”—Am Transformed
into a Snowball—Advantages of New Zealand- Picturesque Scenery
—Niagara Hides her Diminished Head—At the Far End of the
World —Invercargill and Queenstown —Beware of “the Lawyer”—An
Agreeable Surprise and Change of Plans —Grand Excursions—
Scenery Worth Seeing —Whiskey, Whiskey Everywhere, but not a
Drop to Drink —Mount Cook, the Monster of the Southern Alps —A
Mouth-watering Announcement re Mutton —An Opening for Budding
Baedekers —Dunedin Described —Christchurch—Old England for
Ever —On the Trot once More —A Maori Lady and her Meerschaum
—More Rain, more Rest —Geological Gyrations—The Climax of
Scenery—Something About Sluicing at the Diggings—An Alarm of
Fire —Curiosities of Christchurch in Charging—lmpressions of
Wellington—A Little more Navigation—ln the Maori Country —
Taranki, the Garden of New Zealand—New Plymouth and its
Sugar Loaves—At Auckland and Away Again—Young Nick’s
Head —In the Hot Lake District: Boiling made Easy —Maori
Customs —A Good Name for a Globe-trotter —A Cataract Carved
in Parian Stone —Another Cataract of Poetry, some of it after
Longfellow, a long way after—Under the Stars and Stripes for
Sydney.
IST January, 1881.
MgHßffl m has brought up with him five racehorses, and
KSW the first meeting comes off the day after to-morrow,
jjgSiaJ at Euston, a township two miles away on the other
side of the river, and consequently, in New South
Wales; so this morning I turned out with him at five o’clock,
and rode down to the training ground, to see them have their
morning gallop. The morning was beautiful, and cold
enough for us to enjoy a good gallop round the course.
2nd Jan. —An easy day, our principal occupation having
been addressing New Year’s cards to our various friends.
S rode over yesterday to Kulkyne, the home station, and


returned to-day. This afternoon, while sitting on the banks
of the river which runs past the house, we saw two canoes
going down, evidently for the races to-morrow. These canoes
are made only of a piece of bark, tied up at the two ends, and
by way of contrast a little later one of the Murray steamers
went by, bound for Euston Station.
3 rd Jan. —A bush race meeting is a sight worth seeing,
but mightily slow unless you know the horses. I don’t
think I ever really more enjoyed any meeting, as, of course,
I had great interest in M ’s horses, and helped in saddling,
&c. He won the maiden plate with “ Actress,” a grand
chestnut mare. The handicap he just missed by a head,
through the stirrup-leather breaking. The Lady’s Purse was
easily taken by “Columbine,” and the hurdle race by “Actress.”
The last race of all was the most amusing, a hack race for
all comers, on untrained horses and catch-weights. We got
one of the station horses, entered it as “Porcupine,” and put
on it as jockey a small black boy, weighing only about four
stone. He made the pace, but could not hold out to the last,
and came in only third. He looked more like a monkey than
a human being. There was a new chum, a youth fresh from
the Emerald Isle, whom they put on a horse. He came in a
good last. The owner led him up to the weighing place, and
the man in charge entering into the joke, weighed him,
and declared his weight correct, when of course, it being
a catch-weight race, there was a roar from the onlookers at
Paddy’s expense. Directly this race was over we escaped,
and re-crossed the river and were once more in Victoria.
Present at the race meeting were many natives. A word
about them. Their colour is sooty brown. The hair
generally black, rough, lank and coarse. The forehead is low,
eyes large and far apart, the whites of which are greatly
discoloured. The nose is broad and flat, with wide-spread
nostrils; the cheeks are hollow, the mouth wide with thick
lips. Not a beautiful picture. He is of an Ethiopic origin,
the lowest of the human race. Their canoes are either a log
of wood, hollowed by means of burning, known as a “dug out,”
or a strip of bark, tied at either end, and stuffed with clay.
Their weapons consist of the spear, boomerang, and several
kind of waddies and nullah-nullahs, a stone tomahawk, and
small shield. They have no bows and arrows. The spear is
about ten feet long, with the point hardened by fire, jagged or
barbed. This they can throw from fifty to sixty yards or
T


more, with the use of the woomera, or throwing stick, a piece
of wood two or three feet in length with a hook at one end, into
which the end of a spear is fixed, the woomera thus acting as
a sling. Their form of government is patriarchal, and there are
many tribes scattered all over this vast continent. Brunton
Stephens, in his “ Miscellaneous Poems,” gives the following
description of a gin (an Australian woman): —
Thou art not beautiful, I tell thee plainly,
Oh ! thou ungainliest of things ungainly;
Who thinks thee less than hideous dotes insanely.
Thy nose appeareth but a transverse section,
Thy mouth hath no particular direction,
A flabby-rimmed abyss of imperfection.
Thine eyes are set in bile, thou filthy smoker !
The very whites of them are yellow ochre :
“The windows of the soul!” —another choker.
Thy skull development mine eye displeases ;
Thou svilt not suffer much from brain diseases;
Thy facial angle forty-five degrees is.
The coarseness of thy tresses is distressing,
With grease and raddle firmly coalescing,
I cannot laud thy system of “ top dressing.”
Thy dress is somewhat scant for proper feeling,
As is thy flesh, too —scarce thy bones concealing :
Thy calves unquestionably want re-vealmg.
Thy mangy skin is hideous with tattooing,
And legible with hieroglyphic wooing—
Sweet things in art of some fierce lover’s doing.
4 th Jan.—We had intended leaving for Kulkyne to-day,
but M has had to stop, as it is settling day. A. M—
and I went out duck-shooting in the morning, and had capital
sport. Being on the banks of a river in a climate like this is
a great luxury, as one’s morning and evening swim does more
to help one to bear the great heat than anything else.
s th Jan. —Nine o’clock saw us once more on the road, with
only forty miles before us, so we took our time, stopping here
and there to shoot. We bagged a quantity of duck and
pigeon, and some kangaroo, and reached the home station
of Kulkyne about five o’clock. Kulkyne is on rising ground
overlooking a billabong, and about a quarter of a mile from


the river, and appears almost like a small township, there
being in all about eighteen distinct buildings. The view over
the billabong is most beautiful; the grotesque limbs of the
great gum trees reflected in the water, and on either side
rich pasturage, left green by the receding river, on which are
grazing the milk cows and a few of the thoroughbreds—a
picture of homeliness and comfort.
6th Jan. —Horses there are here in any quantity, there
being in all about two hundred on the station. The first
thing in the morning is to go to the stockyard, pick out one’s
horse, and ride down to the bathing place on the river, a
charming spot, with sandy bottom, reaching out some distance
unto the river, which is here about two hundred yards wide;
but then this is the dry season. In the winter months it
overflows its banks, covering the bends, and after heavy rains
in the year 1870, in one place measured fourteen miles across.
It is to these bends, when the water has receded in the
■summer months, that the squatter has to trust entirely for
feed, as in the back country there is neither grass nor water.
The only feed there is the native shrubs, such as the salt bush
and hop tree. At eight o’clock comes breakfast, and to-day we
three started off to inspect the brood mares and foals,
whichare in a bend about five milesaway. “Hercules” resented
our intrusion upon his dominion, and rushed at us with open
mouth, and was only kept off by the use of the stock whip,
which, by the way, lam learning the use of. At first it is
no easy matter to manage a lash ten feet long, with a handle
hardly more than a foot.
7 ih Jan. —The heat during the day I can stand well enough,
but when the temperature at night remains much about the
•same, sleep becomes impossible, and I wander about with my
pillow, trying first one place then another in search of a
breath of fresh air. To-day we have devoted ourselves
entirely to duck-shooting. We took with us a small black
boy, to drive the creek, which leads up to a lake, about
nine miles away. Ducks here were abundant, and we had
capital sport. We only returned to the station in time for
dinner. The wild dogs, or dingoes, are very bad this year.
Upon their heads have been set a price, as upon that of an
outlaw, and for every tail that is brought in ten shillings is
paid. The worst characteristic of the dingo is, that he
fielights to kill as many sheep as possible, but were he con-
tent to kill a single sheep, and then feast upon it, his ravages


would be comparatively trifling compared to what they are-
He kills merely for the pleasure of killing. In form and
disposition he is more than half a wolf.
Bth Jan. —Another fearful night; to-day,however, is cloudy,
which looks like a change of some sort. How one longs
for rain, or for that roaring sound from the south, which is.
the southerly wind coming up. To-day has been spent in
mustering horses, and altogether there have been over one
hundred in the yards. In the afternoon we drafted some
off, and M and myself took a mob of about thirty down
to a paddock four miles away. Stock-driving is a novel:
experience for me, and a very amusing one, especially when:
some young colt breaks away from the rest, and away you
go after him. Towards evening a change set in, with slight
rain, which has made a wonderful difference in the atmosphere.
Here there is one grand thing, that is, a vegetable garden, over
which rules Charlie, the Chinaman. It is difficult to over-
estimate the value of this much-abused race in a place like
this. With what patience does he water away all day long,
looking upon his vegetables as a father upon his children.
Then, too, there is any amount of milk, a thing in which I
revel. Coming in from my morning swim, a glass of
new milk seems to set me up for the day. And last, but not
least, must be mentioned Mrs. Wicket, the best cook on the
Lower Murray. “Plain Arthur” has to-day been hard at
work fishing, and towards evening brought home a splendid
dish of Murray perch, so that our table is now well supplied
with all the delicacies of the season.
9 th Jan. —Sunday, a quiet day on the station. Evident
signs of continuation of the change and more rain.
10 th Jan. —At nine o’clock punctually we left the home
station, all of us well mounted, as we were to have a day’s
kangaroo-hunting. I was riding “ Barney,” who, although
not a first-class fencer, gets over them somehow, although
not always with the greatest comfort to myself. For some
distance there appeared no signs of game, and it was not
until we had left Cantala and reached Brockie (names of
paddocks), and were riding through a lignum swamp, that
we started our first, a fine old man, which don’t as a rule
give a long run, as they soon turn to bay. Standing on his
hind legs, he fights valiantly with his fore-paws, and the dogs,
knowing full well what a nasty wound he can give, wait their
opportunity, when they dash in and seize him by the throat.


A little farther on we started an emu, but a fine kangaroo
crossing the dog’s path, they left to follow him instead. Our
run this time was one of greater difficulty, being through
thick scrub and timber and over a thick brush fence. Riding
through timber is no easy matter, the best way being to
leave it entirely to your horse, and keep a good look-out for
overhanging branches. We next sighted a fine fellow at
some little distance off, and riding up to where we had seen
him disappear, we followed his tracks until the dogs put him
up in some scrub by the side of Monep Lake, and we had
a capital run along its shores. The kangaroo, which turned
out to be another old man, took to the water, and standing
with his back against a fence, defied the dogs, until S rode
in armed with a waddie ; but on his approaching, the kangaroo
made a spring at him. A blow between the ears brought him
-down, and the dogs soon despatched him. When at bay, in
water, there is a great danger of the dogs getting drowned,
as the kangaroo, if it has the opportunity, seizes them in its
fore-paws and holds them under water. After this we
•crossed over to Mounpall Lake, a most beautiful of
water, surrounded by large gum trees, with red sandhills
showing up between the branches, and covered with
wild fowl. Along the shores there are evident signs of
the blacks. In one place, where the sand had been blown
away by the wind, we came upon two skeletons, and
the trees all along bear marks of their handiwork, such as
places where they have taken out pieces of bark for
canoes, or for utensils of various sorts ; here we had to shelter
on account of a heavy thunderstorm which overtook us, and
at Mounpall, in a hut now disused, we camped for a short time
to eat our frugal meal. Along the way, we had many creeks
and swamps to cross, some of which were up to our knee-
pads, and we only kept dry by kneeling on the saddles. In one
we nearly got bogged, and in another our horses got en-
tangled in the long weeds that grow in them all. S- was
leading the way, and had to get off his horse to get him loose :
of course, the first man has the worst of it, and he acts as a
comb, making it all the easier for those following. After
leaving Mounpall we passed three other lakes, and killed three
more kangaroos, and lost two, owing to our dogs being tired.
We reached the home station at six o’clock, having ridden
-quite forty miles, and in the evening, so great had been the
change, we were only too glad to sit over a fire.


nth Jan. —We had intended starting for the back country,,
but the rain has been falling heavily all night, the register
showing three and three-quarter inches. So we have had to
postpone, as the whole of the box flats are now one swamp.
There are two things here I wish to make a note of, one is
the mode of chaining up dogs. Fasten a piece of wire from
the kennel to a post, say thirty yards away, and on it fasten
the dog’s chain by means of a ring, this will give him plenty
of room to move about. Here the wire runs down into the
billabong, so that they always have fresh water. Another
thing is a dish of potatoes and cabbage mixed up, which is
prime.
12 th Jan. —It was eleven o’clock before S. M and I got
away—late enough, as it was forty-five miles to where we,
were to camp for the night, with the box flats, swamps and
heavy sandhills between them. Our road lay past the lakes,
where we saw some black fellows camped, who are on the
look out for wild dogs. All along the road we saw their track,
and at various places laid poisoned bait for them. This is
done by lighting a fire, and when it has burnt out, burying
the poisoned meat under the embers, which takes away the
smell of it having been handled, and being buried stops crows,
taking it. In crossing Chalker Creek, we nearly got swamped
out. After passing the lakes, the road enters the mallee
scrub, dreary, desolate, and uninteresting—miles and miles
of one everlasting sameness. Mallee is a small species of
gum, averaging about twenty feet in height, and growing in
clumps of ten or a dozen at various distances apart, and with
but few leaves, except at the top of the branches. There is
no undergrowth, with the exception of porcupine grass,
growing in tufts, and resembling more a bunch of needles, and
woe betide anyone sitting on it by mistake. From Lookout
Hill, so called by surveyors, we got a most extensive view of.'
this mallee country; an ocean of dull green, the monotony
broken only by patches of sand and belts of pine trees. At
five o’clock,wereachedTieja,once an out-station, now deserted..
Having first made the hut as comfortable as we could under
the circumstances, we set out to lay baits for the dogs, whose;
tracks we could make out all over the place. It was a most,
lovely moonlight night, and before turning in I managed to,
shoot three kangaroos.
13 th Jan. —Slept like a top, with an old wool sack as,
my bed and a bag of chaff as a pillow. On going out at five.


o’clock, I added another kangaroo to the list of dead. Here
we left food for our return journey. At 6.45 we started, driving
first to Boulca, to lay some baits, and then on to Yallam Jip,
where after the late rain there was a good deal of water out,
and when approaching I caught sight of a wild dog smelling
about amongst the bushes in the water, so I started off to stalk
him, and while away S. M sighted another and started
off too; he was more fortunate than I in shooting his, I
missed mine. We reached Pine Plains at about five,
the out-station 100 miles from Kulkyne. The plains are
very extensive, and surrounded by belts and clumps of pines
growing on low-lying sandhills, one of which, hardly more
than one hundred and fifty feet high, bears the name on the
map of Mount Jenkins. That surveyor must have been very
hard up to find something to hand his name down to posterity.
This country .before the days of bad seasons and rabbits, used to
carry exactly two-thirds more sheep. The rabbits are eating the
squatter out of house and home. There is no grass whatever,
and in order to find food at all for the sheep, edible bushes
have to be cut down; the trees even are barked where there
is slope enough to allow the rabbits to climb, and the bushes
look like so many skeletons.
14 th Jan. —S. M and I slept in the sitting-room, and
in the middle of the night I was startled by hearing him
singing out, “Party, Party!” “What’s the matter?” “Get me
some paper.” “ What for ? ” “I want to sketch you.” This
sleep-talking must run in the family. I was sleeping on
the floor and S. M was sitting bolt upright on
the sofa in the moonlight, fast asleep. Directly after
breakfast we started for a ride round the run, I on a
horse called Titchborne. We followed the dry bed of what
was once the Wimmera river ; but so great is the soakage and
evaporation in this part of the world, that this river now
empties itself into Lake Hindmarsh, some sixty miles away,
and gets no further ; only once in the last twenty-five years
has it reached this place and then only just. This resembles,
of course on a small scale, the Caspian Sea, which has no
outlet, although it receives a vast quantity of water. The
Wimmera rises somewhere in Mount Cole, in the Grampians,
near Ararat. We next passed over some low-lying sandhills
on to the Worringa Plain, comprising twelve thousand acres,
once a lake filled by the Wimmera river; we rounded up
about one thousand sheep to inspect theircondition. Here,too,


we had a sharp run after a kangaroo, as having no dogs, we
had to run him down. After leaving the plains, we crossed a
sandbelt, on to what is called “the racecourse,” a small
plain, level as a billiard table, surrounded by pine trees; from
there on to Wonga-Wonga and thence back to the station. In
the evening we bathed at the horse-well; the water is quite
salt—how the horses and sheep drink it is a wonder.
15 th Jan. —Started on our return journey, and when we
were about one mile away we met two travellers. Our first
thought was for our food, but on their assurance that they
had neither stopped at Tieja, or touched any provisions there,
we drove on, however still doubting. On reaching Tieja we
found stuck on an empty jam-pot a piece of paper, on which
was written, “Many thanks,very hungry—P. S.” Fortunately
we had brought with us some “ browny”—brown bread with
raisins in it—and a small piece of mutton, but this did not
recompense us for beer and other luxuries. Our first occupa-
tion was to bury the kangaroos, which were well to windward
of our hut, and after feeding the horses, went down with a
bucket for a bath at the log tank. I was the first to be doused,
when oh ! horrors, the smell —fortunately there was a crab-
hole near, filled by the late rain, in which we finished our
bath. On taking off the logs covering the tank, we
discovered in it thirty-five dead rabbits. How S.M swore !
Not content with destroying all the food, they must now
pollute the water that would have to last for months. For-
tunately for us, there was plenty of water about, as in ordinary
summer months this is the only supply.
16 th Jan. —Up at 4.30 and away before six, bound for
Kulkyne, which we reached at one o’clock without stopping
on the road, forty-five miles. How we enjoyed getting back
once more, and I felt like an English labourer having his
clean up on Saturday night. A shave, a bathe in the river,
and a good dinner sent me to bed at peace with all the world.
1 yth Jan. —We all felt lazy in the morning, which I
devoted to gun-cleaning, but in the afternoon we started
out for a kangaroo hunt. We soon sighted one which gave
us a sharp run, finally standing at bay in the creek, as
they invariably take to water when hard pressed. We next
sighted three, and we killed two within fifty yards of each
other, both in the creek. After this, we rode out about
four miles to try and find an emu, but there being none, we
returned through one of the bends, and got a magnificent


gallop after a regular flyer, as the younger ones are called.
This fellow took to the river, and it was a grand sight to see
one of the dogs overtake him about midstream, tackle him
by the back of the head, and bring him to land, where they
soon despatched him.
xßth Jan.— To-day has been a regular idle one, as S.
M has been at work physicing his racehorses, and A.
M and myself have been sketching.
xgth Jan. —Started off soon after breakfast for another
field day at the ducks. We had very good sport, although
not as good as we expected, owing to the late rain having
filled up all the swamps and crab-holes, which scatters the
ducks. However, when driving along the shores of the first
lake, we sighted a wild turkey, which we successfully stalked,
and on reaching home had him weighed. From tip to tip
he measured about seven feet, and weighed eighteen pounds.
On being shot he flew some considerable distance, falling
dead in the lake about two hundred yards from the banks.
“ Rick,” the black boy, who acted as our driver, took the
saddle off his horse, and himself stripped and swam the horse
out to fetch the turkey in. He is a plucky little fellow, is only
about twelve years old, weighing about four stone, and riding
capitally. On our way home, A. M shot a pigeon, which
fell at some distance, and not being able to find it called up
Rick to look. He saw it at once, and said “ You am blind,”
and laughed away like anything, and then said “ You see fast
enough in looking-glass.” The cicadas make a fearful row,
at times quite deafening; they can be heard at a great
distance.
Cicada ! drunk with drops of dew,
What musician equals you,
In the rural solitude ?
On a perch amidst the wood,
Scraping, to your heart’s desire,
Dusky sides with notchy feet,
Shrilling, thrilling, fast and sweet,
Like the music of a lyre.
20 th Jan. —At last the time has come for me to say adieu
to S. M , and sorry lam to leave ; but Tim has gone on
to Tasmania, and I have promised to follow him in order to
“do ” New Zealand together. Arthur M has to return
to Melbourne, too, so we have decided to go by way


of Adelaide, to avoid the long, tedious coach journey. By
this means, too, I shall see something of the navigation of the
Murray, and be able to look up some old friends in Adelaide.
I can imagine nothing more monotonous than a trip down the
Murray. One mile of it represents the whole, so that we were
not sorry when S. M offered us his buggy to drive as
far as Wentworth, a distance by road of about sixty miles,,
or by river a hundred and eighty. In nearly all cases, the
river-way can be calculated as about three times that of the
road. At Mr. McEdward’s station we stopped for the night—
a perfect oasis in the desert. On our way over we were
fearfully persecuted by mosquitoes. The horses’ backs were
black with them. The home station is built in a sharp turn
of the river, and at one of its narrowest parts. Here were
oleanders in full bloom, vines trellised and loaded with grapes,
figs, melons, and many other luxuries, besides flowers and
vegetables in any quantity. All this only shows what a
fruitful country this might be made, under a good system of
irrigation. Here we got the] most comfortable quarters, and
on being shown into our bedrooms we both exclaimed, “Is this
the bush ? What a difference to a bush home does a wife
make.”
2 ist Jan. — Having only about eighteen miles to drive
into Wentworth, we did not hurry away very early, as the
steamer was not advertised to start until about eight o’clock,
on the arrival of the Darling mail. We crossed the Murray
at this junction, as Wentworth is about a mile up the
Darling. How entirely different were the colour of the two
rivers, the Murray a muddy brown, while that of the Darling
was like pipeclay. Wentworth, some day, will be a Mugby
Junction, as it is intended to join here the lines from Adelaide
to Melbourne and Sydney. The great curse of all these up-
country towns is drink. The men who live in them have nothing
better to do, and those from the surrounding districts come
in for no other purpose. Our steamer was a queer-
looking craft to have to spend two days and two nights on
board, but then the river is too low, except for their smallest
boats. In fact, this will be the last trip of the season.
So much has it fallen in the last few days, that she stuck for
about six hours on her way up, and on this account, the
captain has decided not to pass that particular spot except
by daylight. We started at about eight o’clock, and at nine
we came to anchor alongside the banks. We certainly carried


lights enough and big enough, having five in all. Over her
stern was an awning, fixed tentwise, partly to make it the
more comfortable for sleeping in, and partly so that the red
hot embers from the funnel might roll off, for nothing but
wood is used. A. M , who is a nervous young man about
catching cold, slept in the saloon below, but the rest, six in all,
slept on mattresses under the awning, the draught doing a
little to keep off the mosquitoes. Poor A. M was nearly
dragged out of his bunk by them, and came up on deck in the:
middle of the night, but finding no room had to go below again.
22 nd Jan, —To-day we have got through somehow by
reading, and watching the different birds upon the banks —
white cranes, bitterns, cockatoos, wild duck, and swans, and
in one place thousands of sand martins.
2 yd Jan. —Another night’s misery, but this time we were
going all night, which kept up a draught through the
awning, so keeping off the mosquitoes, A. M this
time preferring the chance of a cold to the plague of these-
dreadful little insects. Another whole day, for it was dark
before we reached Morgan, a small township on the Murray,
sprung into existence by the Government carrying a railway
there to tap the Murray. From it there is only one train a
day, at eight in the morning, and even should the steamer be.
in sight, it will not wait. We put up at the Commercial
Hotel, where we got a capital sitting-room and bedroom.
Jan. —We left by the train, but it was after twelve,
o’clock before we reached Adelaide. At Gawler M was on
the platform on his way into Adelaide also. I had telegraphed
him last night to let him know I was coming. We had
hoped to be able to go on to Melbourne by either the mail
or Orient line, but both had just gone, so there was nothing
for it but to take passages in the South Australian. In the
evening we went to Cole’s Great Circus, and to add to the,
excitement the electric light went out, when the man was in
thecagewith the tigers. We have taken up ourquarters atthe
York Hotel, the best hotel in the Colonies. lam disappointed
to find that both Eustace and his wife are away ; he having
gone to the S. E. for his annual holiday. In the afternoon
B took us up to the Cathedral to show A. M the
organ, and to let us hear some of his choristers sing. I don’t
think I ever heard a finer voice than one boy had, a rich;
soprano. Among other things he sang “ The Chorister ”
most beautifully. Dined with B in the evening, and had:


more music ; both he and his wife are mad on the subject, so
I was rather out of it.
25 th Jan. —Went up to Woodhouse by the early coach,
and, being once more back there, reminded me of the jolly
times of a year ago.
26 th Jan. —Returned by early coach and went on with A.
M to Gawler to stay with the M s. We got out there
in time for lunch, and in the afternoon drove over to Para-
Para, where, if you will remember, I spent New Year’s Day of
last year. The peaches were in full growth, and there are
acres of them, most delicious, equal to our hothouse ones.
27 th Jan. —Went in by the eleven o’clock train and
made a few calls. Most people are out of town, as this is
their hot season. Left by steamer at three o’clock.
29 th Jan. —Reached Melbourne about eleven o’clock.
Ist Feb. —I had before leaving Melbourne for Kulkyne taken
my ticket for Tasmania, via Launceston, but on returning I
found that the “ Rotomahana ” * was sailing the same
day as the “ Mangana,” bound for New Zealand, and
as this trip was advertised to call in at Milford Sound it
was an opportunity not to be lost. The first thing, therefore,
I did this morning was to go down to the Union Steam-
ship Company’s Office, and take a ticket for The Bluff,
the most southerly port of New Zealand. Every berth
in the ship was taken, and all they could offer me was a
shake-down somewhere. The rest of the morning I spent
in packing up, sending off a case of curios to England,
and saying good-bye to friends. It is not likely I shall be in
Victoria again. I leave it with many a regret. From one
and all I have received the greatest kindness and hospitality.
Beside the temptation of Milford Sound, I was anxious to
take a trip in the “ Rotomahana,” the finest of all vessels in
the Australian waters. She is of steel, registering 1,727 tons,
with 2,000 horse power engines, commanded by Captain
Underwood. Her fittings are superb, and had we fewer
passengers no doubt the comforts would be equally so.
There are one hundred and seventy in the saloon, and we
ourselves are a party of eleven, three bound for Hobart only.f
• All New Zealand names are pronounced exactly as they are spelt,
and each syllable is emphasized equally.
tSo called now by Act of Parliament. They endeavour in every way
to do away with everything that is in any way connected with the old
convict days.


We have secured a table to ourselves, and are a very merry
party. The captain has paid us the compliment ofle.avinghis
usual seat, and taking the head of/jur table. Our party
consist of Mr. and Mrs. and Miss Mr., Mrs. and
Miss L , Mr. and Miss M , Mr. H -, Mr. De
J and myself. Fortunately, the weather was fine,
and when night came, the scene of hunting for sleeping
room was amusing. Mr. De and myself
had camped out in the Social Hall, and were ordered
out by a drunken steward. He first took me to a berth
in one of the saloon cabins, and on the way down told
me that it belonged to a man called Snowball, whom he
had put somewhere else by mistake. “ Now,” he said,
“ remember if any questions are asked, you are Snowball.”
He then went on to say that this was not his duty, but that he
was doing it for the head steward, who was, unfortunately, too
drunk. I returned, however, to my camp in the Social Hall,
and on the steward returning, he became most abusive to Mr.
L. J , resulting in a most ludicrous scene, the former
being a very tall man, and the latter remarkably small. He
did not even recognize me. At last, everything was amicably
settled, and I camped out on deck, wrapped in an opossum
rug; very comfortable, until the vessel began to roll, when,
finding myself in the lee-scuppers, I thought it time to search
for other camping ground. After trying several, I selected
one at the top of the companion.
2nd Feb. —Soon after breakfast we sighted land. Passing
first Goose Island, we entered Banks’ Straits, having
Flinders, Barren and Clarke Islands on one side, and the
mainland of Tasmania on the other. The wind was blowing
fairly fresh, but with little or no sea. At two o’clock we
altered our course to due south, and at nine o’clock were
hugging the land. I have now a very comfortable berth in
one of the best saloon cabins, so it is a case of last come best
served. Our steward of last night has been most humble in
his apologies.
3 rd Feb. —This morning, on going on deck, we were
in sight of the Iron Pot Lighthouse. The origin of this is
that it was on this small island that the whalers used to boil
their oil, their fires acting as a beacon. At seven o’clock we
were alongside the wharf, and Mr. H and I went up
to the Ship Hotel to order breakfast for our party. H.M.S.
“Wolverine” and three men-of-war schooners are here, one


of which is the ill-fated “ Sandfly.” G is now in command
of her, and he came over to ask me to go and stay with him
on board, but I am bound to go, so reluctantly had to refuse.
At an old curio shop in the town, I managed to pick up some
curios, brought down by the “ Sandfly ” from the Solomon
Islands. Punctually at eleven we started. After passing the
Iron Pot we got a magnificent view of Cape Raoul and Cape
Pillar. Among our passengers is a son of Spurgeon, a
meagre-looking individual, also two very nice Scotch girls,
travelling alone, having come out from Glasgow in a sailing
vessel for the health of the younger. The elder is twenty-two,
the younger only eighteen. It is rather a plucky thing for
two young girls to do.
4 th Feb. —The weather now is most lovely, but rather
cold, which I feel the more after the heat of Australia. We
keep up an average rate of thirteen-and-a-half knots, consuming
about thirty-six tons of coal a day. I have had a long talk
to-day with Mr. H as to the advantages of New
Zealand. He says that a man with a head on his shoulders,
with £IO,OOO invested in 1,000 acres of land, ought to make
£1,200 a year, and live very comfortably. He quoted a case
of a man who was able to lay by £SOO a year out of two
hundred acres of land. But it must be remembered that the
average yield of wheat per acre is about sixty bushels. In
England it is about half this. In Victoria it is about thirty-
five, while in South Australia it is as low as seven. I got
rather a shock to-day. Before leaving Melbourne I was given
two letters to post. I have found them in my pocket.
s th Feb. —We discovered to-day that our drunken steward
had been dismissed at Hobart. We have a goodly number of
outrageous cads on board, but fortunately they keep to the
main deck, and leave us in peace on the hurricane deck. In
conversation with Mrs. L to-day, I found we were very
near neighbours in London, as they live in Kensington Palace
Gardens. Mrs. L. J has the state cabin on deck, and
each afternoon we have afternoon tea there.
6th Feb. —When I sit down to write my diary, I really am
at a loss to know how to begin. Mine is not the pen of a
ready writer. The one I have I feel inclined to throw down
in despair. When one has to describe such scenery as we
have passed to-day words must indeed fail one. On coming
on deck this morning we could just make out land right
. ahead of us. Many were the surmises made as to what the


day was going to be, and the state of the glass. Heavy clouds
hung all around, and the land, which we knew to be a lofty
range of mountains, was buried in them. As we drew nearer,
however, the clouds began to break, and now and again fresh
snow-clad peaks kept being revealed. But where were we
going? No entrance in the face of these wild mountains
could we see, although we all were hard at work with our
glasses. At last an entrance, so narrow as to appear
impossible for so large a steamer as ours to enter, opened
out, guarded on either side by gigantic precipices, their tops
buried in clouds, making one of the wildest scenes imagin-
able. Gliding onwards, past these bare rocky precipices, we
appeared to be steering dead on to a massive cliff, when
suddenly, on rounding a point, we were within the Sound. On
all sides were massive awe-inspiring crags, and majestic gorges,
all resembling a Titanic transformation scene. The retreating
clouds from time to time revealed fresh wonders. On looking
back we could now see the height of the two mountains on
•either side of the entrance, the Mitre Peak (5,560 ft.) being
a fitting companion for Mount Pembroke (6,710 ft.) —the
former, now lighted up by sunlight, its peak glistening with
snow, while the slopes of the latter were buried in deep gloom.
Far up a grand and gloomy gorge was a glacier, terminating
in the jagged peaks of Mount Kimberley, whose sides rose from
the water’s edge in a sheer wall of 2,500 feet. Before reaching
this, however, we had passed the Stirling Falls, falling
from the height of 400 feet into the water below. Turning
our face now ahead, we had a marvellous view of crags,
and still mightier precipices, rearing one above the other in
the wildest magnificence, while in the distance could be seen
Mount Christina (8,400 feet). At the entrance to the
Cleddan Valley stands Sheer Down Hill, a wall of solid
granite rising 3,500 feet from the water below. We stopped
opposite the Bowen Falls, in what is known as the Fresh
Water Basin, fourteen miles from the sea. Standing on the
deck of the vessel it was impossible to realize the height of
the surrounding scenery. These falls are 540 feet, that is
sixty feet more than three times the height of Niagara. Its
first leap is about 100 feet into a hollow basin, whence,
■springing upwards, they fall in many and varied jets into a
basin below, hidden amongst a bed of bright green foliage.
It was some time before we could land, as it was impossible
to find an anchorage, the captain having at last to be con


tent with lashing his vessel, by means of long hawsers, to the
banks. Standing on the deck the scene was one of perfect
beauty. We appeared as though lying in a perfect land-
locked lake, surrounded on all sides by stupendous mountains,
the lights and shadows on which were lovely. The day, too,
added to its loveliness. The deep blue sky and fleecy clouds,
now the only remains of the deep pall which had hidden
everything but so short a while before, the deep gloom of the
gorges, the rugged, snow-clad peaks, made up a picture of
unsurpassed grandeur. On landing we at once began to
realize the immense height of the surrounding hills. Mr.
L. J , his daughter, and myself immediately started for
a scramble through the thick bush. Oh ! what a glorious
change after the dull monotony of the Australian bush.
Here, at last, we had got rid of the everlasting gum
tree. Here were shrubs and trees of every shade of
green, all clothed with mosses, lichens, and ferns, and
interlaced by the supplejack and other creepers.
After scrambling about for some time we returned to the
water’s edge, where there is a hut, the present home of two
men who are gold prospecting. Here they live by their gun
and rod, and with occasional supplies from steamers like ours.
We next walked along the water, and every step we took re-
vealed some new scene. The water was almost black, except
close to the side, where it reflected the greenness of the bush.
Soon, too soon, the whistle sounded for our return, and at
five o’clock we steamed slowly down the Sound. We took
up our position in the bows, so as to get an unbroken view.
The Bowen Falls now looked most lovely as the rays of the
setting sun struck the spray, forming a magnificent rainbow,
now almost disappearing, only to break forth again in brighter
beauty. Suddenly, while watching the small stream trickling
from the glacier on Mount Kimberley, an avalanche broke
away and was hurled into space, until it was hidden in the
yawning chasm beneath. Going out through the gorges the
wind blew very strongly, but when once outside it was as
calm as possible. Captain Cook has been in and out of all
these sounds, and our captain told us that his observations
are the most reliable of any. Speaking of this coast he says:
“ There is a narrow ridge of hills that rises from the sea, and
is covered with wood; close behind these hills are the
mountains, extending in another ridge of stupendous height,
and consisting of rocks that are totally barren and naked,


except when they are covered with snow, which is to be seen
in large patches upon many parts of them, and has probably
lain there since the creation of the world; a prospect more
rude, craggy, and desolate than this country affords from the
sea cannot possibly be conceived, for so far inland as the eye
can reach nothing appears but the summits of rocks, which
stand so near together that instead of valleys there are only
fissures between them.” Further down the coast we could
see the entrances to many other sounds. It was in one of
these (Dusky Sound) that Captain Cook remained from 25th
March to nth May, 1773, and in another was found, high
and dry amongst the rocks, some twenty-three feet above
the present water line, the remains of a vessel, supposed to
be Spanish, by the peculiar casting of the bell. The view, as
the sun was setting, was one of extreme beauty; below, all in
deep shadow, the rugged snow-clad peaks bathed in rosy
light.
yth Feb. —At daybreak we were off the Solander Islands,
called after Dr. Solander, one of Captain Cook’s followers,
gnd shortly afterwards ran close under the lee of Stewart’s
Island, which forms the southern boundary of Foveaux Straits.
We reached the Bluff at about ten o’clock. Campbeltown,
as the township is called, is situate at the extreme end of a
narrow neck of land, and is the very replica of a small
Scotch port. Here, I suppose I may safely say, lam as far
from England as it is possible to get. There is nothing to
interest one here, so we went on by the first train to Inver-
cargill, a distance of eighteen miles, and took up our quarters
at the Southland Club, as the hotel is called. We were
much struck by the politeness of the notices in the railway
carriages.
Bth Feb. —The town of Invercargill is well laid out in
parallel streets, the main one being of three chains, and cut
in a straight line far away into the country; but the
public buildings, although substantial looking outside, are
mean and paltry within. By four o’clock in the afternoon we
had had quite enough of Invercargill, and left for the Elbow by
train. The line passes through some fair land, most of it
plains interspersed with pine tree forests, which give
employment to many saw-mills. The day was very wet, so
we did not get a good view of the country, although I am
told we did not miss much. The railways are of the most
primitive kind. They are in the hands of the Government,
u


the average speed being fifteen miles an hour, and in order to
kill time they stop at all sorts of places, and on the least
provocation, when the passengers get out and wander about,
gather flowers, or otherwise amuse themselves. On one
occasion we dropped something in connection with the engine,
so the guard walked back about a mile, which somewhat
delayed us. The line is unfenced, and it was amusing to see
how the telegraph posts had been polished by the cattle
using them as rubbing posts. The Elbow is a junction
of the railway to Dunedin and Kingston. The line is situate
in the Waimea district, and owned by the New Zealand
Agricultural Company, who are laying out townships
Elbow one of them —and opening up the land. Town lots in
Elbow fetch as much as £IOO and £2OO for a quarter of an
acre. Here there is a very comfortable hotel, and scrupu-
lously clean. The proprietor formerly kept the stables
attached to the Melbourne Club, before the days of railways,
when the squatter rode down. Charges for livery for one
horse per day were then £l, and in some up-country places
£i 10s. He remembered Mr. D^ljinot having seen
him for over twenty years. I wrote to Tim to-night, but I
have quite given up any hope of catching him.
gth Feb. —We left by the 10.30 train, and at once
entered into magnificent scenery. Wild mountain passes,
greatly resembling the scenery in Skye, little or no timber,
and terminating in wild crags, covered in places with snow.
Shortly after leaving the Elbow, you pass along the slopes of
the Domes, and enter the Dome Pass, following the course
of the Waiau river, a tempting looking one to the fisherman.
Emergingfrom the Pass, you come in view of the Remarkables,
a bold clump of wild mountains, rearing their broken and
jagged crest 7,600 feet above the sea level, and standing as
sentinels over Lake Wakitipu, which now lay below us. A
long circular sweep in the line brought us down to the small
township of Kingston, where there was a steamer waiting to
take us down the lake to Queenstown. In fact, there were
two steamers, both going—as we afterwards found out, the
charge on one being two-and-sixpence and return; the other
one, unfortunately, ten shillings single; the only advantage
offered being a little in speed, but to us no advantage, as we
certainly did not care to be hurried through such magnificent
scenery. All the way, from when we entered the Dome Pass,
have there been signs of glaciers; huge mountains, looking


like so many forts and deep scars in the hillside. Lake
Wakitipu, which is now 1,400 feet deep, and as the tale goes
anyone drowned never rises to the surface, was once a huge
glacier. The views along the way were marvellously grand.
At first fringed with rich green bushes, with gigantic crag-topped
mountains, towering thousands of feet above, deep gorges,
signs of winter torrents, all softened and toned down by the
most lovely of blue hazes, for the day was beautiful. On the
one hand the Remarkables, with the curiously shaped rocks,
called the Devil’s Staircase, leading up to them, and on
the other a lovely bay, surrounded by, if not as high, equally
magnificent mountains. Bayonet Peak, the highest, is over
6,000 feet. The lake at half-way turns directly at right
angles, and right in the corner, hidden behind a small pro-
montory, nestles Queenstown, a largish township, and having
as its only hotel Eichardt’s, the best in New Zealand.
Before dinner we went for a walk along the lake shores, and
afterwards scrambled a short way up the hillside, in order
to get a view of Queenstown. Wandering through the bush,
we were struck with one particular sort of shrub, an evergreen
of dark foliage. This, we afterwards learnt, rejoices in the
name of “ the lawyer ” —perhaps an appropriate name, for
when once within its grasp it is difficult to get out again.
Attempting to pick a small branch, you discover to your cost
that along the back of each leaf and twig are concealed
multitudes of curved thorns, and should you attempt to force
your way through, the chances are “ the lawyer ” will appro-
priate portions of your garments. The moon is now nearly
at its full ; the mountain and lake at night are most lovely.
You can imagine my delight and surprise to-night running
right up against Tim in the hotel. He had been up at the
head of the lake for a few days. So now we are once more
united, I hope not to part for many a long month, and not
before travelling many thousand miles. We had a long
talk about routes, and I have decided to change mine to suit
him, that is, to go to Sydney and up to Queensland, Java,
China, Japan, &c.
10th Feb. —The mornings here are almost the best part of
the day, and I think it is one’s bounden duty not to throw
them away by lying in bed ; but early as I was, I found Mr.
L out before me. We had made up a party yesterday
for an excursion up to the head of the lake in the “Jane
Williams,” certainly not a romantic name, but not quite as


bad as the “ Jane Smart,” at Constantinople. We had
chartered her, and at nine o’clock started from the small pier,
the day being charming, and the lake like a sheet of glass.
I am glad to say we took our lunch with us, which turned
out a most complete success. I should strongly recommend
everyone going on a party to do the same. The usual way
is to go right up to the head of the lake, a distance of
thirty-six miles, land there, lunch at Bryant’s Hotel, spend
an hour strolling about, and return ; but, after talking it over,
and taking the captain’s advice, we steamed to within five
miles of the head of the lake, rounded Pigeon Island, and
landed at Greenstone Gully. By this arrangement you lose
nothing. For the first ten miles you go straight away from
Eichardt’s hotel, passing several bays, beautifully wooded.
In most of these there lay some huts. The hills of Wakitipu
are, as a rule, especially below Queenstown, bare of timber,
but grand in their majestic boldness and rugged peaks. As
the timber is so scarce, and generally only in small patches,
firewood is very expensive, a large number of people earning
.their livelihood by felling it, which the steamers bring down
to Queenstown, Arrowtown, and Kingston. I did not learn
what licence they had to pay for the privilege, but I believe
they pay a rent to Government. A great quantity of it is
destroyed annually by fire, and there is no doubt that the
fuel question in years to come will be a very serious one,
unless some large deposit of coal is found in this district.
The amount of timber required for Arrowtown alone is very
large, that being the centre of a gold-mining district. After
steaming the ten miles we turned almost at right angles.
From this point the view gradually increases in grandeur,
and I almost think that Judge Bathgate, in the“ Tourist Guide,”
may be excused some of the florid language in which he
indulges in his description. Rarely, and I may say never,
have I seen such a beautiful panorama as gradually opened
itself out. Peak after peak, covered with snow, came into
sight, blocking up the whole head of the lake, until it culmi-
nated in that of Mount Earnshaw, close upon 10,000 feet
high, on each side of which are other snow-clad peaks, Mount
Alfred being a pleasing contrast, with its grassy slopes. This
conical-shaped mountain is at the extreme head of the lake,
round whose slope flows the Dart river, winding its way into
the lake, and being, you may say, its chief feeder. The water
of the lake is entirely snow-water, fed by the numerous
292


glaciers, which accounts for its vivid colour and icy coldness.
The two or three islands, of which Pigeon Islandis the largest,
make a pleasing foreground. On the right-hand side of the
head of the lake is Glenorchy, a sheep station and small hotel,
and on the opposite side Kinloch, consisting of only Mrs.
Bryant’s hotel and two or three woodcutters’ huts, where to
while away two or three days in luxurious idleness I am
assured by Tim, who has tried, is by no means a mistake, and
especially as the charges are only thirty shillings a week. I
should have mentioned that the bush fires, which destroy the
timber, are generally started by shepherds signalling to one
another by lighting fires, or to burn off the bracken fern,
which only can be done every few years, when there is
sufficient dead undergrowth. At Greenstone Gully we were
able to lay close to the shore, and land by the gangway, as
throughout the lake there is deep water to within a few feet
of the edge, when it suddenly shoals, forming a terrace.
There is no doubt that the lake is gradually falling, as along
the banks the old water lines of the lake are clearly defined
by the old terraces, now covered with grass. Of course the
subsidence is very gradual. The appearance of the terraces
resembles fortifications. The former outlet of the lake was at
Kingston, but owing to the subsidence, this has gradually
changed, and the only outlet now is on the road to Arrow-
town, in which direction runs a large bay, having the town-
ship of Frankton on its shores, and terminating in the Kawarau
river. Before reaching Greenstone Gully we had consumed
our lunch, which was most excellent, and to which we all
did ample justice; one of our party declaring it was the best
he had ever eaten, and being advanced in years, and from
the little village of London, I daresay he is a man of experi-
ence. This reminds me of a South Australian’s description of
New Zealand, which he summed up in the following short
and pithy sentence : “My word, you can eat and sleep there! ”
Our object in landing at Greenstone Gully was to visit Rere
Lake, lying some two and a half miles inland. Most of the
party started, but only five succeeded in reaching it, the rest
gradually tailing off. (Query —Was it the lunch or the sun?)
All honour to Miss L. J , who was the only lady of the
party who had pluck enough to accomplish . what she
attempted. Those who were defaulters missed a great treat.
The walk was a most beautiful one, through a thickly-wooded
gorge, hemmed in on either side by frowning hills. This was


my first experience of New Zealand bush, and I must say
that, after the sameness of that of Australia, it appeared like
Paradise to me. lam not a botanist, but variety was one
of its chief charms, the beautiful feathery birch predominating.
Rabbits and birds there were in thousands, and I regretted
very much not having my gun, as I could have made a great
addition to my collection of skins. (N .B.—N ot those of rabbits,
but birds.) Amongst others we saw the Paradise duck, the
Maori hen, a bird that cannot fly—which, by the way, I find
is not the only species that cannot do so in New Zealand ;
the kaukau (?), a species of parrot, so tame that by whistling
they may be enticed very close to you ; the parson bird,
with its black plumage and small white “bands,” hence the
name ; the New Zealand robin, larger than ours at home, and
with a grey instead of a red breast. It possesses, however,
the curiosity and cheekiness of its English brother. We lit
a match, and placing it on a stone within a few feet of our-
selves, the little rascal, who had been watching us, after a few
moments flew down, gradually hopped nearer and nearer, and
at last pecked at the flame, much to his own disgust. I have
known them to fly away with the lighted match ; surely there
would be a good opening for various yarns as to the origin
of bush fires. The road was very steep at first, and then
more gradual, until within a quarter of a mile of the lake,
which lay below us, but hidden by thick timber. It is strange
that a spot so lovely should be so rarely visited. The
captain of our boat, who has been upon the lake some ten
years, had never before been there himself, nor has he ever
landed a party there, and I believe those who have visited it
may be counted on one’s fingers. Surrounded by thickly-
wooded hills, running down to its very edge, the mountains,
several thousand feet high, act as sentinels over its placid
waters, which are reflected in it as distinctly as in a mirror.
Although small, in its peculiar beauty it is a perfect gem.
Descriptions of scenery, when in the midst of all that is lovely,
become tedious and wearisome. I strongly commend others-
to follow our example, and make this trip instead of the one I
have already referred to. We all, I know, passed a most
enjoyable day; charming weather, pleasant company, pretty
girls, good food, lovely scenery—what can mortal bachelor
wish for more? Feeling sleepy, and dreading its conse-
quence, I’ll get “for’ard.” Tea awaited us on our return,
immediately after which we embarked. A species of devil*
294


ment then appeared to enter into us, and song and mirth
made the time pass only too quickly. We reached Queens-
town shortly after seven, tired, but pleasantly so. In the
evening, we felt the slight shock of an earthquake. These
occur here very seldom, but at the same time the sensation
is anything but a pleasant one.
ii th Feb. —Glorious weather, as appears to be always
the case in this beautiful climate. All is so thoroughly Scotch,
mixed up with a good deal of Switzerland, that it is most
difficult to imagine oneself so far away. To-day we made
an early start for a ride through the mountains, our object
being to visit Lake Moke. We left the valley in which
Queenstown lies by the Shotover Pass, a wild and gorgeous
piece of scenery. We followed this up for about four miles.
Thus far we had had a good road. After leaving the main
road the track begins at once to ascend, winding in and out
of gullies, so steep in places, that we had to get off and lead
our horses —in no place wider than about four feet. Along
this ledge we crept for nearly five miles, in places sheer down
into Moke Creek, many hundreds of feet below. At one time
this place must have resembled a huge rabbit warren, traces
of which are still extant. All the bed of the creek, and the
many gullies leading into it, have been turned over by
hundreds of eager men in search for gold. The first rush
took place about fifteen years ago, and all that now remain
are a few men, who remember good corners, and have
returned to try their luck once more, and Chinamen,
who generally follow, content with the white man’s
leavings. After about five miles the Moke Creek is joined
by another large creek, in the fork of which is a home
station. We, however, still kept on up Moke Creek, the
path now being hardly eighteen inches wide. Down the
face of the cliffs we crept in a zig-zag, right to the bed of the
creek, where we came upon a man working a corner that
he remembers was not touched in the first rush, and in
order to get at it he is altering the course of the water.
Further up the creek we went, scrambling over huge
embankments of washed dirt, passed Chinamen in their big
flat hats, and once more mounted the face of the cliff, only
to descend again into the plain in which is Lake Moke.
Here, for the first time, we got out of walking pace. We
lunched on the banks of the lake. Our road then, after
what we had gone through, was a fairly easy one, going


through a pass known as the Seven Miles, reminding me
very much of Glen Tilt. This pass connects Lake Moke
and Lake Wakitipu, and in the former’s golden days was
the way the drays would take things to the diggings. We
came down upon Lake Wakitipu, about nine miles from
Queenstown, the track to which creeps along the mountain’s
side, now nearly at the water’s edge, then zig-zagging, until
it was hundreds of feet above. It passes through some
pretty bush, the cabbage trees making a pretty contrast to
the bushes. The ground, too, where there was moisture
enough, was clothed with musk, now in full bloom, a very
carpet of gold, redolent with its delicious perfume.
12 th Feb. —To-day we made an excursion to Lake
Hayes and Arrowtown; Miss L. J , Tim, and myself
riding, while Mr. and Mrs. L. J drove. The
distance there is about fourteen miles. The road follows
the arm of Lake Wakitipu, past the small township of
Frankton. On our way we stopped to examine some
wheat, a marvellous crop, which would average sixty bushels
to the acre. Arrowtown is a specimen of an ordinary gold
town, showing evident signs of there having been at one time
a much larger population. We lunched on the banks of the
river, and then started for home by another route. On our
way we stopped at several small farms to see if we could get
some fruit, but without success, as this is an intermediate
time. Attached to every farm is, as a rule, a large fruit and
vegetable garden; a great advantage which the small farmer
has over his brother the “cockatoo ” of Victoria. There is
one thing all through the country which cannot fail to strike
a fresh arrival, that is, the most extraordinary civility one
receives from everyone. Nothing seems to be too much
trouble, if by doing it they can help you in any way. Our
way back lay through a fair agricultural district on past
Albert Point, where there is a bridge crossing a wild gully,
and once more we were in the Shotover Pass, through which
we rode into Queenstown.
13 th Feb. —This morning we went to the English
church, built entirely of pine wood, and I think we
were all pleasantly surprised at the bright little service
conducted by a lay reader. For some days past it has
been a subject of discussion how we are to get on, and
by what route. To Lakes Wanaka and Hawea there
are two routes, one by Cromwell, to where there is a coach,


and thence by hiring horses; the other, by bridle track over
the Crown Range and Cardrona Valley. We have at last
decided to buy horses, and have made out, with the aid of
Mr. Huddlestone, Government Inspector of the Rabbit
Nuisance, a most formidable route, by which we should ride
right through the South Island. Many have been the
discussions we have had to-day with Mr. Ross, the livery
stable proprietor, as to the prices, &c., of his various nags.
First our fancy was for one, and then for another, but
ultimately we decided to buy “ Barney ” and “ Nora,” a pair
of bays, a perfect match, and also good in harness, which
will go a long way, when the time comes for selling them.
The price, including saddles and bridles, was to be £57. Now,
at all events, we can go to bed happy, knowing that every-
thing is settled. Mr. L. J has kindly offered to take my
luggage to Dunedin. To-night Mr., Mrs. and Miss L
dined with us, so we had quite a dinner party. After dinner
we sat out on the beach. In the moonlight the lake looks
most lovely.
14 th Feb. (Valentine’s Day.) —This place is in a constant
state of whistling. This morning the steamers began soon
after four, and as my bedroom window is within fifty yards
of the pier, there was not much sleep for me after that, but
it did not matter much as I had determined to turn out to
see the L ’s off, after which I settled down until breakfast
to write some English letters. A visit to the bankers to
draw money to pay for our steeds, one or two purchases,
amongst which was a dressed sheepskin to wrap my swag in,
completed our preparations, and at eleven o’clock, with many
a good wish from the L. J ’s for our journey, we started.
Our road lay past Lake Hayes, where we stopped at a small
wayside inn for lunch, and on for another two miles along the
Cromwell road ; but after passing Kawarau Bridge, we struck
off into a bridle-track, and commenced by a steep zig-zag our
ascent of the Crown Range. On the top of the first slope,
there is a large plateau, rich with golden crops. The harvest
is now at its height, and everything looked most thoroughly
homelike. On and on; our track as we got higher became
wilder and wilder, until we reached the top of the Range.
From there, on looking back, a most magnificent panorama
lay beneath us. Just below the plateau we had left glowing
in the sunlight, and in the plain beneath, Lake Hayes, lying
like a silver bed, and not far distant the small township of


Arrow, while away in the distance, like a jewel embedded
in massive setting, was Lake Wakitipu. Surrounded-by its
many snow-clad peaks it looked even grander than ever. Our
road for the next ten miles was a gradual descent down the
Cardrona valley, and at six o’clock we reached L’Affranchi’s
“All Nations’Hotel,” in Cardrona township, where we got
small but comfortable quarters. The way our horses attacked
their food showed they were not much the worse for their
thirty-six miles’ stage. Cardrona was at one time a large gold-
field, but is now reduced to about three hundred people,
including Chinese. Gold was first discovered in this valley
by diggers crossing over from Dunstan to Lake Wakitipu.
They saw the gold in the hillside in nuggets. The first men
made a very good thing out of it.
zsth Feb.—We started about nine o’clock. Ten miles
further brought us out of the Cardrona valley, but it was not
until we rode over the crest of the hill above Pembroke that
we got a view of Lake Wanaka. And what a view it was ! A
sheet of water of the most heavenly blue, in which were reflected
the surrounding mountains, a far more beautiful lake than
Wakitipu, islands covered with bush, beautiful bays with
glittering beaches, and behind all a lofty range of snow-clad
mountains, with enormous glaciers resting on their slopes.
Towering above all was Mount Aspiring (9,940 feet), the third
highest mountain in New Zealand. The glittering whiteness
was reflected in the blue lake at our feet, making a picture
of unrivalled loveliness. For some time we let our horses
browse, and lay enchanted with the scene. On the water’s
edge nestled the small hamlet of Pembroke, the two or three
houses of which were surrounded by poplars and willows.
Down to these we at last rode, and found a most charming
little hotel. A small schooner was lying at anchor, and
hearing she was just about to sail, we interviewed her
skipper and arranged to go up the lake with him, provided
he would send us back to-morrow. To this he agreed,
so after having had something to eat, we started. Sailing
amidst such scenery was more like fairyland. Our
destination was about fourteen miles distant, where there is
a small steamer being built. Before reaching there we
passed through a narrow channel, between a large island to
the mainland. The lake stretched away to our right for
about another twenty-four miles. The mountains at its head
are those over which is the Haast Pass, leading to Jackson’s


Bay on the west coast; a trip which we regret not having
time to do. In another six months this will make a glorious
route to Hokitika, as they are now hard at work cutting a
track there from Jackson’s Bay. On reaching our anchorage
we at once landed and went over the steamer. She
will be ready for launching in another two months. She
has been built entirely by two men, who live here in a
small hut, and have been engaged about her for the last
two years. She will carry, besides passengers, about one
hundred tons of cargo. What a boon she will be to travellers!
It is wonderful —considering its beauties, and it being within
easy reach of both Queenstown and Dunedin by coach —how
little is known of the beauties of this lake. It is far finer
than the head of Lake Wakitipu. Mr. Eichardt, of the hotel
at Queenstown, is the cause of this, as he throws every
obstacle in the way of tourists coming on here, wishing to
keep them in his own hotel. At our evening meal we
mustered in all six men—the two boat-builders, the skipper,
his man, and our two selves; after which, while sitting
smoking, a small sailing-boat arrived, and we were rather
astonished at the way the man in it brought it up broadside
on to the shore ; but on a closer inspection we found that
he was tenderly embracing a two-thirds empty whiskey
bottle. What a lovely night! Clear and cloudless, the moon
rising above the opposite hills, lighting up the lake and
making the snow-clad peaks glitter and look like so many
ghostly sentinels. We were quite loth to turn in, for our
quarters were not of eider-down, but a bundle of shavings in
an open shed.
16 th Feb. —l was up pretty early, and had a fire lighted
and the billy boiling before anybody else was moving. After
breakfast we at once started in a small rowing-boat for
Pembroke, which we reached before lunch. In the afternoon
we rode out as far as Glen Dhu, where the best view of
Mount Aspiring is to be got. The afternoon was perfectly
still, and not a ripple was on the water, above which rose in
gradual tiers this wild mountain range of various colours,
until it was crowned by the snow peaks, all of which were
clearly reflected in the placid water.
i yth Feb.— Out expedition to-day has been to Lake Hawea.
Lake Hawea is 1,000 feet above the sea level, and has
soundings to the depth of 1,300 feet, hence its bottom is 300
feet below sea level. So clear is the water that it is transparent
299


to the depth of 50 feet. Hawea is 100 feet above Lake Wanaka,
and only divided from it by a narrow neck of half a mile.
We left Wanaka about nine o’clock. The first three miles our
road lay over grassy and undulating downs. In the centre is
Mount lon, a huge mass of rock, round which we rode. At
Albert Town there is a punt over the Clutha river, which
here is very rapid. This river is the outlet for both Lake
Wanaka and Lake Hawea, and at Cromwell it is joined by
the Kawarau. From the point to Lake Hawea is nine miles,
over almost level plains, except for the first three miles, when
it follows the banks of the river. From all along the road
we had quite a stretch of the grandest mountain scenery
spread out before us. All the well-known peaks could be
distinctly seen. Lake Hawea, when it first bursts upon you,
is not quite as beautiful as Lake Wanaka; it resembles more
Wakitipu, being less grand, but far prettier. We stopped
for a short time while I made a sketch of it—Tim at the
same time interrogating a man as to the feasibility of working
our way over the range to Lake Wanaka. There is no
regular track, and the distance being too far we decided, at
all events, to ride up the lake as far as the Long Valley
Diggings, to which there was a rush about twelve months
ago. The distance was about six miles, and well worth
doing, as the views of the lake increased in beauty
the further we went. On our way up, we met a Scotch
cockatoo, from whom, after a great deal of pumping, we got
information as to the road across. It is feasible, but the
distance too great for one day’s ride, and not to be done
without a guide, there being no track. Another six miles
brought us to the Panama Diggings. The diggings them-
selves are some distance up the Long Valley, but at its
entrance is an hotel, with a few stores, bakehouse, &c.,
some of which are of canvas only. At the hotel alone there
were signs of life, but on our return from the valley, we
found that even these had disappeared. Not a soul was in
the place. We had to eat our humble bread and butter, with-
out the ghost of anything stronger than water. The hotel was
like a Tantalus; we could see everything through the window,
but not a drop could we get. While having our lunch we
turned our horses loose. So quiet are they that they will
come almost when called, which suits us down to the ground.
After an hour’s rest we started for Lake Wanaka once more,
which we reached about 4.30, having ridden thirty-six miles.


iß th Feb. —To-day we started on a riding excursion up
the Matukituki Valley, one of the greatest sights of this
part of the world, leading as it does into the very heart of
the wildest scenery. We left our quarters soon after
breakfast. Skirting the lake, we passed the home station of
Wanaka. Glen Dhu we again reached. Crossing the flats,
we ascended, by a rough and circuitous path, the hill
behind the now deserted station. From the top of this
a most magnificent view both of mountains and lake is
obtained. The day was simply perfect, and I cannot imagine
anything more beautiful. Descending once more into
the valley beneath, we passed through a narrow gorge
into the Motatapu Valley. Crossing the river of the same
name, we followed it down into a spacious valley. At twelve
o’clock we were at the Cattle Flat Station, belonging to Mr.
Thompson. Here we stopped for dinner. About half a mile
away from the house the Motatapu joins the Matukituki,
and they, under the name of the latter, empty their waters
into the lake. For the next twelve miles our road lay right
up the valley over the Cattle Flats. On either side were
wild and precipitous mountains, while right ahead of us
stood Mount Aspiring, its many peaks standing out against
the blue sky. What a painting for an artist! Gully, the best
of Australian limners, has attempted it, but without doing it
justice. The road is a narrow pathway, constantly intersected
by cattle tracks, which are most confusing, and many a time
and oft did we find ourselves hemmed in by swamps, and
having to retrace our steps. About six o’clock we were
opposite to the saw-mill, where we were going to seek quarters
for the night. At first we were in some difficulty as to where
the ford was, but fortunately discovered a cottage which we
had not at first seen, and its owner put us in the right direction.
Mrs. Russell made us most welcome, and said she would be
delighted to put us up, provided we would take them in their
own way. Here they have no paddock, so Tim re-crossed
the river to Mrs. Cameron’s, the owner of the cottage, and
possessor of a fine paddock with plenty of feed. After a most
substantial meal, Mr. Russell took us up to see where they lead
the water from for working the mill. The hills at this end of
the valley are richly clothed with timber, and directly behind
the bouse rises a vast forest. On our way up we came across
a gap of about two acres, cleared as if by man, but really the
work of the wind in a late gale. You could distinctly trace


its direction. For the last two hundred yards we walked on
narrow planks, along the top of the race, which winds round
the face of the cliff; beneath us a roaring torrent, a ticklish
thing for anyone with a head. At the end, what a scene of
wild grandeur ! A cleft in the tree-clothed precipice, below
a cavern, from which poured a torrent. Here a dam had
been formed, making a beautiful waterfall, and from this
dam the race led. Below was another cavern, worn out by
the water; the rocks, too, were worn into fantastic shapes.
This was a scene of great wildness ; many waterfalls have I
seen, but none that impressed me so much as this. It was
getting dark, so we had to hurry away. We stayed out for
some time after our return, although bitterly cold, to wait for
the rising of the moon, and well it repaid us. At first the
snow peaks, then the glaciers, and, gradually, the forest above
us, were lighted up by its silvery light, until the moon herself
—bursting as it were out of the very top of one of the high
peaks at our back —lit up the whole valley. We are now
buried in the mountains, at the extreme end of the Matukituki
valley, right underneath Mount Aspiring, on to whose
glaciers one could fancy one might throw a stone. This
mountain stands directly at the head of the valley, which
here branches off into what are known as the right and left
branches, like to the letter T. Our long ride had made us
both ready for bed, so we were not long in turning into the
quarters prepared for us —Tim’s the sofa, and mine a bed on
the floor.
i gthFeb. — What a change from yesterday! We hadintended
returning to-day, but when in the midst of such scenery the
temptation to stay is very strong, so we held a council of war,
which ended, as it generally does, in “We have our lives
before us, why hurry ? ” So it was decided that we should
start with Mr. Russell up the left branch of the Matukituki,
from which you get by far the grander view, as from the
other the mountains rise too precipitously, so blocking out
all views. Before reaching the left branch, we had to ford
the river three times. The valley is blocked up by a sheer
wall of rock, and to look at it as you approach, you would
imagine it was the end of all things, so narrow are the gorges
on either side leading to the two branches. Following the
road —made by the bullocks bringing down the timber—for
about three miles, we came to a solitary woodcutter’s hut.
Here we tethered our horses, while we went up into the


forest. The New Zealand bush is most beautiful, real sylvan
loveliness. The birch has a small shiny leaf of deep green,
a spray of which resembles maidenhair, and its trunk is
covered with mosses. The undergrowth comprises many
beautiful species of ferns, for which New Zealand is noted.
The day now began to look so bad that we decided to return,
so said good-bye to our host, who refused to receive any
payment whatever, saying that he was only too glad to have
company. He amused us by telling how two, as he called
them, “ lardi-das ” had come up, as we had done, and had
wanted this and that cooked for them, one thing being
porridge. They asked Mrs. R. if she knew how to cook
it, telling her to stir it for forty minutes. At this Mr. R.
interposed by saying, “ If you want porridge you had better stir
it yourselves.” In our case we could not have found kinder
or more hospitable people. On coming out of the forest, we
saw up the valley a patch of blue sky, so considering we were
not made of sugar, and had our macintoshes with us, we
decided to go on. And well were we repaid, although we
did get a drenching, the weather really adding to the wildness
of the scene. Every now and then the sky would break,
revealing mighty snow-clad peaks and tremendous glaciers ;
then again all would be wildness. It reminded me very
much of some of David Cox’s pictures of storms in the Welsh
mountains. We pushed on about eight miles up the valley,
having to pick our own way, there being no track. Herds of
wild cattle we met, which tore away through the bush at our
approach. In one mob there were twenty-three bulls, some
of them with great manes like lions. They will never attack
you unless pressed. On our way back, we surprised Mr.
Russell by turning up, and with him we went back to the saw-
mill. The river had risen since morning, and so after our
evening meal, we crossed over to Mrs. Cameron’s, for fear of
being bailed up, as sometimes the river remains unfordable
for a week. During the evening there were several roars
like thunder, which were avalanches falling from the glaciers
on Mount Aspiring.
20 th Feb. —The river had risen no higher, but when the
clouds broke, the tops had a fresh coating of snow, which
accounted for it. We had had very comfortable quarters in
a shepherd’s hut. At nine o’clock we started, and rode
right through to Wanaka, which we reached about three
o’clock.
303


2i st Feb. —Nora has shown such signs of not being able to
do the journeys, day after day, that we have decided to sell
out, and have telegraphed to Ross offering them to him. We
started on our journey to Cromwell, having given up the idea
of crossing Grand View. Our road followed down the Clutha
Valley. We rode very easily, and at six o’clock were at the
seventeen mile creek, where there is a comfortable little
roadside inn, owned by a Mr. Kidd. There we put up.
22 nd Feb. —Made an early start, Mr. Kidd riding some way
with us. He is a very old colonist, and was Maori interpreter
to Sir George Grey before he left for the Cape. I had a long
talk with him about a book called “Up and Down,” written
by Captain better known in these parts as “Old Jack
Bas>ry.” There is not much truth in his book. He was.
Mayor of Cromwell, but a few of them here put him in for a
joke, and many were the rows in the Council, Jack B , on
one occasion, taking his coat off to fight some councillor. He
has the gift of the gab, and is now in England as an
emigration agent. The ride was a very pleasant one down the
valley of the Clutha, with the lofty range of Mount Pisa (5,250-
feet) on our right hand, and at eleven o’clock we were in
Cromwell. We again telegraphed to Ross. Tim rode over
to Ardgour Station to see about horses.
23 rd Feb. —He returned early this morning. If we sell our
horses, we shall have to hire through to Morvan Hills Station,
from which they can horse us through. We have had one or
two nibbles here, but no purchaser. Ross still seems undecided.
Late in the afternoon we got so thoroughly sick of trying to
sell the horses that we packed up our swags, and rode on to-
Ardgour station, which we reached about seven o'clock.
On our way across the sand-hills we were caught in a most
fearful sandstorm : not an inch could we have seen in front of
us, had we dared even to open our eyes. The pain of the
sand, driven with great violence upon any exposed part of
the body, was excessive. We crossed the river in a punt.
These punts are built on entirely a different principle to
ours. Instead of having to drag them over, by means of a
rope, they are built on two boats, and are carried over by
means of the current. Their heads are turned to midstream,
and the current rushing between them forces them across.
The town of Cromwell, which we were not sorry to leave, is
the head-centre of the gold diggings of this district, and is
built on the peak of land at the junctions of the Clutha and


Kawarau rivers. The motto of the town is, “ May our
hearts, like our waters, co-mingle in peace.” Perhaps, formerly
an appropriate motto, certainly not now, for on the latter
there are very large gold diggings, which of course discolour
the water. The Clutha is of a deep blue green, so that when
the two join there is anything but peace. The manager of
Ardgour was away, and the only people there were the
housekeeper and an old wool-scourer, named Payne, a
thorough old character. He has been upon all the diggings.
He began life as an apprentice to a large firm of wool
merchants in Worcestershire. He now travels through
Victoria, New South Wales, Tasmania and New Zealand as
a wool-sorter and scourer, and can earn as much as £6O per
month during the season.
24 th Feb. —To-night we are at Morven Hill Station, the
largest run in New Zealand. They shear here close on 100,000
sheep. It belongs to the firm of Dalgetty, Nicolls, and Co.
We rode through from Ardgour, a distance of twenty-four
miles. The ride was a great treat, after all the rough country
we have been over. To-day our road has been for the most
part over undulating plains, having on our right hand the
Dunstan (4,725 feet) and St. Bathan’s ranges (6,123 feet),
and on our left the Grand View range (4,426). Over this
range is the direct route from Pembroke, and one well worth
taking, as from it you get a magnificent view of the lakes.
The winters are very severe; sometimes there is nine feet of
snow in the valley here, and fearful hard work they have with
the sheep. Sheep, when enclosed by snowdrifts, will live for
six weeks without any food, eating the wool off one another’s
backs. As long as they remain in large mobs there is little
or no fear for them ; it is only when they get scattered that
the trouble comes. They sometimes get regularly snowed
over, only a funnel being kept open by their breath, and when
this gets frozen up they are doomed, unless rescued. Every
man is supposed to have three working dogs and a pup.
There are in all fifty of them about the place, and they eat in
the year about 350 sheep, a small item for dogs’ food ! and for
the station use they kill about 2,000 in each year; at shearing
time as many as fifty in one week. The last few miles of
the road here is through a long, narrow, and winding pass,
through which flows the Llindis river. The pass opens out
into a valley about four miles long, in which is the home
station. To-morrow we shall again go on up the pass for
x


another nine miles on our road to Omarama. Mr. McPhale
is the manager here, and he has made us very comfortable.
We had intended staying here to-morrow, but he had arranged
to go on to Omarama, so we shall jog along with him.
25th Feb. —On the way to the wool-shed, which is about
six miles up the Llindis Pass, we crossed the river at least
half a dozen times. For this reason it is that the shed is so
far from the station, as the wool has to go through
this pass on its way to Omarama. Here we remained for
lunch, and afterwards Mr. McPhale paid off the shearers
who had been employed upon the stragglers, that is, sheep
missed in the general muster, and afterwards got together.
We watched the men at work, and one man sheared a sheep
in three and another in four minutes. The greatest number
sheared in one day by a single man this year was two hundred.
In this district there is a most noticeable difference in the
style of the scenery to that about the lakes. Here all is
rounded and grassed to the very tops, whereas in the lake
district you would have great difficulty in finding a rounded
hill, all being peaked and jagged with bare rocky tops. The
Llindis Pass on this account is certainly tame, although the
mountains are of considerable size. It was in this Pass that
gold was first discovered in New Zealand, by men when
making the road. On coming out upon the Omarama plains
we were struck with their deceptiveness. The home station
appeared quite close, although really it was fourteen miles
away. Further away up the valley could be seen the Southern
Alps. We reached the home station at about six o’clock,
tired and hungry, after our thirty miles’ ride. At dinner we
were quite a large party. From Omarama there is a coach
running into Duntroon, whence the railway runs you into
Oamaru, on the Christchurch and Dunedin line.
26 th Feb. —Heavy rain fell during the night, and things
looked so bad that we decided to stay. After breakfast
I started off to try my hand amongst the trout, of which there
are any quantity, and of considerable size, in the small river
running past the house. I hooked two only, both of which
took the fly under water, but, partly through carelessness and
partly the difficulty of landing, I managed to lose both. At
mid-day it showed signs of clearing, so we decided to push
on and try and reach Ben Ohau Station, twenty-one miles
away. Our first stopping-place, Benmore Station, we could
clearly see across the plains, just ten miles away. It belongs
306


to the Hon. Mr. Campbell, and is under the managership of
Mr. Middleton. Riding across these plains is exactly like
walking along a straight road, most tiring. We reached
Benmore in two hours, and after stopping for a short time
there, pushed on on our journey. We had before us the
Ohau river, over which there is a very dangerous ford, and
one which requires very careful directions as to how to cross.
We left Benmore expecting to be put across it by some
teamsters, who were there loading wool, so you can imagine
our disgust, when about three miles away, at meeting these
men with their teams, and being told that there was no one
at the ford. There was nothing for it but to turn back, and
throw ourselves on the hospitality of Mr. Middleton. There
were two teams, each consisting of fourteen bullocks, drawing
a load of five tons. Their general load is seven tons. Each
team was worth about £250. Their average pace is about
two miles an hour, and they charge is. a mile per ton. A
most lovely sunset to-night. Mr. Middleton has been most
kind, and with him and his family we have spent a very
pleasant evening.
zyth Feb. —We left about nine o’clock for Ben Ohau
Station, Mr. Middleton kindly going with us to see us safely
over the ford. When about three miles down the valley, you
get a magnificent view of Ben More (6,111 feet). It is a
remarkable mountain, from the fact that it stands perfectly
disconnected from the surrounding ranges. In all it com-
prises about 100,000 acres, and is bounded on one side by
the Ahuriri river, and on the other by the Ohau ; the valley
down which we rode making the third, and running direct
from the one river to the other. The home station is built
exactly in the watershed of the two rivers. The ford is about
eight miles away, and the track to it branches off to the right
about a mile before reaching the river. Straight on leads to
the wire rope, by means of which the bales of wool are crossed
in a carriage upon runners, holding two bales at a time.
The ford of the Ohau is about the most dangerous in New
Zealand, at all events, in this part. The river is very rapid,
about six knots, and filled with enormous boulders. The
river at the ford is in three branches, the middle one being
the deepest. The danger lies in your horse not breasting
the current, causing it gradually to work down stream, and
so getting off the ridge into deep water. The bottom is so
rough that a horse will sometimes begin to flounder, and


getting frightened will be rolled over. On the centre spit
was the carcase of a valuable horse which had been lately
drowned. Mr. Middleton led the way, I followed, and Tim
brought up the rear. Nora breasted the stream well, but
Barney was very nervous, and I could see that Mr. Middleton
looked anxious, and said to us that if we had any other
river to ford we ought to be careful, as he was a most
dangerous horse. We, however, got over safely, but
with a slight wetting. The water was just up to my knees at
the deepest, so you can imagine that with a strong stream
running, it requires a strong horse to hold up against it. Ben
Ohau was now about four miles away, and we lighted some
of the tussocks as a signal of our coming. On our way up
I was telling Mr. Middleton that we had tried to sell Nora.
He said had he known that before we might have done a deal,
as he would have given us a good horse in exchange. This
was the very thing I had been on the look-out for, as there
was no saying when Nora might knock up, so I proposed
that one of us should ride back with him. On reaching Ben
Ohau he examined Nora, and found her only seven years
old, and as he wanted her to breed from, we agreed to do the
exchange, provided we liked the horse. Ben Ohau is owned
by Messrs. Gouldsborough, the wool-brokers, of Melbourne.
They shear in all about 12,000 sheep annually. Mr. Stronach
is manager, and he has a new wife, a most timid young lady.
After lunch I felt so lazy, for it was I whose lot it was to
ride over, that I got Mr. Stronach to send a station hand to
fetch the horse. Mr. Middleton left us about four o’clock,
and after an early tea Mr. and Mrs. Stronach and ourselves
started off to the Pukaki Lake, about five miles away, to see
the sun set on Mount Cook. Up to the present we had not
seen this monster of the Southern Alps, rising, as it does,
13,200 feet above the sea level. We were in great luck, for
the clouds, which had been about all day, had lifted. The
evening shades had already buried the gorges in deep gloom,
but the summit, illuminated by a strange glow, stood out
boldly against the evening sky. For several thousand feet
down it is one mass of snow, the glaciers reaching far down
into the gorges. The peak resembles the roof and tower of a
church. We sat on our horses enchanted, watching the
gradual change. Never before have I seen anything that has
impressed me so much. Pukaki Lake, stretching away to all
appearance to the very foot of Mount Cook, reflected the many


colours of the surrounding scene. Before the sun finally set,
all was bathed in the most beautiful rosy light. Mount Cook
has this advantage, that although it is in the midst of the
wildest scenery, it stands out apart from all the rest, right
at the head of the valley. A low snow saddle connects it
with Mount Sefton.
28 th Feb. —It was nine o’clock before our new horse
arrived. He is a roan grey, standing about sixteen hands,
five years old, and only been just broken-in, and has been
christened Kelpie. We had intended going through to-day
to Birch Hill Station, which lies right under Mount Cook, but
Kelpie has never been shod on the hind feet, a necessity
now, considering the rough country we have before us, so
we had to ride down to the smithy, on the other side of the
Pukaki river, which we crossed by the punt. From above,
where the river flows out of the lake, is one of the most
famous views of Mount Cook. We were again most fortunate,
a belt of clouds about half way down adding to the picture.
I occupied the time taken in shoeing by making a sketch,
but I feel how impossible it will be to give friends at
home any idea of the grandeur of this mountain. It is
reported that Whimper intends coming out to ascend
it. The people here laugh at the idea. No doubt it will be
a difficult and dangerous ascent,but under such an experienced
climber, I think it must succumb. The ever-falling avalanches
will make it a task of no little danger. We recrossed the
river, and on the other side met Mr. Dark, the owner of
Glen Tanar Station, about twelve miles down the lake
shore, and as it would now be impossible to reach Birch
Hill, we accepted his hospitality for the night which he so
readily offered. Our ride appeared a very long one, and it
was three o’clock before we reached our destination. The
cook soon had tea and mutton on the table for us; a meal of
which I never get tired, as the mountain mutton here beats
any I have ever tasted. The following is from a Dunedin
paper:—Best forequarter of mutton, i^d.; best boiling beef,
flanks, flat ribs, briskets, 2d.; beefsteaks and sausages, qd.;
forequarter of lamb, is., is. 6d., and 2s. When we crossed
the Ohau river, we left Otago, and entered the province 'of
Canterbury. The Ohau, the Ahuriri, and the Pukaki, when
joined, form the Waitaki river, which is the boundary between
these two provinces to the seaboard. This run has been
* l gridironed,”that is, strips have been purchased to protect the


owners against selectors. The land about here carries a
sheep to two-and-a-half to three acres. In looking over that
most rubbishy of books, “ The New Zealand Tourist,” I see
that we come under the head of “ adventurous tourists,” and
“ not likely to be daunted by small difficulties.” It seems
strange that in a country so thoroughly adapted as it were
for tourists, that there should be no decent guide-book.
The one part mentioned is full of the most absurdly flowery
descriptions of places, which don’t assist you much, and when
they do attempt to give you sailing directions they are
invariably wrong.
ist March. —We reached Birch Hill Station this afternoon
about four o’clock, and found no one at home. Our ride for
the last four miles has been of the roughest. We left Glen
Tanar about nine o’clock, and for the first twelve miles the
road was fairly good, as Mr. Dark uses it for bringing down
his wood. After that, there is no track at all, and you have
to pick the best way you can. At one o’clock we were at
Dyke’s Hut, a sort of out-station. There we met about
4,000 sheep, which had been mustered for the purposes of
cutting and tailing the lambs. The view from here was most
extensive, and we had stretched out before us a chain of snow-
clad mountains, with Mount Cook in their centre. We had
got some bread from the hut, so on reaching a small creek
we hobbled our horses, and ate our lunch, after which I
sketched. We had now before us a very rough road, and as
long as we could we kept to it, but after two or three miles
that got too rough, and we were compelled to take to the
river bed. The bed is about three miles broad, and one mass
of stones, the river flowing through it in various channels.
This river is a specimen of another species of rivers in New
Zealand, those with quicksands in them, and most dangerous
they are. There never can be any regular ford, as after each
flood the river bottom changes. The name of this river is
the Tasman, flowing down, as it does, from the Tasman glacier.
Mount Tasman lies to the right of Mount Cook, and is 12,000
feet high. The whole way we had towering above us a range
of the grandest mountains. Every now and then some wild
gorge led up into their very heart, clothed at the bottom
with pine trees, and terminating in snow. For four miles
we had to keep to the river bed, and most tedious work
it was, picking one’s way amongst the stones. Our horses,
however, were very sure-footed, and climbed the banks of the


various creeks like cats. As I have said, when we reached
Birch Hill Station there was no one at home. So after a
little we began to rummage about, and found some mutton
and potatoes, and having lighted a fire set to work to cook
our dinner. Imagine one in England doing this ! We had
just finished dinner, eight o’clock, when the shepherd and
S , a young fellow about eighteen, arrived. Mr.
j f the owner of the station, went down country
yesterday. They had been out Kea-shooting. The Kea is a
species of parrot, and is to the New Zealand squatter what
the dingo is to the Australian. In the winter months it
feeds upon the sheep. Settling on their backs, it tears away
the skin and eats the flesh.
2nd March. —This is without any doubt roughing it, not so
much from the fact of having to do everything oneself, but
in the roughness of everything. The house is but a small
hut of two rooms. In the smaller are two tressel beds, with
blankets only, and in the larger a bunk, a table, one chair,
a bench and a stool. In this room there is a large open
fireplace, and the cooking utensils are about the floor.
One’s ablutions are performed in a bucket outside, and I
may now make this note, that never again will I go on
an expedition of this sort without taking towels with me.
The shepherd left before daylight this morning, so that we
three were left to our own devices. Fortunately for us,
S is up to the ways of cooking, as I am afraid
that neither Tim nor myself can boast much knowledge
beyond the frying-pan. After breakfast, we started for a
ride up to the Hooker glacier, which lies between Mount
Sefton and Mount Cook. On approaching the shoulder of
Mount Cook the valley divides right and left; in each there
is a huge glacier. The right hand one is the Tasman, leading-
down from Mount Tasman (12,000 feet), and the left the
Hooker, from Mount Sefton. Our road was not as rough as
I expected, and we were able to ride right up to the moraine.
Here we hobbled our horses, or rather mine, for Barney can
always be caught. Not having regular hobbles, I use the
stirrup leather, which has to be tied in such a way as not
to cut the horse’s leg. In looking back down the valley, the
slatey pebbles of the river bed looked exactly like a large lake.
The view ahead was one of extreme magnificence, as a fore-
ground the huge moraines, the oldest of which were covered
with pine trees, as were the slopes of the nearer mountains.


On our right was the huge shoulder of Mount Cook, and rising
perpendicularly from the valley beyond, was Mount Cook
proper. Directly above us was Mount Sefton, covered with
snow and ice from the top to our very feet. Never having
been to Switzerland, I cannot tell how this would compare
to scenery there, but I should fancy it could hardly beat it.
Our hard work now commenced with the scramble over
the moraine; struggling over huge boulders, and across
narrow ridges, with a deep crevasse on either side, we
reached the top, above where the river Hooker flows
out, a height of about 300 feet, with perpendicular cliffs
of ice; huge blocks of ice lay about in the river bed, in
place of stones. Pinnacles and columns there were, too, all of
ice. Away up the valley we could see the course of the
river Hooker, which flows in under the glacier, about 300
yards above us, tunnelling, as it were, through a portion of
it. Here we ate our luncheon. It was an amusing sight
to see the three of us, each with a huge hunch of
“ browny ” (bread sweetened with brown sugar and currants)
in one hand, and a lump of ice in the other, for there was no
water within reach. All the time the falling avalanches
sounded like thunder, some near, some distant. We came
down very much quicker than we had gone up, and at three
o’clock we were back once more at the hut. There are
several other glaciers, one of which terminates within 705
feet of the sea level. This is in the latitude corresponding to
Marseilles and Leghorn. I got a lesson how to cut up a
sheep, and how to cook a leg of mutton in a camp oven. A
camp oven is a flat gipsy kettle, with a lid on. Into this
the leg of mutton is put, with plenty of suet, and then hung
over a slow fire. The lid is then covered with red-hot
ashes. In this way it takes about two hours to cook, and I
can only say it was as good a roast leg of mutton as I have
ever tasted. Bread, too, is baked in these ovens in the same
way. To-night I have written to Mr. H to advise me as
to taking horses over to the North Island, or selling them in
the South. Since crossing the Ohau river I have been
struck with the entire absence of rabbits. This is accounted
for from the fact that these runs are bounded by two
unbridged and very rapid rivers. That is the reason why the
squatters are so opposed to any bridge across the Ohau. The
Rabbit Question is the most serious one of the present day.
Their approach means ruination, or nearly so. Tim tells me
312


that at Te Anau, on one of the Hon. R. Campbell’s runs, they
had to drawoff the sheep from 300,000 acres, and that by means
of wheat poisoned with phosphorus, they were getting 40,000
skins a month —this would of course not include those dying
in their holes. At Lake Wakitipu you could plainly see
their awful work, the hills on the Southland side being
completely bare. The Government have appointed Inspectors
of the Rabbit Nuisance to see that the laws with regard to
the destruction of these vermin are properly carried out, but
with regard to Crown lands, they at present do nothing.
This, no doubt, will be rectified when the law gets into
working order. You can see, therefore, how absence from
rabbits must enhance the value of these runs. One
extraordinary thing about the rabbits here is that, not only
are they larger in size, but they have thicker fur; so much so,
that in shooting them you use No. 4, instead of, as in England,
No. 6 shot.
3rd March.—We began our day’s journey by fording the Tas-
man, which took us over an hour; S kindly pioneered us
over. In all we had to cross about twenty-six different streams,
several very deep and rapid ones. Once only were we stopped,
and had to turn back and try lower down. It was a great
advantage having a horse in front of us that knew the river,
as when we came to doubtful ground he refused to move on
to it. These river beds are a caution to ride over, and to
begin the day with five miles of it rather handicaps one’s
horses for a journey. While fording the river, we got one
of the most beautiful views of Mount Cook that we have yet
had. Looking up was like standing at the bottom of the
letter Y, with Mount Cook in the fork, Mount Tasman at the
head of the right, and Mount Sefton of the left branch, with
the glaciers flowing down each valley. The clouds were
down upon the glaciers when we started, but slowly they
rolled away, revealing peak after peak, until they all had dis-
appeared, except a few clinging to the mountain side. It was
a scene never to be forgotten, and one, I should say, hard to
beat in any country in the world. Soon after crossing,
Burnett’s Station is reached, from which there are two routes.
One follows the river bed for about eight miles; the other
takes at once to the hill. Of these routes when we started we
knew nothing, and a dolt of a fellow at Burnett’s, of whom we
asked the way, instead of giving us proper instructions, said,
■“ Go ahead, you can’t miss the way,” but which we promptly
313


did before we had gone a mile. We went floundering on
through bogs and over gullies for at least three miles further,
and no signs of a track appearing, we thought' it high
time to hark back. My horse proved himself a treasure over
the rough and boggy land, never making a false step, or getting
himself into difficulties. It was quite three miles back before
we espied the road cut in the hill above us. What a specimen
of a road it was ! It went straight up the face of the hill, in
some places so steep that one had to hang on to one’s horse’s
mane, to prevent slipping off behind, and drays loaded with
bales of wool have gone up it. Poor bullocks ! To this road
we stuck as best we could, many a time and oft having to
hark back to recover the lost track. On past the Braemar
run, over which some Dunedin speculators are likely to burn
their fingers. Some two or three years ago there was a mania
for buying land, and these men, calling themselves the Otago
Land Co., bought this land for £2 an acre, in all 30,000 acres ;
a big price to give for land so far away. Although there is no
doubt of it being good land, yet it would not pay to cultivate,
as the carriage down would eat up all the profits. Burnett,
I am told, pays almost £5 a ton into Timaru, which is
considered cheap. It was this mania that compelled Mr.
Dark to gridiron his run, as they were going to buy his
frontage, and then give him a nominal sum to clear out of
the back land ; a nice thing after a man has been slaving for
several years to make himself a comfortable home. After
passing Braemar we came upon good roads, lately made, no
doubt, out of the £40,000, as in the province of Canterbury
a certain percentage of purchase money is refunded by
Government for the purposes of road-making. We could see
our road stretching away before us for miles over the plains,
and it appeared never ending, and when six o’clock came, we
began to wonder where we were going to pass the night.
Suddenly, on rounding a corner, Balmoral Station came in
sight, which we reached after fording and re-fording a river,
about seven o’clock. Our journey to-day must have been at
least forty miles, although the actual distance between the
two stations is not more, according to the calculation of
people here, than thirty miles. We have found the New
Zealand miles very long ones.
4 th March. —Four miles from Balmoral over a level plain
brought us to where the Tekapo river flows out from the lake
of the same name. It is a pretty lake, but devoid of snow-clad


peaks. Over the river there is now a magnificent bridge,
for which there is a toll of is. More plains past various
stations for another seventeen miles, and we were at Burke’s
Pass, a broad defile through the range, in the centre of which
is a small township, with a capital hotel owned by the Road
Board. Here we stopped for dinner. Between this and
Albury there is coach communication twice a week, a
distance of twenty-three miles. Albury was to be our
destination to-day, so we could not halt very long. A Mr.
McDonald rode with us as far as Silverspring, a small
agricultural township, seven miles on our way. Our road
was now over plains, all under cultivation. Another three
miles we reached Fairly Creek, from which there is a short-
cut across the mountains to Pleasant Point, so lessening the
road into Timaru. We have decided to turn out our horses-
while we run down to Dunedin, the capital of Otago, but
where to turn them out is the question. Some have
recommended us the Washdyke Paddocks, near Timaru,
others have declared that, owing to the long drought, there
is no grass down there, and that we had better leave them
at Albury. I think the fact of the day after to-morrow being
Sunday, and our not wishing to spend it in Timaru, has
decided the question for us ; for if we turn them out at
Albury, we can go by the first train from Albury to Timaru,
and so catch the Dunedin express. It was nearly seven
before we reached Albury. We at once delivered our horses
over to Mr. Hinkley, who has the mail contract. His
paddock is about a mile and a half long, is well watered, and
has both native and English grasses, so our horses ought to
do well. The charge is 4s. per week for each horse.
s th March. —Left Albury for Timaru by the 9.10 train.
The distance is about twenty-eight miles, and Timaru is
reached at 11.15. Awaiting us at the post-office were letters
from the L. J s, from Christchurch, saying that
they had given up the idea of riding over to Hokitika, on
account of the danger of the fords, and advising us to sell
our beasts. They were to start yesterday, at which we are
both greatly disappointed. Timaru is a large, well-to-do
looking town, situate at the south-west end of the ninety-
mile beach, and about half way between Dunedin and Christ-
church. We left by the express at 1.10. The carriages are
American Pullman, and on account of the narrow gauge of
the line, are single seated on one side. The line for the


greater part of the way follows the coast. After crossing by
a long bridge the Waitaki river, which divides the provinces
of Otago and Canterbury, Oamaru is reached, a large town
containing some handsome buildings. From here the line
makes a divergence inland across Shag Valley to the town-
ship of Palmerston. On nearing Dunedin, the character of
the country entirely changed. Now all was thick bush, with
occasional clearings, the view down some of the gorges being
particularly fine. Darkness came on before we reached
Dunedin, but by the dim light we could see how beautifully
it was situate. We drove at once to Wain’s Hotel, where
we found all our luggage awaiting us. Mine, Mr. LIT *75-
had kindly brought up from the Elbow for me. **
6th March. —There is no mistake whatever that we are in
the midst of a Scotch community. Everybody, everything
seems like Scotland. The province of Otago, of which
Dunedin (Gaelic, Edinburgh) is the capital, was founded in
March, 1848, by a Scotch company, under the auspices of
the Free Church of Scotland —hence the reason. Like
Melbourne, it almost owes its origin to gold, for up to 1861
little progress was made, but in that year gold fields of
extraordinary richness were discovered at Gabriel’s Gully,
about seventy-two miles from the town. Crowds of diggers,
to the number of 1,000 per day, flocked in from the neighbour-
ing colonies. It is now the largest, best built, and most
important commercial city in New Zealand. It is situate at
the extreme end of a beautifully wooded bay, nine miles away
from Port Chalmers, with which it is connected by rail. Its
main street, or rather two street continuations of each other
—Prince’s-street and George-street are two and a half miles
in length. Although very Scotch, they have got as far as
opening their Museum on Sunday ; so after writing some
letters at the Fernhill Club, of which we have been made
honorary members, we adjourned there. The most interesting
to us were the skeletons of the moa, “the great bird which
used in former days to stalk in solitary grandeur about the
islands.” The kiwi is now the representative and last
survivor of this race of wingless birds. They are about the
size of a fowl, with the beak of a curlew, and with feathers
like hairs. The evening turning out wet we took a private room,
worked up our journal, and wrote our English letters.
yth March. —The morning we spent in shopping, buying
photographs, and looking about the town. The streets


running down the valley are flat, and well kept, and along
them run both horse and steam tramways. The streets,
however, running up from the main streets, are very steep, as
the town is built on terraces, overlooking the bay. Up one
of these streets there is a tram, drawn up by a wire rope,
attached to an engine at the top. The town boasts of two
very fine Presbyterian churches, the First Church and the
Knox Church. The former is a remarkably beautiful building,
semi-cathedral in style, not altogether unlike a miniature
Cologne, having only one needle-like spire. It is cruciform
in shape, with another small spire in the centre, built of
white freestone, the quarries of which are close at hand.
This stone is particularly fine for decorative purposes, being
easily worked, but at the same time endurable. At the
extreme end of the bay is the ocean beach, a narrow strip
of land, only about a quarter of mile in width, dividing the
bay from the open sea. Across this runs the road to
Portobello, from which you get the most magnificent views,
and about nine miles out is Larnach Castle, one of the finest
houses in the colony. It is built on the top of a high hill
overlooking the bay on one side and the sea on the other;
rather an airy position in a country where “the stormy winds
do blow.” In the afternoon, we made an attempt to reach
the Leith Valley Waterfalls, from all accounts well worth
visiting ; but after walking some little distance, we both felt
too lazy, so sat down and smoked, quite content with the
lovely scenery about us. That is one great thing in Dunedin.
In five minutes you can be, as it were, miles away from the
town, as encircling it there is a Government reserve, known
as the town belt, on which the native bush has been
preserved, thick with creepers and ferns.
Bth March. —I got rather a scare this morning on going in to
call Tim. He greeted me by saying, “ Well, old man, I’m
in for another dose of scarlatina,” and he looked like it. So
off I went doctor-hunting, and much to our delight, when the
doctor came, he pronounced the rash nothing. In the after-
noon, we went out to call on a Mr. Charles A ——, who was
hurried away from England on account of consumption. With
him we went to see the university, a fine stone building with
a large square tower. Adjoining are the professors’ houses,
built of deep red brick with black facings and being surrounded
trees they have a most picturesque look. We then strolled
through the Botanical Gardens, small, but pretty; after which


Tim returned to the hotel, and I went for a walk up the North-
east Valley. Dunedin is one of the slowest places for a
stranger to spend an evening; there is absolutely nothing to
do. The club is comfortable, but it is quite unlike a club; it
was originally the private house of some wealthy citizen, and
has, since changing hands, undergone little or no alteration.
I cannot describe my feelings, but I could not settle down in
it, whereas Wain’s Hotel is thoroughly comfortable, a large
stone building of five stories. Every precaution is taken
here against fire, a fire-plug at the end of each landing, and
fire buckets standing about, and from several bedrooms on
each storey a rope fire-escape. The same precaution is taken
over the town, as at various intervals along the streets are fire
alarms, connected with the head stations by telegraph. To
give the alarm you break the glass front. Then, too, there are
the regular fire-escape ladders. This is the only town in the
colonies where I have seen any such precautions.
gth March. —In the morning we hired a wagonette and pair,
and were driven along what is called the “ Queen’s Drive.”
The road follows the town belt above the town, and is cut
along the hillside. From it you get about the best view of the
town, stretched out as it is below you, and of the bay and hills
Leyond. We left Dunedin by the 2.30 train for Port Chalmers,
nine miles away. The line passes along the edge of the bay,
and from it we could see the extensive reclamation works that
are going on. At present nothing but small coasting steamers
and small craft can come up the bay, the port of Dunedin being
at Port Chalmers. The “Albion,” belonging to the Union
S. S. Company, was waiting, and about five o’clock we left for
Lyttelton, the port for Christchurch. We had some little
difficulty in getting under weigh, as there is only a narrow
channel amidst mud banks. On these banks, some of which
were above high water mark, were myriads of sea birds,
which rose in clouds as we passed. Once out in the open,
we got some fine coast scenes, but darkness soon came on.
The “ Albion ” is one of the company’s oldest boats, and was
put on at Port Chalmers to replace the “Ringarooma,”
which broke a blade on her way from Melbourne. The
smoke-room, for instance, contains the bath, evidently an
after-thought.
10 th March. —Soon after breakfast we were off Banks’
Peninsula, and abreast of the harbour of Akaroa, a French
settlement about forty miles from Port Lyttelton. This is the


finest harbour in New Zealand. The little township situated
at the head is, I believe, most beautiful, and well worth a
visit. It is of easy access from Lyttelton by steamer to Pigeon
bay, and thence by coach. Shut in as it is by high hills
which protect it from the winds, it is noted for its fruit. We
did not reach Lyttelton until nearly one o’clock. This is
evidently a magnificent harbour, situate as it is some distance
up the bay. It is surrounded on all sides by high hills. We
could not get our luggage out in time to catch the two o’clock
train, so Tim went on with the smaller things, and I waited
till the next train, and loafed about the town. Several large
vessels were lying alongside the wharf, loading for England;
one with wheat, and another with wool.. The latter was the
Lady Jocelyn, a remarkably fine ship of 2,000 tons. Here
they made the most exorbitant charge for porterage on our
luggage. We had to pay 95., although the wharf is hardly
one hundred yards from the station. I also had the pleasure
of paying ss. excess weight, as in all the luggage amounted to
nearly five cwt. The line, almost immediately upon leaving
the station, passes through the longest tunnel in the colony,
being one and three-quarter miles in length. On emerging on
the other side, the Canterbury plains lay stretched out, level as
a billiard table for miles and miles. About six miles away
lies Christchurch, or the City of the Plains, as it is called,
nestling amidst trees, all of which have been planted. A tale
is told of a traveller who saw it for the first time from rising
ground, saying “ What idiots to build a city in the middle of a
forest! ” On reaching the station, who should be on the
platform but the L. J s. They were going by the
“Albion” to Wellington, so that we have overtaken them
only to say “Good-bye.” However, they discovered that
their time for sailing had been postponed, so leaving our
luggage I walked back to Coker’s Hotel, and on the way we
overtook Tim. They strongly advised us to sell our horses,
and on the strength of that we telegraphed to Hinkley to
make us an offer for them v We remained talking with them
until it was time for them to go, so again said “ Au revoir,”
with promises of meeting in Wellington. We then went on
to the Christchurch Club, where we have been made honorary
members. It is a large wooden building. The same remark
applies nearly to the whole town, and it is most extraordinary
how well they imitate stonework.
n th March. —To-day we spent in seeing the town. The


province of Canterbury was founded by the Church of
England. It is as thoroughly English as Otago is Scotch,
and this applies in particular to Christchurch, its capital.
The town is laid out, with but few exceptions, in rectangular
streets, which bear the name of the different bishoprics ; the
principal ones being Columbo Street, Worcester Street*
Hereford Street, Armagh Street, &c. In the centre of the
town is Cathedral Square, in which stands the Cathedral, at
present only half finished. It is a handsome building of a
blueish stone, the plans for which were drawn out by the late
Gilbert Scott. They are at present hard at work upon the
tower, which is the gift of two brothers, citizens of Christ-
church. • At equal distances from Cathedral Square are
Latimer and Cranmer Squares, and along each bank of the
river Avon, which winds about through the town, are Oxford
and Cambridge Terraces. The river is as pretty a little
stream as I have ever seen, and adds much to the beauty of
the town, lined on either side by overhanging willows, and
crossed in many places by the most picturesque of bridges.
The two or three principal streets contain all the shops and
offices, and the rest are composed of picturesque wooden
villas, surrounded by their gardens, thickly planted with trees,
which gives the streets a most refreshing look. The town
is surrounded by a Town Belt, which has a road very much
broader than any of the others. In the afternoon, I
called on Mr. C , who had been a fellow-passenger of
mine in the “Tararua,”in October last, from Auckland to
Sydney. He took us over some of the principal buildings.
First of all, the Provincial Government Hall, now used by
the County Council Boards, &c. It is a very handsome
building, and the main hall is most elaborately decorated.
The hall itself is of stone, the rest of the building is wood.
In the days of the old provinces, Canterbury was very rich,
but since they all have been taken under one government, of
course the funds of the different provinces were taken over,
the Government making some small remuneration for public
offices, &c. Besides this, there are several other very hand-
some buildings of stone, the University and the Museum, in
which they have some remarkably large specimens of moas.
The club here is extraordinary, in that it charges you 12s. 6d.
aday, so that should you know many people here and be remain-
ing some little time it would be rather absurd to live there. This
idea is so contrary to the general liberality of clubs. Beside


the Christchurch, there is another club called the Canterbury,
a good house and comfortable; by some it is called “ The
Inky Fingers,” from it being the commercial club. There is
a story related of a cabman who, when told to drive to the
club, asked whether it was to the gentleman’s or the other.
Attached to the Christchurch Club is a garden full of shady
trees, and a tennis lawn. In the afternoon the governor, Sir
Arthur Gordon, paid his first visit to Christchurch. He was
met with the usual Mayor’s address, &c., at Port Lyttelton,
where, by the way, the Mayor and Harbourmaster had a
quarrel as to who should read his first. He then came
up by train, and was driven through the town and received
in front of the Cathedral, where the school choir tried to sing
“ God save the Queen.” With the governor is the Fijian,
Ratu Lala, now decked out in frock coat and black hat, and
befjajing the high-sounding title of Roko Tui Cakodrove. I met
him afterwards in the street, and had a yarn with him, and he
told me Sir Arthur had promised him that he should go home
and see the Queen. In the evening we went to see Herr
Bandmann as David Garrick, a poor performance—or rather
we went to see the people of Christchurch, supposing that, as
the governor was going, they would turn out to see him ; in
that, too, we were disappointed, so left early. There was a
good deal of chaff going on in the club against a man who
had attended the levee, and who happened to follow a man
whom Sir Arthur knew, and with whom he shook hands.
He, thinking it was the right thing to shake hands with the
Governor, held out his hand, but Sir Arthur drew back, and,
putting his own hand behind his back, bowed most stiffly.
Such is the man who has been so cordially disliked wherever
he has been, and no wonder.
izih March. —We have had the most amusing arguments
as to what is the best thing to do, sell our horses and drive
over, or ride them over, having them sent up to meet us at
Sheffield. Finally, we have decided on the latter plan, so
having been introduced to the Secretary for Railways,
he has given the necessary instructions, and, so far, the
horses are off our minds. In the afternoon we drove out
to Mr. C ’s house, about two miles beyond Sydenham,
to lunch. Several people had been asked to meet us —a
Mrs. W. W , and a Mr. and Mrs. B . Mr. B
hails from Manchester, and is a cousin to the present Rector
of St. Saviour’s. After lunch I had a long yarn with him
Y


about Manchester. He is an old settler out here. Mr.
C ’s house is a most lovely spot, a one-storied, gabled,
wooden house, with deep verandahs, covered with creepers.
Buried away amongst trees in front of it is a running stream,
into which dip the willows, the edge of the water fringed
with their pinkish roots. Swans there are, too, all making
up a thoroughly lovely home. Mrs. C was a daughter
of Jarman, of legal fame. Round the house are forty-five
acres of land, part of which is devoted to shady walks and
gardens, and the rest to paddocks. Here were both horses
and cows, which gathered round us on entering, and sniffing
round us, showed the kind treatment of their owner.
13 th March. —In the morning we went to St. Michael’s
Church, a gothic wooden building, on Oxford Terrace,
surrounded by trees, the belfry standing apart from the
church. There was a good musical service. To-day it
happened to be an ordination service, so that the Bishop and
Dean were there. From the latter we got a most prosy
sermon. We lunched with Mr. W. W , with whom
E is staying. They have a beautiful house in Latimer
Square, on the opposite side to the Club. He, too, has a
most beautiful garden, filled with trees, both native and
English. An avenue of oaks, with bushels of acorns, grassy
footpaths, and banks of flowers, showed how luxuriously
our English trees and flowers thrive here. The water
supply is obtained by means of artesian wells, many
300 feet deep. In the afternoon we went for a stroll
over the Park and Botanical Gardens, through which
winds the river. Altogether, Christchurch has taken
my fancy more than any town I was ever in. It differs
from all other colonial towns in being so thoroughly
English, and that, too, is the great pull to my mind which
New Zealand has over her sister colonies. It is the place
for an Englishman wishing to leave the old country to settle
in. In the evening we walked out with Mr. H to his
house at Avonside, just outside the Belt. There, too, was
another charming villa, Spanish chestnuts and Portugal
laurels being the pride of his garden. The Club does not
keep a night porter, so a window is left unfastened in case
you should return after hours. We felt to-night something
like burglars entering in this way.
iqi/s March. —E called for us soon after breakfast, and
we went for a row on the Avon. We started from the boat-
322


house at Avonside,and rowed up stream through the town, not
knowing that there was a mill that would stop us, as E
had arranged to row up and call upon some friends of his.
When in the middle of the town we stuck upon some rapids,
and caused some little amusement to the crowd which soon
assembled. The river is on an average only about thirty
yards across, and filled with weeds and trout. We were
preparing to drag our boat across the shallow when we were
informed of the obstructing mill, so returned and walked up
to the boat-house above the mill and again embarked. The
river through the Botanical Gardens is too lovely to describe.
Huge willows locked in fond embrace overhead make an
archway of the most lovely green, the water, like a sheet of
glass, reflecting the light and shadow beneath. On its
banks is the hospital, a most picturesque spot, making one
almost long to be ill in order to be sent there. Lovely
gardens, sloping down to the water’s edge, with a lawn tennis
net, more for show than use, for I feel sure if a man was
well enough to play lawn tennis he would not long be in
hospital. After about a three miles’ row we reached the house
where lived E ’s friends. He took us in, and on my being
introduced to the eldest daughter of the house, who should
I recognize but an old friend, Miss C , who had been
staying with the N s in Holland Park about four winters
ago. How small the world is! We stayed to lunch, and
then all went on the river, the two girls and Mr. C
coming some way with us on our downward journey.
15 th March. —Leaving Christchurch by the eight o’clock
express, we were soon at Rolleston Junction, where we found
our horses waiting us. From there we went on to Springfield
by the local train, which we did not reach, although only forty
miles away, until nearly twelve o’clock. The line passes over
the Canterbury Plains, skirted in the hazy distance by the
Southern Alps. For this part of our journey we were
thankful for the railway, slow as it was. In case of an
accident it could not be said that it was the pace that killed,
fifteen miles an hour being the most that they are allowed
to do. The railways are all in the hands of the Government,
who are also life insurers, not a bad guarantee against an
accident; almost as good as Punch's idea of putting a director
in front of each engine. From Springfield the coach for
Hokitika starts, about half an hour after the arrival of the
train. Its days for going are Tuesdays and Fridays. There


were our horses —but oh, ye gods and little fishes! oh, ye
breakers up of well-laid plans! where were our saddles and
bridles ? Strict as had been our instructions as to how they
were to be sent, where were they ? Stolen, or forgotten ?
What were we to do? Stay in this miserable hole for three
days, or go on by coach ? And as that was starting in about
a quarter of an hour we had not too much time to make
arrangements, and what was more, we had not money enough
to pay for our coach fare through. Poor Tim s face was one
of utter bewilderment. Suddenly a bright idea struck me,
which was no sooner spoken than acted upon by Tim. Give
the proprietor of the coach our horses for the price of our fare,
£y each. Of course he accepted our offer, and would not
even throw us a note in for luck. Adieu ! fond Barney and
lively Kelpie, your fate has been decided. Hard work is now
in store for you. You are both sold to a coach proprietor
on one of the toughest roads in the country. For you we had
high aspirations, but how low have they fallen ! At twelve
o’clock we started with a full coach. Unfortunately, the box
seats were taken by K and H , two globe-trotters like
ourselves. We had met them at the W. AV s, so I had
to take an inside seat, along with three women and two
children. My opposite neighbour was a Maori woman, “ Mrs.
Tianui,” the wife of a big representative chief on the west
coast. She was not a beauty, having only one eye. Her
costume amused me immensely; a very short black dress
covered with crape, black stockings and low shoes, with
high heels, over which she was continually tumbling, as
on every possible occasion she got out of the coach,
and squatting down, lit up a huge meerschaum. She was
highly disgusted at not being allowed to smoke in the
coach, and looked down upon a white woman as a poor
thing’for not doing the same. In her hand she carried
an elaborate cane, with silver head, and a silk handkerchief,
which as it got colder she tied round her head, and that, with
a hat on the top, gave her a most comical appearance. Cross-
ways over her shoulder, and fastened by a brooch, she wore a
shepherd’s plaid. Half an hour after leaving Springfield we
began the ascent of Porter’s Pass, up which the driver turned
us out to walk. We followed the old road directly up the
pass, while he went round by the new one, skirting the hill.
The old road was deserted, on account of the difficulty in
winter of getting up and down it, as it is nearly always a


sheet of ice, lying as it does in a hollow where no sun can get
at it. To come down it, they had to lock all the wheels and
fasten on them snow shoes, on which were iron spikes. It
was a tremendous pull; how horses even in summer got the
coach up is a wonder. At the top we met the coach. All
aboard once more, and on past the Castle Rocks, huge fantastic
water-worn rocks of all sizes, perched up on the top of the
surrounding slopes. At a small roadside inn we stopped to
rest our horses, and to refresh the inner man with tea and
bread and butter. Here we met Mr. E , the owner of
Castle Rock Station, to whom we had a letter of introduction,
as, had we ridden through, we should have stayed with him.
He had just returned from Christchurch, to which place he
had been to see Miss North off, who had been staying up here
sketching the wild flowers. At Cragieburn there was a very
nasty steep hill, and to make matters worse the late rains
had washed deep ruts in it. Then past Lake Lyndon, where
we stopped to change horses. The stages here are too long,
this last one being over twenty miles. The road next skirted
the lake, and away in front of us was a panorama of the
wildest mountain scenery. Further along we passed Lakes
Pearson, Sarah, and Grasmere, and on the way crossed a river
with very high terraces on each side. After this there was a
most curious piece of country, a huge subsidence, quite two
hundred feet deep, and about a mile round, horse-shoe shaped,
with the open side to the river. Here the road is constantly
being broken up by fresh subsidences, or upheavals, caused, it is
supposed, by some underground river, as in this part of the
island there is nothing volcanic. The next place we stopped
at was “ The Cass,” on the Cass river, the former resting-
place for the night, but now moved on to Bealey Gorge, about
eight miles further on. Here we again changed horses,
which seemed such a bad division of labour; but the reason
is, that owing to the difficulties of the road on the Otira Gorge
side, the up coach is often delayed, in which case the return
coach has to go on until it meets it, so making this stage quite
long enough. Every mile we went the scenery became wilder
and grander, until we reached the climax of the day’s drive,
the Waimakiriri Gorge. The word “ gorge ” hardly defines it.
It is really a valley, with most precipitous sides. The road is
what is called a bluff road, that is, it is cut out of the side of
the precipice, no wider than was absolutely necessary for the
coach, and in some places the swingle trees were scraping the


cliff on one side, and over the precipice on the other. It was,
however, a real treat to see how “ Tom Power ” managed his-
horses. From the top of the gorge we got a most magnificent
view, a valley of about two miles across covered with
shingle, brought down by the river in flood times, through
which flowed the many branches of the river. At the head of
the valley is the Waimakiriri Range, and on each side
frowning gorges and snow-clad peaks. The view up the
valley looked anything but promising, and the direction of
the wind gave us to understand that we might expect rain.
It was now some time after sunset, and the full moon rising
at our backs lit up the valley and formed in the approaching
mist a lunar bow of great brilliancy. The drive down the
gorge was one of some danger, and of great difficulty. We
came down the whole way at a fast trot, swinging round the
sharp turns in the most wonderful manner. I am not
generally nervous, but at some of them I certainly held my
breath; a mistake on the part of one of the horses, or anything
happening to the harness, and over we should have gone, as
there would have been nothing between us and the river bed
many hundred feet below. However, at eight o’clock we were
at the Glacier Hotel, over against the Bealey Gorge, at the
junction of the Bealey with the Waimakiriri, where a good
feed awaited us, soon after which we turned in, to be ready
for our start at 4.30 to-morrow morning.
16 th March. —At four o’clock we were called. It had been
raining hard all night, and was raining still; the driver, who
had gone on to inspect the state of the river, soon returned
and ordered us to bed again, as they were quite unfordable.
For this I don’t think any of us were sorry, as of all miserable
hours to start on a journey four o’clock on a wet morning is
the most miserable. The rain continued all day without
intermission, accompanied by tremendous gusts of wind
and thunder. This is what is called a “ nor’-wester.’’’
Cold and wet as it is in the mountains, on the plains it will
be a hot wind. Blowing over from the Australian continent,,
the lower portion gets saturated with moisture, which, striking
the high ranges on the west coast, comes down in rain, while
the upper current passes over as a hot wind on to the plains.
Here we must stop until the rain ceases. The river is now
a great roaring torrent, perfectly impassable for man or beast,
much less a coach and four. Fortunately, we are a party of
four, so a rubber at whist, working up our sketches andi


journals, help to pass the time pleasantly enough, and we
might be in far worse quarters. A blazing log fire and a
comfortable room are preferable to the box-seat of a coach on
a howling wet day.
i yth March. —An exact continuation of yesterday, except
when a rift came in the clouds, we could see how heavily it
had been snowing on the tops, which allowed the river to go
down considerably, so much so, that at about twelve o’clock
our driver made a start, and having been first, found that he
could get over. A man in charge of the ford, and a telegraph
linesman on his way to repair some damage, rode in front of
us to try the fords first. We got safely over two of the
fords of the Waimakiriri (Icy Cold—Maori). The water was
over the pole and wheels, and running at a tremendous pace.
It was wonderful how well the horses knew their work, and
no easy work either, the coach rolling and rocking about like
a ship at sea, as it crossed the boulders in the river’s bed.
The second ford was not quite so rough, but when about two
parts over we suddenly dropped into a deep hole, the water
nearly over the horses’ backs. It was still raining hard, and
the river had risen about three inches since the driver was at
the fords but two hours ago, so that it became very doubtful
if we should get over any more. In crossing the third ford
the telegraph linesman’s horse got frightened at the depth and
strength of the current, and losing his foothold was washed
down the river, rearing and kicking, and nearly falling over
on to the top of his rider. We thought the man would be
drowned, as he had on a huge oilskin, but, fortunately, he
was washed into shallow water, and managed to scramble
ashore. The danger of getting into these snow rivers is, that
you get paralyzed with the cold and are unable to swim. This
last escapade decided our driver, and we made for the hotel
again, and once more crossed the fords, which had risen even
in this short time. There is one very safe rule to be followed.
Never cross a river when the water is discoloured, a sure
sign that the river is rising. From the hotel there is a
signal staff and white flag, as well as one on the opposite
side, for those wishing to cross who do not know the fords,
the charges for which are according to the travellers’ needs,
time of day, and state of the river. Guiding only is is.,
swimming a horse is 2s. fid.; but at night these are ss. and
10s. If the horse has been bred on the river, and is a good
water horse, fording is easy enough. If the stream be strong.


he puts his shoulder against it, and fords slightly up stream;
but to cross on a horse unaccustomed to rivers is most
dangerous, as he will lean with his side against the
stream, generally ending in being washed off his legs,
and rolling over on his side. If your horse should have to
swim, the great thing is to lean well forward and give him
his head. The team we had in to-day are splendid water
horses. On one occasion the driver had to swim them with
the coach down stream, the road having been washed away.
When sitting on the seat the water was over his knees. To-
night it has come on to rain harder than ever, and at nine
o’clock our driver called us out to see the river, which was
now one sheet of water, over a mile across.
18 th March. —I was not sorry at being awakened this
morning at about seven o’clock with the call of our driver of
“ All aboard.” It was simply wonderful to see how the river
had fallen in the night. To look at it, it was even lower than
when we had tried it before, but on reaching the fords we
found more water in the first but less in the others. There
is never any accounting for where the course of the river
may be after a flood. So rapid is the rise and fall in these
rivers, that a couple of hours may change them from a
trickling stream to a roaring torrent. After crossing the
Waimakiriri, we at once entered the Bealey Gorge. The
road followed up the bed of the river, crossing it about four
times. All along the way there were men repairing the
damage done to the roads and fords, and from them our driver
got his information as to where to cross. The scenery was
very magnificent, the morning was clearing slightly, and the
snow which had fallen yesterday added much to its beauty.
Precipitous mountains and wild gorges, clothed with the
most beautiful forest, roaring cataracts and tumbling water-
falls, were on all sides of us. The Bealey divides into two
branches, and our road lay up the left hand one, and still
along the river bed, fording and re-fording the stream. From
the hotel a spaniel belonging to some one on the Hokitika
side had followed the coach, and it was a wonderful sight
to see him tackle the river. He took to the water a long
way above where we did, and of course was washed a tremen-
dous distance down before he could land. Before reaching
the head of the gorge we passed two magnificent waterfalls,
the Devil’s Punch Bowl and the Bridal Veil. Leaving the
gorge we at once began the ascent of Arthur’s Pass, up


which we were turned out to walk, until we reached the top
of the saddle, where there is a level plateau,, on which
is Lake Lonely, not an inappropriate name. Here the
scenery was of the wildest description, not unlike in some
places to Kirkstone Pass, in our lake district at home. Huge
boulders lay about in all directions, and at the further end
of the plateau is a huge moraine, completely blocking up the
valley, leaving only a narrow gorge for the stream to pass
through. Over this the road winds. The moraine slopes
down from one side to the other, and is always on the move,
so much so that the road has to be re-made about once every
two years. As you cross it you can see the old roads at
various distances below you. In all these wild gorges you
can see how they have been etched out by the ever-moving
glaciers of days gone by. In one to the left, as you cross
the top of the saddle, you can see a small remnant of what
•once must have been a mighty glacier. From this point in
the road the best view is obtained; looking back the scene
was truly magnificent, a long wild gorge with the river
sparkling as it rushed over its rocky bed, waterfalls tumbling
down on all sides, while away in the distance mountains
upon mountains, until all was lost in the cloudy distance.
Such wonderful effects, too, there were of light and shade.
On the top of the shoulder we crossed the watershed of the
east and west coast, at a height of 4,200 feet, in the heart
•of the Southern Alps, the great dividing range. Before us
was the far-famed Otira Gorge, perhaps one of the finest bits
of scenery in the world. Looking down some thousands of
feet, you wonder how you are to reach its bed; so precipitous
are its sides, that it would almost appear as if you could throw
a. stone down. Where is the road ? No signs of it are to be
seen, except as a thin line in the valley beneath. From the
top the road at once begins to descend, and what a road it
is! One succession of extreme curves, and so sharp were the
corners that you almost appeared to be driving over the
precipice. The great danger, of course, is anything happening
to the brake, as so steep is the hill that should that go, the
horses could not possibly keep the coach back. In this
gorge grandeur and beauty have reached their climax.
What more could mortal wish for in the way of scenery?
Here there is everything. In the early summer, the bush
must look lovely, as the predominating tree is the rata,
which bears a bright crimson blossom. This begins to
329


flower at the bottom of the gorge, and as the season advances
gradually creeps up the hill sides. Waterfalls there were in
any number. One in particular came tumbling down on to the
road, and under which we had to drive, giving us all a regular
shower bath. It is these falls and creeks that make the
expense in keeping up the road so great, as they either wash it
away at flood times, or bring down the loose shingle and
fallen trees from the hill sides. The cost is estimated at
£2,000 per annum. What would it cost to keep a railway in
working order? Hardly a mile passes but what you "see
some remnant of a former road, rendered useless by floods.
They are, however, thinking of connecting the east and
west coasts by a line through Cannibal Gorge, rather further
to the north. When within about a mile of the bottom, we
were pulled up rather suddenly by two men rushing out and
holding up their hands, and we reined up only just in time,
with our leaders’ noses over three immense boulders which
had slipped down but five minutes before. Between them
and the edge of the precipice there was just room to pass,
but not with safety, as, should the near side leader shy, he
would in all probability force the other over the side—not an
uncommon style of accident. We all dismounted, took the
horses out and dragged the coach past; another six inches and
we should have been stuck up for hours. After this the
gorge narrowed very considerably, and the road in many
places was cut out of the solid rock, or supported on uprights
from the rocks below. At the narrowest place it is hardly
thirty yards from side to side, and here it is crossed and
re-crossed by two bridges. This is close to its entrance, not
far from which is the Otira Gorge Hotel, where we stopped
to feed and change horses. It was now raining heavily, so-
before proceeding further the driver and another man went
ahead on horseback to try the fords. It was some little time
before we were once more on our way. First, the Otira river
was crossed by a long and very stony ford, which led some
way down midstream. Up to this I had been on the box,,
but then changed my seat with Tim. Outside it is right
enough, but the sensation when inside is anything but
pleasant. From there you appear to be entirely at the
mercy of the stream, which is tearing past you at a fearful
pace, and every boulder you go over the coach seems on the
point of upsetting. Another two or three miles brought us-
to Kelly’s Creek, by far the worst of all the fords, owing to-
330


the size of the boulders and rapidity of the stream. This
was the spot where some friends of mine (W and C ■)
met with an amusing escapade last year. Then they were
unable to take the coach over, so, along with the driver, they
crossed it on the horses’ bare backs, and rode to Macdonald’s,
a small hamlet, a short distance away. On the return of
the driver the river had risen so considerably that he was
unable to re-cross to those left in the coach, and they, of
course, could not cross to him. Unfortunate travellers ! The
coach was to be their shelter for the night, and food had to
be passed to them along the telegraph wires. We, however,
were more fortunate, although it was with some difficulty we
did get across. At Macdonald’s the Otira river flows into the
Teremakau. Over the next creek there was a wire bridge,
so the men turned out to lighten the coach, as it is not an
uncommon thing, after a flood, for a coach to stick in the
middle, stopped by some big boulder that had been brought
down. Then there is nothing for it but to get out into the
Water. After crossing this creek, the road for some distance
follows the banks of the Teremakau, and in the low-lying
places we could see how recently the river had subsided.
The banks and now dry portions of the river bed were covered
with drift timber, from huge trees to broken branches. All
along the road were men at work repairing it. Our road,
after this, lay through the most beautiful bush it is
possible to conceive. Fine park-like trees, with their stems
and branches covered with creepers, mosses, lichens and
all sorts of green life, and beneath all a carpet of the richest
green. Ferns there were of all varieties, from the kidney to
the tree fern ; but the pride of the forest was the Todtza, of
the deepest green, and resembling Utrecht velvet. Of this-
sort of scenery we had miles, and every bend of the road
revealed some fresh sylvan loveliness, and from my perch on
the top of the coach I could see everything. Portions of the
old road had become grown over with grass, making lovely
avenues. The rain had now entirely stopped, so after all we
were not so very uncomfortable, especially as I had borrowed
from the hotel proprietor at Bealey Gorge a set of oil-skins.
About four o’clock, we reached the Taipo river, the most
dangerous of them all, and at flood times perfectly unfordable.
Taipo is the Maori name for the devil. This river is so often
unfordable that they keep a spare coach on the opposite side,
and when it is required they swim the horses across, and the
331


passengers cross by a wire bridge. This time we were so
much behind our time that a coach had come up to meet us
with the mails, into which we changed ; the other coach then
immediately set off to make the best of its way back to the
Bealey. We were through the best of the scenery, and had
we had money enough I think would have returned too ; but
we had only brought with us just enough to carry us through,
never counting on taking five days over the journey when
it is generally done in two. The Taipo was a demon to
look at, and with all these creeks and rivers we can
be only too thankful that our saddles did go astray.
“ L’homme propose, mats le Dieu dispose ,” otherwise there
is no telling what we might not have attempted in our wish
not to be stuck up, and of course the danger to those not
thoroughly understanding these rivers is very great, and in
all probability we might have come to grief. It was late
before we got away, but we just had daylight enough to get
over the last two rivers, the rough and smooth Waianini.
Across the former there is a wire bridge, over which we
walked. In crossing, the coach was within an ace of
upsetting. Over the latter there was no bridge, and when
in the middle we stuck fast against a boulder; fortunately for
us, one of the roadsmen was on board, so he got off into the
water, and with a good deal of trouble rolled the boulder down
stream. Darkness and rain came on together, so I came
down from my elevated perch and took an inside seat. At
the Taipo several other passengers had joined us, so we were
now packed like herrings. Before reaching Goodfellows, the
junction of the loop line for Kumara, we had the pleasure of
walking up a steep hill, of over two miles long, in the pouring
rain. At Goodfellows we got rid of our female passengers
and the children. Another two miles brought us to Kawhaka,
where we were to have changed horses, but the night was
now so wild and dark, and the road before us a very bad one,
that our driver decided to go no further. We might have
been landed in very much worse quarters. Hokitika seemed
indeed a goal never to be reached. However, we had a good
deal to be thankful for in having a roof over our heads, for
the night was one of those when it was neither good for man
nor beast to be out, raining in torrents, with thunder and
lightning.
i gth March . —At daylight we started, the weather showing
signs of clearing. The ferns along the road were as luxuriant
332


as ever, the banks were one mass of ribbon fem, hanging
down in such regular rotation that you could imagine they
had been arranged. The coral and umbrella fern were in
any quantity. This part of New Zealand might fairly be
called Dame Nature’s Fernery. We passed through the
Blue Spur diggings, now almost deserted. How ruthlessly
had the hand of man dealt with all that was lovely in his
search for gold ! Again, however, Nature has come to the
rescue, in covering the stones turned over by the diggers with
a coating of bright red lichen. On reaching the top of the
last hill we got a magnificent view of Mount Cook and the
Southern Alps, stretching away in the distance, while below
us lay Hokitika, which we reached about nine o’clock, and
after a bath and some breakfast we felt ready for anything.
Lying out in the offing was the “ Hero,” weatherbound, it hav-
ing been too rough for the tender to go out over the bar to fetch
off her passengers. She has been there for two days. How
pleasant for the passengers! All these west coast ports
have bars which allow only steamers of the smallest tonnage
to cross them, and not at all in bad weather, which makes
communication by steamer here most irregular. There is a
steamer due here to-morrow on her way to Nelson, and we
have half an idea of going. Watching the way the tender in
crossing the bar was knocked about made that idea a very
flimsy one. The coach which left Christchurch three whole
days after us arrived here this evening.
20 th March. —The weather is gradually clearing. The
“ Charlie Edwards,” 150 tons, one of the the Anchor line,
came in to-day. We may go by her, but having return tickets
by coach, we have at all events secured box seats for Friday
next. Hokitika is like all towns that have sprung into
existence on account of gold rushes, at the time of the rush
crowded to excess, but after that is over dwindling down in
population, and leaving the town twice too big for its then
inhabitants. At the time of the great rush here in 1864, there
were about 10,000 people in it. Now, I don’t suppose there are
3,000. How true is Adam Smith in his “Wealth of Nations”
when he says—“ Of all those expensive and uncertain projects,
however, which bring bankruptcy upon the greater part of the
people who engage in them, there is none, perhaps, more
perfectly ruinous than the search after new silver and gold
mines. It is, perhaps, the most disadvantageous lottery in the
world, or the one in which the gains of those who draw the
333


prizes bear the least proportion to the loss of those who draw
the blanks; for though the prizes are few, .and the blanks
many, the common price of a ticket is the whole fortune of a
very rich man.” The town is built entirely of wood, and
consists principally of one long street, backing on to the
sea and the wharf, which runs some distance up the river,
the view up which, with the hills in the distance, is very
pretty. The backs of the houses are about fifty yards from
the sea, and consist in a jumble of the most unsightly sheds.
The shore is strewn with rubbish thrown out from the houses,
and drift wood, &c., washed up by the sea. A truly dismal
scene, and not enhanced by the dull blackish colour of the
sand. The finding of gold at Hohonu, in 1864, was the means
of bringing this district prominently forward. It was then
known as West Canterbury, and governed from Christchurch,
but in the year 1874 it became a distinct province under the
title of Westland. It is a narrow, inaccessible strip of land,
cut off from the east coast country by the mighty Southern
Alps, and has a total area of about 4,442 miles. At the first
rush, fortunes were made by merely washing the black sand
at certain points along the sea shore, and gold was found in
payable quantities at many inland rushes. At that time
several other townships sprang into existence, prominent
among them being Greymouth and Ross. In Hokitika there
is one distinct remnant of the digging days, in that each
barber’s shop is provided with baths. No doubt the digger
would come in on the Saturday and get thoroughly done up
at his barber’s before turning out to show himself in the main
street, and treat his lady love to trashy jewellery. The
photographer here has evidently not forgotten the palmy
days of the diggings, his charges being 30s. a dozen for cartes.
The amount of gold exported from the port of Hokitika from
1865-1870, being the actual produce of Westland, was
1,765,024 ozs., or £7,060,096, taking its value at £4 an oz.
Upon this duty has been paid to the Government to the
amount of £211,332. The greatest amount in one year (1866)
was 336,966 ozs.
list March. —This morning we rowed up the Mahinapau
Creek, into the lake at its head. The scenery is most
tropical, passing through the thickest bush, and lined with
flax bushes, which, when in flower, must look gorgeous, as
they are of the same character as our gladiola. We crossed
the lake, and landing, wandered about the bush, amusing


ourselves by cutting supple-jack sticks. The stream coming
up was so rapid in some places, that even with the two men
rowing, and Tim and I poling, we got on very slowly. Our
downward journey on this account did not take as long, and
we were back in time for lunch. In the afternoon we
visited the gaol, the principal occupants of which are some
of Ti Whiti’s followers. He is one of their great prophets,
and has started a religion of his own, founded on Christianity;
for they believe themselves to be the lost tribes of Israel, and
that Ti Whiti is the Christ, come to earth again to restore
them. They are very orderly prisoners, evidently quite
content and happy. They are political prisoners, taken up
for obstructing highways, and ploughing up white men’s
land, under the orders of Ti Whiti. Poor wretches ! they
are not to blame. HangTi Whiti, if they like, but let these,
his followers, go. To-night we sat down to one of the best
dinners that I have had at any hotel in the colonies. The
table was beautifully arranged and decorated with flowers,
each person having a small bouquet in a glass opposite
himself.
22 nd March. —l got up at five o’clock to see K and
H off by the coach to Christchurch. They were unlucky
in not being able to get the box seats, at which K—— was
dreadfully put out. Tim and I started by the nine o’clock
■coach for Kumara, where there are now the largest diggings
in the district, carried on mostly by sluicing works. It is
eighteen miles away, and all along the road there were signs
of the late flood. In some places the road was entirely
washed away, while the bridge over the Kapitea Creek was
snapped across like a carrot, and half of it was lying some
distance down the bed of the creek. Soon after leaving
Hokitika, we crossed the Arahura river, on the other side of
which is a Maori settlement. Further on, we passed through
the townships of Stafford and Waimea. The drive was a very
pleasant one, the scenery in places being not unlike that of
Australia. Gold-digging and sluicing on all sides ;
water races, leading in every possible direction, led over
the road on high scaffoldings. Waimea is about the
oldest gold-digging town in this district, being some
sixteen years old. Here the floods had done great damage
—houses washed away, roads ripped up, and bridges
destroyed. The “ oldest inhabitants ” say it was the
worst storm they have ever seen. The average rainfall
335


on the West Coast is from 130 to 150 inches. The scenery
between Waimea and Kumara was very pretty, bold cliffs
standing out in strong contrast to the rich green of the bush,
rolling mountains, thickly timbered, backed up by the snow-
clad Alps. Kumara is an ordinary bush township, showing
evident signs of its late origin—stumps on all sides. It is,
in fact, hardly six years old, and possesses, at the very least,
thirty public-houses. At one of these we stopped to dine,
and then went for a stroll as far as Dillman’s Town, about two
miles away. Here there are tremendous sluicing works.
The water is carried in races and then led down by pipes,
either of tin or canvas, terminating in a large nozzle, to where
they are working. The height from which the water comes
causes it to be forced out with great violence. This they
direct upon the side of some hill, which, by degrees, is washed
away through a tail race, at the bottom of which are round
slabs to prevent the gold being washed down. The number
of races is something extraordinary. How intricate, indeed,
must be all the water rights. The whole country round seems
undergoing the process of being slowly washed away. Huge
piles of stones lay about in all directions. After we had seen
all the works we returned to Kumara in time to catch the
tram for Greymouth, which is drawn by one horse over wooden
rails. The line passes through the thickest bush ; huge forest
trees were on either side, the space cleared being only just
broad enough for the single line of rails. It reminded me
very much of the old convict tramway on Tasman’s Peninsula,
in Tasmania. Arrived at the Teremakau river, we had to
cross in a cage running on two strong wire ropes. The
distance across is 750 feet, and the weight of the cage with
the runners about nine cwt. On the near bank is a saw-mill,
used for cutting rails for the line. The same engine draws
the cage backwards and forwards. The wires are fastened by
strong anchors, let some distance into the ground, and pass
over uprights. Going over is a pleasant sensation, more
so for me on this occasion, as we had an evidently
newly-married couple in the cage, as well as two men,
and the bride, getting frightened, suddenly threw her
arms round my neck. In crossing we did a very foolish
thing. Four of us sat on one side and only one on the
other, throwing the whole weight on to the one wire.
On the other side was a fresh tram, waiting to carry us on.
It was curious how the character of the bush differs on either
336


side of the river. Up to the Teremakau it had been
entirely of red pine, and on the other side of it there was
nothing but black birch. From this into Greymouth the
line ran along the beach. The sea has encroached, as for
miles the beach was sluiced away, and much gold found.
This must be a curious road in winter; with a westerly gale
blowing it becomes sometimes almost impassable, on account
of the foam. The driver told us that about six months ago
the foam was fourteen feet deep, and entirely stopped him.
Men had to go on with shovels and beat it down. Some
horses get so accustomed to it that they will actually go
through it. We reached Greymouth at six o’clock, and found
some difficulty in finding rooms, as yesterday and to-day have
been their annual race days, and consequently the town is
very full. We got a room, however, at the Albion, and there
found a most loquacious landlord, quite a character. The
town is built at the mouth of the Grey river, and along its
southerly bank the main street faces to the river, with
the railway running alongside. Here, too, there is a bad
bar.
2 3rd March. —We started by the mid-day train for Brunner-
ton, about nine miles away, to visit the coal pits. The line up
is particularly pretty, following along the bank of the Grey
river. At Brunnerton there are three mines, two worked
by shafts and one by a level cutting; it was for the latter that
we had an order. In the managing engineer Tim discovered
a man who had for many years worked at some of the large
pits in Yorkshire, and many were the mutual friends they
discovered. In conversation Tim and I discovered that we
both knew J. B. S , and he told me some rather amusing
anecdotes about him. In this mine they turn out about
30.000 tons a year, working on an average three days a
week. The other two mines turn out only about
20.000 tons. The coal is about the best in the colonies
for gas-making purposes. A large quantity of it goes
to Ballaarat, where it fetches 4s. per ton more than any
other coal. Had they only a decent harbour within reach
this would be a most thriving place, turning out any
quantity of coal. The seam varies from ten feet to sixteen
feet in thickness. There is coal all over this district, and at
Westport it is worked also. They are at present trying very
hard to overcome the bar difficulty by throwing out a
tremendous breakwater. They have already spent on this
z
337


over £150,000. To-day at high water there was only four
feet of water on the bar. The “Charlie Edward” is in.
Supposing we had gone by her ! When should we have got
away? We talked to several of the miners, and they all of
them regretted having ever left home. One man had been
earning as much as 50s. a week, with house and food, and as
much beer as he could drink, fire, education for his children,
and one of his boys w-as earning besides 10s. a week for taking
the newspapers round at night. This was at Nelson, and all
this he had thrown up because he had heard there were large
wageson the West Coast. The wages here average about 10s.
a day. He ended up by exclaiming, “ Old England, with all
thy faults I love thee still.” That was too much for me, so I
invited my friend to come with me to the nearest public-house,
to discuss the matter over a pint of beer. Their great
grievance is the price of beer, and its badness; a small
glass for sixpence for a thirsty man soon runs away with
money. After leaving the mine we went down to the river
side, and helped a man wash for gold. All this country has,
of course, been worked before, but there is still plenty of gold.
We reached Greymouth again in time for dinner, and in the
evening went to a theatrical performance. “ Aurora Floyd ”
and “H.M.S. Pinbehind” were the two pieces performed.
In the town we discovered a most amusing barber, a German,
who has been in many parts of the world. He likens the life
here to worse than being in prison. Nothing to do but eat,
sleep and work, and no enjoyment, besides every luxury being
so fearfully expensive. He longed for his cafe, where he
could sit and listen to singing and drink his coffee.
24 th March. —We returned by the early train, stopping
again at Kumara for dinner. It is astonishing how clean
these out-of-the-way hotels are, and how well they feed you.
Imagine a town at home, only five years old, giving you the
following Menu ; —Kidney soup. Salmon. Roast; Lamb
and mint sauce ; beef. Boiled: Loin of mutton and caper
sauce. Pickled pork. Stewed steak and olives. Vegetables:
Cabbage, potatoes, carrots, peas. Marmalade roley-poley,
apple pie, baked custard, black currant tarts, stewed apples,
and custard. Cheese. And all for half-a-crown! We reached
Hokitika at about four o’clock, and went in to see Mr. C .
Before we left for Greymouth he had offered us £5 for our
saddles and bridles on the chance of finding them. He had
since heard by telegram that they had turned up all right.
338


and that it was the livery stable keeper who had forgotten
to put them into the horse box along with the horses. He
gave us the £5, and made us each a present of a small
nugget of gold, worth, I should say, about £2 each. They
will make good scarf pins. In the evening, we went to see
a Christy Minstrel performance, which was announced in the
streets by the bellman, “ Now, ladies and gentlemen, hurry
up, &c.”
25 th March. —At two o’clock this morning we were awakened
by the fire-bell, and at once turned out. It was one of the
large stores in the main street, and great was the excitement
in the town, as you can well imagine, as in a wooden town,
if there is a strong wind blowing, there is no telling where it
may stop. When we arrived at the scene of the fire no
■engine had begun, but there were two in attendance. They
were busy pulling the blazing house to pieces with a huge
grapnel at the end of a pole with a rope attached, so that
the crowd could assist. It was most exciting : the houses on
either side were dragging their belongings out wholesale. I
saw an old lady dancing wildly amongst a lot of glass globes,
and when spoken to by the owner replied that she was too
■excited to know what she was doing. Some of the costumes
were amusing, they, too, evidently having been too excited
to wait and adorn themselves. Fortunately, there was no
wind, and they confined the fire to the one store. At five
o’clock we started on our return journey to Christchurch,
with every prospect of lovely weather. Besides ourselves there
was only one other passenger —rather different to the coach
K and H went by, as they were crammed full
both inside and out. The rivers and falls were marvellously
low. In some, which had been roaring torrents, there was
now hardly a pannikin full of water. We noticed this
particularly yesterday at the Kapitea Creek, where the bridge
was washed away. We had a most lovely drive now. We
•could see all the hill tops and the wooded slopes, down which'
were plainly marked the course of this year’s avalanches.
We crossed the Taipo, and even now it was a nasty ford.
Going some distance up stream, the ford is right down the
very centre of the river. We reached the Bealey once more
at about five o’clock. On the hills above there was a large
bush fire raging. In the dark the burning fences looked
exactly like streams of lava. We were a goodly number
at tea, as three coaches meet here.


26 th March. —Left at about six o’clock The only new bit of
the road was the one round the bluff, at Porter’s Pass. It
was a creepy one, and not kept in too good order. A barrow-
full of rubbish shot down can hardly be called repairs. Over
this part of the road we had the pleasure of sitting behind
Barney as a leader. Pleasure it was, for he was a perfect
little leader, the driver acknowledging he was the best they
had on the road. There is no doubt whatever that the little
horse is a great deal too good for this sort of work. Kelpie
we met on his way up. He is to be put on the stage into’
Hokitika. As I was getting out of the carriage at Christchurch,
a gentleman came up to me and said, “Is your name
Partington?” “Yes,” I said. “I don’t think you will
remember me.” For a minute I looked at him, and then
recognized B , who was in the same house with me at
Rugby, altered, of course, and with a beard, and considering
I have not seen him since 1871 he was rather surprised at
my recognizing him. We were leaving in an hour to catch
the steamer for Wellington, so we adjourned to the nearest
hotel for something to eat and a yarn. E : turned up
later on, and as I was leaving the hotel, another man
greeted me in the same way, but him I had never seen
before —young R , of Brathay Hall, Ambleside. He is
settled out here. It was his brother who was in Melbourne the
other day, having come out as a doctor in some vessel, and
has since returned. I began to wonder who else was going
to turn up. While away at Hokitika we had stored our
luggage at an agent’s there, as the Club will not take care of
luggage. We had telegraphed to the agent to send it down
to the station to meet us. There it was and with it a little
hill for £1 15s. for taking care of it for five days. The hotel,
too, where we had dined charged us a shilling each for
washing our hands, so we began to think it was time we got
out of Christchurch. The “ Penguin,” the boat advertised
to sail for Wellington, had run aground in Tory Channel,
so the Government steamer, the “ Stella,” happening to
come in, took on the passengers and mails. She is only
150 tons, and used for inspecting lighthouses, &c., and of
course is not fitted up for passengers, so you can imagine
what a nice little crowd there was on board. There
were only two cabins, which were occupied by the ladies,
of course, and a few other berths; into two of these
Tim and I put our things at the advice of the captain,,
340


:as no berths could have been pre-engaged. At ten o’clock
we got away.
2 yth March. —Our berths being in the saloon, we were
turned out of them about eight o’clock. The view from the
deck was very grand. We were just off the Kaikowra
Peninsula, immediately behind which rises the Looker On
range of mountains, in which are two grand peaks—Whakari,
8,500 feet, and Kaitararu, 8,700 feet high. Behind these
again are the two snow-clad peaks of Mount Alarm, 9,300
feet, and Mount Odin, 9,700 feet high. Heavy weather coming
on soon sent me below. What a day we had of it, blowing
hard dead in our teeth ! I was fortunate, however, in getting a
small cabin all to myself, where I lay till we were inside Port
Nicholson. Poor Tim was more unfortunate, having nowhere
to lie down, as both the main deck and hurricane deck were
being deluged. She put her nose into nearly every wave.
After crossing Cook’s Straits, in which it may fairly be said
that it always blows, we passed between Sinclair and
Pencarrow Heads, which form the entrance to Wellington
Harbour. It is an iron-bound coast, bristling with rocks.
For some distance up rocks appear on the left hand, making
it a most dangerous entrance for sailing ships, but these
passed, the harbour opens out into a large sheet of water,
with Soame’s Island almost in its centre, on which is the
quarantine station. Turning sharply to the left you enter a
broad arm, at the head of which is the “empire city” of
Wellington, the seat of the Colonial Government; removed
from Auckland as being a more central position. Waiting
for us on the wharf was H . We had intended going to
the Club, but as they were staying at the Empire Hotel we
went there also. A decided mistake.
28 th March. —The weather being lovely, we all four had
decided on doing the round trip in the “ Penguin” to Nelson
and Picton, in order to see the French Pass and Queen
Charlotte’s Sound, supposed to be some of the finest coast
scenery in New Zealand. We left the wharf at about four
o’clock, and found the “ Penguin ” very comfortable. She
was aground in Tory Channel, as already stated, on her last
trip, but has suffered no damage. Crossing the rip in the
straits we got rather a knocking about, but only for about a
quarter of an hour. It is made by the current running through
the straits meeting the tide. It was just dark as we entered
Tory Channel, and nearly eight o’clock before we were at
341


Picton, which we left again about ten o’clock. On the way
over, our head steward broke his arm. I was standing on the
break of the poop, and saw him fall off the main gangway
ladder, owing to the hand-rope breaking. At first I thought
he had hurt his back, but on lifting him up, his arm fell
useless to his side. Curiously enough, it was the opposite
arm to the side on which he fell, broken by the jerk. At
Picton a doctor came on board and set it, but he must have
suffered terribly by the movement of the vessel.
zgth March. —We reached Nelson early this morning. The
harbour is most peculiar for several miles. At some distance
from the shore there is a shingle spit, guarding the harbour
like a coral reef. It is said to resemble the spit connecting
Portland Bill with the mainland. We only had two hours
given us to see the place, so we chartered a wagonette
and started for a drive through the town and suburbs. The
town is prettily situate between mountains at the entrance
to a valley. It gave one the idea of being a place for a man
to live who wanted perfect rest. Small villas, hidden away
amidst trees, prettily laid out streets, and a purling stream,
lined with willows. Nelson was first settled by the New
Zealand Land Company in 1841, and as Anthony Trollope
says, “It is not the place for a man to make a fortune in.”
One or two might be making them, but for the rest Nelson was
a slow spot. The principal streets are Nile and Trafalgar.
We left again at 8.30, and steamed along the coast. Deep
inlets and wooded hills; the portions near the sea being
almost bare, looking as if they had been worn away by
the north-westerly gales. Passing Croiselle Harbour, we
entered the French Pass, which divides D’Urville Island from
the mainland. The tide at times rushes through here at
over fifteen knots an hour, and it is only at certain times of
the tide that steamers can go through. There is only just
room to pass, as in its very centre is a rock. Through this
we rushed, and there lay before us Admiralty Bay, a most
beautiful panorama of sea, islands and inlets. The day was
most charming, and all reminded me of South Pacific Island
scenery. To an Englishman all this is most interesting, as
being the rendezvous of Captain Cook for a long period. It
is marvellous to think how the great navigator managed to
thread his way amidst all these difficulties. It seems to be
difficult enough now for sea captains, provided as they are
with charts, steam, and all nautical appliances. How was.
342


it then ? Passing Pelorus Sound, we rounded Cape Jackson,
and entered Queen Charlotte’s Sound. The day changed, and
a strong sou’-wester sprung up. Although sheltered in the
Sound,the gusts down the gullies were something tremendous,
lifting the water up in sheets of spray. Some little distance
up the sound is Ship Cove, Captain Cook’s headquarters.
Here, it is said, there are still the stumps of the trees he cut
down. At four o’clock we were at the wharf at Picton,
called after the gallant general killed at Waterloo. It is a
small town, shut in entirely by hills. On what they live it
is difficult to say. One old man, whom we asked, said bread
and wild pigs, but to make their bread they have to import
wheat. Near to Picton is a place worth visiting, had one
time, Massacre Hill, the scene of the Wairau massacre,
the beginning of the Maori war. The massacre was brought
on by an attack on two Maori chiefs, Rauparaka and Rangi-
haeta, who had interfered with some survey work. It was
dark before we left Picton, and we all turned in at once while
in smooth water, knowing full well what a dusting we
should get outside. Our anticipations were realized, for in
crossing the rip I don’t think I was ever so knocked about
before. We reached Wellington in safety about midnight.
The next few days we spent in Wellington. Our first
impressions of the town were not good, as at low tide there
is a nasty smell comes up. At one time it must have looked
lovely, but in the last few years they have burnt nearly all the
hush off the surrounding hills, a thing, I think, they will live
to repent. The harbour itself is beautiful, and at sunset it
would be hard to beat. The whole town, with but very few
exceptions, is built entirely of wood, and I suppose the huge
pile of Government Buildings is about the largest wooden
structure in the world. Windy Wellington, as it is called,
deserves its name, for it can blow here, of which we have had
some experience. Not only dust, but pebbles, are lifted up
by the force of the wind. Our stay here has been exceedingly
enjoyable, and were it not that we were pressed, we
would, with the greatest pleasure, spend some considerable
time. Lawn tennis, garden parties, and evening amusements
would fill up the time most enjoyably. To add to all, there is
a really good club, at which we regretted we had not stayed;
it was partly our experience of the Christchurch Club with
regard to not storing luggage while away that made us
go to an hotel, but here they are more liberal. One night
343


there was a large bush fire raging quite close to the town,
just above Tinekori Street. It did not appear a very safe
thing to be so near to a town built of wood. The clouds
and smoke lighted up looked as if there was a volcano in
action, and the burning fences the lava streams. In our
short stay in Wellington, we have got to know four families
of the same name —rather confusing to a stranger! Many
have been our councils as to which way we are to reach the
Hot Lakes, there being four ways open to us —(i) by sea to
Napier and thence overland to Lake Taupo, a long and tedious
journey, as the natives will allow no stables along a portion
of the route, making one stage very long; (2) by steamet to
Tauranga, the port for the lakes; (3) by coach to Foxton,
thence rail and coach on to Taranaki, on through the
Manawatu Gorge to Napier ; (4) by rail to Masterton, coach
through the seventy mile bush to Woodville, then through
the Manawatu Gorge to Palmerston, and thence by coach
and rail to Taranaki. By the latter route we should be
able to catch a steamer at New Plymouth, in the
province of Taranaki, for Manukau, the West Coast port
for Auckland. This last route we decided to take, as by
doing it we see some of the finest parts of the North Island.
Had we even decided to stay in Wellington longer, one thing
would have driven us away. There is at present a water
famine, and all baths, &c., are disallowed in the hotel.
4 th April. —We left Wellington by the early train this
morning for Masterton. The line at first winds round the
bay to the Lower Hutt, where it branches off up the
Hutt Valley. On the way we passed a place with a queer
name—Ngahawranga. The Hutt Valley is extremely pretty,
but rapidly being spoiled by the way they are destroying the
timber. The line now begins to ascend by many queer curves
and gradients, 1 in 30 and 1 in 35 being about the average rise.
At Kartoke, 27 miles from Wellington, we had risen 300 feet,
and between this and the next station, “The Summit,” we
rose 270 feet more, the line passing through some wonderfully
wild gorges, filled wiih the thickest bush. We were now at
the head of the Remutaki Gorge, but the most extraordinary
part of the line was before us. At The Summit we met the
up train, and with it exchanged engines, as for the rest of the
line they have special engines, with four transverse wheels,
which grip a centre rail raised on iron brackets some distance
from the ground. The gradients are sometimes as steep as


T. in 12 and x in 14, and the line winds about in the most
extraordinary way. In crossing one of these gullies some
little time ago, a train was blown over, and since then, at the
most exposed places, they have erected wind shields to
break the force of the wind. At the bottom of the gorge lies
Featherstone, at the commencement of the Featherstone
Plains. Soon after leaving Featherstone we passed close to
the Wairarapa Lake, a sheet of water of some considerable
size. Following up the valley we soon arrived at Masterton,
the present termination of the line, seventy-one miles from
Wellington. There had been a large Maori meeting here
lately, and the town was full of them, dressed out in the
most gorgeous array, some of them driving about in traps
with Maori names painted on them. At 1.30 we started by
•coach. For some distance out of Masterton, the land
is principally used for grazing purposes, little or none of it
being under cultivation. At Camp, a small township and a
settlement of Scandinavians, we entered the forty-mile bush.
'There are many Scandinavian settlements between this and
Napier, and many are the clearings you pass on your way
through the bush. Government gave them a grant of land
and employment for so many days in the week, which
generally meant road-work. At this they would, of course,
work with a will, as it generally meant roads leading to their
own settlement. The days on which they were not employed
by Government they could devote to their own homesteads.
The road the whole way was very lonely, winding about
through the bush. At Eketahuna, a small roadside inn, we
stopped for the night, having come thirty miles. Here we
got good food and comfortable quarters. All round the hotel
they were busy clearing, and at night it was a very pretty
sight to see all the burning logs and upright trees. The
idea of an early start to-morrow made us all seek an early
bed.
s th April. —We were called at 3.30, and at four o’clock were
■once more on our way through the forty-mile bush. Woodville,
twenty-eight miles further on, we reached in time for
breakfast. Here we met the down coach to Napier. Some
little distance before reaching Woodville the road crosses
the Manawatu river, dividing the province of Wellington
from that of Hawke’s Bay. There is a ford over there, but a
Maori holds the right from time immemorial of ferrying
-people over, so we all had to turn out, easy ford as it was.
345


for the pleasure of being taken over the river in a Maori
canoe and being charged sixpence each, the canoe being
nothing more than a hollowed tree. The same thing used
to occur at another small river over which there is now a
bridge, the government having to buy off the Maori for £IOO,
and give him and his family free passage over the bridge for
ever. It must be remembered that we are now in the Maori
country. Soon after leaving Woodville, the road passes
through the Manawatu Gorge, a fine piece of scenery with a
very dangerous road, cut out of the solid rock overhanging
the river. Nearly the whole way there were but very few
inches to spare. In the middle of the gorge is the division
between the province of Wellington and Hawke’s Bay, so that
our stay in the latter province has been of very short duration.
Beyond the gorge are the Palmerston Plains, and we re-crossed
the Manawatu river, for a second time, in a tiny punt only
just large enough to hold the coach. For this passengers
have to pay 6d. ahead. Tim amused himself by offering to
toss the toll-keeper “double or quits,” at which game he
came off second best. Palmerston we reached at about eleven
o’clock, and by some bad arrangement there we had to wait
until six o’clock. Some day, no doubt, this will be a thriving
township, as it is in the centre of what will be a rich
agricultural district, but at present most of it is covered with
timber. The town itself is but a huge clearing in the bush,
about two miles long, by a mile broad, with houses scattered
all about it. The town proper is built in a square, with the
railway station in the middle. The rails are laid down the
centre of the main street, without any fencing whatever. We
left Palmerston at 5.45, and reached Wanganui at 10.15.
About the country I can say nothing, as it was dusk, but I
believe the land to be good. At Wanganui we found a very
good hotel in the “ Rutland,” but with one drawback, a
talkative landlord, whom we found a great nuisance.
6th April. —A Mr. 0 , whom we had met in the train
last night, kindly asked us to drive out to his place, about six
miles from the town, as by doing so we should see a portion
of the river. The river is navigable for about forty miles for
fair-sized boats, and it is possible to get up in canoes about
two hundred. We had at first thought of going up that way
to Lake Taupo, but on making enquiries were told that the
natives had shot the last man who tried to go up, but
that, as it happened, he did not matter much. However,,
346


we decided that if we were treated likewise, it might
matter a good deal, so decided to go on to Taranaki. The
town of Wanganui is about two miles up the river, over which
there is a splendid bridge. It is a clean and comfortable-
looking town. In its centre are several large mounds, from
which a good view can be obtained of the surrounding country.
On a fine day Ruapehu is plainly visible. While sitting up
on the top of one of these, a lark was hovering over my head,
filling the air with its notes, a thing which carried my thoughts
back to the old country more than anything else had done
since I left it. These mounds are of sand, and have been
planted over with Mysanthebranthemum (pig’s cheek), which,
when in flower, must look very gorgeous. On the larger of
the mounds is the old stockade, now used as constabulary
barracks. The buildings have a very comical appearance,
as the top storey stands out at some distance beyond the
underneath one, built in this way for the purposes of defence
in the times of the Maori difficulties. The morning we spent
in wandering about, and after lunch drove out with Mr.
O to his place. The drive is beautiful, following the
banks of the river. Sheep grazing seemed to be the principal
use that the land has been put to. Very little being under
cultivation, all the land has been laid down in English
grasses. Reaching his house, we at once ascended the
high hill behind it, for the sake of the view, and certainly
it repaid us. A rich valley, with the river, the finest in
New Zealand, winding along it; on the one side the sea,
on the other rising mountains. We ought to have
seen both Ruapehu and Mount Egmont, but we did not.
We returned for afternoon tea, and afterwards, crossing the
river in a punt, drove back along the other side.
Jth April. —The first thirty-five miles of to-day’s journey was
by rail, as far as the small township of Waverley. The line,
within the last week, was only open as far as Waitotara.
It is in this way the Government are by degrees filling in the
different gaps of what will, some day, be a most perfectly
laid out network of railways. The line winds about among
the surrounding hills, overlooking deep gorges, and in many
places excessively steep. From the highest point, a distant
view of the snow-clad cone of Mount Egmont is obtained,
while away to the right lies Ruapehu (9,195 ft.), the highest
mountain in the North Island, whose snow-clad peaks have,
until very lately, been unattempted by any venturesome
347


mountain-climber, but within the last few weeks a party of
four, consisting of three gentlemen and one-lady, crossed its
summit. Waiting at Waverley Station was the coach, upon
which we had taken the precaution to telegraph for the box
seats, and two facing backwards. Up to this there had been
generally a question as to whose turn it was to occupy the
box seats, but to-day, strange to say, there was not that usual
rush, accounted for by the fact that the third seat on the
back was occupied by a decidedly pretty girl. She certainly
must have been highly amused with what regularity we
changed our seats at the different stages. At Patea, we
crossed the river of the same name, which is the division
between the provinces of Wellington and Taranaki. Here we
stayed for dinner. The province of Taranaki has been called
4he garden of New Zealand. At present it is principally
taken up for the purposes of stock-rearing, there being no
population or market, as yet, to necessitate the growing
of either wheat or root crops. Corn would grow here to
perfection, but there is no doubt that it is better adapted for
root crops. Soon after this the road branches off, leaving the
Waimate Plains on the left. These plains, I suppose, are
the pick of the country, and a gentleman who has lately
arrived from England has invested £ 60,000 in the purchase
of land, giving as high a price as £l4 an acre, but for the
bulk about £y an acre. Mount Egmont was so christened by
Captain Cook, and he describes it as resembling Teneriffe.
It is a perfect cone, from the crater to the plains, and so
gradual is the slope that it is almost impossible to tell exactly
where it begins. Its height is 8,270 feet, and upon its
summit is perpetual snow; its circumference at its base is
about thirty miles. The road for many miles is cut through
thick bush, until it reaches Ngaire, where it joins the railway
for New Plymouth. The train had passed us before we
reached the station, so we only had just time to rush from
the coach to the train, and on again through the same scenery.
We reached New Plymouth about eight o’clock.
Bth April. —We had intended driving out to Parihaka,
where the forces are encamped under Colonel Roberts, to
whom we had a letter of introduction, but after our long run
yesterday, even Tim could network us up to the scratch, and
we decided to have an idle day, which we spent in loafing
about on the beach and sketching. The mountain from this
:side has an entirely different appearance, a huge shoulder
348


Indented with gullies runs down towards the sea The
dune here is extraordinary from its black sand, which looks-
UfeT filings Parihaka, had we time, would have been
Si worth visiting. It is there that Ti Whiti lives. He
has been the means of creating a good many disturbances,
and many of his followers are at present in gaol, whether
rightly so seems to be a grave question At all events, it is
a political one. An amusing tale is told of him. Sir Arthur
Gordon sent his aide-de-camp with a message, and all the
answer he got was, “The potato is cooked Many have
been the surmises as to the meaning of this. Some translate
it Why bother me now it is all over ?” but Dr. Manning, the
aathor of “ Old New Zealand,” who has a thorough
knowledge of the Maori race, says “ That meaning nothing he
eaid nothing.” That when a Maori does not mean to answer
you, he speaks some phrases that have no meaning, in order
to make himself appear mysterious and to bother you. At a
small barber’s in New Plymouth, I picked up for a small sum
three rather good Maori curios, sent there for sale. A hair-
headed spear ( Tiha-kura ), an axe {Ti-woti-ma or Paihaka),
a paddle ( Hot ). These were originally the property of a
chief called Tito-ki-waru, and were taken in the war at
Omuturangi. They are good specimens of Maori weapons.
gth April. —The “ Penguin ” came in this morning, and
the mode of getting on board is very primitive, and at times,
I should say, dangerous. A big whale boat is drawn up on
the shore, for it is an open roadstead, and from the shore to
an anchored buoy, some distance beyond the surf, is a
haws,er. This hawser passes over runners at the bow and
stern of the boat. When ready a couple of horses run you
out into the surf, and then men hawl on to the hawser. After
passing the surf, the rope is cast adrift and you are rowed
out to the steamer. New Plymouth is the most charmingly
beautiful town in New Zealand. Behind it rises the grand
mountain, at which you never can tire of looking, and on one
side a clump of curious-shaped rocks running out into the
sea, known as the “ Sugar Loaves.” It is by means of
connecting two of these by a breakwater that they hope to
have a secure harbour; at all events, secure against the
prevailing winds. In the centre of the beach is a grassy
hillock, on which is the signalling station, in charge of an old
sailor, who was cast away here forty years ago in a schooner,
called the “ Old Plymouth,” and here he has been ever since.


io th April. —We came on deck early, in order to see the
entrance to the Manukau, the most dangerous of all New
Zealand harbours. Outside there is sometimes two miles of
surf, and through this a vessel has to find the passage.
There are innumerable banks, through which there are three
passages, the South, the Fanny, and the Main. As these
banks are constantly changing, there is a system of semaphore
signals to guide the vessels. On one of these banks H.M.S.
“ Orpheus ” was lost some years ago, with all hands. Once
inside, however, a magnificent stretch of water opens out,
and from the Heads to Onehunga, the port, is a distance of
several miles. As there was two hours before any train left
for Auckland, only eight miles away, we chartered a cart to
take our luggage, and we made a most ignoble entry on the
top of omnibuses, crawling in at the rate of about four miles
an hour. It was Sunday, and everybody and everything was
asleep. It seems to be our fate to arrive in places on Sunday,
and could any day be more miserable ? However, Tim and
I went to the “Northern Club,” while K and H
hunted about for an hotel, and came to anchor at the “Albert.”
In the afternoon we met and crossed over to the north shore,
and ascended to the signalling station, from which the
best view about Auckland is got, taking in both the town and
harbour. The Club is most comfortable, facing Government
House, which is now only used occasionally, since the seat of
government was removed to Wellington. In the grounds
are capital tennis-courts, the Club being allowed the sole use
of them, except two days a week, which are given up to the
ladies.
14 th April. —The last few days have been spent most agree-
ably, there being several very nice men staying at the Club, and
we have always been able to get up a game at tennis. One
afternoon, I drove out to Packaranga, in search of a relative,
but it was a wild goose chase, as in that neighbourhood he
had never been heard of. Coming up from the south is a
wonderful change. Here the heat is moist, and makes one
feel almost good for nothing. The “ Edith,” my schooner of
last year, is lying here. Many have been our discussions as
to how we are to reach the Hot Lakes, and we had decided to
leave to-night by a steamer going over to the Thames, and
go up in a small launch toTe Aroha, the new gold-fields, and
from there ride over to Cambridge, and on to Ohinemutu.
The Thames was so called by Captain Cook, from its


resemblance to our river, and he speaks of it as being a likely
place for the white man to settle. J. M , the manager
•of the Union S. Co., has been one of our party here, and a
most jovial fellow he is. We were just leaving the Club to
see him off by the steamer, when he proposed that I should
■come with him. The idea struck me as such a good one,
that I decided on the moment to go, and tried to persuade
Tim to come to. We both rushed upstairs to pack, but he
failed me, having sat on his bed to think—a most fatal error.
However, lam leaving him in good hands, as M. T ,an
-old Eton chum of his brother’s, is staying at the Club, and is a
■capital fellow. Taking us altogether, we have certainly
-awakened the usually dull echoes of the Club, and perhaps,
fortunately for us, there have been no sedate old members, or
else I am afraid we should have astonished their weak nerves
-to our cost. We tried a joke on M. T by sending him a
letter, purporting to come from the Committee, requesting
■that his behaviour might be more moderate, but unfortunately
he knew Tim’s handwriting. At eight o’clock I had no idea
•of making a move, and before nine o’clock I was steaming
•out of Auckland harbour, on my way to Napier. It was late
at night before we rounded Cape Colville, passing between it
and the great Barrier Island. After passing Mercury Island,
and the bay of the same name—called so by Captain Cook from
its being the place where he took his observations of the
transit of Mercury—we entered the Bay of Plenty.
15 th April—No land in sight this morning, as from Cape
•Colville to East Cape, the other extremity of the bay, is 136
miles. Late in the afternoon we passed within sight of
White Island, still an active volcano. After sunset we ran
in close to the land, and made the East Cape.
16 th April. —From the East Cape we hugged the land, and
■at eight o’clock this morning we were at anchor in Poverty
Bay, in which is the town of Gisborne ; its old name being
Taranganui, by far the prettier. The sides of the bay are
white cliffs of great height, the middle is low land with hills
gradually rising behind, one towering above another, and
terminating in the chain of mountains, which appeared to be
far inland. This bay is most interesting, as being the first
land that Captain Cook sighted, and the white cliffs to the
south of it he called “Young Nick’s Head,” Nick being the
midshipman on the watch at the mast-head at the time. Here
lie tried his best to get on amicable terms with the natives,
351


but without success, having to shoot one man in self-defence.
He says: “Next morning we weighed, and stood away
from this unfortunate and inhospitable place, to which I gave
the name of Poverty Bay, and which by the natives is called
Taoneroa, or ‘ Long Sand,’ as it did not afford us a single
article that we wanted, except a little wood.” Flowing into
the extremity of the bay is a small river or creek, the so-
called harbour. We landed in a large rowing boat. Gisborne,
at some future time, is bound to be a thriving place, as behind
it lie the most fertile plains. We at once hired a buggy, and
drove for some distance over them to a place called Waerenga-
a-hika, which was the scene of a great engagement during the
Maori war, when Ti-Kooti, a big chief, together with many
followers, were taken prisoners, and afterwards banished to
the Chatham Islands, which lie to the eastward of New
Zealand. After the lapse of two years they carried out a well-
laid plot of seizing the guard, and getting possession of a
Government schooner called the “Rifleman,” in which they
crossed over and landed in Poverty Bay. Major Briggs called
upon them to surrender, which they refused to do, and
thereupon, being greatly the larger number, attacked Major
Briggs, and massacred him and all the whites there with him,
both women and children. This Ti-Kooti is still alive, and in
the country, but, of course, were he to show his face in
whiteman’s land, he would be taken and hung. There was
some lovely pasturage on these plains, sheep and cattle rolling
in fat, and on one farm were several alpacas. Waerenga-a-hika
is a Maori pah, and in it a large meeting-house with an
elaborately carved front, but a description of this I will leave
for my Hot Lake trip, where I shall see Maoris and Maori life
to perfection. At Gisborne they have a comfortable little
club, of which they kindly made us honorary members, but
our stay is short, as we are to leave for Napier to-night. It
is a curious sight in all these towns, to see the Maoris loafing
about in all directions, dressed in the most outrageous
costumes, especially the women, who sit outside the shops
smoking and chattering. The view, looking down the creek
over the bay, was one of extreme beauty. On one side a
Maori pah, on a point with trees and shrubs. Away over the
bay the white cliffs of Young Nick’s Head, backed up by a
purple range of hills, and as a foreground a Maori ferry, a
mere log hollowed, in which these people seem to sit with
the greatest security and ease. A white man never knows


where to stow away his legs, whereas the black race use them
to sit on, either cross-legged or on their heels, a most useful
accomplishment. About eight miles outside Poverty Bay is
the Ariel Rock, never visible above water; a most dangerous
spot, but this coast is remarkably free from dangers. It has
all been carefully surveyed, and I don’t suppose there is any
coast in the world so well provided with lighthouses as are
these, especially in the Middle Island. It was dusk before
we were once more under weigh.
ijthApril. —Long before daybreak we were lying at anchorin
Hawke’s Bay, off that portion of the town of Napier known as
the Spit. The communication with the shore is by a small
steam launch, called “The Boojum,” and as very few out here
had ever read “ The Hunting of the Snark,” the name rather
bothered them. The harbour is formed by means of
embankments on either side of the stream running into the
bay, and the flow backwards and forwards of the tide into the
low-lying flats behind keep the channel clear. Landing, we
at once drove over to Napier proper, which lies about one
and a half miles away on the other side of a high bluff, once
an island, then called Ahuriri, but since re-christened Scinde
Bluff. On the face of this are scattered the houses of the
principal residents, while the town lies beneath, stretching
along the edge of the bay, and backed by low, swampy country,
which is, by degrees, drying up. Behind all rises the Rhuaini
Range, dividing the province of Auckland and Hawke’s Bay.
The town resembles an English watering-place more than
anything I have seen out in the Colonies—an esplanade,
with residences overlooking it, and behind these the principal
street of the town. The Club is in the esplanade, and to
this I at once went, armed with a letter from Mr. K ,a
resident here, and one of our passengers. After a change,
we walked up to his house, which is on the top of the bluff,
to breakfast. The names of the streets and townships round
Napier are called after Indian celebrities and poets. Again
have I arrived in a town on Sunday, but fortunately Mr.
K took compassion upon me, and I spent the day with
him. In the afternoon we walked to the top of the bluff,
from which you get a magnificent view of Hawke’s Bay.
The most southern point is Cape Kidnapper, so called by
Captain Cook from an episode which took place here. A boy
was carried off by the Maoris, but afterwards recovered.
18 th April— Easter Monday, and a general holiday. The
2 A


only amusement has been a competition between the two
Volunteer Fire Brigades—The Napier and the Spit—and it
was most astonishing with what rapidity some of the men
could handle the different implements.
ig th April. —A thoroughly wet day, but having plenty of
writing to do I did not regret it. I leave early to-morrow
morning for Taupo, and as the coach starts from the Victoria
Hotel, at the other end of the town, I took a room there for
to-night, so as to be on the spot in the morning.
20 th April.— Very glad I was I slept at this hotel, as by
doing so I got a comfortable breakfast. At six o’clock we
started in a small coach, holding eight passengers only, every
seat of which was taken. I had telegraphed from Gisborne
for the box-seat, but that had been taken a fortnight ago.
Two of the inside passengers were Maori clergymen, weighing
at least seventeen stone each, and who rather exceeded
their allotted space. However, after a short time we shook
down somehow. The road leaves the town and crosses
the flats by a long, narrow bridge, about a mile and a half
in length, and then follows along a curved sand ridge as
far as Petane, a small settlement about five miles from
Napier. There is no doubt whatever that at one time
the sea extended over all these flats, Ahuriri Bluff
being an island; but some great storm must have thrown
up this spit, so blocking out the sea from the flats beyond.
After leaving Petane, the road crosses some open land, and
then takes to the bed of the Waiohinganga river. This
name has been too much for general use, so it is better known
by the name of the Petane river. The river, for eight miles
runs along the bottom of a deep gorge, so that the road has
to cross and re-cross the river to take advantage of flat ground
when it can. After leaving the river, the same is done up
the Kaiwaka Creek, making in all forty-five crossings. In
very rainy weather the road, as may be imagined, is
impassable. For the next seven miles, after leaving the
Kaiwaka Creek, the road is up-hill to the top of the range,
from which a beautiful but distant view of Napier and Hawke’s
Bay is obtained. After this the road descends to Pohui,
where we changed horses, and well we needed it, for the rain
had made the roads fearfully heavy, and the distance, twenty-
six miles. Our next team was rather a scratch one, having a
mule as one of the wheelers. More up-hill work over the Te
Tiakowra Range, through lovely scenery, the road winding


about in the most extraordinary way. The country, to
begin with, is of the most strikingly volcanic formation ;
every hill is cone-shaped, and every valley tumbled about
in the most extraordinary way. Where there is no bush
the country is covered with fern, and in many places this
has been burnt off, which gives a most weird look to the
scenery. The descent into the Mohawka valley is straight
•and steep, with a gradient of at least one in nine. I was not
sorry when I was safe at the bottom. The Mohawka river
is crossed by a bridge, and at a small roadside house we found
refreshment for the inner man, notwithstanding he had no
licence, but then our lady passenger had a glass of milk, for
which we paid. After this, more ranges, the Te Harato and
Turanga-Kuma, from the top of which there is a glorious
panorama of mountain scenery, and the number of volcanic
cones is truly remarkable. In the distance was the Tarawera
valley, and the Kaimanawa Range. All this mountain work
began to tell on our scratch team, and we crept along at
a snail’s pace. Formerly, this road was well subsidized by
Government for carrying the mails, but latterly it has been
reduced to only £3OO a year, which is called a pack-horse
contract. The country is one mass of pumice, and of course
the roads are always bad, but much worse in wet weather;
unfortunately, we were three hours late, and by being so. we
had, owing to the darkness, missed one of the finest views on
the road, over the Tarawera valley. It was nine o’clock
before we reached Tarawera, our night’s resting place. lam
perfectly certain we had walked the greater portion of the
road, and I had great fun in insisting upon the two fat,
lazy Maoris getting out, and walking up the hills. On one
occasion, after some little trouble in getting the fattest of
them out, he turned to me and said, “Ah! you new chum,”
and I am afraid as a rule it is so, that the ordinary travellers
here never think of walking to save the horses.
21st April. —We made an early start, as to-day there was
forty-eight miles of road before us, without a change of
horses. It was a bitterly cold morning, and the ground
covered with white frost. On the ridges of the hills were
dead trees, covered with long white lichen, like to an old
man’s beard; as the sun caught these they appeared to be set
in silver. For the first twelve miles we wound about among
the hills until we reached Runonga, at the commencement of
the Taupo plains, and at the head the waters of the Waipunga


river. This road is an old military one, made during the time
of the Maori war, for the purpose of being able to get into*
the heart of the Maori country, and at intervals along it were
constabulary stations. Runonga was one of them, but now
deserted. The Taupo plains are about forty miles across,,
and mostly barren land covered with fern. They have,
however, a beauty of their own, covered here and there with
patches of timber, and away to the right and left lies the Tara-
wera and Kaimanawa Ranges; but the greatest sight of all
are the two giants of the North Island —Ruapehu and Tong-
ariro—rising to the height of 9,195 and 7,000 feet respectively.
The former is covered with perpetual snow, the latter is-
still an active volcano. The last bad eruption was in 1868,.
and to within the last year or two it was constantly smoking.
At about half-way across the plain we came to the Rangi-
taiki river, where we camped for lunch. It is a stream of
considerable length, discharging its waters into the Bay of
Plenty, at Metata. Right ahead a huge mountain towers,
above the plain. It is Tauhara, or “Mount of Sin,” an
inactive volcano, at the foot of which lies Tapuwaeharuru,.
on the shores of Lake Taupo. The first view of this is
one of great beauty. It is first seen from where the plain,
reaches its greatest height, 2,500 feet above sea level. Its full
name is Taupo Moano, the latter word meaning “ sea.” It is
about thirty miles long and the same broad, and about 1,250
feet above the level of the sea. It is surrounded by moun-
tains, and its water’s edge by high cliffs, and in the back-
ground* rise Ruapehu and Tongariro, with Mount Taukanu
at their feet. Near the head of the lake lies Motutaiko, an
island of considerable beauty, standing out in dark relief
against the deep blue waters of the lake. It is said to swarm
with rats, and was once, says tradition, the abode of a
terrible “Taniwha,” or water-monster, named Horomatange,
and as to its formation there is a legend. The great
Arawa canoe that led the fleet which brought the Maoris
from their fatherland, Hawaiki, was commanded by a chief
and priest, named Ngatoroirangi. This chieftain penetrated
to the Taupo district, and, desirous of exhibiting his powers
after performing an incantation at an altar he had erected,
ascended to the top of Mount Tauhara, and, poising his spear,
cast it four miles into the lake, where it was at once turned
into a rock. At Opepe there is still a constabulary station, and
remnants of the old stockade. The many white men’s graves.


show but too plainly that this was a spot where we suffered
some reverse. Looking from here over to Tapuw'aeharuru,
we got our first sight of hot springs. From various spots on the
plain steam jets issued, and so I was now on the border of
the famous hot lake district. Along the shores of the lake
were many Maori pahs and whares, and before reaching bur
destination we crossed Waipahihi, a brook of hot water
•tumbling into the lake. Tapuwaeharuru is on the N.E.
corner of the lake, and just at the point where the Waikato
river leaves iL This river rises on the slopes of Ruapehu,
and is said by the Maoris to flow through the lake without
-commingling with its waters. At present there is a native
Land Court sitting here, and the place is full of Maoris.
Their encampments line the lake for some distance. The
law now is that a Maori, before he can sell his land, has to
get it passed through the Land Court, and so obtain a title
to it. To arrive at this title is a most wearisome business,
■on account of the number of claimants. It really belongs
to no one in particular, but to a number who have
acquired certain rights from time immemorial. When
■once the claimants’ titles are settled, all their names
are put upon the title-deed. Before this was done, a
white man bought land, and after he had improved it and
been settled on it some time, other claimants would turn up.
A great deal of trouble was caused in this way. There is
also another law by which a Maori cannot part with all his
land, so that if he cares to work he cannot ever be absolutely
■destitute. We had telegraphed to Lofly, the guide, who keeps
an accommodation house about two miles away, in connection
with the hot springs there. His house was, however, full,
but we succeeded in getting rooms at one of the hotels. The
bar, billiard room, and verandahs of the hotel were crammed
with Maoris, drinking, dancing, and generally kicking up a
tow, and this went on well into the night.
22 nd April. —At a very early hour, I was awakened by a
most diabolical row, bawling and screeching, accompanied
by the howling of all the dogs in the neighbourhood. It
resembled an Irish wake. I afterwards learnt that it was a
■tangi, performed on account of the arrival of some fresh
Maoris. This tangi is also gone through on the death of a
Maori, as in Ireland. At the present day one might say that
the Irish were no better than savages, and still retain much
.of their barbaric nature. We had arranged with Lofly to


come in soon after breakfast, and take us to see the sights.
Until he came, we filled up the time with seeing the town ,
On the banks of the Waikato is a redoubt, within which is
the constabulary station, and post and telegraph office, while
just outside are the school-house and court-house, and
residence of the officer in charge of the constabulary. We
also looked in at the court-house to watch the proceedings,
A witness was being examined as to his claim to a certain:
property, and one of his reasons was that his ancestor
had cut wild cabbages on it. If I had been the judge
I should have had that fellow horsewhipped. When Lofly
arrived we started at once for the springs. They bear the
name of the township, which means “ Sounding Footsteps,”
a very appropriate name, for the whole ground sounds hollow,,
and many are the cases one hears of men putting their feet
through the surface. The Government has purchased the
land round the springs, and Lofly is in charge of them.
In whatever direction you look jets of steam of different sizes
can be seen. The springs, where the baths are, rise in a
deep gully. These are led to meet one another, and at their
junction are the baths. One stream is cold, the other hot.
Over them is trellis-work, covered with creepers. The hot
and cold streams are kept apart for a little distance by
boards, so that you can tumble out of the hot into the cold,
or go below the junction into tepid water, which produces a
peculiar sensation, as the hot water flows upon the top. The
stream flows out of the baths over a waterfall, under which
you can sit, the most delightful of baths ; the water just
flows over the top of the head, leaving room to breathe. The
sound made by the tumbling water is most metallic. After
coming out of the bath I felt ready to fight any Goliath —that
had not had a hath. The greatest sights of the neighbourhood
are the Te Huku Falls of the Waikato. They are about three
miles from the springs. Formerly, you used to walk as far
as the native pah, or village of Otumukeke, but this, owing
to the death of the chief, has been deserted. This is a peculiar
custom of the Maoris. The desertion, however, of the whole
pah, except, perhaps, in the case of the chief, is dying out, and
instead they burn the house of the deceased. In former days,
when a man or woman was on the verge of death, they
were wrapped up in mats and taken away to die alone, in
order to avoid the desertion of their pah. Otumukeke being
deserted, we had to walk the whole distance. Hot springs


bubble up in all directions, or the steam ascends in clouds.
We came out on to a high point above the falls. The
Waikato is a river of considerable size, and suddenly it is
converted into a rocky gorge of about three hundred yards
long, and in no place more than fourteen yards across. The
gorge lies at a very steep gradient, and the water rushes
through with tremendous force, leaping and roaring—a vast
turmoil of water. With one tremendous bound it rushes
from the gorge into a basin beneath. On either side of this
gorge are level plateaus, from which rise queer-shaped volcanic
mounds. In connection with the falls, there is a legend that
a chief named Tamateapokaiwhenua, from the Wanganui
district, with others, was travelling through the island, and at
last came to the Taupo district, and there met with a friendly
welcome from the tribe settled there. Savage-like, each side
was boasting of its deeds of prowess, and the new-comers
vauntingly declared that they were unrivalled canoe-men —on
river in the country had yet baffled them ; they had passed
over rapids, and even over the falls of the Wanganui river.
The Taupo natives listened, and then solemnly said that
there was a fall in their district that no mortal canoe could
pass over and escape destruction. At this the strangers
laughed loudly, and vowed that the danger of the falls would be
as nothing before their skill and prowess, and when dared by
their hosts to put their boast to the test, they readily assented,
and forthwith prepared for the trial. A large canoe was made
ready, and in it the whole party embarked, and chanted as
they drove the canoe down the river with the quick, vigorous
strokes of their paddles. Clustering in numbers about
the first rapid the Taupo men waited for the canoe. It
came, and by skilful management passed the danger safely.
Then a great shout of exultation went up, but only for a
moment, for there were other rapids before them, and then
the final fall. Still, onward shot the canoe, and the natives
raced to keep pace with it, and reached Te Huku just as it
approached the first vortex. There was no shout then, but
dusky faces paled with horror, turned despairingly shorewards,
and then resolutely faced the danger before them. Just then
the canoe shot past a flat rock on the edge of the swirl, and
seizing the opportunity, a chieftain named Taraihioko,
terrified at the prospect of certain death that lay before him,
leapt from the canoe upon the rock, and thence escaped on
shore. Barely had his feet touched than the canoe was
359


sucked into the pass, and was overwhelmed in an instant.
Not one of the sixty-nine brave men it contained were
seen again, but it is said that years afterwards a portion of
the canoe was seen jammed in a rift of the rock below the
falls. This legend is preserved amongst the natives, and the
name of the chief has become a household word for a man
who is always travelling about. A Tamateapokaiwhenua
would be a good name for a globe-trotter!!! On our way back
to Lolly’s we passed some extraordinary gorges, with perpen-
dicular sides, and of great depth ; evidently a tremendous
subsidence caused by the stream which flows along its base.
There are several gorges, and in each the stream is an under-
ground one. They are all most beautifully wooded. Fern
trees grow in great luxuriance. In a cave on the slope of one
of these we saw the skeleton, wrapped in a mat, evidently of
some old Maori at one time placed there to die. At Lolly’s
we had another bath, and on our way home visited, first a mud
spring, a huge cauldron of boiling mud, and then on to the
banks of the Waikato to see the Witch’s Cauldron, a
huge cavity of about thirty feet deep, at the bottom of which
was a pool of boiling water, with intermittent upheavals.
Out of this cavity flowed a stream of boiling water. The heat
all round was intense, for on all sides were holes, out of which
steam was issuing. It is, indeed, an extraordinary country,
and one could well imagine that Dante had visited it before
writing his“ Inferno.” Curiously enough, the vegetation round
these boiling holes was of the richest, ferns growing to the
very edge of the boiling water. Within one hundred yards,
and on the very banks of the Waikato, is a curious formation,
called the “ Crow’s Nest.” It is a cone of about seven feet
high, built of sticks and covered with siliceous incrustations,
deposited from the water. There is no doubt that at one
time this was built up by the natives to keep their children
from falling in. The chief Ngatoroiragi and his two sisters,
KuiWai and Haungaroa, both potent sorceresses, are said to
have kindled all the subterranean fires of the Taupo district.
23rd April. —Had one time, there is no doubt plenty to be
seen in this district, but I am compelled to go on in order to
meet Tim at Ohinemutu. There is no regular coach running
now, so we telegraphed for one to meet us here. At six
o’clock we left Tapuwaeharuru, and crossed the Waikato by
a bridge built over a portion of the river, where it narrows
into a gorge. The scenery along the river is most beautiful.


High perpendicular banks and rich vegetation, with water of
the deepest green. The road winds about through a barren
■ country, covered with fern, and there is nothing of any
interest until about half-way, when on the plains to the left
is a remarkable mount, named Kokataroa, or “ Long Tooth.”
Springing from a terraced base, the huge hill, pyramidal in
form, rises to the height of about 800 feet, and is crested with
overhanging masses of rock. The tribe living in this district,
when at war with neighbouring tribes, used it to keep their
women and children on, who, in case they were attacked,
could defend themselves by rolling stones down upon the
attacking party. Now-a-days, however, the place is tabooed,
owing to it having been used as a burial-place. The Maoris
are very fond of burying their dead in high places. Close to
this we made a halt on the banks of the Waikato. Here there
are remnants of an old accommodation house and stables,
but now the Maoris will allow nothing of that sort, so the
Torses have to do the whole distance, fifty-eight miles —not a
bad stage! The next thing of interest is the Horo Horo Range,
a huge bluff with abrupt precipices, and topped with bush.
Passing through the Hamu Gorge, the first view of Rotorua
is obtained (roto means lake), and to the right of the road
is Whakarewa-rewa, a gully with broken ground, and full of
boiling springs and mud holes. Here the whole country
appears to be steaming. The last few miles into Ohinemutu
is over level ground full of steaming holes, and sounding very
bollow. On one occasion one of the horses put his foot
through the road. The lake is about twelve miles long
and nine broad, and is surrounded by ranges —the Ngongotaka
being the highest, 2,000 feet above sea level. K and
H are still here. Tim arrived last night.
24 th April. —This morning we made up a party to visit the
•geysers and sulphur mud springs of Tikitere, which are in
the ranges to the north-east of the lakes, and about eleven
miles from Ohinemutu. On the way there we passed Roto-
Rawa, a small lake of greenish water, fed by boiling sulphur
springs, and the old mission station of Ta-Ngae. This portion
of the road is thoroughly English in every respect, bordered
•on either side by oaks and elms, and all around are sweetbriar
bushes. The fields in front are neatly fenced, and slope
down to the water’s edge. After this a track leads off from
dhe main road, and down some wonderful hill sides. The
brake being insufficient to keep the trap back, the driver had
361


to keep one wheel scraping against the sides of the cutting-
The springs at Tikitere are supposed to be the most
efficacious of all in this district; the largest of the pools is
called Hurutani, after a Maori woman, who fell in and was
boiled to shreds. It boils with great ferocity, and so dense
is the steam that it is only now and then that you get a
glimpse of its seething surface. Close to this are several
ugly-looking mud springs. Around these the ground is
most treacherous, and it does not do to move an inch off
the beaten track, and even then one treads with cautious
steps. These mud-holes are surrounded with walls of mud
layers, and have the appearance of so many carbuncles.
Following a creek, we ascended a gully called Mimi-o-Kakahi,
and composed of pumice rocks, over which a hot steam falls,,
to a plateau above, in which is a boiling lake known by the
name of Tarata. Taking our luncheon with us, we next
made for Roto-Kawou, the road to which passes through the
most charming bush, filled with every variety of ferns. About
half-way there you get one of the most beautiful views of
Lake Rotorua, with the island, backed up by the dark range
of hills, and all set in a frame of lovely foliage. Roto-Kawou
is in what is evidently an old crater, with precipitous sides,
covered with bush, in places quite three hundred feet in height-
The white pumice rocks show through the bush, and are
reflected in the deep green water. This lake is tapu, or
sacred by the Maori law, from the fact that the caves round
its edges have been used for burying places. In the bush we
noticed several very good specimens of the rata, showing how
this tree grows. It first starts life as a vine, choosing, as it
were, some forest giant to grow up, not round and round as.
is the case with most creepers, but straight up. It next
throws out arms which encircle the tree, and as it grows
older, it seems to squeeze the life out of its early supporter,
until it entirely absorbs it, and itself becomes a forest tree,,
the original prop either entirely disappearing, or forming part
and portion and taking the character of the rata. We next
drove on to Roto-Iti, and on our way passed through a bush-
fire, being at last stopped by it. We ascended a small hillock,
from which we got a magnificent view both of Rotorua and.
Roto-Iti, divided only by a narrow neck of land, through,
which there is a small stream connecting the two lakes-
The view is indeed most charming; on one side Roto-Iti,
with its bold headlands, many islands, and precipitous banks.


all surrounded with wooded and sloping hills, and on the
other the vast expanse of Rotorua, its romantic island, its
white cliffs, and numerous columns of steam rising from the
boiling springs of Ohinemutu, Tikitere, and Whakarewa-
rewa. Lake Rotorua owes its origin to volcanic causes, having
evidently been formed by a vast subsidence. It is only 790
feet above sea level, and hardly in any place deeper than five
fathoms. The island in its centre is called Mokoia, and is.
about 400 feet high, having a pah upon its top. It is the
scene of one of the most famous of Maori legends. Hinemoa:
was a chiefs daughter of great beauty, living at a village
called O-Whata. On the island of Mokoia lived Tutanekai,,
the object of her affections, but to whom her family was
opposed on account of the inferiority of his birth. She,,,
however, planned an elopement with him, that upon hearing
him play on a flute she was to take her canoe and paddle
across. At night Tutanekai takes his flute, and is heard
across the waters by Hinemoa; but she has no canoe, for her
people, suspecting her intentions, had drawn them high and
dry. Taking with her, however six, hollow gourds, she swims
towards the island, her only guide being the strains of the-
flute, and at last she lands at Waikimihia, near to some hot
springs, in which she bathed, for she was trembling with the
cold. Tutanekai’s slave came down to draw water, whereupon.
Hinemoa, dashing the vessel from his hand, broke it to pieces.
Not perceiving who it was in the dark, he returned and told,
his master, who came down in great wrath to the well,
and so discovered Hinemoa. The descendants of Hinemoa and
Tutanekai are living at Rotorua to this day, and their
constant theme is the beauty of their ancestress, and how
she swam across the lake to Mokoia. This bath is still
shown to visitors by the Maoris, also the hill called!
Te-Rewarewa, upon which Tutanekai is supposed to have sat
while he played.
25 th April. —Ohinemutu is a large native settlement,
belonging to a tribe called the Arawas. It is principally
built upon a narrow spit of land jutting out into the lake..
Some years ago there was an earthquake, which changed the
bed of the lake so that a large portion of the town was.
submerged ; remnants of posts can still be seen above the.
water. The Eunanga, or meeting-house, is perhaps the best
specimen of Maori architecture in the colony. It is named.
Tamati Kapua, after a great ancestor of the people.


Piled up on pillars, squat monsters rise,
Perched on each others’ shoulders to the roof;
The tribes’ great council chamber this should be —
Their Whare-Kura, Hall of Sacred Red,
For worship—justice
It is an extraordinary building inside. In regular rotation all
round are these quaint and grotesque carvings of their different
•chiefs, the intervening spaces being filled in with reeds,
neatly fastened together with raw flax. In front of the
-meeting-house is a carved flag-post, and all around are the
whares of the inhabitants. The spot of land on which the
town is built is really a thin crust roofing over a vast boiler.
Hot springs bubble up in all directions, and from every crack
and crevice steam spurts forth. Food is boiled by being hung
in flax baskets in one of the many pools. Buried amidst
the scrub are two large boiling pools, which are tapu, as
in olden days, prisoners were bound hand and foot and cast
into them from a rock above, never to appear again. They
are supposed to be bottomless. A carpenter, a few years ago,
wishing to soak some scaffolding poles, forty feet long, put
them in, when they immediately sank. In the bay there
is a rock jutting out, on one side of which it is quite warm,
while on the other it is very hot. This is a favourite bathing
place for the natives, and in the evening you can see numbers
■of them in the water. The colour of their skin is just fair
enough to allow the warm colour to show through, and the
young girls have large lustrous, dark eyes, rosy lips, and
beautiful teeth. Formerly they tattooed the lips and chin, and
after marriage dyed their teeth. The tattooing on the men is
most elaborate, mostly in circular lines ; but I think everybody
has seen a picture of a Maori’s head, or perhaps the head
itself, for there are several in our exhibitions at home. We
started this morning for Rotomahana, but first called at Whaka-
rewa-rewa river, about two miles from Ohinemutu, to visit
the springs there. The whole valley through which the river
flows is for some distance one mass of boiling springs, geysers,
and mud basins. We stopped at the native town built amongst
them, and were immediately taken in charge by a middle-
aged female, who demanded toll, one shilling each, before
■she would allow us to go any further. The next thing provided
for our amusement was to throw coins into a deep hole for the
-children to dive for. One cannot look at the children without
•a feeling of pain, when one knows how many of them will never


reach man’s or woman’s estate. The death rate amongst
young people is very high, and although children swarm you
see very few young men or women. This ’applies also to
nature. There is a well-known Maori song which runs —
•
As the Pakeha fly has driven out the Maori fly;
As the Pakeha grass has killed the Maori grass;
As the Pakeha rat has slain the Maori rat;
As the Pakeha clover has starved the Maori fern;
So will the Pakeha destroy the Maori.
The whole of this place is one mass of geysers, some of
them throwing up water as high as thirty and forty feet, and
there are holes to the right and left and ahead, all containing
boiling black mud. Then there is another curious hole,
which, in the days when fresh-cooked Maori was plentiful,
they used lor cooking the great dish of brain sauce.
Passing over a hillock more backsheesh was demanded. This
is almost as bad as being in Killarney. From here the road
is uninteresting until you enter the Moerangi bush, through
which the road runs for about two miles. It is curious to
see here how they mend their roads ; stone or gravel they have
none, so cutting down the bracken fern, they lay it on the
road and cover it with soil, which in time hardens and makes
a fair road. Emerging from the bush, you look down upon
Lake Tikitapu. It is a small sheet of intensely blue water,
surrounded by steep wooded heights. It is evidently an
extinct crater. Connected with this lake is the Maori St.
George and the Dragon tale. A great combat took place
between Tu-Whare-Toa and a real Taniwha (dragon), and
after the monster was conquered it was sentenced to go to
the bottom of the lake, and remain their for ever. When
the water is ruffled by a squall the Maoris say the Taniwha
is turning himself over. The next lake is Rotokakahi, also a
most beautiful lake, and in connection with this there is a
tale that some years ago, after an earthquake, the water
turned bright green, and all the fish died. The natives put
this down to the workings of their water-god. Soon after
passing this, the small township of Te-Wairoa is reached.
Here there are two hotels, M'Crae’s Rotomahana Hotel being
by far the best. It was still early, so we started, with a
Maori girl called “ Mabel ” as guide, to visit the waterfall of
the Wairoa river. It is in a deep, thickly-wooded gorge, and
falls about eighty feet amidst moss-covered boulders. This


iis the principal fall, but there are several others, as it
descends from the top of the cliff to ■ the shores of
the lake, a distance of 1,083 feet. After a scramble down
this cliff, by a narrow and winding path, to the foot
of the fall, we retraced our steps and visited the old
church. This is, I suppose, one of the oldest mission stations,
as nearly all the natives here speak a little English. Our guide
spoke it beautifully, and we tried to bother her and a small
hoy in the multiplication table, but failed. Here the fact that
the Maoris are lords of the soil shows itself very plainly.
There are two hotels, each as it were in the hands of a different
section of the tribe, but leased by white men. Should you be
staying at one hotel, you would not be allowed to join a party
for the Terraces staying at the other. The Maoris, I think,
are a most pig-headed people, and our conciliatory treatment
has entirely spoilt them. They consider themselves vastly
-superior to the white man. What black nation would not
Exeter Hall and its nonsensical notions spoil ? A lot of people
who, perhaps, have never been out of England, and have
■ certainly never seen a black man, must, forsooth, pretend to
be able to legislate for them. When we returned to our hotel
we found a good meal awaiting us, also a Maori to know if we
should like to see a haka-haka, their native dance, and if so
how many performers we should like at one shilling a head.
We chose twenty-five, so he departed to make arrangements.
After dinner we adjourned to an old shed lighted with candles,
held by small urchins. In two long rows stood the dancers,
the front being of women, the back of men. Pacing in front
of the line was a man who, with wild gestures, sang a sort
of wild ditty, the others moving and waving their hands to
the time of it. The first part of the performance was gone
through standing; the second sitting cross-legged. After the
mekes of Fiji, and the sivas of Samoa, the haka-haka was
but a poor performance.
26 th April. —A seven o’clock start, as we have a long day
-before us. The track from the hotel to the lake’s edge is down
a steep path, following the course of the Wairoa Creek. The
view of Lake Tarawera from the high ground is exceedingly
beautiful. Below is a long arm of the lake, quite narrow, and
■ enclosed by high, bold hills, clothed with thick bush. This is,
1 think, without doubt, the most beautiful spot in this district,
and especially striking after the dull volcanic scenery around
>Ohinemutu. Here, formerly, waited the canoes. Now, you
366


■ embark in a large whale-boat, rowed by six Maoris. We
were under the special charge of “Sophie,” the half-caste
guide, who speaks English extremely well; the other native
guide is “ Kate,” who, unfortunately, is rather deaf. Right
ahead of us, as we left this arm of the lake, was Mount
Tarawera (3,000 feet), a dull mass of bare, bleak rock, in shape
a truncated cone, with table-shaped top. It is sacred from its
being the principal burying-place of the Arawa tribe, and to
this day remains tapu, and consequently no person is allowed
to ascend it. After the body is decomposed, the bones are
■ collected and placed in caves on its summit. Further away in
the distance can be seen another volcanic cone, that of Mount
Edgcombe. About half-way up the lake we pulled into a small
bay, where there are a collection of whares, and from an old
woman we bought a kitfull of crayfish. Near to this there is
a large stone on the water’s edge. It is said to be the remains
of a great Taniwha, and to appease him you are requested to
place upon it tobacco or money, bywhich you will secure a calm
passage. The lake, as you near your destination, becomes
decidedly warm, and steams like a lake at home does when
the mist begins to rise. Reaching the entrance to Kai-Waka
Creek, we landed —
Not far from where, ’mid reed and sedge,
The warm Mazana’s rapid tide,
A mile long stream, scarce six feet wide,
Comes rushing thro’ the open pass
To Tarawera’s ample lake.
j\n old woman appeared to demand toll of two shillings and
sixpence each, and while we walked on, she, with another
older and still more hideous, pulled a canoe up the creek.
A mile up we waited for it, and by it crossed the stream, and
another short distance brought us in sight of Rotomahana
and the White Terraces. The first sight is disappointing,
especially after all one has heard, for the lake is only about
one mile each way, fringed with sedges, and swarming with
various kinds of ducks, water-hens, the magnificent Pukeko—
a bird with deep blue feathers, long red legs, and a red head,
with a hard red sheath—and also the graceful oyster-catcher
( Torea). From a distance, the White Terrace looks nothing
extraordinary; but on reaching it you cannot help exclaim-
ing, “ How marvellous, how magnificent! ” There is some


thing about it indescribably beautiful, something fascinating..
It is
A cataract carved in Parian stone,
Or any purer substance known,
Agate or milk-white chalcedon.
Its showering snow cascades appear
Long ranges bright of stalactite,
And sparry frets and fringes white,
Thick falling plenteous, tier o’er tier,
Its crowding stairs.
The native name is Te-Tarata. It is like being in fairy-
land. Fold upon fold of the purest white, the terrace covers
the hill side. The top of it is about eighty feet above the lake,
and on it is a seething, boiling cauldron, in a crater-like
excavation, with steep reddish sides forty feet high, and open
towards the lake, through which the boiling water flows down
and over the terraces. Looking down into this cauldron is.
like looking up to heaven, the white steam coursing over its
surface like clouds; the water of the purest turquoise
blue. The heat at the margin is 183° Fahr. The deposit
from the water is siliceous —hence the terraces. The steam as
it rises, and viewed from a little distance, reflects the blueness
of the water beneath.
Looking back from the top of the terraces,
Each step becomes a terrace brow;
Each terrace a wide basin, brimmed
With water —brilliant, yet in hue
The tenderest delicate harebell blue,
Deepening to violet.
The sticks and ferns along,its edge become covered with
silica. The space occupied by this formation is about 300
feet along the base, and about 150 feet high. The face of the
whole is a fine circular sweep, the lower terraces coming out
about twenty-five feet, and growing less as they get higher.
Most of them contain pools of lovely blue-coloured water of
different temperatures, those nearest the top being the
warmest, and the water, as it continually ripples down the
overhanging edge, forms stalactites of great length. The
pools generally are shell-shaped. Behind all this loveliness,
round the shoulder of a hill, are roaring, moaning, hissing,
boiling steam-holes and geysers, hot springs and mud-holes,
and the hill all over steams and fumes with the intensity of its
heat.
368


What sights you meet, and sounds of dread
Calcareous cauldrons, deep and large,
With geysers hissing to their marge ;
Sulphureous fumes that spout and blow,
Column and cones of boiling snow,
And sable, lazy, bubbling pools
Of spluttering mud, that never cools ;
With jets of steam through narrow vents,
Uproaring, maddening to the sky,
Like cannon-mouth that shoot on high,
In unremitting loud discharge,
Their inexhaustible contents ;
While oft, beneath the trembling ground,
Rumbles a drear, persistent sound,
Like ponderous engines infinite working
At some tremendous task below.
A footpath leads past huge boiling holes, terrible to look at,
and were it not that one’s guide marched on with perfect
unconcern, one would have turned tail and run. The first
hole is called “ The Great Nga-Hapu,” and the volume of steam
it throws up can be seen for miles round. Above this, again,
is “ The Devil’s Hole; ” this has no water in it, but steam only,
which rushes out of a hole about twelve inches in diameter
with such violence that one wondered the whole place was
not blown to pieces. What a waste of motive power strikes
one at once. The whole range is indeed a hot-bed of steam.
Beyond all this, again, are a collection of mud-springs, which
throw up a grey-coloured, greasy clay, which the Maoris eat
as a cure for dysentery, also as an article of food. This put
us in mind that we too were getting hungry, and we began to
get rather tired of boiling springs and mud-holes, so we
hurried our guide on. On our way down we passed Roto
Pounamu, a lake of a deep green colour, which they say feeds
the cauldron on the top of the terraces. On reaching once
more the shores of the lake, we found the canoe there with
our luncheon. We soon had the crayfish hanging in their
kit in one of the boiling pools and the potatoes in another.
And while at lunch, I will read you a poem, after Longfellow,
entitled:—
ERIN-NORA.
Should you ask me of my travels,
Of my rambles in the Northland,
Where the hot springs bubble, bubble,
Underneath the belching craters :
2 B


Where the snorting steam jets spouting,
Fringe the banks of Rotorua ;
And the dusky chiefs assemble
In the war dance of their people ;
Putting on some fierce grimaces,
Kicking up some frightful antics,
Going thro’ some queer contortions :
I should tell to you a story,
And a weird romantic legend
Of the lovely Erin-Nora.
“Was she from the Em’rald Island
As her name was Erin-Nora ?”
This, methinks, I hear you ask me ;
And I answer —no, she was not;
Though she dwelt beside the craythur ,
I could find no green about her,
For her skin was dark and dusky,
Shining bright with fat of wild pig ;
And her raven locks were hanging,
Like the mane of Shetland pony,
Down upon my tender bosom,
As she fondly stooped to kiss me,
Softly whispering, “ Tena Koi,
Kapai Pakeha, O Kapai
Rubbing noses as she pressed me
In her arms so thick and brawny.
Then she placed one on her shoulders,
Plunging through the frothy billows,
Clad in simple garb primeval;
Whilst the fierce sulphuric waters
Steamed around the charming creature,
Oozing forth a rich aroma,
Like the smell of bacon, seething
In some mighty pot of cabbage.
Springing lightly on the bank side,
Laughed she loud with many “ Ha ! ha’s ! ”
Then she took me to her wharf
(Put the accent on the e please).
And she rubbed me dry as tinder,
As she puffed her sable dhudeen,
Filled, I thought, with vile tobaccy,
Judging by the frightful odour—
Once again she whispered, “Kapai;
Come and live by Rotorua—
You shall be my Rangatira,
I shall be your own Waikena.”
Bursting from her fond embraces,
“Lovely chieftainess” I murmured,
“ Maori angel, I adore thee—
Keep my memory in your bosom.”
Sobbed she loudly as she listened,
Whilst her tender heart was breaking
But I said, “ Delightful angel,


Take this present from thy true love,
Take this flask of Highland whisky;
Sup it early in the morning,
And remember me my darling.”
Fled I swiftly from the Hot Springs,
From that wild, romantic region;
And the low wind from the mountain
Brought her wails upon the vapour;
Wafted forth her sighs and sobbing,
As she guzzled down the whisky,
Whilst she murmured, “ Kapai, Kapai.”
And I never more shall see her—
Fare thee well my Erin-Nora.
Lunch over, we at once got into the canoe, and were paddled
across the lake to the Pink Terrace, the native name for
which is Otukapuarangi, the crowning glory of the lake
district.
The fountain of the clouded sky,
Tu Kapuarangi—fitly styled.
It flings its steam so wide and high,
’Tis rosy rime they climb this time;
For floors and fringes, terrace piled
O’er terrace, glow with faint carmine,
As fashioned of carnelian fine ;
As if continuous fell from heaven
Some wide white avalanche, downward driven,
Came foaming out of sunset, stained
With sanguine hues it still retains.
Behind the topmost terrace, lo !
A vision like a lovely dream 1 —
A basin large, its further marge
And all its surface hid in steam,
That thinly driving o’er it flies,
Spreads level with the level plain
Of smoothest milk-white marble grain;
And all around its nearer brink
A border broad of delicate pink,
That meets to lemon yellow dyes
That whiteness, and with even hues,
Fair as a rainbow laid in snow.
Nothing more is there to say, except that man comes in to
•defile, by scribbling his name on all their loveliness, and what
is worse, that in a short space of time the water coats it over
with a thin deposit, making it indelible. Manchester was
represented there by a Mr. Whitehead and a Mr. W. S.
Armitage, and thousands of others —Smiths, Browns, and
Hobinsons innumerable. In one of the upper pools we


bathed. There is no bath in all the world that cart
equal this, and loth were we to drag ourselves out of
it, after spending an hour in such intense enjoyment.
All around this district are stone slabs, where the Maoris,
lie and sit, lounging away their lazy hours smoking. We
again entered the canoe, and re-crossed the lake to the
Kaiwaka Creek. The quantity of boiling water issuing from
the ground, both on the shores and at the bottom of the lake,
is truly astonishing. And as it is fed by no stream, the
amount of boiling water poured into it from these springs can
be well imagined, on seeing the volume of water which flows
down the Kaiwaka Creek. Holding one’s hand in the water
as the canoe sped along, the temperature changed from boiling
hot to cool, but never cold. We returned to our boat in the
canoe, shooting with great rapidity down the creek, a woman
sitting at each end, which gave them great command over
the canoe. It was wonderful to watch how skilfully they
handled their paddles. We were rowed back faster than we
had come, the men being exactly like horses in that respect.
Going, on any pretence whatever, they stopped rowing, and.
jabbered like so many monkeys. Unfortunately, we had:
taken a bottle of rum with us, and as it turned out we had
only two who were not teetotallers, and they drank it off by
the half tumbler at a time without any water. We reached
Wairoa in time for dinner, at which we had green tomato
tart—a most delicious dish, and far superior to apple tart. On
our way back to Ohinemutu we passed through the bush;
the number of glowworms on the banks were something
extraordinary. We covered up our lamps, and they quite
illuminated the road. One unsentimental member of ourparty
compared it to the Thames Embankment at night.
2 yth April. —Major and Mrs. D—— left this morning to
catch the steamer leaving Tauranga for Auckland to-night,
but the start was too early for us, so we decided to stay and
go down comfortably to-morrow, and catch the Friday’s boat.
We had intended going via Cambridge, but the charge for
horses is so exorbitant that we have given up all idea of it..
The island of Mokoia is about five miles and a half from
Ohinemutu, and with a strong fair breeze we reached it in
half an hour. We had with us two Maori boys, who know
next to nothing about sailing, and wanted to tie the main
sheet. Landing, we first went to see an aged chief, Hori
Haupapa. Formerly he was of great stature, and noted for-


Eis enormous strength. On one occasion it is said he threw
an adversary over the palisading of the pah. He was defeated
by the great cannibal Hongi, when he stormed and took this
island. Hori, however, escaped by swimming to the main-
land. He is supposed to remember Captain Cook, in which
case he would be at least one hundred and fifteen years old.
The site of the old pah is still pointed out, but little of it
remains. There are some very picturesque food houses; one
in particular, of high architectural design. They are built
upon posts raised from the ground about four feet, to prevent
the rats getting into them. They are really miniature
whares. The front wall is set back in the building some
distance, so making a sort of portico. The eaves are
coloured red and carved, and on the top is a grotesque figure.
In the interior of the portico the beams are decorated with
kiwi and other feathers. We strolled along the beach and
visited Hinemoa’s Bath, a natural tank of warm water, jutting
out into the lake, from the cold water of which it is only
divided by a natural wall of rock. In it there were several
children bathing. The women of this island are still noted
for their beauty, which they are supposed to have had handed
■down to them from Hinemoa. On our way back the wind
dropped, and we had to row in, only arriving at the hotel in
time to escape a heavy shower. As a proof that this lake
was formed by a huge subsidence, in crossing it, we came
upon several trees, which had rotted away to the water’s edge;
but below you could see them going down until they were
lost to sight. Against one of these we ran, and were nearly
capsized.
28 th April. —We left Ohinemutu at ten o’clock. The road
for some time passes along the lake, and after leaving it
gradually ascends until it enters the “ Eighteen Mile Bush.”
In it is some magnificent scenery. Through it flows the
Mangorawa river, which the road crosses, and afterwards
enters the gorge of the same name. Here are massive
perpendicular rocks, in the crevices of which are trees and
shrubs; above and below is the thickest of bush. At one
place, where the road is cut along a face of one of the
slopes, you get a magnificent view over a sea of tree tops,
and beyond this again, range upon range of bush-clad hills.
The road winds about in the most extraordinary way, and in
itself is none of the best. There have been several accidents
lately with careless drivers. The highest part of the


road is about 2,300 feet. We changed horses at a smalt
road side shanty, in charge of an Italian, who has lived here
for two years, never seeing a soul except those passing along
the road to and from Ohinemutu. He hopes, some day, poor
man, to scrape enough money together to be able to return to-
his native country. At Oropi (Europe) the road emerges,
from the bush, and below lies a beautiful panorama of hill and
dale, sea and river. Monganui Mount, a conical hill standing
at the entrance to the Tauranga Harbour, and only joined to
the mainland by a narrow neck, making a distinguishing
feature in the landscape. Beyond are several islands. We
are now about 1,200 feet above the sea, and we rattled down
a beautiful road made of sea-shells. At about two miles from
Tauranga we passed the site of the celebrated Gate Pah, the
scene of the terrible reverse to the British troops on the
29th of April, 1863, owing to bad management. In all, our
troops numbered about 4,000, besides H.M.S. “ Miranda ”
lying in the harbour beneath within shell shot, whereas the
Maoris numbered only 500. It would appear that General
Cameron had divided his force into two divisions, sending one.
round to await the attack which was to be made by the other,
and to remain in ambush. The attack commenced, and the
Maoris were driven out of the pah, and were retreating right
on to the very spot where the second division lay in ambush-
They, however, getting excited, showed themselves too soon,
and commenced firing. The Maoris, seeing themselves
hemmed in, turned and recommenced an attack on the pah,
and the English troops, seeing the firing and the Maoris’
assault, imagined that fresh Maoris had come to their
assistance. A panic evidently ensued, and the Maoris,
regained their pah, committing great havoc amongst our
soldiers, as also did the cross-fire of our own men. From
the wounds examined afterwards there was little doubt that
there had been a severe cross-fire. In all, in that one attack,,
we lost thirty officers killed. The road is now cut right through
the site of the pah, and in the cutting the old rifle pits made:
-by the Maoris can still be seen. Tauranga is a pretty little
town on the shores of the Bay of Plenty. Its main street,,
the “Strand,” which contains the hotels and principal
buildings, runs along the water’s edge.
2 gth April. —The harbour, when once inside it, is magnifi-
cent, but has a difficult entrance known as “The Narrows.” It
is protected from the ocean by Monganui, and the neck.


joining it to the mainland. After breakfast this morning
we strolled up to the cemetery, where so many of our
brave fellows lie. It is very neglected, the graves are in
the most dilapidated condition. Soon, too soon, all
evidence of where those soldiers, sailors, volunteers,
and others who fell on that memorable Gate Pah engagement
will be blotted out. From this point the best view is obtained
of Monganui and the town. This morning there was a notice
put up on the wharf that the S.S- “ Wellington ” (our steamer
for Auckland) would leave at four o’clock, taking the S.S.
“ Taupo” in tow ; passengers objecting could wait until next
steamer. This meant quite doubling our time to Auckland,
as the “ Taupo ” was a steamer of 762 tons larger than our-
selves. She was wrecked some ten years ago in the Narrows,,
and has since changed hands several times. The last
purchasers have at last managed to raise her, and we are to
take her in tow to Auckland, there to be refitted. At about
5.30 we picked her up outside the harbour, where a small
steamer had taken her, and took her in tow with two double
hawsers. It now became evident that our passage was to be
a very long one, as all we did was knots an hour. All
went well until about half past eight, when suddenly
shouts from the “Taupo” were heard, “Cut us adrift, we
are sinking; send boats ! ” This, to say the least of it, was
startling, and orders were at once given to lower a boat,
while the captain stood ready with an axe in case she should
sink before the tow ropes were cast adrift. The excitement
now became intense, as from the shouts we almost expected
her to sink at once, imagining that at least her false bottom
must have been displaced. Our boat was hardly in the water
before a boat from the “ Taupo ” was alongside with most of
the crew. All on board numbered about fifteen souls. There
had evidently been a panic, as they had not waited to bring
their belongings with them, some even being without shoes.
The three men who had been left behind, two of whom were
part owners, stayed as long as they dare, but had to desert
her, not being sufficient to keep the two pumping engines
supplied with fresh water. For three long hours we steamed
round and round her, watching her gradually settling down,
and taking into consideration the time she took to fill, had
the men, instead of at once deserting her, stuck to the
engines, signalling only for us to go slower, the vessel would
have reached her destination perfectly safe, but it would


appear that, as one crying out “ Fire! ” in a theatre, so
had a cry of “The water is gaining on us!” caused a
general panic amongst the sailors on board. At last the cry
came, “She is sinking,” and one could see the water begin
to ripple over her stern, which sank lower and lower, the
lights on the deck-house disappeared, and then came a
noise as if a hundred engines were letting off steam, as
she reared her bows out of the water. Before she finally sank,
she stood up straight on end, and then came the final crash, as
her decks were burst open with the force of the compressed air,
and she sank never more to be raised in thirty-eight fathoms
of water. Her last gasp was, as an old whaler described it,
like the disappearance of a wounded whale. I cannot
describe my feelings when she sank, but I think there was
not a soul on board who did not feel, as it were, silenced
with a certain amount of fear. Amidst the noise one could
imagine the shrieks of human voices, and it was some
seconds before anyone spoke. One life had been lost, that
of a poor retriever, who had been forgotten in their hurry to
leave, and after the waters were again quiet, the captain gave
the order to steam round the place where she had disappeared,
and men whistled, in the hopes that the dog might have been
able to regain the surface. But no answering cry came, and
once more we turned our faces in the direction of Auckland,
and never again do I wish to witness a foundering vessel.
30 th April. —At 10.30 we were alongside the wharf at
Auckland ; but as soon as we were in hailing distance, many
were the enquiries as to where was the “ Taupo ? ” Our only
reply was to point downwards.
Ist May. —To-day is May-day, and as like an English May-
day as possible, the harbour looking most beautiful. We
have at last decided to give up any idea of going to Tahiti,
and instead thereof have taken a passage for Sydney in the
’Frisco mail boat, “City of New York,” due to-morrow.
K and H also leave for Sydney, but, unfortunately,
they have a Union Company’s circular ticket, so have to go
by the “ Rotorua.” News has just been received of the wreck
of the “ Tararua,” off Waipapa Point, not many miles from
the Bluff, with all passengers, nearly eighty in number.
Another case of cutting off corners, and her captain a man
who has made mistakes before. It was he who, as chief
mate, ran the “ Taupo ” ashore. The descriptions of the
wreck have been most heart-rending. She struck a reef


-within half a mile of the shore. The captain, it appears,
lowered all his boats, placing in them his officers and crew,
and a few steerage passengers, who volunteered to go in
■search of a landing place—-surely one boat would have been
sufficient —the consequence was that some were capsized, and
others, unable to reach the ship, put to sea; and it was these
that composed the only ones saved. The captain and his
passengers were left to the mercy of the sea. He removed
all the women forward on to the forecastle, as being the
safest place, but alas! one sea washed every soul overboard.
One man managed to reach the shore, and making his way
.a long way inland to an out-of-the-way telegraph station,
sent the following message, “ ‘ Tararua ’ struck on Waipapa
Reef, all passengers and crew safe.” That being the case
when he left, you can imagine with what consternation the
next telegram was received, announcing the total wreck and
loss of all passengers. This is, with the exception of H.M.S.
Orpheus,” wrecked at the entrance to Manukau harbour,
the worst wreck they have ever had on these coasts.
2nd May. —All in readiness to leave on the arrival of the
mail boat, but when she was signalled it was found she was
flying the yellow-jack, and as she had come last from
Honolulu, a port where small-pox had been raging, of course
it was put down to that. It was some time before the doctor
■came up again, and reported four cases of measles, and for
which, after consulting the Attorney-General and the Act, it
was decided to quarantine the ship. This was rather a blow,
for the “ Rotorua ” was only a small boat, and uncomfortably
crowded, and more so now. Tim and I decided not to go
by her, rather wait for the next boat, when we met the Duke
of who had just returned from the agents of the mail
boat, and said that he was going to risk being quarantined in
Sydney. There were only four little children ill with measles,
and in all only fourteen passengers, so that we should have
every luxury on board. Upon this we, too, decided to run
the risk. It certainly does seem a farce to have put the
vessel to all the expense of quarantine, for there must be
measles innumerable in Auckland. Under the contract with
the Government, the fine is ten pounds an hour for every hour
over their contract time, and for every hour under their
time they receive five pounds. It was on the last trip over
to San Francisco that this vessel broke her crank pin, and
■was fourteen days late at ten pounds an hour. This time she


was in hopes of making some of this up by being over two'
days’ before time. We have received a reprieve until to-
morrow.
3 rd May. —Owing to it being too rough at the quarantine
station, the mails could not be landed, there being 385 bags
for this port, all of which have to be fumigated singly for fear
of spreading the infection. A likely thing ! considering every
bag is enclosed in waterproof wrappers. However, toward
the afternoon she steamed up to the coal hulk, and at eight
o’clock the tender put us on board this pestilential ship,
the Duke, Tim, and myself and another being the only four
saloon passengers, out of all those who had booked, who cared
to risk the quarantine in Sydney.
4 th May. —At 9.35 we steamed away in as fine a vessel
I have ever been on, and the first time that I have ever sailed,
under the American flag. I hope it may not be the last.


CHAPTER VIII.
Farewell to the Festive Kangaroo—A Few Stray Impressions of Two
Years’ Experience —A Fine Opening for Poachers in “New
Zealand ” —“ Quickest Passage on Record ” —To the East, to the
East, to the Land of the Pigtails—Cannibals Met With by the Way
—Albany Pass : A Sight of the Voyage —An Awkward Predicament
for Mr. Jardine; more so for the Natives—Torres Straits and
Commercial Depravity —Something Interesting about Sharks —Little
Ants with Big Crammers—The Heathen Chinee at their Tricks —
A Garden of Eden —All about Alligators—Advantages of Electricity
—Port Darwin to Java —How the Easy-going Dutchmen Get Along
—The Teeming Population of the East Illustrated—Running Amuck
and its Derivation —Something Like a Volcano —A Quid in the
Mouth Worth Two in the Box—A Professor of English Learning the
Language—Arrival of Cousin Jonathan —Dutch Feeding: A Good
Dinner at Last—A Bit of Godfather and Godmother Business —
Should Auld (Rugby) Acquaintance be Forgot, &c.
10th May.
—HHIS day two years ago I sailed for Australia in the
|rang9 “ Kent,” with the intention of spending three
IBi.W months in the colonies, and then going on to China.
Beyond this, little more need be said in their praise
as to how I have enjoyed my visit to Australia. In the period
named, I may perhaps fairly say I have gained some colonial
experience. Australia, before I thought of coming out to it,
was always connected in my mind with convicts, and the place
where young fellows were sent out to, who either would not
work, or else had the failing of taking too much. I don’t
suppose, take the world over, you could find a worse place to*
which to send them. There are exceptions, but they are lament-
ably few. It is said that Sir J. Elder has a batch of such
unfortunates by every vessel, whom he drafts off to his various,
stations, there to end their days, if they are fortunate, as
bullock-drivers. In my short stay here I have come across
many such. In the south of New Zealand rabbit snaring
is a favourite occupation, as there a man lives by himself,
and is away from the class that he would otherwise have to
mix with. A great friend of mine who was sent out to New


.Ze aland as a ne’er-do-weel, after passing through many stages,
is at present a tramway conductor in Dunedirt, in which town
he was once in society. He is now earning 265. a week, and
on it has to keep a wife and three children. Never was there
a greater mistake made than to send such out here, unless
it is absolutely desired never to see their faces again, and it
being no matter what becomes of them. There is another
mistake that is made. Young fellows come out with a
small fortune, and rush into station life without first having
gained experience by station work. No young fellow
ought to invest without at least three years’ experience,
and with such experience a man with as small a fortune
as £5,000 might, and ought, to do well. When one hears
of a station being sold the other day for £50,000 a year
for ten years, one is rather apt to imagine that it is only
a case of buying a station to at once make a fortune. There
is no doubt that large fortunes will continue to be made out
here. Every day people are beginning to pay more attention,
not only to the growth of the wool, but to the build of the
animal; as in the improvement of the shape, so will the
•quality and quantity of the wool increase. It has been my
wish to leave the colonies by the Torres Straits, and, if
possible, by one of the Dutch boats; so that I considered
myself very lucky when reaching Sydney, from New Zealand,
to find the “Atjeh” sailing on the twentieth for the Java
ports. The intervening time I have spent in fishing. Nearly
every day we have been out in the launch —once outside the
Heads for sharks, but instead of catching them I fed them.
At present, lying alongside the wharf of the Circular Quay,
there are four steamers, representing in the agregate 13,200
tons, and it seems a bad arrangement that three of these
should be leaving with mails for Europe within two days.
The “ Orient ” are running in opposition to the P. & 0.,
and arrange to leave on or about the same date. On the
last trip home of the “ Orient ” she delivered her mails
-in thirty-two days. This is, indeed, linking the Antipodes
•very closely to the old country. On the 19th the “Australia”
left for San Francisco, and as we had many friends going
home by her, ’we went off in a launch to bid them
adieu. She is a better arranged vessel than the “ City of
New York,” having her saloon and cabin forward of the
funnel. While in New Zealand I had heard that C. H.
Jiad arrived in Melbourne, having come out in a sailing vessel


for his health. I at once telegraphed him to join me. He-
was, however, too unwell, so that on my arrival in Sydney I
had made attempts to find out his whereabouts, as having
time to spare I wished to run over to Melbourne to see him..
To my letters I got no answer, and my telegrams were returned
to me as “not known ; ” so I wrote a final letter, telling him
that Tim was leaving Sydney in July, and asking him to come
on to China at the same time.
20 ih May. —To-day lam to leave Australia. I leave Tim,
as he has done Java. He will go direct to Hong-Kong at
the end of July, where I shall pick him up. The “ Atjeh ”is
a steamer of 1,500 tons, commanded by Captain De Neef,
trading from Adelaide to Java, and on, via the Celebes and
Philippines, to Hong Kong and Amoy. In her I have been
fortunate enough to get a cabin to myself, and in the centre
of the ship, where I can smoke and do anything I like.
The saloon is the only place where smoking is prohibited.
On deck, there is always a boy in attendance, ready at the
cry of “ Kettri wallah, kassi api,” to bring you a joss-stick,
which is kept always burning in a brazier. A joss-stick is of
a brown composition, with a strong aromatic perfume, and is
principally used by the natives of China to burn before their
idols. On deck there are any amount of chairs and cane
sofas, and the feeding on board has high repute. The stewards
are Chinamen, with Joe at their head, and the crew are
Malays —real mannikins, hardly any of them reaching to the
height of five feet.
21 st May. —So far, the weather has been delightful, and
sitting on deck in a comfortable chair, watching the ever-
changing coast, only about two miles distant, is most enjoyable.
Early in the morning we passed between Seal Rock and
Sugar Loaf Point; the former well deserved its name, being
covered with seals. In the afternoon, we passed Port
Macquarie, where there is a fair-sized town and a signalling
station. The coast-line is exceedingly picturesque, a sandy
beach, backed up by wooded hills, and every now and then
bold headlands. In places it reminded me somewhat of the
Asia Minor coast, more especially that portion in the
neighbourhood of the Bay of Smyrna.
22nd May. —We have still a fair wind, but unfortunately
with it the sea is rising. At twelve o’clock the pin of the
piston-rod of our engines broke—fortunately not a serious
thing; and as we were only about two miles from the coast


;at the time, it was lucky the wind was fair. We had all
canvas set, but during the afternoon our mainsail was
■carried away; unaccustomed, I suppose, to be brought into
such important prominence. At five o’clock all repairs were
made, and once more under steam : we had not done badly,
considering we had made under sail three knots an hour on
our course. Before sunset we got a magnificent view of
Mount Warning and the Macpherson Range, and during the
night we passed Moreton Bay. Into this bay the Brisbane
river empties itself, and twenty-five miles up lies the town of
Brisbane, the capital of Queensland. Here we made a stop,
having neither cargo nor passengers.
23 rd May. —l cannot say last night was one of comfort, as
the vessel rolled tremendously, and at various times in the
night things kept breaking adrift, which had to be set right,
with much chattering on the part of the Chinamen. This
went on well into the day, until we got under the shelter of
dhe Great Barrier Reef. We are now out of sight of land,
having to keep off to escape a reef which runs out some
twenty miles from Sand Cape. In the afternoon we passed
one of the E. and A. boats, bound for Sydney from Hong
Kong, with a cargo of Chinamen; consequently she was fear-
fully light, and with her head to the sea, pitched
tremendously. First her bows, then her stern, were completely
out of water. Her screw you could see whizzing round in
the air. To look at her was bad enough, and to have been
•on board her would have been too awful. At about four
o’clock we sighted Lady Elliot’s Island, with its lighthouse.
This forms part of the Great Barrier Reef; so now we are well
in under its sheltering protection. The feeding on board
•■almost excels my expectations, and this is the first trip that I
have ever shown up to all meals when there has been any-
thing like weather. Yesterday, we were only four at dinner,
•including the Captain; so let us hope that by degrees lam
that worse than foe.
z\th May. —We saw little of the land until late in the
afternoon, when, all at once, we appeared to be surrounded
by islands; whichever direction one turned, there they were.
.At one point we made out at least fifteen, some having the
most extraordinary shapes, high and precipitous cliffs for the
most part barren, except for clumps, here and there, of
Norfolk Island pines. The principal groups were the Percy,
'Northumberland, and Cumberland. To-day is the Queen’s


'birthday, and the Captain has been good enough to hoist the
Union Jack at the main top mast-head. For dinner to-night
I was entrusted with the manufacture of a champagne cup,
which I carried out to the satisfaction of everybody. We
proposed the health of the Captain, his wife, and officers, and
the King and Queen of Holland, and he in return proposed
that of Her Majesty. We sat up till nearly twelve o’clock to
see the Whit-Sunday Passage, which, had it been daylight
would no doubt have been very beautiful.
25 tk May. —At daybreak we were abreast of Cape Upstart,
to all appearances a huge island, as nothing could be seen
of the coast on either side of it. A little further along we
came to Cape Bowling Green, so called from its level nature.
Close on shore was one of the A. S. N. Company’s boats
going south, which rather disappointed us, as we had hoped to
catch her in order to send letters to Sydney. Away in the
distance could now be seen the range of mountains above
Townsville, for which port we were making. I have been
having a long conversation with Captain De Neef—who, by
the way, is a capital fellow, and a real host —and I find out
that, after leaving Java, he goes on through the Celebes and
Philippines, to Macao and Hong Kong, and that by giving
up Batavia, I can have plenty of time to do the southern
portion of Java, and be picked up again at Sourabaya, on the
“ Atjeh’s ” return from Batavia, en route for Hong Kong. The
fare from Sydney to Hong Kong is fifty pounds, to Batavia
thirty pounds, and from Sourabaya to Hong Kong thirty-five
pounds, so that I have decided to telegraph to Eldred and Co.,
the agents in Sydney, to extend my ticket to Hong Kong, by
which, if they do it, I shall save fifteen pounds—a not incon-
siderable item. I have also discovered, and made a note of
for future travel, that a steamer leaves Sourabaya about once
a month to visit, for mail purposes, the different ports in the
Dutch Archipelago, which includes the Spice Islands. I wish
I had time to do it now, but I must meet Tim in Hong Kong
in August. At two o’clock, we were at anchor in Cleveland
Bay, off Townsville, a lovely and picturesque-looking town,
built upon deep red-coloured sandstone mounds, and partly
up the slopes of a hill, which rises to some considerable height
(1.000 ft.) above the town. At one end of the town is a bold
piece of red rock, which stands out into the sea, and on the
top of which is a signalling station. Beyond all this is a
fine range of hills (3,000 ft.), covered with thick scrub, through


which in many places barren rocks show themselves. In the-
offing, besides ourselves, are two other steamers, and away
to the right, lying under the shelter of Magnetic Island, are
two sailing vessels. Altogether, it is a bay of extreme beauty.
Directly we were at anchor, Tintoretto and Co., as somebody
facetiously called us, set to work to sketch. Owing to our
being so much before our time the tenders were not ready
to receive the cargo, so that it was close on twelve o’clock
before we had discharged and taken in cargo ; the latter being
principally soap, destined for Manila, as here there is a
large boiling-down establishment. This is the principal
port for Northern Queensland, and in close proximity to some
large cattle stations. On one, belonging to a Mr. T ,
there are 50,000 head, and on the Bowen Downs, belonging
to a Scotch company, there are 25,000 head of cattle, and
50,000 sheep. Besides this the company has five other-
stations ; should this ice-freezing process be a success, to
what an extent will the price of cattle be affected ! On a
reef, about fourteen miles from here, the “ Gothenburg” was.
wrecked, in which many well-known Adelaide people lost
their lives, as the judges and officers of the land and leading
solicitors were returning from holding the assizes at Port
Darwin.
26 th May. —The coast to-day has been really magnificent;
high mountain, clothed with rich vegetation to the water’s
edge. Lovely islands, some with cocoa-nut trees on them,
one in particular, of • which I got a sketch, called Palm.
Island. To-day, for the first time, we have begun to feel
that we are in the tropics. Early this morning, we sighted
a barque-rigged vessel, which turned out to be H.M.S.
“Alert,” of Arctic celebrity, now surveying out here, on her
way to the Torres Straits". She signalled, “Report us all
well.” She was under full canvas and easy steam. It
would be impossible to excel the living on board this ship,
and I am afraid it will make us fearfully discontented with
others that have to follow. For instance, to-night the menu-
was as follows: —Giblet soup, Roast: Pork and apple
sauce, sirloin of beef. Boiled: Turkey and oyster sauce, ox
tongue, leg of mutton and caper sauce. Entrees: Veal and
ham patties, chicken cutlets and mushrooms. Vegetables:
Cabbage, asparagus, peas, baked and boiled potatoes. Pastry:
Plum pudding, blancmange, jam puffs. Maccaroni, cheese.
Dessert: Oranges, apples, figs, prunes, coffee. The name


“Atjeh” is the Dutch for Acheen, a town on the extreme
western point of Sumatra. I have just come down
from deck, where they are busy taking in sail. The night
being dark we shall come to anchor, as navigation is
most dangerous. It seems curious to see all these little
men at work, keeping the time by a chant of an Eastern
character, resembling somewhat that of the Arabs. One man
sings the air in a high key, while the others respond in a
much lower one, which gives the time. Then the men aloft
have a lantern, which seems odd. The main and foretop
sails are pulled by means of patent rollers. We came to
anchor at about ten o’clock, in fifteen fathoms of water.
Tropical showers are now very frequent, which come down
with tremendous force.
2 yth May. —At 5.30 we were under weigh, and by breakfast
were at anchor in the bay close to the mouth of the Endeavour
river, three miles up which is the township of Cooktown.
Here the captain had to go ashore to clear his own ship, a
most unusual proceeding. We only remained about two hours,
which we filled up by sketching. On one side of the bay are
grassy hills, above which is Mount Cook, while on the other
the hills are of the queerest formation, looking like so many
badly-stopped teeth. They are deeply cut out into gullies
by the water of bygone ages, the ridges only being left bare of
trees. The centre of the bay is a mangrove swamp, fringed
by low sandhills, and above is a distant range of hills. This
is indeed a lotus-eating life; on from dismal cape to dismal
cape, always the same lovely monotony. It is like living
with a vast panorama ever moving before you. It was here
that Captain Cook, in the year 1770, put in to re-fit his vessel,
the Endeavour, hence the name of the town since built
upon its banks. Many of the capes, See., about here
were named by him, which names they still retain. The
coast-line to-day has been principally of low-lying sandhills,
the sand of the purest white, the range of hills appearing
farther inland. Three of us have formed ourselves into a
Sketching Club, which, as I have said, has been named
Tintoretto & Co. Mr. E at present holds the brush.
He has lately returned from Norfolk Islands, of which he
has made some beautiful sketches. I knew him in Adelaide
as the Bishop’s chaplain. The other member is a Mr.
S , also a traveller. Among the other passengers are a Mr.
and Mrs. M , belonging to the Overland Telegraph staff,
2 c


a Mr. W , from Adelaide, with six months leave, and on
his way to England—his first trip out of South Australia.
It is believed in this time he intends to see Jerusalem and
Madagascar, North and South America!!! Another
youth, who sits next to me at dinner, and never opens his
mouth (except to fill it), which perhaps is lucky, as he is
intensely colonial. Then, there is a German, everybody’s
bite noir , representing Wolff Schnapps. We have now got
well beyond civilization, and the land so close to which we
are steaming is only occupied by cannibals, whose fires we
can sometimes see at night. Woe betide the occupants of any
vessel unfortunate enough to be wrecked on these inhospitable
shores. There was a case two years ago of a vessel pulling
into some island near here for some water, and while away
the natives seized the vessel, killed the men left in charge,
and then following up the others, killed them also. The only
man who escaped was the captain, who had gone to the top
of the hill to look out and saw it all, and making his way
down the other side of the island, swam out to another island,
risking the sharks, and was rescued by a lighthouse-keeper.
The lighthouses here are protected by palisading, and the
natives have been made to understand that any one of them
entering within the palisading, on any pretext whatever, will
be shot. Before turning in to-night, we passed the Channel
Rock light-ship, which marks the Piper Islands. This has
been twice boarded by natives, but the captain took refuge in
the after-cabin, and fired on them from the cabin window; on
the second occasion he dosed them with boiling pitch.
Shortly after passing this we saw fires burning on the shore.
Although we have a strong fair wind, all sails were furled at
sunset as a precaution. The night is bright and clear, so
should it remain so, we shall in all probability go on steaming.
It adds rather a zest to travelling, seeing these cannibals’
fires ever ready to cook one, should we be unlucky enough to
fall into their hands. lam afraid, with all the good living
we get on board this boat, we should indeed be a rare prize.
I can hardly imagine myself served up to an epicurean
cannibal as L’homme blanc, avec les pommes de terres friie.
A geologist visited these parts some time ago with a strong
body—he had to fight fourteen battles ; fortunately, the
natives do not use poisoned spears, as he got badly wounded
in the neck. Their spears, however, make a nasty wound, as
the heads are made out of jagged pieces of flint-like stone.


28 th May. —During the night we passed another light-ship
known as Claremont No. 6, and early this morning the one
marking the Piper Islands. The high range of hills have
now entirely disappeared, and the coast-line is composed
chiefly of low-lying sandhills. We are now running quite
close to the Great Barrier Reef, in the neighbourhood of
which are any number of schooners, and one brig fishing for
heche de mer, which is mostly taken to China, and also
pearl shell. The weather is remarkably cool, and I am
afraid we shall feel the heat when we run out of the trade
winds. Awnings are being bent right fore and aft. The
night came on very dark, and as we are now in the midst of
reefs, we came to anchor about nine o’clock, but just before
doing so, passed through what is known as a gateway in the
reef, that is, a narrow entrance, and taking into consideration
that this had to be done by bearings, and not sight, navigation
may indeed be said to be a ticklish matter. One consolation
is that our pilot is one of the best, and it is said could find
his way blindfolded.
29 th May. —We were under weigh again by about six
o’clock, and everybody was out on deck to see the Albany
Pass, one of the sights of the voyage. It is a narrow opening
between Albany Island and the mainland, about a mile long
and hardly a quarter broad. It is indeed a most beautiful
piece of scenery, the hills on either side covered with the
thickest of vegetation, and the rocks lining the water’s edge
are of rich chocolate colour. At the entrance there is some
open country, which is covered with white ants’ nests, in shape
pointed pyramids, reaching to the height of about ten feet.
They sometimes are found as high as thirty. Intermixed
with these were some corkscrew palms, so called from the
growth of their leaves. On entering the pass, beautiful bays
open out on either side, and when about half way through,
we came to the old settlement of Somerset, given up by the
Government in favour of Thursday Island, as being the more
central for the pearl fisheries, and having a better harbour.
It is a lovely spot, the old Government residence standing on
a grassy slope, overlooking a lovely bay. This is now the
residence of Mr. J , owner of a cattle station, and interested
in the pearl fisheries. It was the scene, some two years ago, of
a bloody conflict. Mr. J heard that the natives were coming
to murder him; they had actually entered his bedroom, but
he, having concealed himself below, shot seventeen of them


through the floor. Since thatthey have not troubled him much.
On the opposite shore is a pearl fishery station, consisting of a
few neat houses, nestling in an open space on the water’s edge.
Lying at anchor was a trim-looking schooner of about 150 tons.
It would be impossible to describe the beauty of all this
scenery. The surroundings in themselves were most beauti-
ful, but all were increased by the brilliance of the colouring,
and the clearness of the atmosphere. I never before saw
water of such bright and varied hues. On emerging from
the pass, we at once rounded Cape York, the most northerly
point of Australia, and were in the far-famed Torres Straits.
We are now in latitude io - 3o S., and not far from the coast
of New Guinea. This used to be the scene of many ship-
wrecks in the days before surveys. Captain F , our pilot,
came through here in a sailing vessel in 1866, and they then
counted in all the masts of thirteen wrecks. Of course, all
these may not have been genuine wrecks, but old hulks
bought in Sydney, insured, and sent up here to be bumped
on the reefs. Lying off Cape York are two islands, Eborac
and York, adding much to the beauty of the scene. There
is no doubt that Cape York is the sign-post on the high road
to the future colony of New Guinea. The Dutch, however,
have an eye to it too, and even run a mail boat to some parts
of the coast, although they carry neither mails, passengers
nor cargo. The coast can hardly be determined for islands,
which are here in hundreds. It is said there is almost one
for every day in the year, and they have christened some
after the days of the week ; the principal one being Thursday
Island, which we reached about noon. Close to the entrance
of the passage, leading up to it, are the remains of the wreck
of the steamer “ Mecca.” Through this passage, the tide
was running at the rate of eight knots an hour, and even at
full steam ahead we made but slow progress. On every side
there are pearl fishery stations, with the small schooners
used for the purpose lying off them. The shell is mostly
obtained along the reefs by ( kanaka ) divers, but in deeper
water diving gear is used. It is a gurious fact that sharks
will hardly ever attack a man in diving gear. It is a great
mistake to suppose that sharks will not touch natives, or that
the natives are not afraid of them. One thing certain is,
that a native, when armed with a knife, can cope with a
shark, and generally successfully. The township of Thursday
Island consists of a Government residence, two hotels, a gaol,


and the necessary offices attached to a port. Lying off are
several pearl schooners,and Q.G.S. “ Pearl,” which is here as a
sort of floating magisterial court. She has on board the Trans-
continental Survey Expedition, who are at present mostly
down with fever and ague —the leaders, a Mr. W , the
surveyor, and Mr. H , the pioneer, the best bushman in
the county. The former is a man of sixty, and had a bad
attack of fever and ague while on board ; he looks very ill.
I can only say he must be a man of great pluck to start
upon such an expedition at his age. They started from
Brisbane, and came out at Point Parker, in the Gulf of
Carpentaria, which is to be the terminus of the Trans-
continental Railway. This must have been no easy journey,
as it took them five months, through the heart of a cannibal
country. Lying on the beach are the remains of an old hulk,
now in its last resting place, having been bought by Chinamen
for the sake of the copper fastenings. What a tale she could
unfold ! She began life as a pirate boat at the time of
the American war on the Spanish Main, and was never
caught. She afterwards became a slave-trader, and there
are tales how, on several occasions when hard pressed,
she consigned her living freight to the deep, laden as they
were with chains. She afterwards passed into the hands of
a Liverpool merchant, and came out to the colonies as a
trader. We are taking back with us seven Malajrs, who were
blown over from Amboina, one of the Spice Islands, a distance
of 1,000 miles, and wrecked on the coast some 50 miles from
here. Fortunately for them, they were discovered by the
captain of a pearl fishery boat, and rescued from becoming
food for these brutal natives. All they had to subsist on
during their eventful voyage was about two picols (270 lbs.)
of rice, which they kept boiling in water, and drinking the
water only, until the rice had been boiled away, and, when
found, they were almost skeletons. Since then they have
been living here, fed at the expense of the Government, and
look well and healthy. Three of them are very old men, and
one a boy, whom they leave behind as a servant to the resident
magistrate apprenticed for two years, so that, perhaps after
all, it may turn out a lucky voyage for him. We waited for
the turn of the tide, and then got under weigh. The actual
channel is very narrow, so we had some difficulty in swinging
round; the hawser, which had been attached to a buoy,
parting, but not before we were round enough to let our


engines finish the work. We steamed down the channel
very much quicker than we had come up, and when out to
sea stood directly away from the mainland. We have now
before us the gulf of Carpentaria, which is about 300 miles
across. Fourteen miles out from land is Booby Island.
Before the days of Somerset this used to be a mercantile
post office, and a depot for food and water for those wrecked
on the reefs and surrounding islands.
30th and 31st May. —Crossing the gulf was not so smooth as.
we should have liked it. Although we were abreast of Cape
Wefisel on the evening of the first day, we did not sight
land. Flying fish have at last made their appearance, and
curiously-marked snakes are constantly being seen floating
past the ship. The nights are now both bright and cool, and
the appearance of the Great Bear is like meetingan old friend.
At certain times in the year this constellation can be seen as
far south as 22° and the pole star as 5 0 , whereas the Southern
Cross is visible as far north as the Mediterranean, but only
at certain seasons, and then only at four o’clock in the morn-
ing. The Sketching Club has become quite an institution,
and we are at work from early morn till dewy eve.
Ist June. —During the night we entered Dundas Strait,,
dividing Melville Island from the mainland. The coast line
here consists of low-lying mangrove swamps. Melville Island
is inhabited by the most savage race of cannibals, which up
to the present have defied all attempts at civilization. It
must come some day to extermination. They are finely-
made men, as in the island there are any quantity of buffalo.
At one point in the Straits the water became greatly
discoloured, which wasthefresh waterfrom the Adelaide River.
This part of the world is extraordinarily blessed in having
some of the finest rivers in Australia, amongst which are the
Adelaide, Victoria, Daly, and several others. Some of them
are navigable for large steamers for a considerable distance.
No doubt, should the South Australian Trans-continental
Railway be made, as Port Darwin will be its terminus, this
part of the world will go ahead tremendously. They are
now commencing sugar plantations, but as last year was
the first year, it is impossible to say yet with what result.
We reached Port Darwin at mid-day. The entrance to it is
really beautiful. It ranks as the second harbour in Australia,,
and deservedly so. The township called Palmerston is built
on a rocky spur, jutting out into the bay. The rock is of a


rich colour, reminding me somewhat of Alum Bay, in the Isle
of Wight. The houses, the principal of which is the Resi-
dence, are built along the spur, a few only being on the
shore.
2nd June. —To-day we went ashore, and were much pleased
with the appearance of the township. What there is of it
is well laid out, but it gives you the idea of being a place of
great heat during the summer months. We called on Mr.
p , the Resident. His house is built of stone, with high
vaulted roof. At one time it had a second storey, but all the
woodwork was entirely eaten out by the white ants, and the
flooring came down about their ears. It is a long house,
with verandahs on either side, so that they can always sit
on the cool side, and when the fresh breeze sets in it blows
right through the house.
3 rd June. —This morning we called on the telegraph people
here. There are two offices, that of the British Australian
Railway Co. and the Overland Telegraph Co. Here we saw
what damage the white ants can do. Not content with
eating the woodwork, they actually attack and riddle into
holes the lead. They some time ago completely devoured
the Battery plates. To-night we gave a small dinner on
board to the Resident and his party, Mr. and Mrs. M ,
and one or two others. I brewed the claret cup, which was
pronounced a great success. When out of the way of the
usual ingredients, it is rather difficult to know how to give
it the necessary flavouring. I had to-night to put in a few
drops of essence of lemon, and a fair dose of cherry brandy,
and I think I can recommend the mixture. The “ Ocean,”
with 500 Chinamen, arrived in harbour on her way from
Hong Kong to Sydney. The moon here is most lovely, and
later on we went off with the customs officer, with the hope
of catching some of the Chinamen smuggling. Their last
dodge is to smuggle out gold in the bones of their dead
relatives. Chinamen will always, if they can, send back to
China the bones of departed friends to be buried in their
native soil, and on this they are now trading, to escape the
export duty on gold, which is 2s. 6d. an oz.
4 th June. —This morning we went on board, and I
never saw such a human bee-hive. The vessel is fitted up
purposely for this traffic. Between decks is indeed a won-
derful sight. We were there at rather an interesting
time, their morning meal of rice and chou-chou. In spite of
391


the number everything was scrupulously clean. Afterwards,
we went off to lunch at the Residency,' and in the cool of
the afternoon drove out to the Botanical Gardens. These
have been laid out, at the expense of the South Australian
Government, on ordinary land, not specially selected, and
filled with marketable products, in order first to prove to
what perfection such things will grow up here, and in the next
place to supply settlers with seed. First of all comes the sugar
cane, equal to any I have seen in Fiji; the China cane,
which there bears only six sticks to the stool, here has twenty-
four. Then there are banana, pine apples—and such pine
apples—pomegranates and English peach trees, not yet got
to the bearing stage, but looking in a most hearty condition,
Besides all these, there were rice, arrowroot, maize, jute,
indigo, and various others —indeed, a garden of Eden. This
garden has only been in existence a year and a half. Mr.
S had the laying out of it, and under him were about
600 Chinamen. In all it cost about £ 6,000 to clear it; the
average cost was about £SO an acre, but it must be taken
into consideration that the thickest of bush had to be cleared,
whereas the greater portion of the country here is open, but,
of course, some little distance from Port Darwin, on the banks
of the principal rivers. In several places in the gardens are
huge mounds, which have been made by the native pheasants
for laying their eggs, no doubt the work of centuries.
After leaving the gardens, we drove through the bush, one
of great density. The more open country resembles Australia
generally, whereas the thickest bush is tropical. Here are
bamboos and many trees which I recognized as old friends
in Fiji. Flowering trees there were, too, but like Australia
generally, bright colours, with no scent; like the birds, beauti-
ful plumage, but no song. We came out upon the water at
Fanny Bay, high, rich-coloured rocks, and a sandy
beach. Close to this is the racecourse, and on our way
back we saw many Chinamen at work clearing and breaking
up the land for rice fields. In the days before the
Chinamen, everything, to the vegetables, here was tinned,
and behind every house could be seen a huge pile of
empty tins. But then came “ John,” and he got permission,
much to the delight of everybody, to carry off these empty
tins. But what for ? He melted them for the sake of the
solder, and made a very good thing out of it. Not a tin was
to be seen. It is said that even an alligator enjoys a feed off
392


them. Talking about alligators, they have killed one or two
men here, but never eaten them, as before that happened the
bodies have been recovered ; an alligator will never eat fresh
meat, but waits for it to become putrified. In the evening I
dined at the Residency, after which we had a choir practice,
as such a thing as a clergyman is a rarity in these parts, and
much more so a choral service.
s th June The Northern Territory is a part and portion of
South Australia, but curiously enough in the diocese of
Sydney. In Port Darwin alone there are 250 Europeans,
and yet they have no clergyman and no service. Surely my
Lord Bishop of Sydney is to blame for this, especially as the
S.P.G. guarantee £3OO a year for eight years ; but then, he
is not a man who is ever likely to astonish the world. The
fact that at evening service, held at the Residency, there
were over 70 people present, shows how necessary a thing it
is that a clergyman should be appointed. The sunsets here
are truly lovely, and are followed by nights even more lovely
still.
Ten thousand stars were in the sky,
Ten thousand in the sea ;
And every wave, with dimpled face,
That leapt upon the air,
Had caught a star in its embrace,
And trembling held it there.
6 th June. —Directly after breakfast I went ashore, as Mrs.
S had asked me to come up and take a sketch from
their verandah. Whichever way you look there is a lovely
view. E is staying there at present, so we set to work,
taking the view up the harbour. After lunch we drove out
to the Botanical Gardens again. At one place in the bush
we came to the most lovely group of tree ferns. They are
of a different species to those in the south, not so big, but
more sharply defined, the fronds being divided into unserrated
leaflets. We went off to the “ Atjeh ” to dinner, as the
captain was giving a dinner-party to-night. The youth and
beauty of Port Darwin were well represented at it. After
dinner was over, we went ashore, as Mr. K had arranged
with King Billymuck to hold a corroboree to night. This I
was most anxious to see, in order to compare it with the
dances of the different groups in the South Pacific. The night
was bright moonlight, and on reaching the ground near to the
camp, a fire was burning. Gaunt and strange figures were
393


hovering round it —savages of the most savage description—
their bodies scored over with white chalk, giving them the
appearance of moving skeletons. Their dress, that of “native
nothingness,’’ their hair —matted and hanging all around their
head —a long skewer through their noses, and armed with
either a spear or womera, they indeed presented a picture of
extreme wildness. Before the corroboree began we visited
the camp ; a wild beast in his lair has more of a dwelling-
place than these people. Grouped together at but a few
feet apart were the different families, a small ember fire
burning at the side of each; there could be seen husband and
wife huddled together under one rag. In many instances
branches covered with rags and pieces of tin comprised the
only shelter they possessed, while others had merely a screen
to protect them from the wind, and some nothing at all
—dogs and children lay around on every side. Amongst
these we picked our way. At one end of the camp was a
group of about four men, one playing a flute made of bamboo,
while the others sang and beat time upon their womeras.
These were evidently some of the performers in the forth-
coming corroboree. In the meantime the natives had been
assembled, and a procession came in sight, consisting of the
rest of our party, headed by King Billymuck himself, dressed
in a fashionably-cut but rather antiquated frock-coat, tightly
buttoned, and a very old and misshapen pith helmet. Over
his shoulder he carried the insignia of royalty, in the shape
of a monstrous pole of considerable weight. One of his
queens stalked by his side, simply or neatly clothed in a
ragged old sack; she was accompanied by ladies-in-waiting
and pages, if I may so describe them, dressed in nothing at
all. We bad now all collected, both black and white, clothed
and naked, and at the first wild note of the orchestra a
quiver of excitement seized the sable crowd. The “nims
and lubras” collected firewood, and so did several people, self
included, who, carried away by enthusiasm, rushed into the
bush, receiving as their reward showers of green ants down
their backs and sleeves, as the nests of these particularly
demonstrative insects are built everywhere amongst the leaves.
The dancers, of all ages, including, however, no women, grouped
themselves at a little distance, the audience standing, sitting
and squatting in a semicircle, with the fire in the centre. At
a signal from the King, the dancers gave a yell, and sprang
forward into the firelight, and performed several rhythmic


evolutions in strict musical time, the accent corresponding to
that of six-eight time in music. The ground shook under the
stamp of their nervous naked feet, which beat the ground as
one to the cadence of the strange wild music and monotonous
yet musical chant, in which both band and dancers occasion-
ally joined. In all the dancers numbered about forty; a large
number, considering the great majority of the tribe were away
engaged in an important religious ceremony. The dance,
which lasted over an hour, may be said to consist of a series
of figures representing the history of the tribe, the various
occupations of every-day savage life, and concluded with a
distinct tableaux of actual warfare, given with great dramatic
force. After each figure we applauded, and it was strange to
notice how our doing so seemed to excite them all more and
more, causing the band to sing and play with redoubled anima-
tion, and the dancers to perform with still greater enthusiasm,
till at last King Billymuck himself flung his sceptre into the
fire, and casting his coat and hat to the four winds he stood
forth, whitened, yellow-ochred and vermilioned, himselfto lead
the dance. It was amusing to notice that one of his queens
rescued the burning sceptre from the flames. Even we grew
excited, and some of the party proposed dancing in native
fashion the last figure of the Lancers. The effect was most
weird and picturesque, clouds of dust, the waving of spears and
womeras, the eager noises of the blacks —reminding one of the
short, sharp bark of an excited dog—the glimmering of the fire
on their quivering forms, as they rushed forward and then re-
treated with marvellous agility, their glittering teeth and flash-
ing eyes, as they were gradually carried away, until they seemed
more and more real in their fierce gesticulations, compelled us
spectators to remember how very thin is the thread which
restrains them from returning to their state of actual and
absolute cannibalism, and how very easily that thread might
be broken. The figure in the dance representing war was so
vivid as to be well worth a separate description. The music
for this was of a very marked and special kind, and if one
may compare the two, somewhat like the wild pibroch of the
Highlanders. The figure commenced by a palaver, all the
heads were inclined towards one another, while the bodies
stooped as if in attentive deliberation, while a low murmur
increased into a growl, as if to illustrate the warlike spirit and
hostile declaration on each side. The announcement to fight
was received with a yell, and all bounded forward, more like


tigers than human beings ; though every movement of arm,
leg, and head, and every cry that was uttered, was in careful
concert with the chant of the orchestra and the accent of the
beaten womeras. A sharp engagement was portrayed before
us with tremendous dramatic power,succeeded by the supposed
defeat of the enemy, who were then stamped under foot and
massacred to a man. The victors then stooped, apparently
spoiling the slain, then again stood up, sang a song of
triumph, and with a concluding musical yell of victory,
hurriedly retired. This figure was enthusiastically and
unanimously encored, and was re-performed with increased
vigour three times. On a satisfactory intimation that the flour,
tea, sugar, &c., to the value of £2, would be distributed
the next day, the chorus, the orchestra, the nims and the
lubras united in three hearty cheers, and we retired, but not
before I had obtained, for the price of is., as a reminiscence of
the dance, the bamboo flute or clarionet, which by its wild
bassoon-like notes, had played so prominent a part in their
barbaric entertainment, but from which I have entirely failed
to produce anything but the most unwarlike —I might add
deplorable—moans.
yih June.— To-day I have spent at the Residency sketching,
as the best views of Port Darwin are to be obtained from the
verandah. In the cool of the afternoon we again drove out
to the Botanical Gardens.
Bth June. —We are, by degrees, being worked up to hotter
things to come ! Our clothes are growing beautifully less,
and I feel sure, were it not for our carrying a stewardess, we
should begin to adopt the nose-stick costume. The heat, how-
ever, does not seem to decrease our appetites. A near neigh-
bour of mine at table generally begins his breakfast with
three chops and a heap of potatoes. Every drink and mixture
of drinks has been tried. In the colder latitudes we finished
the liqueurs, and now the aerated waters are rapidly disappear-
ing. It may seem odd, but lam taking to stout.
9 th June. —This morning the “Meath” arrived in port,
on her way from Sydney to Hong Kong. She has brought
a French family, consisting of a mother and daughter, a
brother and uncle. They have come here with the
idea of sugar-planting, and it is said, with no previous
experience whatever. The natives are beginning to smack
their lips, and are looking forward to a French repast, which
will be a change after the everlasting Chinaman. Within
396


the last two or three months there has been a horrible murder
committed near here, close to Port Essington; a white settler
murdered by the men in his own employ. Another instance
of the ferocity of the natives was told me. A man was
seen to carry off a black child, kill it, and cook it.
Port Essington was original settled, in 1831, by Sir Gordon
Bremer, as a military post and harbour of refuge for
distressed vessels, but was abandoned in 1850, and it was
during that period that Leichardt crossed from Sydney to that
point. In 1862, Stuart, the South Australian explorer, crossed
the continent from Adelaide to Adam Bay, on the north
coast, and it was upon his representing the country as
suitable for settlement, that an application was made to the
Home Government for the annexation of what is now the
Northern Territory. In 1864, another attempt was made,
under Colonel Finnis, to settle it, but without success, and
it was not until 1869 that Port Darwin was founded, and
the country around surveyed, under the direction of Mr. G.
W. Goyder, Surveyor-General of South Australia, who was
in command of the expedition. Gold was discovered, in
various localities, by the survey parties. The area of the
Northern Territory is estimated at 531,402 square miles, and
the gold-fields are now known to be very extensive, extending
as they do over an area of 1,700 square miles. These are
mostly worked by Chinamen, there being in the Territory
alone over 5,000 to only 600 Europeans. The port for the
gold-fields is Southport, about twenty-four miles distant from
Port Darwin, and on one of the principal arms branching from
the port. The roads leading from Southport to the gold-fields
are of the roughest, and almost impassable in the wet
seasons. Many amusing tales are told of the difficulties
of transport. Often have the teamsters, overtaken by
the wet season, to camp until it is over, selling or getting
rid, as best they can, of their perishable articles. A man
taking up country a load of potatoes, it is said, was so
overtaken. Upon part of his load he fed, the rest he planted.
He finally delivered the right amount of potatoes, but the
second crop after leaving Southport. The want of water is
felt tremendously during the dry season. Some give up
working entirely, while the more energetic stack the wash-dirt,
and wait for the heavy rains of the following wet season to
sluice it. This, of course, means working without remunera-
tion, but here the store-keeper comes to the assistance of the


miner, and the banker to the assistance of the storekeeper.
The other day, out of two loads of stuff (2 tons), upon crushing,
they obtained £I,OOO. This is not taken as a general average,
as the stuff was selected, it having to be carted over a mile
to be crushed. A word about the Overland Telegraph, the
connecting link between Australasia and England. This
costly work was entirely undertaken at the expense of the
South Australian Government, and was carried out under the
direction of Mr. Todd, the Postmaster-General —a distance
of 1,957 miles. The difficulties to be encountered must have
been indeed great. The parties had to travel months with
their wagons loaded with wire, materials, tools, and every
other article required, over long stages, the furthest nearly
1,200 miles, before they got to their ground; and over an
uninhabited region where water was scarce, where roads had
to be made, bridges constructed, wells sunk, high precipitous
ranges and belts of desert and lofty sand-hills crossed, and,
as the region was thoroughly unproductive of game and other
articles of sustenance, every ounce of food, both for the out-
going and return journey, had to be taken with them. It
was the Port Darwin end that gave the most trouble. It was
completed by Mr. Todd himself, after the failure of two other
expeditions, on the 22nd August, 1872, being only a little over
eight months over contract time. Port Darwin is connected
with Singapore, via Java, by the British Australian Telegraph
Company. Within six months of the opening of the line, the
colony netted nearly a quarter of a million sterling extra on
their wheat harvest. Since the completion of the line, iron poles
have been gradually introduced to replace the wooden ones.
At one time the blacks gave considerable trouble, but after
having received several severe electric shocks they got afraid
of it, and now hardly, if ever, touch it. Some day there will
be a railway. It has been for some time past a subject of
discussion, and then, and not till then, will there be an
answer to the question —What is to be done with the Northern
Territory? It seems strange that we should actually be on
the telegraph, and yet the only news obtainable here is by
in-coming steamers. Even the telegraph operators are not
allowed to mention among themselves the news that passes
through. At twelve o’clock the steam launch arrived from
Southport, with the down country mail, and at one o’clock we
were under weigh. Before sunset we had seen the last of
Australia, and were out of sight of land. Last night one of the


crew died of consumption, and they buried him to-day at sea.
* * * • »,
On the 10th of June we left Port Darwin. Late on the after-
noon of the 12th we sighted the island of Rotti, which lies off
the southernmost extremity of Timor. Coupang,on this island,
is noteworthy as having been the place where Captain Bligh
landed from his voyage of over 3,000 miles in an open boat
from Tofoa, an island in the Friendly group, after the mutiny
of the Bounty, The following morning we were off the
island of Sumba (Sandalwood Island), or, as the Dutch call
it, Sandelhout. The day was hazy and the light bad, so that
the coast had no effect of light and shade, it all being in one
dull grey. Here we got our first idea of the height of the
Java mountains, ahold, fine range seemed to run right through
the island. The next island was Sumbawa, and further along,
divided from it by the straits of Allas, was Lombok, upon
which is the famous Peak of Lombok. Unfortunately, heavy
clouds hid it from view. The weather altogether has been
very unsettled, and every day we have had thunderstorms,
accompanied by heavy tropical rain. E and I both sleep
on deck, as the cabins are too hot, but the double awnings
protect us. Unless you are absolutely obliged, it is a
mistake to sleep on deck in the tropics, as very often a
change takes place in the night, and a chill caught there
is very much more serious than one caught in colder
climes. We have but very light winds, and those aft, so
the days have been very oppressive ; we ought, by rights,
to have had a strong easterly monsoon, but that failing,
our captain thinks there must have been a heavy cyclone
gale in the Indian Ocean. The heavy roll we were now in
also showed it, and on entering the Straits of Lombok,
dividing the islands of Lombok and Bali, we experienced one
of the heaviest “ smooth ” seas I have ever observed, caused
principally by the strong tide meeting the heavy roll, which
was increased by being confined in the Straits. We were in
the worst of it about dinner-time, and the “Atjeh” rolled
tremendously, but with a very easy motion. I began dinner
by receiving a dish of oranges into my soup plate, and as
dinner advanced the table became a lively scene of chaos.
So strong was the current that the ship at nine knots speed
drifted six knots in one hour at right angles to its course,
and we took five hours to do the thirteen miles through the


Straits at full steam. However, on rounding the island of
Bali, we were once more in smooth water. Before sunset
we got a sight of Mount Bali, towering above the clouds,
and sometime after we got a magnificent view of it; it
was a brilliant moonlight night, and we were steaming
within two miles of the shore directly from which seemed
to rise this wonderful peak. At midnight we were abreast
of it, and E got up to make a sketch. This lovely scene
seemed like a passing dream of great beauty. I happened to
mention that the wind was off land, when E immediately
imagined he sniffed malaria, began to feel uneasy, and
getting up, made anxious enquiries of the first officer, who,
however, reassured him. It was probably the effect of
cucumber at dinner. Sleep was most fitful, and every time
I woke up the mountain appeared in some fresh form. At
four a.m. we had heavy rain, with most vivid lightning.
14th June. —E— ’s birthday ; and we rather astonished
him by tumbling him off the skylight before he was awake,
and giving him our congratulations. We have on board
dogs of all sorts, sizes, and descriptions, which have been
greatly added to during the voyage. The captain alone has
five, and one of his to-day gave birth to three pups. We are
now passing along an indescribably lovely coast; sea like oil,
and covered with the quaintest of native fishing craft, built
like a large dug-out, with an outrigger on both sides, and
carrying one or two enormous latteen sails. Here, as in
Ceylon, they speak of a one or a two-man breeze, according
to the number of men required to sit on the outriggers, to
keep it from capsizing. The mountains were splendid—peak
following peak —all about 10,000 feet high; such wonderful
colouring and lovelyformthatweat once set to work sketching.
Mount Merapi, at the foot of which is Banjowanjie, the sub-
marine telegraph station, and Sedano, were the two principal
peaks, the latter appearing quite close. All are volcanic,
and still slightly active, with a foreground of palm trees,
under the shade of which were native villages, plantations, and
rich fertile valleys, stretching away into the hazy distance of
far-off mountains; a glassy sea, in which were clear reflections,
queer Dutch luggers, and native proahs in dozens. All this
made a most glorious picture. In fact, all day long, one
picture —each more lovely than the last—followed in quick
succession. We were gradually drawing into the straits
dividing Java from the island of Madura, and before sunset


passed “The Golden Rock” lighthouse, looking like a
pagoda, standing out of the water. Ahead of us was
Ardjoeno, another tremendous mountain, behind which the
sun was setting in glowing colours. Our passage through
the Lombok Straits had so detained us that it was impossible
to reach Sourabaya that night, owing to a bar and mud-
banks, so that we came to anchor close to the pilots’ light-
ship, seventeen miles off. For dinner I brewed a claret
cup, in honour of E ’s birthday. Now that we had
stopped we got scarcely a breath of air, and the night was
most oppressive ; everybody, with the exception of Mr. S ,
slept on deck. With him we have been having great fun
lately, as he is afraid to do anything for fear of catching the
Java fever, and at the same time does such outrageous things
as drink port wine for breakfast, whereas, were it to save his
life, I don’t believe he would touch fruit of any sort. We
have made the discovery that he represents some large firm
of bank-note manufacturers, and has been out on account of
the Exhibition. We again had heavy rain during the night,
with a very sharp thunderstorm.
15th June. —We got under weigh at 5.30 a.m. We had been
lying close to the wreck of an old pilot ship, which
was run down by a steamer some little time ago, and with
true Dutch lethargy, it is left there, a standing danger, in mid-
channel, its masts being much above high water-mark.
Onwards more lovely coast scenery, with innumerable villages.
At eight o’clock we were at anchor off Sourabaya. The
straits here are hardly two miles across. This looked like a
busy port, for several steamers and a man-of-war were lying
at anchor, besides numbers of large sailing vessels. Smaller
craft there were, too, without end, their huge latteen sails
adding much to the beauty of the scene. No sooner had we
come to anchor than six boatloads of native ladies came
alongside, which gave us some idea of the beauty of the
national dress. The town is particularly pretty —thoroughly
Dutch —red-tiled roofs peeping out from amidst deep green
foliage. As a foreground to this picture, were the ribs of an
old wreck, upon which some native had built a dwelling place.
After lunch we went ashore in a broad-canopied boat, rowed
by two men sitting abreast. The oars were paddle-shaped,
with a spade-like handle, which accounts for the curious side
motion with which they handle ordinary oars, as I noticed
our sailors did. Behind sits the steersman, who uses a
2 D


paddle. We landed at the entrance to a large canal, and
drove for a long distance in a dos-a-dos, drawn by the smallest of
ponies, along its banks. The canals are lined with trees,
and there was a wonderful scene of life —Holland and the
East all rolled into one, and popped down in a tropical
climate. The town proper is quite a mile inland, that
portion near the port being occupied by Government factories,
shipbuilding yards, &c. We drove first to Frazer, Eaton and
Co.’s, but found the men to whom we had letters of introduction
had left for England. We then drove on to the Embong-
Malang Hotel, which is in the suburbs of the same name.
Here we first experienced the pleasure of the Dutch custom
of the afternoon siesta. The hotel, which was a large one,
was like a city of the dead ; not a soul could be seen, except
one native mechanically sweeping the court-yard. One or
two other natives at last made their appearance, and it was
a long time, and not until we had tried every possible sign,
that we made them understand we wanted rooms. We
had left our luggage on board until we had secured them, and
it was evidently the fact of our having none that bothered
them. We returned in our dos-a-dos, of which there are
any number, the charge being three gulden for six hours,
but you cannot pay less, so that you always keep it waiting
until the six hours are up, in case you should want
it again. Besides that, the driver always expects a gulden
for himself. We brought our luggage ashore, and “Joe”
came with us to see it safely through the customs.
His get-up was comical —black English billycock hat and
gingham umbrella, the rest ordinary Chinese costume. On
his finger he wore a massive gold ring, brought from Port
Darwin. This is another of the Chinamen’s dodges for avoid-
ing the export duty on gold. The customs made a most
vigorous search, and pounced down on fifty cartridges I had,
so I sent them back on board to be left with some other
luggage lam sending through to Batavia. Off we started in
two dos-a-dos, and on reaching our hotel found it had changed
to a scene of life. The front portion of the hotel is a fine
porticoed building, and running out from behind is what
might be termed a street, with porticoes on either side, into
which open the different bedrooms, and along which were
sitting, in the lightest of costumes, the various occupants ;
men in pyjama suits, ladies in native sarongs and white
Garibaldi jackets. A sarong is a piece of extremely fanciful


cloth, mostly now-a-days from Manchester, which is wrapped
round the waist, reaching to the ankles. In this costume
the Dutch ladies may be said to live, as they do not change
until the evening, when they dress, either for a drive, or for
dinner, which is always at eight o’clock. The younger girls
wear a Bloomer costume, reaching to the knees, but with
very little bloom about it, and the young children a combina-
tion arrangement. In all the crowd of servants there was
only one European waiter, and he a Dutchman, speaking no
language but his own. Lively! Before dinner, we turned
out for a stroll in the long, lovely groves. Magnificent trees
line either side. There are large houses, with noble
verandahs, and standing in the middle of gardens. Men and
women wander about or drive without hats, and as the dusk
comes on, fire-flies flash about in all directions. The houses
then are lighted up with the.most lavish expenditure of
kerosene, and as the main rooms open out into the verandah
and are without front walls, the various occupations of those
inside can be plainly seen. The verandah is really the principal
living-room, and in it are tables and numerous easy chairs.
The religion of the natives is principally Mahommedan, and
as we strolled along this evening, we noticed several at
prayers. The Dutch seem to have none. At eight o’clock
we had a capital dinner, and much to our pleasure found that
most of our neighbours spoke English. During dinner a
very good band played, and some of the men, who were
evidently gay militaires, or considered themselves such, carried
away by martial excitement, joined in, much to our amusement
at first, but a little of it went a long way. Here every white
man has to serve in the militia, and a young Englishman whom
we spoke to gave us a very amusing description of their drill;
they making a joke of it by pretending not to understand the
Dutch orders, and always doing the wrong thing. The
Englishmen have also a lawn tennis club. Our bedrooms are
most cool and airy, large windows with iron bars only—bed
big, with only two pillows and a bolster, which is known as a
“Dutch wife,” and is used for putting under your knees, or
feet, for the sake of coolness. ’
ibih June. —The day begins here at about five, when
business men turn out for a ride or drive. I was up early, and
took a stroll. The groves—streets or roads I cannot call them
—were full of life, men and women coming into the town with
every sort of produce, carried in baskets, suspended on bamboo


poles across their shoulders; picturesque carts with oxen,
which are more like small ornamental cottages on wheels,
the sides made of plaited split bamboo, the woodwork carved.
They are covered with a roof, which projects over a long way
in front, so as to shelter the driver. Back to breakfast, which
goes on at any hour, and consists of eggs and cold meats,
after which we strolled about until nine o’clock, and then,
owing to the heat, came in and rested. At eleven we
took a carriage and drove again to Messrs. Frazer, Eaton,
and Co.’s, to call on Mr. H , our consul. He was out,
so we drove about the town, and on to the Sourabaya Hotel,
which is on the main canal. The town is the gayest of the
gay, and teeming with people, all dressed in the brightest of
costumes. The hats of the men resemble huge mushrooms,
and are painted with gay colours, the gaudiest being those of
the coachmen, which are gilded and then have a pattern
painted on. I even noticed an ordinary English billycock
hat painted bright blue. On our return, we found Mr.
H in, and after explaining to him our plans, he advised
us leaving that afternoon for Prigen, and gave us our sailing
directions. We at once returned toour hotel, packed, lunched,
and left by the 2.30 train for Porrong. The line passes
through the most beautiful scenery ; native villages without
end buried away amidst banana, cocoa-nut, and other beautiful
trees. The whole country is highly cultivated, the principal
products being rice and sugar. The line follows the main
road, and along it there is an everlasting stream of life;
never in my life before have I seen such a thickly populated
country. In Java there are eighteen million inhabitants,
which are rapidly increasing, and this, when compared
to Australia’s two millions, is enormous. We travelled second-
class, which is half the cost, and by far the more comfortable,
as the carriages have cane seats instead of leather. Fancy
leather in a climate like this ! The third-class was the most
interesting, as it was crammed apparently with every Eastern
nationality. At Porrong we left the train and got into a chica
(little cart), on the floor of which you sit, leaning against its
back. If you wish to sit with your knees in your mouth, a
board takes out in the centre which covers a well. Of these
carts there were any number, and we had our pick. They
are drawn by the tiniest of ponies, able to carry great
weight, and go any pace. Off we went at full gallop, and
many others besides —such a shouting and cracking of whips.


The town is about half a mile from the station, and there we
stopped and lashed on, by means of a cross-bar and ropes, a
second pony, in outrigger fashion, or rather like what you often
see in a costermonger’s cart at home. Off we went again,
faster than ever, over the best kept roads I was ever on, and
never without trees along each side. Ahead of us was a
grand range of mountains —on the slopes of which was
Prigen, our destination —out from above the clouds peeped
their craggy peaks. Distances in Java are measured by
time; a paal (1,500 metres) is twenty minutes, and six
petals go to a post. At each post there is a guard-house,
where are kept the Government horses. Every native is
obliged to give one day out of five to the Government,
and they are employed on certain services, principally
police duty and road-making. At equal distances they
watch day and night, and at intervals beat a huge wooden
gong which hangs up under a shelter. These gongs are
sometimes most elaborately carved in the shape of a huge
fish, and then coloured. These police are armed with a huge
wooden two-pronged fork, about five feet long, which fork is
sometimes covered with prickles. With this they are able to
keep in subjection the most obstreperous offender by running
it over his neck, and should there be only one policeman he
jams the offender up against a tree or wall and roars for help;
but generally the police are in couples. They then tackle the
offender, one on either side. At first I was greatly bothered to
see the use of such enormous weapons, but have since dis-
covered that most men carry knives or krises, which they will
not hesitate to use, especially when a Malay should be running
amuck —that is, when excited with either drink or the effects
■of opium, he in a mad state tears down the street, using his
kris upon everybody he meets. The Malay word for a man
in this state is amock or amoq —hence the derivation of
our word amuck. At the town of Kasrie, we left our cart
and hired ponies, and with a coolie to carry our luggage,
started for the hills. For the first few miles it was a gentle
rise, but the latter part was mostly up steps. It was dark
before we reached the Hotel Plembon, at Prigen. At the
entrance to all towns are the most picturesque gateways, in
which the guards sit, and no doubt where the news of the day
is discussed. At the hotel, we found only one other visitor,
a German, who providentially acted as our interpreter. We
got capital rooms en suite, joined by a revolving wardrobe,


which reminded us of the days of secret doors, as, with the
wardrobe shut, nobody would suppose there was a room
beyond at all.
ijth June,. —On turning out this morning we were able
to see what a lovely place we had arrived at. Situated
on the lower spurs of Mount Ardjoeno, which rises
to the height of 10,800 feet above the sea, it com-
mands a most magnificent view of the plain below, and of
Mount Penangoenang, in front of us, a perfect volcanic cone.
On one side of the hotel was a deep gorge, rich with tropical
vegetation and enormous trees, in the boughs of which many
monkeys held high festival. The hotel itself somewhat
resembled a Swiss chalet. The bedrooms were detached,
and opened out on to an interior garden, filled with the
most beautiful roses, on one side of which was a rustic
billiard-room, and on the other a most magnificent swimming-
bath, into which tumbled quite a waterfall. The water of,
which there is any quantity, is led about in aqueducts. In
front of the hotel is a pretty garden laid out in terraces, with
various grottoes and waterfalls. After breakfast, we started
off on a sketching tour, and in the town found some most
picturesque subjects. At eleven o’clock, we were driven in by
the heat. At four o’clock we again sallied forth, this time higher
up the mountains, in order to get a good sketch of Mount
Penangoenang. I, however, soon returned, fearing a storm,
but E ventured some distance further up, until, leaving
all habitations behind him, and hearing strange noises,
immediately remembered the stories he had heard of tigers,
and thought it advisable to return. There are tigers in
Java, but now they are seldom seen, having been driven into
the far interior by the progress of civilization and the increase
of population. They live principally on wild pigs, with an
occasional Javanese as a great delicacy. They have never
been known yet to touch a European, but E thought
that would be but little satisfaction were he the glorious
exception.
18 th June. —We made an early start, retracing our steps
to Kasri, where we got a cart and drove to Bangil, to catch
the 9.30 train for Malang. At one time we were afraid we
should not do so, as our pony turned out a most decided jibber,
and no wonder, poor brute, for it had a sore shoulder, and
nothing but a piece of thin rope as a girth. This must
sound cruel to English ears, but out here it can hardly be


considered such, when coming from the hand of a race of
people who themselves hardly feel pain. We passed through
a village, where a fair was being held, a most curious sight,
hundreds of natives, mostly women, each one sitting with
her goods or chattels spread out in front of her. There
could be seen buyers purchasing about the hundredth part
of a farthing’s worth of something or other, which was
immediately wrapped up in a piece of banana leaf. We
caught the train, and reached Malang for lunch. Along the
line we noticed plantations of sugar, rice, capsicums,
coffee, cassipi, and maize. The line rises considerably,
crossing a low ridge, and then descends over one or two
very awkward-looking viaducts into the plains, in the
centre of which is Malang. At some distance, on almost
every side, rise huge mountains, all of which are volcanic, and
most of them ending in cones, out of which puffs of heavy
solid-looking smoke occasionally rose. The plains are
principally covered with padi fields —but no connection with
the other Emerald Isle —divided by thick belts of tropical bush.
The hotel is built out on these plains, and away from the town,
evidently for the sake of getting every breath of air it can,
and escaping the closeness and odour of the town, buried
away as it is amidst heavy foliaged-trees. The hotel itself is
a piazza, surrounding a handsome dining hall and suites of
rooms, several rooms of bamboo standing away from the
main building. In one of these bamboo pavilions we took up
our quarters. It was an oblong in shape, divided into three
parts, the centre one being open. In this was a table and
chair and a small gymnasium. Our landlord was most polite,
and apologized for our being put there, but the hotel was full,
it being Saturday, and this the great health resort for the
inhabitants of Sourabaya. It is 1,500 feet above sea level.
No doubt the people here would find these rooms cold, but
of course they suited us better than those in the hotel itself.
At night it was cool enough to sleep with a blanket. At four
o’clock we started for a drive through the town and its
environs, and we found it a most wonderful labyrinth.
Although we drove about it for two hours, we never seemed to
be in the same avenue twice. In the centre there is a large
square, covered with grass, and surrounded by most handsome
banyan trees, with one grand monster in the middle. Round
this squard are some fine houses, and away in one corner the
ugliest and stiffest of buildings, evidently a church of some


denomination, the first we have seen since entering the
country. At dinner there was a large muster. Nearly every
Dutchman speaks English, it being one of the languages
taught in their schools. Latin and Greek are only taught
in the very high-class schools, to those intended for the
universities; the rest learn French, English and German.
There are several families staying here, and we have made
friends with some of the children, who have come to our
quarters for a swing, but it is pitiable to see how ghastly
white they all look.
ig th June. —Early this morning we got a magnificent effect
of the Smeroe volcano, appearing above the morning mists
in the valley, and the sun rising behind it, and, at the same
time, a dense volume of smoke issuing from the crater, which
caught the early morning tints. Before six o’clock we were
off in a carriage and four to the baths, about six miles away.
We took with us our dejeuner, in a most sensible arrange-
ment, a layer of tin boxes fitting into a frame like a Chinese
basket. The drive out was very exhilarating, the morning
was fresh, not to say cold, and the ponies were excited to a
mad gallop by the cracking of whips and the loud cries of
Asch-asch. The harness principally consists of rope, and the
leaders are fastened tandem fashion to each wheeler, with
a short pole attached to their bits, to prevent them spreading.
A curious thing was that the trace of theleaderspassed through
a loop attached to the bits of the wheelers. Arrived at the
baths, we found one of the most perfectly beautiful places of
its kind that I have seen. Amidst tropical bush is the source
of a river, and on a narrow spit of land jutting out into the
broad sheet of water, are built two most picturesque Dutch
buildings, amidst trees of various description. The water
is shallow, and wandering about in it, diving in their noses
for the green weed at the bottom, were several ponies. The
bath is close at hand ; a large square, into which the fresh
springs were bubbling, surrounded by an old terrace, with
moss-covered sides, and old flower vases, and all enclosed
within high walls. The morning mist was still upon the
water, and gave it exactly the appearance of the hot springs
of New Zealand. The water was not as cold as one might
have expected it. It was as clear as crystal, and I have
seldom had such a delicious bath, and one with such pleasant
surroundings. After it we breakfasted in the open courtyard,
overlooking the water. A gcodly breakfast had been provided,
408


with champagne, &c. After doing ample justice to this we
adjourned to the other side to sketch, but before leaving, an
ancient monkey came down to see what was going on. On
■our approaching him he grinned ominously, so we threw him
food from a distance. After spending some time sketching,
we returned, and the old custodian —for the baths belong to
Government —called in a loud voice, “ Kissi-kissi.” As a
response to this evidently familiar sound, at least forty or
fifty monkeys made their appearance. The whole place
seemed alive with them. There was my old friend of
the morning, and close to him his queen, nursing in her arms
a diminutive baby ; every tree seemed alive with them, and
of the natives they took little or no notice, but on making
my appearance —for I had hidden behind a tree to see the
fun —a general grin and stampede took place. A wilder
gallop than ever, and we reached our hotel in time for the
rijsstaffd. The rijsstaffel is an extraordinary meal; first
comes soup, then a soup plate which is fairly filled with rice,
and after that about a dozen dishes, of which you take a
portion and mix up with the rice. It is quite impossible to
tell what you are eating, except that it seems an enormous
quantity. Next comes salad, potatoes and meat, then sweets
and fruit. In the afternoon we sketched, and in the cool
went for a walk through the town. It was Sunday, and a
band was playing in the square, but so absolutely lazy are
the people here, that the only audience were Malays.
20 th June. —We left by the early train on our way to
Tosari. At Bangil we changed and went on to Pasorean.
There we breakfasted, and drove in our usual conveyance to
Pasorepan. There we had good fortune. We arrived in
the town, and were unable quite to make out from our driver
whether we had reached our destination, and seeing a
European sitting in the verandah of a large house, E
went in to make enquiries. Pasorepan it was, but there
was no hotel, and it was still quite a four hours’ ride on to
Togari, which is about 6,000 feet up the slopes of the nearest
mountains. The house happened to be that of the Widonio, a
big native swell, and he kindly offered us lunch and put
his own horses at our disposal. The European was the
Controlleur, and he acted as interpreter, as he fortunately
understood a little French. We had really a sumptuous
repast; twelve different dishes and some very good claret.
The Widonio’s wife was also present. We were waited on


by four servants in livery, which consisted of dark trousers,
bright sarong round their waists, reaching a little above the
knees, dark coat cut short, silver plated buttons, and a bright
coloured head-dress. Our ponies were the best we have yet had,
and most gaily caparisoned, a sort of military saddle, with a
bright red covering and bridle made of gay-coloured cord and
tassels. After leaving Pasorepan, our road almost immediately
began to ascend, and continued to do so with various grada-
tions until we reached Tosari, a great portion of the latter part
of our journey being up steps, some so steep that we preferred
walking up. These ponies have very much the same paces
as a Cairo donkey, but are more tractable. They are
imported chiefly from Timor, Sumba, and Sumbawa. As we
ascended, it was curious to notice the different vegetations,
gradually changing from tropical to that of colder countries.
Leaving bananas and palm trees behind, we passed into the
coffee-growing district, and the whole country seemed to be
covered with this shrub. From that we passed into what
might be termed market garden produce, for there every hill-
side was covered with patches of every conceivable English
vegetable. On our way up, we passed trains of ponies laden
with them on their way down to the towns. Almost all our
English wild flowers were here, interspersed with others that
one at home treasures up in hot-houses. Orchids cling to old
stumps, at the root of which might be seen the harebell and
buttercup. The commonest creeper was the nasturtium,
and ferns and fern-trees there were in rich profusion. The
hillsides at this height are not thickly timbered, but the
vegetation is of the richest and most vivid green. The
commonest tree is the she-oak, so common in Australia, but
growing to a very great height. Every shrub seemed to have
a flower, and the roadsides were one bright mass of blue from
the flower of the trefoil. The songs of many different birds,
and the cooing of the turtle-doves, was a great treat after the
dulness of the Australian bush. I noticed one bird of the
brightest scarlet and black, also the native starling, with its
bright yellow beak and legs. It was nearly six o’clock before
we reached Tosari, which we had seen for some time perched
up on the extreme top of one of the ridges. Towns there were
on all sides, built on the ridges and tops of the different spurs,
like so many of the old Italian towns. At Tosari, which is
6,000 feet above sea level, we found a most comfortable hotel,
on the extreme top of the ridge. On either side a deep gorge,


and the village built along the ridge behind, of which you get
a capital view from the open court-yard of the hotel. We
are enchanted with the whole place, and have at once decided
to prolong our stay here.
2i st June. —After our journey of the day before we
decided to rest. How easy it is to enjoy a quiet day
amidst such scenery as this. We have both been hard at
work sketching, and my collection of views of Java
is rapidly increasing. Besides ourselves, there are
young Dutchmen staying here, so that we are a merry
party. At odd intervals we amuse ourselves by wandering
about the garden with the young son of our hostess, eating
strawberries, and learning Dutch and Malay.
22 nd June. —At six o’clock we breakfasted, and then made
a start on an expedition to the Bromo. The eldest son of
the house went with us, as he did not like the idea of our
going alone. He speaks French and a little English. Our
road for the first few miles was a steep ascent, winding in and
out of the spurs and gullies, until we came to the level of
English grasses, where the cattle are fed. After riding for
two hours, we suddenly made a very steep and quick ascent,
and found ourselves on a plateau overlooking one of the
most wonderful sights I have ever seen. We were standing
on the edge of a steep cliff, with a sheer drop of over 400
feet into a vast crater, out of which rose several distinct
volcanic cones, the centre one being the Bromo, from
out of which were coming dense volumes of steam
with a fearful roar. This huge crater, for it is several
miles across, is called the Zand-Zee. The clouds had not
yet risen out of it, and the various cones stood as out of a sea.
Into this we descended, leading our ponies by a steep and
break-neck path along the edge of one of the ridges. At the
bottom was a vast level plain of sand, or rather decomposed
lava, covered in places with coarse grass. Across this we
rode for at least two miles, round the foot of an extinct crater,
called the Batok. This is a regular cone, deeply scored.
Next came the Bromo, peculiar in its colouring, looking like a
dark-coloured mountain with a fresh fall of snow on it.
Leaving our horses at the foot we ascended by a winding
track until we came to the final cone, where we benefited by
idolatry, for to this volcano come once a year the Hindus of
this district to throw into it fruit offerings to the deity
supposed to inhabit it, a sort of harvest festival—they


have erected a ladder, so that the top is easily reached.
This is a perfect crater, 200 feet deep, and out of a
fissure comes the most fearful of roars. It is not until it
reaches the cold air at the top that the dense volume of steam
can be seen; the side on which it comes out is of the brightest
orange and yellow. Along the very edge of this we walked,
on a path hardly a foot wide, with almost perpendicular sides.
After leaving the crater, we followed along a ridge to a higher
point, from which we got a magnificent view of the Zand-Zee
and all its different volcanoes. Craters there were on all
sides, and at no great distance was the cone of Smeroe, 14,000
feet high, vomiting forth its volumes of thick, dense smoke.
We returned to the foot of the crater, and there found that
our coolie had arrived with lunch —a bottle of Pilsner beer,
and a sandwich were not amiss. We returned to where we
had first descended into the crater, and there sketched. The
day had been perfect, being clear, with slight clouds hiding
the sun, but distant thunder warned us, which I took advan-
tage of and started at once for Tosari. E remained to
finish his sketch. I just managed to get in before the rain;
he got a regular ducking.
2 3rd June. —Another idle day, and it was well we so decided,
for before eleven o’clock we were buried in clouds, and had
some heavy rain. It was not until late in the afternoon that
it cleared up, when we at once started for a walk. We went
up the road for some little way, and then turned off and
visited the village of Podakoijo. These villages are curiously
built in tiers up the slopes of the hills. At one point in the
road we came upon a dripping well, surrounded by rich-
coloured rock and thick vegetation. Here were assembled
many of the townswomen; some washing their maize, others
fetching water in long bamboos.
24 th June. —E is the energetic portion of this travel-
ling partnership. He is always off for a walk some-
where or other, and this morning he got rather more
than he bargained, and came back with a very white
face, having, as he declared, tumbled across the lair of
a tiger, who, fortunately for him, was out when he paid
this call. After lunch, we started on our expedition on foot
to the different villages. They are nearly all within coo-ee
of one another, but to reach them is no easy matter, divided
as they are from one another by deep ravines, up the sides of
which zig-zag paths conduct the puffing and perspiring


traveller. After a scramble of this description, we reached
Wonokitri. The houses of all these towns resemble one
another, and are like any ordinary thatched cottage, but
without a chimney, and with walls of plaited bamboo. The
dried leaves of the maize are used for thatch, and the smoke
coming out through the eaves gives a deep rich colouring to
them. From Wonokitri, we followed a path leading along the
ridge, almost resembling a Devonshire lane —banks of violets
and of the most lovely ferns, and every now and then a peep
through some break of distant mountain and plain. We wan-
dered along this, first stopping to gather violets, and then to
feast off the Cape gooseberry, which grows here in profusion.
From this ridge we descended into a fearfully deep
gorge, and began to wonder whether we could reach Tosari
again without retracing our footsteps. This path led us into
the Hindu town of Sedaang. After leaving this we had a
tremendous scramble to the top of the ridge, and congratu-
lated ourselves on having once more reached the level of
Tosari. And so we had, but a great and deep ravine inter-
vened. This gorge was the wildest and yet the most beautiful
we had yet crossed, and although the scramble was great,
we were well repaid by its beauties. Perpendicular sides,
clothed with richer and more tropical vegetation than the
rest, accounted for by its sheltered position, with beautiful
waterfalls tumbling from a great height, flowers of every
colour and variety, and all enlivened by the songs of birds,
and the merry chirp of the crickets, combined to form one
of this world’s Paradises. All this scenery is on such a
vast scale, that it is not until one has been here for some
little time that one can realize on what a scale it is.
From here there are three routes back to Sourabaya, and I
think, in all probability, we shall cross the mountain to
Malang, and so reach Sourabaya again by train. The third
is by way of Probalingo, a seaport town, but as this would
mean two days- astride a pony, E dare not trust himself.
He is, as it is, getting beautifully less, and even now declares
he never again, if he knows, will trust himself astride one of
these brutal animals. It is most amusing how everybody
uses us to improve or to learn English. Staying here is the
English professor at the Sourabaya School, and his English
is not what you would expect from a Professor. His efforts
to improve it are praiseworthy. Our Malay boys also pump
us. While lam writing, a Malay boy is dancing round me.


between the intervals of laying the table muttering— suffoon,
suffoon. You may not, perhaps guess, that he means a spoon.
He is a promising pupil, as he has just brought me a piece of
paper and on it written “ spoen,” “ lefal-sindok,” the latter
being Malay, so he, too, turns teacher. One thing the Malay
women can do, and that is cook. In their hands we are rapidly
recovering, after the baking we received at Port Darwin and
on the voyage here. The men wear their hair long and
coiled up, but it is hidden under their head-dress, whereas the
women wear no head-dress. Both sexes have a most
disgusting habit of holding between their front teeth a quid
of tobacco, which in the first place discolours them, and then
decays.
25 th June. —Ever since we have been here we have been
having some glorious cloud effects. The mornings, as a rule,
are clear, but at about ten o’clock heavy clouds come rolling
up from the valleys beneath, sometimes burying us, at others
stopping short just below. To-night we had a glorious sunset,
over one of the seas of rolling clouds, Ardjoeno standing out
like an island.
26th June. —To-day we determined to walk to theZand-Zee,
for after a few days here our legs have become accustomed to
the hills, and we now think no more of going up and down
them than if it was level country. We were well repaid for
our tug, for we saw the Zand-Zee and its many volcanoes
under their most brilliant aspect. We returned in time for
lunch, and found an American had arrived.
2 yth June. — Mounted on stout cobs, and with two attendant
coolies and a pack pony, we left Tosari en route for the plains.
Our ultimate destination when we started was uncertain,
except that we were were to ride to Pakeis, a town at the
commencement of the plains, where we hoped to get a chica.
Our road lay over the top of the ridge behind the hotel, and
then down the other side. After crossing the ridge, we at once
entered into the thickest tropical bush, stretching away to a
range of hummocky hills, several thousand feet below us.
In the distance was Ardjoeno appearing higher than ever,
and between him and us was a sea of blue haze. The ferns
on this side were truly gorgeous, and the high banks of the
bridle-path were one beautiful mixture of ferns and flowers.
We passed through some charmingly picturesque towns, and
the road through the coffee plantation was like riding
through an avenue of holly trees. The picking is now on,
414


and everywhere you meet natives laden with the produce,
and hear their queer songs amongst the bushes. This they
do, no doubt, to keep themselves from feeling lonely. Coffee
is a monopoly, Government having the sole right of purchase.
The price is fixed at fourteen gulden the picol, which they
resell at from forty to fifty gulden, according to the market.
Another of their monopolies is salt, and for a long time table
salt was smuggled in as Epsom salts, but this has now been
put a stop to. Our ponies were both excessively good, and
we kept up a pace of about five-and-a-half miles an hour.
Mine was of the softer sex, and as round as a tub. E ,
insisted upon calling her the “ Mayor and Corporation.”
On reaching the plains the population appeared thicker than
ever. We rode along a grand broad road, lined on either side
with teak trees, their enormous leaves making a grand shelter
from the sun. When they are in flower these avenues must
be gorgeous, as every branch seems to terminate in a flower
three times the size of our horse-chestnut. Now, however,
they are in seed. On each side of this road, but at very
short distances, were the picturesque entrance gates to the
different campongs. A campong may be described as some-
thing smaller than a village, and presided over by a person
who is responsible for its occupants to the Widonio, and he
in turn to the controlleur , who is a Dutchman. At two o’clock
we reached Pakeis, where we secured a chica, and finding that
Malang and Lawang were about equal distance, we decided
on going to the latter place. We have not been there, and
it will give us an extra time in the morning, as we intend
leaving by the first train for Sourabaya. After driving some
distance we found ourselves on the road we had come from
Malang to the baths at Wendet. Our old friends the
monkeys were sitting along the roadside. At a place called
Singosarie—near to which, by the way, are some old temples
worth visiting —our ponies gave in altogether. We transferred
ourselves and our belongings to another chica, this time a
most gorgeous affair, resplendent with gold ornamentations.
Our original driver had, by means of stones, tried to make
us understand that the charge to Lawang would be ten gulden.
Now came the difficulty, what to give him. We tried to make
him understand that his ponies were a disgrace, and he ac-
cepted without a murmur the four gulden we gave him. At
last the transfer was complete, and a fresh bargain struck for
two and a half gulden for the remaining portion of our journey.
415


2%th June. —We reached Sourabaya at about eleven o’clock,
and called at once on Mr. H . He was out with the
Maharaja of Johore, who is at present on a visit to Java. He
and his suite are staying at the Embong-Malang. He has
with him his English secretary, a Malay secretary,
and two or three Arab swells, besides a host of atten-
dants, cooks, butlers, &c. Those who are, like ourselves,
without servants pay for it dearly, as nearly every dish
comes to us last, and we have sometimes ourselves to
do a little scramble. I am already beginning to get very
sick of this Dutch living; now that the novelty has worn
off it is either a feast or a famine. No seeming regularity,
no certainty, no system. Eating in this way reminds me very
much of feeding time at the Zoo, and when watching the
animals fed there, I did not then think that I myself would
ever come so near to the brute creation. Mr. H
called on us this evening, and asked us to dinner with him
to-morrow to meet the Maharaja. Hurrah! a good dinner
at last.
zgth June. —Our morning was filled up by packing, as we
leave early to-morrow by steamer for Samarang. I bought
from a wandering hawker several specimens of sarongs,
native imitation. They are printed in Holland, or Switzer-
land, I am not sure which, and are made to imitate the
native work so exactly, that only an experienced eye could tell
the difference. The smell is a sure test if they have not
been tampered with, but the wretches here have got so cun-
ning that they soak the European-made sarongs in the native
wash, so giving them, too, the smell. The native ones are
made or rather adorned entirely by hand, and to see them
painting them is very curious. In the afternoon I bought
three very handsome krises. Mr. E held a baptismal
service at Mr. H ’s house, and baptised about seven
children. They have no English service in the whole of
Java, and are only too glad of such passing opportunities.
In Sourabaya there are about forty English. The married
ones, which are not many, with but one or two exceptions,
have Dutch wives. One man’s face there at first bothered
me, but I felt sure that he had been at Rugby at the same
time as myself, so I asked to be introduced to him, and on
hearing his name remembered him at once. He left Rugby
in 1869, and I have not seen him since. He is the only
Rugby man in Java. lam afraid our share of the champagne.
416


which was broached to drink the welfare of the children with,
went down to the toast of ‘‘ Floreat Rughcea.” At dinner
I noticed that myself and Mr. H , the Maharaja’s
secretary, were the only two present in evening dress. The
custom here is black morning coats, and I cannot understand
why the English community have fallen into it. I sat next
Mr. H ; he has been out in Singapore for about nineteen
years. Inchi Ibrahim is the name of the Malay secretary
rather appropriate name for a secretary by the way. He,
however, is a particularly nice and well-informed fellow.
After dinner, in conversation with the Maharaja, I found
that he knew Major H very well, and from him I
learnt of the Major’s illness, and of his return to England. I
received an invitation to go up to Johore —I hope I may find
time to avail myself of it. The diamond tiara worn by the
Maharaja was magnificent. He also wore the Stars of India
and of St. Michael and St. George. His hands were ablaze
with most gorgeous rings.
30 th June. —We are both heartily thankful to be away from
the Embong-Malang Hotel, for the sanitary arrangements
there are something dreadful. The bedroom I had, I learnt,
was the cause of laying a man up with fever for six months.
Pleasant news. Just the sort to hear when too late. We
went on board the “ Gouverner-Generaal Laudon,” another of
the Netherlands-India boats. The Maharaja and his suite
were on board. There were also on board a party of Arabs,
one of whom I found about to occupy my cabin, and I had
to use very plain English to him to get him out. The trip to
Samarang is very uninteresting, as the coast is very low-lying.
Shortly after leaving Sourabaya we passed through the
remaining portion of the channel between the island of
Medura and the mainland. Outside that we passed close
to the place from which is obtained the bird’s nest for
making the soup. The Government lease the ground to China-
men for a large annual rental. Their ship is constructed for
hot climates, but with one exception, in having no punkahs.
The Dutch will not use them. The only one I have seen
was at Mr. H——’s last night, and when he first used it
Dutchmen used to object to dine with him, and for them he
had to keep “ caps on the sideboard.” Our cabins have fine
large open ports. The local fares are very high, but here I
benefit, having a through ticket. Claret and gin are free
drinks. It may sound dreadful, but I —agreeing with the
2 B


motto of when you go to Rome do as Rome does —enjoy the
gin and bitters before meals. In hotels it is always on a side
table, and is—(talk of the here it comes. “ Thank you, if
you please, a little more bitters.”) We have great fun now
making out what we want in Malay from a small book we
bought in Sourabaya, containing words and phrases in the
different languages.
ist July.—hi eight o’clock this morning we were at anchor
off Samarang, a town built along the low land near the
shore. It has the reputation of being very unhealthy, so we
had determined not to stay here, but if possible to go straight
away up country. Poor E . He slept on deck last night, and
for fear of cold took up his position on the lee side of the
skylight. Early this morning he had to make a sudden
retreat on to its topto escape a deluge of water from the deck
washers. In his hurry he forgot that he had taken out and
placed carefully by his side his set of teeth, and it was not
until some time after, when we were sitting on deck, that he
discovered his loss. Fortunately for his appearance, but
unfortunately for his digestion, they are grinders. On hearing
of it the laugh became general, and the joke was grand when
two Malay boys were told off to look for a gentleman’s
■teeth. Perhaps some ancient shark will take to them, as
they must have been washed overboard. A steam tender
took us ashore, and there we were met by the Consul’s
mandor with a carriage, and a note saying he had taken
rooms for us at the Hotel Pavilion. We at once drove there,
and finding that a train left for Solo at one o’clock we
decided to go up at once. We next called on Mr. D , the
Consul. He fully agreed with us as to our movements, and
gave us letters of introduction along the road. We have
taken berths in the steamer for Batavia, leaving here on the
7th. The country up to Solo is flat and uninteresting, not
to say familiar. This railway is in the hands of a private
■company It is very curious to see the mixture of official
and native dress in the Malay guards ; the small sarong
round the loins, bare feet and native head-dress, on the top of
which is a regulation cap. The uniform is dark blue
■cloth trousers and jacket. The caps of the police are
cut out behind to suit the native custom of wearing
the hair done up in a knot. Imagine an ordinary English
black felt hat cut in half, but leaving the band, and
then the brim turned down, and you have the official
418


Malay cap. It was amusing to see the number of buffaloes,
and the children in charge lying half asleep on their backs.
We reached Solo at about six o’clock, and drove at once to the
Hotel Shei, said to be the best in Java. Our first insight
into it gave us that impression also. The servants seemed
to know exactly what one wanted, and before we had time
to look round, tea was handed to us. After getting rooms,
we drove out to Mr. S ’s house, to whom we had a letter
of introduction. He is a bachelor, and has a fine large
house outside the town. In the front is a large portico, and
off it a long open room, the floor laid with beautiful white
marble. Passing through a draped passage we entered a
tremendously large dining hall, behind which are the gardens.
In them he has cages, containing queer birds, and in an
enclosed paddock some native deer. Directly behind the
house stands a beautiful tamarind tree, supposed by the
natives to be a “ holy tree,” and therefore on no account to
be cut down. We stayed and dined with him, and afterwards
went for a drive through the town. Here is the home of
the Soesoehoenan (Emperor of Solo), and besides him there
is an independent prince, and any number of other princes,
who are poor and live on him. The town is a fine one,
having some really grand boulevards, and one resembles
the Mall. They are lighted by lamps hung on wires
reaching from tree to tree across the road. Many of the so-
called palaces are surrounded by high whitewashed walls, and
are built without any plan or system. The roads between
them are on that account a perfect labyrinth. The Craton,
or Emperor’s Palace, surrounds a large compound, in which
are some fine trees. While driving up one of these streets
we passed a house where evidently high festival was being
held, and on our expressing a wish to see it, Mr. S at
once took us in. We entered first a courtyard covered with
a bamboo roof, this was crammed to excess with the uninvited.
Opening on to one side of this courtyard was a large drawing-
room, brilliantly lighted up, and filled with the male guests.
The other side of the room was like the front of a house, with
a door and two windows looking into the room. In this were
the ladies. The entertainment was at its height, and we took
up our places in the front row of those uninvited. Unfortu-
nately for us, the host was not of high enough rank to invite
us to join his party. He came down, however, and shook
hands with us. It was a beautiful sight, a room brilliantly


lighted and tastefully decorated—the men’s dress, com-
posed of sarong, with bright-coloured belt, .through which
were stuck their krises, in many cases with jewelled handles.
From the waist upwards they wore nothing, but their
bright olive skin contrasted well with the colour of their
sarongs and head-dresses, which are tied to fit quite tight all
over the head. There was a native band, or gamelang, sitting
in a railed off place in the courtyard, the instruments being
different-sized gongs, arranged in sets of from eight to twelve,
besides some very large gongs. There were dulcimers, too, of
wood and metal, and a tum-tum, and native two-stringed
violin. The performer on the latter led the band. The time
was excessively slow, and to this music moved the dancing
girls, now and then joined by different guests. The dance was
most solemn, not a movement of the face as they moved
round in the slowest time. It was more posturing than
dancing, and balance seemed the great thing. There was
not an interval, however short, when there was not motion,
and motion, too, of every part of the body equally. The
curious part was that one man moved with a cut-glass bottle
of brandy in his hand, and another with a small liqueur glass,
and each dance ended up by their all kneeling down and just
tastingthe brandy. The girls’dresses were very pretty, a beautiful
sarong, with an upper bodice of black velvet, which fitted tight
to the figure, and reached up to underneath the arms. They
wore white flowers in the hair. After watching the dancing for
some little time, we went and stood in the band enclosure.
The music was most strange. It seemed to me to be time
without tune, a sort of harmonious combination ; there were
quite a dozen performers. The host sent ns chairs, and
himself came down, bringing with him the brandy-bottle, so
we politely drank his health. This mass of human beings
was rather beginning to tell on the temperature, so we
cleared out, and afterwards continued our drive. We
passed through the two Chinese quarters, where business
was at its height. The country is like an everlasting fair,
and at night the stalls lighted by their little lanterns have a
really beautiful effect. We ended up by going to the Club,
which is a large building, and there we saw the latest English
papers. In front is a large, low round table, surrounded bj-
chairs —I should call it a “ sociable table,” as it prevents
people sitting together in small parties. The table is more
properly speaking a large footstool. Mr. S has advised


os to give up our idea of going to Brambanan to see the ruins
of the Thousand Temples, and instead to go through to
Djocjakarta, and from there visit Imogerie, the palace of the
Sultan’s family. He promised to telegraph in the morning
to the Residente, and advised us also to do the same to the
Consul.
2nd July. —We left by the 7.14 train for Djocja, as it is
generally called. This is the capital of another native
district, at the head of which is a Sultan. We passed
Brambanan en route, and we were afterwards told that, unless
with a guide, a visit to these ruins will in no way repay one.
History here repeats itself, Just as the Pyramids and the
Colosseum were used as quarries, so have these temples been
used for the purposes of building sugar factories, and it was
only until very lately that plundering these temples for this
purpose was most indiscriminate. In the gardens of the
Residente in Djocja are many statues of Buddha, all of which
were taken out of some of the temples for the sake of
preserving them, and at Sir Stamford Raffles’ door is laid the
carrying off of a large proportion. Some, I believe, to do him
justice, were for the British Museum. There is something
.going on, so that permission was not obtained until late in
the day for us to visit Imogerie, which was then out of the
question, but we were vastly amused by sitting in the
verandah of the hotel, and watching the passers-by. A huge
umbrella, with a handle seven feet long, is, so to say, the
heraldic arms of the native aristocracy. The Dutch have
adopted it, to add greater state to their high officials. An
Emperor, Sultan, or a Dutch Residente use a gold-coloured
umbrella- They are carried by footmen, two being behind
the carriage. A very swell English carriage went by,
and its occupant gave us a most profound bow, which
we returned, but most ungracefully, considering we were
sitting in big arm-chairs with our legs on the leg-rests. This
was the Sultan. On the box were two servants. The
coachman, over his head-dress, wore a huge shiny black hat
and cockade. Behind was the great gold umbrella, and he
was accompanied by his native soldiers as outriders. It was
exactly like watching a huge procession. Umbrella followed
umbrella, with few exceptions, on foot. Over some the
umbrella was held open. All were followed by a crowd of
■attendants, the poorer ones being of avery ragged order. One
lot all wore old tall hats, one being a very dilapidated opera


hat, the springs of which were badly bent, giving it a most
comical appearance. After watching this until our sides
ached with laughter, we went to visit the market. In this
we wandered about, making curious purchases here and there.
My bedroom is now almost unbearable, as a funeral party
went by, in front of which was carried burning incense, and
which has filled my room with its fumes. The corpse was
carried on a bier, covered over with a white pall, on which
were fastened, at regular intervals, yellow flowers. The chief
mourners wore white scarves round their shoulders, and all
kept up a dismal murmur. We have received an invitation
to be present at a large ball and entertainment to be given
to-night at the Club, in honour of the visit of the General
Commandant. We have, however, been obliged to refuse, not
having with us the necessary garments, but we had great fun
in watching the entertainment from the verandah of our hotel.
It was a novelty to see men with their huge umbrellas follow-
ing their masters about in the crowded room. The travelling
agent for Chiarini’s circus arrived to-night, and he told
me an amusing yarn, how the clown, when they
were here before, started an umbrella, and always had a
Malay servant to hold it over him, and that he walked-about
mimicking the dignity of the native princes. During our
drive this afternoon we visited the Water Castle, a most
interesting ruin. To all appearance it looks like an old
Roman bath. It covers a large area, and the buildings are
many and various, and at one time it must have been a struc-
ture of great massiveness and beauty. It was only built 130
years ago as a plaything for the Sultan, and was designed by
a French architect. It was destroyed by an earthquake, and
never repaired, and the damp climate has had the effect of
making it look most ancient by discolouration, covering every-
thing with green mosses. Succeeding earthquakes have added
much to its ruin. E made the acquaintance to-night of
a Roman Catholic priest, and he told him that it was always
advisable to know the quickest way out of your bedroom, as
it is never certain when there may not be an earthquake.
He himself had once narrowly escaped, when his church and
clergy-house came down with a run. He now keeps a small
bell suspended in his bedroom, in order that he may be
warned. He says the sensation is something indescribable,
making you feel cold and sick. The shocks are of two distinct
kinds, horizontal and perpendicular, and those knowing in such
422


matters can detect the difference. One does very much more
damage than the other, but lam not certain which. Mount
Merapi, which is quite close to the town, acts as a warning
by giving indication of their approach. Leaving the Water
Castle we drove to the Craton, and there saw some of the
Sultan’s tame elephants. In the palace are also caged lions
and tigers. Formerly tiger-fighting was one of their amuse-
ments, and they are even now sometimes held. An amusing
tale is told of one tiger, supposed to be more ferocious than
the rest, leaping over the encircling spearmen. Much to
the discomfiture of the lady occupants, it took refuge under-
neath a carriage, far more frightened than the ladies them-
selves, though they at once fainted away. Well they might.
A tiger and buffalo fight is held once a year in Solo, and
considering that the natives look upon the buffaloes as a type
of themselves, and the tiger of the Dutch, they always, if
they can, take care that the buffalo shall win. The tigers
in the Sultan’s palace at Djocja are fed daily on living dogs
caught in the streets. Would not this be a good idea to start
in England to rid our streets of its many curs ? The Press
would indeed suffer by this, as what in that case would become
of hydrophobia ? We left the Craton by an old gateway,
outside which were the remnants of a large moat, in which
are now built native houses.
3rd July. —We made an early start from Djocja, in order
to reach Magelang in good time, and see comfortably the
sights en route. We experienced, for the first time, overland
travelling. At every six miles there is a post, where you
change ponies, and it would appear that, according to how
you fee your coachman and driver, so is the pace that you
travel. At each post you change your driver. He rides on a
knife-board behind, and literally drivesthe ponies by constantly
jumping down, and tearing along like a fiend, shouting and
cracking his whip, and not sparing it either if any of the
ponies need it. The regular fee is ten cents to the driver, and
twenty-five cents to the coachman for each post. Our road
to-day, until we were beyond the kingdom of the Sultan, was
very bad, but fortunately the territory over which he rules
did not extend very far, at all events in our direction. The
stages being so short the pace travelled is very fast, and we
thought we should make a good subject for a picture entitled
“On Her Majesty’s Service.” At the third stage we turned
off the main road, and drove down a most delicious


avenue, until we were stopped by a broad river, over which
ponies and carriage had to be taken separately, on a
bamboo raft, floated on two dug-outs, the ropes being made
of a bamboo creeper. Primitive, but I believe safe. The
hill on the other side was very steep, and I noticed that they
carefully led the ponies to the top, and that when the carriage
crossed it was accompanied by a crowd of urchins to assist
in dragging it up. At last the great ruins of the temple of
Boro Buddor burst upon us in all their magnificence. It is
a massive terraced pyramid, built upon the top of a low hill.
Encircling the hill is the road by which we reached the top,
where there is a large plateau, stretching away from the foot
of the temple, part of it covered with thick bush, under the
shade of which are several substantial native houses, now used
as an hotel. Here we ordered lunch, and in the meantime
went for an inspection of the temple. There is just a high
square basement which takes four minutes to walk round.
You ascend this basement by a broad flight of steps, guarded
by ugly monsters. The terraces were guarded on the outside
by substantial parapets about seven feet in height, on the top
of which were ranged in niches cross-legged figures larger
than life, to the number of about 400. Both sides of the
terrace walls were richly covered with bas-relief, descriptive
of the history and life of Buddha. On the top terrace was a
series of smaller terraces leading up to the main cupola, built
over the principal image of Buddha. At various intervals,
and along the top of each of the parapets of the lower terraces,
were figures of this god, and all around the upper terraces
were seventy-two bell-shaped cupolas, with open diaper work
covering more figures of Buddha. The centre cupola is fifty
feet in diameter; the whole building 620 feet square, and
about 100 feet high. The view from the top was something
enchanting. On all sides distant ranges of hills, and below
a plain of great beauty, while behind rose a range of high
hills resembling the Alps Maritimes, near Menton. They
had those queer tooth-shaped tops so peculiar to the moun-
tains of the Riviera. The heat would not allow us, however
enchanting, to remain too long. Under the main cupola is
a half-buried figure of the god. This temple is supposed to
be over 2,000 years old, and was built at the time Java was
inhabited by the Hindus. The Brahmin religion flourished
from an epoch of unknown antiquity until about 1478, when
that of Mahomet superseded it, and, judging from the character
424


of these ruins, the people must then have been of a much
higher civilization than the present occupants of the island.
It has since, of course, suffered more from the shocks of earth-
quakes than by the hand of man, as it has only comparatively
recently been discovered by Europeans, and by that means
has escaped being a quarry for the building of sugar-mills.
Now let us hope such will no longer be the case, although
nothing is done, except by religious fanatics, to keep these ruins
in order. Earthquakes, no doubt, will in time level them.
Several places look even now very shaky. Does it not seem
a shame that nothing should be done to try and prevent
what lam afraid must be the inevitable ? After lunch we left
the ruins, but not before we had had an amusing difficulty with
our landlord, who could give no change, but instead gave us
tick, and we arranged to pay the hotel proprietor at Magelang.
While our carriage was being ferried over the river we were
amused by watching the natives getting logs across. They
were too heavy to float, and it took quite 100 natives to do the
work, their only ropes being bamboos split and tied together.
After crossing the river we once more left the main road
and made a detour to visit the Minduet Temple, erected in
honour of Buddha and his two apostles. It is a tall square,
ending in a cupola, and hollow, in which were three massive
figures of the god and his two apostles. The whole of the
outside is adorned with frieze work, and surrounded by a
terraced moat. We reached the Hotel Loze, at Magelang,
about sunset.
4 th July. —The hotel is built in gardens, on one side of a
large square. Facing us, on the opposite side, is a mosque,
pagoda shaped, and roofed with red Dutch tiles. Buried
away as it is amidst dense foliage, through which a distant
view of a huge mountain is obtained, it made a picture which
tempted us to linger here in order to sketch it. On one side
of the square is a large native training college, in which
there are 100 students. Here they are trained as school-
masters, and for junior positions in the Civil Service. Each
district can nominate a certain number for free education,
but the rest pay for lodging and educational appliances about
£1 6s. a month. We left Magelang at two o’clock, and had
a most eventful drive. Every hill we came to, two bullocks
were hooked on in front of us. The descent of some of these
hills was even worse, as the hind wheel was locked by a
piece of rope, and the front ones looked as if they might come


off at any moment. Ambarawa, called by the Dutch
Wilhelm 1., is the terminus of a branch line of railway from
Samarang, and is one of the most lovely spots in this
district —some say in all Java. Here we arrived just after
sunset. Looking down from the hills above, the plain
resembled a vast inland sea, scattered upon the surface of
which were many islands, such was the effect of the clumps
of bush amidst the padi fields, which are now under water.
s th July. —ln front of the hotel rises Mount Merapi,
with its ten distinct volcanic cones of vast dimensions. We
left for Samarang by the early train. Curiously enough,
Ambarawa has a bad name for fever, in spite of its elevated
position of 3,000 feet above sea level. On reaching
Samarang we at once called on the Consul. From him we
learnt that the “Almora” leaves for England on the 9th,
and by it E intends going, so good-bye to any overland
journey to Batavia from Cheribon which we had talked of
doing. Late in the afternoon we went for a drive round
about Samarang. I think this town boasts the finest avenue
that I have seen in Java. We ended up by driving through
the Chinese quarter. It almost appeared like the “ Arabian
Nights ” in tableaux.
s th July. —Another morning wasted in packing. Would
that we could travel without clothes. At the same time we
have had great amusement, as there has been a large crowd
of hawkers in attendance, ready to sell anything from
diamonds downwards. I purchased a good many of the
native sarongs, some of which had the most extraordinary
pattern. At Solo I had bought a number of krises, so now I
am well set up with Javanese curios. After the heat of the
day we took a carriage and four, and did the grand tour.
We drove up to Djandi, a place on the hills about four miles
out of Samarang, from which we got a good view of the town
and roads. We got back in time to dress for a dinner party
at Mr. D ’s. There I met a Mr. T , who hails from
Manchester.
yth July.— The tender leaves at seven o’clock, so that it
meant being called at five o’clock. I know nothing more
miserable in these countries than getting up too early,
having to finish packing, and rush off to catch a boat. We
were lucky in hitting off the “ Generaal Pel,” one of the Com-
pany’s finest boats, and in getting a cabin to ourselves, for
these boats are often crowded. As a rule, a Dutchman will


not go into a cabin with an Englishman, so even in
this country we have something to be thankful for; I may
fairly say I never was in a country where travelling was made
less easy, and one which I shall leave with so few regrets.
E leaves for England in the Queensland mail boat the
day after to-morrow, and as this boat goes the same day
to Singapore I shall go on in her. I am sick of the Dutch
and their ways. On board was our jovial Dutchman, and
the American whom he had met at Tosari, the latter bound
for Singapore.
Bth July. —Spent at sea.
gth July. —At eleven o’clock we were at anchor off Batavia,
the entrance to which is studded with lovely palm-covered
islands. There are no wharves, but all cargo has to be landed
in proahs. The harbour is connected with the town by a
long canal running out some distance into the sea protected
by sea walls. A tender took us ashore, and as we were to.
proceed on our journey to-morrow, we only took handbags
with us, E sending allhis luggageon board the “ Almora.”
We reached the Hotel Nederlanden in time for lunch, and
opposite to me sat a General and Mrs. , whom I had
met at Tauranga, in New Zealand, and a Frenchman whom
I had seen at the Melbourne Club during the Exhibition.
After lunch, while lounging in our chairs, we amused ourselves
bargaining with the various hawkers, and in the evening went
for a drive through the principal part of the fashionable
quarter of the town, and then across the King’s Plain and
over Waterloo Plain, the former of which the Batavians
pride themselves as being the largest open space of any towm
in the known world. Deluded creatures ! It would look small
if put beside Hyde Park. They have some fine buildings
surrounding them. One thing which strikes one here, as in
all Java, is that every house stands on its own ground, and
one can only wonder that in laying out Australian towns
the same system has not been adopted. But it is a very
difficult thing to make an Englishman alter his ways and
habits. The hotel here is the best we have yet been to in
Java. Behind is a large open courtyard planted with trees,
on to which open the different bedrooms, which are large and
airy. The dining hall juts out into this from the main
building, as a large pavilion, with open sides, its roof
supported by columns —a most cool and refreshing room to
dine in. After dinner we strolled into the Club, of which'


we have been made members during our stay here, and in
this also Batavia excels. I have seldom been in so beautiful
a building, a vast marble floored hall, its roof supported
by pillars, and divided into various rooms by moveable screens.
Another early start to-morrow, so an early turn in.
io th July. —l have sent home by E all my curios
collected here, photographs and sketches. We were under
weigh about nine o’clock, and for a long distance I could see
E flashing his adieu to me with a looking-glass. Never
before have I left any country with so little regret. There
seems to be nothing in common between a Dutchman and a
foreigner, and neither do they wish it. They give you the
idea of not being at all certain of their possession, and that
they wish to keep the Dutchman only before the natives.
A foreign consul receives an intimation that it will be held
as an unfriendly act to fly his country’s flag; and on occasions
when it must be exhibited then only underneath that of
Holland. One thing they do know, and that is how to govern a
colony for their own advantage. Fortunately for the natives,
missionaries can do nothing. Their religion is principally
Mahommedan. In Java there are three distinct classes —
the Dutchman, then a large class termed Europeans,
these are the half-castes (or any with black blood), and lastly
the natives. Take the world over, I doubt if you could find a
lazier set of people than the Dutch ; eating, drinking, sleeping
and smoking seem to be their only occupation ; the men are
generally excessively fat, and age very rapidly. The whole
community goes to sleep in the afternoon, and were you to
break your leg, I doubt your being able to get a doctor until
after siesta time. The women really seem to remain in
deshabille all day long, and on board the steamboat they are
only requested to be dressed from 5.30 until after dinner;
most of them are too lazy even for this, and prefer having
their food sent to them on deck. One of the funniest sights I
have seen for a long time was at Samarang—a large girls’ school
out for a walk. Some girls were quite sixteen. Their dress
was but a loose Garibaldi jacket, garments reaching to the
knees, white stockings and high-heeled boots. It is quite a
common thing to see husband and wife going to their bath
together, sometimes with their children. The baths all
through Java are the same, huge tanks of water, over which is
a grating to prevent you getting in, and out of this you ladle
the water. There is little doubt that this is the most cooling
428


•way of bathing, and wastes less water. I have up to the
present said little about the size or history of Java, for these
things have to be learnt as one jogs along, either from books,
or intercourse with the people one meets. With regard to
the latter, I doubt there being a country in the world where
the inhabitants seem less inclined to give you any information.
A canny Scotchman is nothing to a slothful Dutchman. Java
is without doubt the finest tropical island in the world. In
area it equals England, and is 666 miles long, from 56 to 136
broad. It runs almost due east and west, and forms a portion
of a long belt of islands, which act as a southerly barrier,
protecting the islands to the north from the heavy seas of the
Indian ocean. It is purely volcanic, having in all 38 volcanic
mountains, which average about 10,000 feet, and eleven of
which are in constant activity, a greater number than any
other district of equal extent.
nth July. —We reached Singapore late on the evening of
the nth, after a pleasant but uneventful voyage. At no time
had we been out of sight of land. We called at Muntok, on
the island of Banca, which is only divided by a very narrow
strait from Sumatra. This is the portfor the tin mines. We
also stopped at Riaow, on the island of Bintang. It is almost
impossible to conceive the pleasure of cruising amidst the
islands of the Java sea, the smoothness of the sea, the
lightness of the atmosphere, the constant succession of the
most picturesque lake scenery, islands of every shape and
size clustered together, mountains of the most fanciful forms
covered with verdure to their summits, with rich and luxuriant
vegetation extending to the very edge of the water, the whole
scene enlivened by the number of native boats, which, like
cockle-shells, are wafted about by the wind. The heat may
be great, but under a double awning it is not felt much. In
no place does the depth of the water exceed 50 fathoms.
The Malay Archipelago extends for more than 4,000 miles in
length from east to west, and is about 1,300 miles broad.
Borneo and New Guinea are the largest islands, and on the
former the whole of the British Isles might be placed, and
still leave a margin. Wallace in his book divides this
archipelago into two great divisions, viz., the Indo-Malay
and Austro-Malay, and it is peculiar how distinct are the
natural productions of these two divisions. The inference is
that the whole of the islands eastwards beyond Java and
Borneo do essentially form a part of a former Australian or


Pacific continent, while those to the westward belonged to an
Asiatic one. It is an extraordinary fact that neither Borneo
or New Guinea have any volcanoes. Singapore is an island
situate at the extreme southerly point of the Malay
Peninsula, and is only divided from the main land of
Johore by a strait, in no place broader than three-
quarters of a mile. It contains 275 square miles, and
is 25 miles long by 14 broad, and is in latitude
no N. It consists' of a number of small islands,
none of which are higher than 400 feet. On those
nearest the town are built the houses of the residents. This
port is entirely free, and is one of the largest shipping junctions
in the world. The value of its situation consists in its
commanding the Straits of Malacca, the great channel of trade
and communication between India,China, and the Archipelago.
It was founded by Sir Stamford Raffles on the 29th of Feb.,
1819, and a more splendid geographical site could not have
been chosen for a mercantile city and depot. Here may be
seen ships of all nations lying out in the roads, while the
wharves for steamers are at Tanjong Pagar, some two miles
away. Extending along the sea is a broad esplanade, with a
lawn running down its centre, and drives on each side. In
the afternoon there is quite a gay scene, as there is generally
a cricket match, and always lawn tennis, there being at least
a dozen nets. The people watch the games from their
carriages. On one side of the esplanade is the Hotel de
L’Europe, and at one end the cathedral church of St. Andrew.
The town is divided by a small creek, and spanned by a hand-
some iron bridge. This creek is fairly broad, and is covered
with the sampans of the Chinamen, the deck-houses making
them look like a floating town. The principal shops and
stores are in the Square, a fine open space planted with trees.
The stores of Little & Co., Katz Bros., and Sayle & Co. are
worth visiting, as they contain everything you can possibly
want. Our hotel consists of four distinct houses, connected
by long corridors of bedrooms with back and front verandahs,
the front one looking out on to a garden, while behind are the
different bath rooms, every bedroom having one with a
corresponding number upon it.
12* July. —The day begins here soon after gunfire (five
o’clock), which seems to waken up everybody. Then your
servant brings you a cup of tea or coffee and a roll, after which
_you either walk or read until eight o’clock, when you bathe and


prepare for a nine o’clock breakfast. This morning, however, we
made an early start to fetch our luggage from the steamer, so
we hired a gharry, the cab of this part of the world, and
drove down to Tanjong Pagan The gharry is a box on
wheels, the upper part of which is all windows, which close
with sun-blinds. It is but a stuffy conveyance after all. The
driver, who is generally a native of India, sits on a stool fixed
over the front springs. Tanjong Pagar is indeed a busy scene,
and this port well deserves the title of “ Liverpool of the
East.” Large godowns line the water’s edge, filled with coal,
ships and steamers discharging cargo, which is being taken
away in the bullock-carts to the stores and godowns at Singa-
pore. The P. and O. and Messageries Companies have wharves
of their own still farther away. The road down is lined on
either side with Chinamen’s shops, which are open to the
streets, and inside you can see every conceivable trade being
carried on. The streets are thronged with men, gharries, and
bullock-carts, the latter driven by Klings, natives of West
India. The driver walks between one of the bullocks and
the pole, and drives them by means of a small whip and a
string passed through the nose. While dressing for break-
fast a tap came at the door and a large turbaned head is
poked in—it is that of the Kling barber. Wherever you move
about your hotel your steps are dogged by pedlars, ready to
sell you anything at five times its value. The difficulty is
to know how little to offer, should you wish for any particular
article. The lingua franca here is Malay, so that my educa-
tion in that language can still be gone on with, but it would
be very difficult to say how many other languages you hear
spoken in one day. Almost the first person I met in thq
hotel was Mr. S ——, who had got through Java without
•catching the fever. The streets are lined with long rows of
two-storied buildings with red tile roofs, and underneath the
porticoes sit the various occupants of the stores, at which, in
glorious confusion, are exposed for sale vegetables, fruits,
meats, fish, and many other curious and strange articles. It
is like a huge ants’ nest, all hard at work at something, unless
it be someone resting from his labours sitting quietly smoking
his long pipe. The costume of the Chinese when at work is
simply a loose pair of blue cotton trousers, reaching to the
knee, but when out in the streets he wears loose flowing
trousers and jacket, and thick-soled shoes, very often an
umbrella and English felt hat. The style of dress seems the


same for all classes, differing only in the quality of materiaL
Some of the Chinese here are extremely rich, and it is an
amusing sight to see them driving along in their carriages.
Such a contented look upon their faces. The streets, no
matter how great the slum, always look gay, on account of
the long signboards hanging down perpendicularly, the gaily
painted lamps and names of the different owners. Then
every house has its altar, on which at night two lamps are
always burning, and a curious picture of their ancestor over
it. I had this morning called to present my letter of intro-
duction to Mr. C. S , the Colonial Secretary, but missed
seeing him. He, however, wrote and asked me to dine
with him to-night. His house is about a mile and a
half outside the town, on high ground, adjoining Govern-
ment House. He is the brother of the Rev. C.
S , minor canon of Manchester Cathedral, and also of
Major C , whom I met in Australia and Fiji. Besides
ourselves, for Mr. L had letters to him too, was Count
G , late secretary to the Austrian Legation in London, and
Mrs. S , a charmingly beautiful woman, who sang
divinely, wife of the Assistant Colonial Secretary. Mr. and
Mrs. S were formerly in Hong-Kong, and it was there
they knew Uncle John. They are equally anxious for news
of Major H , not having heard of him since his arrival
in England.
13 th Jtdy.— Mr. L has been travelling for nearly a
year, having come out by way of Europe. He hails from
New York city, and is largely interested in the petroleum
trade. He is gathering statistical information out here,
this being the part of the world where petroleum is most used.
In Java especially, there is very little gas, and, owing to its
price, very few use it, the price in Sourabaya being fifteen
shillings a thousand. The precautions there for the storage
of petroleum were very great. The cans were warehoused
in a large iron building, built on a swamp, and surrounded by
water. The barges conveying it from the ship carried a huge
red flag, with the word “ Petroleum ” on it. I paid a visit
this morning to Little and Co., and to a Chinaman tailor,
but found their prices both about the same, so ordered my
stock of white things from the former. In the afternoon we
drove out to the Reservoir, which is about three miles out,
along beautifully shady roads. The Reservoir is formed by
the damming of a valley, and is most beautiful; the grounds of


it tastefully laid out. On one side is a picturesque house, in
front of which stand three fine specimens of the Traveller’s
Palm, the most noticeable of all the trees out here. It is
shaped like a huge fan, and its leaves are like feathers which
have been stripped half way up. It derives its name from
the fact that water can always be found at the root of the
leaves.
July. —To-day Mr. L has been busy driving
round to the different firms to whom he has letters of intro-
duction, and having nothing better to do, I have amused
myself by sitting in the gharry and watching the street traffic
—Malays, Chinese, and Klings in one mixed crowd. Every-
body busy and mostly selling something, The street cries
in the East beat even those of London. The only thing I
objected to was when a durian seller stopped near to me, but
of this fruit anon. In the afternoon we drove out to see the
gardens of the late Mr. Whampoa, C.M.G., a Chinaman.
He was a man of wealth and position here, being a member
of the Council. They are prettily laid out, with some extra-
ordinary trees and plants, trained and cut to imitate all sorts
of animals, pagodas, and fancy shapes. On each side of the
main drive are long pieces of water filled with the Victoria
Regia.
15 th July. —We are both most pleasantly disappointed with
the heat of Singapore, and although this is supposed to be
the worst time of the year, the weather is deliciously cool.
The Java wind, which is the coolest, is the most unhealthy, as
it brings with it fever. We had heard that the band of “ The
Buffs ” was to play in the Botanical Gardens this afternoon,
so we drove out there in a gharry, but had to leave it at the
gates, as no hack carriages are allowed inside. The gardens
are laid out on the slopes of rising ground, on the top of which
is a raised place for the band, surrounded by a lawn and a
drive. On the lawn were placed chairs, but the fashion seemed
to be for the people to remain in their carriages, which struck
me as being the most unsociable entertainment of the sort I
have yet seen. Mr. and Mrs. C. S were there, she
driving a park phaeton. I had a long talk with her. She
said it only wanted somebody to set the fashion, and everybody
else would follow. We left early, in order to return to our
hotel to dress, as we were dining with them. This is the
season for the mangosteen, and I have tasted it for the first
time, and consider it the fruit of fruits. In size it resembles an
2 F
433


apple, and it is a deep crimson colour. It is opened by
running a knife round and cutting through the • outer skin.
When opened its beauty almost defies description. The
outside case is about a quarter of an inch thick, and of the
deepest crimson lake, getting paler on the inner side. In the
centre is a fruit of pure white, divided into segments resembling
a very small Tangaren orange. The segments, however, vary
in number, and are of unequal size ; the larger ones containing
stones, but these stony ones are reduced in number by high
cultivation. To taste it is like the most delicately flavoured
snow, andto look at you would almostimagine thatit was some
wonderful French device in ice. I should not like to say
how many I could eat. The husk is an exceedingly strong
astringent, and is used by the natives for making tea to
be drunk as a cure for dysentery. The tree of the mangosteen
somewhat resembles a bay tree. This afternoon, before driving
out to the gardens, I went to hunt up the agents for our steamer,
the “Normandy,” which is advertised to sail for Bangkok
to-morrow. It is consigned to Chinese merchants here,
the firm being Tim Took and Co. The head of the firm was
out when I called, so they could not tell me the price of the
tickets, but I felt certain, by the way they looked me down,
that they were calculating in their own minds how much they
dare ask me. I returned to the Club and found L there,
and learnt from him that there was another boat going in two
days. A messenger had calledfor me from Tim Took and Co.,
so we went there together, and found the head of the firm
had returned. He asked us sixty dollars each, whereupon we
immediately offered forty, this being in our mind a fair price,
and to which we stuck. We left the store, saying, “Very well,
we will go by the other boat on Sunday.” As you may suppose,
we were not allowed to go far, and on being fetched back our
offer was accepted, and it was explained to us that there was
very good chow-chow on board and plenty of ice.
16 th July. —Yesterday I had given notice that I wanted a
servant, and this morning I was attended first by a Chinaboy,
who said he had been on an English steamer, and brought
a character from the 2nd and 3rd Engineers. He had
the most comical appearance, and looked like a saint
with a halo round him. A Chinaman, as of course you
know, shaves his head all but a small patch behind, from
which hangs his pigtail, the length of which is increased
i»y plaiting in with it silks, the colour varying according
434


to the taste of the owner. Very often they wish to strengthen
their tail, so they grow a fresh rim of hair all round the
patch, and until this is long enough to be plaited into the tail
it stands out like a halo —so it was with this boy. The next
“ boy ” who turned up was a Madrasse, who spoke English
fluently, and had evidently been with many Englishmen as
their servant. I engaged him at fifteen dollars a month, but
the engagement to be for only one month. He is a fine-looking
man, and his huge white turban gives him a most imposing
appearance. He at once commenced his duties by packing
for me, and at three o’clock we went on board. At lunch we
got into conversation with an American doctor, who has just
come down from Bangkok, and gives us the most awful
descriptions of the effects of the cholera, which is at present
raging there.
*******
20 th July. —The “Normandy ” is a steamer of 450 tons, and
was formerly trading between Liverpool and the Congo river.
The captain gave us up his cabin, so we were well off. We
dined on deck. The first two days out we sighted the islands of
Tioman Pulo Brala, and the Redangs, which were off the coast
of the Malay Peninsula. It took us two days to run up the
Gulf of Siam, and it was only early this morning that we
again sighted land; it was the island of Koh-Kram, on the
Siamese east coast. All the islands along that coast have the
prefix “ Koh.” At about four o’clock the pilot boarded us,
and under his guidance we crossed the bar at the entrance
to the Menam river. Sixty-four miles up this river is
Bangkok, the capital of Siam, although only eighteen miles as
the crow flies. The pilot gave us the most deplorable accounts
■of the cholera, and I don’t think any of us felt very comfort-
able in going right up into its very midst. We have had
■one other passenger, and curiously enough, in looking over his
album, I came across a photograph of a coat of arms, and
recognized it as being that of Mr. L . This man’s name
was L , and he claimed to be a distant connection —a very
distant one I should say. A curious thing happened soon
after we left Singapore, which in a crowded ship might have
caused a panic, and in a heavy sea would in all probability
have sent us to the bottom. The captain has had the shaft
tunnel made water-tight, to act as a ballast tank. This is
capable of holding about 30 tons of water. Two hours out the
-after-hold was found to be full —the tunnel had burst. It took


several hours to pump out. Six miles up the river is the town
of Paknam, where the Custom-house officers came on board.
They were Chinamen, a thorough case of setting a thief to
catch a thief. There are in all 1,500,000 Chinamen in
Siam, and in Bangkok alone 200,000. All the active business
in the country is in their hands. The river here is very broad,
and on an island facing the town there is a beautiful temple.
The river the whole way up is exceedingly pretty, and is
lined with thick bush, through which you get an occasional
peep across the padi fields beyond. In one place it makes
almost a complete circle. Across the small neck there is a
canal, but only for small craft. The tide was running out,
and all along the river were junks at anchor, waiting till the
turn. It is curious to see the huge eyes painted on their
bows. The “Normandy” has the same, as Chinamen declare
that “no see, no savy.” It gives them the appearance of
being huge sea monsters. It was dark before we could reach
the wharf, so we dropped our anchor just below the shipping.
We at once went ashore and took up our quarters at the
Oriental Hotel. This town is called the “Oriental Venice,”
and to-night it somewhat resembled it. As a precaution
against cholera, the natives erect bamboo poles over their
houses, on which they hang lamps, supposed by them to keep
away the evil spirits. It had the most beautiful effect. The
French Consul had died of cholera two days ago, and in front
of his house was a grand display of fireworks, also done with
the idea of frightening the evil spirits. The rain which fell
to-night will do more in this respect than any amount of
fireworks. It was good news to hear that the cholera was
on the decrease. I had before leaving Singapore been in to
see a doctor, and his advice was not to excite myself, and not
to drink too much water. Of the latter lam not often guilty.
Ice, too, is a bad thing, for two reasons—the water it may
be made from, and the sudden chill it may give you. Really
good water is so scarce here, that they are only too glad to
get it, either from Singapore or Hong Kong. Most people
collect their rain water for drinking purposes, and carefully
filter the river water for washing through J ava drip stones,
by far the best filters I have ever seen.
disi July. —l have a letter of introduction to Mr. Gifford
Palgrave, the British Minister here, so this morning I took a
boat and went up the river to the Consulate. The river by
paylight little resembles Venice, except that the boats are


propelled gondolier fashion, but it is most extraordinary to
see all the quaint craft that are continually passing up and
■down. Each side of the river is lined for at least three or
four miles with floating houses, built generally on bamboo
rafts. The better class, however, are upon pontoons of either
wood or iron. Behind these, on the banks, are godowns,
stores, and larger houses built upon piles, in amongst thick
bush, which at night is ablaze with fire-flies. Various creeks
and canals flow into the river. I have purposely made
no plans until after seeing the Consul, as it will depend
on what advice he gives me whether I stay to make an
expedition up the river to visit the ancient capital of luthea,
or return in the “Normandy” in three days’ time. I
was not surprised when Mr. Palgrave strongly advised
the latter, as this is the very worst time of the year,
the best months being October until February. That fact,
coupled with the cholera, are, I think, sufficient reasons for
returning. He has, therefore, kindly promised that I shall
see as much of Bangkok as it is possible in the time. Mr.
N is Vice-consul here, and besides him at present there
isonlyMr. F —-—. Dr. S is the Consulate doctor. With
them I stayed and breakfasted. Mr. N has been out
here for about twenty years, and is a great sportsman; he
tells me that the sport up country in Siam is the finest in the
world. After breakfast I returned to the hotel, and found
that L had decided to stay here and go direct to Hong
Kong, and in the meantime go up the river in a steam launch.
The fact is that he will not leave, American-like, without
having an audience with the King. At four o’clock they
called for me and took me down to the Borneo Company’s.
This is the only other English community in Bangkok. It
was their day—that is, lawn tennis, dinner, and billiards after.
Saturday is the day at the Consulate. We had some splendid
games at lawn tennis, and I was pleasantly surprised at
meeting S , an old Rugby friend. We had a most
delightful evening. Mr. C , the manager, is a young
fellow, and married. At dinner there was also a Mr. and
Mrs. D .
2 2nd July. —l was at the Consulate at nine o’clock. Mr.
P had intended taking me out, but an engagement
with the King prevented him. He, however, provided
ane with a Siamese interpreter, and sent me in his
.-igondola, paddled by four men. It is built after the


pattern of the Venetian ones, with the exception of having a
light roofed awning, and without the large bows. It can
also be propelled in the usual way, but in the heat of the
day paddling is easier for the men, and you get along faster.
The paddle up the river was most delightful. The house
boats are quite different to those in Singapore, having in the
centre a huge barrel-shaped house, made of wicker-work.
Hundreds of these were moored alongside the river with their
stern outwards, on which were displayed fruits, vegetables,
&c., for sale. Further up there was a large quantity of ship-
ping, and in front of the palace numbers of gunboats and
yachts. The palace is not built on the water’s edge, but
some little way in from the river, so that one could not see
very much of it, except the roofs, which are covered with
highly-glazed yellow and green tiles. The style of roof here is
curious, it really being a series of roofs to the number some-
times of five. The top of the upper roof is curved upwards, each
end terminating in a huge devil’s horn. Then, from various
portions of the building, rise the most beautiful needle-shaped
minarets. The interior of the private chapel of the King, I
am told, is truly gorgeous. There is a crystal Buddha, three
feet high, resting on a solid base of ivory twenty feet square
and eleven feet high. Then there is the mat, which the King
used when a novitiate, the strands of which are of ivory, and
yet it is most pliable. In the figure of Buddha there is a
wonderful ruby. Nearly opposite to the palace is the temple
of Wat-Chang. This occupies a large space of ground. On
the banks of the river are some quaintly-shaped pavilions,
near which are the most grotesque figures of men and beasts.
Then there is a large square place, surrounded by praying
sheds and tombs of celebrated people. The carving of some
of the tombs is most extraordinary, as instead of the figure
being on the top, as it is with us, the body is supposed to
be in the tomb, while the head sticks out at one end and the
feet at the other. From the centre of this rises a huge
temple, a square base about ten feet high, at the corner of
which are pavilions, terminating in minarets. At each side
is a pulpit. From the centre of the platform rises the main
tower, which rests upon a double base, each about 50 feet
high, and ascended by steps. The whole of the buildings are
highly decorated with bright-coloured pottery, in the most
grotesque designs. In the niches are small bells, which'
tinkle in the breeze. The roofs of the surrounding buildings.


are of richly-coloured glazed tiles, so that the tout ensemble
is of the brightest description. The view from the higher
platform is extensive, and gives you a good idea of the posi-
tion of the town. The old walled town was built upon the
right hand bank of the river, but the present town has
extended much beyond the old walls, and also to some extent
across the river. The river winds about in the most extraor-
dinary way. The country is flat, but covered with the
richest of vegetation and padi fields. Rice is the chief ex-
port from this country, as it is also the chief means of filling
the treasury, as there is an export duty on it of nearly four
per cent. The import duties are three per cent, on everything.
The heat was intense, so I returned to my gondola, and went
further up the river, as far as the second King’s palace. The
government is an hereditary monarchy, and there are two
Kings. The first King is the actual monarch, the second
King, who receives about one-third of the revenue and has an
army of 2,000 men, seems to occupy the place of first
counsellor, and he is invariably consulted by the first King
before any decisive step is taken. I had intended also
visiting Wat-Poh, but the heat was now too great to be out
with any comfort, so I returned to the Consulate. One
thing which strikes me on the river is the cleanliness of the
people as regards their own persons, but they are fearfully
filthy in their surroundings. Another is, that nearly all the
boats are rowed by women. I lunched at the Consulate, and
later in the afternoon went out for a drive with Mr. F . At
first we drove along the new road, which runs into the town.
The bridges over the creeks and canals are very awkward,
as they are built high to allow the boats to go underneath,
and are all drawbridges, in case the King should ever require
to go along these canals. It is not considered right that he
should pass underneath a bridge. There are any number of
pariah dogs, which, like those of Constantinople, are the only
scavengers. Judging from the fearful amount of filth one saw,
there are not enough for the work. We drove first through
the principal part of the town. The houses of the poorer
classes inside the walls are laid out in blocks, and were built
at one time by some king or prince for his poor relations.
There are public gardens, but they are in a neglected state.
We passed the barracks, which faces the palace, a large open
space dividing it from the walls of the latter. In the centre of this
there is a grand temple-like building, the home of the lately


arrived white elephant, the sacred beast of this country and
the national emblem—sacred, because they believe in the
transmigration of souls, and those of kings and princes are
supposed to take refuge in the elephant. It is also considered
to be the incarnation of some future Buddha. White this
one was not, but when compared with the ordinary elephant
it was decidedly of a very light colour. People in general
would call it a pinky brown. Working in the streets are
numbers of men, with heavy shackles round their ankles.
Most of these are men who, having gambled away all they
possessed, are become so deep in debt that they have
sold themselves as slaves. Women are bought and sold
here ; a fair average price for a woman is about 45 dollars,
but then there are fancy prices as well. Prisoners here are
treated very badly. Once in, they hardly ever come out again,
and die in great numbers. We next visited the Wat-Siket,
a fine temple, but unfinished. It is of great height, and the
top is reached by a serpentine staircase, from which there
is a most extensive view, and it is a wonderful sight to see a
town built amidst such thick bush. The country is excessively
flat, but the soil is of the richest description. Below us, on
one side, is that portion set apart for cremation. At the
present moment there are hundreds of bodies there unburnt.
They have a superstition that it is wrong to burn or bury
until after the cholera is over, so that the bodies are heaped
up in huge piles, awaiting cremation- The trees surrounding
this place are black with vultures, who feed, and are fed by
the priests upon the bodies, and dogs the same. It is no
uncommon thing for a man to leave the money his funeral
would cost to some charitable object, and his body to feed
the dogs and vultures. There has been intense excitement
here lately. The King lost his favourite wife and child by
drowning, and their cremation cost £60,000. A huge
temporary temple is built in which the ceremony takes place.
The priesthood here are distinguished by wearing only yellow
clothes, and they live entirely on the charity of friends, from
whom they do not scruple to beg. They turn out each morning
with baskets to make their collection for the day. The King is
high priest, and the custom of the country demands that every
male should become a novitiate at 15 years old, and a priest
at 20. On reaching the latter age he has to live in a temple,
of which, in Bangkok alone, there are 150. Presiding over
each temple there is one head priest, and in some temples in
440


Siam there are as many as 600 priests. After a certain age
they can please themselves whether they will remain priests
or not. The boys receive their education at the hands of the
priest, to whom they have been sent by their relations as
attendants. The education of women is regarded as useless.
In Siam there are 5,000,000 of inhabitants, and its area is
about 200,000 square miles. We returned to the Consulate,
and I went on to dress, as I was dining with Mr. Palgrave.
He has been here only a short time, I think, having come
from Bulgaria. He is an author and a great Arabic scholar.
He is one of the few heretics who have been inside the Mosque
at Mecca.
2srd July. —l went down to the Borneo Company before
breakfast to draw money, amongst which I got a quantity of
the old coins. They are called Heals, and are lumps of silver
resembling skulls ; the value is about ten ticals to six dollars.
The modern coinage is the same size as our florin, having on
one side the royal arms of Siam, and on the other the head
of the King. I returned and said “ Good-bye ”to L , and
then went on to the Consulate, from where I picked up the
“Normandy” as she dropped down the river. It was
extremely pleasant sailing down this broad river at easy steam,
but it all ended most unfortunately—we stuck on the bar and
so missed the tide, and had to remain for another 24 hours,
as there is only one tide a day, with a rise and fall of nine feet.
At all events, it is healthier than lying in Bangkok, out of
which I am thankful to get, for I am feeling far from well.
This voyage there is a lady on board and two children. She
has to leave suddenly on account of the health of one of them.
Everybody here seems to suffer from prickly heat, and I
myself am beginning to feel symptoms of it. This bar is a
great hindrance to the trade of Siam, as, even in the highest
tide, the depth of the water rarely exceeds 13 feet. Several
companies have offered to make it navigable at any tide, but
the Siamese will not hear of it, as they look upon that bar as
their chief protection against foreign powers, as no man-of-
war can cross in its present condition. There was nothing
for it but patience, however annoyed one might feel at this
24 hours’ delay. At five o’clock we got over the bar, in
company with a large barque, which was being towed out of
the river.
25 th July. —There is an uncomfortable cross sea, which
prevents me doing anything but lounge about. I am still
441


feeling far from well, and am as yet afraid of taking any
medicine, as there is no telling but that cholera might break
out on board. I have given up my cabin to the lady and her
children, and I sleep either on the deck table or in a
hammock.
26 th July. —Another day out of sight of land. The little
child is very ill. The Bangkok doctor told the mother to let
her drink as much water as she liked. She craves for it all
day long. In her weak condition this seems absurd, so we
have had coojee water made for her, but it is with great diffi-
culty we can get her to drink it. In the middle of the day
we had very heavy rain, and all hands were employed in
catching it, as we are not too well off for Singapore water.
Large tubs of Bangkok water have been purified with Condy’s
fluid for the sailors. The pump of the Singapore water
has been unshipped, so that they cannot get to it. Captain
Cutliffe is a real old salt, a naval reserve man. To-day I
discovered some really good old port, which has been in the
ship for a long time. They say it is a good specific against
cholera !
27 th July. —There always is at night heavy lightning,
sometimes with thunder, and it is most beautiful to watch
the forks lighting up the heavens as one lays on deck. It
certainly was most useful, as during the night we were passing
through the Redang group. This time we took the inside
channel, and after daybreak we saw the land quite close, and
a little later ran along within a quarter of a mile of it, with only
15 feet of water. We passed the mouth of the Tringano river,
just within which is a large native town, presided over by a
rajah. The Rajah of Tringano is an independent prince,
paying no tribute to the King of Siam. All north of him do,
and it is levied in gold dust. In the town there is a conical
hill about 100 feet high, on which is a fort, and where is
displayed the Rajah’s flag. The coast is thickly wooded,
and in the interior is a fine range of mountains. At
eleven o’clock we passed between the island of Pulo
Brala and the North Cape, and we lost sight of land.
The child is very much worse, and looks as if it were
dying. We have been searching the medical books
on board, and have come to the conclusion that it is
suffering from cholera, and that it had it before it came on
board, for the treatment for cholera as prescribed in the ship’s
books coincides with that ordered by the Bangkok doctor.


who, should this turn out to be cholera, deserves hanging.
The child is in great pain, especially in the limbs, which
looks like cholera in the second stage. The poor mother is
in a dreadful state, having also a baby only three months old
to look after. She has a Siamese ayah, but she is next to
useless, and has been sea-sick half her time. Towards
evening we thought the child could not possibly live an hour.
It looked as it lay asleep as if it were dead.
28 th July. —l could not sleep, expecting every moment
to hear the mother’s cry announcing its death. She wandered
up and down the deck with it all night, and towards morning
it fell asleep, and she lay down on deck with it. I think, or
at all events hope, chat that was the turning point, for this
morning it looks better. We expected to bave sighted the
Island of Tioman at three o’clock this morning, but at seven
o’clock there was no land in sight, and the captain was at a
loss to know where we were, as we had been steaming 85-
knots on our course all night. However, we sighted the
island at nine o’clock, so there must have been a very strong
current against us. We again took the inside channel, and
coasted along its westerly side. It is about eleven miles in
length, and covered with thick timber. The island is com-
posed of lofty mountains, the highest of which rises to the
elevation of 3,444 feet, and can be seen in clear weather sixty
miles off. On its south end are two remarkable peaks, called
from their shape the Assss’ Ears (Chula Naga); they stand
on one base, and rise almost perpendicularly from the sea to
the height of 2,525 and 2,294 feet respectively. There is now
no chance of our getting in to-night.
29 th July , —At four o’clock this morning we sighted
the Singapore Light, and before eight o’clock we were at
anchor just off Jackson’s Pier. Lying alongside of us was a,
steamer, crammed with pilgrims, leaving to-day for Jedda.
There is also in port the “Jedda,” which was so disgracefully
deserted by her captain and officers not long ago, near Aden,
when crowded with pilgrims. She was supposed to have
sprung a leak, but on after inspection it only turned out to be
something wrong with the machinery. I again took up my
quarters at the Hotel de L’Europe. I have since heard that
we had the closest shave of being quarantined for forty days*
owing to three Chinamen having died on board of cholera on
our way down. Of these deaths I knew nothing, and should
it be true I can only say lam glad I did not. The child, I


am glad to say, has wonderfully improved —had it died our
fate would have been certain. Fancy forty long weary days
on a quarantine island. Could anything be more dreary ?
My luggage left behind at Batavia has arrived safely. The
Maharajah has arrived from Java, and Mr. H is staying
here. I called on Mr. C. S , and he asked me to dine
with them to-night, and also to go with him this afternoon at
five o’clock to see a boat race, so punctually at five o’clock
I turned up at Jackson’s Pier. He acted as starter, and we
had the police steam launch, “Mata-Mata” (eyes), but it is
said that the motto for the police here ought to be, “ They
have eyes and see not.”
2,oth July. —l saw Mr. H this morning, and have
arranged to go over to Johore with him this afternoon. We
started soon after tiffin, and drove across the island for about
iqmiles. It is one of extreme beauty, especially the latter part,
which winds about through beautiful timber. There is no
particularly high land, but undulating ground and small hills,
most of which are covered with jungle. There are large
patches laid bare by gambier plantations, that being one of the
largest exports from this part of the world. We changed
horses half way. The Maharajah is at present staying at
his house on the island of Singapore, and we had intended
calling on our way over, but before reaching it, we met him
driving into town. He seemed very anxious about the cholera in
Siam, and I was glad to be able to tell him of its rapid decrease.
I have never before met a native who is such a gentleman,
and about whom there is but one opinion. Everybody likes
him. He asked me to join the party going from Johore to
some tea plantations, and for which he is sending a steamer
round. By this means I shall have an opportunity of seeing a
little of the interior of Johore. The view of the Straits was
perfect. They look exactly like a large lake, so landlocked
are they. A steam launch was waiting to convey us across to
the Istana (palace) of the Maharajah, which is built facing
the water on the opposite shore. It is not a handsome building
to look at, being without any architectural design, but no
doubt built with the idea of coolness. The whole front is made
up of Venetian shutters. Facing the landing stage, and
approached by a long flight of steps, is the Audience Hall, a
separate building. To the right of this stands the Istana.
The entrance is by a marble paved hall, which leads directly
-through to the ordinary carriage entrance. Afghan guards


march up and down in front and rear. To the right of the
hall is the dining-room, large and handsome, paved with
highly-polished marble, in which everything is distinctly
reflected. To the left are the Maharajah’s private apartments.
Across the carriage entrance is a large billiard room with two
tables. The main entrance, and the one only used on state
occasions, leads over the billiard-room, and is of large extent,
built entirely of marble, and leads direct to the second storey.
The first room is the ball-room, and that opens into a most
magnificent drawing-room, and from right and left of this
lead off two corridors. The one to the right contains the
Maharajah’s and Maharanee’s private apartments. These are
most comfortably furnished, all the furniture having been sent
out from England. The rooms to the left are those portioned
off as the bachelors’ quarters. The main corridor has been
widened by taking away from the bedrooms which line either
side, but open out on to galleries facing outward, and it has been
furnished as a library. At right angles to this, and at the end
of the Istana, is the so-called sitting-room, three sides of
which are open windows, and into which the two galleries
lead. The view over the Straits is truly beautiful. Staying
at the Istana are several other men, so that we are a very
jolly party.
31 st July. —After lunch we went across in the launch to
Mr. H ’s house, which is a little lower down the Straits
on the opposite side. It has the best of situations. It is a
large bungalow, buried away amidst virgin forest, and standing
on high ground overlooking the Straits. Here there is a
lovely sandy beach, whereas nearly everywhere else are
mangroves. He has built a large bathing-place, protected
from alligators by a stout fence. These brutes abound here.
They have been known to take a Chinaman who was walking
along a plank from a ship to the shore. “ The Louisa II.”
arrived this morning, so on our way over we stopped and put
our luggage on board. We had intended starting this
afternoon, but on our return after our visit to Mr. H ’s,
they informed us that the donkey-pump was out of order, and
that it would take some time to repair—they said they would
be ready to start at midnight. We were going to these
plantations under the guidance of Mr. W , an old
Ceylon coffee-planter, who is now here managing the
Maharajah’s and several other estates, and also coffee-
planting on his own account. We therefore went down to
445


his house for dinner, so as to be ready to start when required.
It had been raining, and the “ Louisa II.” did hot look too
comfortable, so some of our party cried off, and we were now
reduced to three. The river up which the plantations are is
about ioo miles from here, along the Malay coast, in the
Straits of Malacca, a case of about 12 hours, so that should it
be rough—which in this monsoon it is very likely to be—we
shall get a tremendous knocking about. After dinner, we turned
in with our clothes on, so as to be ready to start immediately
the steamer should turn up. To-day I tasted durian, and I
have never in all my existence tasted anything half so
■disgusting. The smell of it is ten times worse than the most
loathsome drain, and the taste is even stronger. How people
■can like it as they do is a wonder.
Ist August. —The steamer never turned up, and on sending
to enquire the reason, they coolly informed us that the pilot,
feeling indisposed, did not care to turn out at night. This is
most annoying, and I feel sure that the Maharajah will be in
a fearful rage, as now the expedition has to be given up, Mr.
H not daring to risk it, as he is leaving in three days
for England by the Messageries mail. It was principally on
his account that the expedition was got up, as he is interested
in a coffee estate in Johore, and had written a long time ago
to the Maharajah about fixing the time. This is the month
of Ramazan, one of the great Mahommedan fasts. They may
not eat, or even swallow their saliva, from sunrise to sunset,
but make up for it by eating at night, so that in the daytime
they are as stupid as owls. After breakfast, I went over to
the Istana, and waited there until Mr. H was ready, as I
had decided to return to Singapore with him to-day. There
was a large party there, who had come round from Singapore
in a small steamer to see the Istana, it being a bank holiday.
After they had gone we started, and reached Singapore in
time for dinner.
2nd August. —We now go in for tremendous fruit feasts in
our rooms, instead of breakfasts, and it is extraordinary the
number of different fruits that there are. This is now the
height of the fruit season. The mangosteen I have already
described. Next comes the mango, almost as delicious.
Besides these, there are sour-sop, a fruit that cuts something
like a pine apple, whitish in colour, with large black seeds ;
pulasan and rambutan, two fruits differing only in their outside
skins. They look something like an edible chestnut, only of
446


a deep red colour, and not quite as large. The fruit itself is
composed of five or six different segments, each containing a
small stone,and of most luscious, jelly-like substance. Langsat,
ranbei, and dukoo have a very much similar inside, but rather
tarter; the outer skin is of a dull buff, and is smooth. They
differ only in their growth. The two former ones grow in
long bunches, hanging from the underneath side of the boughs;
the latter grows in the same way, but in single fruit.
Champedas and nangka are two species of jack fruit, a sort of
durian growing out of the boughs and stem of the tree.
Then there is a small fruit, at first hard, but when rolled in
the hand it becomes soft, and tastes exactly like a gooseberry.
I had intended going on to Hong Kong by the P. and 0.,
which leaves here in ten days, and spend the intervening time
with Mr. H , at his house on the Straits, amusing myself
pig shooting, &c.; but to-day I received the following telegram
from Tim : “ Hurry —grand scheme,” so that I must now go by
the French mail, leaving here on Friday next. Tim had
telegraphed from Port Darwin, so that he is now on his way
to Hong Kong. The hours for calling here are eleven to one
o’clock, so this morning I drove out to call on Mrs.
C. S , and on my way there stopped at the photographer’s
and got my photos of Siam. Mr. C. S asked me to dine
with them to-night. After tiffin at the hotel, I walked up
with Mr. H , one of the commissariat officers here, to
call on Captain B , who is in command of the Artillery
during Major H ’s leave of absence. I heard from him
that the Major had been obliged to stop at Gibraltar on
account of his health, but that he had had no further news.
The view over the town from Fort Canny is the best of
Singapore. In front of the quarters is the signalling flagstaff,
the lower portion of which is of iron, and supports an
extremely bright and large light, acting as the lighthouse for
Singapore. We all three returned to the hotel to inspect a
large map Mr. H has of Java, as Captain B and
Mr. H are going over there on Friday next for a short
trip. I have been able to give them their sailing orders for
the east end of Java. Chinamen here are sometimes cheeky
enough to cross right in front of you, as you are walking.
One did so to-day, as we were coming down, and I think he
repented it, for the other two kicked him well. H
had a stick also, so he came badly out of it. This is the only
way to treat these brutes. I drove out to dinner with the
447


C. S s, and met there a Mr. L , who is just on the-
point of starting for Borneo. After dinner we had a rubber
at whist.
3 rd August. —After tiffin Mr. H drove me out in his
dog-cart to see Mount Victoria, one of the Maharajah’s
estates, about three miles from Singapore. In the evening
we dined with the French Consul here. He has a beautiful
house overlooking the harbour, on the road to Tanjong Pagar.
The rooms were still gorgeously decorated in honour of the
fourteenth of July. The punkah was particularly pretty,
being the tricolor with “R. F.” on a shield in the centre.
One thing I noticed at dinner was that we had different
plates for the sweets course. They were of fanciful design.
After dinner we played a new sort of French race game, and
had immense fun.
4 th August. —Early this morning, a large party of Siamese
arrived on their way to England, and I was awakened by the
noise of many cats. On looking out of my door, I saw a
regular menagerie—cats, birds, and monkeys. I soon, how-
ever, had these removed to more distant quarters.
448


CHAPTER IX.
A Traveller’s Life Summed up —Afloat Again—Coaching in Cochin
China—A Chinese Yankee—Hanging out at Hong Kong ; A Curious
Coincidence—The Terrors of Travelling—The Sacred Mountain of
Japan—Our Taste of Japanese Tea—Jaunting in Japan—Griffis’
Opinion of its Dear Little Damsels—A Real Dolce-far-niente
Inside Japan—Garden of Eden-like Simplicity of the Natives—
Writing up Japanese History—Their Idea of the Origin of
Species—A Pretty Story for Orthodox Barbarians—An Iconoclastic
Emperor—The Unsophisticated Japanese and their Tricks—How
Christians Loved One Another Three Centuries Ago—We Sail to
Shanghai and Pick our Way to Pekin—The Origin of the
Pigtaij—Feats with Feet and Tight Lacing—Cologne-like Smells
in Chinese Towns —Entry into Pekin—The Sights of this Extra-
ordinary City—A Run to the Great Wall—A Chinese Execution—
Tim twice Attempts to get into “Heaven’s Temple” and Fails—
Our Return to Tien-Tsin.
s th August.
HAD accepted an invitation to go over and stay
BE gffij with Mr. H until the departure of the English
yji mail, leaving about the 12th, but a telegram from
Tim, dated the Ist, from Port Darwin, in the fol-
lowing words: “ Hurry —grand scheme,” made me decide to
leave by the Messageries to-day. A traveller’s life seems
made up of “ How do you do’s ” and “ Good-bye’s.” We
sailed punctually at six p.m., and Mr. H drove me
down in his cart to the Borneo Company’s wharf, where the
“ Oxus ” was lying. I was well off, having as a fellow-
passenger Col. P , whom I had met at the fort. Besides
ourselves, there were only two youths, and a Mr. and Mrs.
L , not a crowded ship. She is one of the finest of the
fleet, and commanded by Captain Rapatel, to whom I had a
letter of introduction from the Count, who, by the way, came
down the harbour with us, and was loudly cheered by the
officers of the vessel on leaving. He nearly came to grief
getting into his launch, and was only saved from a ducking
by being bodily dragged on board.
2 G


bth August. —What a treat to be once more in the hands
of a French cook; and I could wish that this trip were going
to be a longer one, were it at any other time than in the
typhoon season. Mr. and Mrs. L are a fund of amuse-
ment, and can be drawn without much trouble. I think
“Tom” has as much as he can manage. “Tom, you
know, was asked to go elephant shooting in Ceylon, but
we had to refuse, as he had not an elephant rifle.
We have got rifles for tigers, deer, and such like;
and then again, the mosquitoes were so bad that I
could not possibly have gone.” We asked her whether she
had not got a rifle to suit them, as we had heard that they
were so big, that up there they used revolvers to kill them.
I was showing her a chart of the world to-day, and she, point-
ing vaguely to the centre of Africa, said, “Ah! that’s where
Tom wants to go shooting.” She has brought two durians
on board, and had them in her bath-room, until ordered out
by the commissaire. She tasted one to-day and sickened
us as well as herself. Her definition of them was “ Putrid
onions and gin.” She smokes cigarettes, drinks B. and S.,
and wears diamonds in the daytime. So calm is it that the
captain, who is a first-class amateur photographer, has been
amusing himself by taking some photos. He took a splendid
one of a man fast asleep. Fancy, never daring to go to sleep
for fear of being shot J He tells me that Mr. and Mrs. L ,
although they have come with him from Galle, have not yet
spoken to him. The cabins are deliciously cool, and nicely
fitted up ; instead of hot and stuffy berths built into the ship,
more resembling old Scotch beds, they have light iron cots,
two in a cabin, and not one over the other, so that the man
who has the privilege of having the upper one is within two
inches of your nose, if you happen to be in the lower one, but
at right angles, so that both berths are equally cool. There
is also a washing basin for each. Often have I had to retire
to the bath-room rather than wash after some men, with
whom it has been my bad luck to share a cabin. To the very
smallest item this vessel is fitted up regardless of expense.
She is of great strength, having iron decks covered with teak-
wood.
yth August. —Sunday, and nobody knew it. At n o’clock
to-day we passed Pulo Condoze, an island (Pulo Malay) of
considerable extent, and used by the French as a convict
station. At six o’clock we again sighted land. This time it
450


was the coast of Cochin China, low-lying, with the exception
of Cap St. Jacques, which stands at the entrance to the
river, some miles up which is Saigon, the French settlement.
We had hoped to have reached there to-night, but the bear-
ings of the engines had got heated early in the day, and that
had delayed us for about two hours. As we approached the
land we had a heavy thunderstorm, with most vivid lightning.
At nine o’clock we anchored just inside the mouth of the
river.
B th August. —We got under weigh as soon as the tide
would allow us, and steamed (8.30) slowly up the river.
With the exception of the Cape, there is no rising ground
to be seen, the whole being one dead level. The river, which
in places is quite two miles broad, winds about in the most
extraordinary manner, and we saw Saigon quite an hour before
we arrived there, which we did at 11.30. Under an agree-
ment with the Government, the mail boats may not leave
here under 24 hours. The heat in the middle of the day was
too great to go ashore, and heavy rain coming on soon after
lunch we were kept on board until four o’clock. However,
time passed pleasantly enough in watching the river traffic,
which resembled somewhat that at Bangkok. The boats
are rowed gondola fashion, and mostly by women, but are
not so neatly made. The natives are a decided mixture
between Malay and Chinese; both men and women wear
their hair the same, tied up in an elaborate knot behind, with
a silver pin run through it. The dress of the men is a flowing
pair of trousers and a light jacket. The women wear the
same, but with the addition of a long garment, which is
open up each side to above the waist; around their necks is a
large silver bangle. Even the best can lay but little claim to
beauty. We were lying alongside the Company’s wharf, but
to get to the main portion of the town, which is within a
stone’s throw, we had to take a boat, as there is a small
river, which is as yet unbridged. We landed at the Quay
Commerciale, where we hired two small Victorias, drawn
by the tiniest of ponies, and drove out to the Jardin des
Plantes. They are prettily laid out, but nothing to speak
of. In them there are a few houses, containing some rare
birds; and another in which are two of the finest tigers I
have ever seen. We returned to the Hotel Fdve, and
finding dinner was not until seven o’clock, went shopping.
The principal things to be got here are silver ornaments,


and inlaid wood from Tonquin, and of which we all got
specimens. Some of the cabinets were truly ingenious, and
remarkably cheap, but as I shall in all probability return by
the French mail, I have put off purchasing one until then.
The town is laid out in Boulevards, lined with trees, but
directly you are away from the main streets, there is an
appearance of untidiness, no doubt owing to the rapid growth
here. Chinese, of course, abound, and it is most amusing work
talking “pigeon” French to them. At the hotel we had a
capital dinner, and then returned to our vessel, but not to
sleep, for mosquitoes had already taken possession, and the
noise of the coolies at work, discharging and taking in cargo,
was enough to render sleep impossible, even to the most case-
hardened. Right under my cabin window was a hole, through
which, with many shouts, they were drawing out huge iron
bars, and this being done, in their place they took in large
loads of sacks of rice. I tried the saloon but was chivied out
by the mosquitoes. We were generally amused by Mrs.
L , whose constant cry of “Tom, Tom! there is a
mosquito in my cabin ! ” must have kept him well occupied
during the whole of the night. He now goes by the name
of Lord Slippers, as he has never yet been seen in anything
else.
gth August. —Mr. L and I went ashore in the morning,
I to make some more small purchases, and he to get a
butterfly net, as they have been suddenly seized with a
desire to catch the butterflies, of which there are some great
beauties. We returned for dejeuner at 9.30. At eleven
o’clock, the tide suiting, we got under weigh, but just as we
were off Cap St. Jacques, our bearings got heated, and we
had to come to anchor. During the afternoon we had some
severe squalls accompanied by the heaviest rain. It was
6.30 before we were again under weigh, but by that time all
rain and wind had passed away, and after dinner we had the
most lovely moon. We have now a goodly number of Chinese
deck passengers, and they have made for themselves some
comfortable-looking tents out of strong reed mats. We have
as a saloon passenger a Chinaman who has been for ten
years in the States, and it is most amusing to hear him talking
with a strong Yankee accent.
loth August. —To-day has been pleasantlypassed in coasting
along the shores of Cochin China—rugged and wild moun-
tains, with a coast-line of barren rocks and islands, and deep


indentations, but all of various purple and blues. One
mountain had on its very summit an extraordinary pinnacle of
rock. The heat has been intense, but a heavy thunderstorm
at night somewhat cooled the atmosphere. They evidently
thought we were in for a severe storm, as all ports were ordered
to be closed. Towards sunset it did not look promising
ahead. Clouds of the deepest blackness, lighted up by
seemingly continuous flashes of lightning, were warnings
enough. However, we ran through it in a very short time,
and had a night of the deepest calm.
II thAugiist. —We amuse ourselves byplaying a sort of quoits
—a square board, marked off into nine squares, each numbered,
and on to them you throw round indiarubber discs. The
extent of our stakes is limited to ten cents a game. In the
evening we began with whist, and ended with penny “ nap.”
Accounts are beginning to get complicated, as everybody
seems to owe everybody else some small number of cents.
12 th August. —The homeward-bound P. and 0. passed last
night, so I have again missed another mail. We arrived in
Saigon only a few hours after the departure of the French mail.
We have on board a man in charge of the mail who has been
christened “ The Volcano,” from the disgusting habit he has
of clearing his throat. Unfortunately for us, the eruptions
generally take place during meals. To-day, our run has
been 312 miles, the quickestdone since leaving Singapore. At
sunset we were off the Great Ladrones, of which I was able to
get a sketch, but in noway to give the effect on the wonderful
■colouring. After this, we passed amidst innumerable islands,
through which, thanks to the moon, we were able to find our
way, otherwise we should have had to anchor. Hong Kong
island at last came in sight, easily distinguished from
the rest by the lights upon it, mostly those from the
houses on the Peak, as the town itself was on the opposite
•side to the way we approached it. When we turned the
•corner, and passed between Green Island, upon which there
is a light, we got a beautiful view of the town. The hillside
was one blaze of lights, as well as the harbour, from the
many vessels lying here, although at this, the typhoon season,
there are fewer than usual. It is a time when it is advisable
to avoid the China seas, but travellers cannot always be
choosers. It was nearly eleven o’clock before we were fairly
at anchor, and late as it was, I determined to get ashore, as I
was anxious to see if Tim had arrived. I went direct to the-


Hong Kong Hotel, and sure enough there he was. What as-
tounding luck! He had arrived this morningfrom Australia in
the “Menmuir”!!!! Three months parted, with arrangements
to meet in Hong Kong as near one another as possible, and
to arrive exactly the same day! How we yarned! It was
almost three o’clock before we turned in. We have one
immense room together, furnished as a sitting-room as well
as a bedroom.
13 th August. —lt was not until late in the afternoon that we
could make up our mind which was the better route, either by
the “ Oxus” to Shanghai, and thence to Japan, or direct to
Yokohama by the “ Volga,” both of which leave to-morrow.
A typhoon is one of those things that no man can understand,
although some of the old skippers are getting very cunning
in being able to dodge them, provided they have sea room.
The “ Oxus” we discovered will just miss the Japan mail, so
if we went by her we should have to wait a week in Shanghai,
a thing not to be wished for at this time of the year, on
account of the heat. How strange and novel everything
seems here ; jinriki-shas and sedan chairs the only means of
locomotion! We tiffined at the Bank with Mr. R ,
the chief justice here, to whom Tim had letters, and
afterwards we went off to look at the “Volga,” and decided
to go by her. She is one of the old Messageries boats, of
about 1,500 tons. Tim then went up to catch the Governor,
who is down from the Peak to-day on business. He has a
letter to him from Sir E. J. Reed, M.P., and we wanted his
advice as to the best month to go up to Pekin, as we have
decided to try and reach that city. Nearly everybody at
this time of the year lives up on the top of the Peak, directly
above the town, about 1,700 feet above sea level. We had
promised to dine with Mr. R ,at his house there. You
are carried up in sedan chairs by four coolies —-no small drag.
One could not help feeling sorry for these coolies. It seemed
against the grain to be carried about by a fellow-creature,
bringing him down to the level of a beast of burden. Half way
up, one of our men showed signs of distress, being decidedly
broken-winded. We fortunately met some return coolies,
and made one of them exchange. By going up to the Peak,
one of the best views of Hong Kong harbour is obtained. It
is indescribably lovely, having a beauty entirely of its own.
I have never yet seen any place which it in the least resembles..
The harbour is filled with shipping, and surrounded by rugged


hills of intense colouring —the brightest greens and the richest
reds of sandstone rocks, all, as it were, resting on a bed of
the deepest blue. On reaching the top, we had a grand view
over both sides of the island, and a rich sunset added much
to its grandeur. We had a capital dinner, and got back in
time to pack and go on board, as the “Volga” sails at
daylight. Our departure from the hotel was a most extra-
ordinary one, as it took ten coolies to carry our baggage to
the wharf. On our telling our boy that we were ready, our
room suddenly seemed alive with Chinamen, each armed with
a bamboo pole and sling. It was a comical sight. The
French Consul for Canton, a fellow-passenger in the “Oxus,”
came in to my room to wish me bon voyage. In conversa-
tion with him I found out that he was formerly the French
Consul in Manchester, and a great friend of the G s.
On saying good-bye, he gave me his photograph.
14 th August. —We were under weigh long before I was
awake, so tired was I after my excitement and exertions of
yesterday, and we had passed through the beautiful Ly-ee-
moon passage before I was on deck.
* * * # *
15 th and 16 th August. —Passed through the Straits of
Formosa without sighting land. Rough sea.
1 Jth August. —This afternoon I burst a small blood vessel
in my hand, and with some difficulty it was stopped bleeding
by pressure. Fortunately there is a doctor on board. During
the operation I turned deadly sick, and was only stopped from
fainting by application of brandy internally, vinegar externally,
and the roof of my head nearly blown off by spirits of am-
monia. At five o’clock this morning the doctor came into
my cabin with a mixture for me to take, and I was forbidden
to eat anything until 12 o’clock.
18 th August. —Passed a volcano at about n o’clock; this is
a mere cone standing out of the sea. It is still slightly active.
The peak was buried in white clouds, but steam was issuing
from many places on its slopes. At mid-day we were in the
Straits of Van Dieman and off Cape , of which I got a
sketch, with little Fuji Yama in the distance. The name of
the straits show that Tasman must have been here. How
different would have been our colonies in the South had he
only taken possession, instead of merely christening the places
he discovered, and then being content. New Holland, now
455


called Australia, New Zealand and Van Dieman’s Land, now
called Tasmania, would all have been Dutch possessions.
To-day we passed the Pacific mail boat “ Occidental,”
bound for Hong Kong, and Holt’s boat “ Agamemnon ” for
Shanghai.
igtk August. —Where we are at present is. as a rule,fearfully
rough, so that we may indeed think ourselves lucky in having
a sea as smooth as glass. It was here that this vessel met with
a typhoon on her last trip down to Hong Kong, so that really
travelling in her now is exactly like travelling by railway
immediately after a bad railway accident—the odds are in our
favour. The worst portion is opposite to the entrance to the
Straits, leading to Kobe, where, as a rule, there is a big sea,
caused by the current meeting the tide. There is a saying
that “ He who travels courts a thousand deaths,” and after
being in Siam during cholera, and in these seas in the
typhoon season, it comes rather vividly before one. Some
say, “Just one’s luck.” Is it all luck ? Is it not something
more? There is no mistake now that we are near some port,
from the number of vessels about, and this afternoon it has
been quite one man’s occupation saluting first one and then
another. J apanese junks there are, too, in any quantity, with
their huge square sails and queer flags. We had hoped, as
the day was clear, to catch sight of Fuji Yama before sunset,
as at twelve o’clock our run had been 295 miles, and we had
only 240 to Yokohama, from which Fuji Yama is distant
eighty miles, and visible at a distance of 140, but the sun set
without our seeing this great sacred mountain of Japan.
I don’t know when I have enjoyed a voyage so much as I
have done this. There is nobody on board who can speak
English, except three young Japanese, who are returning
from England, one having been attached to the Japanese
Legation, and are wisely travelling second-class. It seems
to me there is no difference, and they have the advantage of
position, in case of heavy weather, in being amidships. In
the saloon French alone has been the language, and I was
surprised, for I am no French scholar, far from it, how when
obliged, one seems to remember words that, if you were asked
casually, you would not. Then, no doubt, even in seven days,
the amount one learns in this way is most extraordinary.
20 th August. —I was on deck before sunrise, and got my
first view of Fuji Yama. Its wonderful cone, which rises to
the height of 12,300 feet, hung as it were ’twixt earth and
456


heaven. Its base and the surrounding country was buried
in the morning mist —already the yet unrisen sun had begun
to tinge in delicate colours its very peak, the stars still glitter
in the heavens, and the dead stillness of the night has not
yet passed away. This is the sacred mountain of Japan, and
about which every writer has gone into such ecstacies.
Perhaps it was on that account that I was a little dis-
appointed, especially having so lately seen such mountains
as Mount Cook, Egmont, Ruapehu, and the lovely mountains
of Java. The morning broke, and on our seaward side was
the island of Oshima, soon after passing which we entered
the Bay of Yedo, lined on all sides by cliffs, covered with thick
foliage, through which in places the red sandstone peeped,
backed by ranges of mountains in the blue hazy distance.
The surface of the bay was covered with junks, with their
huge square sails, and man}' other smaller native craft,
occupied principally in fishing. Suddenly, Yokohama is
before us, and in a few minutes more, without any fuss, we
are alongside our allotted buoy. Directly we are at rest
innumerable boats surround us —steam launches there are,
too, from each of the principal hotels. At the custom-house
■we had a great deal of trouble, as they insisted upon open-
ing everything, and several little curios I had they refused
to pass. Formerly, the customs for travellers was a mere
form. At the Grand Hotel, where we took up our quarters,
we found Mr. and Miss B , Australian friends of mine,
who have been travelling since last February. Yoko-
hama is the offshoot, if I may so call it, from Kanagawa, the
original settlement selected as a treaty port, but abandoned
in 1859 as being inconvenient, from its situation on the
Tokaido, at a time when collisions between foreigners and
the armed retainers of the daimios passing to and fro along
this great high road was a matter of apprehension. It may
be divided into three distinct divisions —(1.) The settlement
which contains the business portion of the town, shops,
hotels, &c. The street, running along the water’s edge is
called the Bund, protected from the water by a stout stone
wall, and topped by posts and chains. Along this are the
hotels, clubs, and dwelling-houses. There are no docks, but
■each large company has what is called a “ Hatoba,” or landing
■stage. Main Street contains the principal shops, stores, and
■offices, the Japanese Imperial Post Office, Telegraph Office,
and Town Hall. Besides these there are large “ hongs,” and


tea-firing godowns, where the tea is “ fired ” or dried in deep
tin basins over charcoal fires, previous to being packed for ex-
port. (2.) The Bluff, where are situate the principal dwelling-
houses, racecourse, rifle-range, and athletic grounds; but
as we did not visit it I will leave a description of it until later.
(3-) The native town contains two main streets, namely.
Honcho Dori, andßenten Dori, in which are situate the prin-
cipal shops, silk stores, &c. The smaller streets are lined
with small shops, in which every conceivable thing can be
bought. They are of the gayest description, being crowded
with people, and every house decorated with flags and huge
sign-boards. A drive through this portion of the town on our
first afternoon amused us vastly, besides which it was my
first experience of jinriki-shas (man-power carriage), or as
somebody has facetiously named them, “ Pull-man cars.” It
is a baby carriage on adult wheels, being exactly like a large
perambulator, with small shafts and minus the front wheel.
Their origin was placing a sedan chair on wheels, and they
were first used in Tokio. They are rapidly spreading, and
there is no doubt in time they will find their way down to
Singapore. After driving through the town, we visited the
tea-houses on the hill, each presided over by more than one
charming little Japanese girl, who came out and tried all they
could to tempt us in. At last we were tempted by one more
charming than the rest, and went in, taking off our boots
before entering, and tasted our first cup of Japanese tea. It
is brought in cups hardly bigger than thimbles, and a tea-pot
that is absurd to look at. It is very weak and of a light
green colour. At dinner we made up a table with the B s,
and as Tim has come direct from Sydney, he could give them
all the latest news. It is grandfather and granddaughter
travelling together, and he must indeed be a wonderful old
man, as he told me, not having taken a dose of physic in the
last twenty years. They have been in Pekin, and their
descriptions of it have made us both wild to go there.
21 st August. —Tim presented his letter to Mr. W , and
he has kindly put our names down for the United Club, and
asked us both to dinner to-night. The heat here is too much,
being 96° in the shade, so that we have decided upon leaving
Yokohama and getting up into the hills, and as we are both
rather out of sorts, Tim from his liver and I from what the
doctor calls “ land sickness,” we have been advised to take
a round, going first to Kosatsu, famous for its waters, and.


return by Nikko, famous for its temples. Tim went up
this morning by train to Tokio, to see Mr. H ,• to whom
he has letters. Before leaving Sydney Tim met two men
who had come down from Japan, and they gave him the name
of the servant they had, and strongly advised our getting hold
of him if possible. We were lucky, on making enquiries this
morning, "to find him in the hotel and without an engagement,
having just returned from a trip up country. Hakodati is
his name, and he talks English well, and understands every-
thing you say to him. We at once engaged him at 25 dollars
a month. People here tell us that he and one other are the
two best servants in Japan. Of course his wages are high, but
it is what he always receives. An ordinary boy can be got
from 8 dollars to 10 dollars, but then you want more than an
ordinary boy when you have to depend upon him for every-
thing, and Hakodati has a character for honesty, which
is everything with the Japanese. The difference between
them and the Chinaman is this —both will squeeze you,
but a China boy has a conscience, and the ordinary
Japanese boys have not. We had an extremely nice dinner,
at which we met Mr. R , the judge here, Mr. S ,
an American, and the proprietor of the Club. He has
a history. He is an Italian by birth, and began life in the
Crimea as a photographer attached to the 17th Lancers. He
followed the fortunes of the regiment to China, and was
present at the sacking of the Summer Palace at Pekin. After
that he settled down in Yokohama as a photographer, but since
then has become one of the leading merchants. Mr. R
knew the Brasseyswhen they were out here in the “Sunbeam,”
and since then he has been home and paid them a visit. He
quite refuted the oft-told yarn that Mrs., now Brassey,
did not write “ The Voyage of the Sunbeam ” herself, but
that it was her governess who did so. He himself had a
large quantity of her manuscript entrusted to him to post,
and then again there was no governess on board. He told
me one curious thing Lady Brassey does, and that is to show
her guests her own bedroom. It is one of the show-rooms of
the house, and I am the happy possessor of a photograph of
it. The bed is fit for a queen, and the toilet service also.
When staying at Hurstmonceaux, I drove over to see the place,
and on my way through Battle got an order at the stationer’s
there. I was not the only visitor, for there were numbers of
other traps, but on driving up to the hall door, who should be


there in the hall but Mr. and Mrs. Brassey and friends. This
was too much for me, so I got into my dog-cart and drove away
without seeing anything, and contented myself with buying
photographs in Battle, bedroom included. During dinner, we
also had a discussion on the two latest books published
about Japan, Miss Bird’s “ Unbeaten Tracks,” and Sir E. J.
Reed’s “Japan.” With regard to the former, the opinion
seemed to be that it was well written, rather exaggerated, but
gave a most unfair idea of Japan, as she went out of her way
to hunt up places where real discomforts were to be found,
and should there have been two ways of reaching a place she
would always go by the “unbeaten track,” and then groan at
everything being so filthy and uncomfortable. They are also
fearfully down upon Sir E. J. Reed for having so entirely
severed himself, when here, from the European population.
They call him “charlatan.” He saw, however, the Japanese
side of life as few men have ever done. Why they made so
much of him is a wonder, except that he was the first. His
description of his travels is interesting, but of little use to the
ordinary traveller, as he saw everything couleur-de-rose.
There is one curious thing here, that with the exception of
the barbers, nobody seems to use punkahs, but at dinner
everybody is provided with a fan. They are most necessary
things, and lam never without one. The costumes of the
women are extremely pretty, which is more than can be said
of that of the men. The dress is a kimono, which is a sort
of loose dressing-gown, folding over, leaving the neck bare,
and round the waist they wear the obi, which is a broad sash,
tied in an elaborate bow behind, the tying of which is part
of a girl’s education. Underneath the kimono they wear a
gay-coloured petticoat reaching to the knee, which peeps out
prettily when they walk. After marriage this garment is left
off, and there is a native proverb, “ Love leaves with the red
petticoat.” Their hands and feet are bare, and are both
delicately small. Men and women use the same foot gear,
which are either straw sandals or clogs, which are kept on
by a thong passing up between the first and second toes and
then dividing into two spreads out over the instep. The
dress of the better class of men is a kimono with a silk
sash, from which hangs their constant companion, pipe and
tobacco-case. Neither sex wear anything on their heads,
except in the heat of the sun, when a coolie wears a huge
hat, made of reeds, at least three feet in circumference, which


is fastened on by two loops, which come down below the ears
and are then tied together by a piece of string. The head-dress
of the women is most elaborate, especially that of the younger
girls. In the men it differs, as some are adopting more
modern fashions, but the coolie shaves his head along the
crown and slightly on each side, then the hair is gathered on
the top of the head, highly covered with cosmetique, tied at the
roots, and brought over the shaven portion in the shape of a
rounded queue, cut square at the end. Griffis, in describing
that part of the population whom foreigners call “coolies,”
says —“ Two arms, two legs, a head and trunk, when added
together in an Asiatic country, do not produce the same sum
that such factors would yield in America. With us, a man
is a man. In Asiatic countries he is a wheelbarrow, a beast
of burden, a political cipher, a being who exists for the sake
of his master or the Government.” The men wear old unlined
cotton coats and straw sandals as their winter dress. In
summer their wardrobe consists of straw sandals and a rag
around their loins, in all about “36 linear inches of decency.”
From our bedroom window in the hotel, which overlooks the
harbour, we have an ever-moving scene, men-of-war, mail
steamers, and large trading vessels are lying at anchor, and
there is daily some departure or fresh arrival. The native
boats, which are all unpainted, are propelled by sculling, and
not rowing, the boatman or sendo standing and moving his
arms at right angles to the boat. The oar is made up of two
pieces of wood, spliced in the middle, and fastened by a
lashing near the splice to an outrigged pivot. The coolies
attached to shops, merchants, or to Government wear their
master’s name or their occupation in large Japanese characters
on the back of their upper garment. The servants in the
hotel are dressed in tight-fitting black things, from their toes
to their necks, and with black hair also ; they give one the
appearance of being waited on by ancient executioners. The
streets of Yokohama are filled with jinriki-shas, the price
for which is only ten cents an hour, and should you wish for
speed two coolies are employed, one either pushing behind,
or fastened on in front, tandem fashion. They take it turn
and turn about in the shafts. By day they carry a little flag,
their licensed number, and by night a lantern, making the
streets look as if inhabited by so many Will-o’-the-wisps.
The carts are also drawn by coolies —when heavily laden by
f our^_w ho keep up the most extraordinary grunting. To


travel in the country it is necessary to have passports, so
to-day we applied for them through the British Legation.
22nd August. —l have done next to nothing to-day, feelingfar
from well. It is certainly hard lines, after passing through all
the pleasures (?) of mal de mer, and having after two years
travelling almost overcome it, to suddenly start being laid
up with mal deter re after landing from a voyage. Which,
I wonder, is the worse ? At the present moment I would
say the latter. Tim missed seeing Mr. H yesterday,
so to-day he came down from Tokio, and called on us, and
stayed to tiffin. He was formerly in H.M. Navy, but is now
instructor in the Japanese Navy. He, with Mr. S , the
Japanese Secretary to H.B.M. Legation, have just compiled
the new “ Handbook for Travellers in Central and Northern
Japan,” so that from him we got a great deal of most useful
advice and information.
23 rd A ugust. —As we are to start to-morrow, this morning we
went to Curnow and Co., and ordered our stores for our first
trip into the interior, which we expect will take us at least
three weeks. These are to be sent off by means of the
Transport Company, called Tsu-un Kwai-sha, to await us at
Tarasaki. We also bought the Japanese wicker baskets
(yanagi-gou), as being the most useful to carry our things in.
They consist of an oblong basket, with a second, which goes
over it as a cover, and are most useful, since the size can be
increased or decreased according to the things you require ;
and this applies especially to the carrying of provisions, as
they collapse as the “ grub ” disappears. We also bought
sheets of oiled paper in case of wet weather, and to spread
over the quilts given you to sleep upon, as they and the mats
generally swarm with fleas. Insecticide is also a necessity.
I believe I was born to be a traveller, as no insect ever
bothers me. It may be useful for reference hereafter if I
make a note of what we are taking with us, but be it
remembered that this is a trip where we shall remain idle in
one place, to begin with, for at least a fortnight, as otherwise
this list would have to be greatly reduced ; —6 tins of corned
beef, 1 doz. cocoatina, 1 bottle of brandy, 24 tins of soups, 2 tins
of sauce, 4 tins of picnic tongues, 2 tins of lard, 2 tins of yeast
powder, 3 tins of oval thin captain’s biscuits, 4 tins of pate
de foie gras, 1 tin of Bologna sausage, 6 tins of marmalade,
4 tins of potted meats, 3 lbs. of China tea, 8 packets of
•candles, 1 bottle of pepper, 1 bottle of salt, 1 tin of
462


pine-apples, 5 lbs. onions, 1 tin opener, 1 bottle of vinegar,
1 bottle of Nubian blacking, 1 case of claret, 1 .do z. milk,
3 cases of pea-soup sausages, 2 jars of Liebig, 6 tins of
Oxford sausages, 2 tins of bacon, 2 tins of butter, 15 lbs. of
flour, 1 tin of mixed biscuits, 2 tins of pates, 1 tin of H. T. and
C. sausage, 2 tins of jams, 6 tins of sardines, 16 tins of meats, 1
box of toilet soap, 1 box of mustard, 1 tin of apricots, 10 lbs. of
potatoes, 6 tins of vegetables, 1 bottle of oil, 1 Capt. White’s
pickles. As we have one of the best cooks going, we ought to
live like fighting cocks. Mr. W was dining with us to-
night, so I asked Mr. and Miss B also, but they too had
friends, and at once kindly proposed our making up a joint
table, to which we gladly agreed. Their friends were a Mr.
and Mrs. L . I sat between them at dinner, and in
conversation found out that they were old friends of Uncle
John and Aunt Fanny, who were out here. We had a most
enjoyable dinner, and later on Tim and I turned out to see
the Japanese town by lamplight. What with the lights
carried by the jinriki-sha men, and the lamps hanging in
quantities everywhere, it was a gay scene.
24 th August. —This morning we finished packing and sent
Hakodati off with the luggage to Tokio, and to take rooms
for us there at the Sei-yo-Ken, a Japanese hotel. We had our
final lunch with the B s, and drank to our “next merry
meeting ” in a bottle of Miss B ’s ginger-beer, brewed, I
believe, by a firm known as “ Heidseick and Co.” Mr. B
has given us full sailing directions for Pekin, and letters of
introduction to a man in Tien-Tsin. We said “ good-bye,”
and as we drove past their window gave them an Australian
coo-ee, which brought them both to the window. We left
by the 2.0 train for Tokio, a distance of only 18 miles; the
line follows the bay, and passes through several small towns,
one of which is Kanagawa, and Shinagawa, opposite to
which are some old dismantled forts, built by the Japanese
for the protection of Yedo (now Tokio). The line before
entering Tokio passes along a causeway, with water on each
side. The environs of Tokio are of considerable extent, and
before entering the terminus at Shinbashi, a number of
villages are passed, so connected with Tokio as hardly to be
distinguished from it. We drove at once to the Sei-yo-Ken,
and found our rooms ready, and a note waiting for us from Mr.
H , asking us to come up to his house at five o’clock, and
go down with him to the Tennis Club. We are to dine


afterwards with him. It was now three o’clock, so we started
off at once in jinriki-shas to fetch our passports from the
Legation. It is a long drive of at least two miles, and this
gave us some little idea of the size of Tokio. It is said to be
nine miles long and eight broad. We passed through the
Citadel, and past the Castle ( Sihro ), the home of the daimios
and retainers of the Shogun or Tycoon before they were
conquered and done away with by the present Mikado. The
Castle is protected by moats and embankment, faced with huge
stones carefully cut and fitted together, and on the top are
green slopes, planted with trees. The moats are full of that
most lovely of all flowers —the lotus, now in bloom. It was
an extremely hot and very dusty drive, but we have got our
passports, so now feel ready for anything. On our return,
we changed into lawn tennis things, and started off in another
direction, to call for Mr. H . We passed through the
precincts of the great Temple of Shiba. The lawn tennis
ground was still further on, and there we found five others,
so we were able to get up two good sets. It is a most
beautiful ground, and shaded on the sunny side by a high bank
covered with bamboos. We had some splendid games, and
got back to Sei-yo-Ken only just in time to dress for dinner.
To meet us Mr. H had invited Mr. S and Captain
J , commander of one of the Japanese men-of-war, which
so lately visited Sydney, Melbourne, and Hobart. His house
is prettily built in Japanese style, with sliding doors and
Japanese lanterns hanging about the rooms and in the
verandah. We had a splendid dinner, and one that would
have done justice to a French chef, besides which, it was
of great interest to us, strangers to Japan, meeting such men
as these, and time slipped away in the most wonderful
manner.
25 th August. —The proprietor of the carriage we had hired
to take ourselves and belongings to Shinomachi, having his
stables two-and-a-half miles in the direction we were going,
we drove there in jinriki-shas. Miss Bird described Tokio as
“ a city of magnificent distances.” She is perfectly correct.
We left Tokio by the Naka-sen-do road. This is one of the
great roads of Japan, and runs to Kio-to, a distance of 334
miles, its highest point being 2,500 feet. It was constructed
in the eighth century. There are coaches running daily from
Tokio to Takasaki, but we preferred having our own carriage,
as the coaches are always crowded, distances here are
464


calculated by ri, which is equal to about two-and-a-half
English miles, so that to-day we have a journey of 6o| miles
before us, over a tolerably level country, and by far the most
interesting of any part of the Naka-sen-do. The day was
excessively hot, being g6° in the shade, and at each stage of
about ten miles our horses came in almost dead beat. They
seem to have only one build of carriage, and that on the
American pattern, with leather brace springs. They are
built to accommodate about twelve passengers, so that we
had plenty of room. Besides the driver, there is a betto, or
ostler, who hangs on where he can, and when passing a
police station runs in front. He carries a horn to warn
people of our approach. His duties are to clear the way and
to attend to the horses. The road is lined for miles
by quaint little houses, and in one portion they were
decorated with flags and lamps hung along wires fastened to
miniature telegraph poles, it being some festival or other.
What sights of native life we saw! Would that we could
have seen all, but for that one must indeed have had a
hundred eyes. The road, after leaving the town, passes
through richly-cultivated country; rice was at first the
chief product. Towns and villages there were without end,
and the road was alive with transport carts ,jinriki-shas, pack-
horses, and pedestrians of both sexes, the greater number of
the latter being pilgrims, easily discernable by their white
dress. At Itabashi, in front of nearly each house is a bubbling
well, brought to the surface sometimes from the depth of 100
feet by bamboos. After passing through this village the road
descends to a plain, and further along crosses by a very rough
bridge the river Toda-gawa, the boundary of “ Treaty limits,”
and beyond which no foreigner may go without a passport.
This is the same river which flows through Tokio, but is there
called the Sumida-gawa. Rivers very often in Japan have
different names in different districts. At most of the tea-
houses we stopped, where pretty girls came out to wish us
O hayo (good morning), bringing with them the nibachi, and a
tray with the requisite number of tiny cups of tea. How
pretty these little damsels are, and how graceful the voice and
action. They are all perfect little ladies. “ The fairest
sights in Japan are Japan’s fair daughters,” says Griffis,
and I agree with him. lam afraid the horses don’t fare so
well at the hands of the betto. All they get is a cupful of
water thrown into their open mouths out of a dipper. Poor
2 H


beasts ! if they are thirsty, and that I am sure they are, judg-
ing by myself. When almost knocked up, out jumps the betto,
and taking some red paste from a small tin which he carries,
rubs it on their tongues. It is medicine, that is all I could
learn about it. Sayonara (farewell) cry the girls, as they bow
profoundly, and away we go again, the same ceremony being
repeated at the next tea-house. At Konosu we stopped for
tiffin in a large tea-house, and had the room of honour
allotted to us — i.e., a space that is capable of being made
a room, if necessary, by sliding paper shutters. As you
enter the tea-house you are met by the owners, who bow
profoundly, and wish you welcome, but before stepping
on to the raised portion you remove your boots. The floors
and mats shine like polished marble. Once in your room,
the little waiting-maidens arrive with refreshments and tea-
tray, but before handing it to you, they assume a sitting
posture. Would that I could sit like them, for in a native
house I never know what to do with my legs. How pretty
all this is ! Walls decorated by painting, miniature flowers
growing in blue and white pots, and the rooms looking out
on to evergreens, some of which are covered with the brightest
coloured blossoms. While we are sipping our tea, Hakodati
is at work, and presently a sumptuous repast is placed before
us. Game pate, corned beef, an omelette, and Bass’s beer.
From that omelette there is now no doubt of our cook.
Putting aside the fact of being hungry, all I can say is I never
tasted a better. Tiffin over the little girls bring us a pillow,
consisting of a small block of wood, on the top of which is a
soft roll covered with a sheet of clean paper, and while we
smoke and snooze they sit and fan us. Leaving Konosu we
entered upon the silk-producing district, and in every house
were women hard at work winding off the silk. There were
also large trays covered with fresh-plucked mulberry leaves,and
upon which were thousands of silkworms. Kumagai, the next
town reached, has a population of 4,200, who are almost all
engaged in this trade. After leaving Kumagai, an arm of the
Toda-gawa is crossed,which no doubt in winter, from the appear-
ance of its bed, is a formidable stream. Bridges, such as they
are, must then entirely disappear. Honjo was our next large
town, into which we made a most ignominious entry, as one
of our horses entirely gave in just outside, so he had to be
unharnessed, and we drove in with only one horse. Tim
manfully sat in the carriage, but I and Hakodati walked.


For the last stage we got two young horses, which required
a betto apiece, and crossing the bridge over the Karasu-
gawa was rather ticklish —not that we should have come to
much harm had we gone over, as the bridge was only composed
•of loose planks laid across beams, and hardly a foot above the
water. Here I noticed the clever way they have of making
breakwaters. Huge snake-like baskets are made of strong
bamboo, with a mesh small enough to hold large stones, this
is tightly packed and then laid down, along with many others,
in the required position. It was nearly six o’clock before we
reached Shinomachi, the termination of this day’s drive, a
town similar but smaller to those already mentioned. We
got rooms at the post-office. The room we had allotted to
us was upstairs, and spotlessly clean. It looked so pretty,
with its shiny mats and pictured walls, and in the centre, on
one of the raised lacquer dishes, was an octagonal blue and
white dish of pears. What could be more refreshing to weary
travellers than such a sight as that!
26th August. —We left Shinomachi at 6.30, and drove on in a
“one-horse shay” toTakasaki,a distance of about seven miles,
crossing the river Karasu-gawa by another shaky bridge. At
Takasaki, we found our baggage had arrived, so after a little
delay in procuring four jinriki-shas and a pack-horse, we started.
~EsLchjinriki-sha was provided with two coolies, as in some places
the road was steep, and we had quite 40 miles before us for this
day’s journey. Very soon after leaving Takasaki, we left the
Naka-sen-do, and took to bridle-paths only. This was indeed
most enjoyable ; beautiful country, lovely weather, and novel
travelling. The coolies worked tandem fashion, and their dress
was of the lightest. We drove in this way for nine miles, stop-
ping once or twice to refresh, to Kami-Yama, where we halted for
lunch. While eating our tiffin a party of about six pedestrians
•came in, dusty, hot, and travel-stained. They were evidently of
the merchant class. It was an odd sight to see one and all
immediately remove every garment except the thirty-six
inches of rag, and hanging them over the verandah, sit down
and smoke, while the pretty little waiting maidens brought
them their food. After leaving Kami-Yama the road became
steep, and in several places we had to turn out and walk.
The number of our pack-horses had been increased to two.
We were now following the valley of the Karasu-gawa, and
the scenery every mile became more beautiful. The road,
which is only just broad enough for the jinriki-sha, winds


about through the most beautiful of wooded dells. At Sanno-
kura we were to have changed jinriki-shas, but finding
none there our coolies agreed to go on. We had already
come seventeen miles. At the tea-house here there were
several merchants buying skeins of silk, which was brought
in in large paper bags, and then carefully weighed, say a
dozen skeins at a time. After leaving Sannokura the road
becomes steeper, and the scenery grander. It is quite of a
different type to either that of New Zealand or Java. The
former is of the wildest grandeur, whereas Japan is lovely
grandeur. The latter —everything is tropical; whereas here
one sees the oak, the birch, and the maple as the principal
trees. Some of our tracks were particularly steep, winding
along the edge of deep gorges filled with trees, at the bottom
of which we could hear the roar of a torrent, and of which we
only got occasional glimpses. Down the hills the second
coolie hung on behind by a rope, fastened not only to act as
a brake, but also on the side nearest the precipice in case of
the jinriki-sha lurching to that side; as it was, I nearly got
turned out once or twice. In going down some of these hills
I wondered what the directors of my Insurance Company
would say who had already charged me per cent, for the
privilege of travelling in Japan. The whole country was
redolent with the scent of wild flowers, the white wild
clematis covering the roadside in rich profusion. We had now
entirely left the silk district behind, and entered upon the hemp,
which is grown here in great quantities. At Gonda we stopped
to rest our coolies, and to let them have some more food. I
am getting accustomed by degrees to the natives having no
idea of indecency. When we stopped, one or two of the coolies
went off for a cooler in the stream, and strolling back into the
tea-house as naked as the day they were born, quietly sat
down to their rice, and were waited on by the mistress of the
house. We are now on the Kusatsu Kaido, and soon after
leaving Gonda passed through the village of Odo. Thick clouds
began to gather, and the rumbling of distant thunder made us
anxious for ourselves and our baggage. I was the leading
jinriki-sha, and with many a cry I hurried on my coolies,
getting out at any rising ground so as to get on the faster.
On reaching a small stream, just before getting in, my second
coolie, hot as he was, plunged in just like a dog, and lay there
thoroughly enjoying it for at least a minute. A pull up a steep
hill, and we entered the town of Sugawo, our destination for


that day. We rattled up the main street, down which,
confined between stone walls, runs a stream. In the evening
a bath was being freely taken by all sexes. One old lady
was having hers in a tub, and stood, ladle in hand, from the
act of pouring the water over herself, quite unabashed, to watch
the foreigners go by. It was just dusk, and the lightning
one incessant flash, but fortunately no rain. The tea-house
did not look comfortable, and we had to get some people
turned out of the upper storey to make room for us. This
town must be very much like a Swiss mountain village,
surrounded as we are now by high mountains, the houses of
wood with deep overhanging eaves, the roofs covered with
big stones to keep on the shingles. It is necessary, when
travelling, to carry your own candles, as all that is provided
for you is a small dishful of oil in which a piece of pith is
burning. This is placed in the upper part of an oblong frame,
which is covered round with thin paper. ( Andon —Jap.) This
only gives a dim, religious light, and is used by the natives as
a night-light more than anything else. This is the first
place where we have been stumped for water, the only supply
being the aforesaid stream.
27th August. —Not so early a start as we could have wished.
It took some little time to get the three pack-horses loaded,
as to-day it is good-bye to jinriki-shas, and we have the
choice of sitting on the top of a pack-saddle or walking.
Needless to say, we have chosen the latter, in spite of the
heat. We started ahead of the baggage, and rested outside
the town, under the shelter of the large cryptomeria trees,
surrounding a Shinto temple. The temples in Japan, how-
ever small, are always surrounded by these deep, shade-giving
trees. There all is cool and quiet, unless it be the booming
of the bell, or the clapping of the hands of some devotee.
But about these temples anon. Our pack-horses travelled
slowly, so that we had many of these refreshing halts, for the
day was fearfully hot, and what made it worse was that we
had our backs to the wind, and later on in the day our face
to the sun. Hot and tired as we often were, we were well
repaid by the magnificent scenery we passed through ; at
one time through the grateful shade of dense woods, which
at intervals opened out on to patches of rich cultivation. As
we got higher, what a panorama of scenery lay spread out
before us! Hill and dale were covered with one dense mass
of foliage, through which the rocks of some mighty precipice


could be seen; while here and there the roofs of some village,
or rich patch of cultivation, acted as a delicious contrast.
As a centre to this picture of grandeur stood the mighty
Asama-Yama, the best example of an active volcano in Japan,
rising to the height of 8,282 feet. The last greatest eruption,
which laid waste the country and destroyed upwards of 43
villages, and hundreds of people, took place in 1783, but there
was a slight eruption in 1870. The ascent of this mountain
is possible, and one we hope to accomplish on our way over
the Naka-sen-do in November. The valley up which our road
led had gradually been narrowing, until just before entering
the village of Nagano-Nara, the stream rushes with great
violence through a narrow, rocky gorge, which is spanned by
a most curiously-constructed bridge. Heavy beams projected
from the near side in an upward direction, so that supports
are able to be placed upon them. They reach to about half
way across the stream, the latter half being spanned by a
suspension bridge. At Nagano-Nara we stopped to change
pack-horses, and to lunch, andright glad we were of the rest,
for neither Tim nor myself have lately been addicted to much
walking. We had now only seven miles before us, but it
was all hard uphill work, and mostly under a broiling sun,
and what made it worse, we had no grateful mountain torrent
at which to slake our thirst. About half way there is a tea-
house, perched up by itself on the top of a ridge, in pulling
up which I thought I should have entirely melted away.
The road, after leaving this, is less hilly, and winds round the
slopes of Moto Shirane. Before us are innumerable
mountains, mostly grass-covered, except in the gullies and
valley, where there are thick clumps of pine forest. In one
place the road is cut out from the side of the precipice, with
a torrent below, and the overhanging rocks above. Ferns and
wild flowers are in abundance. The most noticeable is the Japan
lily. In a valley entirely shut in by hills lies the village
of Kusatsu, in which nearly every house was an hotel. At the
entrance to it is a large graveyard, crowded with tombstones,
memorial to those who have here died of their fearful maladies.
Passing along a narrow and steep street we descended into
a large open square, which was crowded with naked people
of both sexes, for it was the bathing hour, and here are situate
all the principal baths. It was one of the most extraordinary
sights I have ever seen, or am ever likely to see. In the
centre of the square is a great oblong tank, constructed in


ages long past, for Kusatsu has been in great repute amongst
the Japanese for over 1,000 years, and is the oldest of the
many Japanese watering-places. It was covered in, and
divided into many compartments; but the fire of 1872
destroyed this edifice, as well as a great portion of the town,
so that a great number of the houses are comparatively new,
many of them being of three storeys. From this tank and
surrounding streams rises whitish vapours of sulphurous
odours, and the beds of the streams, the stones of the tanks,
and the conduits employed to conduct the waters, are by
turns green, yellow, and white. This tank is now disused,
and several fresh baths have been built round the square, the
largest of which, called “ Netzu-Noyu,” was crammed with
patients of both sexes, and of all ages. We caused some
little excitement in passing through the town, with our
attendant coolies and pack-horses. The spring near which
we wished to take up our quarters is outside the town, on
the north-west side, and close to the temple, from which
the spring takes its name, “ Kompira-noyu.” These are the
coolest of all the- baths, and have the advantage of a stream
of cold water running into them, so that you can regulate the
heat to your own taste. To these come only the healthy
portion of the inhabitants for their evening bath, so that we
are entirely cut off from all the loathsomeness to be seen in
the town beneath. It was some little time before we could
find quarters. We went first to the temple, on the top of the
small hill just above us, but the quarters there looked most
uninviting, so we returned again to try our luck below.
The road is a cul-de-sac, terminating in a long flight of steps
leading up to the temple. At the foot of these steps, and on
each side, are the baths, and between them flows the river,
which is here arched over. There are in all only about half-
a-dozen houses, behind which is rising ground covered with
trees. At the back of one of these houses we discovered
a small, picturesque house, consisting of one room, neatly
covered with mats, and with one side completely open, but
capable of being closed by sliding shutters, and in front a
small but extremely pretty garden, in which is a small piece
of water. This we hired for yen a day. Soon our servant
had our things unpacked, and we began to make ourselves
comfortable. By this time quite a crowd had collected to
see the only Europeans in Kusatsu, and many, no doubt, were
the excuses which people found to pass through the garden


One litre of
Water
contains
Goza-yu.
Temp.,
65-70 c.
Fi-zo-yu.
Temp.,
48-52 c.
Washi-no-yu.
Temp.,
49‘5i c.
Nitsu-no-yu.
Temp.,
90 c.
Taki-no-yu.
Temp.,
43*48 c.
Sulphate of —
Iron
O' 1663
00150
0-8051
0-2689
0-2187
0-7198
0-2688
0-2331
0-9125
0-2280
01199
ri8oo
0-1928
0-3084
0-2584
Magnesia ...
Alumina
Lime 1
Silica Acid... J
07383
06149
0-6389
0*2 5 50
06731
Sulphate of —
Soda
| o'486o
Potash
CT2050
0'2400
0*4200
0-2035
Free SO4 H ...
» HCI
„ PO6 H ...
Organic Matter
2-1384
0-8485
0-0132
traces
1-7578
0-8875
00450
traces
1-8674
07461
0-0728
traces
1'3392
08532
not determined
traces
2'Il8l
0-8030
0-0072
traces
Total...
47108
T7I76
4-0886
4-3953
4-5645
and in front of our house. The bath is just behind us, and
we have arranged to have it entirely for ourselves, and a
bamboo railing has been put in front of it and a notice affixed
to the effect that it is set apart for the foreigner. So that at
last we are comfortably settled in a climate much more
preferable to the heat of the plains below.
sth Sept. —We have now been here over a week, and time
has gone pleasantly enough. Tim’s digestion is rapidly im-
proving, as his liver gets more boiled, and I at last have got
over my maladies. For the first three or four days I still
suffered from the mal de terre, and when that got all right I had
a wretched attack of rheumatism, which was only got rid of
yesterday by means of hot whisky and water, violent perspira-
tions, and an attendant blind man as shampooer. Tim has
taken his bath regularly, and I have, not wishing to be boiled,
bathed in the river, the water of which varies from 99 0 to 102°.
These baths are so famous for rheumatism that it is, no doubt,
to them I owe getting over my attack so soon. I append an
analysis of all the different baths in and around the place.
MINERAL WATERS OF KUSATSU, IN THE PROVINCE
OF KOTSUKE, JAPAN.
Five of the fifteen sources situate in Kusatsu and environs have been
analysed by Mr. Martin, who obtained the following results
472


The view from a little above our house over the town is most
striking, with its stone-laden roofs and volume of steam rising
out of the centre. One day we followed the course of the
river up. This stream received some years ago a small affluent
on its right bank, which has since entirely dried up. The
dry bed of this torrent is now called “Sainogawara ” (the dry
river of souls), and the Japanese regard it as the place of
departed infant souls. On the numerous rocks of this dry
bed they superstitiously make tall heaps of small stones.
In one hollow amongst the hills there are thousands of these
heaps, and amongst them some figures of Buddha. They are
placed as offerings to deceased children, who are thus relieved
from performing the same endless task imposed upon them by
the old hag Strodzuka-no-Baba, who lies in wait for them on
the banks of the Buddhist Styx. Amongst these boulders is a
rocking-stone, known as Yurugi Ishi. Another day, I walked out
to a point from which there was a magnificent view of Asama-
Yama and of the surrounding country. Looking back over the
town I could see Shirane-San, easily distinguished from the
surrounding mountain by the red colour of its summit. Kusatsu
is about 4,250 feet above the sea, and is described by a former
traveller as being one of the coolest and most interesting places
he passed in his journey. There is no doubt that, by livingfor a
time in a village so remote from the outer world, one sees more
of actual Japanese life than it would be otherwise possible
to do. One is brought into closer contact with the people,
and with some of those people one is frequently very forcibly
struck with the entire absence of any immodesty, considering
all their freedom. Yesterday, while sitting in the tea-house
opposite, I was surprised, on turning round, to see just behind
me a young and charming girl step dripping from her bath,
in truth a Venus; and without the slightest concern, the two
other girls who were in the house disrobed and stepped into
the bath. When lam bathing in the river, women and girls
think nothing of coming and sitting down and talking to me,
and I to them. Of course, as we neither understand the
other, our conversation is very entertaining! In Tokio
and the other treaty ports, since the introduction of the
foreigner, the intermingling of the sexes at the bath has been
put a stop to, and now they are divided by an open railing.
Modesty goes for nothing in Japan, and a woman thinks no
more of sitting stripped to the waist or disrobing for her bath
than we would of washing our hands or cleaning our teeth.


Yesterday morning, we went the round of the different baths,
and tested their temperature. The average, with one exception,
was about n6°; but we, unfortunately, had not a thermo-
meter high enough to test Netsu-Noyu. At all events, it
was over 130°, and into this human beings get. But Japanese
from their infancy are accustomed to boil themselves. Their
warm bath to them is what a cold one is to us. At Netsu-
Noyu we saw the whole process of the bath gone through,
and it was all we could do to remain to the end, so loathsome
were some of the sights. At a given signal the bathers
assembled to the number of about 100, the strongest of whom
took planks about six feet long, and stirred the waters for at
least five minutes. This, we were told, was in order to soften
them, and I daresay at the same time to cool them a little.
At another signal the stirring of the water ceased, and there
was a rush for places, each bather being provided with a
dipper, with which he ladled the water over his head and
face. Looking into the bath, not a vestige of anything else
but human flesh and dippers could be seen, so closely were
they packed, the different tanks having planks put across so
as to make available every square inch of room. They are
supposed to ladle the water over the head 300 times, after
which they sit about, putting tabi (native sock) on their feet,
and bandages on their bodies, and lastly they enter the bath
and sit up to their necks for about three minutes, coming out
as red as lobsters. Perhaps £he worst form of complaint seen
here is leprosy, because it is incurable, and the unfortunate
have to go through such fearful torture in their attempts to
be cured. They are covered with marks. Were it not for their
regularity you would think it was a rash, but it is really the
mark of cauterizing, which is ofttimes repeated at an interval
of only five days. The Japanese hold that leprosy is not
contagious. At the lower end of the square are many douches,
all of them with their bathers. In the winter the inhabitants
almost entirely leave for the plains, only so many remaining
as are required to look after the houses. Our life here is a
very pleasant one; the weather has been for the most part
fine, but at this time of the year, there is very often a
thunderstorm towards sunset. Although we are so out of
the world we have had our English papers and a daily
Yokohama one. The postal arrangements in Japan are
excellent, letters, &c., being carried to the most out-of-the-
way villages by means of runners. We have a good cook.


and our supply of provisions was well chosen, besides which
we can get an occasional chicken, and any amount of
fresh eggs. To give you some idea of how we live, here
is a dinner taken haphazard. Palestine soup, haricot
chops, pate de foie gras, pineapples and boiled rice,
and claret, all served up in the daintiest dishes of
blue and white. I feel certain the most aesthetic china-
maniac could enjoy a dinner off such china. Our teapot and
cups would rejoice the heart of the daintiest of afternoon tea-
givers. We are waited upon by two little handmaidens, who,
sitting cross-legged, watch our every movement. Besides
them there is an old man of over eighty, who sweeps out the
garden every morning, and an attendant coolie, who is ever
ready to do our behests. Then during the day we have
constant visitors, and often, when looking up from my writing
or reading, I see a pair of quaint little eyes peering at me
round the corner of the adjoining house. Others come with
many a bow, bringing a present of a freshly-bloomed flower,
and our room soon became quite gay with tiger lilies, &c.
Our houseman is an amateur artist, and has made us each a
present of a kakimono, that is a wall painting, and I, in return,
painted for him a picture of “ Sydney Heads,” which since I
gave it to him has been going the round of the neighbours.
We have also another artist, a professional, living near us,
and from him we bought one or two kakimonos. In a small
house next to ours lives a wood-carver, and from him I have
bought one or two little things, and in return he has made
us each a present of a small painting. The politeness of the
Japanese is proverbial, and it is a real treat to be living
amongst such people. 0 hayo, 0 hayo, are the first words you
hear in the morning, as everybody greets everybody else at
the same time, making a profound bow, and it is a
most amusing sight to see five or six men meet in
the street. They all bow, not a mere duck of the
head, but one which brings the upper part of the
body at right angles to the legs. Then one of them will
say some little polite things, at which they all bow again,
and so on. A man, on entering a tea-house, goes down on his
knees and bows until his forehead touches the mat. In
giving a present to a person, he immediately raises it to his
forehead, and should it be anything to eat it will be immedi-
ately divided amongst all present. They are also, as far as
I have seen, a nation devoid of cruelty. They never seem to


kill anything, except what is absolutely wanted for food, and
perhaps that may account for the number of fleas one meets.
A moth fell into my soup one night. The little girl took it
outside and let it go. We have always a pleasant look-out
from our room, as our garden is a charming mixture of
nature’s wildness and slight cultivation. Directly in front
is a rough moss-covered rockery, on the top of which are
two miniature wooden temples, in which are preserved the
gohei, pieces of paper brought away as a memento from some
sacred shrine. They are the household Penates, and in the
early morning may be seen some of the old people, who are
unable to ascend the long flight of steps up to the temple,
saying their pagan prayers, always finishing by clapping
their hands. Round this rockery, and behind it, are several
azaleas and cherry trees, so what must it look like in the
early spring! Beyond is a piece of water fringed with flags,
and from which rises a grassy hill covered with pine trees,
and hidden away in its top is an old disused house, up to
which leads a winding footpath. The town at night is curious,
as each house has attached to one doorpost a long oblong
frame, covered with transparent paper, on which is written
the owner’s name and occupation, and inside which burns a
small lamp. lam afraid a great deal of drunkenness goes
on there, and I am truly thankful that we are well away from
it all. Sake, a rice spirit, is their intoxicating drink. On
one or two occasions we have been annoyed by entertain-
ments at the tea-house opposite, which have been kept up
till twelve o’clock. They call it singing, but I never in the
whole course of my life heard such a row; no harmony, no
melody, nothing but noise. A drunken English sailor, as
you hear him struggling with some song, would be charming
in comparison. The ordinary singing girl’s melody resembles
the music you can hear any day in Cairo, at an Arab cafe.
A small guitar ( samisen ) is the only instrument used. The
postmaster here dabbles in photography, so the last two
mornings we have had him up here to take photographs of
our house and garden. They are rough, but at all events
will be a memento of our stay here.
6th Sept.—' This morning the head man at the baths
came up to ask if we would kindly lend him our thermometer,
so, for fear of his breaking it, I went down myself, taking
Hakodati with me as interpreter. They immediately com-
menced the stirring of the water, but before doing it I took
476


the temperature. It was about 130°. By the time the
stirring was finished a goodly crowd of naked bathers had
assembled, who watched my every movement with the
greatest interest. There are three tanks, and the heat of each
respectively was 123 0 ,124 0 , and 125 0 . It was indeed a funny
sight—l, the only European, and the only man clothed. As
I left the bath they all cheered, and the headman followed
me and was profuse in his thanks. What a picture! In
the main street of a large town naked men bowing pro-
foundly to a European. While here we have made one or
two little purchases. Besides those already mentioned, were
fox and bear skins, and some queer little gourds cut and
lacquered for drinking-cups. We have decided to leave
to-morrow, so in the evening Hakodati squared accounts,
and made the usual presents to our faithful attendants,
who, one and all, came to thank us. The bows were
profounder than ever, and at last it became a little tiring, as
out of politeness one has to bow too, and they were not
content with thanking us together, but each separately. I
certainly leave all the kind and polite people with regret.
jth Sept. —I am now at Sawatari, and writing my journal in
the presence of many wondering eyes. We have the upper
part of a new house, not yet completely finished, and are the first
occupants. It is a small but most elaborate building, standing
at the corner of very narrow streets, and opposite is the large
Hotel Yadoya, the two verandahs of which are crowded with
spectators. We intended leaving Kusatsu at six o’clock
this morning, but at that time it was raining hard, so that it
was 10 o’clock before we got away. The whole of our little
community turned out to wish us good-bye, and our attendant
coolie accompanied us to the outskirts of the town. The
usual means of transport, when away from jinriki-shas, is by
pack-horse, or kago. The disadvantage of the former is that in
going down hill, they are very liable to say their prayers, and
for you to find yourself doing the same, against your will, is,
to say the least, unpleasant; and in the latter it is almost
impossible for a European to sit for any length of time, on
account of their being only made big enough to sit cross-
legged in. Tim, however, after his boiling, did not feel up to
the 15 miles walk, so he had his chair slung upon a bamboo
pole and carried by two coolies, with two others as relays.
They carry in their hand a light bamboo stick, upon which
they rest the chair pole, while changing shoulders. We left


Kusatsu by the same road that we had entered it, but a short
way out of the town we branched off to the left, and for
some distance passed along the ridge of a grassy saddle, with
wooded valleys on either side. The day had turned out fine,
but not clear enough to get any very distant views, which,
from the road I believe, are very fine. However, we were
very well content with what we saw. After some little
distance we entered upon a very steep descent, through the
most beautiful woods. The banks of the narrow lane were
covered with ferns and wild flowers. The view of the valley
beneath was perfect, entirely enclosed by richly-wooded hills,
and in the middle of bright green cultivation nestled the
picturesque village of Kosame, 1,500 feet below Kusatsu, past
which rushed a fair-sized river, which disappeared through a
deep and rocky gorge. We passed through the village, and
could see that this was evidently a large hemp-producing dis-
trict. We crossed the river by a very rustic bridge, and on
the opposite side, above the bank of the stream, is the village
of Namazu, where we halted to rest the coolies, and to allow
the pack-horses to overtake us. Here we changed pack-
horses, and had the pleasure of paying considerably more
for hiring others after 12 o’clock, a Japanese custom. We
had paid for ours right through, but owing to our late start,
they would be unable to get back to Kusatsu to-night, so
could not go further than this. After leaving Namazu, we
ascended for several miles a long narrow valley with grassy
slopes, covered with wild flowers and clumps of chestnut trees.
The road at the highest point passes over the top of Kurisaka
(chestnut hill), 3,200 feet above the sea, but before reaching
the top, and looking back, there was a fine view of mountain
scenery. At the extreme top of the pass, there is a good tea-
house, at which we halted for tiffin. These roadside tea-
houses are very amusing, as there is generally a constant flow
of pack-horse travellers and pedestrians, who all, at a tea-
house like the present, stop for their mid-day meal of rice and
beans. It has been noticed by other travellers the length of
time that Japanese women suckle their children. To-day we
had an example of this. On the matted table, if I may so call
it, opposite to us, were sitting a father, mother, and child
of two years old, a most precocious infant, as indeed they all
are, sitting in the most old-fashioned way with a small basin
of rice in one hand, and with the other ladling in the rice with
chop-sticks. Two minutes afterwards it was hanging on its


mother’s breast. Below us, in the direction of Sawatari, lay
stretched out a deep, well-wooded valley, and behind which rose
successive ranges of interlacing hills. Into this valley we
descended, and found in it scenery that surpassed anything
we had yet seen. The chief features were some extraordinary
precipitous rocks, looking as if they had once been huge
mountains, whose sides had slipped away, leaving vast
precipices of red perpendicular rocks, on which, wherever
root-hold could be got, were clumps of green trees. At the
foot of these lay the small village of O-iwa. From there,
until the road crosses the river and ascends into the village
of Sawatari, is almost a dead level. I don’t know anything
more fascinating, or more hard to describe, than travelling
about amidst all this ever-changing scenery, along narrow
paths, which wind about amidst the slopes of the hills and
valleys in the most wonderful way.
10 th Sept.— -Sawatari is situate in a wild mountain ravine,
built there on account of the hot springs, to which numbers
of Japanese come, especially after having gone through a
course at Kusatsu. It is a very curious town, the houses
appearing to be built anyhow, and the main street winds
through them, and is extremely narrow. Facing us, we have
a most picturesque corner; exactly opposite is the Yadoya,
which alone is a study, both on account of its architecture
and its occupants. Almost touching it is another house, but
on a higher level, and in the corner formed by the two is a
rockery with trees and flowers, and at the foot a small piece
of water in which are goldfish. My time while here has
been occupied in sketching. This, much to the amusement
of the many people who have collected from time to time in
the verandahs opposite. We have to wait on us a bright-
eyed little boy, who is constantly bringing in his playfellows,
and with an air of great importance showing them our
different belongings. The attempts at conversation are
amusing, and our reply of Wakari masen Nippon (don’t
understand Japanese) always sends them off into a roar of
laughter. In a Japanese town there is always something to
amuse one, the arrival and departure of travellers, and of
their different modes of conveyance, the tremendous saluta-
tions on the part of hotel proprietor and guests on both
occasions, the constant carrying to and fro of provisions from
the various tea-houses, the barbers with their little boxes,
whom you may constantly see shaving and dressing hair —a


lengthy operation—the cooking operations going on in the
different houses, and many other things, give you a slight insight
into their everyday life. September, contrary to my idea, is one
of the worst months of the year to be travelling in Japan,
as it is the wettest, and from the night before last it has
never ceased raining. Let us hope that to-morrow may
be fine, as we have decided to move on to Ikao. The
more I see of the interior of Japan, the more mystified
am I at the way Miss Bird travelled through it. No
wonder she found everything uncomfortable, and the food
wretched. She would have found things very different had
she carried tinned soups, and Keating instead of a trestle bed.
We have found our quilts uncommonly comfortable, and a
sheet of oil paper between them and the sheets and Keating
perfect guards against the attacks of the light infantry. The
rooms in an hotel or tea-house are merely divisions partitioned
off by sliding screens of paper, some of which are most
elaborately painted. I can quite imagine how wretched she
must have been arriving at one of these in an out-of-the-way
place, wet and tired, and with only an ordinary Japanese boy
with her. The rooms have no furniture of any sort, and all
that is provided for you are two quilts. The floors are
covered with mats, which as a rule are spotlessly clean, as a
Japanese never enters a house with anything on his feet.
Lying on the floor is most tiring, and having your food off it
as well is more so. So far, we have had with us our own
chairs, but in most places frequented by foreigners, chairs
can be obtained, and to rig up a table is an easy matter. We
carry two or three Japanese cloths with us, so that our room
can always be made to look cosy. I think our quarters at
Kusatsu will long bear traces of the foreigner, for we adorned
the walls with pictures from the illustrated papers, pasting
them on with boiled rice, which is stronger than the paste
made from flour.
ii th Sept. —We had decided, come what might, to leave
for Ikao to-day. On looking out at six o’clock it was a
dreary prospect. Tim petitioned to be let alone for another
hour, but I rooted him out, and got Hakodati up to finish off
the packing and prepare breakfast. The population turned
out to see us start, and I daresay to their eyes we presented
a curious spectacle; Tim mounted on a pack-horse, sitting
sideways, as being more comfortable than cross-legged ; the
Japanese ride with their feet on the pack-saddle side, and their


knees in their mouth ; I, with a large macintosh cloak, with
hood over my helmet, followed by two pack-horses heavily
laden with our belongings, and Hakodati in native straw mat
bringing up the rear. The walk of 6J miles to Naka-no-jo
was very pleasant, in spite of the drizzle, as the road passes
through a richly cultivated country. The fields of millet, rice,
&c., have no fences, but are planted round with small mul-
berry trees. Naka-no-jo is a large town, consisting of one
long street about half a mile in length. Here we stopped for
a few minutes, and then went on in jinriki-shas, with only
one coolie each, that commodity being scarce here, owing to
the few who travel by this road. It is possible to come
through from Sawatari here in that way, but there are no
jinriki-shas there, and you have to trust to getting a return
one, in which we were not fortunate. It was still raining
when we left Naka-no-jo, but it soon afterwards cleared up,
which was most fortunate, as the road passed through some
of the most beautiful scenery we have yet seen. It follows
along the banks of the Agatsuma-gawa, the same river we
had passed on the way to Sawatari, but now very much
increased in size. At one point another river joins it at
right angles, and as it tumbles over a high cliff of rocks,
makes a waterfall of extreme grandeur. Our progress was
slow, as the road at one time was almost level with the river;
at another it mounted along the side of rocky, pine-clad cliffs
to some considerable height. At these points the distant
views and closer surroundings were indeed magnificent.
Huge and fantastic rocks, covered in places with ivy, overhung
the path, and under the shelter of one of such a temple had
been built. We next crossed, by a fairly level road, a broad
valley, bounded on each side by high hills. Through the
centre of this valley the river has eaten for itself a deep bed,
with high, rocky cliffs. Some little distance further we
crossed the river by a substantial bridge, and then had to
turn out of our jinriki-shas to ascend a short and steep
ascent. A few hundred yards further brought us to the small
village of Gochoda, just about six miles from Naka-na-jo, and
the termination of our jinriki-sha travelling, the remaining
six miles to Ikao having to be done on foot or pack-horse.
Here we halted for lunch at a small tea-house, from which
there was a magnificent view over the plain below, and of
distant mountains. Amongst the other occupants of the
tea-house was a prisoner in charge of a policeman. His-
-2 I


arms were tightly laced to his sides by cord, and his wrists
tied together by very thin but strong string, which
would cut him were he to try to break it. To his waist
was attached another cord, by which he was fastened
to one of the posts of the tea-house, and when they started
off it was fastened to the waist of the policeman’s servant.
After a halt of about half an hour, we started to walk, taking
with us a pack-horse for Tim when tired, and two others
for our baggage. Leaving Gochoda, the road begins at once
to ascend the slopes of the Haruna group, and continues to
do so almost without a break right up to Ikao, passing through
some beautiful wooded country. The path was only just
broad enough for horses to walk on, and in going through
some of the woods it was like an archway. The whole way
the country was aglow with wild flowers. For a good two
miles before we reached Ikao, we had a capital view of
the town, perched high above us on the mountain slopes, and
embedded amongst pine trees. We arrived there about
five o’clock, and went at once to the principal Yadoya, called
Chigira, almost at the entrance to the town. At this we got
a suite of four rooms, entirely cut off from the rest of the
building, and on the third floor. I don’t think I have ever
seen a more magnificent view than that which lay stretched
out before us—an immense plain, the basin of the tributaries
of the Tone-gawa. On it are scattered various villages,
surrounded by patches of cultivation and clumps of pine trees.
Rising out of the plain are small hills, covered with thick
wood, and between which can just he seen the red banks of
the different streams. From this plain rises in gradual
slopes a magnificent range of mountains, beyond which again,
in the hazy distance, are others of a greater height.
12 th Sept. —l awoke early, and saw a grand sunrise. This
is a view that one can never tire looking at. The hotel is
built on the very edge of a deep ravine, down which tumbles
a small stream, and at a great distance below us winds, amidst
tall pines, the road we had come by. Below us are a few
houses, and beyond stretches away this magnificent valley.
This morning we turned out to visit the town, which is built
in terrace form on a very steep hillside. The view from the
bottom of the main street is very peculiar. It is, in fact, an
irregular stone staircase, with houses built on either side, and
crowded with people. This street terminates in a steeper
flight of steps leading to the Shinto temple at the top. The
482


•steps are of solid stone, and down the centre of the street
runs a conduit containing the hot water, and from which the
pipes are led for the various baths. In the afternoon we
•started to walk to the source of the hot water, which is only
a short way up the ravine, alongside of which threads a
narrow path. Tempted by the beauties of the surrounding
scenery and the distant views, we scrambled up a zigzag path
to a remote tea-house, perched aloft on the very edge of a
steep cliff, commanding a magnificent view. Above us, at no
great height was the summit of Futatsu-dake, the second
highest peak of the Haruna group. It was a grand scramble
through lovely woods, filled with ferns and wild flowers.
We returned through the town. The inhabitants here are
evidently of a better class than any we have yet seen in the
interior. Here we have seen women dressed in beautiful silk
kimono, with handsome obis; children decked out in finery,
with powdered face and necks. We were greatly amused
watching two children fighting. They went at it for some
time without giving or receiving anything to speak of, but the
first blow that went home sent the recipient off with howls,
no doubt to tell his ma. A crowd a little lower down attracted
our attention, and on arriving at it we found two men fencing.
They wore iron masks, and thick pads over their heads, sides,
and thighs. The fencing sticks were about five feet long,
and made of strips of bamboo, loosely fastened together, so as
to lessen the effects of a blow. These they used in both
hands, and dealt one another some tremendous blows across
the head and sides. It was later than we imagined when we
returned, and found we had only just time for our bath before
dinner, which to-night was to be rather above the average,
as we had managed to get some fresh meat and a salmon
trout. Our menu was : —Soup, salmon trout, beefsteak, fried
potatoes, omelette, pate de foie gras, and peaches.
13th Sept.— The first thing this morning our houseman sent
us up a present of fine fish, weighing about three to the
pound; they are a species of white trout. It is a pouring wet
day, and so I have ample time to write a short account of the
history and geography of Japan, for which purpose I have
before me Griffis’ “Mikado’s Empire,” the “ Transactions of
the Asiatic Society,” and “The Guide Book.” Dai Nippon, or
Nihon,means Great Japan, and is the name of the entire empire,
and not, as is generally supposed, that of the large island. The
number of islands in the Japanese group, exclusive of the


four main islands, is stated to be over three thousand, and the
area of the empire to be 150,000 square miles, two-thirds of
which consist of mountain land, owing to which, and to the
narrowness of the main island, the rivers are of no great
length. The longest is probably the Tone-gawa, and from
its source to where it falls into the Pacific Ocean, at the Bay
of Yedo, it measures about 170 miles. The Kiso-gawa and
Shinano-gawa come next. The four main islands are the
principal* island, which has no name, a curious peculiarity
of Japanese geography, and one very difficult to understand.
The manner in which the island was divided did away with
any such necessity, namely, into five divisions. To use the
name of one of these divisions was just as convenient for a
Japanese as to use a collective name like that which
foreigners have misapplied to the whole island would be..
Yezo to the north, now called the Hokkaido; Kinshin to the
south, and which shuts in part of the inland sea (not to be mis-
taken with the Province of Kishin on the mainland), and Shi-
koku. The population in 1804 was estimated at 30,000,000 by
reports furnished by the officers of the Daimios, but it is
doubtful whether J apan, in spite of her being greater by one-
fourth, has a larger population than the British Isles. The
principal towns are Tokio (the new name given to Yedo),
with a population of 800,000, and Kioto, which since
1869 has been re-christened Saikio, and in 1870 had a
population of 370,000. Kioto was the ancient metropolis,,
but after the defeat of the Tycoon, and the restoration
of the Mikado, it was changed to Yedo. Next comes.
Ozaka, with a population of 414,000 souls. The treaty
ports are Yokohama, Nagasaki, Hiogo or Kobe, Ozaka, and
Hakodate, in the Hokkaido. With regard to the origin of
the Japanese, Griffis says that, after a study of all the obtain-
able facts, he believes they unmistakably point to the Ainos,
as the primeval ancestors of the Japanese ; that the mass of
the Japanese people of to-day are substantially of Aino stock,
as having been developed or improved from an Ains model
by means of civilization and of alteration of habits, but that
there also has been an infusion of Chinese, Corean, Malay,
and Tartar blood. Travelling through the country the
traveller cannot help being struck with the number of curious
* Griffis used the name 44 Hondo” as the one given for this island in th&
u Military Geography of Japan,” published by the War Department.


■objects which at first hardly make any impression upon him.
There are coloured glass balls with a little thing inside which
is kept tinkling by a piece of paper attached to it and which is
blown about in the wind. These hang in nearly every house.
Then before all temples and shrines are entrance archways
made of one beam, supported on two uprights, looking
like two crosses standing side by side. These are called
■ torii, and across them you will often notice ropes of rice straw.
Then again, in every house, and at every shrine, you will
notice the gohei, or pieces of paper, brought as mementos
from the more famous temples. In many a house you will
see a mask representing the face of a fat, chubby woman.
For the meaning of all these, one has to go back to most
ancient Japanese mythology. It is nearly certain that the
Japanese possessed no writing until the sixth century, as
their oldest extant composition is the Kojiki or “ Book of
Ancient Traditions.” It may be called the Bible of the
Japanese. It gives the history of the Mikados as beginning
with the year i (660 B.c.),and according to it Jimnu-TennS
was the first Emperor. The present Mikado is Mutsukito,
the 123rd of the imperial line of Dai Nippon, to whose
divinity the Japanese still cling, not only making it a dogma
of religion and the engine of government, but accrediting
their envoys as representatives of the King of Heaven (Tenno).
The Chinese characters employed to express the term" Mikado”
mean" Honourable Gate,”an idea akin to the Turkish Sublime
Porte. In the beginning of all things was chaos : heaven and
earth were not separated. The ethereal matter sublimed
and formed the heavens, the residuum became the present
earth, from the warm mould of which a germ sprouted,
and became a self-animate being, called Kuni-toko-tachi-no
Mikoto. Two other beings of like genus appeared; after
"them again came four pairs of beings, called Kami, who set
to work to separate the elements. As yet the division of
sexes had not taken place. The first manifestation of the
male essence was Izanagi, and of the female Izanami, standing
together on the floating bridge of heaven ; the male plunged his
jewelled falchion into the unstable waters beneath them, and
withdrawing it,the trickling drops made an island, upon which
they descended, and this island (Awaji), together with many
thousand small ones, became the everlasting Great Japan.
The origin of the name Nihon, or Nippon, is Ni (Sun day), hon
i(root, origin, beginning). Japan is the foreigner’s corruption


of the Chinese Ji-pun or Ji-puan. The first child born was.
Ama-terasu 6 Mikami, or the heaven-illuminating goddess,
and so became the goddess of the sun. The next born was..
Tsuki-no-Kami, and she became the goddess of the moon.
Later on there came a fine boy, whom they named Sosanod-
no-Mikoto; he was made ruler over the blue sea, but he never
kept his kingdom in order. He played various practical
jokes upon his sister, the sun goddess, which so enraged her
that she retired to a cave, closing the mouth with a large
rock, whereupon darkness fell upon the earth. Then all the
gods assembled to discuss what was to be done to appease
the anger of the great goddess, and the plan finally arrived
at was to make an image of the self-imprisoned goddess more-
beautiful than herself, and thus excite at once her curiosity
and her jealousy. It was to be a round mirror, like the sun.
This mirror is now the sacred emblem of the Shinto religion.
Finest clothes, jewellery, and apalace were then prepared for
the sun goddess. Paper mulberry and hemp trees were
planted and prepared, and bark and fibre were woven into
coarse, striped, and fine cloth to deck her dainty limbs. A
string of magaiama (carved jewels), materials for a necklace,,
hairpins, and bracelets were made. A sakaki tree was then
pulled up by the roots, and on its branches were hung the
necklace, the mirror, and the fine clothes. This was called a
gohei. The god of invincible strong hands was placed in
concealment ready to pull the goddess out. A goddess with a
countenance of heavenly glossiness, named Uzume, was-
appointed manager of the dance. She first bound up her flowing
sleeves close to her body, under the armpits, by a creeping
plant called masaki and donned a head-dress. While she blew
a bamboo tube, with holes pierced in it between the joints,
the other deities kept time by beating together two hard,
flat pieces of wood. Another kami took six bows, and from
the long moss hanging from the pine trees, strung the
bows and made the harp called the koto. His son made
music on this instrument by drawing across the strings grass-
and rushes. The goddess Uzume then commenced to dance
and sing, and as she danced she loosened her dress, exposing
her nude charms, which so excited the mirth of the gods that
they laughed so loudly that heaven shook. The sun goddess
within, unable to account for this ill-timed mirth, since
heaven and earth were in darkness, and impelled by curiosity,
opened the door slightly, and the god Futodama placed in


front of her the mirror. The sun goddess, so astonished at
her own loveliness, stepped out a little further, whereupon
the god of invincible strong hands pulled the rock door open
and dragged her forth, and the wisest of the gods took a rope
of twisted straw, and passing it behind her said, “ Do not
go behind this.” The wicked brother was thereupon punished
and banished. While in banishment a huge eight-headed
dragon had devastated the land, and eaten up all the fair
virgins. Sosanoo enticed the monster to partake of an
intoxicating liquor, and then slew him while in stupor. In
the tail of the dragon he found a sword of marvellous temper,
which he presented to Ama-terasu. This sword—called
“ Cloud Cluster ” —afterwards became one of the three sacred
emblems constituting the regalia of the Japanese sovereign.
The sun goddess afterwards gave her grandson Ninigi-no-
Mikoto various treasures, chief of which were the mirror,
emblem of her own soul, and now worshipped at Ise, the
sword “ Cloud Cluster,” and a stone or seal. Concerning the
mirror, she said, “Look upon this mirror as my spirit; keep
it in the same house and on the same floor with yourself,
and worship it as if you were worshipping my actual
presence.” Ninigi-no-Mikoto descended from heaven on
Kirishoma-Yama ; he had a son who lived 580 years. This
son married a sea-monster, who appeared to him in the form
of a woman, and by her he had a son, who became ruler, and
was succeeded by a son born of an aunt, Ninigi. The
heavenly descendant was thus the great grandfather of
Jimnu-Tenno, the first emperor of Japan. Japan is considered
by the Japanese to be superior to all the world, as it lay
opposite to the sun when it separated from it; it must
therefore be on the summit of the globe. As it was created
first, it was especially the land of the gods. All other
countries were created later by power of the heavenly god,
but they were not begotten of Izanagi and Izanami, nor did
they give birth to the sun goddess. One need not go far
from Kioto to find the identical spots of common earth, which
the fertile imagination of the children of Nippon has trans-
figured into celestial regions. The dancing of Uzume before
the cavern is imitated in the Japanese dance. The burnished
discs, before which the Japanese beauty of to-day, sitting for
hours on knee and heel, and nude to the waist, heightens her
charms, is a copy of the mirror made in heaven. A mask of
Uzume, representing the face of a fat girl, adorns the walls of


many a Japanese house. The magatama jewels—carved and
perforated pieces of soapstone —occasionally dug up, show the
work of man, and ancient pictures depict the chiefs of tribes
decked with these ornaments. In the preparations made to
attract forth the sun goddess, we see the origin of the arts
of music by wind and stringed instruments, dancing, &c.
To this day, when the Japanese female is about to sweep,
draw water, and perform household duties, she binds up her
sleeves to her armpits with a string twisted over her shoulders,
like the sleeve-binder of the dancing goddess. Before Shinto
shrines, trees sacred to the Kami, on New Year’s Day before
gates and doorways,one sees stretched the twisted ropes of rice
straw. The wand of waving jewels at fair times may be seen
made by suspending coloured paper to a bamboo. The gohei is
still the characteristic emblem seen on every Shinto shrine.
All these relics are to the native ancient, sacred, and productive
of innocent joy. From the death of Jimnu-Tenno to that of
Kimmei, in whose reign Buddhism was introduced (a.d. 571),
there were thirty-one Mikados. During this period of 1,236
years, the most interesting subjects to be noted are the reforms
of Shjin-Tenno, the military expeditions to Eastern Japan by
Yamato-dak6, the invasion of the Corea by the Empress
Jingu-ksg6, and the introduction of Chinese civilization and
Buddhism. Sujin encouraged the building of boats in order
to increase the means of transportation, and to bring the people
at the extreme ends of the country in contact one with
another. Communication between Corea and Kinshin was
rendered not only possible, but promised to be regular and
profitable. He may also be called the father of J apanese
agriculture, since he encouraged it by edict and example,
ordering canals to be dug, watercourses provided, and irriga-
tion to be extensively carried on. Water is the first necessity
of the rice farmer, as it is of the gold-digger, and the immense
labour required to obtain the necessary water supply can
only be appreciated by those who have seen a large gold-
mining district. It was at Kumara, in New Zealand, that I
first saw these flumes. It was in the reign of Sujin that the
building of shrines for the adoration of the gods first com-
menced. Hitherto the sacred emblems (mirror, sword, and
ball) had been kept in the palace of the Mikado, but a rebel-
lion breaking out, and he, thinking this was a mark of the
disfavour of the gods in consequence of his keeping the
emblems under his own roof, removed them from his
488


•dwelling, and dedicated them in a temple erected for the pur-
pose at Kasanui, a village in Yamato. He appointed his
own daughter priestess of the shrine, and custodian of the
symbols, a custom which has continued to the present time.
The shrines in Ise, which now hold these precious relics,
are always in charge of a virgin princess of Imperial blood.
They were deposited there a.d. 4. Copies of the mirror and
sword were, however, made by Sujin and deposited in a
separate building within the palace, the origin of the chapel
still connected with the Mikado’s Imperial palace. The work
begun by Sujin was followed up vigorously by his successor.
This Emperor had two sons, whom he loved equally. Unable
to determine which of them should succeed him, he one
day told them to tell him their dreams, and by them he
•decided that the younger should succeed. The story is
interesting, as to the present day the succession to the
Throne depends upon the will of the father. The Mikado’s
crest, for purposes outside the palace, is a chrysanthemum;
and, since 1868, it has become a national emblem, and is
worn by the soldiers of the Imperial army in front of
their caps. The flower is largely grown all over the
country, and there is a great feast dedicated to it. The
Japanese are great gardeners, and devoted to plants. There
is hardly a house anywhere in which you will not see pretty
blue and white pots, with growing flowers or miniature trees,
and should there be room outside, creeping convolvuli,
balsams, and cockscombs. Another great flower is the lotus,
■“ a thing of beauty and a joy for ever,” the constant symbol
of poetic and religious truth. It belongs peculiarly to the
Buddhist religion. The reign of Yamato-dake was noted for
the military expeditions against the Ainos, the saving of his
fleet from shipwreck by the leaping overboard of his wife
Tachibana-hime, and the crossing of a large army over the
Utui Toge Pass through the Shirano mountains in mid-winter,
an exploit, as Griffis says, equal to that of Napoleon. The con-
quest of Corea by Fingu Kogo took place in the year a.d. 203,
and her son Ojui was afterwards deified as the god of
war, and in his honour some of the most magnificent temples
in Japan have been erected. Nine empresses, in all, have
sat upon the throne of Japan. It is now given to the Empress
of Japan to elevate the position of her female subjects by the
encouragement of the education of girls, and of setting a noble
example, not only of womanly character and of active deeds


of benevolence, but also in discarding the foolish and
barbarous customs of past ages, notably that of blacking the
teeth and shaving off the eyebrows after marriage. This the
present Empress Haniko has done. In 552 a company of
doctors, diviners, astronomers, and mathematicians from
Corea came to reside at the Japanese Court. With them came
Buddhist missionaries. This may be called the introduction.
of continental civilization. Beginning with Jingu, there
seems to have poured into the Island Empire a stream of
immigrants, skilled artizans, scholars and teachers, bringing
with them arts, science, letters, and written literature, and
the Buddhist religion. This was the first of the three great
waves of foreign civilization in Japan ; the second was from
Western Europe, and the third from America, Europe, and
the world in the decade following the advent of Commodore
Parry, a.d. 1854. Of these none were so powerful or so far-
reaching in effect as that in the sixth century, and no one
element as Buddhism. Nothing, among all the elements that
make up Japanese civilization, has been so potent in forming
the Japanese character as the religion of Buddha. Thank
you, Mr. Griffis, for so helping me to fill up a wet afternoon..
I must now describe our rooms a little more fully. They are
four in number, all connecting one with the other by means,
of sliding panels. On each panel there is a painting. We are
in the top storey, separate from the rest, so have windows on
three sides. The two front rooms are our dining and bed-
rooms; in one of the back ones we dress and keep our things,
and in the other Hakodati sleeps, in charge of our stores..
Two sides of our dining-room are sliding windows with oblong;
panes, formed by neatly planed pieces of wood, over which
is pasted a transparent paper, looking like frosted glass ; each,
of the other two sides has sliding panels, and in one corner
there is a cupboard, the doors of which are ornamented with
paintings of tortoises. In another corner hangs a kakimono..
The ceiling is pale blue, and the woodwork unpolished, with
black mouldings. In our bedroom the ceiling is more
elaborate, having twelve panels, each of which contains a
picture, no doubt done with the idea of entertaining you as
you lie on your back. This room has only one side opening
on to the verandah, the second having two recesses. One
nearly reaches to the floor, in which is a bronze vase on a
raised wooden stand, the other half contains three quaint
shelves. At night the verandah is enclosed with wooden


shutters, which help to keep out the cold and rain, and this
applies to all Japanese houses. There is little fear of you
oversleeping yourself, as about six o’clock commences the
removing of all these shutters. The side of our house exposed
to the prevailing wind has a shutter, the upper part of which
are glass windows.
14 th Sept. —In the middle of the night I was awakened
by one of the outside shutters being blown in. It was raining
and blowing hard, and under the gusts our house shook
again. I was just dozing off, when crash ! —I thought we were
toppling over. Tim jumped up and said, “ Come along down-
stairs, I’ve had enough of this.” The whole of the glass shutter
had been blown in, and we were swaying about worse than
ever, and it appeared that our little house perched up aloft
might disappear into the ravine below at any moment. The
crash had awakened others, who were moving with lanterns.
We made our way below, and sent for our quilts and rugs,,
as we had no intention of going aloft again. It was evident
from the gust that a typhoon (tyfu Jap., strong wind) was
blowing, and one knows only too well what devastation they
bring, both at land and sea. Coolies were soon at work
making a barricade, to save the rest of our rooms from being
blown inside out. This all happened about three o’clock, but
the noise of the wind was so tremendous that I don’t think
anybody had much sleep. At six o’clock there was hardly a
breath of air, so we ventured aloft. What a scene of
desolation ! Holes in nearly every pane on the weather side,,
rough barricade and broken glass. We were not the only
sufferers. Below was a photographer’s studio, which lay
levelled to the ground, and we could see various people
repairing breaches in their roofs. Some trees were almost
stripped of their leaves, while others lay torn up by the roots.
This calm was not of long duration. In a short time it began
to blow as badly as ever, but from the opposite direction, one
of the chief characteristics of this species of storm. This
time it was at our backs, so that one could stand in the front
verandah and watch the effects of the wind. It was indeed a
marvel how these, to all appearances, frail houses stood up
against it all, for they are built without foundation and with no
nails, the different beams being made to fit into each other.
We watched a house being built. The whole of the woodwork
was prepared beforehand, and in eight hours the skeleton of
the house was completed. Upon the top rafter they fastened
491


a bough of a tree, as we at home do a flag, and also a gohei
to bring it luck. It was an amusing sight to see the little
men at work, climbing about the growing building like
monkeys. They worked away on tottering beams as
comfortably as possible, and all the scaffolding they used was
a piece of bamboo, which they lashed on when they otherwise
could not get any foothold. After the storm came sunshine,
and with it such effects of light and shade in the valley
beneath and on the opposite hills. We turned out at twelve
o’clock to see the effects of the storm on the town. Shops
were only just beginning to open, and paper windows were
in the most dilapidated condition. Men were going about
collecting the shingles which had been blown off the different
roofs. When we returned we found our own window panes
had been refitted, and later in the day paper men arrived
and repaired the damage done to our sliding shutters. To
repair them was but the work of a few minutes. On one side
I counted nearly a hundred holes in different partitions. A
sharp knife is run along the woodwork, and the torn paper is
taken off. Rice paste is then applied, and a fresh roll of paper,
the exact width of the panes, is rolled along and cut off, and
the repairs are finished. I daresay by evening all damage
done to windows had been thus mended. Paper has, therefore,
its advantages, and Japanese paper is far from easily torn.
We have bought some very queer kimonos, with views of
Ikao on them, and descriptions in Japanese characters. I
also discovered in a shop to-day a small embossed brass box
and pipe-holder of carved wood; both must be of great age.
Besides Hakodati, we have now another servant, a fair young
maid, who assists him and waits on us while he is below
cooking, and there is also a coolie allotted to us. Our
houseman and his wife have both visited us, and said that
whatever we want we have only to ask for. Having finished
our supply of claret, we have discovered here a very fair brand
of St. Emilion, also Bass. Japan is a great country for
forgeries, against which you have always to be on your
guard. To-day a bottle came up with a'label of evident
Japanese paper, and branded St. Emiljon. They had not been
quite careful enough. Before me at the present moment
is lying a box of Tandsticker matches, the label an exact copy,
■even to the prize medals, but on looking carefully, you see
that underneath them is written “Trade Mark,” and on the
-medals, instead of the usual inscription, is “Kowoi, maker.”


One thing to be very careful about is Collis Brown’s
chlorodyne. So cleverly are these forgeries executed that
the eye may often be deceived. A typhoon, besides the
characteristic already mentioned, has two motions. It
or blows round a focus or centre in a more or less circular
form, and at the same time has a straight or curved motion
forward, so that, like a great whirlwind, it is both turning
round and, as it were, rolling forward at the same time.
This applies, also, to other rotary storms. When they occur
on the north side of the equator, the wind turns against the
hands of a watch, whereas, south of the equator the movement
is exactly the opposite. Typhoons seldom appear without
giving notice of their approach, and some indications may
almost be relied on as being sure messengers of warning.
Among the principal of these is the barometer, which, on the
approach of a typhoon, seems restless, and the mercury keeps
oscillating in the tube, and often rises suddenly. These indica-
tions are accompanied at sea by a long,heavy swell,unaccounted,
for in any other way. An unusual appearance of the sky, steel-
grey, or with a greenish tint, blood red, a bright yellow*
sunset, and, added to these, the appearance of peculiar or
unusual motions of the clouds, are sure signs of a typhoon
being in the vicinity. The diameter varies from 50 to 1,000
miles. So well now are these typhoons understood by able
seamen, that if they have sea-room, not only can they keep
out of their way, but so use them as to help them on their
course. The danger is in getting into the centre, where the
storm is the heaviest. Many are the causes assigned for
these gales, but the generally-accepted theory seems to be
now that they are the work of electricity. Cyclones, water-
spouts, and dust-storms are also attributed to the same cause,
and certainly the dust-storms I have seen on the plains of
Australia are very similar in their motion.
15 th Sept. —We are at present in the most happy state of
uncertainty whether to go on to Nikko or go direct through to
Tokio, and so catch the 21st boat for Shanghai, instead of
the 28th. The reason of this uncertainty is the weather,
which has been so unsettled lately. Our only hope, however,
is that the typhoon may have cleared some of it away.
Before leaving Ikao we have determined to visit the Temples
of Haruna-San, distant about six-and-a-half miles away over
the mountains; so this morning, after an early breakfast, we
started on our pilgrimage. At the opposite side of the ravine


is a prettily-situated tea-house, to which we crossed. The track
from here immediately begins to ascend, through hazel woods.
It is at first rough, being over loose scoria, and made all the
worse by the late rains. After leaving the woods, the road
follows one of the many grassy saddles of Futatsu-dake, and
passes round the foot of the final cone. The day was simply
perfect, and the most distant mountains could be seen.
Through a gap in the surrounding hill tops we got a capital
view of the cone of Fuji, standing out above a distant range
of hills. Below us was a plain, a sort of amphitheatre, en-
circled by grassy cones, from which protruded great masses
of queer-shaped rocks. At the far end lay Lake Haruna-
noma. We were not the only pilgrims bound for these
sacred shrines. Numbers of natives were trudging along,
Indian file, staff in hand. The Japanese of both sexes
when going on a journey hitch the kimono up through
the obi. The men of the poorer class wear no cover-
ing to the legs, unless they are going for a long walk,
in which case they wear tight-fitting breeches down to the
knee, and below that a tight gaiter, with tabi and sandal.
The women wear a petticoat reaching just below the knee,
and generally, but not always, a gaiter of lavender silk,but no
.iabi, only sandals, or more generally the wooden clogs (geta).
Besides these there were three Japanese gentlemen, but
their pilgrimage was of the easiest. Leaning back in their
kago, whiffing cigarettes, they looked comfortable enough.
Across this plain, and almost on the borders of the lake, was
a roadside tea-house, where we stopped to refresh. We then
followed round the side of the lake, which is about a mile
long, and ascended the ridge above it, which turned out to be
the top of the dividing range. On the very summit were
two tea-houses, as is so often the case, in friendly opposition,
one on each side of the road, and between which stood a
large torii painted red, the sacred colour. What a view lay
stretched out before us, and one that you could see in no
other country than Japan! We had left the grassy hills
behind, and now all were clothed in the richest forest. Here
'were growing in one thick mass maples, oaks, chestnuts, and
pines, and I daresay many more varieties. We were standing
at the extreme end of a long winding gorge, leading down
into a distant valley. Beyond were mountain ridges and
ranges in the wildest confusion, on which, in the far-off
.distance, lay a light bank of clouds, the various peaks rearing
494


their heads above them. The only other view that I have
■ever seen which could come anywhere near it was Govett’s
Leap, in the Blue Mountains of New South Wales.
Into this valley we plunged, and for another two and a half
miles wound about through the most beautifully wooded
scenery. Just before reaching the temples we passed a
most extraordinary-shaped rock, on the opposite side of the
ravine. It is called the Fudaki-Iwa, and rears its head to
the height of about 60 feet. It looks like the work of man,
so evenly are the blocks fitted in shape. It resembles a
huge crane with an old man’s head. The ravine was now
very narrow, and huge masses of rock peeped out through
the foliage. A little further along, and we came to huge
tcryptomeria trees, a sure sign that we were near a temple,
and the roofs of which we could now see hidden away amidst
rocks and trees. We ascended a flight of stone steps, and
■came upon a gallery cut out from the solid rock, and with a
strong cut-stone parapet. There was another large flight
of steps leading up to the principal temple, but we left seeing
these until our return, and followed along the gallery. Huge
rocks reared themselves many hundred feet above us.
There was a chasm, and a curious bridge of wood, painted
red, the uprights of which were capped with bronze, spanned
it. Round a corner, and in the deep shade of these monster
trees, was a three-storied pagoda, and further along a
magnificent iorii, with bronze uprights, and on each side
two huge bronze lanterns. On the left of the road, and
approached by a flight of stone steps, was the priests’ house.
Below was the village. We returned, and at a small tea-
house hidden away under the rocks, and overhanging the
stream, we rested for tiffin. Every minute fresh pilgrims
arrived, and before ascending the main flight of steps to
the temple, washed their hands in an ancient stone
vase. This, like the Mahommedan, is part of their religion.
We tried to get some eggs for our tiffin, but weretold they were
forbidden to be eaten by the priests. From this we gathered
that they were scarce, and that the country round could only
-supply sufficient for their own table. After a time we went
up to the temple, and paid our fee to the old lady who daily
swept the steps. What must be the faith of these people
if they will travel hundreds of miles, as some do, to ring a
hell, clap the hands, or say a prayer, and afterwards go away
with a piece of torn paper as a memento, for which they


have to pay! This they afterwards set up as a household
god in their own dwellings, the potency of which is supposed
only to last one year, and then again comes the same weary
trudge. We stood for a long time watching the devotees, not
that they were all devout; and from the clanging of the
different bells the god must indeed be a deep slumberer were
he not awake to hear the prayers. The interior of the temple
is devoid of everything, except in the distance is a receptacle
which is supposed to contain something or other. In some,
but not in all, there is a circular mirror, representing the
great one now supposed to be at Ise. Their religion is the
essence of simplicity. We bought our goheis, and a map of
the temples, and departed in peace, and left these sacred
groves behind us. At the tea-house, on the top of the
Tanjin-toge, as the pass connecting the two districts is
called, there were three Japanese of distinction, who had
arrived in kagos. One had been a daimio, or feudal lord, but
these were all abolished, nolens volens, by one fell swoop in
1868, and their property taken over by Government. They
live now in Tokio as private gentlemen. Coming up the pass
we also passed a party of three English ladies and three
gentlemen, residents in Yokohama. At the second tea-house
we made a detour to visit some wild-looking crags, to the top-
of which we scrambled. Through them there is a wonderful
archway, from which you get a view of the plain below;
but the view from the top is most extensive, and as level as
a billiard-table lay the plain of Yedo, across which we could
see for at least sixty miles. We could make out clearly the
various towns along the Naka-sen-do. Getting up was hard
enough work, but getting down was eyelid work. Our next
divergence was in order to return by the tea-house on the
cliff, which we had visited the first day. This we found in
ruins, having been entirely demolished by the typhoon. The
owner was there, however, dealing out barley-water as usual,,
and no doubt in a day or two will be as right as ever again
until the next. We gave the old fellow a yen to help in
repairs, for which he was duly grateful, and half-past five
o’clock found us comfortably seated in the warm bath at the
hotel, and discussing our to-morrow’s movements.
16 th Sept. —We left Ikao at nine o’clock this morning with
the idea of going to Nikko. Our first stage was to Takasaki,,
about fifteen miles. We were lucky in getting jinriki-shas,
as last night none were to be had, there being a party here:


of Japanese, consisting of fifty, and they had engaged all
available ones. However, some fresh ones coming in this
morning, Hakodati managed to secure five, otherwise we
should have had to have walked, and send our belongings on
pack-horse. The road is pretty, winding along the slopes
of the Haruna group, and overlooking the valley of the
Tone-gawa. The first part of the way is constantly up
and downhill, so that we found walking preferable. We met
many pack-horses, which are no easy matter to pass on
a narrow road, with their great packs sticking out on either
side, and you having to pass nicely within kicking distance.
We reached the plains about five miles before entering
Takasaki. They extend in a dead level to the sea-coast,
nearly go miles away, and are principally devoted to rice-
growing, the staple food and wealth of Japan. In olden days
a man’s wealth was estimated at so many kokus of rice. The
seed is first soaked and then sown or laid in heads in the
puddled ground, which is nightly flooded. The plants, when
about three inches high, are transplanted into rows a few
inches apart, in bundles of three or four. Rice is thus grown
wherever it is possible to obtain water, and in this way the
country is terraced in every available spot. It is very rarely
you see large fields, owing to the difficulty of finding any
country of a sufficient level nature for any distance, so that a
view from any height over rice-fields is very extraordinary,
the country being divided into many divisions of various
shapes. At Takasaki we halted at the principal tea-house
for lunch, and while we were refreshing the inner man,
Hakodati had engaged a carriage to convey ourselves and
luggage to Tokio, as we have given up all idea of going to
Nikko —we are both rather tired of roughing it, and I in
particular long for the comfort of an hotel, besides which the
weather looks threatening. We had determined to push on
this afternoon to Semachi, and re-occupy our old quarters,
as in the large town night is made hideous to our ears in
the tea-houses by geisha (singing girls) and sake drinking.
This morning, before starting, a curious Japanese custom
was brought to my notice —that of making a present to the
house-master before leaving. Hakodati informed us that
we ought to do so, but we said it was all very well, but what
had we to give ? The idea of giving money never entered
our heads. However, that was the custom. The two
yen, the amount of our present, were neatly wrapped up in
2 K


a piece of white paper. Outside is marked the amount,
and what the present is for, usually either, “tea” or
wine. The Japanese always wrap the money up in this way,
as it would be rude to present money openly. I have seen
geisha girls paid for their services in the same way.
I have not yet mentioned the currency of Japan. It is
divided into two divisions, coinage and kinsatsu, or paper
money, which latter is always at a large discount, varying
daily. While I have been here it has been as low as i‘73,
whereupon we both bought £IOO worth. Payments to
Japanese are made in kinsatsu, whereas to Europeans in
dollars, which are either Mexican or the silver Japanese yen,
a new coin which is generally taken as an equivalent to a
dollar, although in reality it is about two and a half cents less.
The coinage is decimal, the yen being divided into 100 sen.
The kinsatsu is at first most puzzling, as the English figure
is so small that it can only be made out with the greatest
difficulty. I have at present several works on Japan, and it
seems a pity that the authors have not shown more originality
intheselectionoftheirillustrations. From “ Perry’s Expedition
to Japan,” publishedin 1857, to Reed’s “Japan,” published in
1880, the same pictures may be found. As the weather
changes, so does the dress of the people. The basis of the
costume of both sexes is the kimono, which is merely a
shapeless dressing-gown. You buy the stuff in long strips
of about fifteen inches wide. The armholes are openings in
the side seams, to which are fastened the sleeves, which are
in one width, from three to ten feet long. These are partly
sewn up, and are used as pockets, into which everything is
dropped. Out of these I have seen the most extraordinary
collection of things brought. The paper used for pocket-
handkerchiefs is carried in the front part of the obi,
and in the huge folds of the bow behind are concealed
various other things. The sleeve, says Miss Bird, is the most
important part of the woman’s dress, and plays a very leading
part in the classical dances and in romantic poetry. It is
also used for wiping away tears.
When last each other we embraced,
A solemn vow of faith we swore,
And sealed it with the tears that chased
Adown our cheeks our drenched sleeves o’er.
The obi, however, is the part which takes most attention, as


the tying of it is an art, and an important part of a girl’s
education, and ranks with that of tea-making, besides which
it is the most expensive part of the dress. The prevailing
colours are blue and red. Over the kimono, in colder weather,
both sexes wear a shorter garment. In very wet weather
the men of the lower class wear a regular thatching of rice
straw, made in two pieces, one wrapped round the waist and
reaching to the knees ; the other as a cape over the shoulders.
Oiled paper is also largely used in wet weather, both as
coverings to merchandize, capes for the men, and as jinriki-
sha covers. About five miles out of Ikao we passed
through the village of Midsu-sawa, at the upper end of which
stands a large temple, dedicated to Kwan-non, one of the
“Thirty-three places” of Eastern Japan. At one side, and
under a pagoda, on a revolving platform, are six life-size
bronze figures of, I suppose, Buddha’s disciples. A Buddhist
temple is distinguished from Shinto from generally having a
large gateway instead of a torii. On each side of the
gateway are large hideous figures, with protruding eyes. In
front of them was a wire grating, on which were hung old
straw sandals and bits of white cloth. The figures themselves
are covered with bits of chewed paper, and hundreds
more are lying on the ground below. A worshipper
writes his petition on the paper, then chews it to pulp,
and spits it at the god. If it sticks, it is a good omen. A
priest in gorgeous vestments was saying a mass, kneeling
before the altar. At intervals, he struck a bell, and at one
time raised, by means of a string, the sliding door of the small
shrine situate on the high altar, which contains a figure of
the goddess. I could not help being struck with the similarity
to a Roman Catholic service. Griffis says almost everything
that is distinctive in the Roman form of Christianity is to
be found in Buddhism —images, pictures, lights, altars, in-
cense,vestments, masses, beads, wayside shrines, monasteries,
nunneries, celibacy, fastings, vigils, retreats, pilgrimages,
mendicant vows, shorn heads, orders, habits, uniforms, nuns,
convents, purgatory, saintly and priestly intercessions,
indulgences, works of supererogation, pope, archbishops,
abbots, abbesses, monks, neophytes, relics, and relic worship,
exclusive burial ground, See., &c. The religion of Buddha is
older by six centuries than that founded by Christ. They, too,
in their religion have an Adam and Eve as the first parents.
Christianity was first introduced into Japan by Xavier, a


Jesuit missionary, in 1549. In 1581 there were 200 churches,
and 150,000 native Christians. In 1583 an embassy of four
young noblemen was despatched by the Christian daimios of
Kiushiu to the Pope, to declare themselves vassals of the
Holy See. Eight years afterwards they returned, bringing
with them seventeen Jesuit missionaries. The number of
Christians, at the time of the highest success, was said
to be 600,000, among which were several princes, and
large numbers of lords and gentlemen in high official
position —generals and captains in the army, and the
admirals and officers of the Japanese fleet. The causes of
this astonishingly rapid success of the Jesuits are to be
sought in the mental soil which the missionaries found
ready prepared for their seed. The native religions
then afforded little comfort or consolation to their
adherents. The Japanese are an intensely imaginative people.
The priests of Rome came with crucifixes in their hands,
eloquence on their lips, and with rich dresses, impressive
ceremonies, processions, and mysteries, and outdazzled the
scenic display of the Buddhists. They preached the doctrine
of immediate entrance into Paradise after death to all believers,
whereas Buddhism promises rest in heaven only after many
transformations, births, and repeated miseries of life and death..
The story of the cross, made vivid by fervid eloquence, tears,,
harrowing pictures and coloured images, which bridged
the gulf of remoteness and made the act of Calvary near and
intensely real, melted the hearts of the emotional natives.
Furthermore, the transition from the religion of India to
that of Rome was extremely easy. The very idols of Buddha
served, after a little alteration with the chisel, for images of
Christ. The Buddhist saints were easily transformed into
the Twelve Apostles, the Cross took the place of the torii.
In the roadside shrine Kwan-non, the goddess of mercy, made
way for the Virgin, the Mother of God. Buddhism was
beaten with its own weapons. But was all this to last? No!
As the different orders —Jesuits,Franciscans,and Augustinians
—-increased, they began to encroach on one another’s parishes.
This gave rise to quarrels and mutual vituperation, at which
the Pagans sneered and the bonzes ( bozu , Jap.) rejoiced.
While the friars of these orders were rigorously excommuni-
cating each other, thinking heathens were not favourably
impressed with the new religion. Christianity received her
sorest wound in the home of her friends. Later on came


religious wars and persecution. Sentence of death was
pronounced against any foreign priest found in the country,
and the people were compelled to trample on the cross, or on
a copper plate engraved with the representation of “ the
Christian criminal god.” The fortitude of the Japanese
martyrs of the seventeenth century was marvellous. The
annals of the primitive Church furnish no instances of sacrifice,
or heroic constancy in the Colosseum or the Roman arenas,
that were not paralleled on the dry river beds and execution
grounds of Japan. In 1637 the Christians rose by tens of
thousands in arms, seized the old castle of Shimahara, but
after a siege of two months were defeated, and 37,000
•Christians were massacred, and thousands more were hurled
from the Rock of Pappenberg, in Nagasaki Harbour—the
Tarpeian Rock of Japan.” Then came the edicts against the
“ evil sect.” All over the empire, in every city, town, village,
•and hamlet; by the roadside, ferry, or mountain pass; at
every entrance to the capital stood the public notice-board,
on which, with prohibitions against the great crimes that
disturb the relations of society and government, was one tablet,
written with a deeper hand of guilt, with a more hideous
memory of blood, with more awful terror of torture, than when
the like superscription was affixed at the top of a cross that
■stood between two thieves on a little hill outside Jerusalem.
Its daily and familiar sight startled ever and anon the peasant
to clasp hands and utter a fresh prayer, the bonze to add new
venom to his malediction, the magistrate to shake his head,
and to the mother a ready word to hush the crying of her
fretful baby. That name was Christ. A few interesting traces
and relics still remain of the century of Christianity. In the
language the names Deus (God), Espiritu Santo (Holy
Spirit), Nasu (Jesus), and Kirishito (Christ) have remained.
*****
I have strayed a long way from the temple of the goddess
Kwan-non, at Midsu-sawa, thanks to Mr. Griffis again. We
reached Takasaki about one o’clock, and pushed on directly
after lunch, in order to visit .the silk thread mills at
Shimmachi before they closed. The bridge over the
Tone-gawa had been washed away, and we had to be
transferred to the other side in punts, where another carriage
was waiting for us. The mills are most interesting, and
give occupation to the girls of the district. They belong
entirely to Government. Until lately they were under the


management of a Frenchman, but now of Japanese only.
We examined the various processes of boiling, beating,
carding, combing, and winding, from the cocoon until
packed for the Yokohama market. We found our quarters at
the post-office as comfortable as before, and our little waiting
maids as charming. Had I not been in Japan a
month, I might have been a little taken aback at three
taking a bath at the same time as myself, the bath-
room hardly being 10 feet square. In one corner was a large
tub, in which they sat in turns up to their neck, in the other
corner was my small fiat tub of cold water. I, wishing to
have a cold shower there, the three graces kindly offered to
pour cold water over me, so I stood up in the centre and
they round me with buckets. I, in return, worked up a
tremendous lather of soap for their special benefit.
i jth Sept. —Left Shimmachi at six o’clock, in the same
style of carriage we had come up in. We found the roads
in the most dreadful state after the late rains, and bridges
washed away. We had to cross one—carriage, horses and
all—in a most primitive punt, attached to a rope stretched
across the river. The horses were taken out and made to
get into the bottom of the punt, and the carriage was run on
to a raised part in the centre, which was only just broad
enough. I quite expected a ducking, but we got over safely.
It is sixty-one miles into Tokio, and we took over twelve
hours to do it, changing horses several times. Jolt, jolt, jolt
—the whole way I resembled a wobbling jelly. On arriving
at the Sei-yo-ken at Tokio, we found no rooms, so sent
Hakodati off to Yokohama with our luggage, and to take
rooms at the Grand Hotel. We remained for dinner, and
afterwards strolled through the streets near to one of the
temples, at which there was a grand festival. It was
one of the prettiest sights I have seen for a long time. The
streets on both sides were lighted, at but short intervals,
with gaily-painted lamps, and the shops were all aglow and
decked out. The streets were crowded with booths and
people. Sometimes it reminded me of Paris in Christmas
week. We left by the nine o’clock train for Yokohama, and
immediately we were inside the carriage we both fell off
to sleep. How long we slept I don’t know, except that I was
awakened by a porter coming in with a lamp, and on turning
out found the station deserted.
18 th Sept. —We went out to Tokio to tiffin with Mr.


H , and met Mr. C , of the Naval College, whom
Miss Bird couples in her book with herself and “ Rags.”
19 th and 20th Sept. —We have spent these two days in
paying bills and curio-buying, the latter being no easy task.
I have also to-day received my long-looked-for budget of
letters, all of which contain the best of news. The weather
has changed, and is now almost cold.
21 st Sept. —We have taken our passage in the “ Hiro-
shima-Maru,” sailing this evening, but the weather has
almost made us wish that we had not. It is blowing half a
gale, and there is a big sea on, even in this sheltered
harbour. A wet day for your last in a town is certainly most
disagreeable, as there is always a certain amount of running
about to be done, and to-day we have had more than usual.
R. D. W , who has followed in our footsteps from New
Zealand, has taken over Hakodati for the time we shall be
absent, and will deliver him up at Kobe. The general
appearance of the weather confirms all accounts of September
being the worst month in Japan. Typhoons seem to have
been more numerous this year. The S.S. “ Glencoe ” had
the privilege of being in three on her way up the coast to
Shanghai, and the “ Niigata-Maru ” was all but lost in the
last. She had her fires put out, and lay for some time at
the mercy of wind and waves. Getting on board was no
easy matter, and it was a marvel to me that there were no
accidents, considering that there were 270 steerage passen-
gers, and to all appearances all scrambling at the gangway
at once. We have just received the sad news of the death
of the President of the United States, a truly more than
national calamity. At six o’clock, punctually, th’e huge
paddle-wheels began to revolve, and we were en route for
Shanghai. The “ Hiroshima-Maru ” has a history. She
was built in America, in 1853, and ran for ten years on the
Panama route as the “ Golden Age.” She afterwards was
one of the first steamers to cross the Atlantic to Liverpool,
and from there she proceeded to Australia. She now belongs
to the Mitsu Bishi Steam Navigation Company, carrying the
Japanese mails. They have a fleet of about 30 steamers.
On leaving the Gulf of Yedo there was a fair sea running,
but it was fortunately with us, and the “ Hiroshima-Maru”
was as steady as a rock.
22 nd Sept. —The amount of wreckage about is extra-
ordinary. A sharp look-out has to be kept to avoid running


on to some of it. On the voyage up the captain tells me
they had constantly to stop the engines, and float past, it
being impossible to steer clear of it. This gives one some
idea of the enormous loss of life in these typhoons. The
P. and O. boat “ Malacca,” on her way up from Hong Kong,
saved eleven men off three capsized junks, and a Russian
man-of-war more. In passing between the mainland and
the island of Oshima, there were numbers of dismasted and
wrecked junks lying on the beach.
2 3rd Sept. — We reached Kobe a little after midnight.
The morning broke bright and fine, but with a strong wind
and heavy sea, which increased to a gale, so that no
lighters could come alongside. It was all we could
do to get ashore, and had it not been for macintoshes
we should have had a regular drenching. Kobe is built
along the edge of the bay, at the foot of a range of
hills, and in some respects resembles Hong Kong. It is an
extremely pretty settlement, with broad and clean streets,
planted with trees. The Japanese town is called Hiogo, and
adjoins Kobe on the S.W. To this, after calling at the hotel,
we adjourned, to visit the curio shops, the principal of which
is “ Echigoyas.” He is a famous man amongst curio dealers,
and possesses some of the finest things that I have yet seen
in Japan. It is perhaps needless to say we came out poorer,
but wiser, men. The Bankruptcy Court is rapidly staring me
in the face, for when in these shops I cannot resist temptation.
In the afternoon we drove out to the waterfalls, called in
Japanese the Nuno-biki-no-taki, or Cloth Stretch Falls. They
are in one of the many ravines in the hills behind the town.
On our* way back we visited the Shinto temple of Ikuta,
which stands in a wood of cryptomeria and camphor trees.
It is dedicated to Wakahirume-no-Mikoto, the Japanese
Minerva, and is said to have been founded by the Empress
Jingu on her return from Corea.
24 th Sept. —A most lovely morning, so, soon after
breakfast, we went ashore again, and made our way to the
native town, where Tim invested largely in bamboo basket-
work, for which this town is noted, and I fell a victim to a
daimio’s feeding box. At 12 o’clock we were once more on
board, and in an hour were under weigh. Steaming near
the land, we passed close to the old feudal castle of the daimio
of Kiushiu. We were now in the famous inland sea, but
unfortunately, owing to our late start, the most beautiful part
504


will not come until after dark. As it was, everything was
most beautiful. At first a large sea, still as a lake,, bounded
on all sides by distant blue hills; then came narrow passages
and lovely terraced hills, and lastly a most gorgeous sunset.
25 th Sept. —We were soon to leave behind us this far-
famed sea, for after breakfast we entered the narrow Straits
of Shimonoseki, and anchored in a bay on the opposite side
to the small native township. All was cloud, mist and rain,
and what little we could see showed us the beauties we
were missing. Our only hope is that we may be more lucky
on our return. We left again shortly after noon, and were
soon out in the open. We had expected a roughish sea, so
were pleasantly disappointed at finding it the contrary. In
the afternoon we passed Yeboshi-shima, a solitary basaltic
rock, upon the top of which is a lighthouse. The formation
of the columns is extremely peculiar, as in one place they
are perpendicular, reaching in unbroken lines from the
water’s edge to the top, while alongside they suddenly change
to horizontal. We were then only about 50 miles distant
from Nagasaki, but it was doubtful whether we should be
able to make port the same evening, on account of the
darkness, and the many dangerous rocks and narrow passages
to be gone through, and no more lighthouses to assist in
navigation. At one time the Japanese were building
lighthouses to the most praiseworthy extent, but their
intercourse with foreigners is not of the most friendly nature,
owing to their quibbling about dutiable articles, so that
foreign masters have also taken advantage of the absence of
any law compelling the payment of lighthouse dues, and
refuse to do so. There is rather a fashion at the present
day to believe in Japan and everything Japanese, but those
who have to deal with them have a very different tale to tell.
Official red-tapeism is carried to a fearful extent; their ideas
are scarcely ever original —in fact, they are a nation of apes.
The modern Japanese that you meet in everyday life,
-dressed in badly-fitting European clothes, is the most
objectionable of creatures. The inquisitiveness of the rustic
in him becomes rude insolence. Dark as the night was
the captain held on, being able from point to point to pick
up the land. Fortunately, the elements were kind, and the
misty rain kept off, so that at 2 a.m we were safely at anchor
inside Nagasaki harbour.
26 th Sept Last night there had been no indications of


approaching bad weather, but this morning, from the
barometer’s sudden fall, and the general appearance of the
weather, there was little doubt but that we were in for a
typhoon. The Dutch man-of-war, near which we were lying,
housed her topmasts, and let go two other anchors. Directly
after breakfast we went ashore, and it was fortunate that we
did so, for half an hour afterwards the typhoon was upon
us, and all communication with the ship was cut off for the
rest of the day. To those who have never experienced one
it is impossible to give any idea of the force of the winds, and
we had indeed reason to be thankful that we were safely in
port, instead of on our way over to Shanghai. Before it
became very bad we went down into the native town in
search of curios, but moving about was anything but pleasant,
and as most of the shops had their wooden shutters up, it
was impossible to see anything, so that we made the best of
our way back; no easy matter, as it was in the teeth of the
wind. At one time I expected to be blown away, rikisha and
all, or smothered in the ruins of some falling house. As it
was, I came in for a shower of shingles, one of which
narrowly missed my head. The “Belle Vue Hotel” is built
on slightly rising ground, overlooking the harbour, so from
its verandah we got a capital view of the effects of the wind
on the water and shipping. Before very long, there was a
big sea running in the harbour, which began to affect the
coal-laden junks lying at anchor. One by one, they gradually
filled and sank, and the unfortunate occupants were left to
make their escape as best they could. Later on in the day I
went down on to the bund, and saw six junks sink one after
the other, and the occupants of one, six in all, were left in
the water clinging to some wreckage, and were gradually
drifted up the harbour. Not a single attempt was made to
save them, although they passed within fifty yards of the
Customs Wharf, at which there was a fine English boat, and
at all events enough of us to man it. Not a bit of it. All
the officials were gathered there, and rather seemed to look
upon it as a joke, and beckoned to the unfortunate men to
come ashore. Providentially, the wind drove them into
shallow water, and I walked round to see them land. The
poor wretches’ feet and hands were completely bleached, so
that they must have latterly hung on with great difficulty,
but how many are there who have not been so fortunate.
To-morrow will no doubt show. During the gusts the


water was lashed into foam, and carried in waves over the
harbour. Floating about were sampans (native boats) and
numberless pieces of wreck. A steamer of about 500 tons
dragged her anchor almost the whole length of the harbour,
and a barque came down uncommonly close to the
“ Hiroshima-Maru,” which had constantly to be paying out
cable to avoid a collision. Two or three steam launches
broke adrift, and we saw one have its whole top, funnel and
all, carried clean away; others kept their engines going the
whole time. It was indeed a sight of the grandest confusion
that I have ever witnessed. On land, too, the damage to
roofs and palings was considerable, and on going down one
street I kept a careful look-out for tiles, which were lying
about in all directions. The P. and 0. boat “ Malacca ”
left Kobe only a few hours after us, so that she will have
been caught in it; but as she carries an experienced pilot
she is nearly certain to have put into one of the many bays
which line the coast. The storm abated about five o’clock
and the glass began to rise, so that it was then virtually
over, but still there was too big a sea on for us to attempt to
get on board. At four o’clock, all of us—for there were several
others ashore—started off to a large tea-house in the native
part of the town, to see the “ John Nogie.” This is one of
the principal dances of Japan, but one which is rapidly dying
out. This is now the only town where it is danced to
perfection. Posturizing, not always of the most graceful
description, is its chief characteristic, and I found it dull and
monotonous, having seen so much of a similar kind in the
South Pacific. How it received its name I have at present
been unable to find out.
27th Sept. —What a change from yesterday ! A bright blue
sky, and the bay like a sheet of glass, in which are reflected
the surrounding hills. We were up early and went on board,
as I don’t know anything more miserable than being stranded
without one’s necessary toilet requisites. We have heard
that already sixteen bodies have been washed ashore, and
that over twenty junks have been sunk, amongst which were
those with our coal on board, so that we cannot possibly get
off until to-morrow morning—a thing I do not regret, as it
will allow the sea to go down, which it does very quickly,
and we can well amuse ourselves ashore in the curio shops.
Yesterday we had made one or two little purchases at a
man’s named Sato, so we returned there to-day. It ended in


my buying a cabinet, with a whole set of feeding arrangements,
all with the same pattern on, and having belonged to the
same daimio, as every piece bears that one’s particular crest.
These, with other little things we have bought here, we have
had packed up and shipped direct to England by the
“Stentor,” which at present happens to be in harbour loading
for London.
28 th Sept. —We left punctually at eight o’clock, and steaming
down this lovely harbour was indeed thorough enjoyment.
It is, in fact, a long fiord running inland, and lined by hills.
From the water’s edge on either side run up thickly-wooded
gullies. The entrance to the harbour is thickly studded with
islands, one of which is the famous Pappenburg, from whose
precipitous side, in 1658, 4,000 Christians were hurled. To-
day it is made the great place for pic-nics by the holiday-
makers of Nagasaki. Outside, the sea was like a sheet of
glass; at all events, we had expected a roll, but there was not
even that. Once past the Goto Islands we had said adieu to
Japan, for a time only, it being our intention to return in
November. We were now on our road to Shanghai, across
the Japan Sea.
30 th Sept. —At about five o’clock we sighted land, and soon
after sunset the light on the North Saddles showed up. Long
before reaching land the sea had become the colour of pea-
soup, from the mud brought down by the Yang-tse-Kiang
river, the mouth of which we were now approaching. This,
“The Great River,” as the Chinese call it, ranks after the
Amazon and the Mississippi as the largest river in the world.
Hankow, from which the large steamers of the “Glen” Line
start for England, laden with tea, is 600 miles up, and it
is still navigable for smaller steamers to I-Chang, the
last open port, a further distance of 400 miles, after which
there is an obstacle in the shape of rapids. Beyond this
there are no open ports, but it is supposed to be navigable
for another 1,000 miles. There is daily communication
between Shanghai and Hankow, the trip up taking about
four days. At a distance of about forty-six miles up the
Yang-tse-Kiang we entered the Hwang-pu, at the entrance
to which lies Wusung. It is here that there is a bar to be
crossed, and one which the Chinese will not allow to be
removed, as they look upon it as an obstacle which might
some day be of use to them. Fourteen miles up the Hwang-
pu lies Shanghai, which we reached about 5.30 a.m., having


been under easy steam the whole way up, so as to hit off the
right time for crossing the bar.
ist Oct. —Our first sight of Shanghai, and a most im-
posing one it was. Here the river takes a great bend, and
along the banks of the outer curve runs a substantial “ bund,”
over three miles in length, and on which are built the Hongs,
Consulates, and other principal buildings, all of the most solid
and palatial description. We lay alongside the Mitsu Bishi
Company’s wharf, which is in the American quarter, or “ Con-
cession.” Beyond, and divided from it by the Suchow Creek,
is the English Concession, and which in turn adjoins that
set apart for the French. Here the river is at least half a
mile wide, and is lined with steamers, while others are lying
out in the stream. Further up can be seen a perfect forest
of masts belonging to the junks lying off the Chinese town.
Just on the other side of the Suchow Creek, which is spanned
by a neat iron bridge, are the public gardens, prettily laid
out, and a great boon to men living in the Hongs during the
summer months. The point opposite, formed by the bend
of the river, is called Pootung, on which there are several
foundries, and a small church. It is there that sailors are
buried. We found that we can leave to-day for Tien-tsin,,
and have a choice of three steamers. Another of our pas-
sengers, a German cavalry officer, Herr Von B , away
on leave, has also decided to go to Pekin. We breakfasted
on board, and in the meantime sent a China boy off to
order a carriage. The carriage arrived, but with a jarvie
who could not speak a word of English, so he was sent
away to be changed, and I was vastly amused at the
order given to the China boy, which I will give as a
fair specimen of “ pidgun ” English. You catchie trap..
Why no catchie proper man ? This piecy man, he no savy,
no piecy talky, so fetchy No. i; piecy man can savy.
Come chop-chop. We drove about and examined the various
steamers, and finally decided to go by the “ Hae-an,” a paddle
steamer of about 600 tons, leaving at four o’clock to-morrow
morning. She belongs to the China Merchants’ Trading
Company, who own a fleet of over thirty steamers, one of
which they have just sent to England, and in it all the requi-
sites for opening a “ Hong” in London. We tiffined at the
hotel, and then I called on E. H , whom I heard by the
last mail had settled out here in Gib-Livingstone’s, one of
the old houses. It was mail day, so I left him to finish his
509


letters. We then drove to the “ Bubbling Well,” about three
miles out of the town. We passed many comfortable-looking
houses surrounded by gardens, the large racing' stables of
Jardine’s, and the racecourse, on which were being exercised
numerous ponies, as the races come off next month. Once
outside the town one could see on what a dead level plain
it has been built, all under cultivation. The road was
thronged with Chinese, driving, some in gorgeous carriages.
On our way back we met E. H , and he took us into
the Country Club, for which ladies are also eligible. There
are very pretty gardens, with room for four sets of lawn tennis,
and the main room can be fitted up for private theatricals,
at which they are very great here. The Shanghai A.D.S.
is noted. E. H is at present stage manager, and we
afterwards went all over the theatre with him, which the
A.D.S. rent from the company which owns it. It is large
and neat, with most roomy stalls. Having dismissed our
Jehu, we strolled in the Bund Gardens until dinner time.
E. H had asked me to dine with their mess, but being tired,
and having mail letters to write, I excused myself. Formerly
the large business houses had both senior and junior messes,
and both with regard to eating and drinking there was no
limit. This, however, was in the good old days. After that
they were allowanced, but still lived “ over the shop,” as it
was called. Now all that is changed, and in but few
instances men have rooms of their own.
2nd Oct. —Coffee served in your state room at six o’clock,
and breakfast whenever you like to order it, is not conducive to
early rising, so that when I came on deck we were out-
side the Yang-tse-Kiang river, and steaming steadily through
the pea-soup sea. This is a most admirable ship, with
saloon for’ard of the engines, and with one of the most obliging
captains I have had the pleasure of sailing with. Tim and
I have the largest state cabin, and being a deck-house, we
have the advantage of two large windows. At the
head of the saloon are chairs and tables, and comfortable
couches with windows looking out for’ard, so that it
is always cool. We have a fair complement of passengers,
mostly going to Chefoo, the sanatorium for both Pekin
and Shanghai, besides which there is a youthful missionary
bound for the same port, and who in a few days will
don the Chinese costume, pig-tail and all. To form
this pig-tail the head is shaven, all but a circular portion on


•the crown, four or five inches in diameter. On this the hair is
: allowed to grow as long as it will, and is braided into a neat
tress of three strands. Should, however, the hair be not long
enough to suit the taste of the wearer, other hair is neatly
.plaited in. The lower extremity is securely fastened by silk,
braided in amongst it. The colour of this silk denotes whether
the wearer be in mourning or not. In some the pig-tail
reaches almost to the ground. When at work or at other
times when the tail would be troublesome, it is wound
round the head or looped over the neck, but to come into
the presence of their masters or superiors with it in this state
would indicate bad manners, and the same applies to the
black cap, except in summer, when the wearing of it is excused
on account of the heat. What is the origin of this pig-tail ?
It is not a Chinese custom, but a Tartar one —introduced by
the first Emperor of that dynasty, who usurped the Dragon
throne, in 1644, as a proof of the submission of the Chinese
to his authority. Previous to that the hair had been worn
long all over the head, and gathered in a coil on the top. It
is a badge of servitude to the Tartars, and long hair on the
whole head is an index of rebellion against the Imperial
Government at Pekin. A common name for rebels is
“ the long-haired robbers.” Mr. Doolittle sums up the
custom in the following words: “ Long hair on the whole
of the Chinaman’s head, when interpreted into plain English,
means: — I respect the Tartar supremacy. I own no foreign
.master. I am a Chinese freeman, and my hair exhibits my senti-
ments on the subject. While the pig-tail proclaims ; — I am not
my own master. I cannot even dress my hair according to my
pleasure. Ido not conceal my political condition and character.
My head shows that I am a slave to the Tartar Emperor.
Buddhist priests shave the whole head, while those of
the followers of Confucius wear an unbraided coil, with or
without some of the hair being shaven; so that an inspection
of a Chinaman’s head will at once show his political or
religious status. No Chinaman would dare to show his face
with his head dressed in any other fashion, but at the same
time he seems to have entirely forgotten its servile object, and
now he takes great pains to keep the tail neat, as though it were
an honourable badge. Another curious custom in the wearing
of hair is that none but grandfathers may wear a moustache.
Women do not shave the head, but wear their hair dressed
in many different fashions. Their great peculiarity, however,


is in their feet, the shape and size of which denote difference
of caste. Compressing the feet is said to have originated
with a certain Empress named Tak-ki. She had club feet,
and prevailed upon her husband, in order to hide her deformity,
to cause all ladies of the Court to compress or bandage their
feet. This is commenced when the girl is about five years
old, and it requires two or three years, if properly attended
to, for the feet to be cramped into the genteel shape. There
is no iron or wooden shoe used, as is so generally supposed,
but bandages only. Small feet are not the mark of wealth,
but of gentility. They are the fashion, and are considered
beautiful, and a girl thus crippled is able to marry into more
respectable and more literary families than though her feet
were of the natural size. They cannot walk firmly, but
totter along as if on stilts. Upon this subject there is no
law; it is merely a custom, as is our tight lacing, which is
perhaps equally ridiculous,
3 rd Oct. —During the night we had rounded the Shantung
Peninsula, on the north side of which is the bay of Yeu-tai.
Soon after nine o’clock we were at anchor in Chefoo Harbour,
protected on the north-west by a long sand-belt, terminating
in rocky islands. The Height is a rocky peninsula, jutting out
into the harbour, on which is a group of buildings containing
a signal station. Behind this lies the native town, and
stretching away to the left is a beautiful sandy beach, on
which are built an hotel and several bungalows. In the
background rises a hilly range, after the summer’s heat
almost devoid of vegetation, but one of the great charms to
the visitor, from the dead level of Shanghai. There were
three men-of-war and numerous other vessels lying here,
amongst which were two flying the Siamese flag. As we
were only to remain here two hours, I preferred remaining
on board to going ashore. Tim, however, went with Herr Von
B . Chefoo is noted for its grapes, and materials made
out of the silk of the wild silk-worm. The whistle sounded,
and the paddles began to revolve. There was a shout, a
scream, and a sampan shot from underneath the revolving
paddle, and emerging from the debris was a Chinaman,
bleeding, but alive. Engines were stopped and again started.
More shouts and screams. Two men were said to be inside
the wheel. However, on inspection they were discovered to
be hanging on to the stanchions supporting the outside
galleries. It appeared that this sampan was trying to land.


passengers just as the steamer was starting, and had gone
behind the paddle-box, not expecting the engines to be reversed.
Some men had reached the gangway; two others, seeing the
immediate danger, sprang on to the stanchions, and the one
not having time for that, jumped just in time into the bottom
of the sampan. Fortunately, the wheel, which was only moving
slowly, struck it fair and square, and only pressed it under the
water to shoot it out on the other side. What an escape !
But I have heard of a greater. The mate of a vessel in a
similar case, without the knowledge of anybody, went with a
light inside the wheel. The officer of the watch, seeing the
sampan all right, rang the telegraph, and before the fact
of the mate being in them was discovered, the engines had
taken two revolutions. The engines were stopped, and he
came out unhurt, but a drowned rat. Soon after leaving
Chefoo, we rounded the Bluff, and passing between the
Islands of Meau-tau, entered the Gulf of Pe-chee-lee. It was
a day of days, the sea as calm as it was possible to be, and
not a movement in the ship, so we are looking forward to
crossing the bar of the Peiho early to-morrow morning.
4 th Oct.— Why could not the fine weather have lasted
only another six hours, and allowed us to cross the bar ? We
reached the bar at about nine o’clock, and it was blowing
fresh from the N.E., with a rising sea, so that no lighter
could come alongside to relieve us of some of our cargo.
We came to anchor outside and waited for high tide, but
there seemed little hopes of our being able to get over, as the
wind was rising, and with it the sea. We buried our bows
continually under water, and the saloon windows had to have
the dead lights put up. Twelve o’clock came, and we watched
with anxiety through our glasses the different signals, as
they were hoisted on the signal station seven miles off at
Taku. At last high tide came, and with it 13J feet on the
bar; but although we were only drawinjg i2|-, our captain dare
not try it with such a sea running. A steamer lying close
to us dragged her anchors, and had with difficulty to steam
back to her original anchorage. During the afternoon three
other steamers arrived, so that at all events we have company.
It is bitterly cold, but fortunately there is no rain. Soon
after midnight I heard the gong sounded, and the anchor
being weighed, so I turned out to see if we should be lucky
enough to cross the bar. Already one vessel was under
weigh, and the lights on the others showed that they, too, were
2 L


going to have a try. It was indeed groping in the dark, for
the wretched fellows, although paid 3,000 dollars a year, had
not the lights in the red buoy which marks the channel. We
bumped. “ Stop her ! ” Full steam astern, and a message
to the chief engineer to give her all he could, and we were
off, and soon back at our old anchorage. We, however, left
behind us the other hard and fast. The rest wisely turned
back without trying it.
s th Oct. —During the night two other steamers arrived, so
that we are seven steamers in all and several sailing craft
lying at our anchors, and I daresay all equally anxious to get
across the bar. Although seven miles away as the tide rises,
we anxiously watched the signals at the ports. At 12 o’clock
13 feet 6 inches is up, so our captain determines to try it
again as the sea has gone down somewhat. Again we
tackled it, but again we failed, and this time with worse luck,
for we were unable to come off again, and had to enjoy the
bumping until the tide got low enough to let us rest quietly.
We tried all we could to get her off, but these wretched, old-
fashioned beam engines are next to useless when once the
vessel has lost her way, so that we had to content ourselves
with our position. Another had also stuck, so there were three
aground. Is there another country in the world where seven
large steamers could be detained, and some, if not all, with
mails on board for the capital ? We, however, had plenty of
•opportunity to gaze at a distance on the once famous Taku
Forts. These guard the entrance to the Peiho river, the high
road to the capital of the Celestial Empire. They were
finally captured on the 21st August, iB6O, by Admiral Hornby.
He landed his forces some little distance down the coast, and
took the Chinese by surprise from the land, a proceeding
looked upon by them as very unfair. In the previous year
he had, however, suffered a serious defeat. He was on one
occasion assisted by the American admiral, who made use
of the words, “ Blood is thicker than water,” which have
since become a household saying. Our time on board the
“ Hae-an ” is passing very pleasantly, as we have the best of
captains, who endeavours in every waytomakeuscomfortable.
We have also, as a fellow-passenger, an exceedingly nice girl,
charming in every way, to whom we have all lost our hearts,
and I, in particular, as she hails from Manchester. She is
the daughter of the Rev. J. L , of the London Mission in
Tien-tsin, returning home after an absence of eight years.
514


6th Oct. —l intended turning out to see if we had got off
the banks, but being very sleepy I heard nothing, and awoke
this morning to find we were still at the old anchorage. When
were we to get over this dreadful bar? Everything seemed
against us. Although we were the first steamer here, the
others had lighters alongside. We at last got a lighter, about
an hour before high tide. How those coolies worked ! The
most movable part of our cargo was brick tea, done up in
packages averaging about 16 to the ton, and these they
tumbled out at the rate of a ton a minute. This tea is com-
pressed out of dust and sweepings, and is sent overland into
Russia, on the backs of camels. It was amusing to see the
way they tallied the packages. One man stood on the ship,
and into each poked a stick, which were collected by another
man on the lighter. These are arranged in bundles of five,
fitting into a frame made for the purpose. By this means
they are able at a glance to tell the number of packages passed
out. This system is adopted all over China. In company
with five others, we crossed the bar, and entered the Peiho
river. It seemed impregnable. On all sides were low-lying
forts made of mud and chopped straw, and heavily mounted;
but it is said that the vibration of the big guns would bring
them down with a run. What a country to look at! Every-
thing was mud as far as the eye could reach. On one side
were huge evaporating pans for salt-making, which is here
also a Government monopoly. The pumps for working off
the water were worked by windmills. Huge heaps of the
salt lined the river banks, some uncovered, others being
covered, first with mats, then with a thick layer of mud,
which preserves the salt from the weather. Inside the mouth
ofthe river were lying, in contrast one to the other, old warjunks,
carrying the mostantiquated of iron cannon, pikes, and match-
locks, and decorated with enormous flags of many colours, and
the latest improvements in gunboats, built for the Chinese
Government by Sir William Armstrong, and each armed
with one 38-ton gun. It was a curious sight, five large
steamers to all appearance moving over the land, and so
winding was the river that we appeared to be scattered all
over the country. Villages lined the river side, the houses,
which were made entirely of mud, alive with inhabitants,
children, of course, predominating. There was slight cultiva-
tion along the river, and the people were hard at work
irrigating, by lading the water up in closely-plaited baskets-


In some cases, however, donkeys turned a wheel which drew
up the water. At Kokou there were lying a great number
of huge sea-going junks, which go south to Canton, &c., with
the N.W. monsoon, returning, laden principally with timber,
with the S.E. monsoon, making only one journey a year.
Some of the bends in this river were terrible, and at one we
nearly ran down a huge junk, for we were going up at 12
knots an hour, in order to try and reach Tien-tsin before the
river fell too low. At another bend we had much trouble in
passing the steamer before us, which had run aground; ropes
had to be got out and taken ashore, and our head drawn round
by the steam winch. At the great double bend we ran aground,
but got off only to stick in the mud in mid-stream. The
river was now too low for us to get any higher, and we had
the annoyance of seeing the other steamer go slowly past us,
but not far, for another hundred yards brought her up
hard and fast in the mud. We were now only three miles from
Tien-tsin. Miss L ,as might well be imagined, was most
anxious to get on. We immediately formed a guard of
honour. The captain kindly lent us the gig, so we rowed
her up the river. Not very far up we saw in the darkness a
figure on the river bank, which hailed us. It was her father.
We were not far from the landing-stage, so he walked along
the river bank, during which time we sang “ Home, sweet
home.” Perhaps it was not strange, but this made me feel
dreadfully home-sick, and long once more to be at home. A
wanderer’s life is supposed to be by those who are tied at
home all a bed of roses. One life-long holiday. Is it ?
Echo answers “ No.”
jth Oct. —At five o’clock this morning we were lying
alongside the C. M. Co.’s wharf. After breakfast we started
in a drizzle to present our letters to Mr. G , the represen-
tative of Jardine, Matheson, and Co. He kindly obtained a
servant for us, and gave us many useful hints for our journey
to Pekin. Of course the best way is to ride, but the weather
being so unsettled, he advised us to go up in carts. Neither
of these routes apply, however, if there are ladies in the party,
when the river route must be taken. This is pleasant enough
in the spring or summer, but at this time of the year it is too
tedious, as both wind and current are against you, and the
coolies have to track nearly the whole way by means of a
bow-line fastened to the mast-head. Mr. G had some
splendid specimens of Hawthorn Blue Nankin china, the
516


same for which there was such a rage in England two or
three years ago. Two vases were sold for over £6OO. The
prices they fetch here show what fearful humbug this is.
Years ago this was the commonest pattern, and such quan-
tities of it were shipped to England that the market was
flooded, and the greater portion found its way to Holland,
where it was re-glazed, and now there may often be seen
so-called Dutch potteries with this pattern faintly showing
through the glazing. We afterwards tiffined with him, and
met several of the leading lights of Tien-tsin, all good sorts.
We then went on to the bank, which has only just been
started here, and got the necessary for our journey, as it is
next to impossible to get money in Pekin. We also got “ cash”
for the road, taking ten dollars worth, and so heavy was it
that we could not carry it away. 1,200 go to the dollar.
The manager opened one of the large safes, and showed it to
us full of “shoes.” These are moulded pieces of silver, worth
about 75 dollars, and are the only money that can be taken into
the far interior. In paying away money so much is clipped off
at a time as is wanted. Taking chairs, borne by four coolies,
and with our boy on a donkey, we made our way to the
native town, quite two miles from the settlement. Our road
lay over a rough, muddy waste. So slippery was it that I ex-
pected every moment to come to unutterable grief. On our
way we passed “ The Elgin ” joss-house, where the treaty
was signed (16th June, 1858) after the storming and taking
of Canton by the English and French forces on the 28th
of December, 1857, and capture of the Peiho forts in
the following spring. This treaty stipulated for the resi-
dence of ministers in Pekin, the protection of the Christian
religion, free permission for British subjects to visit any
part of the interior, if provided with passports, &c., &c.
We are nearing the town. Why cannot our coolies go faster ?
The smell is something awful. Handkerchiefs are almost
useless. In this respect all Chinese towns are alike. The
outsides are one mass of human filth. In fact, in all respects
they are alike. If you have seen or smelt one you have
seen and smelt them all. Tien-tsin has extensive suburbs,
where the greater part of the trade is carried on. It is built
on the banks of the Peiho, where it is joined by the Grand
Canal. This wonderful waterway, which in olden days
connected Pekin with the Yang-tse Kiang, like every-
thing else in China, is now tumbling to decay. It was


built in the 13th century by Kublai Khan, the first of the
Tartar dynasty, better known as the Grand Khan, and at
whose Court the great Venetian traveller, Marco Polo, resided
for so many years. Its actual length is 650 miles, and
is the great connecting link between a system of natural and
artificial waterways, the aggregate length of which is about
4,000 miles. Once inside the town there are streets and
narrow lanes, all filthy, full of dust, mud, human filth, ant
rotten vegetables, the only scavengers for which are a few
mangy dogs and the pigs, of which there are always great
numbers ; shops, without architecture, but with the
gaudiest of signboards, most of which hang down
perpendicularly. Above some of the shops runs up a grand
facade, resplendent with gilt, while from others are hung
out specimens of the articles to be found inside. Our
principal object in visiting the town to-day was for the
purchase of fur coats, to be used on our trip to the Great
Wall. Some of the furs we saw were most beautiful, but I
contented myself with buying a heavy sheepskin coat for five
dollars. We had intended visiting the scene of the massacres,
but not having time left it until our return. We returned to
the hotel, and there ordered provisions for our two days’
journey, and five carts to take ourselves, two servants,
bedding and food. These carts are the most extraordinary
contrivances, built for strength,but certainly not for comfort,
consisting of a small wooden trelliswork frame with round
top, and covered with common blue cloth. On each side is
inserted in this cloth a square piece of black gauze, which
acts as a window. The front is open, unless the occupant
wishes to be unobserved, when a curtain is hooked on. All
this rests on a frame of great strength for the weight of the
cart. The shaft protrudes out behind like an Irish donkey
cart, with three transverse pieces of wood on them for
carrying luggage, &c. The wheels are of the rudest
description, the rim consists of many stout pieces of wood
fitted together, and studded on the outside with innumerable
large-headed nails, like a prison door. They have no tire, but
separate pieces of iron are nailed on with similar nails, so as
to cover the jointing of the woodwork. The driver sits on the
shaft. For a journey a second mule is attached to the
axle by means of long ropes, which pass through an iron ring
hanging from the shaft. To the leader there is neither
bit nor rein, being driven entirely by the whip. We dined.


at the hotel, and afterwards went on board the “ Hae-an,” as
Capt. D had kindly offered us our bunks in case we
could not get beds ashore, which we failed to do.
B th Oct. —The skipper himself came in to call me at
five o’clock, he having already got the boys at work preparing
us a good breakfast. I never have travelled with a kinder
captain, and I leave him with great regret. It was drizzling,
and at six o’clock our cavalcade of four carts started. The
first experience of a Northern China cart is indescribable.
Were it not for your being wedged in with bedding and wraps,
I think your life might be despaired of. Over roads that
are not roads, and have never been repaired, or in the
same old ruts, big enough sometimes to engulf cart
and all. Fortunately, this great plain has neither
rock nor stone in it, so we were spared their extra bumping.
The day turned out most beautiful, with every sign of all bad
weather having passed, so we regretted our not having
decided to ride. The most comfortable places in these carts
is, as we soon found out, sitting on the shaft, on the opposite
side to the driver, with your legs dangling down. We were
soon all perched in this position. The inside of the cart has
no seats,but you arrange your belongings to suit yourself, and
considering that the size inside is only about two-and-a-half
feet wide by three-and-a-half feet long,and not more than four
feet high, you have not too much room to spare. How
different to travelling in Japan ! No clean roadside tea-house,
with sweet little handmaidens to welcome you. Here all is
filth. The country was most uninteresting, being one vast
plain, not divided by fences, and with very few trees.
However, the whole was under cultivation, and everywhere
were the people at work, ploughing up the land, after first
finishing gathering the maize, millet, and bean crops. The
ploughs are rude pieces of wood, with an iron stave, but at
the same time seem to do their work well. Ponies, oxen,
donkeys, and even mules are used to drag them. They next
harrow with a mere framework, into which are plaited thin
sticks; on this a man stands, and the earth breaks up so
readily that this is quite sufficient. They then roll in parallel
lines with a small circular roller, which wobbles about on a
square wooden frame. Into these lines the seed is cast, and
then covered with fertilized earth. I noticed that in clearing
the land nothing was wasted, the roots of the millet being
carefully pulled up, shaken and packed for firewood. In the


different hamlets, everybody was hard at work threshing the
millet and beans. This is either done by flails,'or by driving
a stone roller with a donkey attached over it, the heads of
the millet or the dried bean plants being just spread out over
the threshing floor. Others were at work winnowing by
throwing the seeds high into the air. But the most
picturesque group of all were the women, sitting round the
heaps of maize heads. Such colouring ! These heads are first
carefully dried on the roofs of their sun-dried brick houses. The
women here work equally hard with the men, in spite of their
small feet, but cannot, of course, carry any great loads.
Beauty of any sort was a thing here quite forgotten, Along
the road one saw various kinds of conveyances. The most
curious of all was the wheelbarrow. Although a most
cumbersome-looking vehicle, it far exceeds ours for carrying
powers, as the weight is concentrated on the wheel, so that
the man trundling it has only to steady it and propel, whereas
with us the weight comes between the man and the wheel,
acting as a lever against him, compelling him to use another
force, that of lifting. I first saw these barrows in Shanghai,
and it was most amusing there to see stately Chinamen and
Chinawomen sitting on them, Irish car fashion, and being
trundled along the streets. Here, however, they are bigger,
and carry enormous loads ; then they have one or more
donkeys hooked on in front, and another man to keep steady
and drive. At times, too, they hoist a sail, but that I have
not seen yet. A man sits on these sideways, leaning on the
cage encasing the wheel. There are country carts, too, used
for carrying farm produce, &c. These, when heavily laden,
require six to a dozen mules, oxen, or ponies, for it matters
not much which. They are all separately attached by ropes
to the axletree of the cart, which passes through a large iron
ring in the shaft, generally the off-side one. We stopped
the night at Ho-shi-wu.
gth Oct. —Here we got our first experience of a Chinese
country inn. They all resemble one another, varying only
in the extent of their filth. Leaving the street you pass
under an archway, and enter at once into a large courtyard,
round which are ranged sleeping-rooms, stables, &c. This
yard often presents a most lively scene. The rooms are
small, having a third or even more occupied by a brick-built
platform. This is the bed or hang, and is peculiar to Northern
China. All that is provided is a straw mat, not always of


the cleanest,-covering its tiled tops. This kang is really a
stove, and is heated by burning in its little grate a bundle of
the roots of the millet {sorghum). In the interior is a flue
passing backwards and forwards. On the top of this you
spread your bedding, and it is intended to accommodate as
many as can fit on to it. Our bedding consists of a China
blanket, which is a very thickly wadded quilt. , Were I to
start from England again on a lengthy tour, and more
especially if going to Japan, I would take with me an air
mattress. Nobody can tell until they have tried it how
tiring it becomes sleeping on a floor or kang. Let your
quilt be ever so soft, your thigh-bone always will feel its
way through.
gth Oct. —Five o’clock finds us out and about, and our
boys at work preparing our breakfast. The same wearisome
journey over the country, differing not in one iota from
yesterday. Sometimes passing close to the river, while at
others, although we could not see it, we could trace its
course by the sails and masts of the many boats, leading
away into the far distance. The towns are very curiously
built, as nearly every house is surrounded by high walls, so
that you only get occasional glimpses into the interior. On a
grander scale are the Ya-muns of the mandarins. All, how-
ever, is uninteresting, and the only thing that nature seems to
have created is Chinamen, and they with difficulty manage
to get from nature just sufficient to keep soul and body
together. At last our journey is drawing to a close, and we
are making all the speed we can, for the gates of Pekin close
at six. There are the walls before us, and on either side of
us, stretching away in one long castellated line into the
distance, while at a few regular intervals can be seen the
double-roofed gateways. We are in Pekin, having entered
by the Tung-pien-men gate into the Chinese city —for
Pekin is divided into two, Chinese and Tartar. The
entrance was extraordinary. Once a magnificently paved
road, but not having been repaired for years, the huge
blocks of granite have got displaced, and between them
there are crevasses, into which first one wheel then the
other disappears with the most appalling bump. _ Once
inside the city we turned immediately to the right to
avoid the main thoroughfare, and passed through a
slough of despond of the blackest dye, reaching above our
.axletrees; then over an open plain, across stinking ditches.


the cleanest,- covering its tiled tops. This hang is really a
stove, and is heated by burning in its little grate a bundle of
the roots of the millet {sorghum). In the interior is a flue
passing backwards and forwards. On the top of this you
spread your bedding, and it is intended to accommodate as
many as can fit on to it. Our bedding consists of a China
blanket, which is a very thickly wadded quilt. Were I to
start from England again on a lengthy tour, and more
especially if going to Japan, I would take with me an air
mattress. Nobody can tell until they have tried it how
tiring it becomes sleeping on a floor or hang. Let your
quilt be ever so soft, your thigh-bone always will feel its
way through.
gth Oct. —Five o’clock finds us out and about, and our
boys at work preparing our breakfast. The same wearisome
journey over the country, differing not in one iota from
yesterday. Sometimes passing close to the river, while at
others, although we could not see it, we could trace its
course by the sails and masts of the many boats, leading
away into the far distance. The towns are very curiously
built, as nearly every house is surrounded by high walls, so
that you only get occasional glimpses into the interior. On a
grander scale are the Ya-muns of the mandarins. All, how-
ever, is uninteresting, and the only thing that nature seems to
have created is Chinamen, and they with difficulty manage
to get from nature just sufficient to keep soul and body
together. At last our journey is drawing to a close, and we
are making all the speed we can, for the gates of Pekin close
at six. There are the walls before us, and on either side of
us, stretching away in one long castellated line into the
distance, while at a few regular intervals can be seen the
double-roofed gateways. We are in Pekin, having entered
by the Tung-pien-men gate into the Chinese city—for
Pekin is divided into two, Chinese and Tartar. The
entrance was extraordinary. Once a magnificently paved
road, but not having been repaired for years, the huge
blocks of granite have got displaced, and between them
there are crevasses, into which first one wheel then the
other disappears with the most appalling bump. _ Once
inside the city we turned immediately to the right to
avoid the main thoroughfare, and passed through a
slough of despond of the blackest dye, reaching above our
.axletrees; then over an open plain, across stinking ditches.


and more rough and tumble, and we are through another gate
and within the Tai'tar city. Still avoiding main thoroughfares,
we thread about through lanes hardly wide enough to
let our cart pass. These lanes are lined with walls,
shutting out the houses from view. At last we come to a
main street, cross a bridge, and we are amongst the Legations
—we pull up at Vanard’s Hotel. Horror! it is full to over-
flowing. I talk to a German, dressed China fashion, pig-
tail and all. He tells me he sleeps on the floor. His
reddish pigtail and moustache look odd. lam told he is a
trader. Nothing for it but to move on to Tah Lee’s Hotel.
It is an odd corner, not over clean. Tim goes off at once to
the Legation, to see if he can hear of anything better. He
sees one of the secretaries, who receives him with supercili-
ous politeness, and tells him it is not as bad as it looks. Poor
consolation, for it looks very bad. Hotel! Can a stretch of
about four rooms, looking out on to a narrow courtyard,
with a blank wall, in which lumber is kicking about, be called
such ? Here we are, and we must make the best of it, so
our boy was set to work to get things in order. A warm
bath and a good dinner made us feel happier.
io th Oct. —The first thing this morning we walked
round to the British Legation and left cards on Sir T. Wade,
and saw the same man Tim interviewed last night. He
was very polite, and handed us over to the orderly, who is
to order ponies for us for our journey to the Great Wall. I
am afraid our visit to Pekin will be entirely of a tourist
nature, not having any letter of introduction. The fates
have been against us. In Shanghai everybody to whom I
had letters was away, or otherwise there is little doubt
but that one would have been passed on. Sir Pope
Hennessy, to whom Tim had letters, left early this
morning on his return to Hong Kong from a visit to
Sir T. Wade. We are not likely, therefore, to see anything
of social life here. Herr von B is at his Legation, Prince
Bismarck having recommended him. Taking carts, we first
drove to the Astronomical Observatory, situate on the N.E.
side of the Tartar city. This owes its origin, it is said, to the
Persian astronomers who followed Kublai Khan. It was
erected in the 13th century. In the courtyard below are two
magnificent bronze planispheres of considerable size, and
supported by four bronze dragons of exquisite workmanship.
These are said to be the finest bronzes in Pekin, perhaps in-


Eastern Asia. On the terrace above, which is built against the
city walls, are several other most wonderful instruments, con-
sisting of quadrants and one large celestial globe, upon which
the planets and stars are marked by raised brasswork. These
instruments, with the exception of one which was given by
Louis XIV., were constructed in 1674 by order of the Emperor
Kanghi under the direction of the Jesuit Father Verbiest. It
is marvellous to see these chef d’oeuvres on such a pedestal;
stones broken, and weeds growing between them, rusty and
shattered iron fencing, and everything looking in the most
tumble-down condition; but such is China. From this elevated
position we got a magnificent view of the city, which looked
like a labyrinth of huts surmounted by a forest, broken only
by the temple and palace roofs. Beyond all this was the
desert, then the horizon on one side, while on the
other, in the far distance, rose the Mongol Mountains.
Above all was a cloudless sky. No sound came from the
town, but from the flocks of pigeons which kept encircling
overhead came the most lovely music. In Pekin these birds
swarm, and attached between their wings are tiny bamboo
whistles of various notes. As the bird passes through the
air these emit a most plaintive sound. Almost adjoining
the Observatory is the Examination Hall (K’ao-ch’ang),
which we next visited. Passing through a most elaborate
gateway, a main avenue leads up to a large building. Half way
up this avenue is a pagoda, and from each side lead narrow
lanes lined by cells, numbering, I believe, from twelve to fifteen
thousand. At the entrance to each of these lanes wereplaces
for cooking food. In these cells live the candidates for the
2nd and 3rd,degree of Chinese literary education for 14 days,
while they prepare their essays, and during that time they
are not allowed to leave them by day or night. Their size is
about feet broad, 55 feet high, and four deep. It looked
exactly like an imperial pig-sty. Around the large hall were
rooms evidently for the examiners, &c. It is a case of fees
at all these places, and we had provided ourselves with paper
tiaos, 12 of which go to a dollar. These tiaos are issued by
the various banks, and are noted for their unique appearance,
and for the difficulty of being successfully counterfeited.
Some men, however, are very clever at counterfeiting these
bank bills. They generally become known to the bankers
and Government officials, who, instead of arresting them, make
arrangements with them not to counterfeit their particular
523


bills, and not to teach others to counterfeit them, for which
privilege they pay a fixed sum, according to agreement.
Banks are very numerous, and are under no Government
control. Anybody who has sufficient money can establish a
bank and issue bills, on which occasion he gives a feast, and
the neighbouring bankers there and then agree to honour his
bills. If there should be a run on a bank, and the banker is
unable to meet his bills, holders may seize anything they can
laytheirhands on, and so thoroughly gutthe bank. In this way
there have been many disgraceful scenes, as there are always
loafers and beggars about only too ready to join. Bankers
speculate largely in the alteration of the value of the dollar, and
no doubt assist in rigging the market to suit their own purposes.
The next place we visited was the Great Llamaserai, a
Lama temple of Yung-ho-Kung. It is a monastery of the
Mongol branch of the Buddhist religion, called Shamanism,
and contains more than 1,000 priests. It dates from the year
1725, and contains various buildings, all of which have
their attendant priest, who must be fee’d before he will open
the door. Passing two fine bronze lions, and an enormous
incense burner in the courtyard, we entered the first hall.
Standing on the table in front of the main altar are some
magnificent specimens of Email Cloisonne, candlesticks,
incense burners, and various other works of art, all presents
from different emperors. The walls were draped with
embroideries, and on either side of the doorway were a
beautiful toned bronze bell and a huge drum. Close to this
hall is the sanctuary of Buddha, a sombre, narrow, but
immensely high building, entirely filled by the colossal statue
of the god. A staircase behind leads up several stories to
the level of his shoulders, from which you can get some idea
of its size and detail. It is said to be 60 feet high, and to
be the largest idol in China, perhaps in the world. There
were other buildings, but we refused to enter. Fair play is a
joke, but exorbitant demands for entrance fees were getting
to be more than one. I daresay we missed nothing. Wai-
Miao, or temple of Confucius, was founded in the 13th century,
or Yuan dynasty. Temple it is not, for Confucianism
is not a religion. Confucius was only a philosopher,
and the father of rationalists. Passing through a court-
yard filled with cypress trees, we entered at one end a
large hall, raised on a broad and handsome terrace of
white marble, and surrounded by a beautifully carved balus


trade. What a contrast to all the gaudiness of Buddhism !
Here was “a magnificent empty void,” the roof supported bv
huge teak pillars, 60 feet high, brought from Burmah. On
one side, under a wooden canopy, was a small red upright
tablet of wood, upon which was written, in Chinese and
Manchu, the following inscription : “ The Tablet of the Soul
of the Most Holy Ancestral Teacher, Confucius.” Similar
tablets of the four sages, Tseng-tszu, Mencius, Yeu-hui, and
Tszu-szu, are placed on each side, while round the hall are
many others to various followers. Close to the roof are
large tablets in praise of Confucius. Each emperor presents
one in token of veneration. “Of all Men the Unrivalled,”
“ Equal to Heaven and Earth,” “ Example and Teacher of all
Ages ” are some, while the present boy-emperor’s bears the
following inscription: “His Holiness is Divine; Heaven
cannot circumscribe it.” The floor is covered with a coarse
drugget, made of camel-hair ropes. Everything is covered
with the thickest layers of dust. Here comes the emperor
twice a year to say his prayers, and I can only hope that
before he comes they clear away a little of the dirt. Round
the courtyard are arranged rows of buildings, containing
over ioo more tablets to celebrated scholars of the Confucian
school. Facing the hall is a handsome gateway, in which
are the celebrated stones, shaped like drums, and bearing
very ancient inscriptions in the old seal characters. These
are the oldest remains of the Chinese literature, and are
supposed to date from the Chow dynasty, two centuries
before Confucius, so making them 2,500 jmars old. In front
of this is where the triennial examinations are held for Chin-
Shin, a doctor of literature, the highest Chinese literary
degree. Round this court are erected stones, in commemo-
ration of each examination, bearing the names and addresses
of the successful candidates. They date back five hundred
years. In one of the courts are six huge shafts, supported
on the backs of enormous turtles, on which are engraved
the conquests of the Emperors Kang-hi, Yung-Cheng,
and Kien-Lung; over each of these is built a yellow-
tiled pagoda. In fact, the roofs of all these temples
are resplendent with yellow and green tiles, showing
that they are supported by the emperor. Near to the
Confucian Temple is “ The Hall of the Classics,” or
Pi-Yung-Kung. There is a large open space, in the centre
of which stands the Imperial Pavilion, a square pagoda


shaped building, in the middle of a circular basin of water
surrounded by a marble balustrade. The building is approached
on the four sides by marble platforms. At the far end of the
courtyard is a magnificent yellow-tiled archway. In this
pavilion is the emperor’s throne, from which he confers
certain honours on those who have successfully obtained
their literary degrees. Opposite to the pavilion is a large
building, where candidates submit to an examination before
the emperor himself. To come out first at such an examina-
tion, and to receive the personal attention of the emperor, is
a Chinese student’s highest ambition. Two long and low
corridors line each side of the enclosure, under which are
arranged about two hundred huge granite tablets. On these
are engraved the entire contents of the King, or thirteen
classical books —the highly-prized remains of the ancient
Chinese literature. Were this kept in order, how lovely it
might all look; but weeds growing in every hole and corner,
and dust covering everything, give it a mean and neglected
appearance. We were now tired of sight-seeing, so told our
coolie to drive us through the town and back to our hotel.
Pekin is the most extraordinary city I was ever in, and I
suppose the oldest. It is said to date from 1121 8.c., under
the name of Chi. In the sth century b.c. it was the capital
of an independent state named Yen. Marco Polo mentions it as
Cambaluc (Khanbaligh, i.e., City of the Khan), and from that
title of the Mongols the greater part of the palaces derive
their origin. They were kept in the same condition by the
emperors of succeeding dynasties, and were but little changed.
When the Ming dynasty succeeded the Mongols in 1368, A.D.,
Nanking (southern capital) became the capital of the
empire, until Yung-Lo, the third emperor, transferred, in 1409,
the seal of “ the Son of Heaven ” to Pekin, which then took
the name Pei-ching (northern capital). Thus was it called
at the time of the early Jesuit Fathers, and by whom it
became known to the western world. In 1419 Yung-Lo
built thepresent wall ofthe Tartar city, and in 1544 surrounded
the suburbs to the south of the city by a wall, which now
forms the Chinese town. When the Manchus (the present
dynasty) took possession of Pekin, in 1644, the northern part
of the city was given to the victorious army for habitation.
The Tartar city is in a regular square, with a circumference
of about 14 miles. Adjoining it to the south, forming an
irregular square, is the Chinese city, with a circumference


about ten miles. The total circumference of both is 2o| miles,
and the area 25 miles. No wonder this city was called that
of the “ Magnificent Distances.” Miss Bird is wrong when
she applies this term to Yedo. The walls consist of a stone
foundation, and two brick walls filled with mud. The
average height is about 40 feet, while at their base they are
50 feet thick, and at the top 36 feet. At intervals of 300
yards there are massive buttresses. Into the Tartar city there
are nine gates leading, each topped by an enormous pagoda-
shaped tower, of over 100 feet high, of the most striking appear-
ance. Each gate is defended on the outside by a semi-
circular or square enceinte, on which there is a smaller
tower, facing the larger one. The largest gate is the
Chien-Men, pierced by three enormous gateways. In the wall
of the Chinese city there are only seven gates, which have
not such a striking appearance. The centre of the Tartar
city is occupied by the Imperial city, another walled
enclosure of about seven miles in length. Inthe centre of it, and
almost in the centre of the whole city, is the Imperial Palace,
surrounded by a wall and moat, and having the most in-
accessible appearance, from which it has been called the
“ Forbidden City.” Into this there is no possibility of getting.
On the northern side is another walled enclosure, containing
a fine park, in the midst of which is an artificial hill. On it
are several pavilions. In one, Tsung-Cheng, the last Ming
emperor, hung himself when the victorious army of the Man-
chus entered the capital. It is said that this hill is made
entirely of coal, to be used for fuel in case of a siege. The
name this hill bears is Ching-shan (Prospect Hill), or Mei-
shan (Coal Hill). Having passed both the Forbidden City and
the park, we came to a string of most beautiful lakes, covered
with lotus, and spanned in the centre by the Marble Bridge.
Standing on this bridge we got a magnificent view of temple,
palace, and garden, and on slightly elevated ground a beau-
tiful white pagoda. Pekin was laid out with a most liberal
hand. The streets cross one another at right angles. Some
are broad and some are narrow. The houses of the better
class are hiddenby high walls; the rest are mere miserable mud
huts. The streets of Pekin are one of the city’s chief sights.
Once the main arteries were paved with marble ; now they
are one mass of holes and deep ruts. There are no such
things as sidewalks, and the crowds of people, carts, donkeys,
and camel-trains is something extraordinary. Some of the


larger streets are lined by fine shops, with the fronts magnifi-
cently carved, and signboards of wonderful proportion ; but
in these days of overcrowding poorer brethren have run up
small shanties in front, giving the street a sort of fair-day
look. Articles of second-hand clothing are displayed in there,
and boots and well-darned socks are laid out to tempt the
passer-by. Under an awning may be seen a story-teller,
with a large, open-mouthed crowd anxiously listening, or a
songster amusing his audience by, to us, the most dismal of
ditties, sung in falsetto. But while speaking of the streets
of Pekin, I must not forget the beggars—a regular recognized
fraternity. These are most miserable-looking objects, filthy
to the utmost degree, and hardly clothed in rags or some old
piece of matting. They carry with them either gongs or
pieces of hollow wood for the purpose of making a noise, and
will stand beating these, entirely interrupting business, so
that the shopkeeper, in self-defence, gives cash to get rid of
the fellow. Others sing, keeping time with bamboo clappers.
These beggars are governed by headmen, whose’ names are
entered in the office of the district magistrate, and beggars
within a certain boundary are under the control of one of
these headmen, who live, not by begging, but by perqui-
sites. A headman may make an agreement with shopmen,
merchants, and bankers that they shall not be visited by
any beggars, for which a sum of money, varying from a
few to ten and twenty dollars per annum, is paid, and
in proof of this agreement he gives a slip of paper on which is
printed the following : “ The brethren must not come here to
disturb or annoy.” This paper is pasted up in a conspicuous
place, after which, should a beggar persist in his importunities,
he may be beaten. The money so paid for this is supposed
to be divided amongst the beggars. Often, in cases of burying
and marriages, large sums have to be paid to one of these
headmen to stop any trouble or annoyance en route.
will Oct. —This morning we started on our expedition to
the Great Wall. Herr von B and Dr. L , of the
German Legation, joined us. We were all mounted on Mongol
ponies, with two mafus (grooms) in company. Three carts
took our servants and provisions. These latter were sent
direct to Wan-Shou-Shan, our tiffin rendezvous, as we were
first going to visit Yuan-Ming-Yuan, or the Summer Palace,
which was destroyed and sacked in iB6O as a just punishment
to the Chinese for their horrible treatment of British subjects


who were taken prisoners when bearing a flag of truce. It
took us over an hour to reach the Hsi-Chih-Men gate, from
whence a stone-paved road leads to the Summer Palace,
passing through the large suburban village of Haitien. Yuan-
Ming-Yuan signifies “round and splendid garden,” and such
it was until iB6O. The Versailles of China, abounding with
extensive and costly palaces, it was used exclusively by the
Emperor and his Court. It has an area of twelve square miles,
and is artistically laid out with artificial hills, &c. To these
grounds entrance is strictly prohibited, but on the far north
side some enterprising Chinaman has knocked a hole in the
wall, and he gets a living by holding visitors’ horses and fees
for entrance. It was a pitiable sight inside to see all that
must have been so lovely levelled to the ground. Lying in
all directions were most beautifully-sculptured marble
capitals, shafts, and pedestals. The roads have become
impassable, marble bridges broken, lakes overgrown with
weeds, canals choked, gardens and walks have become
devastated, ruins without tenants; temples without priests.
The only thing that seems perfect is a beautiful pagoda,
built entirely of polished tiles of many colours. This stands
■on rising ground, and from it you get a capital view of all
the surroundings. What you can see of the buildings
shows plainly a mixture of Oriental and Western luxury and
elegance, due no doubt to the Jesuit priests, from whom
the Chinese derived such enormous benefits, apart from
religion, and which shows itself in all their works of art.
Leaving Yuan-Ming-Yuan, we made across the plain to
Wan-Shou-Shan, passing through a country of ruins, homes
of those once dependent on the palace. Leaving our
horses just inside the gateway, which was guarded by two
immense bronze lions, we proceeded through innumerable
ruins, once the reception halls for emperors, and entered on
a magnificent terrace bordering a broad expanse of water. A
lovely vista lay before us, broken by eccentric arches, some
circular, some octagonal, shaded by trees, and bordered by
quaint water-worn stones, mounted on marble pedestals. It
was a delightful walk. In a pavilion, built out into the
water, lunch was awaiting us. Above us rose a hill, or
gigantic terrace built of enormous blocks of stone, and ascended
by a colossal staircase, reminding me very much of some of
the pictures of Nineveh or Babylon. Everywhere can be seen
the debris of palace and temple, garden, house, and pagoda.
2 M


After lunch we strolled to the far end of the terrace, and came
to a massive structure known as the “ Pagoda Bridge,” on
which is built a pavilion. In the water below lies a massive
stone junk, no doubt a regular plaything in times gone by.
The view over the lake (Kung-Ming-Hu) was beautiful. On
all sides could be seen the most beautiful marble bridges, and
one in particular, of fifteen arches, leading on to a small island
on which there is a temple. We next ascended the hill by a
winding pathway. To the right and left were ruins, but the
one on the very top was in splendid preservation, built entirely
of yellow and green tiles. It is a noticeable object in the
landscape. Each tile has on it a sitting figure of Buddha. The
view from here was most extensive. Pekin, with its walls,
towers, and prominent buildings hardly ten miles away,,
seemed beneath us; then the lovely lake and its many bridges,
while behind lay stretched out the range of hills. On the
nearest spur of the Hsi-shan rose a magnificent marble
pagoda, while on the slopes of the hills were old forts said to
have been used for the drilling of troops in attacking fortresses.
As we descended we passed a most beautiful pagoda of deep
blue tiles, relieved by various other colours, whose little bells
were tinkling in the breeze. Further on is a small temple,
built entirely of bronze. We had now no more time to spare,
so to horse, and started for Chang-Ping-Chow, whither our
carts had preceded us. It is no joke in this part of the world
being locked out, for then you have to find lodging where you
can. Our ride was a helter-skelter one across country; we
lost all signs of roads until we hit off the town of Sha-ho, after
which we followed along the banks of the river of the same
name.
12 th Oct. —Soon after leaving, the mountains began to
draw in, and we entered on a vast amphitheatre, round which
are ranged the thirteen tombs of the emperors of the Ming
dynasty. Here there is an imperial road leading to the
principal mausoleum, the Chang-Ling, that of the Emperor
Yung-Lo, who reigned from 1403 to 1424. We first arrived
at a marble gateway or pai-low, dating from a.d. 1541. This
is probably the finest pai-low (gateway) in China; it is
constructed entirely of fine white marble. The fashion in
China in building a wooden pai-low is to roof it with green
or other tiles over each compartment. Viewed from a
distance this magnificent gateway seems to be so roofed, but
on nearer inspection it may be seen to be cut in solid marble.


It is go feet long by 50 high, and is divided into five arches
of a square shape, decreasing equally on either side, from the
centre one. Crossing a stone bridge, we next approached
the Great Red Gate, the former entrance to the park, but
the walls have now entirely disappeared. Further along
comes a pavilion, in the centre of which is the usual
massive shaft borne on the back of a gigantic turtle, twelve
feet long, and engraved with a poem of the Emperor
Kien-Lung. Four stone pillars, each supporting a griffin,
surround this pavilion. Beyond this begins the Avenue
of Animals, one of the most extraordinary sights in the
world. On either side of the road are colossal statues,
coarsely carved out of one piece of greyish sandstone.
They stand facing one another in pairs, and it was with the
greatest difficulty we could get our horses past them. The
pairs are about 20 yards apart, and consist of lions, unicorns,
griffins, camels, elephants, and ponies. Beyond are three pairs
of military and three of civil dignitaries. The avenue
terminates with a triple gateway. Passing over two dry
river beds, once spanned by magnificent stone bridges, we
crossed some richly-cultivated land, planted with persimmon
trees, at present in full bearing. The fruit somewhat resembles
a small flat pumpkin, and is of a bright orange colour, the
leaves of the trees being of the brightest scarlet. We presented
ourselves at the portals of the tomb of Yung-Lo. It consists
of a large enclosure, divided into two courts. At the division
stands a magnificent hall, erected on a fine marble terrace,
with elaborately carved staircase and balustrade. On entering
we were struck with the eight rows of pillars. They consist
of one teak trunk and are 60 feet high and 12 feet in circumfer-
ence, a present from the King of Siam. Beyond is a second
court filled with oak trees, gorgeous at this time of the year
in autumn tints. At the far end stands the actual tomb, a large
tumulus, more than half a milein circuit, and about 150 feet
high, covered with trees. In front of this stands a massive
two-storied pavilion. This we entered by a sloping passage,
through which the coffin would be borne. Ascending to the
top terrace, there is a large marble shaft bearing the Emperor’s
posthumous title of “ Ch’eng-tsuw6n-’huang-ti,” i.e., the
“Perfect Ancestor and Literary Emperor.” It is from this
terrace that a magnificent view of the surrounding country is
obtained, and in the different corners of the plains may be seen
the other tombs, all somewhat resembling this one, but of


lesser magnitude. There are 13 altogether. The two first
emperors of the Ming dynasty are interred at Nankin, while
the last, who hanged himself on Coal Hill, in Pekin, is buried
near that city. As we left, we discovered a marvellous echo
in the coffin passage, the voices being repeated in the same
tone, and as distinctly as uttered. A ride across country
of about ten miles brought us to the old walled city of Nankow,
standing at the entrance to the Nankow Pass, the great
commercial highway into Mongolia now, as it was centuries
ago. It is through this pass that all the camel trains
carrying tea into Russia must go. There we stopped for
tiffin, at a fairly comfortable inn, and then pushed on, on
donkey back, for the road was not practicable for our horses.
It was a rough road following the river bed, and winding
about amidst vast boulders. Once there was a paved
highway, remnants of which are still extant, and in which
may yet be seen the deep ruts worn by the carts. Now a
cart must be unshipped and carried through on camel or
mule back. The pass presented a lively scene all along its
fifteen miles —trains of camels, laden with tea for Russia,
merchants mounted high on their mule packs, and humbler
donkey-riders, and numerous pedestrians. Five miles up
the pass wearrived at Chii-Yung-Kuan, another fortified town,
and in which there is a famous gateway of the 14th century,
adorned with four most quaint bas-reliefs, and a Buddhist
inscription in the Sanscrit, Thibetan, Chinese, Mongol, Uigur,
and Niuchih languages. These towns are not only fortified
in themselves, but they have fortified walls stretching up to
the top of the hills on each side of the pass. The weather,
which had been warm and lovely, changed to a cutting N.E.
wind and cloudy sky. I sat shivering in my saddle, which, by
the way, gradually became more uncomfortable. I found it was
my fault, not that of the saddle. Another five miles’ scram-
bling and we were at the temple of Shih-fo-ssu, with its
guardian temples perched on the rocks above. The rocks
here are carved with many quaint figures of Buddha, executed,
no doubt, by the workmen engaged on the Great Wall, for it is
from there that we got our first view of it. The pass at that
point became very narrow, and after another two miles a
final scramble brought us to the summit. There before us
and on either side was the Great Wall. Rising and falling
in zig-zag lines, appearing and disappearing behind rocks,
it followed the spurs and unevenness of the mountains.


at one time rising to their very summit, the next moment
reaching to the bottom of some deep gorge. We reached the
gate of Pa-ta-ling, 2,000 feet above sea level, dividing China
from Mongolia. The sun was setting, and a perfect picture
was spread out in front of us, but a rough outline sketch
was all that I could obtain, for my fingers were benumbed.
Around lay old iron cannon of the Ming times, showing signs
of serious work. As to the age of the Great Wall, there are
various and differing opinions, but the following I fancy is
the generally recognized one. From the Pacific coast, until
it reaches the desert border of Thibet, it crosses twenty-one
degrees of longitude, and with its windings has a length of
upwards of 1,200 miles. This great work was begun by the
Emperor Chin-Wangti in the year 240 b.c., and it was
completed in tbe year 220 b.c. —a surprising work, one of
magnitude and perfection, and yet completed in twenty years.
The aboriginal tribes of the Mongolian race, centuries ago,
left their sterile homes in the north and spread themselves
over the south-eastern portion of the continent of Asia,
established there a kingdom, and built up a prosperous and
highly-refined race. Annoyed by incursions from the same
northern steppes, this wall was built to protect themselves.
For 1,400 years did it serve its purpose, but during that time
the people had declined in strength and vigour. Then came
Kublai Khan, who forced the wall and conquered China, and
reigned as the first Emperor of the Mongol dynasty. Years
rolled on, and even that dynasty came to an end, for in 1368
the Chinese again gained the ascendant, and having expelled
the Mongols, placed upon the throne the first emperor of the
Ming dynasty, which lasted 276 years. In 1644 the
Manchus established themselves in Pekin, and finally, after a
seven years’ struggle, acquired sovereignty of the whole
empire. One and a half miles further on we reached the
walled town of Chatao, and sought for quarters at the inn. All
was full, but they immediately turned out from the principal
guest-chamber some Chinese travellers. The rooms were
redolent, and it was long before they assumed their normal
atmosphere. The courtyard was full of camels, and on our
way down we passed several camps. Round the centre tent
was piled the merchandize, and round that again were
ranged the camels in a square with their heads facing
inwards. These are animals I admire, but do not love, and I
always give them awideberth,fortheir viciousness is noted. A


man came to assist our boys in getting our rooms in order,
but he smelt so strong that we had to forbid him a second
visit. These men hardly ever change their clothes, and in
the cold seasons certainly never wash. To begin with, their
clothes are not made for washing, being either skins or of
wadded cloth. We passed a comfortable night in spite of
the cold and the gruntings of the camels outside, but before
turning in I had a sharp attack of ague.
13th Oct. —Saw us start on our return journey, but Herr
von B and Dr. L left earlier, as they were due on
the morrow at a dejeuner to be given by the German Minister.
We, not being pressed for time, took it easier, and made a start
about eight o’clock. It was raining slightly, but that soon
cleared off, and we made the return journey to Nankow in
four-and-a-half hours. There we tiffined, and afterwards
pushed on to Nang-pang, where we found a decided improve-
ment on last night’s inn.
14 . th Oct. —On our way back to Pekin we first visited the
Temple of the Great Bell, which is only about one mile outside
the city walls. It was built in 1578, to accommodate one of
the five bells which the Emperor Yung-Lo had ordered to be
cast a century and a half before that time. The bell is 15
feet high, and at least half a foot thick. It is covered, both
inside and out and on its edges, with Chinese characters,
consisting of extracts from Buddhist works. We ascended
by a staircase above it, and amused ourselves by trying to
throw cash through the small aperture at the top. If you
succeed in this it is said that you will succeed in whatever
you attempt. If I could believe it, I would attempt something
at once. Leaving this we rode across an open plain of over
a mile wide, used for drilling troops, to Hwang-ssu, or “ The
Yellow Temple.” Within the precincts of this temple there
is a marvellously beautiful white marble pagoda, erected
during the last century by the Emperor Kien-Lung, to the
memory of the Teshoo Lama, the uncle of the great Dalai
Lama, from Thibet. He died of smallpox, when on a visit to
the Court in Pekin. On the eight sides of the base of the
pagoda are engraved scenes in the Lama’s life, from his birth
to his death. We entered the city by the Tung-chih-men, and
on our way back to our hotel visited Ku-lou, or Drum Tower,
containing a huge drum, which is beaten in times of alarm,
and to give the watches of the night. Watchmen also parade
the streets and beat together two pieces of wood, a noise that
534


:is apt to keep you awake. Close to this tower is Chung-lou,
or the Bell Tower, in which is another of Yung-Lo’s 'five great
bells. They are each said to weigh 120,000 lbs. This tower
was built in 1740 by Kien-Lung. Close to it is the temple
where Sir Harry Parkes and Captain Lock were confined
towards the end of their captivity. It was now all I could do
to sit on the saddle, so petitioned Tim to give up any more
sight-seeing for to-day, and hasten back to the hotel. I can
see my friends smile as they read this, but indeed it was no
smiling matter. The dust in Pekin is something fearful, and
we were both as black as coal-heavers.
15 th Oct. —Tim went round this morning to our friend the
orderly at the Legation, and got from him the address of a
doctor, who later on came round to see me. He was an
American attached to the Protestant Mission here, with a
Chinese hospital under his control. “ Poultice every half-
hour,” and he left me.
*****
Four weary days, and the monsters —for there were
two —together with several other smaller satellites, have
succumbed. Never before in my life have I had a boil,
and why should they seize me here of all places ? Curio
dealers have been my only joy, and I think my friends
at home would have laughed to have seen me regularly beset
by these at other times perfect pests. Curios of every
description, china of every age, silks, satins, and embroideries
of every sort and colour. lam afraid I bought more than I
otherwise should have done had I not been laid up. Tim
has been amusing himself much in the same way, and has
made one or two expeditions. One morning he started early
to witness an execution by strangulation. A mere bamboo
awning was put up by the side of the street, under which sat
a mandarin. The condemned man, dressed in red, and with
a stick stuck in his collar, on which was fastened a piece of
paper with his sentence written on it, was brought in a cart,
and led before the magistrate. He simply gave the order for
his immediate execution, whereupon he was taken a little
further up the street, jostled by the crowd. A string was put
round his neck and tightened by being twisted with a stick,
until death ensued. Sometimes, just as the man is on the
point of death, they loosen it again, and so torture him like
a cat playing with a mouse. After death, the mandarin


examined the body, gave some orders, and departed. All
this happened in the open street, and the man is' left to lie
there like a dead dog until the next day, when he is taken
and thrown outside the city wall, and there he remains until
somebody has compassion on him, and removes the body for
burial. My room at night presented a most comical
appearance, being full of coolies, carpenters, and packers, all
at work, under the superintendence of our boy, packing.
Every now and then, some dealer, more daring than the rest,,
forced his way to my bedside, with “No. i piecey, welly
good,” whereupon he is ignominiously kicked out. Already
are five carts ordered for to-morrow morning, to take ourselves
and belongings to Tung-chow.
30 th Oct. —Tim made a second attempt to get into the
Temple of Heaven, but again failed, owing to some mandarins
being inside. Were it not so, the worthy custodian is ready
for the price of ten dollars to let you in, and so risk a good
bambooing. After tiffin all was in readiness, and getting our
cavalcade in order, we started for Tung-chow, a distance of
about fifteen miles. There is very little to interest one along
the road, except the Pa-li-Chiao (Palikao) bridge, built of
white marble, and curiously ornamented. It was badly
damaged in the war of iB6O in an engagement which took
place near it. Prom it, the French General Montauban took
his title, that of Comte de Palikao. There is a grand new
road being constructed, but this is not for the good of the people,
but for the funeral cortege of the Emperor’s mother, who died
a year ago, to pass over on its way to the royal mausoleum.
Tung-chow we reached at about six o’clock, when we
immediately transferred our belongings on to a house boat,
for which we had to pay eight dollars. The usual price for a
boat is six dollars, but as there were only two in at that time
they, of course, took advantage of it to charge us more. The-
river Peiho there was little more than a small muddy
stream, and on its banks rose the walls of the town, and two
fine pagodas. Camels there were in any quantity, waiting for
their loads of brick tea. A house boat is a long barge, the
centre of which is covered in,and contains three compartments,
one for a sitting-room. On a higher level is that set apart
for sleeping. On the floor of this you spread your bedding
and rugs, and were it not for the draught, would not be
uncomfortable. At the other end is the part for cooking, &c.
These three compartments are divided by doors. At nine


o’clock we started, and I rather fancy that our boatman took
advantage of the night, and of our being asleep, to take it
easy.
2i st Oct. —Monotonous, though interesting for the first
time, is this river journey of 113 miles, the great highroad to
the capital. It is crowded with craft, nearly all of which were
being towed up the river, and what astonished me was that in
no case was other than men used for the purpose. Of course,
when the wind suits, they set their enormous sails. They
can then make fair way. We, who ought to have had the
fair wind, had it instead in our teeth, and consequently our
progression was very slow. It was bitterly cold, and we
walked a greater part of the distance by day, taking short
cuts across the different bends. Besides our own servant,
we had on board another boy, who had asked for a passage,
who had been a cook at the English Legation, so that we
have fed right royally.


CHAPTER X.
Tien-tsin in its War Paint —The Story of Terrible Slaughter—Shanghai
by Gas-light—The Gayer Side of Chinese Life —A Visit to the
Venice of Japan —Ozaka, an Ancient City oftheEast —More Antiquities
—A Peep into a Monastery —Another into Buddha’s Peeper—A
Tumble through the Temples —A Square Meal in Japan : More Cloth
than Dinner—A Compliment to the Mikado—The Ugliest Man in
the World —Doing the Rapids near Kioto —The Break-up of a Jolly
Party—Where Umbrellas are made in Japan—A Glorious Discovery —
Bitter Beer; Eureka ! —On Tramp in a Strange Land—How Travellers
are Treated in Japan —An Interesting Procession —A Row on the
Road to Yokohama —Farewell to Japan—Homeward Bound —’Frisco
in the Dim Distance—Arrival at the Golden Gates—lmpressions
of a Mushroom City—Across tho Continent to New York —Notes
by the Way—lnteresting American Customs—On Board the
“Senna”—Home, Sweet Home.
22 nd October.
WINSTEAD of reaching Tien-tsin, as we ought to have
,1C Sn done, this morning, it was nearly six o’clock before
1 we were once more comfortably settled in the Globe
Hotel. The river, as it winds its way through the
town, is interesting, its banks thickly lined with junks, some
of which we were told were war junks. We passed the junc-
tion of the Yiiho and Peiho, and a little further along came
to the bend, in which stands, as a monument of the Tien-
tsin massacre, the gutted French Cathedral, and near it the
open space in which was the French Consulate, and the
establishment of the Lazarists, but these latter buildings were
entirely destroyed by fire. On the other side of the river, in
a small house, lived ten Sisters of Charity of St. Vincent de
Paul, devoting their lives to the poor. Under their charge
was an orphanage for children found in the streets and left
there to die, so common amongst the Chinese. Let us now
go back to when the English and French first settled in Tien-
tsin, and we shall there see the primary cause of the troubles
that were to follow. The Chinese are very peculiar in having
many associations attaching to particular places. Now, when


we were on the look-out for a site for our consulate, if we
happened to have hit on a spot with some such association,
and were asked to fix on some other spot, we immediately
did so; but not so the French. They fixed on the spot where
the cathedral now stands, which happened to be a most
sacred one in the eyes of John Chinaman. They were asked
to move on and choose another; but that was the spot they
had chosen, and that was where they intended to remain.
In May, 1870, alarming rumours began to be circulated that
certain children had disappeared, that they had been killed
by the Sisters. An illness broke out at the same time in the
orphanage, and several children died. This all seemed to
assist these awful rumours. Their bodies were buried in the
cemetery near the French Consulate, which were afterwards
dug up by the mob and grossly outraged. Pere Chevrier, the
head of the Lazarists, immediately petitioned M. Fontanier
to speak to the Chinese authorities before matters went too
far, but instead of paying any attention to him he turned a
deaf ear. At M. Fontanier’s door must be laid the cause of
the massacre, forbad he then acted, all further trouble would
have been averted. The Russian Consul-General was the next
to call and see M. Fontanier, but he was refused admittance,
and afterwards demanded an interview in writing. M,
Fontanier called the next day, but on the subject being
broached by the Consul-General, replied, “What business is it
of yours to meddle ?” and instantly left the house. Things
went on this way from bad to worse. Interviews took place
between M. Fontanier and Chung-hou, the commissary of
“The Northern Ports” (Chefoo, Tien-tsin, and Nu Chwang),
who was employed in the direction of all affairs regarding
foreigners, and with the Chih-hiien, or chief magistrate, at
which interview the Consul behaved in the most insulting
way. The mob had increased, and were daily getting more
excited, and no one made any attempt to restrain them.
General Chen-Kwo-Shuai had arrived, commanding a body
of irregular troops, the terror and disgrace of the Government,
adored by the Pekin mob, noted for his acts of violence,
and for his intense hatred of all Europeans. Such was
the state of affairs in Tien-tsin, and at a time when
there were no gunboats of any nationality in the river,
a fact which the mob well knew. At last the ill-fated 21st
of June arrived, and on that day took place the massacre of
nearly every European that happened to be in the native city.
539


With very few exceptions did anyone escape. First the
church, then the consulate were attacked, the inmates
murdered and the property burnt. Next came the worst
scene in that awful day’s work —the massacre of the Sisters
of Charity. Situate as the convent was on the other side of
the river, had Chung but given the order sooner than he did
to sever the bridge of boats, this might have been averted, but
the order was not given until after the murder of the Consul.
They were on the point of obeying him when General
Chen-Kwo-Shuai arrived, and insisted on crossing. They
dared not refuse him, and he crossed, dragging with him
his horde of assassins. Arrived in front of the con-
vent, with cries of “ Death to the French,” “ Death to
the foreigner,” they immediately set fire to the buildings.
The doors were then burst open, and the massacre began ;
the bodies of these unfortunate women were literally torn to-
pieces, and cast into the flames. The remains that were
afterwards discovered were not enough to complete five
bodies. The remainder had no doubt been carried off as a
charm, and distributed among the people. The consternation
in the settlement at this time was great. Separated from the
scenes of the massacres only by an open piece of ground,
without gunboats to assist them, they expected every moment
to be attacked. Before their windows floated the corpses of the-
unfortunate victims. The women and children of the mis-
sionaries were placed on board a merchant steamer, anchored
on the Peiho. At last English gunboats arrived, whereupon
Chung addressed the mob and calm was at once restored, a
proof that had he wished it he could have easily prevented:
all the horrors that had happened. Just at this time the
Franco-German war broke out. Fortunately for the Chinese,.
Chung went to France to explain the conduct of the Chinese
Government. An enquiry was instituted in Tien-tsin, the
two magistrates were banished to the frontier for military
service, with forced labour; twenty wretches who had
assisted in the massacres were executed, and thirteen others
exiled, while General Chen-Kwo-Shuai, the arch-fiend who
was the real mover and promoter of the whole thing, got off
scot free. Finally, as an indemnity, 250,000 taels were
paid over by the Chinese Government. We called on the
Rev. J. L , and saw once more his fair daughter. We
remained for tea, and afterwards went to their little service.
The church is of the simplest, being used by three denomina


tions. We also went over the hospital, which has been erected
at the entire expense of the Chinese, and is still supported by
them. They do a certain amount of good, but very little, as
a Chinaman will not make use of it until the last stage, when
all his own doctors have failed. A Chinaman is a splendid
subject for the surgeon’s knife. It matters not how many
pieces he may be cut up into he can be mended. He is a
veritable piece of china. There is never any fear of after
inflammation, as in a European. Packing, visiting the native
city, calling on former acquaintances, and shipping off our
cases, occupied us until it was time to leave Tien-tsin. There is
an export duty here of five per cent, on curios, and a transit due
of half that amount on curios purchased in Pekin. We, not
knowing the latter fact, carefully informed the Custom-house
authorities where we had bought them. They must have
thought us very green.
24 th Oct. —The “Sin Nangsing,” one of Messrs. Jardine
Matheson, & Co.’s finest steamers, left early this morning for
Shanghai, and it was with difficulty we got berths, and even
then only subject to our being willing to turn out at Chefoo,
•should there be ladies going on. With what a liberal hand
are things conducted in the China seas. First-class chow-
.chow, and all wines, &c., free. Champagne and bitters handed
round at ix o’clock, and sherry and ditto at four. The
internal arrangements in the vessel are peculiar, as the first-
class accommodation is right for’ard, comfortable enough
in a following or smooth sea, but no doubt, when pitching into
a head one, something awful. At Chefoo a Mr. and Mrs.
F came on board, with their family. They have been
sitting on their boxes now for three steamers. We gave up
• our cabin, and were given in place the second officer’s on deck,
a much more preferable position, as we have now on board
thirteen children, four of which howl from morning till night,
a howl which is peculiar, as they were suffering from the
croup. Another old “gentleman,” who was comfortably
ensconced in a large cabin by himself, objected to turn out,
on being asked to do so by the Captain, who offered to give
him up his cabin, and on the Captain saying to him that
he surely could not see a lady sleeping in the saloon while he
had a large cabin, he replied, “ Mrs. F is a very much
younger woman than I am a man,” an argument only fit for
the society of beasts. He was, however, moved. Mrs. F
and her children proved a great acquisition, and I enjoyed


a romp with the little ones. They were the best-behaved
children I had seen for a long time.
2,'jth Oct. —On reaching Shanghai, after a most pleasant
passage, thanks to Captain D •, Mr. F was kindness
itself, sending off to have our names put down at once for
the Club. He was himself tied down by a bad attack of gout,
and it was all he could do to get ashore. There were no
rooms vacant at the Club, so we drove to the Central Hotel,
but finding no civility there, we put our traps into our
rickshas and drove on to the Hotel des Colonies, in the French
settlement, very comfortable, and by far the best hotel in
Shanghai.
2nd Nov. —Our time here has been most pleasantly spent.
One day we tiffined with Mrs. F and saw some marvellous
curios, and in particular a collection of Chinese snuff-bottles, of
which she had over 100. On Sunday we visited the Cathedral,
a magnificent brick building of Sir Gilbert Scott’s, but religion
here —like everywhere else in the east —is cold, and this service
was. The church was too big for the congregation, which was
small and scattered all over it, so there was nothing like a
congregational service. Everybody appeared to be afraid of
hearing their own voices. The service in the little Independent
Chapel last Sunday at Tien-tsin was far heartier, and much
more like worship. After service we tiffined with E. H
at the junior mess at Gibb Livingstone’s. On two other days
we tiffined and lunched with Mr. C. T , who has been
kindness itself in taking us round to show us where to buy silks,
&c. With him we went on to the native city and saw many
curious things; there were the corn-cutters plying their
trade in the streets, and the fortune-tellers sitting at
their stalls, ready to tell blushing young maidens the
fortunate day to be married on. There was also a tea-
house, built in the middle of a piece of water, the
exact representation of the willow pattern. The H ——s
only arrived the other day, and at present, not having a house
of their own, are staying with friends, so that I did not see
half so much of them as I should have liked, but one afternoon,
I went out and had a long walk with Mr. H , and heard
all the news of friends at home. Just before dinner, on the
last night, who should turn up but B , an old friend of
mine in England, and whom I had not the remotest idea was
out here. E. H was dining with us, so he stayed and
made the fourth. From him I got no end of news, and all


the latest scandals, &c., from one’s home circle, the last
engagement, and even down to the latest flirtation. After
dinner we started for a tour of inspection of the night scenes
of Shanghai, which tour is to the young blood of China what
Paris or London is to us. In the afternoon we had called
on the Chief Inspector of Police, and he had kindly put a
Chinese detective at our disposal. We repaired first to the
theatres, of which, of course, we had free entree, and at once
went behind the scenes. It was an amusing sight to see the
various preparations, the painting of faces, and the dressing up
of the men to take women’s characters, for men only act in
China. E. H , who is the stage manager of the A.D.S.
here, was highly edified, and no doubt took some valuable
hints in the way of facial decoration. The performance itself
was tedious, and hardly worth spending any time to watch. It
consisted in a good deal of beating of cymbals, and general
rough and tumble on the stage. From there we moved on to
the opium-houses, and I was astonished with the luxury
displayed in some of them. They invariably smoke in couples,
one filling the pipe for the other. There were no horribly
disgusting sights, as are so often pictured by those who are
strong on the subject of opium-smoking. As drinking is with
us, so is opium-smoking to the Chinese, and I must say that
it would be difficult to say which habit, when carried to excess,
is the most disgusting. At all events, opium-smoking has this
advantage, that while the man or woman is under its influence,
he or she is quiet and can do no harm, whereas two-thirds of
the crime with us may be put down to drink. Many and various
were the other sights that we saw before we found ourselves
wishing one another “ chin-chin, ” in the Shanghai Club.
Laden with messages for old friends at home, we went on
board the “ Hiroshima-Maru,” which was advertised to sail at
“ daylight,” a term which shipping agents protect themselves
under. It may mean directly the captain can see to move, or
it may mean any time during the day to suit themselves, but
never to suit you.
2nd Nov. —Our day has been filled up with listening to the
grunts and groans of the old “ Hiroshima-Maru,” as she
buried her nose into the south-easterly roll, which increased
towards evening. However, during the night they eased
down the engines, so one felt the motion less.
3 rd Nov. —The rain has been something tremendous. I
happened to have one of the large family cabins amidship r


which has only a skylight. Through this the rain managed
to penetrate, and I have slept under a macintosh, and with a
■can suspended over my head. Tim fared worse, as his sky-
light was blown in, but fortunately for him his was not over
his bed. At eight o’clock this morning we were once more in
Nagasaki Harbour, looking as beautiful as ever. It was within
this harbour, on an island called Dezima, to which, after
the massacre of the Christians, in 1637, the Dutch were
banished, not being allowed on the mainland, and only one
ship per annum was permitted to come from the Dutch East
Indies for trading purposes. Our party consists of Colonel
H , returning home from Burmah; Mr. S , in the
colonial service of the Straits Government; and the Hon.
M. L , who is coffee-planting on the Malay Peninsula.
It is not yet decided, but in all probability we shall all go
over the Nakasendo together. Nagasaki, of all the ports, is
perhaps the best place for curio-buying, being less overrun by
foreigners, so that it was not long before we were ashore, and
."hard at work making our purchases. This time, however, I
contented myself with very little, but in Kojimas we saw
■some beautiful things. Nagasaki is also famous for the
manufactory of those large vases which we so often see
standing in halls at home. Col. H was at the sacking
. of the Summer Palace, and we have had some most interesting
yarns with him. It must have been gala times for them.
The regiment that he was then in lost their way on their road
up to Pekin, and unconsciously rode into the Summer Palace.
They found the Emperor had just flown, the nest being even
•then still warm. The Colonel carried off as a trophy the yellow
satin bed cover, which he still possesses. Hardly being the
place for cavalry, they retired for the night, only to return in
the morning to find the French had entered in the night, and
were hard at work carrying off the choicest bits. The
amount taken must have been something enormous. General
M , of the French army, acknowledged to £30,000, and
an English officer to £8,500. What they could not carry
away was smashed, and the whole place afterwards burnt.
Pekin escaped only by a few seconds from being bombarded
and sacked ; the guns were all in position. Twelve o’clock
was the time fixed for the signing of the treaty, otherwise
bombardment. A few minutes to twelve, the royal dragon
standard still floated over the palace. The men were standing
ready to fire, when just on the very stroke of twelve, much to


everybody’s disgust, the standard was hauled down. The
Colonel amused us tremendously with his description
of how the soldiers carried off the pig-tails of the slain,
and how, after peace was signed, they made the man-
darins turn out of their green palanquins, otherwise they
would ride at them, and turn them over, palanquin
and all.
sth5 th Nov. —At mid-day we entered the Straits of Simono-
seki, and were once more within the calm waters of the
Inland sea. It would be impossible to imagine anything
more beautiful —a vast lake, as it appeared, surrounded by
mountains on one side of water-worn sandstone, the yellow
ridges peeping out from between dark green pine trees ; on
the other were hills with green slopes and richly-timbered
glens, while the lower ground bordering on the water was
brilliant with the bright greens of the cultivated terraces and
the dull reds of the wax trees. There were many islands
dotted about, and as we coasted along the shores of the
Island of Kinshin, which forms the southern boundary of the
Inland sea, we passed some beautiful scenery. One bit was
pointed out which was supposed to be the gem of all. Of
this I was able to get a sketch. A large amphitheatre of
mountains, with precipitous rocks standing out from their
sides, encircled a lovely bay, in the centre of which stood out a
conical hill. At the foot of the hill was a valley richly
cultivated, the bright greens of the crops making a lovely
contrast to the blues and greys of the surrounding scenery.
It was long before any of us turned in, for the scenery under
the light of an almost full moon was too enticing.
6th Nov. —At six o’clock the chief officer came to turn us
out to see the last of the narrow straits, which run into the more
open sea. At eight o’clock we were at Kobe, and lying at anchor
was the Flying Squadron, under the command of Admiral Lord
Clanwilliam. The Bacchante is one, on board of which are
the two young Princes. We at once went ashore, and for the
first time had no trouble with the Customs. We had antici-
pated getting no rooms in the hotel, but in that we were
pleasantly disappointed. The “ Hiogo ” was very comfort-
able, but our day was mostly spent in the curio shops, princi-
pally that of Echigojra, about whose things there appears to
be a doubt as to their genuineness, especially of the lacquer
work. When one sees a small cabinet for 5,000 dols., and a
tiny incense box for 2,500 dols., one begins to doubt. I
2 N
545


bought, however, a magnificent suit of armour, the most
complete I have yet seen.
'jth Nov. —Up to five o’clock we lived in curio shops, at
which time we left by train for Osaka. We reached there
in time for dinner. This town is called the Venice of Japan.
It is built at the mouth of the Yodo-gawa, which flows down
from Lake Bewa, and is intersected by numerous canals. It
is one of Japan’s chief trading ports, and the river is lined
with junks and small steamers, which ply between here and
the various places in the Inland sea, and to Nagasaki. It was
full moon, and as we crossed the many bridges most lovely
were the reflections and lights upon the water. Jeutei’s
Hotel we found most comfortable, and everything prepared
for us, as our servants had gone on by an earlier train.
Bth Nov. —The chief exports from here are tea and silk.
The town itself is one of the cleanest I have ever been in.
The streets are paved with thin small bricks set edgeways.
The curio shops we found exorbitant in their charges, so we
were saved from spending much money at them. However,
at a cabinetmaker’s, I picked up a most beautiful cabinet of
dark wood, richly carved. This morning we started in
jinriki-shas for Mino-san, a place noted for its maples, which
at this time of the year are one of the glories of Japan, just
as the cherry blossom and azaleas are in the spring. Of the
two seasons it is very difficult to say which is the better time
to visit this country, but I feel perfectly certain that the
weather could not be finer nor the country look more glorious
than it does at present. They are now busy with their rice
harvest, and the country is covered with peasants gathering
the golden grain. It is reaped with a small hook, tied in
bundles, and then hung head downwards along bamboo poles,
as the ground is much too moist to put it into stocks, and by
this means also the crows cannot get at the grain. Instead
of thrashing, the grain is taken out by means of dragging the
heads through a sort of large steel comb. It is then winnowed
and spread out on mats to dry. The colouring of the rice
fields was relieved by tea plantations and orange groves, and
as we approached the mountains, the autumn tints of the trees
began to show. Our boys took us at a capital pace, but the
Colonel was most unlucky, being upset twice, but a fall from
a jinriki-sha is not a serious thing, unless you happen to be
tumbled over into a padi field, out of which I am afraid you
would not come with clean hands. At the entrance to the


village of Mino we left our jinriki-shas, and got coolies to
carry our luncheon baskets up the valley. This valley is one
of the most celebrated in Japan for its maple and cherry
trees, and I have never before seen such a blaze of colouring.
There was every conceivable shade, from the brightest yellow
to the most vivid red, mingled together in the most beautiful
harmony, and relieved by the deep green of the pine trees.
Really, at a distance, a hill side looked like a most lovely piece
of tapestry. In the centre of this valley is a temple and tea-
house, beautifully situated over a mountain stream. Here
we were to tiffin, but before doing so we walked on to the end
of the valley, where there is a massive wall of granite, over
which tumbles a lovely waterfall. It was most amusing
work watching the antics of a crowd of baboons, who had
taken up their positions in a large tree close at hand. There
were numbers of Japanese, too, in holiday attire. There is
little doubt that this race of people are thorough lovers of the
beautiful. It shows itself in all their art work, in their houses,
and in their always being present at lovely spots, such as this.
They are a happy people, always laughing, and always polite.
They and their country grow more fascinating the longer you
are in it, but in so speaking of the Japanese I do not include
the man who dresses in ill-fitting European clothes, aping
European manners; neither do I include Japanese officials,
who are entirely wrapt up in red tape and the idea of their
own importance. We had a most enjoyable tiffin in a lovely
garden, overlooking the temple grounds, and shaded by all
these bright-coloured trees. Fair little maids attended to our
wants, and laughing Japs looked on, highly amused, M.
L had been making a sketch, and a Japanese gentleman,
who was taking his meal at the tea-house, attended by a pretty
little girl who sang sonnets to him, accompanying herself on
a samiseu, sent to him a tiny card, on which his attendant
scribe had written, “The Valley of Maples is very beautiful.”
It was now time to leave, so we made the best of our way
back to the village, where we re-entered our jinriki-shas.
We reached Ozaka about three o’clock.
gthNov. —Early this morning, we started off in riki-shas
to visit some chrysanthemum gardens, for this is the time
of the year at which they are at perfection, and it is the
flower on which the Japanese pride themselves the most,
being their natural emblem, and their Mikado’s crest. It is
largely used in all their ornamentation as a flower, and as a


crest; when as the latter,the Mikado alone uses it with sixteen
leaves, all the rest are of fourteen. We saw chrysanthemums-
larger and of finer colour than I have ever seen at the Temple
show. We returned to breakfast, and afterwards drove out
to the castle. L has decided to go through to Kioto, and
wait for us there, as he does not feel up to the long jinriki-sha
drive round by Nara. Ozaka covers an area of about
eight square miles. Its history dates back to the 15th
century, and its castle in that history is a prominent feature,
and played a most important part in many a native struggle.
What is left of the present castle dates back to 1583, being
built under the direction of Hideyoshi, within which was
erected his palace, “ probably the most magnificent building
that Japan ever saw.” This palace survived various sieges,
but was finally destroyed in 1868 by the besieged before
retreating. Some of the blocks of stone in the walls show
the enormous strength of this fortress, the largest being
forty-three feet long. The view from the top of the Teu-shu,
or donjon tower, was most extensive, and from it we could see
all the distinctive features of the town. Here is the Mint of
Japan, and the Arsenal, but the latter place is at present used
as a needle factory. The castle is defended by an outer and
inner moat, which in old days must have been almost
impregnable. It is now used as the headquarters of the
military district. We inspected the cavalry stables, and were
astonished at the cleanness of everything, and the way in
which the harness was kept, all of which was made in Japan.
Directly we had finished seeing the castle, we started on our
journey to Nara, thirteen ri off. The road lay over a
plain with hills in the distance. Through these is the Tatta
Pass, leading to another plain, and another range of
hills, at the foot of which lies Nara. En route we stopped
to see the Temple of Hirano, in which there is a wonderful
picture, supposed to be 750 years old. Some of the
carvings and ornamentation in this temple were extremely
beautiful. We stopped at a small roadside tea-house
for tiffin, and soon afterwards reached the famous
monastery of Ho-rin-ji, one of the seven great monasteries of
Nara, dated back to 607 a.d. We entered by a magnificent
two-storied gateway, guarded as usual by the gigantic Ni-o,
one of which is remarkable as being carved out of one piece
of wood. Within the entrance stands a fine pagoda, and a
building called the Kon-do. These two buildings are all that


are now left of the original temple, and are the oldest wooden
structures in Japan, their age being nearly 13- centuries.
Within the Kon-do are extraordinary figures of Indian origin,
and some of which are said to have been brought over from
either Corea or China between the 10th and 12th centuries.
The walls are covered with fresco paintings, the only ones
existing in Japan. They are of great antiquity, and are
almost defaced. Leaving the Kon-do we ascended some steps
to a temple dedicated to Yaku-shi, which is interesting from
the fact of every possible place being covered with knives,
swords, looking-glasses, locks of hair, and pictures, the
offerings of people whose prayers for restoration to health
have been answered. We next visited a building in which
the pupil of the eye of Buddha is kept. It is enclosed in a
crystal pagoda, and kept carefully wrapped up in various
casements of silk, each separately tied with a silken cord.
It is said the Prince Tai-shi, when only a year old, after
offering up his prayer to Amida, found it in his hand. Amida
was Buddha’s mother. It was in this temple that Tai-shi lived
and died, and after his death was canonized. Here are shown
various carvings, said to have been executed by himself.
There were various other curios set out for the young Princes
to see, who are expected here to-morrow. Amongst them was
Prince Tai-shi’s bedding, without doubt of great age, Buddha’s
tooth, and various other equally interesting relics. The
approach to Nara was very beautiful, but before we reached
the town it was dark. The streets were highly illuminated
with lamps, it being the termination of one of the temple
festivals. Every now and then a rocket shot up into the air,
by far the most beautiful I had ever seen. Each burst and
represented peacocks, chrysanthemums, and the last was a
serpent, which slowly moved along. At the Musashino tea-
house, at which we took up our quarters, we were highly
amused by the officiousness of the police, who were most
anxious to get us out of our rooms, evidently under the
impression that when so important a personage as
Prince and his retinue were there, no “ foreign
devils ” ought to pollute the atmosphere. However, possession
was everything, and we stuck to our quarters.
10 th Nov. —The situation was perfect—on the wooded slopes
of a hill overlooking a most extensive valley, while beneath
us, buried in foliage, were many temples and pagodas. The
arrangement of the tea-house was very perfect, consisting of


a number of pretty little houses neatly grouped in gardens.
From the year 709 to 784 Nara was the capital of the country,
and is even now a large town, having a population of 21,000.
By way of getting an appetite for breakfast, we ascended
Mikasa-Yama, or “Three Hat Hill,” so called from its three
summits rising one above the other. It rises just behind the
tea-house, and is almost devoid of timber, but when near its
top, which is only about 600 feet from the base, we came
across some nicely-wooded dells, out of which we put up
several pheasants. The view from the top was good, and
well repaid the scramble. Immediately after breakfast we
started for the temple of Kasuga-no-nuya, which was close at
hand. On the way to it we passed a number of small shops,
at which were exposed for sale quaint little figures, said to be
carved by the priests out of pieces of the temple wood to
represent the characters in the mediaeval lyric drama of
“Nio.” Besides these, there are articles made out of deers’
horns, as at this temple the deer is sacred. There are a great
many of these tame about the temple grounds, the legend
being that it was founded in 767 by Take-mika-dynchi, who
rode up to Nara on a white deer, in search of a new residence.
The buildings are many and various, situate amongst the
most beautiful cryptomeria groves, the paths amongst which
are lined with innumerable stone lanterns. The temples are
dedicated to various personages with the most unpro-
nounceable names. They are principally built of wood and
plaster, and with extremely deep eaves, red being the
predominating colour. The galleries surrounding the buildings
are hung with countless brass lanterns, offerings, no doubt,
from time to time, just as the stone ones have been which
line the walks outside. They are lighted at night by
subscription, the number varying with the liberality of the
people. In front of the temple, in the centre of one of the
courtyards, was an open shed, in which were twelve young
girls most elaborately dressed. We were in luck, for there
was to be a special full performance of the ancient sacred
dance, called the kagura, in the presence of the young Princes.
Their dress consisted of a pair of white and red trousers,
white under-garment, and a long gauzy mantle; their hair
was gathered in a long tress, and fastened by a peculiar gold
band. On their head they wore a chaplet of gold, and red
dowers, which stood out in front so as to shade the eyes, and
their faces and necks were thickly covered with white powder.


and their lips of a bright red colour. The priests, too, were
in full canonicals, as were also the temple attendants. Upon
the arrival of the Princes the dance commenced, and it was
as slow a performance as I have ever witnessed, and we got
thoroughly sick of it before it was finished. The orchestra
consisted of three priests, who performed on several queer-
looking instruments, and sang a hymn dreadfully out of tune.
Leaving this great Shinto temple we drove in our jinriki-shas
to that of the Dai Butz, called the To-dai-jai. Before
reaching the building, which contains the colossal figure of
Buddha, we passed through two gateways which contained
a large Nio. Entering the temple, the size of the figure, to
those who have never seen the like before, is astounding. It
is in a sitting position, with right hand uplifted, and measures
in height about 53 feet. It is constructed entirely of bronze,
as is the enormous lotus flower which forms the idol’s seat. At
one time it was said to have been gilded all over, but no
traces are now to be seen. Arranged in cases round the back
of the temple were all the relics, set out for the Princes to see,
They formed a most interesting museum, consisting of old
armour, bronzes, and implements. After seeing the temple
we started on our journey to Kioto, a distance of thirty miles.
The road runs over a richly-cultivated plain at the foot of a
range of hills, and for some distance follows along the right
bank of the Kidzu-gawa, then strikes across country and
crosses the Uji-gawa by a fine bridge. This river flows down
from Lake Bewa, and the view, as you look up on crossing
the bridge, is very beautiful. Shut in entirely by high moun-
tains, the broad river seems to have no outlet. On its surface
were several boats, with their square white sails glittering in
the sunlight. At the extreme end of the bridge, literally over-
hanging the river, is a lovely tea-house. There I think we
would have stayed the night had M. L waited for us, but
he had left but an hour before, having evidently given us up,
for we had arranged to meet here about twelve o’clock, but
our having waited for the temple dance had delayed us. The
district round here is famous for tea, producing the finest
kinds known in Japan, Sabo-Mukashi and Gioku-ro fetching
as much as 5 to 7J yens per lb. Another 18 cho brought us
to Kioto. Distances are measured in Japan by ri and cho.
Ari is about miles, and contains 36 cho. In driving
through the streets of Kioto one of our unfortunate coolie’s
lanterns went out, and we were chivied for some distance by


a policeman before the fellow would stop, but at last he was
caught. The occupant happened to be S ,so we made
our servant exchange with him, and left him to fight the
battle. No doubt the poor devil of a coolie would be fined,
but considering we were a string of five jinriki-shas and he
was in the middle, our being stopped seemed absurd. We
made our way through the town to the district called Maru-
Yama or “ Round Hill,” which overlooks the town on which
the European hotels are situate. Ya-Amis was the highest
up, and the one to which we went, where we found M. L ,
and everything looking most comfortable, and the dinner,
which was not long in making its appearance, proved to us
we should not regret having taken up our quarters here.
*****
Kioto, up to the year 1868, was the capital of the country, and
the home of the Mikado, but in that year he removed himself
and the government to Tokio, which, of course, greatly affected
its prosperity. Saikio, or “Western Capital,” is its modern
name, but one scarcely if ever used. In 1877 its population
was 225,539. Kamo-gawa flows through the centre of the
town, but, except during the rainy season, it is little more
than a rivulet, with a broad stone bed. The town is laid out
in rectangular streets of a very narrow description, with the
exception of San-jo-don and Teramachi-don, which are fine
broad streets, in which there are some shops to tempt the
traveller, especially that of a screen-maker near the railway
station. The pottery, too, for which Kioto is noted, is very
beautiful, but that, like so much other modern Japanese
work, can be best bought in either London, Paris, or
New York. Of the latter I bought none, but to the screens
I am afraid we all bow'ed down and worshipped. The
things which tempted us the most were the old silk shops,
out of which we managed to get some capital embroideries.
From one I bought an old daimio’s dress, which might
serve some day at a fancy dress ball. Just below our hotel
is a tea-house, attached to which is a garden with one of the
grandest show of chrysanthemums I have ever seen, and
species which I am sure are unknown in England. One
night we had a Japanese dinner, but before going down to
it we took the precaution of ordering a good supper at the
hotel. The dinner had been ordered by our servants at the
principal restaurant in the town. When we entered the room


it hardly looked as if we were going to partake of a feast, for
there was nothing in the room except two huge candlesticks
and about twenty small square mats, set round the room in
a circle. On these we took our seats. As soon as we were
seated the geisha and singing-girls came in, the former most
gorgeously attired and with elaborately painted faces and
lips. Altogether there were about fourteen girls. As soon
as we were all seated, the food was brought us, and in front
of every one was placed a diminutive table {zen), and on it
were small bowls and plates containing messes, which I
passed, and amused myself instead in trying to the best of
my ability to chaff my fair neighbours. I think my attempt
at using chop-sticks amused them highly, and one of them,
pitying my vain attempts, offered to feed me herself. When
the feast was at its highest, I counted in front of me fourteen
different dishes —the same number would be in front of
everybody else. In the centre of the circle sat two women
who looked after our wants. The best dish of the evening
was salmon, served up in salt water, and the one most
peculiar to Japan was raw fish, with a very hot sauce. This
I enjoyed, but I must say at first I was rather qualmish
about tasting it. The fish is served up alive at very grand
entertainments. The lips of the girls were so painted that
they ate with great difficulty, and with much care. When
the feast was finished, the four singing-girls commenced to
strum on the violins, and the twelve dancing-girls arranged
themselves in a line at the other end of the room, and went
through their usual posturizing, which to Europeans is very
tedious. We found it so, especially as we were all hungry,
and longed to get back to our supper at the hotel, which
we found very much more to our taste. The servant there
amused us highly by tellingusthat there was a “ duck gander ”
coming, which made us wonder what bird that could be. It
was a wild duck. lam afraid, with the exception of Tim, we
are none of us great sightseers, and he is death on temples ;
hut we felt that we really must devote one day to it, so
started early one morning for a round. On our way through
the town we pulled up at the temple called Nishi Hon-gwan-
ji, the headquarters of the sect of the same name, which was
founded in the beginning of the 13th century by Shi-ran
Sho-nin (b. 1173, d. 1262). Eleven years after his death, his
youngest daughter and one of his grandsons erected a mon-
astery near to his tomb at Otani, in the east suburbs of


Kioto, to which the Mikado gave the title of Hon-gwan-ji,.
“ Monastery of the Real Vow,” in allusion to the.vow made
by Amida that he would not accept Buddhaship except under
the condition that salvation was made attainable for all who
should sincerely desire to be born into his kingdom. It is
upon a passage in a Buddhist scripture, where this vow
is recorded, that the doctrine of the sect is based, its central
idea being that man is saved “by faith in the merciful
power of Amida, and not by works or vain repetition of
prayers.” At the entrance to .the large courtyard of the
temple stands a magnificent gateway, elaborately carved
with chrysanthemums. Opposite to the gateway stands the
main building, erected in 1591, and measuring in the
interior 138 feet long and 96 broad. Facing the door is the
large altar, covered in by gilt trellised folding-doors, and on
either side are sliding screens, upon which are painted the
plum, pine, and bamboo, covered with snow. Above are
carvings of enormous peonies. The cornice and beams
are decorated with coloured arabesques. Leaving this
we passed through various buildings, and entered the garden,
which is prettily laid out, and in which is the Pavilion of the
Flying Clouds, removed to this from Hideyoshi Palace at
Fushimi. It is of great age, and in it are some very old
paintings. Re-entering our carriage and pair, we made our
way to the Town Hall ( Fu-cho ), once a palace of the Shogun,
who in olden days was the chief military general, in order to
obtain permits to visit the Palace of the Mikado. Out of
politeness they kept us waiting quite an hour! so wrapped
up in red tape are these imitators of modern civilization.
At last we reached the Palace, and found it a gigantic sell ;
an exaggerated tea-house, or perhaps huge barracks, divided
up by sliding screens, the paintings on which were the
only things worth going to see, and they were really good.
With this exception there was not the slightest decoration.
All the wood was perfectly plain, but various brass hooks
showed that, no doubt, when inhabited, silk hangings would
adorn the walls. The largest building is the Shi-shin-den,
or Audience Hall, 102 feet long by broad. This
opens out on to an inner court enclosed by a colonnade, into
which a flight of eighteen steps leads, corresponding in
number to the original grades into which the Mikado’s
officials were divided. The meaning of Shi-shin-den is:
Shi, purple, the true colour of the heaven; shin denotes that


which is mysterious and hidden from the vulgar gaze, and
den hall. This chamber was used for the enthronement of
the Mikado, for the New Year’s Audience, and for other
important ceremonies. The hall is devoid of all furniture,
but on the panels on the back are painted the portraits of
four ancient Chinese sages. Above them are two modern
portraits of the Mikado and his wife, painted by Ugolini, of
Milan, from photographs, and if his portrait be correct, the
Mikado must indeed be the ugliest man in the world. In a
building called the Kashiko-dokow was kept the copy of
the sacred mirror given to the Mikado’s ancestors by the
Sun-goddess, the original of which is at her temple at Ise,
In one room the floor takes up, so that the Mikado can
worship his ancestors on the earth strewn there, instead of
descending to the ground. His own private apartments —if
to our ideas you can call a portion, divided off by screens,
apartments —are in the very centre of the building, and
entirely surrounded by others occupied by his female
attendants, so that no one could get near him without the
knowledge of his immediate attendants. In one of these
apartments are kept the regalia — i.e., a stone and sword, or
rather their copies, for the original sword is at Ise. The
paintings of the screens about these apartments were
truly beautiful, representing birds, animals, and flowers.
Behind the palace is a small but pretty garden. In it was
an artist at work on a rough sketch for wall decoration in the
Palace at Tokio. His materials were a huge sheet of paper
stretched upon the ground, upon which he walked in his
slippers, and sketched away with a brush and Indian ink.
The next place on our list were the Mikado’s gardens, called
the Shin-gaku-in. These are situate about six miles from
Kioto, amongst the hills. The drive there was pretty, passing
through some exceedingly lovely bamboo groves —in fact, at
this time of the year, it is impossible to go wrong, for the rice
harvest makes even the flattest and plainest country look
beautiful, some fields being still ungathered, while in others
the people are busy gathering the grain, reaping it with a
small hook, and tying it up in bundles. In this they differ
here from the more southern countries, where they gather
only the heads and burn off the straw. When cut the sheaves
are suspended on bamboo poles, the ground being too damp to
put it into stocks. When it has hung in this way long
enough it is taken down and scutched. That is a term used
555


in Ireland for flax. The heads are dragged through a steel
comb. We reached the garden, and again foundanother sell.
I have seen prettier mill-dams in England, but the view over
the valley perhaps repaid us, with the surrounding foliage,
under their autumn tints. These are evidently great places
for pic-nics, for around the small piece of water and on
islands are little tea-houses. Parties bring their mats and
provisions, not forgetting the sake, and make a day of it. We
did not, but hurried back to our jinriki-shas, so as to make our
pic-nic at our hotel in Kioto. The day following we started
early in jinriki-shas for Yama-moto, on the Katsura-gawa.
This is the starting point for the Rapids, and is distant from
Kioto about three hours’ drive. The road lies across the
plain to the opposite range of hills through which it winds, in
some places so steep as to necessitate walking. It was a
pleasant drive, and the river at Yama-moto perfectly lovely.
There we hired two of the long flat-bottomed boats to convey
ourselves and our jinriki-shas down to Arashi-yama, which
took us about two hours, passing through the most lovely
scenery. Some of the rapids were truly exciting, but the boats
are most skilfully managed, and there has never been an
accident. One man stands in the bow with a long bamboo
to pole off the rocks, two others row on the same side, that
opposite to the man who steers with an immense oar. The
boats are built of planks neatly fastened together by nails
driven vertically downwards through slits cut in the planks,
but without any stanchions, so that they give to the slightest
touch, and to watch the bottom of the boat as it moves about
would make you believe it must come to pieces at any moment.
It is well enough going down, but the return journey must be
most tedious work, for the men have to track the boat back
again. The scenery the whole way was very lovely, rugged
bluffs and precipitous hill sides,clothed with the many-coloured
tints of autumn,lined our course; huge rocks and narrow gorges
seemed to block our way, and at times it would appear as if
we must be dashed to pieces against some of them, but a turn
of the steer-oar, and we rushed by without even a touch. At
Arashi-yama the river broadens out into a grand reach,
and on its banks is a fine tea-house. There we found our
tiffin awaiting us. Directly we had finished we left again
for Kioto, which was only an hour away. It is indeed
wonderful at what a pace these jinriki-sha coolies can travel
when they are so minded, and I must say there is something


exciting in rattling through a town at a furious race. 1
wonder if they have any laws in this country against furious
driving, for I am afraid our final mile was very much so.
Soon our party was to be broken up, for M. L had to
hurry on in order to see as much of the country as he could
before the leaving of the French mail, as he was going to
Shanghai for a fortnight’s shooting before returning to the
Straits. Our dining-room of the hotel for the last two days
was turned into a regular curio shop, as dealers of all sorts
appeared to try and tempt us with their wares. The last day
we had a most successful photo taken by a Japanese, as a
memento of a very jolly time spent together.
17 th Nov. —M. L left yesterday for Kobe, en route to
Yokohama, so we decided to leave to-day for our journey
over the Nak-a-sendo, or “Great Mountain” road,which runs
right through the interior of the country from Kioto to Tokio.
Colonel H , after much vacillating, has decided to come
with us. We left Kioto in jinriki-shas soon after breakfast,
and drove through to Otzu, which is at the foot of Lake Biwa,
and the terminus of the present railway from Kobe. We
arrived there in time to catch .the steamer which sails daily
at 12 o’clock for Maibara, the nearest point on the lake to
the Nak-a-sendo. In all there are about thirty steamers on
the lake plying between Otzu and the different towns. Ours
was called the “ Tanchio Maru,” a diminutive side-wheeler.
S decided to go up the lake with us and return by the night
boat. The lake is 37 miles in length, and 12 wide at its
broadest part. In area it is about equal to the Lake of
Geneva. The day was perfect, and naturally everything
looked most lovely. It is a fine sheet of water, but nothing
beyond that to make it remarkable, surrounded on all
sides by low hills, most of which are of sandstone.
Maibara is 42 miles from Otzu, so it was late when we
got there. The town is built on a smaller lake connected
with Lake Biwa by a narrow channel, just broad enough to let
the boat pass. In bad weather the steamer cannot get into
this. At the entrance is the village of Naga-hama. There we
stopped for a few moments to land some very sea-sick Japs, as
for the last two hours it had been blowing, and there was a good
deal of motion on so small a craft. At Maibara we found the
principal inn full, but secured most comfortable quarters in
one of the smaller tea-houses. We have decided to walk and
take one of the small handcarts for our baggage, so that it was
557


most amusing to hear the crowd of coolies outside quarrelling
as to who was to have the privilege of taking us. The usual
way is to take jinriki-shas right through, but this we
considered very poor fun.
18 th Nov. —At eight o’clockweleft Maibara. It wasalovely
morning, with the first signs of hoar frost, just giving a coating
to the grass and twigs. Just the right sort of morning to make
one feel one could walk any distance, and send one’s spirits
up a long waj? above zero. The road wound about through
lovely hills, the valleys between which were richly cultivated,
and at Bamba, a small village, it joins the Nak-a-sendo.
The scenery after this became somewhat tame, as the road
crossed over a plain with a distant view of the mountains.
At Seki-ga-hara we stopped for an hour to tiffin, and after-
wards pushed on to Akasaka, a town noted for its crystals,
cornelian, and coloured stones, which are found in the neigh-
bouring mountains.
jg th Nov. —Still the same style of scenery, and I think after
the 2i miles yesterday, our first day out, we all felt a little
'Stiff, but everlasting padi fields become a little monotonous.
Lying about a mile off the road is Sifu, one of the large towns,
and there Hakodati thought he might be able to raise some
beer, as that is a beverage which Japanese are now beginning
to drink; so after tiffin at Myeji, we despatched him thither
while we toiled on to Shin-kano, our destination for that night.
Tim was the first to give in, for in passing through the town
of Kano, he hailed a jimiki-sha and drove off, leaving us to
walk in the remaining six miles. It is most extraordinary
in Japan the length of their towns. As a rule, they are bhilt
along one single street running generally in a straight line.
For five miles, which is the distance between Kano and Shin-
kano, we passed along one incessant string of houses.
This town is noted for its manufacture of umbrellas, thou-
sands of which, of every colour and pattern, line the streets
spread out to dry, giving to the town a most comical as well
as gaudy appearance. At the latter place we found a
luxurious yadoya, and Tim already ensconced in very comfort-
able-looking rooms, drinking tea out of old Kago cups. The
landlord came quite a mile on the road to meet us, hearing
from him that there were other guests to arrive. Hakodati
came in shortly afterwards, bearing in triumph eleven bottles
of Bass and a sponge cake. On an expedition of this sort
we ought to become very “ healthy, wealthy, and wise,” for our


hours are such as are supposed to produce those estimable
qualities. There is one great advantage in arriving early at
a tea-house, as not only do you get the choice of rooms, but
also the first of the hot bath, which every Jap takes at night.
The water, however, is never changed. The bath consists of
a huge wooden tub encased at the bottom in tin, and into
which a tin funnel penetrates ; below a fire is lighted, and so
the water is kept hot.
20 th Nov. —For the first four miles our road lay over a
“ level grassy plain, called Kagamino, bounded on the
right by a range of low hills.” This in the guide-book did
not sound promising, but we were pleasantly disappointed,
as altogether it resembled somewhat that of English scenery.
In one cottager’s garden I noticed a camellia tree at least 40
feet high, covered with blossom. Last night there had been
heavy rain, but this morning it all cleared away, leaving
behind it that extraordinary freshness in the air which is
most pleasant to pedestrians. Leaving the plain, and crossing
some very barren sandhills, we suddenly came upon some
magnificent scenery. Through an avenue of pine trees we
suddenly overlooked a magnificent river. It was the Kiso-
gawa, foaming over a rocky bed, at the foot of dark rugged hills.
This river is navigable for boats, and had we been going the
other way we would have availed ourselves of it to avoid eight
miles walking. The road creeps along its right bank, under
overhanging rocks, and through pine avenues. At Ota we
rested for tiffin, at one of the prettiest of tea-houses. At
Mawatashi we crossed, baggage, cart and all, in a ferry boat,
and with some difficulty managed to drag the cart up the steep
bank on the opposite side. Our commissariat department
secured at a village on the road a pheasant and three doves.
We reached Mitake quite an hour before our baggage, and
had first some difficulty in finding therighttea-house, although
we knew the name of it, and then had to sit outside until
Hakodati arrived. Without exaggerating, the Japanese are
the most stupid people I have ever been amongst. They
don’t attempt to understand you. You may try every con-
ceivable sign, and they will simply stand and grin at you,
which generally ends in your getting dreadfully angry, and
using language that, perhaps as well, they do not understand.
21st Nov. —Soon after leaving Mitake we left the Nak-a-sendo
and took a new road which has been constructed, to avoid
the Thirteen Passes. This road, owing 1c the rain, is in a
559


dreadful state- deep, muddy, and slippery clay. We had
three coolies to our cart all the way, and over one steep pass
increased that number to six. We stopped to rest and wait
for our cart at a farm-house. The occupants were excessively
polite, and immediately prepared us hot sake, which in our
drenched condition was most grateful. These houses are nearly
all arranged on the same plan, and divided from the main
rooms by sliding screens are the sleeping apartments. The.
main room itself is the general living room and farm-house,
half is raised and covered with mats, in the centre of this is
a square opening in the mats, in which is the fire, and over
which hangs the cooking pot. The other half contains the
stable for the farm pony, the rice-pounding mill, and other
farm implements. These pounding mills are the same all
over Japan, being really a large pestle and mortar; some are
worked by a huge lever, at one end of which is the pestle,
while on the other the man stands and so raises it. He then
steps off on to a platform, and the pestle falls. I should
say, to watch a man at this work, that a treadmill would be
preferable, but whenever wateristobe obtained, water-wheels
are used, water-wheels, too, in most cases of the most
primitive description, consisting merely of four spokes, at
the end of two of which are boxes, which fill with water,,
and then the wheel makes half a revolution. In other cases
the lever is simply raised by water flowing into a large scoop
fixed at the opposite end to the pestle ; this latter plan and
the two-box wheel have the advantage of being able to be
worked no matter how little the water. After leaving this
farm-house the road became very bad, being evidently of very
late formation; in some cases the stumps of rice straw were
still standing in the pathway. The descent into the valley
beyond was even worse than the ascent, for one slipped about
in the most extraordinary way. It was nearly three o’clock
before we reached Ramato on the Nagoya-Kaido, a fine broad
road connecting the Nak-a-sendo and the Tokaido. It joins
the latter road at Nagoya, a seaport town about fifty miles
distant. The tea-house was full of lazy Japs, lying wrapped
up and asleep until the rain was over. Early as it was,
the warm bath was begun, and some fair young maids, while
we were sitting at our tiffin, performed their toilet just outside
our room with the greatest complaisance. There was nothing
comfortable here, so we decided to push on another seven
miles to Oi, a large town on the Nak-a-sendo. There we
560


found a large tea-house, but crammed to overflowing, owing
to the wet; hut they managed to turn out some Jap.s, and we
got really comfortable quarters. There we first came
across the kutatsu, a sorry comfort on a cold night to
weary, wet-footed travellers. About the centre of the
room a small mat a foot square lifts out, and in its
place is shoved a square box containing charcoal embers ; over
this is placed a square wooden frame, and over that again a
quilt. Round this you huddle, and while your toes get hot,
icicles hang from your nose; indeed, it is a poor substitute
for a fire. We are all beginning to think Japan rather a
fraud, and the Nak-a-sendo in particular—we have now
trudged 120 miles to see nothing but the most commonplace
scenery, and that, too, in wretched weather. Why is it that
people in general think it always necessary to go into raptures
over anything that is novel? Japan is perhaps the latest
country that has been opened to the ordinary traveller, and I
don’t think there is another country that has had more rub-
bish written about it. I put it down to the superficial way
that travellers in general see Japan. I must confess to being
at first taken in, but the more I see of the country the less
I like it, and this remark applies especially to its male popu-
lation ; from the highest to the lowest they are a swindling
set of scoundrels of the very meanest description.
22nd Nov. —Getting up by candlelight, washing al fresco
in an open verandah in snow, and breaking your ice, is not
what may be called thoroughly enjoyable ! It is bitterly cold,
and we are too late for this road. We have now to take to
pack-horses for our baggage, which is a very slow way of
getting on, for they have to be changed at every station, a
distance sometimes of only six miles, and unloading and re-
loading takes time, as in loading a pack-horse there is great
skill required. Soon after leaving Oi we got our first grand
view of snow-clad mountain ranges, which in the early morn-
ing, with the rising mists, and dark pine trees peeping out from
the snow, looked really beautiful. To this point let me advise
future travellers, if going over the Nak-a-sendo in this direc-
tion, to take jinriki-shas, and to walk then as far as Takasaki.
The road descends into a large circular valley, in the centre
of which is the town of Nakatsugawa; there we rested for
tiffin. For some way ahead of us we could see our road winding
up the face of the opposite hills. Almost directly after leaving
our halting-place we crossed a rapid river, and began the ascent
2 o


of a pass known as the “Ten Turnings," by a winding path
through shady woods. On the top of this pass is situate the
village of Magome, from which you get a most extensive view
of hill and dale, backed up by snowy mountains. It had been
a stiff climb up, but the descent on the opposite side, called
the Magome Toge, was more gradual. AtTsumago we came
to a halt for the night, but had some difficulty in finding a
tea-house with room for us. We at last secured a very small
room in a fairly comfortable-looking 'house, in which we, as
usual, huddled together round the kutatsu for the sake of
warmth. In fact, we now turned that most useful commo-
dity into a dining-table, and sat round it perched on folded
razaies.
23 rd Nov. —We may now be said to be amidst perhaps the
most beautiful scenery of the Nak-a-sendo. We are following
along the valley through which flows the Kisogawa, which in
places passes through grand and pine-clad gorges, the trees
covered with snow. Above us rise some of the great peaks
of the district, those of Ontake and Koma-ga-take being the
finest, each over 10,000 feet. There is the abode of the bear,
so much prized by the Japanese doctors, for the sake of their
grease and livers. The gorges in some places were extremely
narrow, and walking under some of these overhanging cliffs
was not altogether safe, for once several huge stones fell hut a
few feet ahead of me, loosened by the night’s frost, and set free
by.the mid-day sun. But no doubt the most beautiful part
of the day was that near sunset, when the snow peaks were
lighted up with all the various colours, and beneath all was
the deep green of the pine trees. Except for these trees
there was not a leaf on any other, which consisted principally
of oak and beech. There is no doubt that in summer this
part of the Nak-a-sendo must be really beautiful, but I would
advise travellers only to come this far, and turn off at
Tsumago and make their,, vay to the river, so famous for its
rapids, and so reach the Tokaido, and by that road find their
way back to Yokohama. We pushed on to Agematsu, where
we found a large tea-house.
24 th Nov. —I spoke previously of the superficial manner in
which the ordinary run of travellers see Japan. I will explain
myself. He lands at one of the Treaty Ports, and sees the
surrounding country under the guidance of his servant, and
of coolies, who are accustomed to the ways of foreigners, and
are to a certain extent within the jurisdiction of the Treaty


Ports. Some travellers see little more than this ; others cross
either the Tokaido, which is the more frequented route, or
else the Nak-a-sendo ; but to do this they hire their jinriki-shas
and coolies for the whole route from their starting point, so
that along the road they have little or nothing to do with the
people of the country, and that little pleases them, and they
go away happy and contented, declaring that the Japanese
are the pleasantest of people, and their country the easiest
to travel through. We, however, started in a way different
to this. To begin with, rather than be dragged by a coolie
over so many miles of road, we preferred walking, and rather
than take jinriki-shas through for our baggage, we preferred
picking up our means of conveyance as we went along. By
this means we had some little insight into the character of
the people. Selfish to the last degree, I don’t believe they
would help their dearest friend out of a ditch if he were
dying—all smiles and politeness, so long as the thing pleases
them. In every transaction they will swindle you to a degree
beyond belief, and against which you have no redress. The
general charge laid down for jinriki-shas along the road is
seven sen a ri. We have had to pay as much as thirty-two sen,
and even then, with lazy indifference, they will strhll up and
feel the weight of your various packages, before finally agree-
ing to go. An application to the police benefits you nothing.
They will only shrug their shoulders, and say they cannot
force a coolie to go unless he wishes. Your passports mean
nothing beyond being a permit to travel. The tea-house
charges are increasing every day, and the reason why you so
often get refused a night’s lodging is that they are really
afraid of the trouble Europeans may bring on their heads.
Laws and rules are laid down for the direction of tea-house
keepers with respect to European travellers, and, before he
has got these regulations well into his head, fresh ones come
out, so that he is really bothered to death by his own people.
.A police officer, of which there are any number in the
country —berths I take it for the old Samurai class—comes
down to inspect the tea-house register in which is entered
the names of all travellers. He sees the name of some
European, and immediately begins to ask all sorts of ques-
tions as to where he came from and to what place he was
going, had he a servant, and where was his passport
dated from, to all of which the unfortunate man may not be
able to give satisfactory answers. He is then marched off


to the station, which may be some distance off, and further
interrogated, and either fined or dismissed with a reprimand.
For that class, then, there maybe an excuse for an overcharge,
as there is no doubt that a European does require more
attention than the ordinary Japanese traveller. But how
about this wonderful Government that has made such strides
in modern civilization ? It is a country that has over-
reached itself; anxious to imitate and to appear to other
nations to be in no way behind the rest of the world, it
sends young men to England, America, and France, and
they return filled with modern ideas, formed from a society
which in England hovers round the neighbourhood of Gower
Street. Such ideas are spread through the country. Enough
steam let off for the present, I will now proceed on my
journey. We left Agematsu at our usual hour. A bright
frosty morning, and through lovely scenery somewhat raised
our spirits. We followed along the valley of the Kisogawa,
and our first halting-place was Fukushima, where we stopped
to imbibe some hot sake —not that I like it, but it is warming.
Soon after leaving this town, which extends for some distance
along both banks of the river, we got a magnificent view of
Koma-ga-take and its many rugged peaks, the shape of one
of which gives the name to the mountain, being supposed to
resemble a “ little horse ” {Kama). A short distance along
we crossed the river, and passed a most beautifully situated
tea-house hanging over the water, which is there a boiling
torrent, and shaded by huge trees. In this part of the
country a great deal of rough silk is produced, and
consequently the mulberry is largely cultivated. At
Yagohara we stopped to tiffin, and sat outside, choosing
a tea-house on the sunny side of the street. On
these occasions we are always surrounded by an open-
mouthed crowd, wondering, no doubt, at the queer implements
we use for conveying our food to our mouths, and at the
enormous quantity of sake we drink. Beer is called hint
sake. We are sorry-looking travellers, especially as regards
our feet. My boots are in the most dilapidated condition,
and both Tim and the Colonel have had to cut away great
portions to ease sore places. The latter has a really bad
foot, owing either to poisoning from some new socks, or from
the frost having got into a broken blister. We have swathed
our legs up to the knee in blue bandages, which are much
preferable to gaiters, and a great support on a long tramp.


We are now over 3,000 feet above sea level, and above us
rises the Torii Pass, so called from the Torii, which stands on
its summit, dedicated to Ontake, a fine view of which we
obtained, as the day was as clear as crystal. The summit is
about 4,200 feet, and is reached by a series of zig-zags of easy
gradient. We were now leaving behind us the valley of the
Kisogawa, which we had followed for so long. The road
down was on the shady side of the range, the snow lay
thick, and the path, which had been trodden hard by the many
travellers, was as slipperyas glass. Below us lay the village of
Narai, and at some little distance further Niyegawa, but before
reaching which, we had many windings and crossings of the
river Saigawa. The scenery here is so shut in by mountains
that no view is to be obtained. I know nothing more
tantalizing than at every turning, when you expect to come
out on some grand extent of scenery, to find only another
gorge similar to the one you are in. No doubt, in summer
these narrow defiles must be lovely, with the river tumbling
at their base, shaded by fine trees, but, at this time of the
year, everything is so bare that it is hard to believe that it
can be so. It was dark before we reached Niyegawa, and
our baggage was some time after us, but this time we had
insisted on Hakodati coming along with us, and leaving that
to its fate. By this means we can get stowed away in a
comfortable room, with our toes under a kutatsu.
26th Nov. —Last night it snowed heavily, so that we have
had a fresh covering of lovely whiteness, and while we were
crossing the plain of Ki-kio-ga-hara" we saw several snow-
storms going on around us, but fortunately we escaped.
Before 12 o’clock nearly all the clouds had dispersed, and we
had one of the grandest panoramic views we have yet seen.
A plain of considerable extent, surrounded by grand ranges
of mountains, with all the lights and shades distinctly marked
on the snow surfaces by the retreating storm-clouds. We
passed through several pretty little villages, and reached
Shiwojiri, where we halted for tiffin and to change
pack-horses. Here we had a row with the pack-horse agent,
as he tried his best to make our luggage weigh heavy enough
to insist upon our having two pack-horses instead of one. This
up to Niyegawa they had done, but at that place there was
only one pack-horse in, and that and a coolie for one smaller
article carried our things with the greatest of ease. I was
very much amused at Hakodati, when, knowing the weakness


of his own countrymen, he said, “Please, sir, don’t say hyaku
(quick), for the more you say it the slower he will be.” A
little way before reaching Shiwojiri a road branched off to
Matsumoto, a large town of over 14,000 inhabitants, and one
of the most important in the province of Shin-shiu. _ While-
eating our tiffin we were entertained with watching the
various vehicles arrive which connect it with this place, and
with the harness of the horses. One in particular I noticed,
an old saddle with the shafts through the stirrup leathers,
and the rest fastened on with ropes. Above us was the
Shiwojiri Toge, the ascent of which was most decep-
tive. On reaching, as I supposed, the top, I found still
another steep ascent. The views, looking back over'
the plain, were grand, but nothing compared to that
from the top. Its height is about 3,340 feet, and which-
ever way you look, bold mountain ranges rear their snow-
clad peaks. Stretched out in one grand panorama were
range upon range, with the summits of Koma-ga-take, Ontake,
and of Shirane-san. But the view ahead of us beat all.
Below lay the lake of Suwa, circular in form and about five
miles across, around which is a great cultivated basin
covered with villages. This basin is entirely encircled by high
mountains. On our left, we could see the road climbing the
steep ascent of the Wada Pass, the continuation of the Nak-a-
sendo, but one which I think we shall not attempt, while
ahead of us, in a break in the range, stood against the blue
sky the pure white cone of Fuji-yama. A steep descent, and
a long trudge through the rice-fields, brought us, tired and
weary, to the town of Shimo-no-suwa, famous for its hot
springs. The principal one is called Wata-no-yu, and at a
tea-house near to there we took up our quarters. Attached
to the tea-house is a private bath— private, not from its privacy,
for it stands out into the street, and encircled by an iron
fencing only, but from the fact that only visitors at the tea-
house can use it. After our evening meal, and over our usual
tumbler of toddy, we summoned Hakodati, and held a council
of war, for from this point there are three distinct routes into
Tokio or Yokohama. The most direct is by the Koshiu-kaido,
Then there is the Nak-a-sendo over the Wada and Usui Passes,
no doubt in summer by far the finest; but we are all three
sick of this tramping through snow and slush, and long for
the warmer temperature of the plains. The third was the
one we finally decided upon, and that was to make our way


to the Fuji-kawa, and thence by boat to the Tokaido, for by
doing this we shall get in the best part of that roa.d, and see
both Hakone and Miya-no-shita. We found out that Lord
Harris’s party had also gone by this route, no doubt, like our-
selves, having got sick of the Nak-a-sendo. Having got experi-
ence, one can now see the proper thing to be done, and I will
make a note of it at once. Leave Tokio and go to Nikko by
way of Utsu-no-miya, and from there to Takasaki, and thence
over the Usui and Wada Passes to Shimo-no-suwa, and from
there make a day’s excursion to the top of the Shiwojiri Pass.
After doing this, drive to Matsushima (p. 130 Hawes’ Guide),
and come down the Ten-riu-gawa in a boat to the Tokaido
This river is famous for its rapids, which are well worth visit-
ing. We have, however, decided to reach the Tokaido by
the Fuji-kawa, and for that river we made an early start with
a thermometer ever so much below zero. No vehicle of any
sort could be got in Shimo-no-suwa, so we got a handcart
for our baggage, and pushed on to Takashima, about three
miles away. The road follows round the lake, and through
the village of Kami-no-suwa. The lake in winter is entirely
frozen over, and so firmly that heavily laden pack-horses can
cross it. At Takashima we, with great difficulty, got the hire
of a one-horsed vehicle, the owner first declaring that it was
hired by a Japanese, and then when pressed that he did not
care to lend it to Europeans. We managed to secure it as
far as Kashi-wahara, a distance of six miles, where they
thought either jinriki-shas or a carriage could be got. A betto
ran behind, and Hakodati, with a rein in each hand, acted as
coachman. Our trap was small, and we had a tight fit. The
horse was not a chicken, and with straw warati on his feet
was slowness itself, except when he made a bolt of it.
Hakodati was not the best of whips, and in many places our
lives were in jeopardy. If there was a log in the road, he
invariably tested the tilting angle of the vehicle by going over
it. The views, however, were truly lovely, Fuji-yama ahead of
us, and a bright snowy range behind. It was like passing from
winter into spring, and so on into summer as we descended.
At Kashi-wahara we managed to raise three jinriki-shas,
but these only with a good deal of persuasion, and sending
Hakodati on in front to see if he could get others, and with
our luggage in the other two we set forth on foot. After
about two miles walking we came across two other jinriki-
shas, so putting the heavy luggage on one, much to the


coolie’s disgust, and dividing up the remaining portion
amongst the lot, we started. The roads were good; and in
some places steep, and in coming down the hills our coolies
sometimes got run away with, and I thought we were all
bound to come to grief. However, I was the only one who did.
In coming down a hill my coolie slipped and fell on his nose,
and of course I came out on to the top of him—a most
ludicrous position. We picked up the pieces, and found that
neither of us were much the worse. At Kanasawa we found
Hakodati had been able to get a “one-horse shay,” and while
that was being got ready we ate our tiffin. The road at first
was good, but by degrees the effects of the autumn rain
became apparent, and we had to do a good deal of walking
over rough river beds. In one place our carriage got upset,
and in another we had to upset into the padi fields a cart
belonging to a man who refused to get out of the way, or
help us in our dilemma. However, we managed to reach
Nirasaki, although not before dark. This is a road rarely
used by foreigners, and we found the tea-house people more
than doubly stupid. The difference in temperature was
something charming, and I think we have said “ good-bye ”
to the kutatsu, let us hope, for ever.
zjth Nov. —The same horse and chariot were ready
for us at eight o’clock. We had intended going through to
Kofu, but found that there was a shorter way of reaching
the river. The nearest point was Kajika-sawa, and the road
crosses the plain of Kofu, which was intersected by the
various streams which form the Fuji-kawa. These streams
made progress very slow, and it was tiffin-time before we
reached Kajika-sawa. Here was another proof of how prices
are altering. The guide book, written by men well versed in
Japanese travel put the price at under two yen; we had to
pay over eight. We had intended getting as far as the
Tokaido, but the time we had taken in reaching Kajika-sawa
prevented this, so that at four o’clock, having reached a
suitable resting-place, we decided to halt for the night. It
was the small town of Nambu, situate on the river banks. Our
j ourney thus far had been through successions of lovely scenery,
with wonderful views of mountain ranges. Lying thus in a
boat, gliding down a swift-flowing river, with an occasional
rapid to keep up the excitement, was real pleasure after our
late journeyings. These rivers are of considerable importance
in Japanese transport service, as on this one alone there are


500 boats, and over 2,000 men engaged in taking them up and
down to the coast. For each boat a licence of eighty yen a
month is paid. The toil of towing these boats up heavily
laden against the stream must be great. It takes two and a
half days on the journey up to Kajika-sawa. There are on
an average four men to each boat, three of whom track
along the bank, while the fourth keeps the boat from running
ashore by means of a long bamboo passed through holes in
the bow. They generally go up in companies of four to six.
The bamboo pole of each boat is so arranged as to press
against the stern of the boat in front —by this means, the
strength of all the men towing is brought to bear on all the
boats, thus equalizing the labour. As I have said, we landed
at Nambu. That was easy enough, but to find quarters
was quite another thing. Foreigners were evidently not
loved there, for at the five tea-houses to which we applied
there was no room, or at least they said so. By the time we
had gone the round the whole town was out to see the
foreigners, and no doubt we caused them some considerable
amusement. To ourselves we appeared disreputable enough
looking to be refused anywhere. There was nothing for it
but to apply to the police. They were polite, but shrugged
their shoulders. However, they offered to do their best, and
sent off one of their number, in height about four feet, and on
whom they girded the sword of office. After a short absence
he returned, having got us somewhere to lay our weary limbs,
but apologized for th e size of the room, and said that it was true
all the tea-houses were full, owing to a pilgrimage to some
Buddhist shrine close at hand, but that, in any case, the
tea-house keepers objected to foreigners, because an English-
man had once been there who required six razaies over
and five under him. Beautiful tale, but one that would not
wash, considering a razaie is about two inches thick.
Our march through the town was one of considerable effect,
and one which, I hope, the Japanese thoroughly appreciated.
The said officer, with his sword dragging behind him, headed
the procession. Then came our three selves, and behind us
Hakodati bearing a brown paper parcel, and an old pair of
boots,- our heavier baggage having been left in the middle of
the street. Then followed the whole of the population. I
felt very much inclined to pass the hat round and see if for
once I could not earn an honest cash. Our quarters turned
out to be the house of a private householder, whom the


police, feeling obliged to do something for us, had persuaded
to give up to us. I daresay we fared better than had we
gone to a yadoya. For dinner we had some deliciously
cooked venison, which we had espied in a shop during our
triumphant entry into the town. Being a private house, I
think the owner had invited some friends in to see the
foreigners, for during the whole evening four men sat in
solemn silence in the one corner of the room, which they
had reserved for themselves, watching our every movement.
To wait on us we had a charming little maiden, who was
evidently delighted at her new occupation, and at the present
of a sponge cake.
28 th Nov. —At eight o’clock our boatmen came to carry
us and our belongings off, and we left Nambu, shaking the
dust from off our feet. The river below is more beautiful
still, and at Utsabusa it passes through a perfectly grand
piece of scenery. The river there is hemmed in by precipitous
rocks, and at its narrowest point is spanned by a frail-
looking bridge, on which were two Japanese pilgrims, making
a finishing touch to this already beautiful picture. Nearly
the whole way down the cone of Fuji appeared, towering over
the intervening range, but, except at certain times, it is
almost impossible to imagine that it is 13,000 feet high.
At Iwabuchi we left our boat, and decided to push on at once
in jinriki-shas as far as Yoshiwar, before taking tiffin. A
short distance beyond this town an unbroken view of the
whole of Fuji is obtained. The day was perfect, and the
mountain, now covered more than half way down with snow,,
stood out a solitary and grand mass against the blue sky.
From the top of the cone could be seen the snow being blown
away by the wind. The road further along passed through
a dense pine forest, the trees taking the most grotesque
shapes. Beyond this again was a beautiful view of the Gulf
of Suruga. At four o’clock we arrived at Mishima, a large
town with a most comfortable yadoya, in which we got a
magnificent suite of rooms, overlooking a perfect specimen
of a Japanese garden, with its quaintly-shaped trees, fishponds,
and miniature temples, and beyond which rose Fuji, in all
the glory of a magnificent sunset.
29 th Nov. —Over to-day Nature drew a veil of thick mist,
so that our march to Hakone for tiffin, and thence on to
Miya-no-shita, was merely a matter of progression, and we
missed, I believe, some of the finest scenery in the Tokaido,


as directly after leaving Mishima, the road began to ascend,
until the top of the Hakone Pass is reached, 2,970 feet. For
our baggage we chartered two kagos, and walked ourselves,
as nobody, unless he was absolutely obliged, would ever
think of going in one of these dreadful modes of conveyance.
We reached Hakone drenched, but rested at the Hagu-yafor
tiffin. This is built on the very edge of the lake. On a fine
day this place must be truly lovely, but to-day all had to be
left to the imagination, except some of the avenues of
cryptomeria trees, which even a wet day failed to deprive of
any of their grandeur. A mile beyond Hakone we left the
Tokaido, and took to a narrow track, winding over the hill,
from which, no doubt, magnificent views can be obtained.
Needless to say, we did not obtain them, neither were we
sorry when we found ourselves at Miya-no-shita. Here the
Fuji-ya is a large hotel with every European comfort, except
fireplaces, and for which I must say hibachis are indeed a
poor substitute, especially as you can’t have all the doors and
windows shut, or else asphyxia would be the consequence, so
that on a cold night you must sit in a draught or die of cold,
or else be smothered with charcoal fumes.
30 th Nov. —The Colonel and I have had enough of these
sort of luxuries, so have decided to go through to-day to
Yokohama. Tim, however, has decided to remain, so we left
him behind with Hakodati. At nine o’clock, with our baggage
in a kago, we started to walk down to To-no-sawa, where we
got jinriki-shas, bargaining with them for four-and-a-half yen
for the journey into Yokohama, a distance of about forty miles.
At Sammaibashi we rejoined the Tokaido, and at Odawara, a
large town on the coast, changed jinriki-shas, and started for
Yokohama. We were, of course, now without our servant, and
had to make ourselves understood as best we could. The daywas
perfect, and we thoroughly enjoyed our drive, at first along the
seashore with lovely views of distant promontories. We crossed
the Sakawa-gawa by a tiny wooden bridge, which at flood times
is invariably washed away. This is the boundary of the Treaty
limits. On the horizon was the large volcanic island,from whose
cones dense volumes of smoke were issuing, and that, with
the many white sails reflected in the still blue water, and
the dark pines on the shore, made a really pretty picture. We
stopped to rest and eat our tiffin at a village about five miles
short of Fuji-sawa, where we had originally intended to stop.-
I noticed that our coolies were inclined to be insolent, and^


•made demands for money. I was foolish enough to give
them a yen, hoping it would make them go all the quicker,
as we were anxious to get into Yokohama in time for dinner.
When we reached Fuji-sawa, they would insist on driving
into the gates of the yadoya, there pretending they wanted
to eat, and I am afraid they made us both angry, for
they had only just had something to eat. My man was
particularly insolent, so I hit him over the head with a
blanket I had in my hand. Fortunately for him, I had not a
stick. It was pretty evident that they thought we were up
from Yokohama for a day or two, having only just landed
from some ship. I was afraid they were all going to strike
work, for there was a fearful row going on amongst them,
and the man I had struck was shaking his finger at me,
demanding five yen. I seized him and his jinriki-sha, and
bundled them both out of the hotel yard, and then turned on
the unfortunate proprietor, who had come out to try and
pacify me. I never saw a man jump so, and he was into the
house before you could have said “ knife.” After some more
jabber, we got under weigh once more, our coolies being very
sulky, but when about two miles out of the town we came to
a very long and steep hill. They, of course, pulled up at
once to let us get out. Not a bit of it, we sat as’ still as a
rock. It was the only way we could punish them, as
they got evidently unmercifully chaffed by all the other
coolies we met, for having got such light loads to
pull up. After this things mended, and towards evening
they pulled up at a small roadside tea-house and asked to
be allowed to go in. We walked on, and when they over-
took us they were profuse with their “ arigatos.” After
yesterday’s rain, the road was very bad, as in the last few
years there has sprung up a fair traffic in carriages as far as
Odawara, which cuts it up unmercifully, leaving no sideway
at all for the unfortunate jinriki-shas. There is a law that
a coolie must be decently dressed within the limits of the
settlement, and some of our men certainly were not, and it
was most amusing to see them at a place where we stopped,
just before reaching Yokohama, dividing up their various
garments amongst the party. At 7.15 we were at our hotel,
and our coolies received without a murmur the exact amount
of their dues. They had made a mistake, and they
knew it.
j sf Dec.—lt was bitterly cold in Yokohama, with a


cutting north-east wind blowing, which made it anything but
agreeable. However, we had several expeditions left, which
we felt it our duty to do, so that for the morrow we ordered
horses to ride over to Dai-Butz and Enoshima.
2nd Dec. —We started soon after eight o’clock on three
capital hacks, accompanied by two running bettos to show
us the road. We had already despatched a servant with
lunch in a jinriki-sha, to meet us at the “great god.” The
ride was a pleasant one, along narrow tracks among the
padi fields. Our road lay through innumerable valleys, and
round well-wooded hills. In one of these valleys, surrounded
by low hills, stands, or rather sits, the monstrous figure of
Buddha ; at one time, no doubt, there was a temple covering
it but now all has disappeared, leaving the figure sitting in
solitary grandeur. It is composed of bronze, and is about 56
feet high. The face alone measures ten feet from chin to
forehead, and is thirty feet across the shoulders. The hands,
which are of enormous size, rest upon one another. The ex-
pression on the face was one of extreme sweetness, the down-
cast eyes giving it the appearance of deep thought; the head
is covered with knobs to represent curls. We stood and
gazed on it for some considerable time with a feeling of deep
awe and reverence, until called to more worldly matters by
our servant announcing that tiffin was served. This he had
spread on a small table, lent by one of the priests, in front
of the god under the shade of some trees. While we were
enjoying ourselves in this way a priest came up and offered
to take a photograph of the god with ourselves sitting on its
hands, to which we agreed, and no doubt it will be an amusing
memento of our pilgrimage to the shrine. We afterwards
went inside the figure, in which there is a small temple and a
ladder reaching to the level of the shoulders. Leaving there
we remounted our horses and rode on with our bettos as guides
to Enoshima. This is an island, but connected at low water
by a narrow strip of sand. It is indeed surrounded by a
lovely panorama. The tide was rising, so we could not cross,
but contented ourselves with gazing on this lovely view of
ocean, island, and hilly promontory. We had by that time
had enough of sight-seeing, so gave instruction to our bettos
to lead us home. So turning our horses’ heads inland, we
passed through a large fishing village, and after a short ride
struck the Tokaido. It was a treat once more to be on a
road where we could ride abreast and not in single file.
573


io th Dec. —I know no day more disagreeable than the
last one ashore, previous to finally leaving a place. Nor can
one experience a greater feeling of relief than when you are
safely on board, not having forgotten anything. The “ City
ofTokio” is to sail at daylight to-morrow, so that after a
final dinner at the Grand Hotel we went on board in the steam
launch. Our last few days have been one incessant rush. I
alone have shipped to England eight cases of curios, and I
can only say how glad I am that Japan happened to be about
the last country I shall visit on this tour where curios are
to be bought, for it contains by far the most tempting things,
and it is pleasanter to feel yourself about “busted” towards the
end rather than at the beginning of one’s tour. I have on the
whole enjoyed Japan, but at the same time I have been disap-
pointed. Japan has been the fashion, and writers in general
have painted it in too vivid colours. About its scenery there
is a great sameness, and everything connected with it is petit.
There is no doubt that the spring would be the best time to
see it.
xi th Dec. —At seven o’clock the screw began to revolve,
and with it my spirits rose, for we were bound for home.
The morning was thick and dull, so that we got no farewell
view of Fuji. Outside the harbour the sea was lumpy,
but the “ City of Tokio ” was as steady as a rock. Soon after
leaving we passed “ The Wanderer,” a three-masted yacht,
of over 700 tons, bound for Yokohama, belonging to a
Mr. Lambert.
ijth Dec. —Our first two days out we had strong N.W.
winds, which decided the Commodore to take a more
southerly course than usual. At times we must have been
doing quite 16 knots an hour. The “ City of Tokio ” is a
steamer of 5,500 tons, built by John Roach and Co., the
American shipbuilders. Before reaching China I had heard
of her as being one of the finest vessels in the Eastern world,
so that I was rather surprised, both in China and Japan, to
hear her spoken of as a bad roller, unseaworthy, and every-
thing that was disagreeable. I have, so far, found her just
the contrary. Her motion is so easy that I have never felt
the slightest inconvenience from it. Roll, all vessels will,
and it is said that a vessel which will not roll is unsea-
worthy. At all events, in her rolling she never causes that


so usual a sound at sea> the smashing of crockery, for she
never comes back with a jerk, which so many vessels do.
Our cabins are large and airy, and I have one to myself.
The table and general appointments are such that the most
fastidious could find no objection to. Our passenger list is a
peculiar mixture. A missionary and his family, a German
doctor and his wife, and a Mr. S , with ourselves, com-
plete our table. At the Commodore’s table are about eight
people, one of whom is a Mr. R. P , with whom we have
become great pals. He comes from Amoy, and is a nephew
of some great friends of ours in London. We are only about
sixteen saloon passengers in all. Of course there is a baby—
did ever a ship go to sea without one —but this one is excep-
tionally good. We crossed the ißo° long, at about seven
o’clock this evening.
i Jth Dec. —This at first seems most confusing, but perhaps
it is better than being robbed of a day altogether, which
happens on the return journey. This is indeed a most
monotonous voyage, nothing to see except one solitary
seagull, who follows in our wake ; the only excitement is the
day’s run, and watching the sails, which we have had set
nearly the whole time.
Christmas Day. —For the last four or five days there have
been many and various conjectures as to whether we should
eat our Christmas dinner on shore. It is now un fait
accompli, for to-night we dined at the Palace Hotel, San
Francisco, said to be the largest hotel in the world, having
over one thousand suites of apartments. Who should be
standing at the bottom of the elevator as I came down to
dinner but E. S . You can imagine my surprise, as
I had thought him to be in New Zealand. He, of course,
stayed and dined with us. Curiously enough, he had also
known R. P when out in China some years ago, so
it was indeed an odd gathering, and the more enjoyable as it
was Christmas Day, and then again in so out of the way a
part of the world as San Francisco. Our whole trip over
has been one succession of fine weather. We have had
strong winds, but always in the right direction ; sometimes,
too, a heavy sea, but always a following one. The Commodore
claims for this vessel the fastest voyage yet made across the
Pacific from Yokohama, having done the distance of 4,801
knots in 14 days, 22 hours, and 58 minutes, as against the
champion run of the “ Oceanic” over a distance of little over
575


LOG OF S.S.
‘CITY
OF TOKIO"
II
34-50 N
140-20 E
63
Left Yokohama 7 a.m.
12
35’20 „
I47*08 ,,
336
Passed Cape King, 11 a.m.
13
35' 12 ..
153-28 „
312
Strong breeze, all sail set.
14
34'54 >.
I6OT7 »
336
15
34’58
l66'04 »
284
r6
34'58 „
172-28 ,,
315
17
35' 11 »
178 35
301
r 7
35'37 ..
175-37 W
285
18
35'56 „
169-13 „
3 Ir
19
36 06 „
162-50 ,,
310
20
3 6 ' 11 »
I 55'47 ..
342
21
36'35 »
149-11 „
318
22
36-50 »
I42-43 >,
3™
23
37’°7 n
136-06 „
318
Heavy roll.
24
37'2i »
I29 - 22 ,,
323
25
337
Passed through Golden Gate,.
noon.
4,500 knots in a rather longer time. I give a copy of each
day’s run ;
Thus making an average of 321 miles a day —not bad work
considering she is limited to half consumption of coal per day,
that is to 45 tons only. Last night we had held high revel
on board, in order to celebrate Christmas before we parted.
An excellent dinner had been provided, which included, amongst
many other things, of course, roast beef (frozen), turkey
and cranberry sauce, plum pudding, mince pies, and ices.
The baby had a stocking hung out for it, to which we all
managed to contribute something. One of our passengers,
whom I have before mentioned, Mr. S , has been quite a
conundrum to us. Since leaving Yokohama, Ido not think
he has been outside the social hall, except to go to his meals
and to bed, but settled himself in one corner of it and there
remained. He looks as if he had worn his clothes all his life,
or as if his stock of linen was very limited. He was educated
at Eton, but has not the manners of a pig. There are also
on board over 1,100 Chinese, making in all about 1,242 souls.
With so many on board, it often strikes one how many could
be saved in case of an accident. The carrying capacity of
these vessels is enormous. Besides her passengers, she has
1,100 tons of coal, and 4,200 tons of cargo. The Chinese are
all forward, and are stowed away in bunks, made of uprights
with bamboos lashed, across which is stretched canvas.
These are three deep and two in breadth, with a passage


just broad enough to pass along. The place is ventilated by
fans, which draw out all the foul air, and pass it away into
the smoke stack. Every morning they are all driven out,
by means of sprinkling cayenne pepper on charcoal, and
the place is swept and cleaned. They are the most
orderly crowd that I have ever seen. Given a mat and
some gambling implements, they are perfectly happy.
In case of a rising amongst them, the hot steam jet
would be used, but this could only happen in a steamer
of this size by a mistake in managing them. Their
passage-money across is thirty-two dollars, so that
they are a paying freight. The Californian Government
is at present considering the subject of Chinese immigration,
and it is feared that they will pass a law prohibiting more
than fifteen to be landed by any one ship. Soon after
breakfast this morning, we sighted the Farraleones, rocks of
the most inhospitable-looking character, and also passed
two schooners, our first signs of life, bar the seagulls, since
leaving the Japan coast. From these rocks to the Golden
Gate is about thirty miles. On the right of the entrance is
a fort, but of such construction as to be of little use ; but as
a wit said —“We have no need of forts or men-of-war; we have
only to shut off the fog-horn, blow up the lighthouses, andi
turn on the fog, and all the navies in the world could not
find us.” Such is the case. San Francisco is famed for its
fogs. This is a town which sprung up at the time of the
Californian gold rush in 1849, and was built on sandhills.
It is a city of some considerable size, but of no interest, and
contains the worst paved streets of any in the world. Cars
seem to run in every direction, and are the general means of
locomotion. To a Californian it is a Paradise, but to the
rest of the world it is a very one-horse place. It derives its
name from the fact of it having been the spot where some
Franciscan friars had had a monastery during the time of the
Spanish occupation in 1777. The present town is built upon
the bay, with its back to the Pacific, from which it is distant
about seven miles. It has some fine streets, but they are
decidedly untidy, pieces of paper and orange peel litter them.
I suppose everybody is too busy money-making to attend
to such trivial matters. The Stock Exchange here is one
of the worst in the world for wild speculation. America,
of all countries in the world, has the highest duties,
and there is hardly a thing that is free, so that we
2 P


were all lucky in getting through without bother, the
fact being that a Christmas Day’s dinner had made the
custom-house officers at peace with all the world. They opened
all our things, however, except the Colonel’s, and his they
passed unopened, saying that at least deserved a box of cigars.
Landing is simple enough. A transfer agent comes on board,
and takes charge of all your luggage, which arrives in due
time at your hotel, and for which you are charged fifty cents
per package. The climate here is good, the difference in
temperature between summer and winter being but slight. It
is about eight degrees, whereas that of Mentone is about thirty.
Again, it is within reach by railway of some of the most
beautiful places in Southern California, where the climate is
simply perfect. The dust in summer in San Francisco is said to
be fearful —it is indeed a place where the dust of an earthly to-
day is the earth of a dusty to-morrow. There being nothing to
do here, the Colonel, R. P. and myself have decided to
move on, and make our way across to New York by the Cen-
tral Pacific. There is another route now open, by the
Southern Pacific, which perhaps at this time of the year is
the better one, but as it takes longer, and P cannot afford
the time, we have decided on the former route.
27 th Dec. —Tickets had been taken for us and all arrange-
ments made by the indefatigable agent of the Burlington and
Quincy line, which is one of the lines connecting Omaha
and Chicago, and acting as links on the overland journey.
The courtyard of the hotel resembles that of the Louvre
in Paris, but on a much larger scale, and is lighted by two
electric lights. Looking out into this are the corridors of the
eight stories, and from Italian vases on the top droop festoons
of creepers, the whole being covered by a glass roof. This
may be said to be our starting point for the overland journey,
for there our baggage is delivered over and checked through
to N.Y. We left the hotel at three o’clock, and drove.down
to the Ferry House at the foot of Market Street, the great
thoroughfare of San Francisco. This is the termination of
nearly all the tram-car lines. The ferry-boat which con-
veyed us across the bay to Oakland was of enormous size,
and propelled by paddles. The bay presented a lively scene ;
small launches, antiquated stern-wheelers, and other
enormous ferry-boats whistled and screeched in a most
alarming manner. Vessels of all nations lay at their anchors,
and some of the old side-wheelers of the Pacific Mail Co.


had evidently come to their last resting-places. To look at
them, one wonders how it was ever possible that they could
ride out a storm in the Pacific, and yet they did, and crossed
and recrossed between here and Yokohama to within very
recent years, making extraordinary long voyages. The bay
is extremely pretty, surrounded by hills, and dotted with
islands. Oakland is a large and thriving town of about
50,000 inhabitants, and is the home of many of the San
Francisco merchants, being noted for its wonderful climate.
It is said that over 10,000 people cross daily by the ferry-
boats. There is a railway running through it, upon which
the inhabitants have the privilege of riding free, that being
their condition for allowing it to pass through the town. At
■Oakland the Atlantic Express was waiting for us, consisting
of about four “ Silver Palace Cars,” and several for baggage.
In one of these we had secured a drawing-room, that is, a
small compartment at one end of the car, capable of holding
three very comfortably, although made for four. We reached
Sacramento in time for dinner, crossing the river there, train
and all, in a huge ferry-boat.
2nd Jan. —The journey across the continent is over, and I
am at the Victoria Hotel in New York, a journey of over3,ooo
miles through wild and picturesque canons, over rugged
mountain ranges, and across vast prairies, a journey of great
interest, not only on account of the scenery passed through,
but principally of the people you meet en route. Had it been
any other time of the year, we should have made a call both
at Ogden, from which Salt Lake City is reached, and at
Chicago, but sight-seeing in snow is anything but pleasant.
Tim has, however, decided to do so, and so he remained behind
in San Francisco. As far as Ogden the line belongs to the
Central Pacific Railroad, and then to Omaha or rather Council
Bluff, which is on the opposite bank of the Missouri, to the
Union Pacific Railroad. The highest elevation reached
on the Central Pacific Railroad was at the summit of the
Sierras Nevada, 7,017 feet. Unfortunately, we passed
through all the lovely scenery of the Sierras during
the night. It is at a place called Cape Horn that the
train clings to a precipitous bluff at a perpendicular
height of over 2,000 feet. To make the track men had to be
let down by ropes, as no foothold could be found on the sheer
•down sides. The climbing of the Sierras is described in a
book called “Sand”: —“Along the bare plain the ringing


rhythm of iron upon steel keeps up the glib clip-clap-clatter
of its inconstant time, until the night comes down dark and
threatening as the train arranges among glancing lights to
climb the Sierras. In the snow, that deepens under the night
that darkens, the climbing begins. Not one iron horse now,
but two, sometimes more than two. There is here no desert.
The dark pine looks loftily and dimly above the white snow
as if listening to the talk of the engines. ‘ Who-o-o-o-o-oop !
are you ready ? ’ says the fore to the aft engine. ‘ Who-o-op I
all ready?’ says the aft. ‘Away we go then.’ So it is.
And thus all night long the iron monsters talk to each other
on the icy altitudes among the listening pines, and thus the
dialogue of iron industry goes on. The comfortable passenger
in the elegant sleeping-car hears it in his dreams; the
emigrant, curled up and cramped in his car-seat, hears it
through the dry chill that has permeated his bones, and ever
and anon he flattens his nose against the window-glass in a
vain endeavour to look out, only to find his eye gazing into
a reflection of the car he occupies.” Again the prairies are
described as —“No green and gold of leaves that grow and
leaves that die, no babbling streams through valleys grown
with grass, no heaving fields with squares of ‘ thine and
mine,’ but one wide waste of ashen gray, one cloudless sun,
one wagon road across the scene, and mountains all about:
The solemn silence of that plain,
Where unmanned tempests ride and reign,
It awes, and it possesses you —
’Tis oh ! so eloquent.
After the Sierras, no doubt the most beautiful part of the road
is that which comprises the Echo and Weber Canons.
Fortunately, our car was the last on the train, and I, in spite
of the cold, took up my position on the back platform, so that
I got an uninterrupted view of all this beautiful scenery. The
territory of Utah is the home of the Mormons, of which
Ogden is the second principal town, and the junction for the
lines going south to Salt Lake City, and North and Virginia
City. Leaving the plain, we entered a wild and narrow pass,
through which flows the river Weber, by what is known as
the Devil’s Gate, which the line crosses and recrosses by
strong iron bridges. The scenery is of the wildest, and at a
place called Devil’s Gap it reaches its climax. Above all
this rise the high peaks of the Wasatch Mountains, clad


with everlasting snow. What a pity it was that we had to
see all these wonders from a railway train. Before you
have hardly taken one wonder in another is upon you.
Past the Devil’s Gap, you dash on to the Devil’s Staircase ;
on every side of you are steep precipices, and above you
towering rocks of the quaintest shapes, all of which have
names, such as the Pulpit —from which the Prophet of the
Lord was once said to have preached to the assembled mul-
titude of “ the Latter-day Saints” —Monument Rock,Witches’
Rocks, and so on. Close to the track grows a solitary tree,
upon which hangs a board, “ Thousand Mile Tree,” marking
the distance to Omaha. Leaving Weber Canon, called after
an old trapper, we entered Echo Canon, the rocks in
which are even of more fantastic shapes, and of red sand-
stone. Soon after leaving them, we ran out of Utah, and
entered the State of Wyoming, stopping at Evanston
for lunch at the Mountain Front Hotel. About three miles
away are large coal mines, in one of which is the famous
burning mountain. Amine took fire, and has defied all efforts
to extinguish it. How long it will burn no one can tell, as a
ifire with a perpetual supply of fuel is rather a puzzler.
However, they are still working the mine, by building, where
the fire is burning, a strict watch being kept, and on the
■slightest appearance of fire a fresh wall is built. On over
Alkali Plains to Green River, where we supped. This is
supposed to be the coldest place on the road, and we all
wrapped up well before turning out. Beyond this were many
snow sheds and fences. These sheds are huge wooden tunnels
of great strength, built in the places where the worst drifts
have occurred. Formerly trains used to be stopped for days,
but now there is hardly ever a detention beyond a few hours.
Trains have been delayed this year already, but February and
March are by far the worse months. The snow even now,
in places, is fairly deep. At mid-day and towards sunset
some of the effects of light and shade in the snow are lovely.
The fences are also placed in many places at a little distance
from the line. When the drifts have reached the top of the
fences in height the railroad men go along and raise the
fences to the top of the drifts. What must be the life of a
railroad man in this country. There is one man to every ten
miles, and it is his duty to walk up and down the line, and
see that all the rails'and fish-plates are properly fastened.
.Lines here are not set in chairs, but are simply nailed down


upon the sleepers. At the time the line was built the greatest
amount of line laid in one day was ten miles, ■ and that
by the Central Pacific Railroad. This was done for a wager
of 10,000 dols. given by the Union Pacific Railroad, with
whom there was keen rivalry. The 29th day of April
was fixed, and by one o’clock on that day they had laid
eight miles of track, the average speed being 144 feet a
minute. By seven o’clock the Central men had finished
their task with 200 feet to spare, whereupon the Superin-
tendent ran a locomotive over the ten miles of the track in forty
minutes. To complete this there had been over 4,000 men
employed. The rival roads were now nearing completion,
and it was on the 10th of May, 1869, at a place called Pro-
montory, 804 miles from San Francisco, that the two lines-
were united, so linking together with bands of iron the East
and West. We next crossed the Laramie Plains, which extend
for about 100 miles, and are the approaches to the Rocky
Mountains. The wind was blowing, and with such force
that it was impossible, as well as too cold, to stand outside.
It was so strong as to make the westward bound train late,
and we had to wait for it at the Tie Siding. The elevation
there is about 8,000 feet. Of course the line is but a single
one, and one is reminded of the old riddle of how many trains
will you meet in a journey of seven days from San Francisco
to New York, taking it that a train departs every day from,
both places. About two miles before reaching Sherman, the
summit of the Rocky Mountains, we passed over Dale Creek
Bridge, one of the wonders of the road. This spans a wild,
rocky chasm, and looks of such slender construction as hardly
capable of bearing the weight of so heavy a train. It is 650
feet long, and 150 feetfrom the bed of the creek. The country
after this was of the wildest and most rugged description;
huge blocks of red granite are scattered about in the wildest
confusion, and are of the most fantastic shapes, rounded
by the action of the weather. The ascent had been so-
gradual (about 50 feet to the mile), the view over the great
plain so extensive, that it was almost impossible to imagine
that on reaching Sherman the height was 8,242 feet, and to
within recent days the highest railroad in the world. When
we stopped, our conductor facetiously asked us to come out
and taste a Rocky Mountain breeze. Needless to say one
taste was enough, not wishing to be cut in pieces by the
bitter blast. Our next stopping place was Cheyenne, or “ the


Magic City of the Plains,” at an elevation of 6,041 feet, with
a gradient from the summit of about 67 feet per mile. It is
the capital of the Wyoming territory, with a population of
about 4,000. From this point two lines run south to Colorado
and New Mexico, the Denver Pacific and Colorado Central.
It is perfectly wonderful how towns spring up. It was cut
previous to the building of the Union Pacific, afterwards it
was known by the pleasant name of “ Hell on Wheels,” now
it possesses a court-house and jail, which cost 40,000 dols.;
a large public school, a city hall, and a brick opera-house.
To the north lie the Black Hills, famous for their gold, and
besides that, it is the centre of a large stock-raising country.
For instance, in 1875, 525 cars, or 10,500 head of cattle were
shipped from this point. I forgot to mention that just before
i-eaching Sherman we saw a small brown bear close to the
line, driven down by the snow on the mountains. Ever since
the construction of the line there has never been a case of
Indians interfering or meddling in any way with the telegraph
wires. They look upon them as “ great medicine,” and are
consequently afraid. The same, lam told, applies along the
Southern Pacific at the present day, where the Indians are
still hostile to the white man. We saw numbers of
their wigwams along the line, and at the station there
were many loafing round, evidently on the look-out for
something to steal. They are allowed to travel free
on the platform of the ordinary cars, and several were
sitting huddled up in their red blankets on our train.
The United States Government treat them uncommonly
well, feeding them and giving them blankets, but as far as
being able to civilize them, they have long ago discovered
that to be an impossibility. The cold was intense, and the
rivers in nearly every instance were frozen over, icicles hang
from everything, and the snow scenes were wonderful. We
next entered upon the Nebraska territory, and away to the
south could be seen the snowy Ranges of Colorado. On all
sides of us a great desert, covered with nothing but sage bush,
the food of the sage bush grouse, a bird nearly as large as our
capercailzie. The country was like one vast ocean, an ocean
of ever-changing shades, as the fleecy clouds shut out the
sunlight. There is something most impressive in these vast,
boundless plains, never a tree, a bird, or animal to break their
monotony, great rolling uplands, sometimes broken by rugged
bluffs, looking like some dangerous rocks at sea. They


are in extent about 1,000 miles from north to south, and 500
east to west. It was at Sidney we stopped for dinner, and
after that we began once more to get into a settled country,
and entered on the Great Platte Valley, through which runs
the river Platte, which empties its waters into the Missouri a
little below Omaha. It was in this valley the constructors
met with so much trouble from the Indians. It is over
the prairies here that the railroad runs in a direct line for
forty miles. We stopped at Grand Island for tiffin, named
after an island on the river Platte which is forty miles long
and from one to three miles in width. It was first settled in
1857 by a colony of Germans. Columbus is a thriving
township, noted for being the centre of the United States, as
well as of a very rich grain-growing country. It was over this
valley that the immense trains of heavily-freighted wagons
passed in their slow progress towards the setting sun. It was
the great highway both to Utah, Colorado, California, and
Oregon, but now the “ bull-whacker,” with his white covered
wagons and raw-boned oxen, has given place to the snorting
engine and Pullman cars. We reached Omaha, on the banks
of the Missouri river, at 3.35. This is now one of the most
important towns in Central America. It is a large head
centre for railroads; there are upwards of 12,000,000 people
living in a radius of 100 miles, and there are 26,000 miles of
railroad radiating in every direction. There is a tale told of
how, when it was first made a postal town, the postmaster
used his hat for a post-office, and in which he carried his mail
when he went his rounds. Since then the post-office, now a
handsome stone building, has often handled 20 tons of over-
land and local mails. It also receives an enormous quantity
of lead ore, and its smelting works are the largest on the
■continent. We crossed to Council Bluffs by the bridge over
the Missouri river, which is a marvel of engineering skill.
It was finished in 1872, and comprises eleven spans, each of
250 feet in length and elevated 50 feet above high water
mark; its total length is 2,750 feet. I may say that, ever
since leaving Yokohama, I have heard of the Chicago,
Burlington and Quincy route, which is one of the several
lines running from Omaha to Chicago, and the one by which
we decided togo. So on reaching Council Bluffs it was rather
amusing to find that on Saturdays the several lines took it in
turn .to run the one train, and that on this Saturday it was
that of the Rock Island route. We have now got into the
584


land of “ Dining Cars,” and it is certainly a treat to be able to
eat one’s dinner at leisure, and not bolt everything in twenty
minutes. On arriving at a feeding station a general stampede
takes place. Outside the refreshment room stands a black man
beating a gong with all his strength, while at some opposition
tavern over the way a man is violently ringing a bell; added to
this is the noise of the engine, and you have a fair idea of the
pandemonium of a feeding station. You seize a chair, and in
front of you are scattered about a dozen small dishes containing
the various articles to be consumed. You are waited upon by
negroes, Chinamen, or young damsels, and I noticed that in
Utah it was more frequently the latter —“ Mormon brides”
perhaps. Crossing the bridge we left behind us the territory
of N ebraska, and entered on that of lowa. Council Bluffs derives
its name from certain circular hills, the place of meeting
in former times between the Indians and the agents of the
Government. What a change from an average pace of about
twenty miles an hour to that of 40 at least, from bare and
barren prairies to an inhabited country. In the dining car
we had a most excellent dinner nicely served, and the car
neatly decorated. The menu was a work of art in itself,
being decorated with a view of the Yosemite Valley and
Colorado. Dinner can be had up till nine o’clock, after which
the car is unhooked. I should fancy, as competition in time
becomes of greater moment, these cars will die out, as they
must add greatly to the weight of the train. They are
capable of dining about 40 people, and have a very neat
kitchen in them besides. I will for curiosity copy out the
menu , which can be taken as a very fair specimen of how you
live on these railroads. Fish: Broiled whitefish, broiled
salt mackerel. Broiled sirloin steak, tenderloin steak, veal
cutlets, mutton chops, sugar-cured ham. Breakfast bacon,
calves’ liver, salt pork steaks (served with tomato sauce or
mushrooms). Fried: Mutton chops (breaded), oysters, veal
cutlets (breaded). Miscellaneous: Stewed kidneys, fried
mush, codfish balls, stewed chicken, stewed oysters,
codfish with cream. Cold: Ham, oysters, beef, tongue.
Eggs : Fried, boiled, scrambled. Omelets, plain, with parsley ;
ham, cheese, or tomatoes. Potatoes; Stewed, baked,
Saratoga, sweet potatoes. Maple syrup. Bread, &c.:
French rolls, corn bread, dry toast, wheat cakes, plain
bread, oatmeal, Vienna bread, buttered toast, milk toast.
Black tea, English breakfast tea, green tea, coffee, and


chocolate. The price for a meal is 75 cents, and I think
out of that menu one can manage to make a square meal;
besides which, wines, spirits, and beer are carried, also
cigars, so what can mortal man wish for more ? At Davenport
we crossed the Mississippi by a magnificent bridge, and
passed over Rock Island, which gives the name to the
route. We then entered the territory of Illinois, and passed
through rich farm land, the comfortable-looking homes
of the farmers speaking well for their prosperity. We reached
Chicago at 2.45, and had just time to drive across the
city in one of Pamelee’s omnibuses to catch the New York
Express by the Michigan Central Railroad. I was astonished
with Chicago, a town of vast proportions and of immense
stone buildings. It is hard to imagine that it was almost
entirely destroyed by fire so recently. Now, I suppose,
it is one of the most important towns in America.
Chicago is situate at the southernmost end of Lake
Michigan, and is the centre of an enormous trade,
especially that of wheat. The large elevators here are
extraordinary, and capable of holding an enormous quantity
of the golden grain. It contains over 300,000 inhabitants.
From Chicago you have a choice of several routes into New
York. We have chosen the Michigan Central, as it lands you
in New York at the Grand Central Depot. We left at
3.30, and for some little distance followed along the shore of
the lake. It was a pretty sight, as everything was covered
with ice and icicles, although the lake itself is not yet frozen.
Between the lake shore and the fine houses which border it
is a broad band neatly laid out with grass plots. We
remained up until after eleven o’clock to see the ferry across
the river which unites Lake Erie with Lake Huron. Ihe train
is divided into two, and runs on to an enormous ferry-boat.
The distance across is about two miles to Windsor on the
Canadian shore. Once more lam on British soil, but not
for long, for when we awoke in the morning at seven o’clock
we were at the Suspension Bridge, where they allowed us ten
minutes for breakfast. From the Bridge we got a partial
view of the Falls, but not enough to give one any idea at all
of what they really are. It is too cold to stop, and again this
is a bad time of the year, being too early to see them in
their real winter garb. Having crossed the Bridge, we were
once more on American soil, and in the territory of New York.
The snow is now very deep, and the towns as we pass


through them give a real winter scene. It is curious how
the railroad runs through a town without any fencing, and
along its main streets. When nearing a town a continual
clanging of a bell is kept up, which sounds like the ringing of
church bells ; these bells are attached to the top of the engine
behind the safety valve. All last night we travelled at a very
fast rate, and we have now no dining car on, and so great
is the competition between this and the other lines that
they only give us ten minutes at Poughkeepsie to get
someting to eat. At Rochester we stopped for the New York
Central and Hudson River train, to which our Pullman car was
attached. The next place of any importance was Albany, which
we reached at 4.40. There we crossed the Hudson River. The
line follows the left bank of the river right into New York,
and you pass there some of the most beautiful scenery. As you
gaze across this broad river to the wild bluffs on the opposite
shore, known as The Palisades, you might imagine you were
on board a ship at sea looking at some wild and rock-bound
coast. Then came timber-clad hills and deep bays, and
nestling townships and broad stretches of lovely scenery.
The evening closed in with a brilliant moon, and the river
looked more lovely still, the frozen sides and snow-tipped
trees, the reflection of the moon, and the twinkling of the
thousands of lights on the opposite shores, made as pretty a
picture as I ever had seen. We arrived thirty minutes late
at the Grand Central Depot, owing to it being holiday time.
There we and our baggage were transferred to an omnibus.
We at first went to the Brunswick Hotel, which is about the
best in New York, but they being full we went across the road
to the Victoria.
3rd Jan. —The journey is at an end. A journey of 3.300
miles right across this vast continent. “ Straight as the flight
of an arrow we go westward, crossing the Father of Waters,
the sublime Mississippi, and thence on across the ever-sullen
Missouri. Now come days of gray alkali deserts, with ragged
sage bush, the very epitome, the quintessence of desolation;
then the Wasatch, with their lofty plateaus and long-reaching
ranges; then the miles of snow sheds, the snow-crowned sum-
mits, the yawning chasms, canons, and ravines of the Sierras.
Beyond this the Sacramento, the Golden Gate.” Thus has
another traveller epitomized his journey.
10th Jan. —I have now been a week in New York ; a week
spent in finding my way about, and in watching the people,


There are cities in America which are said to have particular
features. Chicago is noted for its hospitality —which consists
in asking you to have a drink every five minutes —Boston
for its culture ; Philadelphia for its oysters; and Baltimore
for its canvas-back ducks ; but of New York it is said that it
is too cosmopolitan to have any distinctive feature. But to a
stranger one of the most striking features is the dress of its
women. I can do no better than let an American here describe.
The following is from the New York Herald of yesterday: —
The flattery that the American woman has received about her dress has
taken such hold on her very soul that she now has the idea that to be
dressed on all occasions and on any occasion in any but the most elabo-
rate style is to work disaster to her reputation, and danger to her social
position. I have sometimes thought in England that the English woman
was the worst dressed woman in the civilized world. I remember on two
occasions especially when 1 came to this conclusion—once when I saw a
blue dress with a red flounce, and once when I saw a waterproof trimmed
with white lace. But I now give it unhesitatingly as my opinion that the
American woman is the worst dressed woman in the world, while there
are no words eloquent enough to express the unfittingness of the American
.child’s dress, nor the mischief that such dress works for the child. The
decoration of the person has become with us a wild scramble. Women,
piled all over with plush and velvet and lace and silk, and set in diamonds,
crowd the stores, jostling each other like mad creatures. They get into
.cars, and before they have made ready their money for their fare take an
inventory of the dress of all other women. Daily in public conveyances
they can be heard discussing the ways and means of dress. In houses
of worship they dress as for the opera ; and one might imagine an elegant
New York church outpour on Sundays an outpour from a wedding, rather
than from the worship where “miserable sinners” had been pleading
God to “ be merciful.”
Last Thursday was violently stormy. I rode in a half-dozen cars in
my pursuit of New Year’s missions. The ladies that I saw then dressed
in elegant silks and plush were the rule, not the exception. They sat in
reeking, steaming cars, with dripping umbrellas resting against elegant
cloaks, and against elegant and suddenly ruined dresses. It was a sight
to make an earnest person weep; not alone for the destruction of that
■which had cost so much to produce, but for the disaster to the well-being
and the lovableness of woman as woman.
The Gainsborough hat is but a small part of the dress chapter. (I
may say en passant that my own daughters do not wear Gainsborough
hats. I can find something for them much more befitting and dignified
for the street, while for the opera and theatre they do not wear hats at
all.) The extreme to which we are carrying personal decoration to the
neglect of dignified manners, and the effrontery of the parade of drawing-
room and fireside toilets on the street, are marking us as the worst
dressed (because the most inappropriately) and the most vulgarly dressed
women in the world.
Were I to end here, it might be supposed that there were


no such people as gentlemen and ladies in America, for
such as described in that letter certainly are not. For
although in this democratic country every man is his neigh-
bour’s equal, and Jack is as good as his master, yet for all
that there are men and women with cultivated minds and
refined tastes who really form the society of America, and
most charming that society must be. How erroneous is the
opinion generally formed of America by English people,
opinions, in all probability, based on the family of some
rich parvenu whom they have happened to sit opposite at
a foreign hotel. But how would we like to be judged
as a nation by samples of “ Our ’Arry ”at the seaside ? The
Hudson River flows into a bay, and the bay communicates
by a narrow opening known as The Narrows with the
Atlantic Ocean. This bay is New York Bay, and bounded
on one side by the Hudson and by East River; on the other
is an island thirteen and a half miles in length on one side and
eight on the other, and one mile and three-fifths broad on the
average. This is Manhattan Island, and on it is the main
portion of the city of New York. Its most southern
extremity is known as Battery Point, where less than three
centuries ago Henry Hudson, the Dutch navigator, landed.
In the year 1614, on this point there was a pit and a few
houses, bearing the name of “ Nieu Amsterdam,” but in 1674
that name was changed to New York, upon it falling into the
hands of the English. In 1699 the population was about
6,000, and in 1880 it had increased to a trifle over 1,250,000.
But these figures comprise only New York proper, and do not
take in those two large tributaries, Jersey City on the other
bank of the Hudson, and Brooklyn across East River. This
latter place will soon be linked to New York by one of the
largest suspension bridges in the world, being nearly 1,600
feet long. You can imagine as a commercial centre what a
wonderful position this city occupies, with a water frontage
on all sides, and at the mouth of a great river. This city is
the simplest in the world to find your way about in, as the
streets are rectangular, with the exception of Broadway,
which runs from corner to corner; those across the island
bearing consecutive numbers and are called streets, while
those running up the town are called avenues, some
of which bear numbers while others have names. Of
course, the three principal arteries are The Broadway, Wall
Street, and Fifth Avenue. The Broadway is very much


like our Oxford-street connecting the City and the West End,
or as it is here called “up town ” and “ down town.” Wall
Street is our Lombard Street, and the Fifth Avenue is the
fashionable world. The principal streets, shops, and places
of amusement are now lighted with the Brush electric light,
which is here a great success. The upper regions of the city
are one network of wires, for they do not carry their telegraph
wires under the streets, as we do in London, but on telegraph
poles. These poles give a peculiar appearance to the streets,
and more so at the present moment, for besides the telegraph
poles are those for the electric light wires, then come the
ordinary gas lamps, and besides these again the electric light
lamps, and in some streets, to add to it all, trees line each
side. At the point where Broadway and Fifth Avenue
Intersect is a fine open space, surrounded by large and fine
buildings. This is Madison Square Park, the chief promenade
of New York, and the centre of the fashionable world. In
summer it must be a delightful spot, filled as it is with shady
trees, in whose branches are small boxes for the sparrows to
build in, and in its centre a large bronze fountain. On the
Broadway side is erected on a stone pedestal a colossal hand,
in whose grasp is a torch. This is to be a portion of the
goddess Liberty, which is to be erected on Bedloes Island in
New York Bay. It is the gift of the French Republic, and I
believe was exhibited at the French Exhibition. From the
drawings I have seen, it is a sort of companion to the Colossus
of Rhodes. Looking out over the square is the Fifth Avenue
Hotel, which was once so famous, but now decidedly a
commercial hotel; near, however, is the Brunswick, to which
is attached one of the best restaurants in New York, while
facing it is the famous Delmonico’s, said to be the best
restaurant in the world. Beside this there is another square
a little further down Broadway called Union Square, once the
fashionable neighbourhood, but now given up to enormous
stores and huge business structures. In it is the Union
Square Theatre, one of the best in the city. There are also
statues to Washington and Abraham Lincoln. One thing
must strike the visitor, and that is the enormous height of
all the buildings, and it is that which gives such a massive
appearance to the city. Most buildings are of seven stories,
while others are more. The stores are mostly built of iron,
fronted with either stone or brick. Of course, in all these
buildings, elevators, as they are called here, are used. I don’t


suppose there is another city in the world which can boast
of having a street containing so many magnificent buildings
as does Fifth Avenue. The architecture of some of the
buildings is, as has been described, that of Henry the Third
converted into Yankee, but the general run of the buildings
is plainness itself, huge rows of eight-storied buildings built
of dull brown stone, broken, however, by many magnificent
churches, especially the Roman Catholic Cathedral. It is in
this street that the men who have made vast “ piles ” of
money vie one with the other in the building of houses,
pulling down superb mansions to make room for others more
palatial. The one very noticeable is the house of white
marble, built by the late A. P. S , in which I believe
are many pictures by some of our most famous artists,
besides those also of the French school, especially of Meis-
sonnier. Further up are the three houses being built by the
V family, but such people as these form a society of
their own —a society of wealth and monetary display, quite, I
should say, of the Sir Georgias Midas stamp. There exists in
New York a clique of young men who are facetiously called
Anglo-maniacs, from their wish to copy everything English,
even to the Crutch and Toothpick. They mostly congregate
at the Knickerbocker Club. The clubs of New York are fine
and luxurious, the chief being the Union, the Union League,
and the Lotos. Far up Fifth Avenue, and almost in the
centre of Manhattan Island, stands “ Central Park,” of which
New York people are justly proud. I have amused myself
on several mornings hy walking up there. It comprises
about goo acres, and is a wonderful specimen of how man
can alter Nature. Twenty years ago it was a miserable
swamp, now it contains lovely lakes, with wide sweeps of
lawns and vistas of great beauty, with a thousand nooks and
corners and winding paths. These extend over a distance of
twenty-eight miles, while for driving there are carriage-ways
extendingover five miles, and bridle-paths to the extent of nine
miles. Entering as you do from the south end, you first
pass through a prettily laid-out garden with a lake winding
about amongst undulating banks covered with shrubberies.
Here are places set apart for amusement, such as swings,
carousels—whatever that means—and refreshment pavilion,
besides which there is a museum and menagerie. Passing
through this you follow along the drive until the Mall is
reached, the fashionable promenade, planted with long rows


of trees, the centre avenue being broad and lined by statues
of English and other poets. At the northern end is the
music stand and grand marble terrace and staircase, over-
looking fountains and a lovely lake, on which are boats.
The one great thing that seems to me to be an objection is
that the walks are all asphalte, and visitors are not allowed to
walk on the grass. What must this be in summer? Leaving
this behind you come to what is called the Ramble, a labyrinth
of narrow winding paths consisting of deep thicket-wooded
glades and lovely vistas. On the lawns are many peacocks.
Then there are caves and many other attractions. In summer
all this must be very enjoyable, especially in the centre of a
city like New York where the heat is so unbearable. Coming
out of this you reach the Obelisk, which now seems the fashion
for every nation to have. Thisone formerly stood in Alexandria,
near to the harbour, and was presented to this city by Ismail
Pasha,and brought here by Commander Gorringe, of the U. S.
Navy. It is mounted as nearly as possible as it originally
was, that is, supported on the back of a bronze sea-crab.
Remnants of the old mounting are in the Metropolitan Museum,
in front of which it stands. This museum contains a varied
collection of antiquities and paintings, both modern and by
old masters, but the most interesting portion by far was the
collection of General Cesnola, made by him while American
Consul in Cyprus. Most people have heard of this collection
and have read his book. Instead of being here, this collection
ought to have been in the British Museum, and I believe it
was offered first to us and refused. It contains some splendid
specimens of ancient pottery, bronze work, and glass. I was
particularly interested in it, as I procured a few things when
in Cyprus in 1878, but as at that time all curios were forbidden
to be taken out of the island, I only got what I was able to
smuggle on board the steamer. The Central Park extends
for a long way beyond this point, but I had no more time or
inclination to go further, so returned to my hotel for lunch. To
see the carriages you have only to walk up Fifth Avenue about
three o’clock, as about that time everybody turns out to
shop. There are some magnificent horses, and the carriages,
as a rule, are neat and not gaudy. Monograms are generally
used, crests rarely, and I daresay those who use them have
but little right to them. Cockades have made their appear-
ance —surely these are signs of one man trying to prove himself
better than his neighbour. In fact, I believe there is more of


it in this country than there is at home. At home a man
has a fixed station ; here, in so many cases, yesterday he was
nobody, and by a stroke of luck to-day he has money, and
strives by outward signs to show the public that he is some-
body. Another thing which strikes one very forcibly here
are the harsh, high-pitched voices of the women, and their
fearful outre costumes. Wherever you go you notice this.
In remarks that I make it must be remembered I am only
speaking as an outside observer, for I know nobody in New
York. And should I be wrong in what I say, I am only
turning the tables on Americans who judge us still more
harshly, and who, by their Press, strive in every way to give
their people a bad impression of England and its people.
One thing amused me. It is the fact that they claim to speak
purer English and with a better accent than we do. In a
letter written to the Chicago Times by its correspondent, Mr.
F. B. Wilkie, he says —“ There is no part of the world where
English is so poorly spoken as in England,” and that it is
often difficult to understand what is said by ordinary people
in conversation on commonplace topics, and he instances
this by the streets cries of pedlar and cabmen, and he picks
out a few words to show what he means. “ Colquhoun,
is pronounced Calhoun; Beauchamp, Beechem ; clerk, dark ;
Bouverie, Booverie; Ludgate, Luggat; telegraph, tele-
grawph ; nasty, nausty ; cab, sir, kib, sir; High Holborn,
Tgh ’Oburn ; Royal Oak, Relluke.” And then he objects to
our calling the rails on a railroad “metals,” or a railway track
a “ line,” or a store “ a shop,” or a hardware man an “ iron-
monger.” He also objects to the word “constables” instead of
“ policemen,” and to our saying “ I beg your pardon ” instead
of “pardon me,” and to our using the word “ guard ” instead of
“ conductor ” on a train, and to “luggage ” instead of “ bag-
gage,” and “ booking-office ” instead of “ticket-office,” and to
our “ shunting”a train instead of “ switching”a train, and to a
“ luggage van ” instead of a “ freight car.” This same
individual says all that is needed to get into society in
England is a dress-coat, a white choker, and a few letters of
introduction, and if he be “ good form ; ” and he complains
that there is only a very limited part of the opera house in
which ladies wearing a hat or a bonnet and a gentleman
not with a dress-coat and a white neck-tie will be admitted.
Speaking of our social life, he says “ it is purely intellectual,
and that an ordinary evening in an English house will rarely
2 Q


be lightened by so much as a song or a bit of instrumental
music. The piano is always present, always open and sugges-
tively lighted by towering wax candles, while piles of music
by the best composers are close at hand. But nobody is
asked to play, nobody seems even to think of music. Equally
tabooed are flirtations between the young people ; and except
among certain people with large dramatic acquaintance and
tendencies, a recitation is not on the programme. Jovial,
jolly evenings, bubbling over with merriment, and sparkling
with the lighter conversations of wit, or the broader flashes
of humour are exceptional in their occurrence.” In another
letter he says, in describing the difference between the people
of the two countries, that an American is dark, the English-
man a blonde; the women of the former are slight, graceful,
willowy; those of the latter are stout, and often unwieldy.
The American is sociable, the Englishman just the reverse.
The American is exceedingly polite and reverential to women ;
the Englishman either exactly the reverse, or else stupidly
indifferent. “ I have never,” he says, “ seen an Englishman
give up his seat to a woman, or in any way in public show her
any attention. An American building a house surrounds it
with a light fence, in order that the flowers, &c., may be seen
and enjoyed by the public. An Englishman, under the same
circumstances, constructs all around his premises a thick
wall fifteen feet hi -h. He then buys up all the bottles, and
cements these on tne top of the wall with the sharp edge up.
Then he goes inside, locks the gate, takes out the key, fills
in the keyhole, walks into his castle, and is happy. With
us we say to be either blind or lame is a merit. An English-
man is not truly happy until he cannot see more than three
feet in front of him, whereupon, with a monocular glass
screwed in one eye, he is supremely blest. The British lion
is really the king of beasts. The average Briton of the
sterner sex, and between certain ages, is the perfection of
physical beauty in many respects. Between eighteen and
thirty-one finds a class of men who have few equals and
no superiors. They are little above the medium height,
square as to shoulder, broad and deep as to chest, with
mighty thighs and swelling muscles as to arm and leg;
witnessing no end of devotion to rowing, cricket, bicycling,
and other muscle and health-giving exercises. It is as
good as looking at a fine picture to see one of these fellows
walk. He has a long, swinging stride; his swelling


muscles, the poise of his trunk, his advanced chest, and the
ease of his movement, all combine to suggest power —a
power ample for the work in hand, with a further
suggestion as to a reserve available for any imaginable
purpose. His cheeks are ruddy, his eye bright, his lips red,
his gleaming teeth faultless. He rides a horse as if part of
himself, rising with an easy, graceful motion, as the
animal trots, or sits as immovable as a rock when flying
along at a swift gallop. In fine, the British youth is the
perfection of physical manhood ; as handsome as Apollo, as
strong as Samson, as swift as an antelope, and as enduring
as a lion. Prior to this age, he is a callow, shame-faced
youth, with enormous feet, ill-fitting jackets, and a plug hat.
After passing thirty, he grows beefy and stout. At forty, he
is paunchy, with a nose that is growing bulbous. At fifty he
is short-winded ; he measures forty-five around his chest,
and ninety-five around his waist; his nose is pitted and
blooming as a strawberry; the top of his head is as white, as
gleaming as a billiard ball, and he suffers from twinges in his
big toe, coming from unlimited indulgence in port, sherry,
champagne, bitter beer, Bass’s ale, Guinness’s, hock, claret,
and brandy and water —all of which he decants into himself
at, or about, a grand daily cramming performance, which he
calls his dinner. From the time the British female makes
her debut in a baby-wagon, up to the time she puts on
long dresses, she is the most charming creature in existence.
She is generally a blonde, with long, abundant hair,
streaming like a yellow cataract down her back. Her eyes
are blue, and filled with an innocent light, which, while
saint-like, is yet healthful and full of energy, and a pleasing,
and not immodest self-reliance. Her complexion is exquisite,
her features delicate, her ensemble pervaded with grace,
health, and beauty. What becomes of all these beautiful
children ? Gone are the beautiful complexions, gone the
delicate features, gone the sylph-like figures, gone the clear
innocence of the eyes, gone everything characteristic of child-
hood and girlhood. I have yet to see a dozen entirely pretty
or wholly well-dressed young ladies since my arrival in
England. Their breadth of shoulder is masculine, their
walk, although strong, is rarely graceful, and their taste in
dress often simply atrocious. ‘ Oh, you haven’t seen anything
but the lower classes! ’ —this from some disgusted Briton.
Ah ! yes, my friend, I’ve heard that remark before. 1 have sat


in Hyde Park when all the fashion of London was out on
wheels. (This letter was written Aug. nth, 1877.) I have
been at the Zoo on a pleasant Sunday afternoon, in the season,
when everybody was there, from the Earl of Beaconsfield
down or up, as your politics may choose to have it, and I will
say of them, as a general thing, that they are handsomely
dressed, and entirely respectable people in appearance. No,
the British young woman is not handsome. She is beautiful
in appearance. The rounded lissom form of the girl
disappears, or is merged in the often broad and angular form
of the young woman. So in time disappears the mother, with
the radiant glow on her face, and the tender light in her eyes,
and then the rigid features and scowling face of the matron.
Beer and maternity have done their work, especially the
former.” Chicago is one of the largest cities in Central
America, and no doubt the paper containing these letters
would be read by thousands who up to that time may, or may
not, have formed any idea of what England and the English
are like ; but it is to such penny-a-liners as this man that
we owe the bad opinions that some Americans have for their
cousins across the Atlantic.
izih Jan. —At dinner last night I suddenly made up my
mind to accompany R. P to Boston, whither he was
bound on business, together with a Mr. P , whose
relations, by the way, I happened to know in Melbourne.
We left by the 10 o’clock express, taking berths in the sleep-
ing car, and arrived at our destination at 6.30 this morning,
when we immediately drove to the Parker House for a tub
and breakfast. These two important items in the day’s
proceedings over, the other two started off on their business
round, while I turned out to see the town. The first thing
that struck me was the early hour at which the world began
to move. Even when we arrived the street cars were full of
people going to their work, and I am told that most men are
in their offices by eight o’clock, and leave them for good
about 2.30. This is like our old English habits. In fact,
Boston is more English than American. They speak like
us, dress like us, and have barrel-organs. The quiet way
the people dressed here struck me very forcibly after all the
gaudiness I had seen in New York, and the dresses displayed
in shop windows showed the general tastes of the people.
In the centre of the town is a large open space called “ The
Common,” and alongside of it the public gardens. Every


thing was covered with snow, and sleighs were dashing about
in every direction, their bells keeping up one • incessant
jingle. How pretty they all looked, and also the old, quaint
red brick houses in Beacon Street, overlooking the Common.
It was close to them, and near the site of the present State
House, a magnificent building with gilded dome, that the old
beacon stood enclosed, erected in the year 1634, in order to
alarm the country in case of invasion. Boston was described
in 1699 thus: —“ On the S.W. side of Massachusets
Bay is Boston, whose name is taken from a town in
Lincolnshire, and is the metropolis of all New England.
The houses in some part join, as in London ; the buildings,
like their women, being neat and handsome. And their
streets, like the hearts of their male inhabitants, are paved
with pebbles,” &c., &c. Running along the top of the
Common, and extending for some distance, is Beacon Street,
along which have been built some really fine residences,
and a little lower down comes Commonwealth Avenue, a
magnificent boulevard; in width it is 250 feet, and over a
mile and a half in length. Running up its centre is an
ornamental garden laid out with lawns, trees, and paths, and
contains several statues. This district is the West End of
Boston, and consisted formerly of unsightly flats, salt marshes,
and dreary wastes of water, being a portion of the bay; but
it was reclaimed at a cost of 1,750,000 dols. The town is
built on a pear-shaped peninsula about two miles in length,
and hardly one mile in width, and consisted originally of
783 acres, which by reclamation have become 1,829, but
beyond this the city extends until it takes in an area of
23,661 acres, or about 36 square miles. It has a popula-
tion of 362,839. Washington and Tremont Streets, running
almost parallel to each other, contain the principal shops.
It was in this part of the city that the great fire of
1872 occurred, which spread over 65 acres, and destroyed
about 80,000,000 dols. worth of property. Boston, to my
mind, is the nicest city I have yet seen in America, and
the people one meets in the street remind one much more
of the old country. An American, as a rule, likes a town
laid out in rectangular streets, so that looking down any
■one of them he can see into the dim future; it is not so in
Boston. In this respect there is just the difference between
Boston and other American cities as there is between Mel-
bourne and Sydney. In this town, too, there are reasonable


cab fares, 50 cents to any part of the town ; whereas, in New
York, it is a dollar and a half, and if the driver thinks you are
what is called a greenhorn, he will try and extort as much as
he possibly can. Oh, how I long for a Hansom once more ! !
Attached now to every hotel is a telegraph office, and nearly
always a telephone, so this morning before leaving I sent a
message by telephone to the railway station, to secure a chair
in the palace car of the New York Express, this afternoon.
The position of the smoking-room about American hotels is
curious, being generally on the ground floor, with huge plate
glass windows, looking into the street. In this men sit to
read the paper, and others to watch the passers-by ; while
others sit there elaborately dressed, to be seen by such. I
always look at them, and think there is one thing
wanting, and that is a label, with on it, “ This style 3s. 6d.”
I heard a most amusing conversation at the dinner-table last
night. One old gentleman asked another if he had been to
Professor So-and-So’s funeral. “ No,” said he, “ how did it
gooff?” “Oh, it was such a pleasant funeral!” was the
reply. At that I could not help laughing; the only pleasant
funeral I had ever heard of was an Irish wake, where there
was plenty of whisky. One of the old fellows told an amusing
story of the early days in this country, how, on the death of a
leading Unitarian citizen, there not being a Unitarian chapel,
the minister asked permission to hold the service in the
Presbyterian chapel. This request was refused him, and he
was afterwards heard to say that the only time he ever met
a Presbyterian with any pleasure was at his funeral.
Funerals and all the accompanying pomp of death are carried
to a much greater extent here than it ever was in the old
country. Here there is a horrid parade of grief, consisting in
quantities of crape ; no doubt that, as Americans make such
a study of what suits them best, they have discovered, like
many people, that it is black. In the newspaper the announce-
ment of a death is almost always accompanied by a note
naming the time of the funeral service. In the announcements
“ Engagements ” are included, which being translated means,
‘I am going to be married, prepare your wedding presents.”
13 th Jan. —I am back in New York, having come through
last night by the Springfield route, which does the distance of
234 miles in six hours and a half. Wagner’s, not Pullman’s,
cars are used on this line. They are really the same, with a
difference. At one part of the journey, near Worcester I


think, a boy comes round with a list of eatables, and he
telegraphs your order on to Springfield, at which- station a
basket is brought to you. The other route, the one I went
by, is called the Shore line, and that goes by way ofNew Haven,
and keeps close to the coast. They leave Boston by different
stations, but both arrive at the Grand Central Depot in New
York. Tim has arrived, and has had good times, having been
down to Virginia City, the great silver mining district, Salt
Lake City, and remained a day at Chicago to see the pigs
killed, and then another day at Niagara. He has been
lucky in escaping snow, and having lovely weather. M ,
who had been a fellow-passenger of ours across from San
Francisco, asked me to dinner at the Union League Club,
but I had to refuse, as R. P returns to-night, and I
wait dinner for him.
14 th Jan.— The papers this morning gave us news of a
fearful railway accident on the Albany line, by which the
last two cars were telescoped, and before the unfortunate
people could be extricated they caught fire. Senator Webster
Wagner, the inventor of the car, was among the killed.
There is a custom here, which I believe is peculiar to America,
and that is interviewing; it does not matter who you are or
what has happened, a reporter can force his way into your
presence and put you through a regular catechism, and I am
told by men here that, however much you may resent it, you
are bound to give in, otherwise the Press would make it
mightily unpleasant for you. This interviewing was brought
prominently forward in the accounts of yesterday’s accident
which appeared in the New York Herald and Tribune of
to-day. After describing in as graphic a manner as possible
the horrors of the burning cars, and how Senator Wagner
was burnt to a crisp, it goes on to give the accounts of some
of the passengers, and begins with these sort of sentences:
“ R. H. S., of , was found last night at the Grand Union
Hotel, , and Senator J. W. B. was found at his house,
No. , shortlybefore midnight; hishead was cut and other-
wise badly injured, and his left knee was severely cut. He was
badly shaken up, and could with difficulty collect his thoughts
sufficiently to give a detailed account of his experience. He
said,” &c. Poor man, he had escaped the accident, and, cut
and bruised, had reached home exhausted, but he could not
escape the penetrating power of a New York reporter.
Even the relatives of the unfortunates who are killed do not


escape. The New York Herald revels in horrors, and is as
poor a specimen of a leading journal as I ■ have ever
seen. It is printed badly, and on poor paper, and contains the
affairs of various criminals, and their sayings and doings.
They are having great times of it at present with the Guiteau
case, and should that scoundrel wink his eye, a reporter,
Cuttle-like,immediately makes a note of it. This interviewing
is carried to a fearful extent. When any of our aristocracy
visit this country, there appears such announcements as the
following ; —“ The Duke of slept well last night, and
enjoyed his ham and eggs for breakfast; he wore a light tweed
coat, with five buttons! !!” &c., &c. They are very fond of
describing a man’s dress, and the colour of his hair and eyes,
&c. At the New Year’s Day Levee at Washington, it was
stated in the paper that the President wore a light pair
of trousers, a Prince Albert coat, and a violet necktie. How
very interesting ! ! ! Young ladies here receive their friends,
and in to-day’s paper there were several announcements of
how Miss Lucy ’s reception went off, and how she was
dressed. At a dinner given to Oscar Wilde by a lady here,
the conversation which then took place was duly inserted in
the following morning’s paper. This is a world indeed without
any privacy. In fact, in summer, lam told that ladies sit on
their front doorsteps, and converse across the street. I
believe at the present moment the fashions are changing, for
in all the papers you see remarks about the Anglo-American
and those who wish to be ultra-English. Up to the present
French has been the ruling style of New York. At a
theatre you can count on one hand the number of men
in evening dress, and at one we were at, ourselves and the
“ gentleman ” who showed us into our seats were the sole
representatives. Ladies go most gorgeously attired, wearing
bonnets and hats. To get one of these Gainsboroughs—which
are at present all the fashion —before you in the stalls gives
you a poor chance of seeing much of the performance. In all
the jewellers’ shops you see French jewellery, and on my
buying a stick the other day, I was told it was the latest from
Paris, and was charged two dols. fora shilling ash-plant. Oh,
how the money goes in this country! I pay one dollar a day
for the pleasure of a bath-room, and as R. P ’s rooms
adjoin mine, which has not a bath-room attached, he pays a
dollar a day also, so that the bath brings in eight shillings a
day to the hotel. In American hotels everything is put in


your room, so that you may need as little outside help as
possible—in fact, you may in many hotels ring, or we should
say whistle, for anything wanted. Attached to your room is
a bath-room, &c., with hot and cold water. Matches are in
■every bedroom, boots are cleaned, and that is about all you
will get, and even for that, when you leave, a man who blacks
them will demand a dollar. The charge for taking my luggage
from the steamer in San Francisco to the hotel was four
dollars. It comes, however, to this —individuals pay dearly, the
public pay little, as in case of tram-cars, &c. One of the great
things in New York is the elevated railroad, which runs above
the streets raised up on iron girders ; you can ride on this for
any distance for ten cents, but take a cab for the shortest dis-
tance and it is one and a half dollars. In these railways there
is no division of class. In so enlightened a country a coal-
heaver is as good as the merchant, and although the merchant
may not like so powerful a neighbour, he must look as if
he did. Another peculiarity of New York is the way people
Jive in hotels, originating, no doubt, from the trouble there
is with servants. The charges very often in these hotels are
enormous. A gentleman with whom I dined the other night
told me that for bedroom and sitting-room, and a small room
for his wife’s maid on the fourth floor, he paid twenty-four
dollars a day. On young people and children this hotel life
must have a very bad effect. I have been highly amused by
watching the calm assurance of some of the children in this
hotel. A mite of about ten years old will walk into the public
dining-room, and order her meal as unconcernedly as possible.
One young lady of about ten years old, the other day came
in reading a book, and having scanned the menu , said,
“Waiter, bring me a potato salad.” Children, too, are dressed
here in the most extraordinary way, and wear any number
of rings and ornaments, and judging from those I have seen,
are allowed very much their own way. In fact, if you may so
say, there are no such things as children, they are all
diminutive grown-up people. I have before mentioned how
fond the papers are here of publishing all sorts of horrors.
They have in this country a day set apart for hanging, and on
the last about seven criminals suffered the extreme penalty
of the law. The papers the next morning were full of the
erection of the scaffold, the testing the strength of the ropes
by means of sand-bags, the number of people who visited the
jail, the sayings and doings of the criminals, and their last


hours, and finally the execution and the disposal of the bodies.
In most cases the friends are allowed to carry them
off, and in one case the body was afterwards exhibited
in the town before burial. They have a curious law here,
that a man who is in prison awaiting his trial may be allowed
out; as, for instance, a man who was in for a large embezzle-
ment was allowed to spend his New Year’s Day with his
friends. Guiteau, on New Year’s Day, held quite a levee,
and it is said that over 300 people visited him ; mothers even
taking their children to shake hands with this noted criminal.
The last excitement here, however, is Oscar Wilde, who is
being run by D’Oyly Carte, along with the aesthetic piece,
“Patience.” Each is a good advertisement for the other. The
other night Oscar Wilde delivered a lecture on “ English
Renaissance.” When he made his appearance on the stage,
a distinct laugh seized the house. His get-up was
extraordinary —long dress-coat, black doeskin knee-breeches,
black silk stockings, and pumps with enormous bows, a very
low shirt, and one huge stud, hair over his shoulders. His
attitude during thewhole lecture was evidently studied, resting
one foot on a stool which he had placed there for the purpose.
As might be expected, he said that there was not a poet in
the world but Keats —and himself; nor an artist but Burne
Jones —Byron was a rebel, and Shelley a dreamer. He, to
suit his audience, pitched into the English, and said that
nine-tenths of the British public thought “aesthetics” was
either French for “ affectation,” or German for “ dado,” and
that the young pre-Raphaelites were a lot of young eccentrics,
who thought a sort of divine crookedness and holy awkward-
ness in drawing the chief objects of art; that to know nothing
about their great men was one of the necessary elements of
British education. The papers describe him as “ a penny-
Ruskin at the head of a band of so-called aesthetic enthusiasts,
who, we suspect, have to keep up their art frenzy by the force
of example, and by figuratively tearing their flesh, and actually
rolling their eyes in the manner of the howling der-
vishes.” He described aestheticism as a desire for a
more gracious and comely way of life, a passion for physical
beauty, an exclusive attention to form, a seeking for new
subjects of poetry, new forms of art, new intellectual
and imaginative enjoyments, &c., a desire to produce a general
culture. A word about the New York theatres. Of these
there are a dozen or more, at which are produced most of our


well-known English pieces, the chief role in most cases being
taken by English actors and actresses; but America has
given some most able men to the list of actors—Booth and
Jefferson are amongst the foremost. On entering a theatre,
the first thing that strikes you is that there is nobody in
evening dress, and of course this detracts much from the
general appearance of the house. Wallack’s Theatre was only
opened about a week ago, and the seats were selling at an
enormous price for the opening night. I heard a case of 300
dols. being given for a box. We went a few nights after, and
were struck with the gorgeousness of the house. There has
been an attempt at high art, but it has failed, and all devolved
into masses of crimson plush and gold put on thick. In the
rear of the dress circle is a lounge, in which everything is
peacock-blue plush ; however, the theatre is a fine one, and the
stalls are by far the most comfortable I have been in yet.
It seemed so odd to see men coming in with their wives, who-
were most elaborately attired in walking dress, in their dirty
boots, and not over clean shirts. The appearance of the dress
circle was entirely spoilt by both men and women throwing
their cloaks and overcoats over the front, giving it the
appearance of a rail in an old clothes shop. The piece per-
formed was “The School for Scandal,” and it was well done,
with Miss Rose Coghlan as Lady Teazle. Besides this we
have seen “ Patience,” which was admirably acted, if only
the chorus had been composed of greater beauties —“ Olivette,”
feebly, with Miss Catherine Lewis taking the chief part, and
“Esmeralda” at the Madison Square. The last theatre is.
the prettiest in the world, at all events as far as my limited
experience extends. It is a perfect little bijou. The stage is a
wonderful contrivance, being a double one, one above the
other, so that during the performance of one act the sceneryfor
the next is being prepared. The whole colouring of the theatre
is decidedly sombre, being principally chocolate and browns,
so that there is nothing to detract from the stage. The drop-
scene is a perfect piece of embroidering. I am told the
theatre is owned or managed by a clergyman, whose wish is
to raise the standard of the stage, and all pieces to be per-
formed are strictly scrutinized by himself. “ Esmeralda ”is a
charming little drawing-room comedy, enlivened by pleasant
acting and delicious stage appointments. It is not difficult
to see that the man who arranged the artist’s studio was
himself a man of great taste. We had gone to see this piece,.


a party of six, who had met together on our last night in
New York at dinner, at New York’s famous restaurant of
Delmonico’s, said by people here to possess the best cook in
the world. After being in America, even for a short time,
one gets accustomed to this term, but there is no reason to
doubt, especially taking the way our dinner was cooked, that
he is as good as the best, and also remembering the fact
that the best can always be procured by paying for it. As
Americans resemble the Parisians in dining away from home,
they are willing to pay for the best that can be procured in
that respect. Money here is easily made, and is consequently
lavishly squandered.
18th Jan. —At last the day has arrived when we are to
leave for England, and at 3.30 p.m. the whistle sounded, and
the tugs commenced to assist this huge monster to back out
from her berth, and turn in the river. The “ Servia ”is the
last of the Cunard line, and the largest vessel (except the
“Great Eastern”) afloat, being 8,500 tons, with 10,000 h.p.
engines, burning on an average 200 tons of coal a day. Fol-
lowing us down the river and across New York Bay were
the National Line steamer, bound for London, and the
French mail boat for Havre. After discharging our pilot
outside the Narrows, we very soon left them far behind.
21 st Jan. —We are now more than half-way across the
Atlantic, on a smooth sea, and a strong fair wind. We com-
menced with a good steady roll, which kept most of the pas-
sengers “ under the weather ” for at least two days; but now
one is recognizing fresh faces almost hourly, for we are in all
170 saloon passengers. Take them all together, I have not
seen a rougher crowd collected together for many a long
day. But there are a few nice people, and they soon
collected together. Foremost came a Mr. and Mrs. F
and their two children. Mrs. F is an American, but I
would defy the greatest epicure on these matters to detect
any difference to the most charming English lady. Then
there are a family on their first trip to England, intent upon
enjoying everything, and I think they will, for they are the
right sort, and the girls are so amusing as to make friends
wherever they go. My neighbour at the saloon table has
deservedly been called “ The Belle of the Ship,” a young
Californian girl returning to Europe to finish her education
for the stage. She has charming eyes. With her party is
another unmarried lady from California, of doubtful age, a


thorough specimen of the ordinary American, one who thinks
that when the distribution of the talents took place they were
all given to Americans. She will be disappointed with
England, and will return without having made any real
friends. These, with the addition of two Scotch girls, make
the upper crust of our feminine society. The remaining
crowd are quiet and inoffensive ; but of the men such cannot
be said, for beyond the few gentlemen,the ruck are the essence
of vulgarity and drink, who turn the smoking-room into a
mixture of low tavern and cheap auction mart, from the sale
which take place daily of the Calcutta sweeps. For those who
do not know what these are I will endeavour to explain. Cer
tain numbers ranging over about twenty of those most likely tc
be somewhere near the ship’s run for the day following are
bought for a fixed sum, say is. or 2s. 6d. These numbers
are then put up to auction, and the amount fetched is divided,
half going to the original possessor of the number, and the
other half to the pool, in which is already the amount
originally paid for the numbers. Of course the pool varies
according to the speculative state of the audience. For
instance, one ticket may be sold for 6d., while the next may
fetch from 30s. to 40s. The auctioneer is a bullet-headed
cad, known on board as “The Pug,” from his likeness to
that animal. Next in being most objectionable is a Mr.
B , a son of a rich City of Jersey merchant, who is
always more or less intoxicated. On the first day he had
ordered fourteen bottles of champagne. He announced in
the smoking-room the first night that he was ready to play
anybody at any game of chance, for any amount, or take up
any bet. Whereupon he pulled a£s note out of his pocket,
and offered to bet anyone in the room they could not say
whether its number was odd or even. “ I bet you -£To you
are wrong,” has become quite a saying on board. He sits at
our table, and passes his time when he is sober enough to come
there by making bets with his neighbour as to the number
of letters in certain words, and as to what dishes will arrive
first. It must not be supposed, however, that we are all like
this, although lam sorry their number is legion. Mr. F
is an English gentleman, who has made his money in America,
and lives partly there and partly in London. It is quite a treat,
after the children we have seen lately, to talk and play with
his little girl and boy. The latter is at present at school at
Slough, preparatory to going to Eton. Then there is a small
605


coterie of American gentlemen, and another a Canadian who
has made fifteen million dols. in the last five years, mostly out
of railways. What cannot these railways in America do ?
When one hears of such men as Vanderbilt, who has sixty
million dols. in the funds, and as much and more again
outside. We are a small set of Englishmen, a Mr. W ,
who has travelled, and is returning from his brother’s ranche
in Texas ; Ernest H , brother of Captain H , who
drove the Portsmouth coach “The Rocket,” and who himself
drives “ The Sportsman,” running from Windermere to
Keswick. Altogether we are a very merry party, and much
fun and chaff goes on about English and American ideas.
*****
26 th Jan. —At Queenstown. Landed mails and proceeded
to Liverpool.
2.7 th Jan. Liverpool. Once more in Old England.
Visions of loving friends and familiar faces crowd out
thoughts of any lengthy valedictory. Those gentlemen of
England who sit at home at ease, little know the ups and
downs of a traveller’s life. If I have taught them something
of what they may expect by land and water, how to avoid
dangers, despise difficulties, and see all worth seeing at sur J iy
times and in divers places, I shall be amply satisfied.
FAREWELL!
606


THE WOE WORLD
London; Edward. Stanford.fi&CJ***!


Edward. Stanford. 55, Chariru? Cross.
1 W'OEILB


Date.
Departure.
Time.
Arrival.
Time.
Conveyance.
Dista’cej Price
i
1879.
10th May
>>
London
The River
9.30 a.m.
3-35 P-m.
Tilbury
IO.25
train
24
12th May
>>
Plymouth
3 p.m.
(At sea.)
Plymouth
1.30 a.m,
350
1st July
15th „
Melbourne
I p.m.
(At sea.)
Melbourne
Distance from
8 p.m.
Plymouth
Cape
s.s. ‘Kent”
to Cape Otway
Otway to The Heads
11636
IOO
£60
17th „
27th „
Adelaide
(At sea.)
Adelaide
7 a.m.
s.s. “Victorian”
490
£ 5
29th „
3ist „
16th Aug.
Melbourne
Sandhurst
Melbourne
12.15 p.m.
3.20 p.m.
5 P-m-
(At sea.)
Melbourne
Sandhurst
Melbourne
4-i5 P-m.
8 p.m.
s.s. “South Australian”...
train
490
90
90
return
ticket, £ 8
28th
>y i»
Suva
Levuka
5.30 p.m.
2 p.m.
(At sea.)
Suva Fiji
Levuka
7 a.m.
11,30 p.m.
s.s. “ Suva ”
2240
60
|
Balaga
Balaga, Savu Savu Bay
Wai-wai
5 P-m- 1
cutter “ Bella "
II 1) ...
I 80
£1
ITINERARY.


Date
Departure.
Time.
Arrival.
Time.
Conveyance.
Dista’ce
Price.
28th Sept.
Wai-wai
10.30 p.m.
1st Oct.
Levuka
I p.m.
cutter “ Bella ”
70
Levuka
4 p.m.
2nd „
Suva
12.15 p.m.
rowing boat
70
,£5
Suva
8 p.m.
" ”
(At sea.)
return,
13th „
Melbourne
4 p.m.
s.s. “Suva”
2240
£25
''Melbourne
ii a.m.
Ballaarat
3.30 p.m.
tram
100
3rd Nov.
Ballaarat
11 a.m.
Hamilton
4.50 p.m.
J1 * *
119
Hamilton
6 p m.
Casterton
12 night
coach
40
4th „
Casterton
7 a.m.
Mount Gambier
2.30 p.m.
„
48
7th „
Mount Gambier
2 a.m.
Penola
7 a.m.
,,
32
Penola
7 a.m.
Narracoorte
12 noon
>»
32
i
Narracoorte
12.1s p.m.
Kingston
3 P-m-
train
53
i- £ 6
Kingston
4 p.m.
8th „
Meningie
9 a.m.
coach
98
Meningie
9 a.m.
Milang
12 noon
steamer
40
Milang
12.15_p.rn.
Strathalbyn
1.30 p.m.
omnibus
13
Strath albyn
2.is p.m.
Woodhouse
4-3°
coach
27
12th „
Woodhouse
7 p- m -
Adelaide
IO.I5
»» ...
12
„
25th „
Adelaide
10.15 a.m.
Port Adelaide
iQ-45
train
7
Port Adelaide
12 noon
26th „
Kingston
6 a.m.
s.s. “Coorong”
150
)i n
Kingston
9 a.m.
Robe
12.30 p.m.
buggy
■ 27
Three
days’ journey to Gillott and
back
88
6th Dec.
Robe
ii a.m.
Kingston
4 p.m.
s.s. “Penola”
30
Kingston
6 p.m.
7th ,,
Victor Harbor
8.30 a.m.
,, >>
100
8S-
Victor Harbor
1 8.30 a.m.
Adelaide ,.
5-45 P-m.
coach
52
ITINERARY— continued.


Date.
Departure.
Time.
Arrival.
Time.
Conveyance.
Dista’ce
Price.
24th Dec.
Adelaide
4.15 a.m.
Woodhouse
Christmas Day.
7 a.m.
trap
r 4
3ist „
Woodhouse
10 a.m.
Adelaide
12 noon
14
Adelaide
4.45 p.m.
Gawler
6 p.m.
train
2 5
l880.
2nd Jan.
Gawler
11.20 a.m.
Adelaide
12.50 p.m.
,,
25
6th „
Adelaide
10.15 a.m.
Port Adelaide
ro.45
7
Port Adelaide
11.30 a.m.
7th ,,
Robe
2 p.m.
s.s. “Coorong”
180
nth ,,
Robe
4 p.m.
Kingston
8 p.m.
buggy
2 7
12th ,,
Kingston
8 a.m.
Narracoorte
4 p.m.
train
53
13th „
Narracoorte
5 p.m.
14th „
Kami ton
4.15 p.m.
coach
112
Hamilton
12.45
Ballaarat
6.50 p.m.
train
119
17th „
Ballaarat
ii a.m.
Melbourne
3.30 p.m.
...
100
14th „
Melbourne
12 noon
Mount Macedon
2 p.m.
43
20th ,,
15th March
Mount Macedon
q.iq a.m.
Melbourne
11 a.m.
43
Melbourne
3 P-m.
16th ,,
Launceston (Tasmania)
3 P-m-
s.s. “Maugana”
J 73
£2 IOS.
17th „
Launceston
3 P- m -
Hobart
8. 45
train
J 33
ioth} A P ri!
Expedition to Tasman's
Peninsula
“Rachel Thompson,” 17
ton ketch
125
£2 a day
i7^h} A P ril
„ „ New
N orfolk
steamer and coach
60
21st „
Hobart
8 a.m.
Compbelltown
12.5
train
91
»> JJ
Campbelltown
5.20 p.m.
Launceston
8.10
42
26th „
Launceston
2 p.m.
Rosevears
3-3°
s.s. “Mangana’’
J> JJ • • •
r 4
27th „
Rosevears
9 a.m.
Melbourne
5 P-m.
159
ITINERARY —continued.


Date.
Departure.
Time.
Arrival.
Time.
Conveyance.
feista’ce
Price.
2gth April
Melbourne
1.55 p.m.
Wodonga
11 p.m.
train
ig5
Wodonga
11.30 p.m.
3°th „
Wagga-Wagga
3 P-m.
coach
g5
[£3/17/6
) J 55
1st May
Waega-Wagga
5.30 a.m.
Sydney
6 a.m.
train
300
)
nth ,,
Sydney
g a.m.
Bathurst
5 p.m.
j,
122
13 th »
Bathurst
12 night
Sydney
6.30 a.m.
it • ■ •
122
3 oth ..
Sydney
8 p.m.
Mount Victoria
12 night
)»
77
2nd June
Mount Victoria
10.30
Sydney
6 p.m.
» j
77
8th „
Sydney
7 a.m.
(At sea.)
15 th ..
Levuka Fiji
3 P-m.
s.s. “ Gunga ”
1814
23 rd 1!
Levuka
8 a.m.
24th „
Savu Savu Bay
9 a.m.
cutter “ Bella” ■ ...
70
12th July
Savu Savu Bay
ii p.m.
14th „
Levuka
8 a.m.
,, ,,
70
21st ,,
Levuka
7 a.m.
Goro Island
4 p.m.
s.s. c ‘Ocean Queen
48
’O
22nd „
Goro Island
12 night
Qila Taviuni
5 P-m.
,,
48
c
23 rd »
Qila
6 a.m.
Rabi Island
10 a.m.
>5 55 •• ■
23
o'*
u S3
24th „
Rabi
7 a.m.
Laucala
12 noon
5 5 5 1 • • •
42
S >;
Laucala
2 p.m.
Mago
11 p.m.
5 5 5 5
57
25th „
Mago
12.15 a.m.
Cicia
3 a.m.
5 5 5 5
22
<S a
Cicia
4 a.m.
Kanacia
10 a.m.
5 5 '5 • ■ •
■ 33
<u.°
tt
Kanacia
10.15 a.m.
Loma-loma
p.m.
5 5 5 5
23
25th ,,
Loma-loma
9 a.m.
Mago
3 P-m.
5 5 5 5
45
z6th July
Mago
11.25
27th „
Vuna Point
8 a.m.
s.s. ‘Ocean Queen’
65
28th „
Vuna Point
11 a.m.
Savu-Savu
5 P.m.
55 .5
50
Savu- Savu
9.30 a.m.
Bua
5.30 p.m.
55 55 - • ■
60
ITINERARY —continued.


Date.
Departure.
Time,
Arrival.
Time.
Conveyance.
Dista’ce
Price.
2gth July
2nd Aug.
Bua
Levuka
6 a.m.
3 P* m -
Levuka
4 p.m.
s s. “ Ocean Queen ”
58
7 th ..
8th „
(At sea.)
Tonga-tabu
6 a.m.
Tonga-tabu (Friendly Islands)
10 a.m.
430
£5
gth „
Haabai
10 a.m.
80
13 th »
Haabai
12 noon
” ”
14th „
17th „
(At sea.)
Va-Vau
2 p.m.
Va-Vau
3 a.m.
schooner “ Edith ”
70
£ r
20th ,,
5th Sept.
(At sea.)
Apia
q a.m.
Apia (Navigator Islands)
8 a.m.
■■
350
£3
6 th ,,
Keppel Island
Keppel Island
4 p.m.
180
£3
7th ,,
6 a.m.
8th „
Va-vau
2 p.m.
180
J
13th „
Va-Vau
1 p.m.
” ”
14th „
Haabai
8 a.m.
75
£n
18th ,,
Haabai
6 a.m.
’ ”
igth „
Tonga-tabu
Tonga-tabu
8 a.m.
80
From
22nd ,,
T p.m.
”
2nd Oct.
5th „
Auckland
4 p.m.
(At sea.)
Auckland
7 p.m.
>» »> • • •
ms
Apia
£*o
nth ,,
2gth ,,
(At sea.)
Sydney
7.15 p.m.
Sydney
s.s, “ Tararua ”
IT 57
£10
30th „
Melbourne
Melbourne
12 night I
train and coach
600 t
£3/17/6
7s. 6d.
13th N. v.
12,15 P-m.
Mount Macedon
2 p.m. I
train
40
ITINERARY —continued.


Date.
Departure.
Time.
Arrival.
Time.
Conveyance
1 . ,
1 )ista ce
Price.
15b Nov.
Mount Macedon
9 a.m.
Melbourne
ii a.m.
train
40
30th ,,
Melbourne
6.45 a.m.
Sale
2 p.m.
»> ■ • •
123
Sale
2 p.m.
La Trobe Bridge
2.30 p.m
coach
3
s».
1 st Dec.
La Trobe Bridge
2 p.m.
Bairnsdale
g p.m.
steamer
60
IOS.
2nd „
Bairnsdale
9 a.m.
Melbourne
10 p.m.
coach and train
166
£i/n/6
28th „
Melbourne
3.30 p.m.
Inglewood
10 p.m.
train
120
££ 1/5
J> »»
2gth ,,
Inglewood
11 p.m.
Swan Hill
4 p.m.
coach
105
£115s.
Swan Hill
3 P-m-
Piangle
p.m.
buggy
30
3°th „
Piangle
9 a.m.
Bum Bang
8 p.m.
J> • ••
70
1881.
5th Jan.
Bum Bang
9 a.m.
Kulkyne
5 p.m.
• • •
40
12th ,,
Kulkyne
11 a.m.
Tieja
5 p.m.
„
45
13 th
Tieja
6.45 a.m.
Pine Plains
5 P-m.
„
45
15th „
Pine Plains
6.45 a.m.
Tieja
2 p.m.
,,
45
16th ,,
Tieja
5.45 a.m.
Kulkyne
1 p.m.
,,
45
18th „
Kulkyne
...
43
19th „
Wentworth
18
Wentworth
2ISt ,,
Morgan
s.s. “ Tyro ”
37°
£3 IOS.
22nd ,,
Morgan
5 a.m.
Adelaide
12 noon
train
70
£ r
26th ,,
Adelaide
Port
...
7
Jf ,,
Port
28th ,,
Melbourne
s.s. “ Victorian ”
500
£3
1st Feb.
Melbourne
3 p.m.
(At sea.)
3 rd
Hobart
7 a.m.
s.s, “ Rotomahana”
460
Hobart
ii a.m.
(At sea.)
1
ITINERARY— continued.


Date.
Departure.
Time.
Arrival.
Time.
Conveyance.
Dista’ce
Price.
6th Feb.
Milford Sound
12.30 p.m.
s.s. “ Rotomahana”
930
»» 5>
7 th »
Milford Sound
The Bluff
5p.m.
2 p.m.
The Bluff
Invercargill
11 a.m.
3 P- m -
train
2l8
18
50
3b
20
36
l8
21
£9
45.3d.
8th !!
gth ,,
14th
15* „
2 1 st ,,
Invercargill
The Elbow
Kingston
Queenstown
Cardrona
4.30 p.m.
10.30 a.m.
1.30 p.m.
11 a.m.
8.43 a.m.
11 a.m.
The Elbow
Kingston (Lake Wakatipu)
Queenstown
Cardrona
Pembroke (Lake Wanaka)
17 Mile Creek
7 ,x 5 P- m -
1 p.m.
3.30 p.m.
6.30 p.m.
12 noon
6 p.m.
”
s.s. “ Mountaineer
horseback
gs. 6d.
10s.
17 Mile Creek
8 a.m.
Cromwell
n
1 7
18
23rd „
24th ,,
25th,,
26th,,
27th „
28th,,
4 p.m.
Ardgour Station
7 p.m.
”
Ardgour
Morven Hills
Omarama
Benmore
Ben Ohau
10 a.m.
ti a.m.
1.15 p.m.
9 a.m.
10 a.m.
Morven Hills Station
Omarama Station
Benmore Station
Ben Ohau Station
Glen Tanner Station
4 p.m.
5.30 p.m.
4.15 p.m.
1 p.m.
3.10 p.m.
2 4
30
10
18
is
ist March
3 r<1 »
4th „
5 th
11 J>
gth „
Glen Tanner
5.15 a.m,
10 a.m.
Birch Hill Station
Balmoral Station
4 p.m.
6.30 p.m.
21
40
Balmoral
Albury
Timaru
Dunedin
8.30 a.m.
g.20 a.m.
1.10 p.m.
2.30 p.m.
Albury
Timaru
Dunedin
Port Chalmers
6.45 p.m.
11. 15 a.m.
6 p.m.
3 P- m -
rail
11 *"
4°
. 28
130
9
4s. rod.
2S.
11 11
10th ,,
»» 11
15th „
Port Chalmers
Port Lyttelton
Christchurch
5.30 p.m.
3 P- m -
8 a.m.
Port Lyttelton
Christchurch
j Springfield
i p.m.
4 p.m.
L2 noun
s.s. “ Albion ”
rail
IQ2
9
40
£2
2S.
II?.
ITINERARY —continued.


Date.
Departure.
Time.
Arrival.
Time.
Conveyance.
1
DIsta’ce
Price.
15th March
Springfield
12.30 p.m.
Bealey Gorge
8 p.m.
coach
— 1 54
,, }}
Bealey Gorge
4.30 p.m.
Kawhaka
8 p.m.
j)
...j 60
I jt'4 1 os.
18th ,,
Kawhaka
6 a.m.
Hokitika
9 a.m.
•■•! 15
single.
19th „
Hokitika
g.15 a.m.
Kumara
11.30 a.m.
?>
...; 21
4s.
22nd ,,
Kumara
3.30 p.m.
Greymouth
6 p.m.
tramcar
...i ig
7 s -
Greymouth
8 a.m.
Hokitika
4 P-m.
train and coach
..., 40
24th „
Hokitika
5 a.m.
Bealey Gorge
6.30 p.m.
coach
•••1 75
25th „
Bealey Gorge
7 a.m.
Springfield
2 p.m.
54
26th ,,
Springfield
3 P-m-
Christchurch
6.ao p.m.
rail
40
,,
Christchurch
8.30 p.m.
Lyttelton
9 p.m.
...i 9
27th „
Lyttelton
10 p.m.
Wellington
4 p.m.
s.s, “ Stella ”
... 179
£3
28th „
Wellington
3.30 p.m.
Picton
7-iS P-m.
s.s. “ Penguin ”
53
Picton
10 p.m.
2gth „
Nelson
7 a.m.
... j 85
Nelson
8.30 a.m.
Picton
4 p.m.
...j 85
Picton
6 p.m.
Wellington
11.45 p.m.
••■1 53
4th April
Wellington
7.30 a.m.
Masterton
12 noon
rail
71
I7S.
5‘h „
Masterton
1.30 p.m
Eketahuna
6 p.m.
coach
...I 30
6th ,,
Eketahuna
4 a.m.
Palmerston
11.30 a.m.
• ••1 45
j £1 15s
,, }}
Palmerston
5-45 P-m.
Wanganui
10.15 p.m.
rail
62
ios. 6d.
7th ,,
Wanganui
7-43 a.m.
Waverley
11 a.m.
• ■-i 33
10s. 6d.
,, ,,
Waverley
11. 30 a.m.
Ngaire
5.20 p.m.
coach
-•-j 45
17s. 6d.
>> }>
Ngaire
5.20 p.m.
New Plymouth
7- so p.m.
rail
53
10s. 8d.
gth ,,
New Plymouth
3 P-m.
!
10th „
Onehunga
8 a.m.
s.s. “ Penguin ”
•••: 135
£3
,, 55
Onehunga
9 a.m.
Auckland
10.30 a.m.
omnibus
9
14 th »
Auckland
9 P-m.
■
ITINERARY— continued.


Date.
Departure,
Time.
Arrival.
Time.
Conveyance.
Dista’ce
Price.
16th April
Gisborne
8 a.m.
s.s. “ Albion ”
304
i^5
Gisborne
6 p.m.
17th ,,
Napier
5 a.m.
„
85
J
20th „
Napier
6 a.m.
Tarawara
9 p.m.
coach
50
} £2 IOS
21st „
Tarawara
7 a.m.
Taupo
6.30 p.m.
„
48
23 rd „
Taupo
6 a.m.
Ohinemutu
6 p.m.
buggy
57
£2
25 th ..
Ohinemutu
2 p.m.
Te Wairoa
4 p.m.
IO
IOS.
(For the
Hot Lake of Rotomohana and
Terraces
26th „
Te Waiioa
6 p.m.
Ohinemutu
8 p.m.
,,
IO
IOS.
28th „
Ohinemutu
10 a.m.
Tauranga
5 p.m.
,,
42
£1
29th „
Tauranga
4 p.m.
With s.s.
Taupo in tow, which foundered
off Mayor
Island
30th „
Auckland
10 a.m.
s.s. ‘‘Wellington ”
ISO
£* 15s.
4th May
Auckland
9,35 a - m
(At sea.)
s.s. “ City of New York ”
8th
Sydney
8 p.m.
1281
£ro
20th
Sydney
8.4=; p.m.
(At sea.)
s.s. “ Atjeh,” 1509 tons ...
25th „
Townsville
2 p.m.
1400
Townsville
11.45 P- m *
27th ,,
Cooktown
7.45 a.m.
,,
255
Cooktown
10 a.m.
(At sea.)
;
29th „
Thursday Island
12 noon
„
400 j
3 oth „
Thursday Island
3.30 p.m.
(At sea.)
!
j
1st June
PortDarwin(N orthernTen itory)
4 p.m.
749
gth ,,
Port Darwin
1 p.m.
1
(At sea.)
I
ITINERARY —continued.


Date.
Departure.
Time.
Arrival.
Time.
Conveyance.
Dista'ce
Price.
15th June
Sourabaya
10 a.m.
1250
(Java)
16th ,,
Sonrabaya
2.39 pm.
Porrong
train
,, „
Porrong
Kasri
cart
l)
,, „
Kasri
Prigen
6.30 P.m.
pony
18th „
Prigen
6 a.m.
Kasri
> s
,, „
Kasri
Bangil
cart
,, ,,
Bangil
Malang
11.45 P-m-
train
—
C X3
20th ,,
Malang
6.45 a.m.
Pasorean
,,
tfi "C!
„ ,,
Pasorean
10 a.m.
Passerapan
carriage and four
§ S
„ ,,
Passerapan
1 p.m.
Tosari
5 p.m.
pony
27th „
Tosari
6 a.m.
Pakeis
2 p.m.
CO «
I! J>
Pakeis
2 p.m.
Lawang
5 p.m.
cart
5 c
28th ,,
Lawang
7.45 a.m.
Sourabaya
ii a.m.
r ail
3 oth ..
Sourabaya
9 a.m.
T 39
1st July
Samarang
8 a.m.
s.s. “ Govr.-Gen. Laudon "
}> ?5
Samarang
1.3 p.m.
Solo
rail
2nd „
Solo
7.14 a.m.
Djocja
g.15 p.m.
,,
3 rd „
Djocja
7 a.m.
Boro Bodoer
12 noon
post carriage
,, >}
Boro Bodoer
4 p.m.
Magelang
6 p.m.
n
4th ,,
Magelang
2 p.m.
Ambarawa
6 p.m
5 th
Ambarawa
7.15 a.m.
Samarang
12 noon
train
7th ,,
Samarang
g a.m.
8th „
Batavia
11 a.m.
s.s. “ General Pel ”
2 34
gth „
Batavia
9 a.m.
10th ,,
Muntok
3 P-m.
\ ■
nth „
Muntok
4 p.m.
Riaow
2 p.m.
f 520
Riaow
2.30 p.m.
Singapore
9 p.m.
j-
)
ITINERARY— continued.


—■
Date
Departure.
Time.
Arrival.
Time.
Conveyance.
[Dista’ce
Price.
16th July
Singapore
3.30 p.m.
(At sea.)
Bangkok
6.30 p.m.
s.s. “ Normandy '*
... 868
64
£8
23 rd „
Bangkok
10 a.m.
The Bar (grounded)
4.30 p.m.
24th ,,
The Bar
5 p- m -
(At sead
804
15
15
£8
2Qth ,,
3 oth >>
Singapore
3 p- m -
Singapore
Johore
8 a.m.
5.30 p.m.
carriage and launch
1st Aug.
Johore
4 p.m.
Singapore
7 p.m.
5th „
7th ,,
Singapore
6 p.m.
(At sea.)
Cap St. Jacques
9 p.m.
<-,s. “Oxus”
... 608
... 48
j
8th „
Cap St. Jacques
8.30 a.m.
Saigon (Cochin China)
11.30 a.m.
”
£16
gth ,,
12th
Saigon
11.30 a.m.
Hong Kong
10.30p.m.
,,
945
)
14th ,,
Hong Kong
5.30 a.m.
(At sea.)
Yokohama
10.30 a.m.
s.s. “ Volga”
... 1600
.... 18
£16
24th „
Yokohama
2 p.m.
T okio
2.55 p.m.
train
6.30 a.m.
Shimmachi
6 p.m.
carriage
42
17
25th „
Shimmachi
6.30 a.m.
Sugawo
6.30 p.m.
jinriki-sha
on foot
27th
Sugawo
6.45 a.m.
Kusatsu
3 P- m -
8th Sept,
nth „
16th „
Kusatsu
Sawatari
9.30 a.m.
7.30 a.m.
9 a.m.
Sawatari
Ikao
Shimmachi
5.30 p.m.
5 p.m.
4..3op.m.
on foot and jinriki-sha
jinriki-sha
... J 7
... 22
61
18
17th „
Shimmachi
6 a.m.
Tokio
6 p.m.
carriage
train
Tokio
9.15 p- m -
Yokohama
10 p.m.
2ist „
Yokohama
6.30 p.m.
1
ITINERARY— continued.


Date.
Departure.
Time.
Arrival.
Time.
Conveyance.
Dista’ce
Price.
(At sea.)
s.s. “ Hiroshima-Maru,”
23rd Sept.
Kobe
12.30 a.m.
1800 tons
348
24th ,,
Kobe
1 p.m.
25th „
Shimoneseki
ii a.m.
,, ,,
239
Shimonoseki
26th ,,
Nagasaki
(Detained by typhoon.)
148
28th
Nagasaki
!
30th „
Shanghai
„
469 1
1st Oct.
Shanghai
4 a.m.
1
(At sea.)
8.30 a.m.
3 rd
Chefoo
p.s. “ Hae-an ”
5 11
Chefoo
10 a.m.
4th
Taku Bar
9 a.m.
,, ,,
r 93
dols.
return.
(Detained
on Bar by bad weather.)
6th ,,
T aku
1 p.m.
(Ran aground in River.)
7th
Tien-tsin ...!
5 a.m.
,, ,,
5i
/
8th „
Tien-tsin
6 a.m.
Hoshiwa ...;
7 p.m.
mule cart
40
gth ,,
Hoshiwa
4 a.m
Pekin
5 30 p.m.)
,,
40
nth ,,
Pekin
6 a.m.
Chang-ping-chou . 1
5 P-m.
horseback
32
(Visited
the Summer Palace and Wan-
shou-shau)
i
X2th ,,
Chang-ping-chou
6 a.m.
Chatou
5 p.m.
horse and donkey ...!
30
(Visited
Ming Tombs and the Grcit i
Wall)
I3th ,,
I4th „
Chatou
8.30 a.m.
Nang-pang
6 p.m.
„ „
' 25
Nang-pang
7 a.m.
Pekin
4.30 p.m.
horseback
25
23tll ,,
Pekin
2 p.m.
Tung-chou
5.30 p.m.
mule cart
X5
Si. 50
,, „
Tung-chou
g p.m.
} ,
(Down the Peiho River)
Tien-tsin
7 p.m.
house-boat ... !
113
4S8
ITINERARY— continued.


Date.
Departure.
Time.
Arrival.
Time.
|
Conveyance. ; Dista 'ce
Price.
24th Oct.
Tien-tsin
7 a.m.
25th „
Chefoo
10 a.m.
s.s. “ Sin-nanzing ”
244
>> ,,
Chefoo
3 p- m ’
27th „
Shanghai
1 p.m.
5 11
2nd Nov.
Shanghai
7 a.m.
4th .,
Nagasaki
8 a.m.
p.s. “ Hiroshima-Maru ”
469
5th
Nagasaki
12.30 a.m.
Shimonoseki
i p.m.
148
3> 33
Shimonoseki
2.30 p.m.
6th ,,
Kobe
239
7th ,,
Kobe
4.55 p.m.
Osaka
6.5 p.m.
train
20
gth ,,
Osaka
11.30 a m.
Nara
7 p.m.
jinrika-sha
32
10th „
N ara
1 p.m.
Kioto
7.30 p.m.
30
c/i
17th „
Kioto
10 a.m.
Otzu
12 noon
8
C
Otzu
12.20 p.m
Maibara
6 p.m.
p.s. ■ Taucho-Maru ”
42
rt
(/}
18th ,,
Maibara
8 a.m.
Akasaka
4 p.m.
on foot
21
igth
Akasaka
9 a.m.
Shin Kano
3 p- m -
173
a*
20th ,,
Shin Kano
8.30 a.m.
Mitake
5 P- m -
t 92
2 tst ,,
Mitake
9 am.
Oi
6 p.m.
22
l)
22nd „
Oi
8.15 a.m.
Tsumago
5 P- m -
I 7s
23rd
Tsumago
8.10 a.m.
Agematsu
5.15 p.m.
23
u,
<u
24th „
Agematsu
8 a.m.
Niyegawa
5.45 p.m.
224
0
25th ,,
Niyegawa
9 a.m.
Shirao-no-Suwa
5 P- m -
20
1-
26th „
Shimo-no-Suvva
8.45 a.m.
Nirasaki
8 p.m.
foot, carriage & jinrika-sha
37
0
27th ,
Nirasaki
8.15 a.m.
Nambu
4.30 p.m.
carriage and boat
35
bo
28th „
Nambu
8.15 a.m.
Mishima
4 p.m.
boat and jinrika-sha
40
29th
Mishima
8.30 a.m.
Miya-no-Shita
4 p.m.
on foot
18
3°th „
Miya-no-Shita
9 a.m.
Yokohama
7.15 p.m.
jinriki-sha
425
nth Dec.
Yokohama
6.45 a.m.
IT INERARY —continued.


Date
Departure.
Time.
Arrival.
Time.
Conveyance.
Distance
Price.
(At sea)
s.s. “ City of Tokio,” 5500
Fare thro’
25th Dec.
27th „
2gth „
San Francisco
noon
San Francisco
3.30 p.m.
tons
4801
toLondon
Ogden
10 a.m.
Ogden
8*30 a.m.
Central Pacific Railway
895
from
Yokoh’ma
31st „
Omaha
3.25 p.m.
Union Pacific Railway
1032
$43°
JJ 55
Omaha
4 p.m.
1882.
1st Jan.
Chicago
2.45 p.m.
Rock Island Route
00
O')
Chicago
3.30 p.m.
New York
Q.40 p.m.
Michigan Central & Ntw
18th „
New York
3 p.m.
York Central
1041
(At sea)
s.s. “ Servia,” 8200 tons
$100
Queenstown
5.30 a.m.
26th „
Queenstown
6 a.m.
Liverpool
8 a.m.
55 >5
27th „
Liverpool
xi a.m.
London
train
3.50 p.m.
Total miles
55575*
ITINERARY— continued.


S.S. “ KENT.” —PLYMOUTH TO MELBOURNE.
Date.
Lat.
Long.
Days’
run.
Total
from
Plymouth.
Remark?,
May 13
No
Sights
2 days
13th, 3.30 p.m. Left
:> 14
440 ; S'N
8° 51'W
422
422
Plymouth.
..
39 56 „
11 23
273
695
., l6
35 32 „
12 52 „
274
969
17
3i 25 „
13 55 ..
253
1222
„ 18
27 13 „
15 12 ,,
262
1484
„ 19
22 51 „
19 30 >■
271
1755
19th. 10 a.m. Sighted
African Coas*.
Total for week ...
1,755 knot?.
„ from Plymouth ...
••• 1)755 „
Average per hour for the week
io-5 ,,
May 20
xg 3 N
17 33 w
246
2001
,, 21
H 55 ..
!? 35 ..
248
2249
„ 22
10 52 „
16 56 „
247
2496
.. 23
82,,
14 31 ..
222
2718
2 3 r d* 3 P- m ‘ A female
„ 24
5 15 ..
11 37 ..
241
2959
passenger died.
.. 25
2 36
8 57
227
3186
„ 26
O 2 „
5 IQ „
221
3407
26th. o’i5 p.m. Crossed
the line.
Total for the week
1,652 miles.
,, from Plymouth ...
... 3,407 miles.
Average per hour for the week
9*8 knots.
»>
,, from Plymouth
... io-2 5 »
May 27
2 40 S
4 11 W
212
3619
.. 28
4 53..
3 16 „
137
3756
28th. Stopped 7 hours
.. 2 9
7 49..
1 24 „
208
3964
.. 30
10 5 1 „
0 16 E
207
4171
„ 31
14 14 ..
1 56 „
227
4398
June 1
17 44 „
3 45..
235
4633
2
21 16 „
5 51 ,•
243
4876
Total for the week
... 1,469 knots
,, from Plymouth ...
... 4,876 .,
Average per hour for the week |
Including stoppages 875 ,,
Excluding ,, 9*15 ,,
» »
,, from Plymouth |
Including stoppages 975 ,,
Excluding ,, 9-87 ,,
ITINERARY OF VOYAGE.


Days’
Total
Date.
Lat.
Long.
from
1 Remarks.
1 U i i •
Plymouth.
June
3
24
35 S
8 16 E
240
5H6
4
27
16 „
10 16 „
195
5311
4th &* 5th. Heavy head
5
29
37 »
n 45 •,
162
5473
sea.
••
6
32
15 -
ip 4 1 ..
233
5706
6th. 1 la.m. Spoke “ Satur-
nian.”
7
34
53
18 40
242
5984
7th. g a.m. Passed
8
37
37 >■
23 27 „
284
6232
Cape Good Hope; 23d.
i6h. from Plymouth,
giving an average of
9*6 for 5,920 miles.
9
39
34..
28 30 „
263
6495
gth. Hearing sea-birds
in company.
Total for the week
i,6ig .,
„ from Plymouth ...
... 6,495
Average for the week
g-6 „
)
„ , f Including stoppages 0*72 ,,
from Plymouth | Exdudin " g H )> ° 9-87 „
June
I
No
Sights
10th &> nth. Heavy
II
3 days
southerly gale.
12
'~39
33 »
42 21 E
646
7141
12th, 8 a.m. to 16th, 6
13
39
52
47 55 „
258
7399
n.m., strong fair wind.
4 1
16 „
53 10 >.
255
7654
15th. Under sail only 3
15
42
33 »
58 50
270
7924
l6
44
If V
65 23 „
297
8221
hours.
Total
for the week
1,726 knots.
from Plymouth ...
... 8 221 ,,
Average per hour for the ween
10*27 ,,
”
’>
„ ,, ( Including stoppages g'83 ,,
„ from Plymouth lExdudjn - g g . gI „
June
17
45
15 s
70 46 E
238
S459
igtb. g a.m. to 21st, i.oon,
screw up.
18
19
20
1
47
No
Sights
3 days
23
88 34 E
753
Q 2 I 2
17th to 23rd, wind varied
21
No
Sights
2 days
N. to E.
48
17 s
98 16 E
394
9606
23rd, a.m. Wind fair;
23
48
16 ..
103 1
igi
9797
noon up screw.
Total for the week
... 1,576 knots.
.. from Plymouth
... 9.797
Average per hour for the week
... 9-38
»
. ( Including stoppages 97(1 „
, from Plymouth | Exdudh f g „ g.33 „
ITINERARY OF VOYAGE—continued.


Date.
Lat.
Long.
Days’
run.
Total
from
Plymouth.
Remarks.
June 24
.. 2 5
„ 26
.. 2 7
„ 28
„ 29
30
48°; 11 IS
No
47 39 ..
46 22 „
44 2 7 „
43 3
40 57 ..
iog Q ; i ( E
Sights
119 3° „
125 4°
13° 57 ..
I3 6 J 5 „
140 ig „
241
2 days.
426
262
252
245
220
10,038
10,464
10,726
10,978
18,223
11*443
Wind fair Ther. 39°.
Heavy rain&snowstorms.
Cabins flooded.
Weather fine.
Strong head wind.
Sea calm. No wind.
To
Av
July 1
tal for the week
,, from Plymouth ...
erage per hour for the w
„ „ „ from Ply
| Passed C. Otway 7 a
eek
mouth
m. | 193
1 u.635 1
1 1
1,646 miles.
... 11,443 miles.
979 knots.
IO ‘3
Sandridge pier, Melbourne,
8 p.m.
Capt. Saunders.
LOG OF S.S.
‘ GUNGA.” 746 tons.
Date.
Lat.
Long.
Distance
Remarks.
1880.
June 8
.. 9
32 0
; 10' S
156°; 32- E
285
viii. Left Sydney 7.20
a.m. s passed the Heads
8.20 a.m.
„ 10
30
38 „
161 4 „
260
ix. x. Strong southerly
„ II
28
28 „
165 23 „
266
gale and heavy sea
with rain.
„ 12
28
28 „
169 3i
259
Moderate East winds and
» !3
23
43 »
172 46 „
249
fine weather.
14
21
10 „
I? 6 33
245
Fog. Lay to for four hours
15
No sights
taken.
250
off Mt. Washington,
Kadavu.
Arrived Levuka 3 p.m.
Total miles ...
1814
ITINERARY OF VOYAGE—continued.


Date.
Lat.
Long.
Course
steered.
Remarks.
July 16
.. l 7
3°
; 47 / N
103°: 58 ; E
Various.
Left Singapore 3.30,
Passed Tioman 7 a;m
„ 18
6
59 „
*02 59 „
N.N.W.
Ft. Brala midnight.
Passed Redangs.
» 19
9
48 „
101 33 „
Passed Kho Kramga.m
„ 20
No
sights.
RETURN VOYAGE FROM BANGKOK.
Date.
Lat.
Long.
Course
steered.
Remarks.
July 23
No
sights
Dropped
down the
river
Left Bangkok at 10 a.m,
and reached bar at
4 p.m., but failed to
cross.
.. 24
No
sights
S.E. i E.
Crossed bar at 5 o’clock.
.. 25
ii°; 10/N
ioi°; 2 ; E
”
Cross sea running.
Passed Kong See.
» 26
8 4 ..
102 11 „
(dead
reckoning)
Heavy shower. Calm
sea. Thunderstorm
during night. Passed
inside the Radangs
4 p.m.
» 27
No
sights
S.E.
Passed Pt. Brala 11 a.m.
» 28
» 29
No
sights
)}
Passed Tioman 9 a.m.
Singapore 7.30 a.m.
COPY OF “THE EDITH’S”
LOG.
Date.
Lat.
Long.
Course
steered.
Remarks.
Sept. 22
Left Tonga Tabu
at 1 p.m.
.. 23
No
sights
95
Passed Pylstaart
Island 8 a.m.
» 24
177 ; 29 / N.N.E.
24"; 13/ S
29°;75/
N.N.E.
135
.. 25
No sight
sights
29 80
s.w.
„ 26
179 34 E
25 54 S
S.E.
155
27
r 79 5 »
27 23 „
Calms
120
„ 28
No
sights
29 78
N.
., 29
177 37 W
28 56 s
29 80
N.N.E.
114
Heavy weather.
» 3°
No sight
31 43 „
„
l8o
Oct. 1
174 19 w
34 24 „
„
149
Made Cape Brett
7 p.m.
„ 2
No
sights
S.W.
180
Anchored off
Auckland
p.m.
;
Total
miles ...
1,128
OUTWARD VOYAGE FROM SINGAPORE.


S.S. “TARARUA.”
Days’
run.
Distance
Do.
Date.
Lat.
Long.
Course.
from 3
Kings.
from
Sydney
Remarks.
1880.
Oct. 7
34 c
; OS'S
170°; 52/E
N 82 W
190
58
965
Passed 3 Kings
at daybreak.
„ 8
33
54 „
l66 O7 ,,
N87W
2 37
295
728
9
33
58 „
161 14 „
S 89 W
243
538
485
„ IO
33
59 „
156 3i „
West
235
774
255
„ 11
33
48 „
I 5 I 33 „
N87W
248
1,022
IO
Passed Sydney
Heads 1 p.m.
“CITY OF TOKIO.”
Date. !
Lat.
Long.
Days’
run.
Remarks.
1880.
Dec. 11
34°
50<N
140°
20/
E
63
Left Yokohama 7 a.ra.
„ 12
35
20 „
*47
08
if
338
Passed Cape King, n a.m.
.. !3
35
12 „
153
28
„
312
Strong breeze, all sail set.
.. *4
34
54 „
160
*7
336
» 1 5
34
5» „
166
04
jj
284
„ 16
34
58 „
172
28
jj
315
.. J 7
35
11 if
178
35
301
» 17
35
37 „
175
37
W
285
„ 18
35
56 „
169
13
u
311
„ *9
3&
°6 „
162
5°
310
„ 2°
36
11 „
155
47
M
342
„ 21
36
35 „
149
II
318
22
36
5° „
142
43
310
„ 2 3
37
°7 „
136
06
318
2 4
„ 2 5
37
21 „
122
22
323
337
Heavy roll.
Passed Golden Gate at
noon.


S.S. “
SERVIA.”
Capt. Cook.
Date.
Lat.
Long.
Course
steered.
Distance.
Remarks.
1881.
Jan. 19
O
0
40/ N
68°
; i'W
N 88 E
270
Passed Sandy
» 20
4 1
52 ■,
60
5 »
79
365
Hook.
„ 21
42
28 „
5i
28 „
85
387
„ 22
44
39 »
43
45„
69
363
„ 23
47
15 ..
35
8 5,
66
392
24
49
19
25
46 „
72
402
.. 25
5°
4° >,
15
46 „
78
394
26
To
Queenstown
294
2,867


CORRECTIONS.
5, line n for “ running ” read “run”
tf 7, ~ 42 ~ “ was ” read “ has ”
9, „ 25 ~ “a” read “an ”
' 2i, „ 7 ~ “ along ” read “ above ”
, 35, ~ 30 ~ “ Heiaelburg ” read “ Heidelberg ”
36, „ 1 ??
52, ~ 43 ~ “va ” read “ca ”
~ „ „ fi “ empty ” read “it is empty”
55, „ 7 „ “ Cakoban ” read “ Cakobau ”
59, 12 ~ “ came ” read “ cane ”
6g, ~ 3 ~ “ Mallicols ” read “ Mallicolo ”
71. ~ 23 “hg” read “ng ”
95, ~ 39 “ looked ” read “ booked”
~ 103, ~ 20 ~ “ train ” read “ tram ”
~ 105, 10 „ “ lithofracteur ” read “ litrofracteur ”
114, ~ 27 ~ “ but ” read “ not ”
202, ~ 28 „ “ burned ” read “ curried ”
223, „ 13 ~ “ Neutia’s read “ Neuha’s ”
~ 292, ~ 37 ~ “ Earnshaw ” read “ Karnslaw ”
298, 40 ~ “to ” read “ and ”
, 332. ~ 12 „ “ propose ” read “ propose ”
~ “ dispose ” read “ dispose ”
339- ,? 17 ,? “on ” read “no ”
360, ~ 24 does not form part of quotation
„ 381, ~, 14 for “Amoz ” read “ Amoy ”
382, 11 ~ “a ” read “no ”
384, 21 ~ “ land ” read “ court ”
385, „ 39 „ “ Islands ” read “ Island ”
„ 386, ~ 13 ~ “ pulling” read “ putting”
391, „ 18 „ l< railway ” read “ telegraph ”
399, ’’ 12 „ “ grey” read “gray”
414, ? 31 strike out 2nd “ were ”
416. line 3 and 18 for “ Maharaja ” read “ Maharajah ”
.. 4*7? ?>3 » 2 7 » J „ - ,
430, line 9, for “islands read “ hillocks ”
436. „ 43 „ “ paylight ” read “ daylight ”
442, .. 10 ~ “ Coojee” read “ Conjee ”
.. 451! „ 35 » “Quay” read “ Quai”
462. ~ 22 ~ “Tarasaki ’ read “ Takasaki”
}J 465, „ 36 ~ “ nibachi ” read “ hibachi ”
484, „ 8 after “ are ” put :
~ ~ j 6 for “ kiushin ” read “ kiushiu ”
~ ~ 18 ~ “ kishin ” read “ kishiu ”
488, ~ 27 “ kinshm ” read “ kiushiu ”
494? ?? 3 »» “ scoria ” read “ scoriae ”
314 }> 12 ” after “ away ” instead of after ‘rises”
515, Jast line for “ lading ” read “ laaling ”
528, line 5 ~ “ these ” read “ then ”
• 1 537, „ 8 „ “ men ” read “manpower”
•? 543? ~ 4 “ tour ” read “ town ”
?> 545 ?? x 9 ” “ kinshin ” read “ kinshiu ”
>? 547? ?? 33 ?? “ samissu ” read “ samisen ”
»» 567? „ 30 “ Warati ” read “ Warafi ”
