

WINIFRED LAW


v t*' > & m '■ I
> >
%
*


)■ i H HJ M I £3f
rj ■ ; HE Sp| S£sO wbS gjgj


■


RANGERS OF
THE UNIVERSE


A circle of horrifying humans were staring down at him


RANGERS OF
THE UNIVERSE
By
WINIFRED LAW
Illustrated by
DICK ALDERTON
/
Sydney
NEW CENTURY PRESS PTY. LTD.
3 North York Street


Registered at the General Post Office, Sydney,
for transmission through the post as a book.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
COPYRIGHT.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
New Century Press Pty. Ltd., 3 York Street,
Sydney.


Cj 8821
18 JAN t9
CHAPTER I.
“THE RANGERS OF THE UNIVERSE” were
shooting swiftly towards space. On the dark
streamlined sides of the twenty rocket ships, shone
the great blue star of Aureela, beneath which flashed
a small replica of The Southern Cross.
The young commander of the expedition—the
Earthman, Ralph Hannon—sat in the control cabin
of The Flame gazing intently into the darkening
atmosphere, vaguely aware meanwhile of the chatter
of his brothers who were seated behind him.
Whither would the adventurous voyage of The
Rangers lead? Ralph wondered as the ships sped
upward.
Undreamed of dangers doubtless lay ahead, but
the knowledge that each ship carried the powerful
weapons of Aureela—the King’s sleeping and death
rays—and other annihilating inventions, inspired
both pilots and crews with confidence.
Would they ever reach the Earth? Ralph asked
himself. Would he and the youngsters ever see
home and parents again ? Imagine the boys’ tales
of their sojourn on the planet Aureela—especially
Lai’s tales.
Ralph smiled ... He looked at the spaceometer.
The rockets were tearing through the upper atmo-
sphere which enveloped Aureela. A few minutes,
and they would be out in space.
The young commander’s eyes turned again to the
void.
With a start, he sat bolt upright—his dreams sud-
en 3 wienching with a jerk into a very real present.


Reaching forward, he clutched the transmitter.
“Meteors ! !” he shouted.
From the glass walled control cabin of The Flame,
Ralph gazed with awe at a shower of lights which
appearing suddenly in the distance came rushing
towards him from space—brilliant darting points of
light, fanning out in the dusky universe.
“Chins up, boys !” he cried encouragingly, turning
for a second to his brothers.
The boys did not answer. They were already on
their feet gazing horror stricken at the terrifying
though beautiful sight.
“Oh, Ralph, they’ll strike us !” shrieked Allister,
as a great beam approaching with terrific velocity
turned the control cabin into a blaze of light.
“Oh, shut up, Lai !” cried Tom, the older boy,
trying to steady his voice, “and hold on tight !”
His voice was drowned in a dull roaring crash. A
blinding light enveloped the ship. Thud !—thud !
—thud !—Knock !—knock !—knock !
As the meteors crashed and banged against the
ship’s sides, the boys were hurled to the floor, while
Ralph rocked crazily in his seat.
Would the walls of the ship hold? was the young
Earthman’s agonized thought—would they?—one
hole in the meteor proof sheath and they were lost !
The suspense was unbearable. In a few seconds he
would know.
With startling suddenness the crashes ceased.
The brilliant meteors had passed.
Ralph drew a sharp breath of relief as the velvet
darkness of space suddenly spread about them—the
thickly scattered untwinkling stars showing as tiny
bars of light, while the sun hung in the dark sky,
a great gleaming ball.


“Phew!” whistled Ralph, “not too good while it
lasted—but we know now that our sheaths are
really meteor proof. One of our great dangers can
be ruled out!”
“All right, boys?” he asked, seeing the pair pick-
ing themselves up off the floor.
“Quite,” said Tom, trying to speak calmly.
“And you, Lai?”
“Fine, Ralph,” said the small boy rather tremu-
lously.
“Eldron and his pilots will be full of pep, now
that we have survived a meteor bombardment”
exclaimed Ralph delightedly, “I must offer congratu-
lations at once!”
Stretching out his right hand he grasped the
transmitter, meanwhile sweeping the void swiftly
with his revolving lenses.
An exclamation of astonishment broke from his
lips. His hand fell nervelessly from the transmitter.
“What’s the matter, Ralph?” Tom asked anxiously.
“The other ships” said Ralph tersely, “They’ve
all disappeared!”
There was a horrified pause. “We have been
flung from our course by the meteor shower” he
said slowly.
“Gee!” exclaimed Allister rather shakily, “what a
shower! We were certainly knocked all ways. No
wonder the fleet is scattered!”
The King’s great ships?—lt was impossible that
all could have vanished!— With what care he (Ralph
Hannon) had trained those pilots and crews!
Surely fate had not decreed that, alone with the boys
once again, he should travel the boundless and my»-


terious universe of which he knew less than nothing ?
. . . Nonsense! —at any moment he would sight the
ships!
Ralph squared his shoulders.
“Cheer up, young ’uns!” he exclaimed. “What
about a drink, you want something to buck you up
after all the excitement.”
“We’re willing,” said Tom, and jumping from his
seat, he took a glass jar from the wall chest and
poured a sparkling cordial into mugs.
Allister drank thirstily. Then slipping from his
chair, he walked along to the store cupboard and
took out a substantial biscuit.
Ralph continued to scan space through the great
lenses—his face strained with anxiety.
“I hope we reach the Earth before we have to
start on the tabloids,” Allister remarked as he bit
into his biscuit.
“I wouldn’t count too much on reaching the Earth
if I were you,” Ralph replied absentmindedly.
“I don’t,” said Allister, “and I’m not worrying
either—think of all the gadgets we have to help us!”
“Gabbler!” jeered Tom. “Who was worried a few
minutes ago?”
“Poker face!” retorted Allister. “Who was scared
stiff and pretended he wasn’t?”
Disregarding the boys and their banter, Ralph
continued to gaze anxiously into the limitless void,
hoping against hope that his vigilance would be
rewarded by the reappearance of at least one of the
Aureelian ships.
t
“They should be as safe as we are, wherever they
may be” he remarked after a time, “but it would be
a hard blow if we were to be separated so soon.”


“But you don’t think we’ve lost them for good, do
you Ralph?” asked Allister in consternation.
“No, Lai,” replied Ralph, “I don’t.”
“The Aureelians could carry on even if we re-
mained separated, couldn’t they?” asked Tom.
“Yes,” replied Ralph. “Both pilots and crews are
highly efficient. They are also courageous and
resourceful men.”
“All the same—” he added gravely, “I feel a
certain responsibility regarding them.”
“What are those shining objects away to the left,
Ralph?” enquired Tom, who was staring through the
glass wall of the control cabin.
Nearer and nearer floated the huge dark sphere


“I don’t know,” said Ralph, “I have been watching
them for some time—they are getting larger . .
Tom looked over his brother’s shoulder, while
Allister, still munching his biscuit, knelt with his
nose flattened against the glass wall, staring out at
the dusky star riddled sky.
Then, with a suddenness which surprised the boys,
clouds began to wreathe around them, becoming
thicker, till at last the objects they had been watch-
ing were completely shut out from view.
“Do you think we’re approaching another planet,
Ralph?” Tom asked eagerly as they raced onward
through rolling clouds.
“Unlikely, Tom, I think,” replied his brother.
As Ralph spoke, two great lights burst through the
clouds ahead. A second glance showed a huge bulky
object of spherical shape from which twin lights
radiated like fiery eyes. On either side of the great
lights, a mass a dull metal tubes projected.
“A weird space craft of some kind!” exclaimed
Ralph excitedly. “This is rather thrilling!”
“Gee!” cried Tom, “isn’t it?”
Nearer and nearer floated the huge dark sphere,
till at last they could only see the great eyes which
lit up their ship and illumined its interior with a
light brighter than day.
Suddenly a nameless dread replaced their excited
interest. The craft was almost upon them. The
light seemed to take on a sinister quality. Instinct-
ively the brothers shielded their eyes against it, as
a strange sensation swept over them.
Ralph strove to overcome the paralysis which was
deadening his brain.
Fantastic figures were wrenching at the door of
his ship.


CHAPTER 11.
RALPH stirred uneasily, dimly aware that the boys
were crouching near him . . . The light ? that awful
light ? What had happened ? What were the strange
sounds he could hear?
In a flash his memory returned. He opened his
eyes, and sitting up quickly, suddenly recoiled.
A circle of horrifying humans were staring down
at him—men with long pointed ears, leathery faces
and fang-like teeth, their bodies encased in some
shining substance, their heads protected by helmets.
In the front piece of each helmet flared a crimson
light, which cast a reddish glow upon the awful faces.
Behind the forbidding figures—a lofty black wall
curved upward inset with circular windows. In a
dazed fashion Ralph noted the machinery between
the windows, and the mechanical figure which
appeared to operate a mass of controls. Huge cylin-
ders surmounted by enormous metal plates pro-
pelled blinding light waves outward through an
upper quarter of the windows—while a small globe
attached to the mechanical pilot, illuminated the
machinery, and cast a glow over the sinister walls.
There was no need to try and guess what had
happened. He was a prisoner, with his brothers, in
the mysterious sphere . . .
Rising unsteadily to his feet, Ralph faced his cap-
tors boldly, while the boys, terrified by the strange-
ness of the scene, looked on with dread.


“Speak!” Ralph readily received the thought
sounds of the pointed eared horror who appeared
to be captain of the craft, as with a swift movement,
the strange human switched off his head light.
“What do you seek in space?”
“What do you seek?”
A snarl greeted this retort.
“Dare you question a captain of Ira?—your object
in space?”
“I am bound for the planet Earth.”
“A lie! You are a scout of the chieftain of Mer!”
Ralph shrugged his shoulders. “Mer? Ira? I have
never heard the names.”
“You know not the name of Ira, whom all inhabited
space fears ? Ira the destroyer, of the planet Helion
which lies near the sun?”
“I know him not.”
The creature gave a horrifying yelping laugh.
“Aha! Aha!—so you will not reveal to us the
secret of your presence in these regions—you are
bound for an imaginary planet!”
Yelping laughter from the crew greeted this
outburst.
“Take a little time then” the hideous captain con-
tinued, “and if your mind suffers no change, we
have here a device which will loosen your tongue.
It will wring from you your master’s secret, that
the great Ira may profit. Then—you will journey
with us to Helion, and the chieftain of Mer will look
in vain for his scout.”
Switching on his headlight, he turned away, and
followed by the weird crew, seated himself near the
mechanical pilot with his men grouped about him,


all whispering together, and from time to time cast-
ing venomous looks at their prisoners.
“Well, of all the —” began Allister faintly. Words,
however, failed him. “A deadly mob” Tom whispered
weakly.
Ralph sank to the floor of the sphere beside the
boys.
“Don’t be scared, kids,” he said in an undertone
as he looked at their pale young faces. “Do you
forget the ray caskets which I carry strapped to my
chest and back? I cannot operate the death light
here, but when I get a chance, the golden ray will
fix them! They’ll make a wonderful target all sit-
ting over there together.”
“Gee!” exclaimed Allister, his face brightening
visibly.
“As you can see,” continued Ralph, “a mechanical
figure pilots the sphere.”
“And the sphere would continue to function if
they were all knocked out” whispered Tom.
“Yes—so we wouldn’t crash immediately, though
Lord knows what would happen us or how we would
end up! Anyhow, I mustn’t lose a minute. They’re
just itching to try some form of torture on me, and
discover whatever it is they want to know.”
‘Aou lie down behind me, Tom” Ralph continued
—“between me and the wall. Loosen the strap on
my back, and ease the casket to the floor. See that
it doesn’t fall with a clatter ... You sit in front
of me, Lai, and lean against my knees.”
Tom, who had been sitting beside his brother,
yawned sleepily and then stretched himself on the


floor, the upper part of his body hidden behind
Ralph’s broad back.
“Come, Lai” Ralph whispered, and Allister
obediently leaned backwards against his brother’s
knees.
The watching enemies on the opposite side of the
sphere saw only the strange human and two sleepy
young ones huddled together in front of the wall.
Cautiously stretching out his right hand, Tom
began to release the strap on Ralph’s back. Very
slowly, obeying his brother’s muttered instructions,
he eased the casket to the floor and, opened it.
“I’ve removed the torch, Ralph” he breathed.
“Wait a sec. and I’ll slip it under your knees.”
The boy sat up as though restlessly changing his
position, and Ralph felt the metal object slide behind
his heels. Screened by Allister, he grasped the
torch, but even as his fingers closed about it, the
Captain’s harsh thought sounds echoed across the
sphere.
“The time is up” he communicated with an evil
smile. “Break your silence, or make ready for the
torture.”
“Now, Lai!” whispered Ralph.
The boy leapt to his feet. In a split second the
torch was whipped from the floor, balanced on
Ralph’s knees, and a bright golden ray swept across
the sphere falling full on their enemies.
One terrible shriek of horror came from the
Captain and crew—then they sprawled on the floor,
asleep in the golden light.
“Scrumptious!” cried Tom. He clapped his hands,
while Allister looked on delightedly.


“The first step” said Ralph grimly. “They’re well
out of action. Now I can have a look around—
always hoping the pilot continues to function—!”
Rising to his feet, the Earthman crossed the
sphere, and placing the torch on a flat portion of the
machinery from whence its ray continued to envelop
his foes, he began a systematic examination of the
walls.
The boys followed him closely, peering and poking
fearfully but inquisitively at everything they saw.
The sphere appeared to be roughly, but very
strongly constructed. Nothing streamlined here.
With the exception of the machinery, and several
fairly large metal chests, the great globe was empty.
Reaching the wall opposite the twin windows,
Ralph drew in his breath sharply.
“Hullo!” he exclaimed, “What have we here?”
Ripping aside a curtain resembling black oilskin,
he found himself staring through a curved glass
panel, beside which was a small recess containing a
mass of strange mechanism.
“Quickly, young ones!” he shouted, “Something
for you to see!”
Springing forward, the boys looked through the
panel. They uttered shrieks of joy. “Oh boy! Oh
boy!” yelled Tom. “Our ship!”
Gliding through deep dark space behind the
sphere, they saw “The Flame”—her control room
lights aglow, the blue star of Aureela and the South-
ern Cross blazing on her side.
“I was expecting something of the kind” said
Ralph, when the youngsters’ excitement had sub-
sided a little. “But what a relief to see her! They


have evidently projected gravitational waves by
means of this fantastic apparatus which are drawing
her along behind the sphere!”
“We shall have to get back to her somehow,” he
added, gazing at his beloved ship . . . These fiends
must have left the sphere to wrench open her door.
I must find out how they did it.”
“Yes” exclaimed Allister, “If only we could get
out of the thing.”
“The problem of breaking away from the wave
pull should prove equally difficult,” said Ralph,
“However —one thing at a time!”
“There must be some means of exit,” he continued,
“It would not surprise me if this glass panel and the
peculiar metal contrivance clasped to the wall beside
it were in some way connected with an opening.”
He began to examine the intriguing metal struc-
ture, and the portion of the wall beside it.
“There might be tools or helpful instruments in
one of these chests, boys” he said. “Just try if you
can open one of them while I am working here. It
will save time.”
Eager to help, the pair ran across to a large box.
A few paces away, lay their prostrate foes, swathed
in the brilliant ray. Though the boys shuddered a
little at the sight, they nevertheless found it diffi-
cult to tear their eyes from the long eared men, who
partially obscured in the golden glow appeared more
repellent than ever.
“If we had our ray masks” said Tom “we could go
and have a good look at them.”
“Yes, but we haven’t” said Allister, “and anyway,
I don’t want to get any closer.”


The younger boy, seizing the lid of the chest,
began to try to force it open . . . “Here, can’t you
help a fellow!” he panted at Tom.
“What is the matter with you ?” he added, as his
brother did not respond
Turning he saw that Tom was staring intently
through the lower half of one of the windows.
Ceasing his efforts to raise the lid, Allister fol-
lowed his brother’s gaze.
“Ralph!” Tom shouted, “Look at the big red cloud
see! right away in the distance!”
Walking across to where the boys stood, Ralph
stared through the window into space.
“Strange,” he said, “A cloud of that colour seems
unnatural. What phenomena could reflect such a
crimson glow?”
“Anyhow” he added, turning again to the wall,
“you two keep your eyes on it, while I get on with
the job.”
Returning to the chest, the boys had just managed
to force the lid open, when Allister, raising his head,
took another look into space.
“Gee! Ralph” he cried. “It is coming nearer. It is
all breaking up—into little red clouds!”
Discontinuing his search, Ralph hurried to the
window.
“Those are not clouds” he said slowly, “but a num-
ber of solid objects!”
“You’re right!” cried Allister.
Ralph’s voice rose. “Why they’re spheres!” he
cried, “red spheres, and they’re closing in on us!”


CHAPTER 111.
SWIFTLY the crimson spheres formed two vast
wings, and shooting upwards, sped forward at a
terrific pace. As the spacecraft rushed onward,
luminous tubes could be seen projecting from the
side curves of the colourful walls. Passing high on
either side of the black globe, the newcomers avoided
the sinister light which streamed from the twin
glass windows.
For the moment, the watchers within lost sight
of them.
“There is nothing we can do, boys,” said Ralph
calmly. “Only to hope that their occupants are of
a different calibre to our sleeping friends!”
“They couldn’t be worse” said Tom.
“Will they try and shoot us down?” asked Allister
nervously.
Ralph shrugged his shoulders.
“They must be feeling rather puzzled” he said.
“The long eared men would have taken action
minutes ago—either signalled a friend, or gone into
action against an enemy. The fact that the black
sphere is calmly ignoring them and keeping its
course with an alien space ship in tow should cer-
tainly arouse curiosity.”
For a few seconds there was an uneasy silence.
“What are you thinking about, Lai?” Ralph asked,
giving the boy an encouraging pat.
“That you can get us out of anything, Ralph”
said Allister firmly.


Ralph managed a smile. “Go on believing it, son
he said cheerfully.
Turning from the boy, the elder brother gazed
grimly at the curving walls of the sphere, watching
and waiting. Where and how would the new menace
strike? . . . Were the red spheres even now poised
overhead preparing to deliver the knock-out blow ?
or would curiosity regarding “The Flame,” and the
strange inaction on the part of the crew of the black
sphere cause the newcomers to attempt a capture,
rather than a kill? . . .
The tension was becoming unbearable, when a
sudden sharp sound broke the silence.
Part of the sphere wall slid back, and as the
brothers watched with dull foreboding, tall figures
brandishing strange weapons burst though the
opening.
“It is useless to resist, Captain of Ira—” began
the leader, his thought sounds flowing fluently across
the sphere.
Seeing Ralph and the boys, and the crew of the
sphere lying prone in the golden ray, he paused,
apparently dumbfounded.
“You are not the long eared devils of Helion!”
came the exclamation at last.
His followers, lowering their weapons, crowded
about Ralph and his brothers, gazing at them in
open-mouthed wonder.
“I am an Earthman” said Ralph, “searching for
my own world; we and our ship were captured by
the crew of this sphere.”
"So—” said the leader, “the mystery of the
unknown and strangely built space craft is solved!”


Talking excitedly together, the newcomers pressed
closer to Ralph and the boys.
The leader spoke again.
“What is the strange golden light ? Are Ira’s men
dead or sleeping?”
“They sleep in the golden ray—my weapon which
is projected upon them.”
The intruders were clearly astounded at the scene
which confronted them in the captured sphere.
They were men of tall stature, with a noble cast
of features, and wore suits of gleaming golden metal
and ornate but tightly fitting headgear in the front
piece of which sparkled a small bluish light.
“They look rather wonderful” Allister whispered
to Tom.
“Especially the leader, with that spurt of light on
the top of his helmet,” returned Tom, “Gosh! he’s
the cat’s whiskers 1”
The newcomers walked towards the ray projector,
and after regarding it with interest, advanced still
further and gazed at the sprawling bodies of the
long eared men.
The leader, however, after casting a piercing look
at the ray-stricken Helions, turned again to his
young prisoner.
“I am Olera, the chieftain of Mer” he stated
haughtily.
“The chieftain of Mer?” queried Ralph. “These
men”—indicating his sleeping foes—“believed me to
be a scout of the chieftain of Mer. They were about
to inflict some form of torture upon me to extract
information which they imagined I withheld. Fortu-


nately I possessed a defensive weapon, which, watch-
ing my opportunity, I used against them.”
“You do not lack courage, strange human” said
the chieftain, gazing at his prisoner with interest.
“I will take you to the asteroid Meloor, for which
I and my fleet are bound. There I will set you a
test whereby you may prove your quality. Prove
whether in courage, strength and endurance, you
are the equal of my valiant men. Should you sur-
vive this ordeal, you will accompany us to Mer.”
Ralph bowed. There was nothing to be gained by
offending this new and more attractive captor.
Thege was a moment’s silence—then Ralph asked
slowly, “Should I not survive such an ordeal, what
would be the fate of these young boys?”
“They would be cared for, and reared to manhood
as brave warriors of Mer!”
“Hell’s Bells!” muttered Tom, while Allister sank
down weakly against the wall.
“And now” resumed the chieftain imperiously, “I
would learn the mechanism of your sleeping ray.
You will explain to me its substance, and the details
of its action on the men of Ira.”
Ralph hesitated. He was in this stranger’s power
—. After all, he still possessed a deadlier weapon!
He looked at Olera’s noble face. It inspired trust.
He decided to take a chance, and without further
delay plunged into a detailed account of the mechan-
ism and operation of the ray, to which his captor
listened with rapt interest.
“If it be true that the Helions will sleep for
several hours, young Earthman,” Olera said when
Ralph finally paused, “then I command you to shut
off the ray!”


With a gesture of assent, the young man turned
to obey. Accompanied by Olera, he crossed the
sphere and placed his hand on the projector, while
the chieftain and his followers looked on with eager
curiosity.
Silently they watched the ray pale and fade, and
when the last vestige had disappeared, the warriors,
at a sign from Olera, sprang forward and bound
their enemies.
While Ralph restored the torch to its casket, and
with Tom’s help replaced the latter in position on
his back, the chieftain inspected the interior of the
sphere, paying special attention to the wave pro-
pellers with their metal plates and cylinders. He
also closely observed the Helions and counted their
number carefully. Finally, after having given
orders to his men regarding the enemy craft and its
crew, Olera approached Ralph and the boys who had
meanwhile seated themselves on a chest near the
wall . . , Ralph ruminating on the coming ordeal,
and the boys praying silently that they would never
become warriors of Mer—“Brave or otherwise” Tom
muttered.
“Come, stranger!” commanded Olera “you and
the younglings will transfer to my sphere!”
Striding to the opening in the wall, the chieftain
with a wave of his hand, indicated a short tunnel-
like bridge which, extending into space, linked his
brilliant sphere to the captured craft.
Accompanied by his bodyguard, Olera then stepped
through the opening, and followed by Ralph and the
boys, crossed the bridge which was illumined by a
powerful central light and entered the huge crimson
globe.


Oh! Tom, look! ’ the boy gasped excitedly, "A Girl!”


A passage with gleaming silver walls opened out
in front of them, and continuing onward behind their
captors, the trio finally stepped into a wide circular
space which apparently marked the centre of the
sphere.
Several small round doors showed in the shining
walls, while at the far side a steep ladder led to an
upper floor or compartment.
“Gee!” whispered Allister, “this is different to
the black sphere. Controls and everything shut off.
I hope they’ll let us see through all those doors!”
“It is on a finer scale altogether,” said Ralph in a
low tone. “I should say that these men are highly
civilised.”
As he spoke, a door opposite opened, exposing a
narrow but lofty room, where members of the crew
could be seen sitting amidst masses of intricate
machinery. The chieftain and his men passed
through, leaving Ralph and the boys to stare curi-
ously about them.
Allister tiptoed across to the staircase and peered
upward, while Ralph and Tom returned to the pass-
age and examined the bridge which had swung into
place against the wall.
A sudden exclamation from Allister brought them
back. “Oh! Tom, look!” the boy gasped excitedly,
“A girl!—and she looks just about my age—perhaps
a little older!”
The door at the head of the narrow staircase had
opened, and standing on the top step was a lovely
golden-haired girl. She wore a dress of some soft
white substance, over which was thrown a blue velvet
cloak, while her bright hair was tied back with
shining ribbon.


The girl returned the boys’ interested looks, but
seemed uncertain whether to advance or retire.
“Narelle!”—Olera stepped from the control cabin,
and the girl flew down the staircase and caught his
hands affectionately.
“I watched the capture of the black sphere through
the glass panels, my father,” she said, “and am
amazed to see these younglings—the like of whom
I have never seen before!”
“You see here my daughter,” said the chieftain
to Ralph, “who, since her mother’s death, accom-
panies me on certain of my journeys through space.”
.“Back, my child,” he said, turning to Narelle, “I
have much to plan, and important work to do.”
Casting a lingering look at the boys, the girl
walked obediently towards the staircase, *but on
reaching the steps, turned again, and spoke to her
father.
“Are the younglings friends or foes?” she asked.
“That I cannot tell,” said Olera, “time alone will
prove their quality.”
The girl walked slowly up the steps, and disap*
peared through the doorway.
“Now, stranger,” said the chieftain, “you will
follow me.”
Behind the staircase was a small door which they
had not noticed. It led to a medium-sized compart-
ment, the outer wall of which was panelled in glass.
A large mat lay on the polished metal floor, beside
which rested a tray set with food and drink. Other-
wise the room was empty.
“You will be wise to rest, young Earthman,” said
Olera. “In seven hours we land on Meloor. There


in the council hall of the fort I will hear your story
—the story of your own world, and the details of
your voyages in space. When you have spoken, the
nature of your ordeal will be revealed.”
Inclining his head gravely towards his prisoner,
Olera turned and strode from the room, the door
sliding noislessly into place behind him.
“Whatever will they expect you to do, Ralph?”
said Tom in an anxious voice.
Allister walked to the glass wall and stared out.
“An ordeal—it sounds awful,” he said unhappily.
“Put it right out of your minds, boys,” said Ralph.
“Don’t cross your bridges till you come to them.
Cheer up, Lai! Come! Eat some of this food from
the tray—then both of you lie down and go to sleep!”
The pair obeyed rather unwillingly. Ralph helped
himself to the food, and feeling suddenly spent and
weary, stretched himself on the mat beside them.
In spite of his advice to his brothers, the young
spaceman’s thoughts turned uneasily to the future.
The test!—supposing he failed . . .
After a time Ralph fell into a troubled sleep- in
which he was eternally sighting the missing ships
of his fleet, and then losing them again in great
scarlet clouds. In spite of the harassing dreams,
however, he felt fresh and vigorous when he
awakened, several hours later.
The boys were still asleep . . . Rising to his feet,
Ralph walked over to the glass wall. The dark
canopy of space with its still stars, had given place
to white clouds which spread like a fleece on a bluish
sky.


Aroused by his brother’s actions, Tom raised his
head.
“Are we nearly there, Ralph?” he asked.
“Yes, Tom,” replied his brother. “I should say
that we were above Meloor.”
“Gee! let’s have a look!” cried the boy, springing
to his feet. He shook Allister to waken him, and
then bounded across to the glass wall and looked
down.
The sphere was flying low and at great speed.
They were passing above a barren region—a bare
depression bounded by arid brown ridges. From the
lower ground, hundreds of geysers gushed into the
air, throwing up tremendous showers of spray.
As the trio gazed curiously at the geysers, a large
sheet of water flashed beneath.
“Whatever is that in the centre of the lake, Ralph,”
cried Allister wonderingly.
“A huge whirlpool, I should say,” said Ralph
slowly, gazing downward with interest. “There is a
rock, or small island near it.”
But already, the lake, the whirlpool and the sur-
rounding geysers were far behind, while ahead,
stretched a bare brown landscape . . . Now they
were above bright blue water—miles of it, and now
above an island with harsh mountains rising from a
sapphire sea.
“We’re going down, boys!” exclaimed Ralph as
the sphere began to slacken speed.
“I can see a building on top of a mountain crag,”
cried Tom.
“It looks like a fort or a castle,” said Allister.
“The chieftain mentioned a fort,” said Ralph, “so
here we are!”


Soon they hung immediately above the mountain
top. On all sides crimson spheres could be seen
swooping downwards. A short distance from Olera’s
craft glided the great black sphere—dark and sinis-
ter, drawing “The Flame” in its wake.
“Gee! doesn’t she look great, Ralph!” exclaimed
Allister as he caught this glimpse of their ship,
“Different to these old spheres!”
“What I am wondering,” said Ralph “is how ‘The
Flame’ is going to land without me. They’ll hardly
wish her to crash behind the black sphere . .
As though in answer to his thoughts, the door
slid back, and Olera entered.
“Come, stranger,” he said. “You will return to
your ship, and guide her safely to the landing
ground.”
Ralph’s face glowed with pleasure. Stepping for-
ward eagerly, he thanked the chieftain.
Delighted, the boys prepared to follow their
brother, but to their dismay, Olera raised his hand.
“No!” he exclaimed. “You remain with me!”
Ralph’s spirits were rather dashed.
“Need you separate us?” he asked. “I will follow
your sphere faithfully to the landing ground—can
you not trust my word?”
“I know you not, young stranger,” replied Olera,
“and though my reason bids me trust you—l take
no risk,”
Ralph shrugged his shoulders. He turned to his
brothers.
“Only I can land our ship, boys,” he said “and we
mustn’t lose her. You will be quite safe, I have no
doubt on that score.”


“Come!” exclaimed the chieftain imperiously.
“Cheerio, kiddikins!” said Ralph, and following
Olera somewhat reluctantly, he disappeared through
the door.
Already the bridge was swinging outward, join-
ing the chieftain’s sphere to “The Flame.” “Your
ship will be released from the gravitational waves
propelled from the black sphere, immediately you
enter her,” said Olera. “Ira’s men have awakened,
and the captain and his crew now obey my orders.”
A few minutes later, Ralph was in his seat, and
as the freed rocket ship shot past the dark monster
from Helion, he saw that the great windows were
dimmed, no evil light streamed from them now. His
spirits rose. He felt sure that the boys would meet
him on the landing ground, and whatever might be
in store for them all, Ralph was pleased that they
were not bound for the planet Helion, prisoners of
the long-eared men of Ira.
Down, down, he glided. Above and around him
were the great crimson spheres, below, the embattled
fort on the crag.
Olera’s pilots were landing on an immense roof,
surrounded by squat crennalated towers upon
which, at the moment, the sun fell in brilliant streaks.
Climbing from “The Flame” and looking anxiously
skyward, Ralph saw the chieftain’s globe rush down-
ward, and hurrying forward, watched it land, fol-
lowed by the black sphere.
“Here I am, youngsters!” he shouted, as the boys
with worried faces clambered from the sphere.
“My hat! we’re glad to see you, Ralph!” cried
Tom, “we couldn’t help feeling a bit scared!”


“We’ll be all right now!” cried Allister, “as long
as we’re not separated!—oh! look, Ralph!”
Ira’s captain and his weird crew were being
marched from the black sphere, their wrists tightly
bound, and each man chained to the one ahead.
“I’m glad they haven’t done that to us,” whispered
Allister.
The captain had almost reached them, and on
passing the boys, drew back his lips in a hideous
snarl.
Allister put his thumb to his nose. “Donkey’s
ears” he muttered vindictively.
“You will follow me,” said a voice beside Ralph.
Olera had disappeared. The Earthman turned to
take a last look at “The Flame,” but was unable to
catch more than a glimpse, so closely were the
curious Merites crowded about her.
Attended by two warriors, the brothers were taken
through a door into one of the towers, and marched
down a wide stone staircase.
On reaching the last step, the boys caught a
glimpse of Narelle, as, accompanied by a woman
attendant, she disappeared down a distant passage.
And now huge double doors slid back in front of
them, and the party entered a lofty hall with rough
stone walls, in which narrow air slits showed at
intervals.
At the far end of the hall, which was barely fur-
nished with rows of benches, the chieftain of Mer
sat on a massive seat, with a company of his war-
riors grouped about him.
felt a slight tremor as he walked the long
distance between, but the boys, their eyes roving


curiously around, had forgotten their fears for the
time being, and in any case, faith in their brother’s
✓
ability to protect them, enveloped them like a shield.
“And now, young Earthman,” said Olera when
Ralph finally stood before him. “I will hear your
story.”
Ralph told his tale. How he and his brothers had
left their country on earth to visit another part of
their world. How they had been catapulted' into
space by the mischievous unthinking interference
with the space control panel by his brother, Allister,
His fears that they must perish, and their surpris-
ing landing on the planet, Aureela. His offer to the
King to build a fleet of ships to range the Universe,
hoping that in the voyaging he would return to his
own world, and lastly of the meteor shower, and
their capture by the crew of the black* sphere.
When his story was finished there was a moment’s
silence. Then a Merman standing behind the chief-
tain raised his hand.
Suddenly the clang of a great bell rang through
the fort, and immediately the warriors of Mer began
to file into the hall.
Ralph felt uneasy, but head erect, held himself
confidently . . .
At last the hall was filled, and Olera, rising to his
feet, related the prisoner’s story.
“This human would seem to come of a brave and
adventurous race,” he said in conclusion. “Should
he survive his ordeal, I shall welcome him as friend
and brother.”
Fear came upon Tom and Allister like an ava-
lanche. What awful thing would their brother be
called upon to do?


Allister turned pale and tried not to tremble. Tom
made an effort to stand up bravely like Ralph, but
his body wilted.
“Hear now your ordeal, young Earthman,” Olera
continued. “An ordeal which I warn you, few sur-
vive ! To-morrow at dawn, you will be flung into the
roaring whirlpool in the Lake of Winds in Geyser-
land ! . . . Fight your way out —if you can!
CHAPTER IV.
DAWN was breaking. The bare brown ridges were
already gilded with the first long sun rays. Here
and there the spray of the geysers caught in a
bright beam, had become gold spangled—while the
windswept lake, with its terrifying whirlpool, was
beginning to emerge from the shadows.
Suddenly, high above the ridges, numbers of
scarlet spheres appeared .. . Passing over the
geysers, the brilliant squadrons swooped to a level
stretch of ground near the lakeside.
As the spheres landed one after another in a high
wind, their crews rushed towards the globe which
carried Ralph and his brothers, hoping to see them
as they alighted.
The brothers, however, numbly indifferent to the
excitement and interest they were causing, climbed
from their huge machine, and stood for a few min-
utes gazing in horrified fascination at the awful
whirlpool.
Such tons of turbulent grey water! Whipped by


the winds, tossing, foaming, roaring, the outer rings
swift and smooth, gaining momentum as they raced
madly towards the churning inner turmoil—the
tumultuous circle which swept around the terrifying
central spout.
Shudderingly the boys surveyed the solitary rock
which rose steeply at the eastern edge of the
writhing waters.
Despairingly they looked up at the bare brown
ridges cut by deep gorges, which sloped upwards
beyond the gushing geysers—and hated the asteroid
Meloor—how they hated it!
The lake in. front of him tossed and writhed.


The prisoners had spent the long hours of waiting
in a rough stone-walled room of the fort, lying on
hard benches, pretending to sleep most of the time,
because they had no heart for speech.
Ralph’s thoughts, during this seemingly inter-
minable time, had revolved mainly in a worried circle
about his brothers. Fear for their future should he
fail in his test, lay like a blight on his mind. Visions
of the missing ships also pierced his consciousness
at times. He pondered sadly on their fate, and re-
membered regretfully adventures shared with his
loyal Aureelian friends . . .
And now the hour of trial was at hand!
Here in the lake in front of him, tossed and
writhed the furious whirlpool, waiting to suck him
down.
The warriors had already begun to take up their
positions—numbers crowding about Olera, who had
moved to a low slope above the geysers, while a
second group had seized a point of vantage near
the shore.
Ralph turned for a last word with the boys, who
had chosen to remain with this latter group.
“You know I’m like a fish in the water, Lai,” he
said, “brought up shooting the breakers—playing
among waves with a surf board at Manly. I just
couldn’t drown. Neither of you fear rough water,
so why fear for me?”
He shook each of them by the hand. The brave
little bruddikins!
“We know you’ll come through all right, Ralph,”
said Tom courageously, trying vainly to keep his
voice steady, Allister, however, could not speak, and


throwing his arms around his brother, clung to him
wildly.
Putting the boy gently aside, Ralph walked to the
edge of the lake and stepped into the small boat
which awaited him.
A few minutes later, accompanied by two hefty
Mermen, he was climbing the windswept rock at the
edge of the whirlpool.
Shouts and cries came faintly to his ears through
the roaring of the waters .. . The excitement was
growing. Every eye was on the young stranger;
every voice speculated upon his chance of success.
Ralph’s heart sank as he thought of the boys wait-
ing there in front of the warriors—fear and dread
overwhelming them.
Now he stood on the summit of the rock. In his
right hand he balanced a flat board which he had
received permission to carry.
Ralph looked up at the sky—at the long rows of
crimson globes by the lakeside, at the sunlight on
the ridges . . . and lastly at the spot where his young
brothers stood by the shore.
“I refuse to be beaten,” he muttered through
clenched teeth. “I’ll fight for my life!—fight!—
fight!!—fight!!!”
Turning his eyes from the sky, he gazed at the
tumultuous waters beneath him, trying to devise
some sort of plan, but the churning circles gave little
reassurance.
There was no excuse for further lingering, and
on raising his hand as a sign that he was ready, the
two warriors stepped forward, and seizing their
prisoner about the waist, hurled him with all their
strength into the roaring whirlpool.


Unable to suppress a cry of anguish, the boys
closed their eyes, but, taking courage, opened them
again to see their brother standing erect on his board,
flying along the outer rim of the whirlpool.
Hearts in their mouths they watched. Round he
flew, perfectly balanced, feet firmly placed, and body
adjusted to the movements of the board.
Twice, with lightning swiftness, he shot behind
the great whirling spout—the boys gasping with
relief at his reappearance .. . But now he was
approaching the foaming inner circle!
Frenzied shouts of excitement burst from the
crowd on the slope . . . The board began to fairly
dance in the choppy swirl as Ralph vanished once
again behind the writhing central column. He re-
appeared. Impossible that he should retain his
balance in the chaotic tumult which was being
drawn relentlessly inward towards the spout!
Agonized groans burst from the boys as they
watched their brother’s jerking body—jerking
head—the tormented waters! . . . The board sud-
denly tilted! “He’s falling!” shrieked Allister, and
even as Ralph’s feet slid from beneath him, he was
caught up in the furious maelstrom.
Half blinded with spray, he was catapulted up-
wards, and turning in mid air, saw in a flash, that
he would fall in the outer circle of the racing pool.
A chance, though slight!— Out shot his arms,
and summoning all his strength, he thrust his head
downward, and making a superhuman effort, dived
deep beneath the surface.
With a few swift strokes he sped through the
clear depths below, and making a last terrible effort,


passed in to the comparative smoothness of the
lake.
The boat was coming towards him. The roaring
of the waters he had so narrowly escaped, beat in
his ears and brain. Ralph’s strength began to ebb.
Strong arms seized him and drew him into the boat,
where he sank down in utter exhaustion.
Olera and his warriors were already hurrying
down the slope, and as Ralph was rapidly conveyed
towards dry land, the two companies joined ranks
by the lake side.
Reaching the shore all too quickly, the Earthman
stumbled dizzily to his feet, and with the help of
one of the Mermen, staggered from the boat.
Servants came running forward bearing restora-
tives, towels and clothing. Ralph was handed a drink
which he found helpful and stimulating. The eager
attendants then applied a brief massage to the
young stranger’s limbs and assisted him to dress.
As his strength began to return Ralph looked
about him. The chieftain and his warriors were
rapidly approaching. Now they were skirting the
geysers nearest the shore, marching towards him,
gold uniforms and close-fitting helmets flashing in
the sun.
Ralph’s eyes swept the throng in an effort to locate
the boys, but before he could pick them out, Olera
had reached the spot where he sat near the lake-
side, the ministering attendants still circling about
him.
“Greeting, young friend!” Olera exclaimed as
Ralph rose slowly to his feet. “Your courage is
indeed proven ... I will be proud to welcome such
a guest to the glorious planet Mer!”


The warriors gathered around Ralph, strange cries
of enthusiasm rang out—and forgotten for the
moment, the boys hovered on the outskirts of the
crowd.
“They all want to have a good look at him,” whis-
pered Allister proudly. “They know now what our
Ralph can do!”
“Oh! boy!” returned Tom joyfully, “wasn’t he
great ? Our troubles are over —we’re set —whoopee!”
As the pair looked on happily, the throng began
to move towards the rows of crimson spheres, and
following closely, the boys caught up with their
brother as he reached the globe which had carried
them from the fort.
Smiling at their enthusiastic greetings, Ralph
climbed into the sphere.
“Gee, you were wonderful, Ralph!” cried Tom as,
on entering the small compartment allotted to them,
the sphere began to rise. “How thankful we are to
see you safe and sound!”
“Do you feel all right?” he added anxiously.
“Stiff and tired—that is all,” replied Ralph, as he
sank thankfully on to the couch which had been
provided for him.
“Thank goodness it’s over,” said Allister shud-
dering. “It would have been thrilling to watch if
it had been anyone else . . . and I don’t know now,
Ralph,” he added wonderingly “however you got
yourself out of it.”
“It is a good thing over and done with,” said
Ralph soberly. “Now we know where we stand.
These men are our friends. I am afraid the Earth
is as far off as ever, but Olera and his warriors are


highly intelligent who knows? they might
possess reliable charts of space!”
“So they might!” exclaimed Tom. “Oh, Gee!
imagine getting home and seeing Mum and Dad
again!”
“We’ll never give up that hope,” said Allister
earnestly.
“The boys at school, too,” said Tom. “Golly! we’d
have lots to tell them!”
“And I’d have oranges and grapes to eat,” cried
Allister “and two sixpenny ice-cream cones at once!”
“Oh, shut up, Lai!” said Tom rather irritably.
But the realization that they were hovering over
the fort on the crag quickly put a stop to Allister’s
vain hankerings. They were already floating down-
wards and a few minutes later landed on the tower-
bordered roof.
As the brothers were about to enter their dingy
room, they were intercepted by a warrior.
“Olera commands your presence with the young-
lings, young Earthman, at the midday meal in the
great dining hall of the fort,” he communicated.
“You will follow me.”
“With pleasure!” exclaimed Ralph turning from
the door with relief, “though I’m afraid, Lai,” he
said to his small brother, “that you won’t get any
of your favourites.”
“I don’t care,” retorted Allister, “I’m starving—
ready for anything they’ve got.”
Following their guide along tortuous stone pas-
sages, the trio eventually entered a large and airy
room.


The brothers were conscious of many laden tables,
and many gleaming suited warriors—the skins of
strange animals scattered about a stone floor, bare
walls with slits here and there—a huge brazen lamp
suspended from the roof, and a long table standing
on a raised platform at the far end of the room.
The chieftain, who with Narelle beside him, was
awaiting their arrival amidst a group near the door,
stepped forward and welcomed his visitors with
grave courtesy, then, as the warriors drew aside to
let him pass, he led the guests across the room and
up the steps to their places at the raised table.
The boys were soon seated, one on either side of
Narelle. They gazed curiously at the scene below,
where the warriors were taking their places on rough
benches around the tables. Then suddenly a bugle
sounded, and the meal commenced.
The food, though strange to their palates, proved
appetising, and there was a sweetish drink which
the boys enjoyed. As the meal progressed, Tom
began rather haltingly to ask Narelle questions
about Mer, and their thought sounds gradually be-
coming adjusted, the young people were soon getting
along quite happily together.
Ralph, meanwhile, seated beside Olera, was learn-
ing much that he wished to know.
It appeared that the asteroid was an outlying
stronghold of the planet Mer. Great forts scattered
its mountain tops—rough buildings inhabited by
warriors. No softening comforts here —save in the
small suite in the main fort reserved for the chief-
tain’s daughter.
The natives of Meloor, he gathered, lived in tun-
nels boring into the rugged mountains, while Gey-


serland, which was unexplored, was regarded with
superstition by the inhabitants of the other regions.
The chieftain’s, interest, however, appeared to be
wholly centred in the strongholds which guarded
the various mountain tops.
Olera’s enemy, Ira, the destroyer, of the dread
planet Helion, was freely discussed, and his habit
of ranging space—sending out destructive waves,
landing on lesser planets, plundering and destroy-
ing, was vividly communicated to Ralph.
'‘You need rest and sleep, my young friend,” Olera
said after a time. “In the early morning hours we
set out on our journey to Mer—l and my daughter
and my fleet of spheres. You wdll pilot your own
craft. An hour before dawn my captains will accom-
pany you to the landing roof, where you can examine
your ship and prepare her for the journey. Go now,
and take the rest you so greatly need.”
“If only we could fly off on our own,” Allister
said regretfully as they made their way along the
grim stone passages to their room a little later.
“I have no choice, but to obey Olera,” said Ralph
seriously. “We can do nothing at present, Lai, but
I have great hopes of the future.”
When at dawn the red squadrons rose above
Meloor, Ralph and the boys were feeling quite gay,
they were so at home in their beloved “Flame”.
They travelled, too, with friends. Ralph still
entertained high hopes of contacting their sister
ships, and no doubt interesting sights and scenes
awaited them at Mer.


“I’m as happy as a lark,” cried Allister, “I’m sure
we’re going to like Mer.”
“Why we’re almost over Geyserland already,
Ralph,” cried Tom. “There is the awful whirlpool!”
But Ralph did not reply. His face had suddenly
changed.
“There is a strange formation ahead,” he said in
an alarmed voice. “Keep your heads, little brothers!”
A huge mass of black spheres, yellow lights gleam-
ing fiercely, was sweeping swiftly towards them.
CHAPTER V.
BLINDING waves of light had already begun to
stream from the sinister spheres.
Rapidly manipulating switches and levers, Ralph
rose swiftly and propelled “The Flame” forward at
a terrific speed. As he shot out of range of the
leading spheres, he saw three of Olera’s craft hurtle
downward in the destructive light.
Swinging his ship into position, he grasped a
projector—“ Now for it!”
The boys, w r ho had been thunderstruck at the
suddenness of Ira’s attack, shouted with excitement
as a great scarlet ray shot from the ship, dyeing
the sky crimson, and enveloping numbers of enemy
spheres.
Ralph’s face was dead white. Which was the
stronger force?
The black spheres, dull globular objects in the
powerful red ray, suddenly toppled.


“They’re falling!” Ralph shouted.” Thank God!
They’re falling!”
For a second he felt dizzy, “There’s another
group of them, Ralph!” cried Tom. “See! above the
ray!”
“I’m watching them,” said Ralph. “Hold on here.
Tom, while I project another!”
Quickly Tom obeyed, but before Ralph could
grasp the projector, the ship gave a terrific lurch
dashing him sideways against the wall.
“They’ve got us!” yelled Allister. “There’s a big
one just above!”
“The Flame” began to sway as two huge waves of
light rushed towards her.
Recovering his balance, Ralph bent forward. Was
there time? Down he went in a terrifying dive.
Exerting all his skill, he pulled the ship out, and
crash landed on the shore of the lake.
For a few seconds the boys were too shaken to
speak, and with pallid faces, sat huddled in their
seats.
Pulling back his headgear, Ralph wiped the sweat
from his face. “They didn’t get us so easily that
time,” he said grimly.
Opening the door of the ship, he climbed out, and
gazing anxiously at the sky, swept the great ex-
panse with his hand lense. “They have risen into
space,” he said. “Not a sphere of anv brand in
sight!”
“Jump out, boys!” he exclaimed. “A few minutes
in the fresh air, and then we’ll race back to the
fort, and I’ll ask advice of the chieftain’s warriors.


It is just possible that some of the spheres may
have returned for re-grouping.”
The boys clambered out rather unsteadily, and
glad of the short respite, the trio sat gazing idly
at the geysers.
“They had it all their own way before, when they
captured us,” said Tom when he had recovered him-
self a little. “The lights played full on us then. “Gee!
those black spheres rolled down, didn’t they?”
“You’d think the men of Mer would have stronger
waves or something than those ugly devils,” said
Allister shakily.
“Olera’s fleet was taken entirely unawares,” re-
plied his brother. “Ira has never before penetrated
within hundreds of thousands of miles of Meloor.”
“Had you told the chieftain about the red ray,
Ralph?” asked Tom.
“Yes,” Ralph replied. “There is now absolute trust
between us. Olera took his squadron leaders into
his confidence, but the sphere crews and the war-
riors at the fort knew nothing of the weapon.”
“Gosh! the crews must have been surprised when
they saw it in action!” exclaimed Tom.
“I don’t think Olera lost more than three spheres,
thanks to the ray,” said Ralph. “Numbers of Ira’s
were destroyed, though unfortunately many escaped.
However, the Mermen, having recovered from their
surprise, will doubtless deal with them.”
“Our particular enemy got away quickly, didn’t
he?” said Tom, looking up at the -sky.
“Yes, he apparently thought better of pursuing
us downward ... Nice little surprise for Ira to
find that there is a stronger weapon than his own in
chartered space!”


For a few minutes they continued to watch the
geysers, then Ralph roused himself. “Come along,
boys!” he exclaimed. “Time is up! Jump in!”
“Can you hear anything, Ralph?” asked Allister
abruptly.
“No,” replied Ralph, “only the swishing of these
wretched geysers!”
“Listen!” exclaimed Tom. “I thought I heard
cries!”
“By Jove, yes!” exclaimed Ralph, turning his
head. “There is some one calling!” and, springing
to his feet, he hurried off in the direction of the
Reaching the distressed pair, Ralph spoke to Leon.


sounds . . . The boys saw him suddenly stop dead,
and following curiously, the pair shrank back in
dismay . . .
A shattered red sphere sprawled in the spray of
a geyser, while several yards from the wreckage,
her face buried in her hands, and sobbing broken-
heartedly, crouched Narelle . . . Leon, one of her
attendants, apparently the only other survivor, was
trying vainly to pacify her.
Reaching the distressed pair, Ralph spoke to Leon.
“This is not the chieftain’s sphere?” he asked,
feeling rather bewildered.
“No, master,” replied Leon. “It is the small and
comfortable sphere of my young mistress in which
we always travel. When the chieftain determined
to capture the black sphere in which you were held
captive, his daughter was removed to his own craft
in case danger threatened. Our spheres have
hitherto been free from attack for vast distances
beyond Meloor. Alas! my mistress’s handmaiden
and bodyguard are dead, and we are alone in this
unexplored and horrifying region!”
Ralph bent over the stricken girl.
“Do not fear, little one,” he said kindly. “I will
take you back in my ship to the fort; there, your
father’s warriors will care for you. They will
arrange for your comfort and safety.”
Narelle looked up through her tears. “You are
good and kind,” she said gravely, “and very brave,
my father’s captains say. I will gladly return in
your ship.”
“Come, boys,” Ralph called to his brothers who
hung back shyly. “Keep Narelle company. I’m
going to walk on to the slope behind the geyser


and search the sky thoroughly through my lense.
It will only take a few minutes; then we will return
to the fort.”
The boys approached Narelle rather diffidently.
Neither knew what to say to console her. They
expressed their sympathy as best they could, and
trying to turn her thoughts from the wreckage and
the mangled bodies which lay therein, began to
question her about the speed of the spheres and the
length of the journey to Mer.
As Ralph hurried on to the bare slope, he noticed
that the ridge above was split by a gorge. Indif-
ferent, however, to his surroundings, he took out his
lense, and sweeping the sky in all directions searched
for signs of spacecraft. He noted that lowering
clouds had begun to cover the sky, but his glass
showed no spacecraft, friendly or otherwise.
Turning on his heel, Ralph was about to hurry
back to the young people, when to his amazement,
his arms were suddenly caught from behind, in an
iron grip. With an angry shout, he strove furiously
to free himself, but a dark cloth was thrown over
his head, stifling his cries and blotting out his sur-
roundings, and in spite of his violent struggles, un-
seen assailants began to drag him to the top of the
ridge.
Ralph’s enraged cry came down faintly to Narelle
and the boys. Looking up at the slope they saw the
attack, and with an icy chill at their hearts watched
their only friend and protector disappear over the
edge of the gorge amidst a mob of savage humans.
Leon, who was searching amidst the wreckage in
an endeavour to find an extra wrap for his mistress,


was also an appalled spectator of the capture.
Realizing at once that all hope of returning to the
fort was lost, the man gathered up the articles he
had salvaged and was about to hurry to his charge
when the engines of approaching aircraft sounded
overhead.
Peering around the side of the shattered machine,
the Merman was horrified to see a black sphere
swoop from the clouds.
As the servant, petrified with fear, hesitated,
the sphere landed and the crew climbed out.
The Helions stared for a minute at the mutilated
sphere, and then with triumphant cries rushed
towards Narelle, whom they obviously recognized.
On seeing the boys, however, they paused, clearly
puzzled by their appearance.
A piercing yell came from one of the marauders;
he had discovered “The Flame”.
Turning from Narelle and her companions, the
entire party approached the strange rocket ship,
and gazed at it fearfully.
The captain spoke a few hurried words to his
crew and with an uneasy glance about them, the
Helions retraced their steps, and pouncing upon the
three young people—in spite of their despairing
struggles and cries—dragged them into the sphere.
A few minutes later, Ira’s dark sphere was high
in space above Meloor.


CHAPTER VI.
THE rough interior of the black sphere seemed all
too familiar to Tom and Allister as they crouched
with Narelle against the curving wall. Staring at
the massed machinery, they saw again in their minds
the fierce struggle on the slope, the strange humans
dragging their brother to the edge of the gorge, and
his terrifying disappearance.
Would they ever see Ralph again? Where were
they going? What would happen them?
“There can’t be anything but horrors on Helion,”
thought Tom desperately, “the planet of these
leathery looking devils.”
Glancing at Narell’s drooping figure, he tried to
pull himself together.
“Cheer up, Lai!” he whispered to his brother,
“remember we’ve got Narelle to look after now.”
Allister was glowering fiercely at the weird figures
of his foes. “We’ll have to get ourselves out of this
awful mess somehow,” he said.
Having someone to look after does seem to make
things a bit easier,” he added, “though I don’t know
why it should.”
Tom turned to Narelle.
“Allister and I have sworn to protect you, Narelle,”
he said in a low voice, “so don’t despair. You don’t
know all the tight corners we’ve got out of!”
The girl’s face brightened for an instant. “I am
fortunate to have found friends,” she said “ but I
cannot forget my father—and oh!” her voice broke,
“all my people lying dead in the sphere!”


“We must make up plans to escape and tell one
another about them,” whispered Allister hurriedly,
trying to divert her sorrowful thoughts.
“Yes,” said Tom “and don’t forget that we three
are comrades now. We will share our hardships,
and absolutely refuse to lose hope, even though our
position seems desperate!”
“Shake on it!” whispered Allister, grasping
Narelle by the hand. “Hurrah for the three good
comrades! Why, I feel cheerful already!”
“Perhaps something will happen to help us,” said
the girl more hopefully.
Cheered a little by the sense of comradeship, the
trio settled down to watch the actions of the repel-
lent crew.
“I wish I had a catapult to knock that fellow
between the eyes,” said Allister, indicating the cap-
tain, who was glaring at them with unveiled hostility.
“Just as well you haven’t,” said Tom.
As though sensing that he was the target of their
remarks, the evil looking human rose to his feet and
walked towards the captives.
“You had better sleep, Olera’s daughter,” he said,
addressing Narelle abruptly. “No harm will come
to you, you are too valuable. The fate of these ugly
creatures,” pointing at the boys, “will be decided by
Ira.”
“Ugly creatures!” cried Allister, bursting with
indignation. “What do you think you are, you old
leather boot!”
“Your thought sounds are strange, youngling, but
I like them not,” retorted the captain, and shooting
out his foot, he gave Allister a vicious 'kick.


“You wait till my big brother gets you,” shouted
Allister furiously, “Shut up, old chap,” said Tom,
grasping his brother by the arm as their enemy
moved away. “It won’t help to act like this.”
“If only I were big and strong like Ralph—” began
Allister.
“Don’t you think we should try and sleep as he
said,” interposed Narelle gently.
“Good advice, Narelle,” said Tom. “I don’t want
to sleep, but I’m tired all the same. Come on, Lai,
let’s have a try.
“I’m sure it’s the last thing I want to do,” said
Allister grumpily—but he followed Tom’s example,
and taking off his headgear, stretched himself on
the floor of the sphere.
Narelle curled up against the wall near them, and
soon all three were asleep.
Tom awoke ... He stretched himself lazily.
“Phew! don’t you think it is very hot,” he said
sleepily.
“Just what I was thinking,” said Allister yawn-
ing so loudly that Narelle started up in a fright.
“It’s all right, Narelle, friends here!” said Tom
reassuringly.
Hearing the voices, two of the crew appeared from
behind the machinery bearing bowls of a syrupy
liquid, and approaching the young people, the hideous
spheremen offered them the fluid, indicating by
signs that they were to drink.
“Queer looking stuff,” said Tom, handing a bowl


to Narelle as their enemies moved off. “I suppose
we'd better drink it.”
“I’m feeling pretty hollow, anyway,” said Allister.
“There can’t be anything wrong with it. They don’t
want to poison Narelle—and as old Ira is going to
deal with us later—not sooner, here goes!”
He drank thirstily. Tom had already drunk his
portion, and after some hesitation Narelle followed
her friends’ example.
They all began to notice the heat.
“The air grows hotter—ever hotter!” exclaimed
Narelle tossing back her thick golden hair.
“What is that fellow doing?” Allister asked, indi-
cating one of the crew who was standing at a recess
in the sphere wall.
As the trio watched, the Helion began to remove
a number of metal objects from a shelf, while thb
captain and the various members of the crew, hurry-
ing forward, gathered around him. Each was handed
one of the curious metal shapes, which were of the
same silver colour as the outfits.
“Masks!” breathed Tom.
His guess proved correct. The long eared men
began to fit the strange shapes over their faces
beneath their helmets.
“What beats me,” said Tom, “is how they’ll ever
recognize one another. They all look exactly the
same to me—except for those black squares and
marks on their collars and chests!”
“They all looked exactly the same before,” said
Allister “ lousey!”
The crew returned to their duties, while the Helion
at the recess, removing three outfits (including head-
gear and masks) seated himself on the floor of the


sphere and began to alter and readjust the shining
suits.
“Why, I believe they are for us,” whispered Tom.
“He’s making them smaller!”
Fascinated, the young people continued to watch.
After a time, apparently satisfied with his work,
their enemy arose, and gathering garments and head-
gear together, came forward. He handed each of
the boys an outfit, and with a commanding gesture,
ordered the pair to pull the heat-proof protectors
over their flying suits.
As Tom and Allister proceeded to obey, the sphere-
man presented the remaining suit to Narelle, who
casting aside her bedraggled velvet cloak and outer
tunic, reluctantly struggled into it.
Helmets and masks were then produced, and most
unwillingly the young captives drew the metal ob-
jects over their heads and faces. Narelle was forced
to plait her hair and twist it tightly about her head
in order to make the fantastic headgear fit.
Arrayed in their shining suits, with masks firmly
adjusted, the trio regarded one another curiously.
The queer human, however, broke in on their
thoughts.
“The air grows ever hotter as we approach Helion,”
he said warningly. “Without these outfits and
masks, you would quickly shrivel and die.”
“Charming place, Helion!” muttered Tom.
Narelle shuddered. “Must these strange helmets
and masks always be worn?” she asked.
Always,” replied the long-eared man, “till you
enter the fire-proof buildings of Ira’s city.”
“Hell’s Bells!” suddenly exclaimed Tom, who was


standing facing the windows. “I believe we’re arriv-
ing!”
Turning quickly, Narelle and Allister followed their
companion’s gaze.
He was right . . . They were flying over Helion . . .
With bated breath the young prisoners edged a
little nearer the windows, where an awful sight met
their eyes
Towering, slate coloured, fiercely burning volca-
noes spread below.. Huge sheets of flame bursting
from the craters seemed suddenly to fill the sky and
the air about them. For a few moments the black
sphere seemed engulfed in a sea of fire.
Allister shrank back in horror against the wall,
while Narelle began to tremble.
“Don’t be afraid, little comrade,” said Tom stur-
dily, though his knees were almost giving way
beneath him. “The captain said no harm should
come to you.”
But as they descended the scene grew worse.
Wide rivers bubbling and boiling could be seen rush-
ing at a terrific speed through dreadful valleys, while
huge waterfalls, blood red in the awful glare, dashed
madly down slate-coloured cliffs.
Clasping her hands in front of her mask, Narelle
shielded her eyes from the terrible sight, while all
three began to feel uncomfortably hot in spite of
their heat-proof suits.
“How could anyone live in such a place?” asked
Tom looking at the scene in horror.
“Even long-eared leather skins,” said Allister, try-
ing hard to control his fear.
Down, down, dropped the sphere.


“Surely we’re not going to land here,” gasped
Allister.
Then through the flames and the shadows they
saw the city huddled low on the slope of a mountain.
“Look, Tom!” whispered Allister. “Do you see
the buildings ? They are dark grey in colour like the
mountains!”
“Yes,” breathed Tom, “I see them.”
Down, down, they glided into the awfulness
below, and circling above the dread city, the sphere
finally landed in a vast space quarried from the base
of a volcano behind the buildings.
The captain crossed the sphere to where the cap-
tives stood.
“Welcome to Helion!” he communicated with an
ugly smile. “Soon you will enter the presence of the
great Ira—come!”
Making heroic efforts to overcome their fear, the
youngsters climbed out of the sphere.
Narelle still tried to shield her eyes, and the boys
linked arms with her to give her courage, as in-
wardly quaking, they set out with the captain and
crew.
High above them flared the awful mountains, the
flames casting a demoniac glow over the buildings,
while clouds of hissing steam rose from a river which
rushed past the outskirts of the city.
A horrifying street opened out in front of them,
in which the dark structures rising on either side
were bathed in a reddish light. Their captors turned
into a broader and apparently more important
thoroughfare—and cold fear almost paralysed the


young prisoners when their escort paused in front
of a gigantic building, slashed with rows of win-
dows, which shone like crimson mirrors.
“Old Nick’s palace,’’ whispered Tom.
A high doorway rose in the centre of the building
which was guarded on either side by rows of long-
eared humans.
“Come!” commanded Ira’s captain.
With sinking hearts the young captives stepped
forward.
“Into the chamber of horrors,” Tom murmured,
as shuddering they passed through the doorway.
CHAPTER VII.
WHEN the covering was removed from Ralph’s
head, he looked about him with some trepidation,
wondering what he might see.
He was standing in a tunnel—the curving walls
of which bored inward from a gorge. A quick glance
through the open mouth showed the opposite walls
of the chasm to be riddled with openings such as the
one in which he stood.
... A few paces away, a crowd of queer flat-faced
humans whispered together, all of whom clutched
wicked looking knives.
The man who had freed Ralph’s head from the
covering raised his weapon in a threatening gesture.
. “We saw the battle of the fearsome ships of the
air!” came his harsh whispering thought sounds.
“Often we have watched the dread crimson globes


"What do you seek in our gorge?”


flying above our gorge. This day there were also dark
monsters with gleaming lights and yet another giant
craft. A red light also played upon the sky. You
have come from one of these monsters. What do
you seek in our gorge?”
Looking intently at the tunnel dwellers, Ralph saw
hatred and fear in their cruel eyes.
They meant to kill him. So much was clear—and
without wasting time.
Looking desperately about him, he saw that there
was no chance of operating a ray in the confined
space of the tunnel. Could he convince them of his
innocent intentions? It was worth a try!
“I seek nothing,” the young man began earnestly.
“I did not even know men lived in this gorge. From
the higher ground I was searching the sky through
my lense for enemy craft. I was about to return to
my ship and fly to the fort of the chieftain of Mer . . ,
Allow me to leave, I beg of you.”
Dead silence greeted his effort. The tunnel dwel-
lers gazed at him stonily, distrust written plainly
on their dull flat faces.
“Worse than useless,” thought Ralph. “I’ll try
bluff . . .”
Facing his foes confidently, his thought sounds
rang boldly through the tunnel.
“Although I carry no weapon in my hand, across
ray chest is strapped the mechanism o in frightful
death ray! .. . See the casket! I place my hand upon
it! Should you seek to detain me you are all dead
men! Even as you saw the black spheres slant and
fall in the red death light, so shall every man in
your chasm tunnels perish!”


The effect of the threat was instantaneous. It
surpassed Ralph’s wildest hopes. All had witnessed
the destruction of the spheres . . . With shrieks of
terror the flat-faced humans stampeded from the
tunnel, trampling one another in a mad attempt to
escape from the young operator and his deadly ray.
A few minutes, and the tunnel was empty. Ralph
rushed to the entrance. His enemies were swarming
down the gorge ... He looked about him. Above
reared the reeky chasm wall. Throwing a glance at
his retreating foes, he began to clamber upwards.
Clinging tenaciously to the cliff face which yielded
but a precarious footing, he progressed slowly, fear-
ing that a false step might send him crashing to the
depths.
Persevering doggedly, he at last reached the rug-
ged line of the summit, and dragging himself over
a rocky ledge, stood once again on the barren slope
above the geysers ... In the distance, he could
see the great whirlpool spouting furiously in the
Lake of Winds.
Ralph examined the sky through his lense, and
seeing no sign of space craft, began to hurry down-
ward.
Suddenly he noticed Leon standing near a geyser.
Narell’s servant was behaving in an extraordinary
manner! He had evidently seen Ralph, and was
shouting and waving his arms wildly as though
trying to attract attention.
Why the extravagant gestures ? Ralph looked for
the youngsters. One would have thought they
would have been on the watch! Where were they?
A cold fear suddenly froze him. It was evident
that Narelle’s man was in trouble!


Ralph began to run. He had almost reached the
foot of the slope, when he was joined by Leon, who
had run even faster.
“The young people—where are they?” Ralph
asked breathlessly.
Leon blurted out his story.
“It all happened so quickly, master,” he said when
the horrifying facts had been related. “Even had I
been beside the younglings, no act of mine could
have saved them.”
The Merman looked apprehensively at Ralph, evi-
dently fearing that the Earthman would in some
way wreak vengeance upon him.
Ralph, however, remained silent, stunned by the
tragic tale.
It was he who was to blame, not this man. He
should never have left the three youngsters . , . not
for a moment. Who could have imagined foes lurk-
ing behind the ridge ?—Yet—he had known this
region to be unexplored!
m “I am not blaming you, Leon,” he said at last.
“Had you also been captured, you may have made
the youngsters lot easier to bear—but again, you
may not even have been able to do this. After all,
I know now what has happened them. Had you also
disappeared, I would have been quite in the dark.”
“We will not indulge in vain regrets,” he added,
as they walked slowly towards “The Flame”. Get
into my ship. We will return to the fort, and seek
advice from Olera’s warriors.”
As the two men were about to climb into “The
Flame,” the hum of aircraft came suddenly to their
ears, and looking up, Ralph saw a red sphere flv-


ing high over Geyserland. It began to descend, till
in a few seconds it was immediately overhead.
“Wave something, man!” Ralph shouted to Leon.
“They may be searching for the little Narelle!”
Removing his helmet, Leon waved it frantically
and then tossed it into the air.
“They have seen us!” shouted Ralph.
The sphere glided downwards, and a few minutes
later landed near the geysers.
Ralph and the Merman reached the red globe as
the captain of the craft climbed out.
“Why, Leon,” the captain exclaimed joyfully,
“My search then is ended. Where is your young
mistress ?”
Leon was silent, his gaze bent on the ground.
“What has happened?” demanded the captain,
looking in bewilderment from one to the other.
“A grave misfortune has befallen us,” said Ralph.
“I had better tell you the story”.
The captain was stricken dumb when he heard
the details of Narelle’s capture.
“The chieftain’s daughter—carried off to fiery
Helion!” he exclaimed when he at last found his
voice. “Olera should be contacted! He must be in-
formed of this disastrous happening!”
“In what direction were you flying?” asked Ralph,
“and the chieftain’s spheres—where are they?”
“My object was to follow the sphere of the little
Narelle,” replied the captain. “In the surprise of
Ira’s attack, I became separated from her craft,
which it is my duty to escort and protect. In terri-
fic combat with two black spheres I rose far into
space .. . My enemies finally overthrown, I descend-


Ed over Geyserland, where the waves first struck . .
In the hope that my charge had escaped, and that
her sphere could be overtaken in the space lanes, I
vas aoout to continue swiftly to Mer—when flying
low—l saw your ship.”
A silence fell on the two men. The spaceman was
deeply disturbed. “Olera is far away, pursuing Ira’s
remaining craft,” he said after a time, ‘‘—at too
great a distance for wave messages to reach him.
This asteroid lies over a million miles from Mer, on
the edge of chartered space. Alas! what can I do?”
“If you will act as my guide, I will follow the
marauders to Helion,” said Ralph eagerly,
‘‘l would gladly guide you, but is it possible that
your ship should survive the heat and flames of such
a planet?”
“I am willing to try,” said Ralph grimly.
“I have flown but once high in space above Helion,”
said the captain. “It is a dread planet of steam and
fire. We know not how the flames would affect our
sphere envelopes should we descend too low or
attempt to land. No man of Mer has, as yet, wished
to submit to such a test.”
“My ship in her meteor proof sheath should carry
us through the heat,” said Ralph confidently.
The captain smiled. “Our spheres are also meteor
proof, young stranger—a hundred times more
strongly proof than your craft, I dare swear. You
have yet much to learn of space!”
“I do not doubt that,” said Ralph goodhumouredly,
“but in the meantime, I am more than willing to
take a chance with my ship over Helion!”
“Would that I could accompany you,” said the
captain, eagerness creeping into his voice. “It would


be a great adventure shared with such a comrade!”
“Dare I take the risk?” he asked himself.
Evidently torn between the desire to share Ralph’s
perilous adventure, and his duty to acquaint Olera
with the facts of Narelle’s capture at the earliest
moment, the captain relapsed into silence.
“Have you any idea of what the chieftain’s move-
ments will be, once his enemies are overthrown?”
asked Ralph, breaking into his companion’s troubled
thoughts.
“Olera will speed along the space lanes to Mer,”
replied his companion. “The chieftain will imagine
this his daughter, under my protection, has already
arrived, and that you who rendered him so great a
service are already on your way.”
... A short pause, and the captain announced his
decision.
“My duty lies plain before me,” he said regret-
fully. “Should I accompany you and perish on
Ilelion, Olera would never learn of his daughter’s
fate. No attempt at her rescue could ever be made
from Mer. Should she chance to survive, she would
be imprisoned forever, among the fiends of Helion.
Such a risk I dare not take,”
“I agree,” said Ralph. “Much as your companion-
ship and support would mean to me.”
“I will guide you then to Helion,” said the Mer-
man, “and await you in space above the planet for a
given time. Should you not return ere the appointed
hour, I will hasten to Mer, and report the capture of
my young mistress, and receive Olera’s orders.”
“Then it is settled!” exclaimed Ralph exultantly.
“Curb your impatience, young stranger, while I
think how best to help you,” returned the Merman.


“A fire-proof suit will be needed to protect your
body should you succeed in forcing a landing. These
suits we always carry, as on occasion our spheres
contact the gravitational pull of a star. The intense
heat radiating from these gaseous masses threatens
to shrivel our bodies at the first breath. The envel-
opes of our spheres, however, last long enough before
firing, to operate the withdrawing apparatus which
pulls us clear.”
“A thousand thanks!” cried Ralph. “With such
protection I need have no fear. What about the
young people? Though it is obvious that if they are
alive and on Helion they must already be provided
with heat-proof outfits.”
The captain agreed. He called Leon, who was
hovering near.
“Would you be afraid, Leon, to accompany the
young Earthman on a dangerous journey?—a jour-
ney to the dread planet Helion?” he asked. “He will
need a steadfast and faithful servant.”
“Afraid, master?” cried Leon joyfully. “Am I not
a man of Mer? With what pleasure will I serve the
brave young Earthman! He who had no harsh words
for me when ill fortune befell my charges!”
It is well, then
The captain thought for a moment, and then
turned again to Ralph. “I have a better plan,” he
said, “which offers not only protection but a perfect
disguise. We will return to the fort and possess
ourselves of the suits and headgear of two of the
prisoners from Helion. Disguised as Helion sphere-
men, you would have added confidence should you
succeed in making a landing . . . Another precau-
tion, young Earthman—as your great ray would


doubtless prove worthless in the fire and steam of
the dread planet, I will provide you with two small
protective weapons to be used at close range.—The
death spray, and the fume phial. Anti-spray and
fume protectors will also be supplied to wear beneath
your masks. These weapons may be useful either to
you or your servant for use in a confined space, or
where great numbers are not involved.”
“Thanks again, good friend!” cried Ralph enthu-
siastically. “Into ‘The Flame,’ Leon, and off to the
fort!”
CHAPTER VIII.
THE gleaming black walls of a towering vestibule
confronted the trembling young captives.
Through a door to the right, a large apartment
could be seen on which hung rows of fire-proof suits
—while directly opposite, was a second door which
was strongly guarded.
Weird attendants stepped forward to remove hel-
mets and masks, after which the trio, clutching their
headgear, and almost petrified with fear, were push-
ed towards the long-eared guards.
What lay in the room beyond . . .?
The guards stood aside, the door slid back and the
prisoners, scarcely daring to breathe, moved for-
ward . . .
A vast and lofty room opened out in front of them
—the walls, ceiling, and floor of which were of a
sombre shining black . . . Male Helions in tight yel-
low garments, and hideous women in black robes


and strange head-dresses, crowded the floor, while
in the centre—a black marble platform arose,
reached on four sides by flights of ebony steps.
On this platform, high above the crowd, a fan-
tastic and terrible figure reclined on a gaudily draped
couch ... A horrifying creature, encased in a
tightly fitting scarlet suit, who drew the young
people’s gaze directly they entered the room, and
whom with cold dread, they immediately realized,
could be none other than the Master of Helion.
About the steps descending from the platform, sat
members of his horrible species, and as those throng-
ing the glassy black floor moved forward to obtain
a closer view of the captives, their rasping thought-
sounds rose in a deafening clamour.
A fierce red glow came through a row of huge
windows which ran along one side of the room, bath-
ing the terrible company in an uncanny glare. The
leathery faces and long sprouting ears appeared in-
credibly evil, and the panorama of flaring mountains
seen through the windows, added horror to the scene.
The hideous throng fixed malignant eyes on the
shrinking youngsters as they approached the steps,
while Ira, a terrifying and menacing figure, rose
slowly from his couch . . .
Making a tremendous effort, Tom pulled himself
together.
“Chin up, Lai,” he breathed. “We can only die
once!”
Allister gained a little courage. “Old ugly face,”
he muttered, managing to glower up at Ira. “You’re
not going to know how scared I am”—and in spite
of their quaking fear, the pair stood up bravely,


each grasping one of Narelle’s arms firmly, suppoit-
ing her between them.
Ira gave a blood curdling laugh.
"Like the yelp of a dingo,” thought Tom with a
shudder.
"Worthless beings! Worthless!! Aha! Aha! the
weird creature shrieked as he glared down at the
boys. "Unworthy even of food! but the girl—Aha!
she is worth a fleet of spheres to me!” —“Ha! Ha!”
he yelped. "How Olera would rage and fume if he
knew that his daughter was held captive on Helion!
. . . The captive of Ira, the destroyer!—the terror
of inhabited space! . . .” and flinging out his arms
in a mad gesture, he stared dowm at his captives with
awful malice.
Tom’s blood ran cold. In spite of himself Allister
began to shiver, while Narelle closed her eyes to shut
tout the fiendish face.
"I w’ould speak with the captain of the sphere
who captured them,” shrieked Ira. "He will receive
a rich reward.”
With a furious gesture, he signed to a woman on
the steps.
"Away with them!” he screamed. "And it would
be well to remember,” he flung at the defenceless
trio, "that there is no way of escape from Helion,
the planet of steam and fire!”
A guard stepped forward, and accompanied also
by the woman, the shuddering youngsters made their
way through the evil crowd leaving the room by a
side door.
“Anything to get away from him,” murmured Tom
weakly.


“I’m goosey all over,” gasped Allister.
Narelle could not speak
More black walls! Apparently the whole interior
of the sinister palace, including the floors, was of
a shining jet black. On either side, the corridor
walls rose to a tremendous height. “Make you feel
about the size of an ant,” Allister murmured
wretchedly.
They finally entered a small room which opened
into a large apartment. There were wide windows
here, too, through which the flaming slaty mountains
appeared only a few feet away.
“Charming scenery,” muttered Tom.
Turning his back to the windows, the boy stared
at the depressing black walls. He noticed that there
were no doors, the only means of exit being through
the draped opening which led to the smaller room.
The hideous face of their female gaoler struck a
chill at their hearts, as in stony silence she collected
their helmets and masks. They were relieved when
she disappeared into the adjoining room.
“She’s even worse than the men,” said Allister.
“Impossible,” retorted Tom.
The youngsters were about to seat themselves on
the floor, as the room was completely bare of furni-
ture, when their repulsive guardian reappeared. '
Signing to the boys to remove their fire-proof out-
fits, she stared curiously at their flying suits. Narelle
was then taken into the ante room, from whence
7 •
she emerged a little later, dressed in a dismal black
robe. The girl seated herself beside the boys in
front of the great windows.


RANGERS OF THE UNIVERSE 69
“I hope they do not take you away,” she said
unhappily.
“I don’t see why they should separate us,” said
Allister glumly. “Unless old donkey ears decides
to do away with me and Tom.”
“You’re a cheerful cuss, Lai!” retorted Tom—but
as he thought of Ira and his terrible room, he sud-
denly relapsed into silence.
“We must not lose hope,” said Narelle earnestly.
“Didn’t you tell me that you had come through ter-
rible trials?”
“We did,” said Tom stiffening his back, “and we’ll
come through this, too, never fear.”
“But what are we going to do here?” asked Allis-
ter. “We couldn’t stand this black room for long,
looking out at those awful mountains!”
“Did you see where she put our outfits, Narelle?”
asked Tom ignoring Allister’s restiveness.
“She hung them on the wall—in a corner,” replied
Narelle.
“Just as well to know where they are,” said Tom.
“We’d be dead in a couple of minutes if we stirred
outside this building without them.”
“What could we do anyway, out of doors among
fiery mountains and boiling streams?” asked Allister
truculently.
“Not much,” confessed Tom.
“Oh, Gee!” burst out Allister. “Why does this
have to happen to us ? . . . Dumped on lousy planets
all over space!”
“Oh, stop moaning, Lai!” retorted Tom, “and any-
way, whose fault was it that you and I ever got into
space!”


“Shut up,” said Allister, but he stopped grumbling.
The entry of the woman, carrying a jug and three
small basins, prevented further argument.
Filling the bowls with the syrup they had
sampled in the sphere, she placed them on the floor
in front of her charges.
When the three had finished drinking they were
each presented with a tiny pellet which they found
to possess a strange, but not unpleasant flavour.
“Is this all we’re going to get?” asked Allister
indignantly, as quickly swallowing his tablet he saw
the woman stoop to pick up the empty bowls.
She cast a baleful glance at the boy, otherwise
ignoring him.
A depressing silence descended on the trio. The
boys’ thoughts alternated between Ralph, and their
parents and home on the far away Earth, while
Narelle’s turned to the terrible moment when the
sphere crashed near the geyser.
As time wore on all three began to wish desper-
ately that they could escape. Their vain imaginings,
however, always ended on one question—“lf we got
out of here—where could we go?”
Their position was so hopeless that Allister hadn’t
the heart even to grumble.
Gradually the room grew darker, till at last, look-
ing through the windows, Tom could only see the
dim outline of the mountains bathed in a lurid glow.
Now the flaming summits whirled madly against a
dark starless sky.
Narelle had been trying hard to choke back tears.
The darkness seemed to make things worse.


RANGERS OF THE UNIVERSE 71
“I cannot forget the sphere!” she burst out at
last. “I can see them all lying dead in the wreck.
Oh, is there nothing—nothing we can do?”
“Not at present, little comrade,” said Tom. “But
even though it seems impossible, I feel that some-
thing will happen to help us!”
Narelle dried her eyes. “I must have courage,”
she said. “Perhaps Leon would get back to the
fort—”
The depressing attendant appearing once again
interrupted their conversation.
“Come!” she said addressing Narelle. “You will
sleep in the smaller room.”
“You needn’t be afraid of her, Narelle,” whispered
Tom. “Don’t forget! You’re worth a fleet of spheres,
as old Nick said!”
Rising to her feet, the girl reluctantly followed
the forbidding female.
“Good-night!” the boys cried as she disappeared
behind the curtain, “Sweet dreams” Allister added,
and then suddenly his thoughts flew to his mother.
A feeling of abject misery swept over him, and he
lay face downward on the floor, wishing for the
moment that he were a girl, so that he could cry and
cry and cry.
Tom sensed his brother’s misery. His own heart
felt like lead, but he lay down with wide open eyes
staring out of the window opposite.
Soon he heard Allister’s regular breathing, and
felt pleased that Lai had found forgetfulness.
Suddenly Tom sat bolt upright. He shook Allis-
ter’s arm. The boy stirred. “Lai! Lai!” Tom whis-


pered “Don’t think I’m mad, but I could swear that
I saw ‘The Flame’ small in the distance shooting
down that mountainside over there! It came and
went like a shadow!”
“Dreaming, old boy,” Allister murmured sleepily.
“It sounds like that, I know,” said Tom, “but I’m
wide awake!”
Allister, however, was already asleep.
Tom lay down again. Perhaps after all it was
some fantastic shadow he had seen
Closing his eyes, he thought of their flights in
“The Flame,” and then of the men who had so
suddenly sprung upon Ralph on the ridge . . .
For a time the boy dozed uneasily. Suddenly he
became wide awake, his thoughts centred on his
elder brother. Oceans of space separated them, and
yet in some strange way he felt that Ralph was quite
near.
What was that!—A muffled sound in the next
room disturbed the boy’s thoughts . . . Almost like
a scuffle! . . . His heart gave a nervous bound.
Someone had entered the ante room, A low groan
made him start—what were they doing to Narelle!
Tom sprang to his feet. At the same moment the
curtains separating the two rooms were wrenched
roughly aside, and two Helions in fire-proof suits
and masks burst into the room. They strode swiftly
towards Tom and his sleeping brother.
Instinctively the boy raised his arms to ward off
blows.
They had taken Narelle away—now they were
going to kill him and Allister!


CHAPTER IX.
SPEEDING along beside the red sphere, “The
Hame,” far out in space, was nearing Helion.
Disguised in the outfit of a Helion sphereman, in-
cluding fantastic mask and protruding ear protec-
tors, Ralph sat at the controls, while Leon, similarly
disguised, stood behind him.
“No man of Mer has yet landed on Helion, my mas-
ter,” Leon was saying, “therefore I can offer no
advice. We know where it lies—we have flown high
above its flaming mountains, but no being in charted
space is desirous of visiting Ira’s domain.”
“A stiff task confronts us,” said Ralph grimly.
“We must be approaching, master!” cried Leon,
“See! the red sphere is signalling!”
The sphere was slackening speed, and a few min-
utes later became stationary. Her bridge was
quickly extended, and when the ships were linked,
the captain joined Ralph in the control cabin of
“The Flame”.
“Helion lies far below, young Earthman,” the
Merman said. “Note my position carefully on your
spaceometer, for here I will await you for three
nights and a day. Should you fail to return at the
appointed time, I will speed to Mer and inform my
chieftain of his daughter’s capture. Then will I
return with the great avenging fleet, which Olera
will surely lead on Helion.”
Ralph checked his spaceometer.
“You have assisted me in many ways, good cap-
tain,” he said, “and the sure knowledge that you


tiwait us in space will give us confidence. Also
should we remain alive, and yet be unable to contact
you—we shall not feel entirely cut off from help.”
“You will need all your confidence, young Earth-
man,” returned the captain, “more even than when
you fought your way out of the roaring whirlpool . .
Would that I could accompany you! . . . Farewell,
courageous stranger, I pray that success will reward
you.” \
Ralph watched the Merman cross the bridge and
step into his sphere. The bridge was withdrawn,
and the sphere remained stationary.
Now for it, Leon!” cried Ralph. “Prepare for the
worst!” and bending to the controls, he sent the
ship diving downward.
The two men looked aghast on the scene which
spread below. “Where could one land amidst such
an inferno, or half a dozen infernos rolled into one!”
Ralph exclaimed as he surveyed the terrible sight.
“It would seem impossible,” said Leon, “and
nothing but the thought of rescuing my young mis-
tress could give me courage to land amidst such
horror,”
“And nothing but the thought of my brothers
would induce me to take a second glance,” exclaimed
Ralph. “Anyhow, the ship is standing up well to the
heat, Leon,” he added. “I don’t think she is going
to explode or go up in flames after all!”
“One ray of comfort,” muttered the Merman.
Ralph dived lower . . . The blood red waterfalls
were horrifying. The distant noise as the water


crashed over the cliffs came up to the two men
in the ship.
Reducing speed, Ralph flew slowly onward above
the awful planet. The sullen grey sky was darken-
ing and as night closed down upon them, the red
and orange flames grew ever more vivid below. The
hiss of the plunging steaming rivers could be plainly
heard as clouds of black smoke began to writhe
around the ship.
“No end to the horrors,” Ralph muttered.
On—on—they flew. Nothing but volcanoes, smoke
and flame! Time passed. In spite of himself Ralphs
spirits began to sink. He could detect no sign of
either city or habitation on the fantastic landscape.
. . . Could humans really exist amidst this incredible
conglomeration of battling elements?
Suddenly they ran into thick cloud—the flames,
partially obscured, breaking through in a dull red
glow.
Shooting from the cloud bank after a time, they
found that they had left the mountains behind.
Great masses of greyish smoke now spread below.
For miles they flew above this floor of smoke cloud,
their course set towards an encircling chain of moun-
tains, which rose on the far horizon . . . The night,
unlit now by glow or roaring flames, lay black and
silent about them.
“A change, anyway,” said Ralph after a long-
pause. “But what lies beneath all this smoke? I
think we had better investigate.”
Flying low, the two men caught glimpses here and
there of dark formations which may have been
massed trees or foliage. But so veiled were their


surroundings in the all-enveloping smoke, that they
could not be sure.
Ralph flashed a huge beam of light from the ship
in an endeavour to penetrate the mysterious fog—
but the powerful flash proved unrevealing, merely
intensifying the weirdness of the scene.
“In any case we couldn’t land here—l am only
wasting time,” the young man said at last. Rising
swiftly he resumed his flight to the distant moun-
tains.
“Well, Leon,” Ralph remarked as volcanoes once
more spurted violently beneath them. “I must admit
that the hideous confusion below is enough to dash
any man’s hopes. But we must keep going!”
For a time they cruised about uncertainly ... A
tremendously high range was passed—then down
they sped past a slate coloured slope, its contours
bathed in a satanic glow.
Suddenly Ralph leant forward.
“What are those red and orange blotches in the
darkness immediately beneath us?” he asked the
Merman. “They appear to be uniform.”
Leon peered downward. Then his voice rose shrilly.
“Windows, my master!” he cried. “See! they run
in rows! Windows, reflecting the light of the
flames!”
“Why, I believe you’re right!” cried Ralph
excitedly. “Hurrah! this is where we step off. Some-
thing to bite on at last!”
“Dare I go lower and observe?” he asked himself.


“As strangers don’t appear to worry them here, it
is unlikely that they would be on the watch for
space craft!”
“I’ll risk it!” he cried. “Down we go Leon!—and
use your eyes!”
Now they could plainly distinguish the outlines of
large, window blotched buildings huddled in a great
heap at the foot of a mountainside; also what ap-
peared to be a huge landing ground quarried out of
the base of a cliff from the outer edge of which, rows
of spheres fanned out in circles. . . Near the out-
skirts of the massed buildings, rushed a dark steam-
ing river.
Swiftly Ralph rose again—“A city! and a large
one!” he exclaimed exultantly. “Can we have chanced
on Ira’s stronghold? If only I possessed some in-
formation !”
Leon shook his head. “Nothing is known, master,
save that Helion is inhabited by hordes of long-
eared humans who range space in large black spheres
propelling waves of destructive light.”
“It is reasonable to suppose that it would be to a
city such as the one below that prisoners would be
brought,” said Ralph thoughtfully as they cruised
high in the darkness above the buildings. “In all
those miles we saw no other trace of settlements—
which doesn’t prove, of course, that none exist—but
I could swear that had there been a city even half
the size of the one below, we would have seen it
from the air.”
“That is true, master,” said Leon decidedly.
“I’ll land as near this sinister metropolis as I dare,”
said Ralph, “but where?”


“If we could but place our feet on firm ground'—
that would be a beginning,” said Leon doubtfully.
Ralph gazed downward. “Looks so impossible,”
he muttered.
Passing high above the mountains behind the
city, he dived again and rushed along a narrow val-
ley between steep slopes with madly flaring sum-
mits, his eyes meanwhile searching for landing
space.
Soon the peaks on either side gave place to sheer
precipices which, gradually closing together, formed
a narrow gorge. Angry clouds of dark smoke par-
tially obscured the gorge, and as he flew onward the
chasm walls sank downward, dropping lower and
lower in the dense smoke, till finally they disappear-
ed in a wild depression bounded on three sides by
fiercely burning craters.
Ralph craned his neck eagerly. “Here we are!”
he exclaimed suddenly. “I believe 1 can land here—
do you see, Leon?” he cried triumphantly.
“We will get nothing better, master,” said the
Merman, “There appears to be ample space in the
hollow.”
After some manoeuvering, Ralph brought “The
Flame” safely downward, and the two men climbed
out, thankful for the protection of their masks,
without which they would have been blinded by the
glare.
Ralph looked anxiously about him. “It seems a
good spot, Leon,” he said. “The smoke between
here and the mouth of the gorge should conceal the
ship effectively; and as far as I can see, the gorge
is the only outlet.”
Ralph gave an involuntary shudder as he looked
about him. Bad enough for him and the Merman—


but awful, how awful—for the youngsters! Were
they still alive? . . . Were they?
He turned abruptly to his companion.
“There is no time to lose, Leon,” he said, “as we
have to work at night, and have no idea how long
the darkness will last, we had better set out at once.
We must get into that city. To-night we’ll recon-
noitre. Get the layout of the place. See and hear
what we can.”
“And if we learn nothing on the first visit, we will
persevere,” said the Merman firmly.
“I think I have the geography of the place pretty
plainly in my mind,” said Ralph, casting a penetrat-
ing glance about him. We’ll walk through the
gorge into the valley. Then continue along the
floor of the valley and around the foot of the moun-
tain at the northern end, near that awful plunging
river . . . After that the way is clear—we follow
the river into the city.”
“We will steal about the streets,” he added, “and
try and locate Ira’s headquarters—always suppos-
ing they are here!”
“A fine plan, master,” agreed Leon.
“Our disguise is good,” Ralph continued, “the
long-eared horrors would never dream that men
from other planets could walk their streets dressed
in their own fire-proof outfits,”
“It is certain they would not,” said Leon eagerly,
“and I doubt not that we will find the younglings,
should they be alive and in the city.”
“You have your close-range weapons? the fume
phial and the death spray?” asked Ralph.
“I have, master,” replied Leon.


Casting a last look at the ship, and brushing aside
the fearful thought that some stray inhabitant
might discover her in spite of her seemingly safe
positions Ralph led the way to the edge of the
depression.
Entering the gloomy gorge, they picked their way
between smouldering grey rocks and heaps of burn-
ing slate, and were relieved to finally emerge in the
valley where the walking was a little easier.
... At last they rounded the slopes at the north-
ern end, and reaching the steaming river, stood well
back from the bank for a few minutes watching
the surging water whirl its way through the awful
landscape.
So far they had seen no sign of life or habitation,
although the fantastic shadows and patterns cast by
the flames down the mountainsides, made it impos-
sible to distinguish special features.
There was no indication of either road or track,
but dodging between the molten heaps, slabs of lava,
and huge boulders which lay about the foot of the
mountains, the pair marched forward doggedly,
always keeping the river in sight.
After a time, the jumbled heaps gave place to
more even ground, and the two men passed beneath
high overhanging rocks, which forming a rough
passage shut out the glare of the surrounding moun-
tains.
Suddenly emerging from this comparative dark-
ness, Ralph gave an involuntary gasp.
The two men stood still . . . For a moment
neither spoke.
Less than a quarter of a mile away, stood the
strange mass of buildings which they had seen from


the air, with a furiously burning mountain in the
background.
It was a strange sight—the fantastic city with its
dull forbidding buildings standing out in the fierce
red light, honeycombed with rows of gleaming win-
dows.
“Who could have believed it!” breathed Ralph.
“Let us creep on, Leon, and pray that our luck won’t
desert us!” he exclaimed softly.
Peering cautiously about them, the adventurers
advanced stealthily, and ere ten minutes had passed,
had reached the nearest buildings.
Leon suddenly gripped Ralph’s arm.
Voices! and a group of Helions just ahead!
Ralph’s heart beat a little faster. Was the risk
too great? No! they would press on and mingle
with their foes.
“Chest out, Leon,” he whispered. “We’ll pass
them.” Moving boldly forward, the pair passed the
strange group without attracting a glance.
“A good start,” murmured Ralph. “After all, we
might be the twin brothers of any of them!”
A weird street opened out ahead. Here a num-
ber of the queer inhabitants paraded back and forth,
while high above the lofty mountain spurted forth
its fire.
As they continued onward and no look of suspicion
or even interest was cast in their direction, Ralph
and the Merman gained confidence.
After a time the street turned into a broad avenue
which seemed to mark an important part of the city.
On either side dark buildings reared their huge
bulk dotted with glowing windows. . . Here, they


■B2 RANGERS OF THE UNIVERSE
found the inhabitants to be congregated in great
numbers . . . All were masked. Men and children
wore identical shining suits, while an outfit of a
slightly different design, and masks with ornamental
ear protectors, seemed to mark the women. The
only variation in the general uniformity of the men
appeared to be in their helmets, but on observing
the Helions more closely, Ralph and his companion
noticed black badges of varying sizes displayed on
either collar or chest.
A short distance ahead, a small crowd had gath-
ered around a citizen whose harsh thought sounds
were being listened to with rapt attention.
“The captain of a sphere/ whispered Ralph. “1
recognize the type of helmet worn by my enemy of
the black sphere! Get nearer, and we’ll try and
hear what he says,”
Loitering on the edge of the group, Ralph and
Leon listened intently.
“Olera’s daughter is a valuable prize,” came the
rasping thought sounds. “The great Ira is gratified
by our success. We feast at his palace an hour
hence.”
“Who were the strange younglings ?” he was asked.
“Beings from an unknown tribe of Mer,” came
the reply, “It would seem that Olera prized them,
as they were found in his daughter’s company. All
three are lodged in the eastern wing of the palace.
Ira’s plans regarding their fate will be divulged
to-morrow,”
“Time passes, friend,” exclaimed another. “Our
comrades are already entering the palace.”


Still discussing the young captives, the Helions
began to move away—Ralph and Leon following as
closely as they dared.
“Alive, and as yet unharmed!” Ralph whispered.
“Fortune smiles,” murmured Leon.
A huge forbidding building loomed ahead, block-
ing the end of the thoroughfare, its myriad win-
dows brightly crimson. In the centre of the great
mass, a doorway bristling with guards could be dis-
tinguished.
“It would seem that we have arrived,” murmured
Ralph.
Swarms of Ira’s followers could be seen entering
the doorway, while the street in front of the palace
was thronged with onlookers, their red headlights
dancing, and silvery suits varying in colour, as the
light shed by the volcanoes played upon them.
The two men stood for a time observing the
building closely.
“Too risky to try and enter here,” whispered
Ralph. “Let us find a way to the rear ... It should
be more or less deserted with all the fun going on
in front!”
Gradually threading their way through the crowd
to the far side of the palace, Ralph and his com-
panion turned the corner and following the walls of
the building which rose sheer from the street, soon
reached a jutting extension which they calculated to
be the eastern wing.
As Ralph had imagined, the rear of the building
was deserted.
Facing them was a dark wall inset with rows of


windows, but there was no sign of either door or
entrance.
“This is where we get in,” said Ralph as he sur-
veyed the ground floor windows. “I can easily cut
out a square of glass. But which window? Let me
climb on your shoulder, Leon, and I’ll have a look
in.”
Clambering on to his companion’s shoulders, Ralph
peered through. “A huge corridor,” he whispered.
“Queer place—as black as ink. Can’t see anyone.
We’ll try here.”
Taking a small instrument from his belt, the
Earthman rapidly removed a piece of glass, expos-
ing a space large enough for the body of a man to
pass through . . .
A minute later, nerves taut with excitement, the
pair stood in a towering black corridor gazing un-
easily about them.
A dozen yards away, the corridor turned sharply.
On one side ran the windows, on the other, a plain
shining black wall.
Stealthily the intruders crept towards the corner,
each clutching his small metal fume phial.
Ralph put his head around the corner. He quickly
withdrew it. A few yards away two Helions lounged
near a door. They wore tight yellow suits and were
exchanging thought sounds in rough tones.
Chancing another look, Ralph was in time to see
one of the men turn from the door and walk away.
He disappeared around a second bend in the corri-
dor, while his companion stared idly after him.
“I’ll jump on that fellow, Leon!” breathed Ralph.
“At once—Now!”


With cat-like tread Ralph turned the corner, and
taking a flying leap, sprang upon the man from the
rear bringing him down and crashing his skull on
the hard black floor. The queer human lay still.
Ralph stood over him for a second. “He won’t
give us away,” he whispered. As the Earthman
spoke, the door opened suddenly, and the pair were
confronted by a hideous black robed woman, who on
seeing the prostrate man, backed into the room in
terror.
Pressing a switch, and thrusting his phial beneath
her nostrils, Leon caught the woman as she fell
limply forward. With Ralph’s assistance he laid
her on the floor.
A cry made Ralph turn. With difficulty he re-
pressed a shout of joy. It was Narelle! The girl
had sprung to her feet in the opposite corner and
pale with fright was cowering against the wall.
A few steps brought Leon to her side.
“Little mistress do not fear,” he whispered “It
is Leon. Have you an outfit in which to escape into
the flames of this awesome planet?”
“Leon?” whispered Narelle unbelievingly. Then
her face lit up with joy. “It is Leon’s voice—Yes!—
Yes!” she said. “There is the outfit hanging on the
wall.”
“Into it at once, young mistress,” said the Mer-
man, “and lose no time. Place this anti-spray pro-
tector beneath your mask.”
Ralph grasped the curtain which separated the
two rooms. Dragging it aside and striding through
the doorway with Leon following closely—he saw his
brothers . . .


“Don’t you know me, Tom?” Ralph whispered, as
the boy sprang to his feet in terror. He shook Allis-
ter roughly. “Wake up, Lai,” he said. “We haven’t
much time. On to your feet and follow me!”
Utterly bewildered, Allister scrambled to his feet.
A long-eared Helion with his brother’s voice?
Why it was Ralph!—their Ralph!!
“Not a word, Allister, and do as you are told!”
said his brother in a peremptory whisper, as the
boy opened his mouth to speak.
“Quickly—get into these suits,” offering the boys
the outfits which Leon had thrust into his hands,
“and I want you to wear these small spray protec-
tors beneath your masks.”
Narelle had already discarded her black robe and
was dressed in her protective outfit.
A few minutes and Tom and Allister were ready,
and Ralph was hurrying them through the doorway.
The boys threw an astonished glance at the pros-
trate attendants.
“Gosh! I’m excited!” whispered Allister.
“Some work, Ralph,” Tom murmured, as he step-
ped over the motionless figure of the guard.
Moving cautiously along the corridor, they reached
the broken window. Ralph lifted Narelle through
the opening, the remainder of the party following
silently.
A babel of strange sounds came suddenly to their
ears!!
Would their luck hold?


r\nt
L I i i^p^^iTyB** 1 g^^3FSBgv^*^3
.. , / I I
rSijHMr -* : ] I I >r '.—___
"Keep near the wall and run!’’ whispered Ralph


CHAPTER X.
THERE was no one to be seen in the street. The
sounds evidently came from within the palace!
“Keep near the wall and run!” whispered Ralph,
“and see that you keep close behind me!”
Following at Ralph’s heels, Leon, with Narelle
and the boys sped around the jutting wing avoid-
ing the glare of the volcanoes and keeping in a patch
of shade near the wall.
The front of the palace was safely reached
The crowds here were beginning to disperse.
“Don’t be afraid, youngsters,” Ralph whispered
encouragingly. “We’re going straight through this
mob. Keep close together and follow me—now!”
Mingling with their foes, the fugitives began a
breathtaking passage through the main thorough-
fare.
The shining suits of the populace, changing
chameleon-like in the reflected glow from the moun-
tains, now pale yellow, scarlet, or orange, fascinated
Allister in spite of his swiftly beating heart.
“Like some strange picture,” he murmured to
Tom.
“Like a lot of devils in hell,” rejoined his brother
feelingly.
Quickly realizing that they were arousing no sus-
picion in the minds of the weird humans about them.
Narelle and her comrades began to lose some of
their fears, and passing through the crowds as
rapidly as they dared, the little party succeeded, in


a comparatively short time, in reaching the street
which led to the river.
Here there were fewer inhabitants, and the dan-
ger of detection became correspondingly greater.
“We had better spread out, Leon,” whispered
Ralph. “Tom, you walk apart from us—over there
to the right. Lai, you keep near Leon, and not beside
him, and I’ll go ahead with Narelle. When the hue
and cry starts it will be for you three young ones
that the Helions will be watching.”
Unobtrusively the boys altered their positions, and
with eyes fastened on their deliverers, succeeded in
keeping well abreast of them.
“What were flaming mountains and boiling rivers
when one had such a brother as Ralph?” thought
Tom as he trudged along. “Oh boy! what a brother!”
When at last the river bank came into view, Ralph
drew a sharp breath of relief. They had left the
city behind, and passed through its outskirts un-
molested !
The ten minutes’ walk in the open, which now lay
ahead—between the fugitives and the overhanging
rock passage—was fairly smooth, though odd heaps
of volcanic refuse lay about at intervals.
Halting for a second in the shadow of one of these
mounds, the two men took stock of their surround-
ings. ... No sound of human voice or activity
could be heard. Overhead the sky was black as
ebony. Steam rose in clouds from the turbulent
river on their right, while the glare from the moun-
tains cast an uncanny glow.
“We have at least gained a start,” whispered
Ralph, “but now the real danger begins. At this
\eiy moment they are possibly hot on our trail.
Anyone coming from that street could easily spot


us. Quickly now, youngsters! We’ll make for the
shelter of the passage!”
“Wait, master!” exclaimed Leon. “Would it not
be well that I should conceal myself hereabouts, and
should pursuers appear from the streets, fire my
weapon, causing death among them?—a diversion
which should allow you to reach the passage safely ?
—you could then meet the survivors at the entrance
with your death spray.”
“A sound idea!” exclaimed Ralph. “That heap of
slag should hide you, Leon. Give us ten minutes,
and if no one appears, join us at once!”
Ralph hurried onward with his charges. “Now,
youngsters,” he said, as they quickened their pace
almost to a run, “after leaving the passage, there
will be a stiff walk of almost two hours ahead. Leon
and I will take turns in carrying Narelle if she
tires, but I expect you two to keep going.”
“We’ll keep going all right,” said Allister rather
breathlessly as he sped along beside his brother,
“but do tell us how you got here—”
“And who were the fellows who grabbed you on
the hillside,” interrupted Tom eagerly.
“Enough, boys,” rejoined their brother. “You’ll
hear my story later. But I’ll say this. We had an
advantage on landing here. It would be impossible
for these creatures to imagine such a thing as a
rescue. No stranger has ever before landed on their
planet, or wished to.”
“It was wonderful!” said Narelle earnestly.
“Being disguised in their own outfits we felt
fairly confident, though I will admit to a qualm or
two before we found out where to look for you—but
there was certainly an element of luck in it all.”


“My hat, I can hardly believe it yet!” interjected
Tom.
“Your disappearance, however, alters everything,”
continued Ralph, “proving as it does the presence of
foes in their midst. Henceforth danger will dog us,
and unfortunately we are quite in the dark as to
the methods they could use to entrap us . . . Now,
no more talk, boys! . . . Save your wind, and step
it out!”
They were only a few yards from the passage
when a pall of black smoke rising from the river
suddenly enveloped them and whirled viciously
through the opening between the overhanging rocks
ahead.
“We’ll have to feel our way for a few minutes,”
said Ralph. “Single file will be best at the moment.
The smoke is too thick for my torch ‘to penetrate
unfortunately.”
“It will soon lift, boys,” he added. “Just whirls
up and down. Keep close to me and I’ll look after
Narelle.”
“Here we are!” Ralph exclaimed suddenly, “We’re
inside. Look out that you don’t trip, Lai—plenty
of snags—though much smoother than the walking
further ahead. I—”
A sudden blood curdling yell cut short his sen-
tence, followed by a screeching, yelping din, as a
swarm of Helions sprang forward, hemming in the
little party, and pouncing upon Ralph before he had
time to draw his weapon. . . With cruel blows they
felled the young Earthman and his brothers. One
of the horde snatched up Narelle, who was scream-
ing with terror, while others, lifting the unconscious
man and the two boys, bore them off through the
smoke-drenched passage.


Leon’s blood ran cold as the shrieks and yells rang
out in the hot night air. Springing from his hiding
place, he ran as though demented towards the smoke-
choked opening. Clutching his weapon he stepped
stealthily into the passage. The red headlights of
the Helions moved dizzily in the darkness, and
through a transient rift in the smoke he caught a
blurred picture of two of his enemies bearing in
their arms his mistress and their staunch protec-
tor'.
In the dark confusion, his weapon at the moment
was useless . . . His opportunity, however, would
come! He would wait here and project the spray
at close range as the Helions were returning through
the entrance.
Suddenly Leon strained forward. Did his ears
deceive him? The voices were becoming fainter!
The attackers were leaving the passage by the oppo-
site outlet!
For a second the Merman was bewildered.—Were
they not returning to the city? . . . Quickly he
made his decision. He would follow and mingle
with the enemy and keep close to his mistress and
their good friend. A chance to assist them must
surely arise!
“I will not falter,” he muttered. “Am I not a
man of Mer?”
Feeling his way along the wall, Leon reached the
opening where the smoke was less dense, and peer-
ing out, saw the marauding band moving towards
the river bank.
Stepping cautiously from his hiding place, the
Merman dropped swiftly behind a lump of slag. Two
Helions were standing less than a dozen yards
away!...


His enemies were mounting a small metal con-
trivance on a stand. Another second—and strange
sounds were echoing through the burning night.
The Helions were sending out messages!—To
whom? Leon crawled closer, dodging among the
shadows of the scattered volcanic mounds, till finally
he lay hidden but a few feet from the operator.
For a few minutes there was silence, and then
another set of sounds rang out.
The operator turned to his companion. “Hasten
to the captain,” he said. “We proceed to .”
Straining his ears Leon caught sounds resembling
“Three Towers”.
The man addressed ran swiftly towards the Helion
band, which, enveloped at times in clouds of steam,
stood grouped along the river bank ... On receiv-
ing the message, the party began to move forward,
marching in an opposite direction to the city.
The operator meanwhile restored the apparatus to
its case, and hoisting it on his shoulders, followed
in a more leisurely fashion.
Leon crept forward, and trailing his enemy till
the latter joined his companions, he stole along
behind the party, keeping as close as he dared.
The Helions continued onward beside the steam-
ing river beneath the dark night sky, their uniforms
gleaming in the fitful glare of the volcanoes, their
headlights flaring redly. After a time, swinging
around the base of a long slope, the marauders
poured across the awe inspiring valley along which
Leon and the Earthman had hastened but a few
hours before; and on reaching the opposite heights,
made their way along a rough mountain track.
After crossing the slope of a blazing mountain, c
wild gap opened out amidst the ranges—and march-


mg through the rugged break, the Helions finally
paused at the entrance to a dim defile amidst a mass
of cliffs. . . . Here was the Merman’s opportunity!
As his enemies stood at ease in the weird shadows
at the foot of the heights—their thought sounds
rising in a confused clamour, he contrived to leave
the shelter of a group of rocks and slip among them
unnoticed.
He could now see the prisoners . . . Narelle was
lying limply over the shoulder of the Helion who
carried her. Mercifully, she seemed to have fainted.
As the band broke up, and the long-eared men
ceasing their chatter began to form into single file,
Leon moved quietly into line not far behind the men
who carried the captives.
Silently the strange humans filed into the narrow
opening, the thick blackness ahead being dimly lit
by flares attached to long poles and carried by those
in the lead. Thin veils of smoke blew wisplike among
the awful company as the line moved onward
between the towering cliffs.
At last the Helions emerged from the close dark-
ness of the mountain cleft, and Leon looked
anxiously about him.
Immediately ahead—about several hundred yards
distant, plunged a boiling bubbling river—apparently
the same river which he had seen .before, while at
a wharf roughly hewn out of the rock, three strange-
ly constructed boats lay amazingly still on the seeth-
ing waters.
The boats loomed darkly on the dreadful river, like
great amphibians waiting to pounce on their prey.
Deckless, plain semi-circular structures; their en-
closing envelopes were of a dark steel colour.


Approaching closer, Leon noticed large windows
placed at intervals, but whatever their composition
they were dull and dark and did not reflect the glow
of the flames.
But the Helion horde was moving forward—those
ahead were already nearing the edge of the wharf,
and advancing amidst his foes, the Merman crossed
the wharf and stepped boldly through the great
sliding doors of the boat on to which the prisoners
had been taken.
Above him arched a high roof. Rows of dull
metal seats spread frcm the walls, while in the
centre was the driving apparatus of the boat, oper-
ated by a mechanical figure.
Ralph was placed on one of the benches with
Narelle and the boys lying near him. Tom and Allis-
ter were evidently regaining consciousness—Leon
noticed that they were fidgeting and moving their
limbs. The Earthman, and his little mistress, how-
ever, lay quite still.
He must get near the little Narelle! She would
recover, and he must speak to her! He must let her
know that he was here!
Threading his way unobtrusively through the
throng which overflowed from the benches on to
the floor about the machinery, Leon gradually
moved closer.
The Helions, meanwhile, were preparing to take a
meal. Small metal food receptacles, fitted with nar-
row glass tubes, were being handed around among
the company, and passing the tubes through the
mouthpieces of their masks, the queer humans pro-
ceeded to swallow their nourishment.
Helping himself to one of the dishes, Leon, imi-
tating his foes, found the food not distasteful.


A Helion approached Narelle, and giving her a
shake set down a bowl beside her. The girl sat up
slowly but made no attempt to eat ... As the man
turned away to place food near Ralph and the boys,
Leon edged closer.
Taking a chance, he stepped forward and picking
up the bowl offered it to Narelle. “Do not show sur-
prise, little mistress,” he whispered. “Leon will
guard you—eat and keep strong!”
With an upsurge of joy in her heart, the girl
placed the tube in her mouth and began to swallow
the food.
At the same moment, Allister struggling into a
sitting position, seized his dish. Looking around,
he saw Tom, sitting near Narelle and holding his
head in his hands—while Ralph lay on the bench a
few feet away.
“Ralph,” he whispered, “Are you all right?”
“Yes, old son,” replied Ralph, “just lying here
thinking hard. I was knocked out for a bit. Tom
seems to have a sore head.” Tom groaned. “Mine’s
pretty sore, too,” said Allister . . . “and poor Narelle
—anyway she’s able to eat!”
As the boy was about to place the glass tube in
his mouth a passing Helion lurched against his
shoulder, which was bruised and painful.
“Look where you’re going!” burst out Allister
angrily.
“It is Leon, young master,” whispered the man
bending over the boy and giving him a cuff on the
ear. “Tell your brother—l watch my opportunity.”
Amazed and overjoyed to hear Leon’s voice, Allis-
ter flinched backward and gave a loud cry.
“Leave them, friend, and touch them not,” said


"Look where you are going,” burst out Allister angrily.
one of the Helions addressing Leon. “Such are the
orders.”
The Merman nodded and moved away. Finding
himself near the mechanical driver, he lingered for
a time, trying unsuccessfully to discover the method
of operation.
Meanwhile the boats were driving along the river
at a terrific rate. Great glowing mountains flashed
by in the awesome night. After a time it seemed
that the volcanoes were burning less fiercely. Then
smoke obscured the view.


The boat began to slow down. They were going to
land. Ralph, though still feeling ill and dazed, was
gradually recovering.
Allister edged the few feet along the bench towards
him.
“Leon is here,” he whispered.
“Where?” asked Ralph eagerly.
“Somewhere among them—keeping close to
Narelle no doubt—didn’t you see the fellow knock
me on the shoulder?”
“No, but I heard you.”
“That was Leon,” said Allister. “He said to tell
you that he is watching his opportunity—to help us,
I suppose.”
Ralph gave a sigh of relief. “It is good to have a
friend at hand amidst this villainous crew,” he mur-
mured. “The Merman is courageous. He will do
his best.”
The boat had now reached the wharf.
“Swallow a couple of the smaller tabloids, boys,”
Ralph whispered hastily. “They will give you
strength.”
As the pair quickly obeyed, one of the Helions
approached Ralph.
“We land,” he said peremptorily, “Rise!”
While Ralph was struggling to his feet, two others
of the band came forward, and gripping the Earth-
man’s arms, proceeded to bind them firmly behind
his back. Then seizing the young people, the long-
eared men secured their arms in similar fashion.
“Now, follow!” came the order.
The doors of the boat slid back, and as their foes
streamed through the opening on to the wharf,
Ralph’s spirits began to ebb in spite of the fact that


he knew Leon was hidden somewhere in the hostile
crowd about him.
How to get out of this awful jam? and “The
Flame?” Ere now some fiend may have discovered
her! So they had boats plying the awful rivers!
How long had he been unconscious? They must be
entering the city from a different angle.
It was still dark as the Helions began to swarm
across the rough stone wharf. The prisoners were
puzzled by their surroundings. There was no sign
of human dwellings. The flaming heights had van-
ished, and in front of them spread layer upon layer
of greyish cloud, split by occasional black rifts, into
which the Helions ahead were disappearing.
The prisoners stepped into a thick cloud bank,
which as they advanced appeared to float before
them and above their heads. The ground beneath
their feet was fairly smooth, leading Ralph to be-
lieve that they were traversing a road or track.
It was impossible to discern any distinctive feat-
ures in their surroundings, thdugh Ralph seemed to
sense trees and thick vegetation about him.
“Could this be the clouded landscape he and Leon
had seen from the air?”
The young spaceman was rapidly recovering his
normal strength, but the boys were tired and spirit-
less.
On—on—they tramped through their smoke-
veiled surroundings, the Helions swarming about
them in a fantastic band. Ralph and Tom marched
together. Walking a few paces behind was the
Helion who carried Narelle, with Allister plodding
sulkily beside him.
Suddenly pale yellow rays darted through the
clouds, and a dim light began to creep through the


smoke mist showing up strange ebony black trees,
huge spreading ferns, and queer gigantic flowers.
“Dawn,” murmured Ralph,
Contrary to expectation, the sun did not penetrate
very deeply, and in the subdued light they found
that they were marching along a wide tree-bordered
track.
Allister forgot his painful bruises as he peered
inquisitively into the clouded forest trying to pierce
its mystery.
“Are we not returning to Ira’s city?” Ralph boldly
asked one of his guards.
“Are you mad, traitor!” rasped the Helion con-
temptuously, “or blind—that you cannot see the
great smoke forest?— Why such foolish pretence?”
Ralph made no reply. He suddenly realized that
the fantastic beings regarded him as one of them-
selves.
What did they want with him anyway? Where
were they taking him?
While Narelle dozed fitfully, the boys continued
to gaze curiously at the shining black trees—at
great dark lilies with scarlet and yellow centres,
and at trailing vines covered in purple flowers, all
veiled in a gossamer haze. No sound broke the
silence of the great smoke forest, save the feet of
marching men.
Then into this misty strangeness broke a sudden
cry. A second, and all was confusion. Shouts and
yells rent the air. A dozen Helions fell to the ground
like logs, while others scattered uttering howls of
fright.
“The younglings!” they screeched. “The young-
lings! Olera’s daughter and the young Merite have
vanished into air!”


CHAPTER XI.
UTTERING frenzied cries, the Helions wildly broke
ranks.
A number whirled off the track and in between
the trees in pursuit of the invisible foe, while others
with threatening gestures closed around Ralph and
Tom.
Ralph felt numb and cold beneath his fantastic
outfit. This was Leon’s work! . . . Could the Mer-
man hope to outwit these horrifying humans?
If anything were to happen Lai!—The youngster
was so venturesome . . . disobedient sometimes . . .
Tom groaned despairingly. Quick-tempered,
naughty little Lai! “What’ll he do without me?” the
boy asked himself miserably. Tom wished with all
his heart that Leon had not interfered. “Why didn’t
he just grab Narelle and leave us alone!” he mut-
tered resentfully.
Once again the transmitting machine was mount-
ed on its stand, and while the fallen Helions were
being placed on hastily improvised stretchers, queer
sounds began to vibrate in the smoke laden air
The last inert form was hurriedly lifted from the
ground, and the remnants of the band, gathering
around the machine, listened intently.
The captives’ hearts grew cold as a sudden fiendish
yell broke from the crowd, and all eyes turned for
a moment towards Ralph. It appeared that some
message regarding their prisoner had pleased them.
Immediately they reformed their depleted ranks,


the guards gave the prisoners a vicious push, and
the party, leaving the transmitter and its operators
behind, resumed its march.
The shrouded trees of the forest loomed darkly
sinister in the pallid light, as Ralph and Tom trudged
in stony silence amidst the jabbering Helions.
“What’s that ahead?” Tom whispered suddenly,
after they had covered a considerable distance. “Gee!
we’re coming to something, Ralph!”
“Looks like' it,” commented his brother as he
gazed at a group of elusive shadows which could be
vaguely distinguished rising above the trees.
A few minutes later, the track suddenly merged in
open ground, and through the drifting haze in front
of them Ralph saw three strange dark towers, their
tapering summits obscured in mist. The great round
bases of the towers were formed of greyish slate.
Lights gleamed here and there in the weird struc-
tures, and the upper storeys were connected by mas-
sive stone bridges.
To the right of the tapering towers, lay a vast
tract of level ground, where, through the smoke
clouds, the dark curves of massed spheres showed
vaguely.
In the lofty central tower of the smoke-enveloped
building was a wide-open door, apparently the main
entrance—and while the Helions, including the
stretcher bearers, suddenly halted—the prisoners
were marched across to this opening by their guards.
Feeling anything but happy, Ralph and his young
brother passed through the entrance to find them-
selves in a huge stone room lit by flickering torches
which were fastened at intervals along the walls.
Rows and rows of metal boxes and barrels were


stacked along the thick slate walls, overflowing into
heaps on the floor—and amidst the jumble of casks
and cases, numbers of Helions were busily engaged.
From one end of the ground floor, a stone stair-
case led upward, while at the other, a metal door led
to a smaller room into which, even as they gazed
confusedly about them, the prisoners were roughly
jolted.
The door closed quickly—evidently the room was
heat-proof.
A solitary lamp glowed on a stand ... a few seats
stood about the floor, while against the opposite wall
stood a plain black couch, from which a scarlet-
robed figure—menacing and horrible, rose slowly.
Ralph did not need Tom’s despairing ejaculation
of “Gosh, it’s him!” to enlighten him as to the iden-
tity of the fantastic figure. Instinct told him that
here in front of him stood the master of flaming
Helion.
With arms tied behind their backs, Ralph and his
young brother faced Ira.
“Unmask the traitor!” shrieked Ira. “He who
assisted my prisoners to escape!”
It was an awful moment. “This is it,” thought
Ralph “and I can do nothing!”
A Helion tore off his mask.
Tom shivered with fear as Ira glared madly at
Ralph.
“What is this!” shouted the master of Helion.
“This human is not of us! . . . He is of the same
strange tribe of Mer as the younglings!!”
“From whence have you come?” he screamed.
“You can discover that for yourself,” said Ralph
coldly.


“The Merite has landed from a red sphere!” Ira
shrieked. “He has killed one .of my men and stolen
his outfit. The unbelievable has happened. An
enemy has at last landed on fiery Helion!! ~ .”
“ Tis well that I forbade his return to the city
space drome to be flown hither by air! Others of
his kind may lurk among my citizens!” His screams
rose to a crescendo. “The red spheres of Olera of
Mer are landing on my planet!—even at this moment
they may be landing in great numbers on distant
parts! .. . I will send out the Waves of Warning!—
The Waves of Warning!” he gibbered ~ . “To warn
bands on flaming mountainsides, crews of black
spheres, boatmen on boiling rivers, and drivers of
flat-bottomed boats on the seven cool lakes! Send
my operators to me at once!— Remove my enemies
to the cell beneath the pinnacle of this tower, and
strip them of their protective outfits ... We will
wring information from this spy—then, after sun-
set, he will die. Ha! Ha! Ha!—Ha! Ha! Ha! .. .
Aha! ha! ha!”
“Good Lord!” ejaculated Ralph.
With the mad laughter ringing in their ears, the
prisoners were ushered from the room, and led across
the ground floor to the staircase.
“Now you know how we felt when we saw him in
the big black palace,” whispered Tom weakly.
“It doesn’t bear thinking of,” muttered Ralph.
■“lf only, we could have stuck our fingers in our
ears,” said Tom shudderingly.
“That would never have done for me,” returned
Ralph. “I wanted mine wide open.”
As the captives mounted the stone steps, hostile
shouts and angry snarls were flung viciously in their


direction by the Helions who swarmed about the
ground floor.
“The worst ever,” muttered Ralph.
On the upward climb, several broad stone landings
were passed, each of which was closely packed with
the boxes and barrels noticeable in the room below.
There were also numerous metal objects of various
shapes and sizes which could be spare parts of
sphere machinery. The tower appeared to be a
store house . . . Finally Ralph came to the conclu-
sion that the building was connected with an im-
portant space drome. Probably the largest and most
important on the planet.
At last the room beneath the pinnacle was
reached, and on being hurried through the doorway
the brothers found it to be small and dark. There
was neither lamp nor window, ventilation and light
being supplied by a tiny filtered fanlight in the roof.
The cell was evidently heat-proof, as the Helions
began to remove the prisoners’ outfits and masks.
They took the fume phial and death spray from
Ralph’s belt—handling the weapons with extreme
caution. The small anti-fume filters in the masks,
apparently escaped their notice.
Stripped of their protective outfits, the brothers
realized how conspicuous were their closely-fitting
Aureelian flying suits—how alien to Helion eyes!
And as their captors twisted their arms behind their
backs and rebound them, a feeling of awful depres-
sion settled on Ralph . . .
Shrivelled to bits if they moved from this little
room. In any case their clothing a complete give
away! Wrists and arms tightly bound behind them!


The door closed, and the Helions could be heard
clanging down the staircase.
“No need even for guards,” thought Ralph bit-
terly.
He looked at his sturdy young brother, standing
there, arms bound, chin up, in his little flying suit . .
Tom believed in him so implicitly!
Ah! well! they had got out of seemingly impos-
sible situations before—
“Well, Thomas!” he said lightly as the Helions’
footsteps died away, “here we are!”
“We may as well sit,” he added, sliding down and
resting his back against the wall.
“But we won’t be staying long,” said Tom stub-
bornly, as he sank down beside his brother.
“Leon will do what he can,” said Ralph cheerfully.
“Without our ship he and Narelle would be marooned
here—perhaps forever. However, kid, always re-
member, that the Lord helps those who help them-
selves! I’ve got to think, and think hard!”
Leon, meanwhile, dragging his charges with him,
was racing through the smoke clouds.
He could hear the yells and screeches of his
enemies, as recovering from the first shock of sur-
prise, they tore into the forest in pursuit of their
unknown attacker howling like a pack of demon
wolves.
“Climb, my little ones! climb!” the Merman whis-
pered urgently, as taking a sharp turning, he paused
beneath a giant tree. Allister needed no urging.


Springing at one of the lower boughs, he caught it,
and climbing with great agility was soon astride the
loftiest branch ... Leon, assisting his little mistress
from bough to bough was not long in joining him.
Breathless with fear and excitement, the fugitives
peered down from their high perch, listening to the
wild screams of their foes as they crashed through
the foliage beneath.
“They hurry past us,” whispered Leon “and
though in dire peril, we are not without advantage.
A cautious enemy should be hard to find in this great
smoking forest.”
■por what seemed an interminable time, the two
children and their faithful protector sat in the tree
top in silence.
“How did you do it, Leon?” Allister whispered
when at last the ferocious yells of their enemies
had faded in the distance.
“I followed from the boats close behind the Earth-
man, young master,” replied the Merman. “I noted
that you and my young mistress were on the right
of the robber band. Slipping from the track into
the forest, I ran ahead under cover of the trees,
thereby outdistancing the Helions. Standing hidden
near the track, I looked about me and decided on
my plan, f selected this tree, and as you and my
young mistress and your guards came almost abreast,
I fell in near you unobserved amidst the curling
smoke . . . Unseen, I fired my death spray into the
steaming air about you. The charge polluted the
atmosphere, and unprotected by anti-fume filters,
the first man fell. Another second, and Helions were
falling on every side. As stricken with amazement
our foes gaped at their fallen brethren, I seized you,


and amidst the noise and confusion, dragged you
into the smoke clouds and hastened to this tree.”
“You did well, Leon,” said Allister sadly, “but I
would rather have remained with my brothers!”
“Not so, young master,” returned Leon. “I will
have to leave you for a time, and you must then pro-
tect my young mistress. The Earthman must be
freed—how else could any of us escape from this
awesome planet? My opportunity had to be taken
as I found it. Four prisoners were too many to free
at a blow.”
“That is true,” said Allister seriously.
“If you are not afraid, I will leave you at once,”
said the Merman. “I wish to see whither the track
leads and discover where the Earthman has been
taken.”
“Would you be afraid, little Mistress?” he asked
turning to Narelle.
“No, no, Leon!” exclaimed Narelle. “You must
go. I will gladly remain with my comrade.”
“Go at once, please, Leon,” broke in Allister, and
find out what you can about Ralph and Tom!”
“I will set out at once, then,” said the Merman,
“and do not, I beg of you, leave this tree!”
Dropping from the branches to the ground, Leon
disappeared in the swirling smoke.


CHAPTER XII.
MAKING his way cautiously between the hazy tree
trunks, Leon was about to step on to the track, when
two Helions emerged from the forest within a few
yards of him.
Turning boldly, the Merman faced them.
“Saw you any sign of an enemy, sphereman?” one
of the men cried on seeing the newcomer’s distinc-
tive badges.
“I saw no sign,” said Leon.
“You are bound for the spacedrome of The Three
Towers?” asked the second Helion.
Leon nodded assent. “I hasten to join my sphere,”
he replied.
“Come then, sphereman,” said the long-eared
human. “We, too, are bound for the towers. Let us
hasten. We burn with anxiety as to this traitor’s
identity ... He who aided the great Ira’s prisoners
to escape from the palace! He whose hidden asso-
ciates struck down without sound or weapon, strong
men of our marching band !”
“Ira will surely take revenge on such a one,” re-
turned the Merman,
“Have you not heard ?” asked the first Helion. “An
hour after the setting sun brightens the clouds, the
miscreant will crash to his death I . . . Hurled from
one of the great bridges which link the towers!”
Stragglers suddenly appearing from the forest,
and loudly hailing his companions, saved Leon the
necessity of a reply. Eager for news of the enemy
the new arrivals hastened forward, and finding their


hopes to be vain, confessed to their own lack of suc-
cess.
Still discussing the invisible enemy in subdued
tones, the Helions began to move along the track,
their numbers being added to at intervals by other
groups of unsuccessful hunters.
Soon, the strange tapering towers rose vaguely in
the mist ahead. The Merman craned his neck to
obtain a better view. He could see the high central
tower —somewhere beneath these strange pinnacles
the young Earthman and his brother were impris-
oned !
An hour after sunset?— How long was the Helion
day? . . . Judging by the light, he calculated that
midday had passed. It was likely that but a few
hours remained.
But suddenly Leon’s thoughts were rudely dis-
turbed—his blood ran icy cold. The strangest—
the most awful sounds were vibrating in the air!
The effect on the Helions was electric. Wild
shrieks and yells resounded on all sides.
“The Waves of Warning!— The Waves of Warn-
ing! . . . Some dreadful event has occurred! . . .
A catastrophe threatens! ~ . The great Ira calls
on his people to rally!!”
Figures came running from every angle. From
out of the forest, from the towers and from the
forest track. They gathered in front of the smoke-
veiled towers chattering and gesticulating frantic-
ally.
On either side of the great central doorway two
Helions appeared, each holding aloft a flashing red
torch.
“Ahoi! Ahoi!” the strange humans cried. “Bear-


ers! bearers to carry out fuel for the spheres!—this
way! this way!”
Leon’s companions surged forward—the Merman
meanwhile worming his way well to the front. It
was necessary that he should get into that tower!
Among a number of others he was allowed through
the doorway and directed up a staircase.
“Carry out the kegs! Carry out the kegs!”
screamed the torch bearers. “Your planet is in
danger—threatened by Olera of Mer! Hasten with
the fuel, men of Helion! Hasten! A great fleet
speeds towards us to refuel. When the traitor meets
"Carry out the kegs—Your Planet is in danger!”


his death after sunset—all spheres must be ready
to take the air!”
Up the staircase raced Leon in company with his
weird companions, wide landings being passed en
route, on which were stacked numbers of casks and
cases. On reaching the high landing where it became
obvious that their work was to begin, the Merman,
giving a quick glance upward, saw that a last flight
of steps ascended to the door of a room directly
beneath the parapet. The smaller space here had
also been utilised, several rows of casks being
stacked on either side of the door, reaching to the
top of the walls.
Wondering why no attempt was made by the
Helions to ascend this upper flight, Leon decided
that the closely stacked barrels were either empty
or filled with special fluid .. . And the door ? What
lay behind it?
Anxious, however, not to arouse suspicion by any
display of curiosity, Leon promptly seized a barrel
near him, the opposite end of which was immediately
grasped by a Helion; and together, the pair made
their way across to the stairs.
With the awful Waves of Warning whining and
screaming in the air about them they bore their
burden downward. Long wraith-like wisps of
smoke drifted through slits in the tower wall, at
times partially obscuring the toiling figures on stairs
and landings, while flickering lamps attached to the
walls cast a dismal wavering light.
On reaching the ground floor, Leon’s piercing
gaze swept the confused scene. The din was deafen-
ing—the rasping yelping cries—orders being scream-
ed, boxes and barrels being upended and rolled


from the walls, and through all—the hideous pulsat-
ing vibrations denoting fearful danger—whipping
excitement to fever pitch.
A backward glance, as he reached the main
entrance with his assistant, showed the Merman a
row of fire-proof outfits hanging on the wall beneath
the staircase.
There were heat-proof rooms within the tower!
He had already noted the door at the far end of
the ground floor opposite the staircase. The only
other room would appear to be the one beneath the
pinnacle.—What likelier prison chamber for the
Earthman and his brother, than this apparently in-
accessible cell?
Outside the smoke-wreathed towers, the crowd
was growing larger, and on emerging from the door-
way, the two fuel bearers made their way through
excited groups to a low platform near the rows of
spheres.
Leon tried frantically to think out a plan. The
first action of the enemy would be to deprive their
prisoners of heat-proof outfits. This one action
would ensure their safe keeping. No attempt at
escape could be made without this protection . . .
How to procure outfits? and how convey them up
the staircase and through the locked door?
“Impossible!” muttered the Merman as he de-
posited his load.
His thoughts flew to his young mistress. Were
they to remain forever on this awful planet?
Leon squared his shoulders and clenched his teeth.
The Earthman must be freed!
Taking advantage of a cloud of enveloping smoke,


Leon easily contrived to lose his fellow bearer as
they left the platform, and making his way around
in front of the spheres, looked desperately about him.
A receptacle in which to hide an outfit!—that
must be his first aim. He looked at the row of
spheres. A dozen yards away, the figures of several
Helions showed vaguely in the smoke.
Cautiously Leon approached the first sphere and
sliding the door panel aside, climbed through the
opening and peered anxiously about him. Hurriedly
he unfastened the lid of a chest which stood against
the wall. It contained machine parts. Nothing to
help him here. He opened two others with no better
result. In despair he decided to slip out of the
sphere, when a chance glance behind the automatic
pilot revealed a medium-sized metal case standing
at the foot of the figure.
Springing forward he opened the box and emptied
its contents (small tools for delicate parts) on to
the floor. Would it be large enough?—He would
find nothing better! ... He was about to shut
down the lid, when the sound of a harsh voice behind
him made his heart contract.
Turning, the Merman saw the head and shoulders
of a Helion in the open doorway. On the human’s
head was the helmet of a captain.
“You are slow, sphereman,” said the captain.
“All here should be in readiness.”
“All is in readiness,” said Leon. “I now return my
tools to their box.”
“Be not again so tardy,” said the Helion, and to
the Merman’s overwhelming relief, he withdrew his
head.
With hands which trembled a little, Leon grasped


the case, and casting a furtive glance through the
panel, climbed out, and looking anxiously to right
and left, darted around the sphere and mingled
among the crowd near the platform, hoping against
hope that a sphereman carrying a box of tools was
not an unusual sight.
Making his way through the chattering mob to the
great tower, the Merman, holding himself confidently
walked through the main entrance. The excitement
here had become hectic, as with time passing, the
Helions strove for quicker movement. No one paid
any attention to Leon as he gravitated through the
turmoil towards the staircase with his box.
The light here was not good. Boldly placing his
case on the floor beneath the outfits, he seized a
cask and, rolling it forward stood it on end. Step-
ping behind the barrel, he quickly surveyed the out-
fits. There were about a dozen in all, and hanging
at the end of the row was the suit of a youngling . . .
It seemed likely that the last two outfits were those
which had been stripped from the prisoners.
The boy represented more of a problem than the
grown man, and only one suit could be carried at a
time.
Swiftly Leon tore down the smaller outfit and
crouching behind the barrel, doubled it in half, and
placing it in his case snapped down the lid.
Straightening himself, he stepped around the cask
and on to the staircase, and amidst the conglomera-
tion of struggling Helions in the upward and down-
ward traffic, the trailing smoke and flickering lights,
he climbed upward without attracting a glance.
Reaching the landing, the Merman slipped his
case behind a keg, and as he paused, uncertain as


to his next step, a Helion bearing a high-powered
torch arrived on the landing, where he was held up
for a few moments by the crowd of toilers.
“Make way for the Councillor of Ira!” the human
yelled arrogantly. “Make way! I bear orders to the
traitor in his prison chamber!”
Respectfully the Helions drew aside, and the Coun-
cillor, crossing the landing, began to ascend to the
floor above.
The Merman thought quickly. Slipping his hand
into his belt he felt for the death spray. In the
confusion of the half light, the rolling and the
carrying, he grasped his case, and in the smoky mist
which partially hid the stairway, turned, and with
cat-like tread followed Ira’s Councillor.
Nearing the top step, Leon saw the Helion swine
open the door, and bounding on to the landing and
swiftly aiming his spray, the Merman saw the man’s
knees buckle under as he pitched headlong into the
room.
Springing forward, Leon burst in on Ralph and
Tom, meanwhile projecting anti-death fumes from
the inner tube of his weapon. Hastily he closed
the door over, leaving the tiniest crevice open.
“It is Leon, master,” he whispered, as quickly re-
placing the spray, he drew a knife and began to
sever their bonds. “Dress in this man’s outfit, and
in this case is a suit for the boy. Place this anti-
fume protector in your mask. That of the young-
ling is intact. All is movement in this strange
tower as the fuel for the spheres is carried out,
and excitement rises not only at the thought of your
coming execution, but at Ira’s fierce call to the
Helions to rally.”


“What is your plan, Leon?” asked Ralph, as
quickly divesting the dead Helion of his suit, he
struggled into it. “Our difficulties appear insur-
mountable. How about Tom? I haven’t seen a
single young Helion since we left the boats. Even
if we could mix with them unobserved, Tom could
not.”
“Here is my plan, master. I have noted the casks
outside this door, and believe that all are empty.
Now that you are protected against the burning at-
mosphere, the door can be opened without further
danger. I will purloin a cask, and in it we will place
the youngling. We must bear him down the stair-
case, and out of the tower, and so escape into the
forest to my young mistress and your brother.”
“How about it, Tom?” asked Ralph, as Leon stole
through the partially open doorway.
“Rather stuffy,” said Tom, “but it’s all right with
me. We’ve got to get out of here.”
“Good fellow,” said Ralph approvingly.
“Hurry, master,” said Leon breathlessly as he
rolled in the barrel, “We work against time. Bear-
ing in mind the talk of our enemies, sunset will
soon be upon us.”
“A few air holes first,” said Ralph. “We won’t
let your suffocate, old chap.”
Rapidly the slits were made, and Tom crawled
into the cask.
“Now to get him down,” said Leon. “Our best
plan will be to let him roll down as though by acci-
dent. It will be quicker—as we have barely time .”
“Walk out confidently, master,” added the Mer-


man, who was looking through the partly open door.
“Now!—hasten! No one casts a glance this way!
All are too busy at their task. I will follow with
the barrel and kick it down as I am about to step
on to the landing. Go, master! see the wreathing
smoke, it obscures the upper flight!”
Ralph stepped from the room, and walked quietly
down through the smoke. He had barely reached
the landing when Leon, following after, kicked the
cask sending it clanging across the landing and down
the lower staircase.
Ralph stepped forward. “Careless lout!” he cried
as the cask banged down the lower flight interfering
with the straining carriers. “Hasten after the
cask, and look what you are doing.”
Angry snarls greeted the obstructors as they hur-
ried downward, but no significance was attached to
an apparently careless incident.
Seizing the barrel from the centre of the ground
floor where it had finally come to a standstill, the
two men bore it through the doorway, and out to-
wards the grounded space craft.
New formations of spheres came gliding through
the smoke clouds as the pair made their way
laboriously onw r ard, while from the encircling forest
stray Helions continued to emerge.
As they approached the fuel platform, the nerve-
wracking vibrations which constituted the Waves
of Warning ceased with startling suddenness.
A terrible stillness hovered over the closely-packed
humans in their shining suits and red headlights.
To the right of the towers, the spheres spread in


sinister rows, while overhead, quite suddenly, and
to the intense surprise of Ralph and Leon, the
smoke clouds enveloping forest and towers, began to
assume glorious coloured hues.
As Ralph and Leon, resting their barrel for a
moment on the platform, gazed in astonishment at
this beautiful transformation, a harsh trumpet call
rang out, and a figure in silvery outfit with scarlet
helmet and scabbard appeared on one of the tower
bridges.
Screeches of acclamation greeted Ira’s appearance.
When the tumult subsided, the Master of Helion
leaned forward.
“Helions!” he shrieked. “My thought sounds on
this occasion will be few . . . Our planet harbours
no traitor, but a spy of Olera of Mer! ... A spy
who forcibly removed from my palace Olera’s
daughter and the young Merites captured by my
captains in space. Ere the hour has passed, this
enemy will meet his death. Even now my Council-
lor questions him before conducting him to the tor-
ture chamber should he refuse the information
desired , . .
“And now—hearken to my command!
“At the middle hour of darkness, after the next
setting of the sun, spacemen, boatmen, and Helions
of the mountain bands will gather at our great meet-
ing place. I call on all to be present! . . . Olera’s
spheres land secretly on fiery Helion! We must
exterminate the enemy, and drive him from our
planet!”
As fanatical screams of admiration rang out once
again and Ira retired, the gloriously tinted clouds


which had turned golden, suddenly became black as
night.
The crowd split up, breaking into excited groups.
Numerous torches began to flicker amidst the
throng, while Ralph and Leon, slipping behind the
globes and into the forest with their barrel, dragged
Tom from his uncomfortable and ignominious posi-
tion.
“Damned awkward for you, old chap,” whispered
Ralph, “especially that last wait, but thank heaven
we’re out of that tower!”
“I wouldn’t like to have to go through it again,”
gasped Tom.
“Feel all right, kid?”
“When I stretch out a bit.”
“Right! stamp your feet and work your arms a
little—then we’ll make straight for Lai and Narelle!”
“This way, master,” Leon whispered, after Tom
had been allowed a few minutes to recover himself.
“I will lead the way among the trees.”
“Here is the track,” he added a little later. “Now
we follow on till we turn in towards the tree.”
Everything was quiet now—little sound of the
Helions penetrated these gloomy depths, and as they
moved farther away, Leon in subdued tones, re-
lated his experiences, following the capture of
Ralph and the young people in the passage of the
overhanging rocks.
After a time they turned in from the track, and
Leon guided them to the giant tree.
“Poor little Lai,” breathed Tom. “I’ll be dashed
glad to see him again.”


“Are they there, Leon?” Ralph whispered
anxiously.
Climbing the tree, Leon flashed his torch on the
spreading boughs—over the surrounding foliage . . .
“Something terrible has happened, master!” he
exclaimed in a voice choked with emotion. “They
are not here—my young mistress—both younglings
have disappeared!”
From afar came faint echoes of the shrieks of an
angry crowd.
Ralph’s escape had been discovered.
"Something terrible has happened, master!”


CHAPTER XIII.
THE time seemed long to Narelle and Allister, as
they sat in the high tree top straining their ears
to catch the slightest sound.
How weird it all was. Allister wondered if there
were any birds in the trees—any strange animals
hiding in the undergrowth. He could hear no rust-
lings. No sounds of any kind. The great smoke
forest was silent as the grave.
Then into this silence suddenly darted the most
horrible whining sound, bringing fear and dismay
to the startled children.
As speechless with dread they looked about them,
the dark forest seemed suddenly to become alive.
Red headlights began to gleam in the smoke clouds,
and as the youngsters peered fearfully through the
branches, Helions came hurrying between the tree
trunks jabbering and yelping—all apparently pro-
ceeding in the same direction.
With fear in their hearts the pair continued to
stare downward. After a considerable time they
noticed that - the hurrying humans were becoming
fewer in number. .. . The noise gradually grew
less—the bobbing headlights finally disappeared, till
at last, but for the terrible echo, the mysterious
black forest was again perfectly still.
“There must be something awful happening some-
where!” Allister whispered; but Narelle made no
reply.
The children continued to amidst the boughs
in strained silence, their eyes trying to pierce the


They sat high in the tree tops.


cloudy haze about them, wondering what the awful
sounds denoted and listening eagerly for Leon’s
footsteps and welcome voice.
Time wore on. The pair swallowed their nutritive
and thirst-quenching tabloids . . . Still Leon did
not come.
Suddenly to their intense relief the terrible sounds
ceased . . .
“There is not a leaf stirring, nor a soul about,
Narelle,” Allister whispered after a time. “Let’s
climb down and stretch our legs. We’ll do a little
exploring—just near the tree. We won’t go far.”
Narelle gladly agreed. Allister helped her from
the top boughs, after which she climbed down and
reached the ground almost as quickly as her friend.
Moving cautiously, the boy led the way between
the lofty trees. “We must see that we don’t get
lost,” he whispered looking carefully about him.
“What about picking bunches of this purple flower,
Narelle, and scattering the blooms as we walk?”
“That is a clever thought,” said Narelle. “Among
these thick black trees and clouds of smoke, we
could easily lose our way.”
Each gathering an armful of purple flowers and
advancing cautiously, the girl and boy gazed rather
nervously at the huge black trunks, giant ferns and
trailing vines as they sprinkled their flowers thickly.
“Gee! look at the smoke clouds ahead, Narelle,”
exclaimed Allister suddenly, “there is a sort of
glow on them—look!”
Standing beneath the fronds of a huge fern the
children watched in amazement as the greyish smoke
clouds began to take on the most beautiful rainbow
tints.


Softly the lovely mists rolled among the ebony
trees. Then gradually they melted into a bright
golden hue.
“The sun must be setting somewhere overhead,”
whispered Allister.
The pair crept along in silence till after a time
the golden light seemed to grow richer, and the
black forest became sombrely beautiful—wrapped in
trailing clouds of misty gold.
“Why there is water! See it shining, little com-
rade—just ahead!” Narelle whispered as a bril-
liant cloud suddenly parted in front of them.
“Gee whizz!” exclaimed Allister, “so there is. It
might be a creek or a river. We’ll see—” but even
as he spoke, the golden mists about them faded as
though by magic, and the great smoke forest
became black as night.
Terror struck at the hearts of the children. The
loneliness was awful. Worse! Allister suddenly
realized the horrible truth that they would be
unable to see their flower track in the pitch dark-
ness. They would have to remain where they were
till the darkness lifted—and how long—oh, how long
was the Helion night?
“Don’t be afraid, Narelle,” he whispered sturdily.
“We’ll just have to lie down and go to sleep till day
dawns—then we’ll be able to see where we sprinkled
our flowers.”
“But Leon!” exclaimed Narelle in a voice full of
distress—“if he returns and cannot find us!”
“Yes, I’ve thought of that,” said Allister in a low
tone. “We just can’t do anything about it!”
Naielle sat down silently with her back against
a tree. For a time neither spoke. Then Allister


said, “Do you know, Narelle, I’m sure the air is
cooler here.”
“That is strange,” said Narelle. “I, too, have
noticed a change. How wonderful if we could take
off these horrible helmets!”
“I could uncover the tip of a finger for a second,
and see if it shrivels or burns,” said Allister eagerly.
“No, no!” exclaimed Narelle, horrified at the idea,
“you must not—wait till day dawns—then at least
we can see—.”
“Another thing,” said Allister, “that water, what-
ever it is must be still. It is only a few feet away,
and it is not bubbling or hissing!”
“That, too, is strange,” said Narelle wonderingly.
Allister began to fumble with his protective glove.
“Little comrade—don’t be rash —I implore you—.”
Disregarding Narelle’s plea, Allister continued to
fidget with his glove . . . This was one of those
occasions on which a boy takes no notice of a girl.
Very gradually he unfastened the covering, finally
exposing his whole hand. The air felt warm and
moist upon it.
Knowing it to be useless to protest, Narelle held
her breath as Allister’s elbow stuck into her, as
raising his arms, he began to unfasten the clips at
the back of his mask.
Gingerly he raised the covering above his chin—
right off his face. He breathed the hot moist air.
Trembling with excitement, the boy caught
Narelle’s arm.
“You can take off your helmet, little friend.” he
said joyfully. “My face is quite uncovered. I
should think the air here is only about as hot as
the hottest part of our tropics. Let me help vou take
it off.”


“That’s a piece of luck, anyway,” the boy said
cheerfully, as he laid the helmets side by side on
the ground.
“Now we’re not going to mope,” he continued. “I
don’t think we need be afraid, for I’m sure there is
not a living thing anywhere about us. I’ll tell you
a story about my parents and my world, and then
you can tell one about yours—we’ll take it in turns!”
Sitting close together in the pitch darkness with
their backs against the tree, the youngsters ex-
changed their stories in whispers, and after a time,
,'orgetting their fears and becoming sleepy, they lay
down on the ground and went to sleep . . .
When Allister awoke, yellow shafts were falling
through the smoke clouds, turning the black rolls
to silver grey and softest white.
Narelle was still asleep. Allister looked at his hel-
met and mask. The air though hot and steamy, felt
pleasantly cool on his face. . . The boy yawned.
The smoke clouds were whirling overhead. Suddenly
remembering the water they had seen on the
previous night, he peered sleepily around the huge
tree trunk at the foot of which they had slept.
Wide awake now, he sprang to his feet, and step-
ping from behind the tree, gave an excited gasp. A
lake! covered in giant water lillies of the most beauti-
ful hues! The water shone and a gentle breeze blew
among the flowers. The air shimmered in the heat,
and high above, white clouds, shot through and
through with golden light, were wafted hither and
thither.
The black trees of the forest w r hich grew 7 close
around the lake edge as far as he could see stood
out clearly, while the further end of the lake dis-
solved in a beautiful sun-lit haze.


“Oh Gee! but it looks good,” thought the boy.
“Wake up, Narelle!” he cried turning and giving his
friend a vigorous shake—“nothing to be afraid of
either!”
Narelle rose sleepily.
“Do you see what I see?” cried Allister delightedly.
Helmets in hand, the pair stood on the brink of
the lake. Bending forward Allister thrust his hand
into the water. It felt pleasantly warm. Seating
themselves near the water’s edge, the children sat
for a time talking excitedly about the lake and ad-
miring the lillies . . .
. . . “Gee! I’d give anything for a grilled chop and
a cup of tea!” Allister exclaimed suddenly.
“A what?” asked Narelle curiously.
Allister tried to explain. Then with a sigh, he
produced some tabloids which he and his companion
proceeded to swallow.
“Gosh! Narelle, I believe I’d like a swim even bet-
ter than a chop!” the boy announced a few minutes
later.
“Would it be wise?” asked Narelle.
“No,” said Allister, “I suppose if Tom were here,
he wouldn’t let me.”
“Anyway,” he continued, “people can’t always be
wise—let us have a bit of fun for a change!”
Tempted by the shining water and great scented
flowers, Narelle was easily persuaded to remove her
outfit.
“It won’t matter getting your tunic wet,” the boy
said as he removed his close fitting jacket. “It’ll
soon dry—whoopee!—off we go!”
Fears thrown to the winds in their eagerness, the
children waded into the gleaming lake. They laughed


for the very joy of it, as they swam and splashed
and dived. They stroked the velvety lily petals
lovingly, and drank in their beautiful perfume.
“Absolutely scrumptious!” cried Allister gaily. “I
wonder what is behind those high lilies further up
the lake?”
They could see huge clumps of blooms, which un-
like those about them grew on long stalks, higher
they judged, than their own heads.
“There is something in behind them,” said Allis-
ter. “I’d like to have a peep.”
“No,” said Narelle firmly. “We must go back.
Leon may have returned . . . And are not enemies
likely to appear from anywhere at any moment?”
“I wish I had another boy with me,” said Allister
darkly.
“I wish you had,” said Narelle tossing her head.
Allister changed his tactics. “Oh, come along,
Narelle,” he wheedled, “be a sport! I’d really much
rather have you than another boy. And when we
see what is behind those lilies, we’ll go straight back
to Leon’s tree.”
Narelle relented. “Let us hurry then,” she said
“but I greatly fear that we are doing wrong!”
Hiding outfits and masks in the undergrowth, they
again plunged into the water. With a wild whoop,
Allister led the way between the lily clumps, shoot-
ing along with a swift overarm stroke. Narelle fol-
lowed, fears already forgotten in the enjoyment of
the delightful swim.
Allister was the first to reach the tall lilies, and
finding that the water had become shallow, began
to wade through the colourful blooms.


After a time the flowers thinned out a little—
some clumps were not so high. “Different kinds,”
Allister decided.
Suddenly a huge sun-tinted cloud floated upwards
in front of him, and the boy stood still—transfixed
with delight.
“Why, Narelle!” he shouted. “Look what I’ve
found ... An island—a lovely little island!”
Standing amidst lilies taller than themselves, the
children gazed delightedly at the island which was
of a dull reddish colour resembling sandstone.
Long low cliffs faced them, and the blue opalescent
water which lapped the tiny beach was studded with
lilies which were mostly pink and cream.
At one end of the fascinating little island, a
streamlet ran in through the cliffs, apparently mak-
ing its way out again by the opposite shore.
With a shout of joy, Allister raced through the
lilies and sprang on to the beach.
“It is indeed beautiful,” cried Narelle happily as
she danced lightly after her venturesome friend
“We’ll wade in here between the cliffs,” cried
Allister . . . “Why the little stream runs right
across the island!”
Splashing into the water, the children were wading
along between the steep walls shouting gaily to one
another, when suddenly their hearts turned to ice . .
Cutting through the horrified silence which
gripped them, came a harsh screaming voice.
“Heard you the strange sounds?” it cried com-
mandingly—“Spread out, Men of Helion!—Spread
out! Search the island!— The enemies of Ira may
lurk close at hand!”


CHAPTER XIV.
YELLS and shouts rang out ominously. Great
splashing sounds could be heard, and turning quickly
Allister caught a glimpse of a low flattish boat on
the water, near the spot where they had sprung
ashore.
Despair surged over the boy. Their enemies were
on the point of surrounding them! Their Helion
outfits were far away on the shore of the lake!
Seizing Narelle by the arm Allister dragged her
downward. “Swim!” he whispered hoarsely point-
ing along the stream. “Swim for your life to those
rocks!”
Swiftly the pair swam towards a cluster of boul-
ders near the opposite shore of the island where the
stream re-entered the lake. Fear spurring them
onward, they reached the rocks, and drawing them-
selves out of the water, crouched with pounding
hearts behind a boulder listening to the yelps of the
Helions.
But the cries were coming closer—closer! Their
foes were swarming across the island!
“Remember the Waves of Warning!” came the
blood-chilling shrieks. “Seek out the lurking Mer-
men ! Seek out the spies of Olera of Mer, who have
dared to land on our planet!”
For a split second, Allister looked wildly about
him. Then with Narelle at his heels, he plunged
breathlessly into the lake among the lilies. Crawling
forward in the shallow water on hands and knees
as far as they dared, the children burrowed among
the blooms and lay as still as mice.


Their foes were now entering the water. Loud
splashings told of their nearness. The Helions began
to beat the heavy flowers from their stalks with
sticks, and Narelle’s hair stiffened on her head as a
long-eared man passed within a yard of where she
lay.
“Spread out, and close around the island!” came the
harsh command. “Beat off the flowers! The enemy
may lie hidden therein. Aha! Aha! the large Mer-
men will not hide for long!”
It was now or never. “Can you swim under water,
Narelle?” breathed Allister. “Yes,” came the whis-
pered reply.
“Come along,” said the boy.
With bated breath the pair wormed their way
forward into deeper water where the flowers, now
flatter, lay in scattered groups about the lake.
Swimming under water, they reached a huge
clump of flame-coloured lilies.
The screams of the Helions rang in their ears, as
surrounding the island their enemies searched vainly
among the rocks, and strode with rising fury, judg-
ing by their shrieks, among the heavy-headed flow-
ers. The fugitives shuddered. Not daring to look
back, they sank beneath the water and swam for
their lives towards the shore.
Continuing under water from clump to clump,
they gradually approached the wooded banks, and
reaching shallow water, rose panting amidst a mass
of blooms.
“Just in the nick of time, Narelle!” gasped Allis-
ter, “only just! Another second reaching those flame
lilies and we’d have been lost!”
Narelle nodded. She was too breathless to speak.


Parting the flower petals, Allister peeped out
betweeen them. He saw strange flat boats hovering
near the island.
“Two of them are moving out, Narelle,” he whis-
pered. “We’d better skip into the forest as quickly
as we can.”
Narelle agreed—and stepping cautiously ashore,
the youngsters ran into the shelter of the trees.
To their horror a blast of hot air greeted them and,
terrified lest the shrivelling heat should return and
scorch their unprotected bodies, they slipped back
again into the water.
The children burrowed in among the blooms.


“We’ll have to get around to where we left our
outfits,” said Ailister, “We know it’s safe there.”
Crawling through the shallow water, the boy and
girl soon reached the point at which they had entered
the lake, and stealing ashore and uncovering their
suits and masks, they hurriedly struggled into them.
Both youngsters had become very silent
What had happened to Ralph and Tom? —Ailister
wondered. He and Narelle had been away for so
long ...
The boy began to feel very ashamed. Had Leon
returned and found them absent? .. . This was the
uppermost thought in each of their minds as they
followed the trail of purple blooms back to the tree.
With the smoke clouds drifting about them once
more and their spirits gradually sinking lower and
lower, the pair stole along in the subdued light till
finally they reached the big tree.
“Where have you been ?” asked Ralph’s stern voice.
Ailister almost jumped out of his skin.
“Yes, young man,” continued Ralph shinning
down the trunk, “Where have you been? Delaying
us in this manner for a whole night, and part of a
day. Perhaps taking away our one chance of escape
from this awful place . . . Forced to remain here
till nightfall entirely on your account!”
Ailister hung his head.
“There’s a beautiful lake covered in lilies in there,”
he said lamely, “and an island in the middle of it . . .
It was all my fault.”
“We don’t doubt that,” said Ralph curtly, “and if
I were not afraid of bringing our enemies down
upon us, I would cut a thick switch from this tree,
and give you the sound thrashing you deserve. The


precious hours we have lost through your thought-
less disobedience!”
“I am sorry, Ralph,” said Allister miserably. “1
expect I’m really a bad little lot—like Mr. Smith
said the afternoon I broke the two dormitory win-
dows at school.”
“At the moment, I’m afraid that I agree with
Mr. Smith,” said Ralph coldly.—“Up that tree —
double quick time!”
Overcome with remorse, and quite unaware of his
brother’s overwhelming relief at his safe return,
Allister clambered upwards unhappily. On nearing
the top boughs, however, he was warmly welcomed
by Tom. “You’re an awful little devil, Lai,” Tom
whispered grasping the younger boy’s arm affec-
tionately, “but I’m jolly glad to see you all the same.”
Narelle, meanwhile, had tried to take some of the
blame, but no one noticed her protests, and on reach-
ing her crestfallen comrade sitting beside Tom in
the smoky tree top, she, too, gave him a sympathetic
pat.
Allister felt quite undeserving of any kindness
but nevertheless he appreciated these efforts to com-
fort him.
Good old Tom—Narelle was a little sport—. But
no wonder Ralph was mad!
Never, never again would he (Allister) be so
thoughtless and foolish. Never! Never!
The boy began to slowly regain his spirits. In
an hour or so, he felt fit for anything . . .
Throughout the day, the party remained in hiding.
Ralph and Leon had decided to try and reach the
boats. How this would benefit them, they could not,


at the moment, foresee. But it was only by travel-
ling down the dark turbulent river that they could
hope to get anywhere near “The Flame”.
Immediately the blackout descended on the forest,
the two men climbed from the tree, the three young
people following quietly. The party advanced in
silence to the track, and still keeping within the
shelter of the trees, began to follow it towards the
river.
As they approached within sight of the wharf,
Ralph became conscious of a strange sound. A
murmuring sound—which rose and rose, finally
swelling to a perfect babel . . .
Voices! —the voices of a great number of humans!
Looking out between the smoke-veiled trees, the
Earthman saw myriads of crimson headlights flar-
ing in the darkness, while beyond the wharf—on
which the smoke cast sombre shadows —white lights
flashed from jumbled masses.
Boats! the river was jammed with them! and
from the boats a multitude of the masked inhabi-
tants was pouring from the wharf on to the forest
track!
The hum of engines sounded faintly overhead,
and glancing skywards, Ralph saw the twin lights
of scores of spheres shining in the night.
From their hidden position, the two men watched
the headlights of the yelping, jabbering torrent turn
into the opposite side of the forest about a dozen
yards from where they stood.
“Wonder what is doing?” Ralph whispered. “Can
this be the response to the Waves of Warning?”
“Undoubtedly, master Earthman,” said Leon,
“and could we but gain a slight knowledge of their
future movement or plan, it might show a way out.”


“The boats should soon be practically deserted,”
said Ralph. “If only we could drive ourselves down
the river! Do you remember clearly, Leon, the point
from which we embarked?”
“I remember prefectly, master,” replied the Mer-
man, “also do I remember the path through the dark
cleft towards the great gap—the track across the
mountain slope to the valley—and the gorge which
leads to the hollow where your good ship lies . . .!”
“I am going to follow this mob and see what they
are doing,” said Ralph, suddenly deciding. “We’re
almost opposite that track or road they’re following,
and it would be quite easy in the smoke and dark-
ness to slip from the trees and mingle among them.
I will go along with them for a short distance and
learn what I can.”
“I will attend you, master,” whispered Leon. “The
younglings knowing how fraught with danger is our
position will remain without sound in this tree.”
Ralph turned to his small brother.
“Can I trust you, Lai?” he asked.
“You can, Ralph,” replied Allister earnestly.
“Very well,” said Ralph. “I rely on you all.”
Leaving Tom in charge high in a tree top, the two
men switching on their headlights, slipped from the
smoke-shrouded trees without difficulty, and mingled
unobserved among the crowd.
Moving onward amidst the throng, they found
that they were traversing a wide forest road . . .
Vague snatches of talk soon told Ralph that his sur-
mise had been correct. Dire danger threatened
Helion—the crowd was moving towards some great
meeting place.


They had covered about a mile when the smoke
cleared a little, and fiery mountain tops became
visible once more. The forest began to thin out on
either side. The ground gradually became rough
and rock strewn, and soon they were passing between
steep mountain walls . . .
Now they could hear a terrific hum—almost a
roar of voices.
“We’re coming to it, Leon,” whispered Ralph,
“whatever ‘it’ is.”
The noise increased in volume, and as the preci-
pices on either side closed in, the track ended in a
comparatively narrow opening.
“A natural gateway,” Ralph whispered. “I don’t
trust it —but having come so far, we must certainly
step inside and see what is happening!”
The crowd was held up for a few minutes by the
narrowness of the entrance, but with much yelping
and shrieking the Helions gradually passed through.
Eventually Ralph and Leon’s turn came, and with
a number of others they at last emerged from the (
congested gateway.
Ralph drew in his breath, while Leon gave an
audible gasp . . .
... A vast open space amidst the mountains,
floored with solid black lava spread out in front of
them, upon which thousands of Helions were con-
gregated—while opposite—in front of the multitude,
reared a huge curving wall of lava, resembling a
gigantic black wave arrested in mid air . , .
Towards the centre of the dark sweeping curve
were inset two whirling balls of flame which propelled
brilliant beams across the throng, while in between
the fiery masses a small platform projected.


Beneath this platform—in rows and rows of seats
hewn across the lava wave and extending downward
to the edge of the crowd, sat countless Helions . . .
Away to the left of the colossal black curve, the
lights of hundreds of spheres could be seen danc-
ing in the darkness. Numbers of the spacecraft
could be seen descending—their crews landing, and
streaming across the lava towards the throng.
As Ralph and Leon gazed in wonder at the fan-
tastic scene, screams and cries suddenly arose, swell-
ing to a deafening clamour, as Ira, clad in shining
suit, red helmet, and clutching a red scabbard,
mounted the platform between the flaming discs.
The noise died and a great silence fell
.. . “Helions!” shrieked Ira, “In obedience to the
Waves of Warning you have hastened from far and
near! Danger!” he yelled. “Danger threatens the
planet on which a stranger has never before landed!
Olera of Mer covets fiery Helion, and has at last
devised means of landing upon it!”
His voice rose to a scream. “Olera’s daughter
was spirited away, while Helions were done to death!
The Merman and the youngling vanished as though
by magic from beneath the pinnacle of the space-
drome tower! Alien voices were heard in the cool
lake of lilies . . . Danger! danger lurks in every
corner—!. Our protective outfits, all of one design
save for their distinctive badges, and hitherto con-
stituting no menace, now give great and terrible ad-
vantage to a foe, who by killing a Helion and steal-
ing his outfit, is able to mingle unobserved among
the unwary. With my captains I have found an
answer to this peril. Even here in this gathering,
the enemy may stand beside you unseen.”—A per-


ceptible uneasy movement swept the throng.—
“Those appointed will now, according to plan, begin
the task of identifying each human present. All
summoned have now arrived, save the few boatmen
and mountain bands accounted for—.”
“This is where we buz off,” whispered Ralph.
“Quickly! While they’ve all got their eyes on him!”
The two men took a backward step into the open-
ing. “Look above, master!” gasped Leon, and fol-
lowing the Merman’s gaze Ralph saw a huge metal
sheet with wide serrated edge coming down above
his head. There was just time! ... As they
sprang clear Ira’s voice came to them faintly. “The
gateway is about —”
“Close shave!” gasped Ralph. “Unless we can
work quickly we’re done! Put out your headlight,
Leon, and sprint for your life!”
The two men ran at breakneck speed along the
now deserted road, hardly pausing for breath till
they reached the tree where their young charges
awaited them.
“Hurry, youngsters!” panted Ralph. “There is
not a second to lose. Down you come,” he continued
as he helped them to the ground. “Our only hope
lies in one of those boats.”
A few minutes, and they had crossed the rocky
wharf—and striding aboard the nearest boat Ralph
saw two Helions standing beside the machinery.
“Drive this boat to the wharf at the dark defile,”
he said threateningly. “Obey my orders, or you are
both dead men!”
“Who are you who thus orders us?” asked the
nearest Helion truculently.
Quickly Leon handed Ralph his fume phial, and
leaning forward, the Earthman waved the small


weapon beneath his interrogator’s mask . . . The
man tottered and fell.
Ralph turned to the second man.
“Start the boat at once,” he said peremptorily.
Terrified, the Helion turned and obeyed. A few
minutes later, the boat was well out from the wharf,
heading downstream.
Ralph and Leon seated themselves a few paces
from the boatman, while the young people, standing
near one of the windows, watched the smoke clouds,
all three shuddering when the glowing mountain
craters reappeared.
Start the boat at once,” he said peremptorily


“What about these two fellows?” Ralph asked,
as the boat finally drew in and stopped at the wharf.
“The death spray,” answered Leon promptly.
“Yes,” agreed Ralph, “there must be no one to
tell tales. They must die.”
As Ralph hustled his charges on to the wharf,
Leon, drawing his weapon, projected it upon the
Helions.
The one dropped like a stone . . . The sleeper
would never wake again.
Replacing his spray, the Merman quickly led the
way to the mouth of the defile.
“This place is, of course, new to me,” said Ralph
looking up at the steep walls as they entered. “What
a death trap such a passage could be! We’ll have
to chance our torches. Now, kiddikins, step it out!
We’ve got to go for our lives. Remember we work
against time!”
Through the darkness of the deep cleft they hur-
ried, on through the wild gap, and along the moun-
tain track to the valley, the men’s nerves strained
almost to breaking point as they kept watch for
stray members of the “mountain bands accounted
for”.
By the time the valley was reached, Narelle had
begun to limp, and lifting her in his arms, Ralph
carried her as the march was continued.
When at last the party entered the smoke-
enveloped gorge, the boys, dizzy with fatigue, were
stumbling badly.
In spite of their masks the fumes in the enclosed
space almost choked them, but making a tremendous
effort, the pair kept going.
On—on they reeled between the awful heights,


unpleasantly reminded of the overhanging passage
and expecting each moment to be sprung upon by
enemies.
Could that really be the depression among the
volcanoes which Ralph had spoken of opening up
in front of them ? Tom wondered light-headedly . . .
Was that really their beloved ship—their only home
—rising majestically in the awe-inspiring surround-
ings ahead . . .?
It was.
Dragging themselves forward behind their pro-
tectors, and uttering weak cries of joy, the boys sank
down beside “The Flame”.
“Well done, Bruddikins,” said Ralph approvingly,
as Narelle slipped from his arms. “What a walk—
or run! We’ve certainly moved quickly. I’m all in
myself!”
The young man looked about him and then stared
upward.
The sky was black as jet, the weird craters spang-
ling its darkness with red and gold.
“We should have a good start, Leon,” Ralph said.
“It should be a couple of hours at least before they
can get their patrols out. The business of identify-
ing that crowd should take some little time. Depends
on their powers of organization, of course . . .
Anyway, I must get some sleep. I am dizzy for
lack of it. Even an hour ... I should not think our
friends could get going before then—.”
“You must sleep, master, while I keep watch,”
said Leon looking anxiously at the Earthman. “I
can sleep later in the ship. You will need all your
strength. Fresh dangers assuredly await us.”
“lou’re right there, Leon,” Ralph agreed


“And now, young ones!—into the ship and stretch
out —masks and all . . . Your worries are over, for
the moment anyway.”
The trio did not need to be told twice. In a few
minutes, they were fast asleep.
At the time agreed on, Leon aroused Ralph.
The flames still spurted against a dark starless
sky. Ralph rose to his feet—yawned, and thumped
his chest.
“All serene, Leon?” he enquired.
“All, master,” replied the Merman.
“I feel a new man,” declared Ralph. “Wish I
could remove this confounded mask though. Re-
markable what a fellow can get used to! Let us
have some tabloids before we start.”
Standing in the shadow of the ship, the pair
swallowed their monotonous refreshment.
“Not very satisfying at the moment,” Ralph re-
marked with a shrug.
“It will restore your strength, master,” said Leon
soberly.
“Which is the main thing,” returned Ralph.
“And now to our seats,” he added briskly, “With
a little luck we will keep our tryst with the red
sphere. Don’t w r ake the young ones —they can eat
later. Poor little devils, what a time they’ve had!”
Leon quickly took his place in the ship, while
Ralph, pausing for a moment, anxiously scanned the
sky through his lenses. He was about to lower
them when tiny pin points of light, high over the
distant mountains, arrested his attention.
“They’re out, Leon!” he cried.
Springing into “The Flame,” Ralph slid into his
seat. A hectic minute or so at the controls, and
the great ship began to shoot towards space.


As they were entering the smoke banks high
above Helion, Ralph caught a glimpse in his televisic
mirror of a dark cloud-like formation below. The
flaming craters were blotted from view . . . Ira’s
black spheres spread like a blanket above the
planet . . .
“All set—ready to give Olera a hot reception and
prevent further landings,” said Ralph. “Imagine
the search that is going on underneath! .. . Wonder
how the identification got along? Wouldn’t Ira
be furious when he found they were all trumps!!
Anyhow, Leon, we should be safe in the space lanes
till they find out their mistake.”
“Fortune has indeed favoured us, master Earth-
man,” said the Merman fervently.
Up—up—they shot into space, great distances
beyond Helion to the pre-arranged meeting place,
Ralph meanwhile keeping a careful eye on his
spaceometer.
Suddenly grasping the lense he swept the sur-
rounding darkness. “There she is, Leon,” he cried
triumphantly. “There—you can see her now with
the naked eye!—l’ll signal her.”
Returning the signal, the red sphere glided swiftly
towards “The Flame,” and the spacecraft were soon
linked by the bridge.
The captain’s face wore an expression of tense
anxiety, as he entered Ralph’s ship. He gazed eagerly
about him, till suddenly his eyes fastened on the
youthful sleepers.
“Good friend!” he exclaimed with emotion. “You
have survived a visit to dread Helion. That in itself
were enough. But you have also found and rescued
the younglings. I beg of you to relate to me how you
accomplished this seemingly impossible feat!”


Bending over the transmitter for a second, the
Merman ordered the withdrawal of his bridge, and
after giving the order that the red sphere shoot at
full speed towards Mer, he seated himself near Ralph.
As the rocket ship and the sphere glided onward
covering hundreds of thousands of miles, the captain
listened with rapt attention to Ralph’s story.
“You have earned the gratitude of Olera and all
men of Mer,” the spaceman said when at last the
adventurous tale was finished. “Besides restoring
our chieftain’s daughter, you have walked Ira’s city
- -you have moved among the flaming mountains of
Helion. Olera thirsts for knowledge of the planets
and the stars. He will wish to learn and hear from
you what you have seen.”
“I will gladly give him any information he de-
sires,” said Ralph eagerly.
“The chieftain has made extensive charts of in-
habited space,” continued the captain. “He has
penetrated behind the dark cloud in the region of the
white veil. It is his great desire to chart the skies
and make his knowledge free to all .. . Ira endeav-
ours to frustrate him, but Olera steadily pursues his
way.”
“The region of the white veil? the dark cloud?”
repeated Ralph with a puzzled frown. “Why, per-
haps those regions are what we on earth call the
Milky Way and the Coal Sack ?”
“I know not,” said the Merman.
“Good captain,” exclaimed Ralph impulsively. “I
long to return to my own world, the Planet Earth—


your chieftain may be able to help me. Perhaps he
would allow me to study his charts ?”
“Olera has called you friend and brother, with-
out doubt he would help you—” began the Captain.
A shaft of light shooting through space lit up
the control cabin, interrupting their conversation,
and causing both men to rivet their eyes on the dark
void about them.
Great bolts of light were stabbing space.
“An electric storm!” cried the captain. “I return
to my sphere. Keep your craft stationary till you
feel her dropping beneath you—then exert all your
ingenuity to retain control.” The bridge was hur-
riedly extended and withdrawn, and the Merman had
barely re-entered his sphere when “The Flame”
began to rock crazily.
Ralph struggled with the controls as the ship
rolled and pitched and shuddered.
The young people awakened. Startled and be-
wildered, they looked about them. Narelle tried hard
to suppress a scream. It was evident that they had
escaped from Helion, and that “The Flame” was out
in space .. . But what was wrong?
Narelle alone knew. She had experienced electric
storms when travelling through space with her
father, and the memory tilled her with dread.
“Keep calm, youngsters,” said Ralph, “that will
help a lot, we’ve only struck an electric storm, we’ll
weather it!”
“Only!” jerked out Allister as he was lifted bodily
from the floor by a terrific jolt and flung against the
wall.
Grasping Narelle’s arm, Tom tried to comfort her.
“Don’t be frightened,” he whispered. “We’ll come
through all right!”


Narelle shuddered. “Never, never can I get used
to these storms,” she said despairingly.
Suddenly the swaying movement ceased, and the
ship began to glide onward at a terrific rate.
“Danger, master!” yelled Leon.
Narelle bowed her head on her knees, while the
boys, their faces white beneath their masks, shrank
back against the glass wall.
“Gravitational pull of a star,” said Ralph grimly.
“We’re rushing towards a mass of sizzling gas!”
CHAPTER XV.
BENDING over the control panel, Ralph rapidly
adjusted switches ?nd levers. The ship’s special
apparatus designed to withstand the terrific pull of
a star was as yet untried.
As “The Flame” sped along like a swiftly flying
arrow, Narelle and the boys huddled in frozen silence
against the wall.
Would the withdrawing apparatus act?—would
it? Ralph asked himself frantically, as the hair-
raising glide continued with unbroken velocity.
Then suddenly the ship swerved. She became
stationary—. Another second, and she began to
drop down, down, down . . .
Face livid with strain, Ralph bent over the con-
trols. Leon regarded him fearfully. Could the
young Earthman steady their falling craft?— Yes!
surely their descent was a fraction slower!
Then suddenly Ralph put her into a horrifying
spinning dive.


“The Flame” tore through the gravitational waves
like a meteor. Exerting a supreme effort, he pulled
her out, and they began to travel at normal speed.
“Phew!” exclaimed Ralph pushing back his head-
gear and wiping his brow. “A close thing! How-
ever, here we are, and I have learned from the
experience.”
He turned to the three pallid ones.
“Poor little Narelle and brotherkins! How about
a drink for me and something to eat for you?—A
treat after all the tabloids!
The youngsters brightened a little at the thought
of food.
Rising unsteadily to his feet, Tom poured out a
drink for Ralph while Leon poured one for Narelle.
With an effort Allister roused himself. He opened
a metal box, and taking from it some of the food
which had been supplied to them on the asteroid,
offered it to his companions.
All three began to eat silently, but with evident
enjoyment.
The trio began to feel more cheerful.
“Come along, Narelle,” said Tom, after the meal
was finished, “Sit between us, and we’ll look out
into space, and see what’s going to come at us next!”
Ralph, who had been scanning the void with some
anxiety, heard Tom’s suggestion.
“Keep your eyes skinned for the red sphere,
youngsters,” he said. “She should appear at any
moment. Olera’s spheres are better equipped to
withstand gravitational movement than we—so look
out for her—she is bound to be somewhere near.”
“Right!” exclaimed Tom. “W r e’ll see who can spot
her first!”


“Have you any idea where we are, Leon?” Ralph
asked the Merman as the young people took up their
posts of observation. “We covered vast distances
in that gravitational pull. Examine the spaceometer.
Are we nearer or farther away from Mer?”
“Farther away, master,” Leon replied. “We were
drawn many thousands of miles in an opposite direc-
tion .. .” He bent over the instrument. “We should
be in the region of the distant asteroids known as
the Three Pearls,” he added.
“The Three Pearls!” repeated Ralph smiling.
“Yes,” said Leon. “They are small and lovely.
Pearls of Space.”
“Did you hear that, young ones?” cried Ralph.
“Sounds good after Helion!”
“See, master!” exclaimed Leon. “Clouds are ris-
ing about us. I believe even now we are above one
of The Pearls!”
Ralph, however, made no reply. He was gazing
intently into a cloud formation directly in their
path.
“Tell me, Leon,” he said in a low tone. “Do you
an object in the clouds ahead? It is definitely
not a sphere. Surely I am not mistaken, it looks
like a rocket ship.”
“I see it plainly, master,” said Leon. “But there
is more than one shape—l see several.”
A yell came from Allister. “Space ships! just
like our own!”
“Why, Ralph!” cried Tom, his eyes sparkling as
a thrilling idea entered his head.
Ralph’s eyes danced.
“Well, boys!” he cried. “If those are not my lost
Rangers, I’ll eat my hat—or mask!”


“I knew it!” cried Tom joyfully.
“Our ships!” exclaimed Allister ecstatically.
It was Leon’s turn to exclaim with satisfaction,
as the red sphere came gliding towards them through
the clouds. The Merman’s relief was very real—
for should the Earthman’s conclusion prove correct,
might he not decide to continue the search for his
own planet instead of visiting Mer?
Increasing speed, Ralph forged towards the phan-
tom shapes, followed at a short distance by the red
sphere . . . All doubts were set at rest. They could
see the blue star of Aureela, and the Southern Cross
flashing from the ships!
In pursuit of the rockets, he was rapidly ap-
proaching the asteroid. Clouds rolled below, and
diving through them, “The Flame” entered a silver
mist.
The ships were well down over the asteroid, Ralph
could see them landing.
“Won’t Eldron be pleased!” shouted Tom.
“And old Olia,” added Allister, clapping his hands
with glee.
Beneath them, low green hills showed through a
gossamer of glittering mist, while chains of beauti-
ful lagoons, their waters shining like polished mir-
rors, abounded jewel like in the emerald setting.
One of the Aureelians, standing beside the ground-
ed space craft, looking upward, saw the swooping
Flame . He gave a great shout. Turning towards
him, his companions followed his gaze .
Joyous cries burst from the Aureelian crews.
The Flame! The Flame I—The young Earthman!
Our Commander! he comes! he comes!”


Rushing forward wildly and crying out an enthu-
siastic welcome, the Aureelians surrounded the ship
as she landed, but as Ralph and Leon appeared in
their heat-proof outfits, so different to their own high
altitude gear—the spacemen recoiled.
“Back to your ships, men!” Eldron shouted. “Our
leader has been captured by unknown foes!”
Ralph leapt from “The Flame”.
“You’re wrong there, Eldron!” he cried, and rush-
ing forward, he grasped his friend by the hand.
Tom and Allister, close at his heels, greeted their
old friends rapturously.
“Good old Eldron and Olia,” yelled Allister.
“We thought you’d gone forever,” cried Tom.
For the moment they all forgot Narelle and Leon,
who having alighted from the ship, were watching
the scene with interest. Ralph quickly missed the
pair, however, and bringing Narelle and the faith-
ful Leon forward, he introduced them to his friends.
It was a joyous reunion. The Aureelians sur-
rounded Ralph, delighted to see him again, and
clamouring to hear of his adventures. For their
part, they had been driven from their course by the
meteor shower, and had subsequently received a
severe battering in an electric storm. Finally they
had reached the asteroid, where they where shelter-
ing while repairing their fleet.
“Our ships are now spaceworthy,” Eldron con-
cluded. “Had you arrived even a little later, you
would not have found us here.”
Meanwhile, the red sphere was landing near the
Aureelian ships, and as the captain and crew climbed
from the craft, Ralph hailed them.


“Meet a brave captain of Mer, my friends!” he
cried, “and also his courageous crew!”
Stepping forward, the Aureelians greeted the new-
comers cordially. They gazed at the red sphere with
interest, and when, a little later, Ralph and his party
returned to “The Flame” to discard their heat-proof
outfits, the captain invited Eldron and his crews to
inspect the craft.
Seated in front of the great rocket ships, Ralph
and his captains decided, after some discussion, that
after a few hours rest, the entire party should set
out for Mer.
Ralph wished to return Narelle to the chieftain,
and was also anxious to pay a brief visit to the
planet which produced such highly intelligent and
remarkable men ... He prayed that Olera might
be able to help him. He must strain every nerve in
his endeavour to speed the return of the boys to the
Earth. For them—this wild adventuring should
cease . . . He looked at Allister who was relating
with great gusto some of his experiences to his old
friends. At Tom, seated beside Narelle, similarly
occupied. The boys were in perfect health, with
nerves to all appearance unimpaired ... He must
get them back where they belonged.
While Ralph was telling his friends of Olera’s
studies, of his maps and knowledge of chartered
space, he noticed a procession of tiny figures moving


towards them along the flower-starred bank of a
lagoon.
“The asteroid is inhabited then?” Ralph enquired
of Eidron.
“Yes,” the Aureelian replied. “Small gentle beings
who have fed us with fruit and vegetables, and
brought us fresh water from their springs. They
live mostly in sunshine, for there is but one hour
of darkness on the Pearls.”
The young people stared curiously at the smal!
golden brown inhabitants, who wore wreaths of
flowers in their hair, and who on seeing new visitors
approaching, had come to offer gifts.
When the presents had been duly accepted, and
the boys had sampled some delicious fruit, Tom
begged Ralph’s permission to accompany the soft-
spoken little humans for a short distance on their
homeward way.
Ralph thought for a moment, as he cast a pene-
trating glance about him ... “I don’t see how you
could get into any mischief here,” he said “though
one never knows—does one, Lai? —Yes, you can go.
Be back in an hour.”
It was a happy break. The trio raced joyously
along green flower-strewn slopes, and Narelle
plucked beautiful yellow blossoms, which grew to
the edge of a shining lagoon. The highlight was the
plunge into the tempting water and the delightful
swim which followed.
The friendly inhabitants watched the young
people’s actions with interest. The small humans
did not live in houses or huts, their guests discov-
ered, but slept among the flowers in the sunshine.


“It would be all right for awhile,” Allister re-
marked to Ralph on their return, “but they must
get tired of doing nothing. I’d be praying for
something to happen. We must be a godsend to
them!”
Ralph laughed. “I’m afraid you would soon be
making things happen, Lai,” he said. “It is a little
habit of yours. Come now, and get some sleep. In
a few hours, we shall be setting out for Her.”
All was excitement and bustle when they awoke.
The captains were giving their ships a last look
The friendly inhabitants watched the young people.


over, while the gentle inhabitants arrived laden with
gifts once again, regretful that their visitors must
leave them.
An hour later, the Rangers, with the red sphere
in the lead, rose over the asteroid, and were soon
far out in space. Shooting onward at top speed, the
space craft journeyed unbelievable numbers of
miles.
Ralph talked gaily to Narelle and the boys. He
was looking forward to his visit to Mer. He hoped
no more meteor showers or electric storms would
be encountered, and as they were now vast distances
from Helion, no trouble from that direction was
anticipated.
Narelle sat between the two boys. All three were
laughing happily. Ralph smiled as he listened. He
liked the laughter of children.
But suddenly his smile froze ... He leaned for-
ward staring into the purplish void. Surely he
didn’t see aright!
W hat were those points of light flashing in the
distance ?
“Ira scouring the Universe for us!” the young
man muttered. “Distance means nothing. He’s
after our blood!”
Quickly Ralph flashed a message to the other
ships.
Huge fleet of black spheres ahead. Just where I
want them .'—Prepare to attack!”


CHAPTER XVI.
•‘INTO formation!” came the second order. “At the
signal, project the scarlet ray!”
Ira’s spheres came rushing onward—a dark
blurred mass punctuated by thousands of gleaming
lights. The space ships had already begun to rock
as the malign waves rolled towards them.
Swiftly the Rangers of the Universe wheeled into
formation, each operator alert at his machine. Then
came the signal, a burst of fire from “The Flame”.
In a split second, twenty scarlet rays threw out
their coloured radiance forming one gigantic band.
Dusky space was blotted from view.
The black spheres leaned sideways. Myriads of
fiery eyes moved dizzily and then snapped out. Ira’s
spheres shrivelled in the death light . . . They
dropped swiftly from view.
“That should fix them!” cried Ralph exultantly, as
he turned to signal his congratulations to the other
ships. “Had we been alone ... it would have been
the end!”
“Are you sure they’re all knocked out, Ralph?”
asked Allister.
“Sure,” said his brother.
“Cheer up, Narelle!” Tom cried. “We’ll soon be
landing on Mer!”
“It is a great victory, master Earthman,” said
Leon gratefully. “Olera will now resume his ex-
plorations unmolested—moving ever outward in the
great beyond!”
Ralph was about to reply, when the red sphere
which had remained in position beside “The Flame”


during the projection of the rays, was seen to extend
her bridge.
A few seconds later, her captain joined Ralph in
the control cabin. >
“Congratulations, young Earthman!” he ex-
claimed. “Our chieftain will be doubly grateful when
he learns of this noble victory. It will be long before
the Helions are able to reassemble a fleet of such
dimensions!”
“Yes,” replied Ralph. “It should be some con-
siderable time before they reappear. We wifi hope
that Ira was leading his fleet, but of that of course-
we cannot be sure.”
“At any rate, good friend,” he added gaily, “we
have won a victory. We can afford to rejoice as we
speed towards Mer.”
The remainder of the journey proved uneventful,
much to the delight of the young people. Even Allis-
ter felt that he had had enough excitement to last
for quite a long time. The three friends were more
than content as the hundreds of thousands of miles
flew by.
And now the last wonderful night had passed
the journey through the bright rings, amidst the
glory of the moons of Mer.
The Rangers were rapidly approaching the planet.
Beautiful cloud formations wreathed about the
ships. Some of the most beautiful Ralph and the
boys had seen.
I wonder what those clouds hide!” exclaimed Allis-
tei who could scarcely contain his high spirits.
“Something different to Helion, I know!”
“You can bet your life on that!” cried Tom.


Narelle gazed through the glass panelling—she
was too excited to speak.
Then suddenly the roseate mists parted—and float-
ing downward, they found themselves hovering over
a lovely silver city, the tall buildings of which were
approached by flights of gleaming steps. The waters
of artificial canals could be seen shining in many
parts, while in the centre rose the tall and beautiful
palace of Olera, so lofty a building that its summit
appeared to merge in the rosy mists of heaven.
As the red sphere appeared over the city, followed
by the Aureelian fleet, the people of Mer rushed into
the streets, crowding the flights of silver steps in
robes of beautiful hues.
No wave or televisic messages had preceded the
visitors, and intense excitement prevailed when the
sphere, and the rocket ships were sighted above.
The red sphere descended towards a vast landing
roof, where it finally came to rest, followed at a
short interval by the ships of the Aureelian fleet.
A squad of sturdy Mermen rushed to the landing
space craft. They gazed at Ralph and his crews in
wonder as they stepped from their ships—at the
two boys . . . and when Narelle appeared in the open
panel of the red sphere into which she had changed
for the landing, their excitement knew no bounds.
Extending a courteous greeting to the strangers,
members of the roof staff ushered them into a lift,
which flashing downward, passed countless floors.
On alighting from the elevator, the spheremen
were escorted through a great pavilion beneath high
silver archways, and down a flight of gleaming steps.
Here, at the foot of the steps, the entire party em-
barked in graceful boats on a shining canal which
flowing between flower-bordered banks wound


through strange and beautiful streets till it reached
the wonderful palace of Olera, chieftain of Mer.
The great Merman, surrounded by his wise men,
stood on the palace steps above the canal, impatiently
awaiting his guests.
Narelle, who was the first to step from the boats,
was affectionately welcomed, her father having no
knowledge of the dangers through which she had
passed.
The captain of the sphere followed, and bowing
low to his ruler, began a detailed account of Narelle’s
capture, of Ralph’s rescue of the three young people
from Helion, and lastly of “The Rangers’ ” final
triumph over Ira’s fleet.
Olera listened in amazed silence.
After a pause, he addressed Ralph. “All I have
is yours, young Earthman,’’ he said. “You have but
to ask and you will receive. In what manner may
I show my gratitude?”
“You can perhaps help me to return to my own
world,” said Ralph eagerly. “I have heard, great
chieftain, that you possess remarkable charts of in-
habited space. More than all else, I wish to return
with my brothers to my home on the planet Earth!”
“You will tell me of your world,” replied Olera,
“and I will help you if I can. I will search every
chart in the hope that I may locate the planet Earth.
But first a feast will be prepared in your honour. We
shall all rejoice together—happy and honoured that
you and your brothers should be our guests.”
After Ralph had expressed his thanks to Olera.
and the Aureelians had received an equally warm
welcome, the chieftain with Narelle at his side, led
the way up the steps into the great silver palace.


In the vast hall, he summoned attendants to escort
his guests to their apartments.
Gleaming silver walls towered above them.
“You little pygmy, Tom,” Allistered whispered, as
with his brothers he entered a curiously carved lift.
The guests were whisked to an upper floor, and
on alighting, were ushered into an attractive room—
one of a fine suite overlooking the palace gardens.
Beautiful silken robes were brought to them to
wear.
“Tunics again,” grumbled Allister as he took up
two pale blue robes meant for himself and Tom.
“The purple ones at Aureela were bad enough—but
they were not quite so ‘girly’.”
“Yes,” agreed Tom. “I’ll feel a bit of an ass in
pale blue.”
“And I’ll feel rather foolish in white silk,” laughed
Ralph as he surveyed his fine white and gold gar-
ment.
“Never mind, boys,” he exclaimed. “Into the bath!”
—indicating an elaborate structure in the adjoin-
ing room which the attendant had shown him—“and
then dress yourselves in the pale blue!”
When finally they were ready, attendants led
them down a magnificent curving silver staircase into
the great hall.
Darkness had begun to fall, and the high walls
were lustrous with the reflected lights of rose and
gold lamps which were fastened to the walls, and
placed upon a table laden with food and drink which
stood along the centre of the hall.
The boys shyly took their places beside Narelle,
and opposite their brother, and though they were
' ery quiet as they ate and drank, their eyes were
a ery busy, and their ears most attentive.


It was a gay feast. Olera could not hear enough
of their adventures. The story of Helion fascinated
him, also Ralph’s description of the planet Earth.
He showed plainly his admiration for his intrepid
young guest.
The Aureelians and their hosts found many topics
of mutual interest to discuss, and altogether some
wonderfully happy hours were spent.
Long after the Aureelian space men had retired,
Ralph sat with Olera in a large rectangular room,
the walls of which were adorned with charts and
.naps of inhabited space.
The young Earthman was thrilled as the chieftain
spoke to him of the vast universe. Of great cluster-
ing star cities, gravitational movements and forces,
inhabited and dead planets, suns, moons, stars, and
tiny asteroids.
After a time, however, a feeling of despair began
to creep over Ralph. How recognize his own small
planet in this bewildering galaxy of other worlds,
other systems, lit by other suns ?
Olera noticed the young man’s discouragement.
“Do not lose heart, young friend,” he said. “You
say that you recognize the White Veil and the Dark
Cloud ?”
“Yes,” replied Ralph, “I am convinced that those
legions aie what are known to the people of my
world as ‘The Milky Way’ and ‘The Coal Sack’!”
“Then there is no need for despair,” said Olera.
“Observe this chart.”
Ralph poured over the map indicated, which was
attached to a table beneath glass. It told him


nothing . . . Another sun with planets revolving
about it . . .
“Now examine this photographic televisic print on
the wall,” said Olera. “See,” he added touching a
hidden switch, “I magnify it a hundredfold!”
Stepping closer, Ralph gazed at the picture with
interest.
Then his excitement suddenly rose by leaps and
bounds.
“Why—Jupiter!” he cried. “Jupiter and her array
of moons —Saturn, and her moons and rings* The
Solar system . . . Ours!—l can pick out red Mars,
clouded Venus!”—for a moment he was speechless—
“and between Mars and Venus” he continued in a
low voice “the Earth and her tiny moon!— Great
chieftain of Mer! You cannot dream what this means
to me!”
Olera smiled at his young guest’s enthusiasm.
“Again I magnify,” he said.
Unable to speak Ralph gazed as the picture widen-
ed and lengthened. He read the names by which
these planets were known to the men of Mer.
Near the Earth were three asteroids. Looking
closer, Ralph read their names slowly, unbelievingly,
his eyes bulging with amazement.
“The Three Pearls,” he said softly. “To think
we were so near the Earth!”
“So you may hope, young stranger,” said Olera.
“Millions of miles are easily and rapidly navigable
by space rockets and spheres. The billions of miles
which I have charted form, as you are aware, but a
minute fraction of the Universe.”
. . . “Charting the Universe,” said Ralph slowly.
He repeated the words like one in a trance. “The
dream of my boyhood—.”


Impulsively he turned to Olera.
“You know the name of my fleet ‘The Rangers of
the Universe,’ ”he said earnestly. “I have yet
another favour to ask of you. Should I reach my
own world safely, I would return to you again, study
with you, accompany you on your journeys of ex-
ploration—pioneer inter-planetary travel, thus open-
ing out to mankind a vista of knowledge of the
heavens, which at present exists to the majority,
merely as fantastic imagery!”
“Your suggestion pleases me,” said Olera, “In
the meantime, young friend, you will receive every
assistance in the planning of your journey to the
planet Earth.”
Three weeks later, Ralph and his fleet were near-
ing the Earth, having visited each of the “Three
Pearls” en route.
Eldron and his pilots were to escort their leader
as far as the moon, after which they were to return
to Aureela (which had now been located on Olera’s
charts) and report the result of their voyages and
adventures to the King.
The boys had taken leave of Narelle with great
regret. In fact they had enjoyed their stay on the
wondrous planet to such an extent that both boys
had begged their brother to stay “just a little
longer.”
“The only real holiday I’ve had,” Allister said in
an injured tone when his brother refused. “With a
few exciting things happening, of course,” he hast-
ened to add.
“Yes, indeed, Lai,” laughed Ralph. “Please don’t
forget the excitements, I have a hunch that you


attract incidents and adventures, as others attract
the ordinary and humdrum.”
“Just like my big brother!” cried Allister gaily.
And now here they were, shooting towards their
own world, the boys as usual gazing out through the
panels of the control cabin.
“You haven’t changed your mind about the moon,
Ralph?” Allister asked his brother.
“No indeed, old chap,” replied Ralph. “I promised
myself that much before I was as old as you.”
“Gee! I can hardly believe it!” exclaimed Tom.
“To think that we are going to land on the moon—
our moon!—how much longer, Ralph ?”
“We are approaching now. We are, in fact, flying
above the cold half of the dead world, which as you
know is turned away from the sun for a fortnight.”
“We’ll soon be looking at those craters we used
to see on the photographs at home,” cried Tom. “but
they’ll be different, I guess.”
With eager anticipation the boys peered downward.
Then suddenly, they saw great mountain ranges
standing out below with startling clarity, casting
great black shadows . . . They were hovering above
the small dead planet which lit their world!
Slowly the fleet descended. Row upon row of vast
yawning craters, alternating with desert plains
crossed by chains of high mountains, greeted the
curious eyes and captains and crews!
“It looks horrible but exciting,” said Tom. “What
do you think, Lai ?”
“I don’t think I’d like to stay long,” replied Allis-
ter uncertainly. “But it should be thrilling to land
in the ‘airlessness’ and be able to jump up the sides
of the craters.”


Ralph smiled. “We won’t be staying long, boys,”
he said. “Ours will be but a fleeting visit. And it
may not be as thrilling as you think, Lai,” he added.
“We are well equipped for the part, and with Olera’s
help nothing seems to be forgotten—excessive heat,
meteors and the like—but after all, one can never
be quite sure . . .”
A few seconds later the space ships were hover-
ing above the awesome craters. Very slowly they
continued their descent.
“Gee!” cried Allister. “How deep the craters are!
Why, they’re gigantic, like hollow mountains!”
“Look at those with hills inside, like the photo-
graphs!” exclaimed Tom.
“No wonder no one can live here,” said Allister
with a shudder.
“There is a fairly level stretch to the east,” said
Ralph. “See boys! Well, brace yourselves—that is
where we are going to land.”
Signalling the ships of his intention, Ralph flew
over the craters and descended to the plain.
The boys held their breath. The landing was
accomplished safely, and one after another the
space ships glided downward and landed near “The
Flame” . . .
“Look at the sky, boys!” exclaimed Ralph as the
pair turned excitedly to the glass panels to observe
the lunar landscape.
The boys peered upward.
‘Golly!” cried Tom. “Look at the big misty globe
hanging out in space among the stars!”
“It is round—something like the moon looks from
the Earth,” cried Allister—“only bigger!”


He rose in the air—up—up, higher and higher.


There was a pause. Then Ralph said softly. “Boys!
that strange clouded globe is our world ... the planet
Earth!”
“Gosh!— Ralph!!!” cried the boys as they gazed
and gazed . . .
“Now, youngsters,” said Ralph when finally he was
able to persuade the pair to drag their eyes from the
veiled indefinite sphere and turn their thoughts again
to the moon. “I will climb out first. It has been ar-
ranged, as you know, that I shall try out the atmos-
phere, or rather the lack of atmosphere—so here
goes!”
Opening the door, he climbed from the ship. The
boys, thoughts again centred on the dead planet on
which they were about to land—watched with rapt
interest.
To their horror, Ralph’s feet had barely touched
the ground when he rose in the air—up—up, higher
and higher. He became a mere speck ... He vanished.
“Something has gone wrong!” cried Tom hoarsely.
“He has disappeared down one of those awful craters
—miles away!”
CHAPTER XVII.
THE boys gazed at one another in horror.
Then Tom found his voice.
“We can’t get out,” he said. “I’ll transmit a mes-
sage to Eldron.”
To the boys’ amazement, they heard the Auree-
lians laughing.
“All is well, young friend,” came Eldron’s reply.
“We were prepared for this strange effect. Your
brother will soon return to us.”


“But I didn’t think that he should rise anything
like that height from the surface,” said Tom
anxiously.
“True,” said Eldron, “but our commander is carry-
ing out an important experiment for Olera, for which
he is equipped with special apparatus.”
Reassured, the boys watched anxiously for their
brother’s reappearance . . . After a breathtaking
interval, they saw him near the craters.
The pair gave a gasp of relief. “He’s coming
towards us,” Allister cried.
Several minutes later, Ralph came floating down-
ward, and as he came on a level with the door, he
swung it open and hurled himself into the ship.
To the boys’ alarm he sank to the floor.
“Leave me alone for a minute,” he gasped.
Taking a tabloid from an inner pocket, Ralph
swallowed it hastily.
Removing his headgear, he sat up slowly and
gazed at the two anxious young faces.
“All right, bruddikins!” he said. “Did you get a
fright?”
“Oh, Ralph, why didn’t you tell us?” exclaimed
Allister. “What would we do if anything happened
to you—and so near home!”
“You gave us a bit of a jolt, Ralph,” said Tom.
“You’ll have more confidence in yourselves after
seeing the height to which I could rise, youngsters,”
said his brother. “When you find yourselves float-
ing, or jumping a mere six feet you’ll feel just fine.”
“Oh, we’ll be all right,” said Tom jauntily, but he
exchanged an uneasy glance with Allister.
Rising to his feet, Ralph transmitted a message
to Eldron, after which he turned, and unlocking a
small cupboard in the metal wall behind the control


cabin, took out a book in which he proceeded to
make copious notes.
“Well,” he said as he shut the book at last. “I
have gained some interesting data for Olera.”
“Now, boys, are you ready?” he asked. “Oxygen
apparatus all right?—suits in order? You know
that the heat here during the fortnight the sun
shines would burn you up, as surely as would the
heat of Helion!”
“We’re ready, Ralph,” said Tom. “After Helion
the heat doesn’t frighten us, but I must say, now
that it has come to the point, that I wish our feet
would stay put!”
“So do I,” said Allister feelingly.
After transmitting again to Eldron, Ralph flung
open the door. The boys tumbled out.
Tom clenched his teeth when, on placing his feet
on the ground, he felt himself rising—rising—.
Allister’s hair stood on end. He was unable to
restrain a cry. “I’m going up more than six feet,”
he yelled, “and I hardly jumped at all!”
“No you’re not, son,” said Ralph calmly. “Take
hold of yourself, and remember that you are grow-
ing up! You’ll soon get used to the motion. We’re
going across this plain, and up that towering peak
directly opposite.”
Allister floated unhappily downward. For a few
minutes he was oblivious of his surroundings all
his willpower centred in an effort not to show abso-
lute funk.
The meteors falling in hundreds all about them
added to his horror, but on seeing how harmlessly
they passed them by, glancing away from their pro-
tective equipment, the boy began to gain courage.


Nevertheless, he thanked his lucky stars that their
visit to the moon was to be of short duration.
Tom was also feeling thankful that he would not
be lingering in lunar regions. He soon recovered
himself sufficiently to look around him, however—at
Ralph and Lai—Eldron and his Aureelian spacemen
in their strange outfits—rising up and down on the
weird dead surface of the moon.
Would they ever reach the Earth, Tom wondered,
and gaze upward at the bright disc in the sky,
lovely in its reflected light from the sun?
There was nothing lovely here. No silver light.
No wind. No sound of any kind. Mountains grim
and towering rising from the plain casting dark and
fearsome shadows . . .
Quite near them now was the circular crater wall
down which Ralph had disappeared.
Keeping a little ahead of the party, Ralph led the
way across the desert to the barren mountain range.
A strange exhilaration began to be felt by each
member of the party. Even Allister became less fear-
ful, while Tom gazed with tremendous interest at
the awe-inspiring heights ahead.
In an incredibly short time they had reached the
edge of the inky shadows, and on arriving at the
foot of the mountains began to climb a steep slope.
t-P — U P> they bounded, without experiencing the
slightest fatigue.
Ralph had almost reached the jutting rock, from
whence he had decided to make his observations,
when Allister, turning to look backward, suddenly
lost his balance, and hurtling down the mountain-
side, disappeared in a yawning chasm.


CHAPTER XVIII.
TOM was terror-stricken. Then he remembered that
even as one could climb much higher on the moon
than on Earth without tiring, so one could fall a
relatively longer distance without getting hurt.
Ralph was already bounding downward, a terrible
thought meanwhile oppressing him. Had Allister’s
oxygen apparatus become displaced in the fall?
V ith Tom and the Aureelians following, leaping
and scrambling among the jagged rocks, Ralph
finally reached the bottom of the chasm and, guided
by the boy’s cries, discovered Allister crouched in a
dark fissure, with his arms tightly clasped around a
rock.
The boy seemed quite pleased with himself.
I feel fine, Ralph,” he said. “Not hurt at all!”
Ralph gave a sigh of relief. “Well, little fellow,”
he said, “you knew you could fall quite a long way
without injuring yourself.”
“Yes,” said Allister, “but I might have fallen too
far.”
“It was your oxygen outfit I was worrying about,”
said Ralph. “Anyhow it has not moved—come along
—up you get—and do try and look what you are
doing!”
Once again, the spacemen, with the two boys fl-
owing, turned their faces to the tow T ering heights.
Climbing from the ravine, they began to retrace
eir way to the summit, advancing slowly to enable
Ralph to observe the contours and peculiarities of
the landscape.
On reaching the rocky ledge, the Earthman, with
EJdron s assistance, proceeded to take a number of


televisic reels of the strange and desolate scene about
him.
The interesting task accomplished, and the reels
stored in carefully prepared receptacles, Ralph
turned to the boys who were rising up and down
somewhat uneasily near by.
“Now for ‘The Flame,’ boys!” he exclaimed. “We
won’t waste further time.”
His brothers, only too pleased at the idea of re-
turning to the ship, set off with alacrity.
“You’re not going to land on the dark side of the
Moon, are you, Ralph?” Tom shouted as they made
their way down the mountainside.
“No, Tom,” said Ralph. “It can wait till our next
visit.”
Allister heaved a great sigh.
“I’m glad to hear that, Ralph,” he said.
“Yes —it would be awful,” agreed Tom, “dark
and cold.”
“We really don’t know what it would be like,” said
Ralph. “Natural features much the same as here, I
suppose. It would be interesting—.”
“Oh, for goodness sake, Ralph, don’t think about
it,” -interrupted Allister, “or you might change your
mind.”
“Not I!” said Ralph. “Hi there, Eldron,” he
shouted to the Aureelian, who, fascinated by his
surroundings, had fallen behind with his men, “let
us race the boys to the ships!”
It was a weird but thrilling race which followed.
The knowledge that each second brought them
nearer “The Flame,” so long their home in space,


enabled the boys to enjoy their strange journey
through the black shadows cast by the mountains,
and across the dreary lunar plain.
The pair felt much happier, however, when a little
later, they were seated in the ship enjoying a hearty
meal . . .
It is not pleasant to think of parting with
friends, said Ralph as he rose a little later from
their tiny table. “But the time has come to say
good-bye. Unfortunately we can’t put it off any
longer!”
Opening a cupboard, he took out his notebook, and
leached for the transmitter. “I am going to have a
last long talk with Eldron,” he said. “He will con-
v message to his King, and later explain to
Olera the result of our experiment.”
ou two can speak later,” Ralph continued. “I
know how highly you regard the Aureelians—and
you’ll probably want to send a message to Prince
Ichee, and Narelle, too—though of course, it will be
some time before Narelle can receive hers.”
“I wonder if Ichee still has my charm—the little
black pig,” Allister whispered to Tom as Ralph began
his talk with Eldron. “I hope it has brought him
some luck. He was a great little chap!”
Tom nodded. He was thinking of his parents, and
the Earth, so near—and yet so far!
“Gosh! Tom, won’t it be great going to school and
tellmg the boys all about everything!” exclaimed
Allister, hardly able to contain himself at the idea.
“ ‘The young astronauts’!— that’s you and me
Sounds fine, doesn’t it?—l can see all the boys—.”'
Oh shut up, Lai!” interjected his brother. “What


I can see,” he added grimly “is you, in plenty of
fights!”
“Well, that needn’t worry you, old smug face,”
said Allister pertly. “You won’t have to protect
me—.”
Making a sudden grab at his brother’s arm, Tom
gave it a vicious twist.
Taken unawares, Allister gave a terrific yell
“Quiet! boys!” said Ralph sternly.
The boys subsided, “It’s your swollen head that
is going to worry me,” Tom muttered. Then sud-
denly he smiled, “The Young Astronauts,” —well—
it certainly takes Lai to think of things! “I must
tell Ralph that one,” the boy thought, his smile
gradually broadening.
“What are you grinning at?” whispered Allister
fiercely. But Ralph’s voice broke into these some-
what heated exchanges. “Take the transmitter,
Tom,” he said “and make your messages as as
possible. Lai can say a few words when you have
finished . . .”
“And now for home boys,” Ralph exclaimed when
the pair had finally farewelled their friends. “We
are very near you know. How do you feel about it ?”
“When I think of landing on the Earth and seeing
Mum and Dad again, I can hardly wait for the time
to come.”
“Same here!” echoed Allister, who had quite re-
covered his good temper.
Ralph took his seat at the controls. “Well, here
we go!” he exclaimed.
At a signal from “The Flame,” the rocket ships
rose swiftly from the moon and shot out into space—


Eldron and his pilots speeding far out towards
Aureela . . . “The Flame” onwards, toward 0 the
planet Earth.
The boys, gazing through the glass wall, were too
excited for words.
At last the clouds began to pile up below, and
shooting through the soft white floor and rushing
ever downward “The Flame” burst into brilliant
morning sunshine —and Ralph and his brothers,
looking downward . . . saw the Earth . . .
“ Which part do you think we’ll strike first Ralph ?”
cried Allister, almost beside himself with excite-
ment.
“It is not a year since we left home,” said Tom in
a low voice, “and yet it seems like a hundred.”
“We are over Africa,” shouted Ralph. “I can see
the Suez Canal!”
Swiftly they crossed the Indian Ocean. Soon
Perth lay far below. On—on—rushed “The Flame”
across the continent of Australia.
“A few minutes, and we’ll be over Sydney boys!”
cried Ralph.
“I can see the harbour bridge!’.’ spluttered Allis-
ter. “Imaginitis!” cried Tom.
Several minutes later, Ralph slackened speed.
“The Flame” passed high. above the city. She
descended some thousands of feet.
Ralph could see the people walking in the streets
—the harbour and its many branches glitter)ng in
the sun.
There at last was the great steel arch of the bridge.
“Well little brothers!” cried Ralph gaily. “Here
we are—Home! . . . Home ... at last!”
THE END.




« '
"Rangers of the Universe"
Ralph Hannon and his two young
brothers, Tom and Allister, set out in
their super rocket ship, the "FLAME," to
return to the Earth. En route, they are
diverted by a terrific electric storm, and
are captured by the "Pirates of the
, Stratosphere".
How the "FLAME" and her young
adventurers extricate themselves, and the
further thrilling trials, into which their
escape plunges them, will hold the
Interest of the reader from start to finish.
♦


43#


• j ’••-• .v .. I ....- if-ry- ' ; -
i . , ft
'
\ r -li ; > ! •’'■ '■■ ■'. ! /V-; &\X v ■ ’ '
’T’r - T U: xxm,^r
. 4 I
*-V. . >* -- HL , K
I - . '* v, ;, / -V . i
, ■ 1 ' . -ff- !
» I -
.
'■ v i 1 ■r' :*' -
J '■ 2 ’ '
v '-r • '
9 - . • • I' '
T ■
'
v , «.-!; s ■■ I ' /’) I .11 \ m «.\
