

RARE OPALS
REGISTERED CABLE ADDRESS:
“BLACK OPAL, SYDNEY."


Vice-Regal Jeweller
Lapidary
Dealer
In Precious Stones


... Some ...
Interesting Information
About Opal.
I HAVE often been asked by Customers to give some
particulars of the manner m which Precious Opal is
won from the bowels of the Earth, and from time to
time have given such information by word of mouth. “ How
very interesting !” has usually been the comment. “ Why don t
you publish a short account of this valuable gem ? ’ But, being
merely a handler of Opal in all its forms and not a writer, until
the present 1 have abstained from “ scribbling ’ about it. Still,
in a modest way, I think I can intelligently describe the very
interesting processes, which in an unbroken line lead up to the
finished gem as it corruscates in all its unique, kaleidoscopic
splendour in the Jeweller’s Show-window.
1 will confine myself entirely to the Rare Black Opal,
which, as most people now know, is found only m a compara-
tively compact area in New South Wales, adjoining the
Queensland Border. This field is called Lightning Ridge. The
nearest towns to it are Walgelt and Collarendabri, and it is
about 300 miles from Sydney as the crow flies. Soon after the
first find of Black Opal, I foresaw that there were immense
possibilities in this new gem, which was then, as it still is,
exceedingly valuable, indeed unique, amongst Precious Stones.


An Abandoned Claim.
Some of the Opal Miners.


Mining for Black Opal.
SO, securing a Miner’s License, up to the Fields I went,
staked my claim, and sunk my shaft. There is very
little to guide one in selecting a “likely ” spot, for
although the surface display of “ potch ” —a kind of commer-
cially valueless Brown to Black Opal —has sometimes led to
good results below, yet it is at best a very precarious help
towards locating really payable material. But, having decided
on a spot, one sinks a shaft, and from it puts in “drives” as
required. The shafts rarely exceed a depth of 40 feel, and
sometimes the Opal is reached at a depth of little more than
six feet. For my own “ poor part ” 1 persevered in the hard
work of digging, and bucketing the rock to the surface, to a
depth of about 20 feet, but though I obtained what the miners
term “ shin crackers,” that is blows on the shin owing to the
rock suddenly breaking off, I found no Opal of any value.
Experienced miners informed me that it was really a matter of
luck as to whether one chanced on to a rich find, as there is
almost nothing to guide one when at work with the pick. The
finest Opal usually occurs in a hard formation in seams, or
more correctly, nodules, and the stones are often rounded and
are very seldom anything but small. Great care has to be
exercised in searching for the Opal, as the careless blow of a
pick would nullify the miner’s good luck after having been
fortunate enough to strike a “ find.”


An Opal Buyer's Camp at Lightning Ridge.
An Aboriginals’ Camp near Opal Field.
Local Store.


Opal Dealing, Etc., Etc.
LET us suppose the miner has obtained some Opal in the
rough, that at first glance appears to be of great value.
He can either sell it so much per ounce just as it is, or
if he prefers, “ face” it, that is partly smooth it. In the early
days of Lightning Ridge the miners sold their “ winnings in
the rough, but now-a-days, with lapidaries on the field, they
prefer to “face” the stones themselves or even have them
completely cut and polished. If they do this, of course they
run the risk of a lowering of value if what are termed “sand-
shots " occur in an otherwise perfect stone, but on the other
hand if they do obtain unblemished specimens, they reap the
reward of an increased price. The speculative element m
dealing with large parcels of rough Opal is thus largely
diminished, though whether the actual miner really loses or
gains by polishing the stone outright is a matter of individual
opinion. Many a Buyer of the rough stones has lost considei-
ably on account of the blemishes which cutting and polishing
brought to light. A really perfect Black Opal of any size is
exceedingly rare, and it is fairly safe to assert will become
increasingly valuable as the output of the strictly limited field
diminishes. Black Opal is the Gem Novelty of the 7 wentielh
Century, and there seems little prospect of any new field being
discovered. It is my firm belief that it will before many years
become quite impossible to obtain any but more or less
blemished specimens,


Portion of the field noted for a Valuable find.
Miners Examining Opal.


An Infinite Variety.
OF course, it is generally known that Opal is a natural form
of hydrated silica occurring in a “ porodine” condition.
During consolidation it has suffered unequal contractions
in different directions, and though amorphous, its polarisation
is like that of a doubly refracting body. It is this fact that
renders it utterly impossible to imitate successfully the ever-
changing colours that flash and live in its depths. Everyone
is more or less familiar with the beauties of light Opal, and far
be it from me to under-estimate them. In their own way they
are a perpetual fascination. But Black Opals, wherein “ the
prismatic colours are sown in a back ground of black night,”
are mesmerically obsessing in their flashing splendour. The
term “ Black Opal ” is in a sense misleading, and it has to be
remembered that it was coined in contradistinction to the
familiar “ Light Opal.” As a matter of fact, under the name
“ Black Opal ” is included a myriad of colours and shades, the
lightest shades of green glowing fire to the most pronounced
shade of ultra-marine blue —you can find them all in “ Black
Opal and they are interwoven with flashes of flame into
most intricate patterns; not a shade is without representation
in some specimens of Opal, and with every change of position
new effects spring into being. It, however, has to be borne in
mind that “ Black Opal ” is not merely Opal Matrix as some
unscrupulous exploiters have made out is the case. This Matrix
could never deceive those who have once beheld the true
Black Opal, but the attempt to pass it as such might easily
enough prevent the novice in such matters taking any further
interest in what (seeing merely the matrix) he would be justified
in believing a sort of myth.




Black Opal “Beggars Description.”
AN eloquent writer in a recent work speaks of the difficulty
of choosing a Black Opal:Stones ablaze with flashes
of liquid flame that in an instant quiver to sapphire
blue or slip into molten green, as the angle of light alters !
Stones alive with dancing needle points of glowing crimson shot
over with shafts of meteoric gold and lavender ! And others
rarer still, which burn and twinkle and palpitate mesmencally !”
And it must ever remain true that Black Opals “ beggar all
description.” They must be seen to be appreciated and once
they are really known, they emit a “call” which henceforth can
never be disregarded. An hour spent in noting their splendours
is worth more than all the volumes ever compiled about their
multifarious, ever-changing fascinations. If the reader considers
this language superlative, let him or her favour my collection
with a visit, and 1 have no doubt whatever as to the ultimate
aesthetic result.
The illustration opposite is an attempt to convey the
extraordinary colourings which are to be seen in Black Opals,
and represent a few unique examples of my Australian
collection.
Hl.~ Hrllliant Hlaek Harlequin
Opal - weight *2-j Carats.
H 2. Glorious Royal Him* Inter-
mixed with Vivid Greens.
weight -Wets.
H 3, Hrillia nt Golden Flash Hlaek
Opal - weight *2l/iets.
Hi. - Sparkling Hlaek I’infire Opa 1
a perfect gem. weight hii/icts.
HA.- A remarkable stone of tin*
finest Hlack Pi nil re pattern,
containing an outline of Aus-
tralia, a wonderful and beau-
tiful freak of nature.
weight ITicts.
Hti. — Flashing Hlaek Opal with
every colour, in existence.
weight lUcls.
H 7. Thick Hlack Opal, witli rc<l
fin- predominating. unusiml
weight. micts.
Hs.— Triangular Cushion shaped
Light Fin- Opal, exceptional
quality - weight *2l/.ets.
HP. (Tlique I’laid Pattern Opal,
blaek on one side, light on the
reverse - weight HV,VIs.
HIM.- Fan-shaped Hlack Opal,
rema rkal >le and unusual pul
tern - weight Wets.
Hll. Circular Red-black Harle-
quin Opal, very brilliant,
weight 14ets.
Hl2. Shield Shape Crimson
Hlaek Opal, a weird and bean
liful gem • weight *2«>cts.


PERCY MARKS, Specialist in Gems, Jewels and Rare Opals
A few Examples cut on the premises at 5 Hunter Street.
PERCY MARKS cuts every precious stone, except Diamonds, on the premises at 5 Hunter St.


Care in Lapidary Work.
IN its cutting and polishing, every single piece of Black Opal
demands individual treatment in order to display its veiled
beauties to the utmost, and much experience is needed by
the Expert Lapidary to secure the maximum of effect —the
least inadvertence often means irreparable ruin to an essentially
magnificent stone. The lapidary must first carefully study the
Opal, and decide what style of treatment is needed to free its
imprisoned colour-wealth, for even if the piece under consider-
ation is free from natural defects, only the highest skill can turn
the rough article to a scintillating, ever changing glory. And
in the Black Opal, largely because of its opaque or semi-opaque
back ground, this is nearly always a difficult matter in the
most valuable pieces.
Opal Curiosities.
APART from the gems for mounting purposes, there are
many Opal “ freaks ” that at the same time are interest-
ing and beautiful. In my possession can be seen what
are termed Opalised Wood, Opalised Bone and many Opalised
Sea-shells, formed by nature through pre-historic ages. Some of
such specimens are so striking in their attractiveness as alone to
justify Ruskin’s enthusiastic praise of the beauty of Rough Opal.
Of course, it was the Light Opal about which he wrote, for so
far comparatively few curiosities of this kind have been
discovered on the Lightning Ridge Black Opal Field. I should
be pleased at any time to afford a view of many Opal curiosities
to anyone who would favour me with a visit.




Panama Pacific Exposition, 1915.
MR. PERCY MARKS has been appointed
representative by the New South Wales
Government to furnish for exhibiting a
special collection of N.S.W. and other Australian
Gems in both rough and cut form at the Panama
Pacific Exposition, 1915.
The collection will eclipse the exhibit made
by him on behalf of the N.S.W. Government at the
Franco-Brilish Exhibition, 1908, and for which Mr.
Marks was awarded The Grand Prix and Gold
Medal, the highest honor obtainable.
The entire Exhibit may be seen in the New
South Wales Section of the Australian Building at the
Exposition, and being the best that has ever been
shown, should be inspected on account of its educa-
tional, instructive and interesting character.
PERCY MARKS,
Gem Merchant and Lapidary.
5 Hunter Street, SYDNEY,
Australia.
Registered Telegraphic Address:
“ BLACKOPAL, SYDNEY.”


Percy Marks has been honored With the following
Distinguished Patronage
B-R-B- Prince Leopold of Battenbers
Bis Excellency Lord Denman,
P.C., Q.C.jEQ., K..C.U©.
Bis Excellency ‘Che Eate Lord Dorthcote
Bis Excellency Che Earl of Dudley,
P.C., Q.C.n.Q., Q.C.'U.©.
Ber Excellency Che Countess of Dudley
Bis Excellency Che Eate Sir Barry
Q.C.'U.
Bis Excellency Eord Chelmsford, K.C.J'EQ.
Bis Excellency Sir Chomas Carmichael
E.c.n.q.
Ber Qr ace Che Duchess of Bedford
Sir Everard Im Churn
Sir Seibert Spicer
Sir Richard Poore, K.-C.B.
Lady Poore
Sir Alexander Qapier
.Melba, etc.


WHOLLY SET UP AND
PRINTED IN AUSTRALIA BY
Marchant & Co., Limited
435-7 KENT STREET
SYDNEY


WHOLLY SET UP AND
PRINTED IN AUSTRALIA
• • BY - -
MARCHANT & CO.
LTD.
ART PRINTERS
435 Kent Street
SYDNEY
