





icfifir


RAYMOND,
LORD OF MILAN.
A TRAGEDY OF THE 13m CENTURY
BY EDWARD REEVE,
r6KSJ E B L y i STUDENT OF BRISTOL COLLEGE.
SYDNEY :
PRINTED BY HAWK.SLEY <fe CTJNNINGHAME,
KznoVstreet East.
1851.




FACTS FROM HISTORY FOR THE TRAGEDY OF
"RAYMOND, LORD OF MILAN."
Tut Gueif family were related to Lothaire, raised (A.D. 11 to the throne
of Germany, in prejudice of the Swabian race, who had come to regard the
imperial d gnlty as no longer elective, but their own in right of birth. Upon
this there arose two great faction*, both in Italy and Germany, The House
of Swabia whose partisans were GKrBKLLivv-eappotting the rights of the
Empire; and that of Franconia, whose followers were Ocwlfs, upholding the
spiritual power of the Popes. By a kmg struggle with the Emperors, the
Ouelflo cities ensured their liberties, in the north of Italy, which however
their opponents did not entirely lose sight of. ,
The greatest Swabian prince the Gaelfa had to contend with was Frederic
11,, who, on his return fiom Palestine’ to Italy, found the Ouelf faction pre-
dominant from Papal intrigue. He endeavoured to realise his nominal
sovereignty, but though oue of the most warlike princes of his age, was fre-
quently defeated ; and at last compelled’ to abandon the enterprise. He
defeated the Milanese (devoted Ouelft) at Oorteouova, 1257, but at they were
protected in their retreat by Pagan Della Torre, be reaped no benefit from
the temporary success. Pagan Della Torre was then chosen by the Milanese
as their sovereign prince, and proved an invaluable general and ally. Though
lord of Yelassinaby birth, he was attached to the cause of theOuelft or commons
from disgust at the tyranny of the nobles, and governed Milan with vigour and
impartiality. Wherever he turned his arms they were victorious. He raised
the siege of Parma in the following year (1253) and surprising the army of
Frederic 11., destroyed them to a man. The war continued until the Em-
peror, after suffering fresh reverse*, was glad to treat for peace. A sort of
MOSiufAL iwfbbioeity to him, was acknowledged by some of the Italian
States, but none of them really submitted. They neither did him homage,
nor paid him tribute, but were governed under the laws and princes of their
choice. As a proof of this when the Emperor sent to (he Milanese, requesting
that they would allow him to bo crowned at Monza, (a town in their territory,)
the reigning prince of the Toniani family gave him the insulting refusal
described in the play. Frederic 11. died in 1250, and was succeeded by
Conrad IV., his son, as titular Emperor of Germany. But the vigour of the
House of Swabia was gone; and on Conrad’s death in 1254, Couradin’s claim
*wu neglected, and the Diet almost unanimously elected Richard Earl of Corn-
wall to the vacant throne. This Richard was therefore reigning in Germany at
the time when the action commences In the following piece, la the mean time


Martin Delia Torre had succeeded his brother Pagan as Lord of Milan, and
after a prosperous reign of thirteen years, left bis diadem to his nest brother
Raymond early in the year. 1308. The Pope contemporary with Raymond
was Urban IV., who had sat in the papal chair t<:r two years previous.
During the reign of Martin, a Ohlbellio prince of Verona tamed Ezzelin
da Romana, (also spelt Romagna,) son-in-law of the Emperor PreCcnc 11.
had invaded Milan A.D. 1350. He was defeated and slain on the hanks of
the Adda, in a sanguinary engagement, by the Milanese under the able coin*
mand of the Princes Della Torre; who, by that act, released Verona from an
infamous tyrant. He is supposed to have bsvn the father of the Ecsetin in
the following pages. A
At this period the republics and independent princedoms of Italy were divided
into four great clusters, and though often adverse to each other, and varying
in their modes of government, were animated by the same sentiments ol
freedi in. In order to depress the absorbing influence of Torriani, Pope
Urban IV. sent their deadly foe Ottene Visconti, as Archbishop to the province
of Milan. He was rejected by Raymond, who had nominated Ambrose, a
relative of his own, to the vacant see. The city was excommunicated by the
Pontiff In consequence, and during a long Interval of fifteen years, Ottone
Visconti was compelled to live in exile. He appears In the tragedy in the
intriguing character for which he was so infamous. As the fall of the Torriani
dynasty, terminated with Napoleon Della Torre, Ottone and his successors
became sovereign princes of Milan; and under their rule, the freedom and
prosperity of that city was soon a matter of history.*
• See Lardner's Cabinet Cyclopaedia (art), Keighiley's Outline* of History,
Denham's Germanic Empire,
Sismoudi’t Italian Republics,
Nicolas' Chronology of History,
Dallam's Middle Ages,
L’Dioeraire de Milan,
Penny Cyclopcß<na (art), Visconti, sol, *xvi„ page .183, *<•.


DRAMATIS PERSONA’.
MEM.
Raymond Della Torek, prince of Milan.
Philip, bis brother and heir.
Ezzelin da Romans, son of Ezzelin 111., (last prince of Verona,)
secretly aspires to the sovereign power.
Ottone Visconti, an imperialist, appointed Archbishop of Milan
by Urban IV., to check his old allies the Torriani.
Stefano Salermo, a Milanese noble and patriot, recently returned
from France.
Julio Sforza, a Milanese noble, friend of Salermo.
Ambrose, an old priest, related to the reigning family, ap] win led
Archbishop of Milan by Raymond.
Austrian Ambassador.
Roman Legate—Cardinal San Carlo.
Attendants, Soldiers, Conspirators, and Gaolers.
WOMEN.
Mary, Countess da Romana, formerly betrothed.to Raymond, but
now the wife of Count Ezzelin.
Her Infant Child—The Spirit of Zilla the Slave—Ladies of th*
Court.
The action extends from the sunset of one day to the midnight
after the next day following. The scene is laid in the city of
Milan. Time, A.I). 1263.




RAYMOND,
LORD OF MILAN.
ACT I.
SCENE I.— Sunset. A street in Milan. Enter Counts EZZELIN
DA ROMANA and SALERMO, meeting.
Da Ron. A welcome to Milan, my noble friend!
I am glad yon are returned from France at last, —
’Tis long since we have met.
Sal. It is indeed j
Some fourteen years have past since last I stood
I’ the walls of this my native town, and now
I find her changed—much changed.
Da Rom. Aye, without donhf.
For thou didst leave her, ere she had recovered
From the effects of Austrian tyranny
And civil war. Shattered, if unsubdued,
Her citizens were rude and penniless.
Practised in war, but all unused to peace,
No hum of noisy trade was heard in her,
For commerce had not with a bounteous hand
Lavished all wealth and merchandise upon her.
Mail-clad and watchful soldiers paced the streets,
And with a rigid air challenged the passenger.
Where now the busy merchant hurries by.
The music of the angry drum and trumpet
And the harsh voice of insolent command
Had not then yielded to the soft guitar,
Low chiming to the honied songs of love:—
Ha ! ha ! ha !
Sal. Dost laugh ?
Da Bom. I do to think npon’t.
Why thou didst leave the city formed of clay,
And now they build their palaces in marble.
Sal. [Angrily.] My lord, I left her free—
Da Rom. Speak not so loud.
For if Milan be now not free, perchance
Thy life is forfeit for the wonl.


Sal. I khv
I left my country free, a virgin state,
In which no coward tongue had dared defend
The accursed cause of tyranny. She made her laws,
And all with reverential joy obeyed.
Aye, she ruled well, because she ruled herself ;
In her senate there was wisdom and vigour,
And among the people—liberty, order, and content.
And thou—thou that dost well remember this—art calm.
And smilest at the change.
Da Rom. What if I do f
Sal. Why then the love thou feignedst for Milan
Was worthless, changing, and contemptible
As the love of fickle woman.
Da Rom. What, art going ?
Sal. Aye, to search for one that loves his country,
And, when I’ve looked on him, to die.
Da Rom. But, Sir—
Sal. 0 Cortenuova ! Brescia, too, and Parma !
Names that a patriot thrills to think upon,
1 thought—l thought that freedom would have sprung
From your red sod !
Da Rom. Alas ! recall to me
What this my own adopted country was
At first, and I will sympathize with thee
Sal . I drained myself of blood, and fought for her
In vain, with this my single arm opposed
The imperial tyrant Frederic—pray you pardon me,
He was your grandsire.
Da Rom. Nay, speak on.
• Sal. Not so ;
For I love thee, Ezzelin, though thou art one
Of Swabia’s royal house.
Da Rom. ’ And thou didst leave
This race of warrior princes ?
Sal. Simply this.
Mere citizens of an adopted state ;
Devoted, faithful servants of the Senate,
And in their duty active generals,
But nothing more—l find them now—
Da Rom. Yes, what ?
Sal. Kings, princes, bastard counterfeits of Osesar,
Who only keep the naked form of liberty
More surely to betray. Tell not to me *
That they did first protect us. Pagan died,
And then Martino, for full thirteen years,
Oppressed a sinking and corrupted state.


Title* they heaped upon him j wealth, and power,
With all the royal pomp that dazzles men.
Made fearful progress with him, till he died.
And now the moodv Raymond's iron hand
Hath seized the chief authority; was it for this
We fought and bled together ?
Da Bon. Attend, attend ;
1 thought with you that freedom was of earth,
No shadowy intelligence that man
Formed from ideal nope ; that 'twas a gift,
The natural gift of God—
Sal. And so it is !
Da Rom. But Raymond hath most excellently shewn
How grievously I erred. It was a time
When the heartstrings of government had jarred,
And that which had been harmony amongst us
Was something out of tune. The ignorant filth
That cumbers all our city streets had lain
So long i’ the sunbeams of prosperity,
That ’twas grown rank, and ored a pestilent
Sedition. Yes, they clamoured for a change;—
And there were tumults (soon, soon quieted)
That troubled our free state.
Sal. 0 Italy ! Italy .' Italy .'
Da Rom. Nay, do but listen. “ Freedom, my dear Lord,”
“ Good Ezzelin"’ he said, “ it cannot be.”
And thus he did convince me:—“ Freedom oft
Bears in herself immedicable wounds,
Most dangerous when moat hidden to the eye.
She will not be controlled, and thus destroys herself,
Headstrong and wanton as an erring maid,
Loveliest when nearest ruin. From her frame
Who shall withdraw the ever growing seeds
Of premature decay 1 0 Libertv ! Liberty !
With in that bosom outwardly so fair,
Lingers the cankerous curse of foul excess !”
Sal. There was a cankerous curse for he was there
Da Rom. You’re warm, Salerrao.
Sal. Yes, my lord, I tin ;
The ranting, crafty speech you have delivered
Has something stirred my lilood : it is the same.
The common cant of all who would excuse
The grinding tyranny that makes men slaves.
Leave me, leave me—l see that thou art fallen.
Da Rom. Come, come, be cool, look in my face awhile
Sal. What now ?
Da Rom. Didst think I was in earnest?


Sal. Aye.
Da Ron. Thou’lt know me better soon, and so shall he.
Can I forget the wrongs of all my race,
And meanly crouch to kiss the bloody hand
Which dragged my sire, Romans, from a throne,
And swayed the sword that made me fatherless ?
Faugh ! lick it like a dog —never ! never ! never !
Sal. Thou dost not love this Raymond then ?
Da Rom. Who, I?
Damnation, —no; —for what have I to love him ?
For ruin, defeat, and degradation,—
For a father’s violent death, —for leave to live
And stink in my dependence on an enemy,—
Love him ! He gave me life to grace his triumph,
And now he ostentatiously caresses me.
May horrors, such as make the sick man tremble,
Darken around his death bed !
—But you'll join—
Sal. In what?
Da Rom. In a deep-laid conspiracy,
That men who look for freedom to Milan
Have laid against this prince.
Sal. I’ll hear thee further oft.
Da Rom. [ Presenting a paper.'] Behold our list j come, set thy
name below
The great Visconti and Santano.
Sal. What!
“ Given at the Vatican," —Pope Urban ?
Da Rom. Hush? —
Speak low. [ Exeunt reading the paper.
SCENE 2. —A large room dimly lighted. The Prince RAYMOND
advances alowly.
Rat. The shinies of evening in these gloomy halls
Are gathering round me fast, yet here alone
As the tired quarry seeks for solitude,
Ipace awhile, released from all the toils
That weigh down those who rule in times like these.
Yet I was formed for a far different sphere,
Not for the woes of a precarious crown ;
I should hare been a father and a peasant,
Known only for my honesty and strength,
Used for defence and not oppression’s sake,
Tasting the sweets of a domestic life
With tne fond daughter of 'some neighbouring serf.


Tet she, the peasant too, might have been false.
Women are fickle, wayward, changing things,
And the man that rests his soul ujion their faith.
Hath trusted in the fleeting glories of a cloud.
False, fickle—such was Mary. Off, off, off j
Ye thoughts that crowd upon a jarring brain,
I will not think of her. 0 heartless woman !
That with the smiles and tears of innocence
So wrought upon my inexperienced heart
That I had sworn she loved me ; —loved me ?—aye,
She doted. [i/e pacei up and down the tlage.
And so there is a new conspiracy,—just heaven !
How oft shall I extend my clemency
To these crude minions of the populace,
Fer them to plot and be forgiven. Why do this t
1 could like fire consume the recreant herd,
And drive them forth as exiles from Milan,
Houseless and hungry through the world, —
A warning and a spectacle to those
That dare to be my foes. Yet no, no, no,—
I am too firmly seated on my throne
To fear the envious wasps that buzz around me,
And draw hut nearer to the light they covet
To perish utterly. Let time roll on.
And when some'fleeting years have past away,
These fools and their attempts to bar my path
And check the rising greatness of Milan,
By a relapse to anarchy and war
Shall be forgotten, ho historian’s page
Shall carefully preserve their memories
For the succeeding millions of our race
To imitate their virtues. When they die.
They die, and that for ever. Earth to earth,
This be their fate.
But thou, 0 great and glorious Milan,
The Queen of northern Italy, arise !
No Roman despot now shall’envy thee
And lay rude hands on thy young loveliness,
Nor shall the Frank, the Swabian, nor the Goth
Oppress, or ravage thee and thy fair plains
With famine, fire, and sword. Be strong ;
Fear not, —my hand is with thee. Soft,
What footstep breaks on my repose t
—How now ?
Enter Ezzelik da Romans.
Da Rom. Your pardon, gracious Prince; there is arrived


(Journeying in S]ieedfrom Austria hitherward)
An honourable nobleman unknown to me,
Who comes to give thee greeting and commands
From his Imperial Majesty the Emperor.
Rat. “ The Emperor” “commands”—ha! ha! What more?
Da Rom. He waits without. ,
Rat. Let him wait on— [Mullers to himself.
Yet stav, conduct him to the northern wing,
And bid the Chamberlain attend him well.
“ Commands ” —“ commands." Leave me, “ His Majesty the
Emperor!”
[Aside.] He lingers yet. Come hither, Ezzelin,
I love to gaze upon my friends. Art well ?
Thy lips are quivering, and upon thy face
The cold sweat hangs in heavy drop's.
Da Rom. ’Tis past,
’Twas but a faintness troubled me. [rijtrfc.] No guards •
Is this my boldness ? I must do it now,
[ Fumbles in his bosom.] Or bid adieu to all my hopes for ever.
Rat. Whv dost thou start, and tremble then like this.
And why avoid my glance ?
[The Prince, thrusting Romans roughly back on his at-
tempting to stab him, dashes the poignard out of his hand
with his sword.]
Ah, devil! devil!
Cowardly, damned wretch, imperfect in thv trade,
A bandit had not blunder’d so ; —stand off. l
Else by that woman now thy wife, this sword
Shall send thee shivering down to hell. What ho,
[ Guards rush in.] Guards there, guards I say ! bind me this slave.
Til root them out for this !
[Exit Raymond ; and exeunt the guards, with Da Romans,
bound, on the other side.]
SCENE 3. The Court of Milan; nobles, &c. The Hall of Au-
dience at the Palace brilliantly lighted, with a chair of state at
the upper end. Enter to them the Prince who seais himself
Ray. A fair good even to you all, my lords,
Be covered. We desired your presence here,
Because as doubtless all of you have heard
The embassy of our good friend the Emperor
This evening hath arrived. How now, ray friends,
What are your thoughts on this ?
He claims the iron crown of Lombardy
And the sceptre of Milan. I see you start •"


He knows os not. Say, are we not the men
Who easily foiled the Emperor Frederic
When he had set his face against our state ?
Were we not then the rampart of all Italy ?
And though he poured his thousands on our plains,
Twice, thrice, he-fled to Germany alone,
Leaving their bodies to the Italian yultures: all,
.Yes, au, quelled by the avenging blades of liberty
And the free warriors of Milan. Will you.
Who fought till Adda's waves were red with blood.
Whose suvered locks proclaim you men of Parma,
Whose hard-knit sinewy limbs once toiled at Brescia,
Aye, on other fields, till victory
Stooped down from heaven to bless our holy cause,
Will you be slaves ?
1 see your eyes are bright with noble rage,
You grasp your sword* like men that use them well;
But lay them by, and from your honour'd brows
Pluck off the laurels earned by sweat and blood,
Teach your free lips to lisp in adulation.
And whisper slavish words of deference,
For Bichard, Emperor of all Germany,
Demands it. Bow down those stubborn knees
That hitherto have knelt to none but God,
And as yon kneel before the despot’s throne,
Struggle who first shall kiss his feet!—
Will you do this ?
All. No, never.
Bat. No, my lords,
I thank you for the word so warmly spoken j
If he beEmperor beyond the Alps, not so
In Italy; she was, she will be free.
Had you resolved on such a degradation,
[Shewing Romana'e dagger .] I would have plunged this dagger
to the hilt
In the proud heart that bounds within me now,
[Throve it on the etage.~\ As freely as I throw it there !
Ist Noble [aside.] Antonio, see,
’Tis the stiletto of Bomana, for
I know the blade.
2nd Noble [aside.] Hist! there’s some mystery here.
Bat. Yet have 1 something further for your ears...
You are united in an iron band
Against the Prank ; so far ’tis well, yet yon,
You make me Prince and plot against my life !
[Pointing to the dagger .] Look there, who knows of this? Aha,
I see,
b


From the wan looks and drooping heads of some,
All are not innocent. You seek my life;
[Starts up.] Here take it if von can ! by heaven’s pure light.
From which yon hide such guilty deeds as this.
There's not a living man amongst you all
That in my own plain fashion, sword in hand,
I would decline to meet!
[Salermo strive! to press forward, but is held back by a con-
spirator.
Cossp. Keep hack! art mad ?
Ist Noble. My lord, we knew not of this treachery,
And 1 and those around me hate the deed.
’Tis this loads us all with infamv.
Death, death to the assassin, flow then, speak—
What is the doom ye give him ?
Several Voices. Death.
Old Noble .Although I know that weapon but too well,
And shudder for the husband of my child,
My voice must be for death.
Rat. Old man,
Forgive. I knew not thou wert near....
My friends, we will have counsel on this head, —
f Reseating himself. ] Lord Chamberlain, go forth, we wait
For the Ambassador.
Enter the Austrian Ambassador, ushered in by the Lord
Chamberlain.
Ambassador. Most noble Prince, —
And you the honoured lords of proud Milan,
I bring you greeting from my master, Richard
Emperor of Germany.
Rat. * We thank you, Sir,
Right heartily. Proceed, my lord.
Abb. ’Tis known,
And too well known to dwell upon it here,
That the successors of the Royal Ceesars,
Although no more they dwell in holy Rome,
Have ever reigned in Italy. Alas !
I know that late events have intervened
And brought heartburnings, bitterness, and hate
Betwixt the imperial father of his subjects
And those I see around me. Why is this ?
I see a cloud upon your angry brows
That bodes my cause no good: my lord,
I am an old man and a foreigner
X'narmed, defenceless, aud alone.
Rat. Fear not.


The honor of Milan shall be thy gage,
These looks are for thy master.’
Amb. ’ 'Tis enough:
Short be my speech. His Majesty hath sent
To claim the iron crown of Lombardy
[Rathond signs to an attendant and whispers, Exit attendant .]
Which is his own of right. And he demands
That true obedience which for ages past
Was ever given the Emperors by Milan.
If you despise the mandate, then prepare
For all the terrors of a bloody war.
Oh! pause ere you reply.
Re-enter to Ratmono the attendant, with the crown upon a
cuthion.
Ist Noble. Behold!
Rat. He that would wear the crown of Lombardy
[Puts on the crown.] Most win it first. 'Tis mine, I say, ’tis
mine,—
That which the Lord hath given me will I keep,
Woe to the hand that touches it.'
—Enough,
Farewell, you have your answer now.
Amb. My lord !
My lord!—
Rat. Conduct him from our presence straight,
And use him courteously.
[Exit Ambaisador, several nobles shewing him out. The
scene closes.
SCENE 4. — Midnight. Chamber at in Scene 2nd. Enter AMBROSE
and RAYMOND together.
Ambrose. Rest, rest, my gracious lord, and calm your spirits,
For there's an anxious look upon thy face
That thrills my inmost soul to contemplate;
Or if there be in the mind of this thy servant
Aught of good counsel that may benefit thee,
Speak on.
Rat. Say canst thou keep a secret ?
Ambrose. Yes.
Rat. It is too horrible—thou’lt not believe it—
The avenging spirits of the guilty dead
Are hovering round os now.
Ambrose. My gracious lord!
Rat. Be still, be still; dost thou see yonder door
Where the dark tap’stry hangs in heavy folds ?


Ambrose. 1 do.
Ray. Why then I tell thee yesternight.
As I stood gazing thitherward in thought,
Lo, a grim ghost, with horror-streaming eyes,
Glassy and dim in death, rushed in.
What! dost thou doubt, 0 God, it was too true.
Ambrose. Come lean upon a faithful servant’s arm,
You are not well to-night. Hence to the balcony,
The cool and balmy air will dissipate
These troubled thoughts which fancy hath engendered.
Rat. Not so, not so j there’s somethihg burning here.
Not the keen air of morn or midnight breeze
Can ever lull to rest or render cool.
Ambrose. Alas ! your father was thus troubled oft.
Rat. Why dost thou speak of what I would forget,
What son, however he may steel his heart,
Can bear to set a sacrilegious foot
Upon his father's grave f— There was a maid—
-1 am loath to tell it thee—l do remember
So much that once was godlike in my sire.
Such hatred of oppression,—such a love
Of that fair phantom men call liberty,
And worship as a god : —such gentleness
And matchless danng courage oh ! that one
Endued with all that could ennoble man
Should be se lost.
Ambrose. I ever thought, my lord,
The memory of your sire of Velassin
Was spotless; aye, pure as the ray that falls
Through yonder casement.
Rat. No, good Ambrose, no;
’Tis a true tale, although but little known,
Of lawless guilty love ; like fire it flew
And scathed the laurels which past victories
Had by the honour-giving hand of fame,
Twined round his brow...
A maid from Sicily,
Of Saracenic faith and parentage,
The Christian arms had made a prisoner
And brought to Lombardy. This infidel
(Forgetful of his creed and better nature)
My father loved. ’Twas madness, and not love.
He grew a slavish captive to the will
Of one who was herself -a worthless slave,
For her, a harlot, he despised my mother.
Young, guilty, gay, and beautiful she was ;
The tones of 'her soft voice were deadly sweet,


And thrilled through one like mournful music; soon
She lured my sire to ruin, for her hand
Knew how to scatter bright deceptive flowers
1’ the paths of sin and shame. My mothtr died —
Why dost thou start and glare upon me thus.
Is there aught now beside us ?
Ambrose. No .
Suspicion like a gloomy cloud passed over me
At that deep emphasis.
Rat. ’Twas even so.
My mother died, —not by the hand of God
Recalling to himself in his good time
The spirit he gave. Zilla, the Moorish slave,
With hellish artfulness administer’d
The poisonous drug that sent her to the tomb.
0 horrible, too horrible for me
To think upon ; the worst is still unsaid.
How shall I utter that, how speak for shame ?
The man whose blood now tingles in my veins
And rushing to my brow proclaims me his;
He, my degraded father, shared the guilt!
Ambrose. Is't possible ?
Rat. Aye, more than possible,
’Tis true.
Ambrose. And doth the syren live, my lord,
Who wrought all this ?
Rat. No, no, I was avenged,
f Shewing a dagger .] Look on this trusty steel; the time has been
When thou might'st easily have seen thy face in it
As in a mirror.—See ’tis dim.
It gathered all that rust in the warm tide
Of her heart’s blood.
The ghoet of Zilla euddenly appears at the back of the stage
with a threatening aspect.
Ghost. Woe to the bloody house that rules Milan.
Woe to the Torriani!—woe ! —ruin and death,
Come speedily upon them till they fall,
And rise again no more ! [ Vanishes.]
The Scene closes slowly, leaving the Prince and Ambrose in
silent horror.
End or the First Act.


ACT II.
SCENE I. — Morning. The Palace Gardens. Enter RAYMOND
solus.
Eat. A welcome to the glorious orb of day
That brings us warmth and light. - I’ the clear sky
The smiling morn comes blushing from her bed,
And the gay birds on every leafy hough
Sing their sweet mattins unto Clod. How beautiful!—
This earth would be a heaven to all mankind,
if innocent as God created them.
No more the fearful visions of the past
Glare on my aching sight, cowering i’ the pall
Of darkness all have fled. Still my head aches.
Who would have thought that an old coronet,
Neglected, half forgotten, could have weighed
Upon the brow so heavily T 'Twas a bold deed,
Such as might raise me nigh in estimation
Or drag me down to dull obscurity.
To be the common mark of vulgar scorn
As a man that once did over rate himself
And therefore fell. What will Milan,
Or rather those the noisiest part of her,
Think of the act ? They know not that effects
Are always wrought—a truce to this—Best, rest, rest:
I will to bed and sleep; for though the town
Yet lies beneath me hushed in deep repose,
There’ll be a storm anon, Bumour is rife,
Loving to put a gloss on every thing,
She will misconstrue me in this. I’ve need
Of all that nature gave to me for service
Upon this day. I must search out the plot—
Bethink me of the traitor Ezzelin—
And guard agaiust the policy of Borne,
Widen though unseen hath not been idle here.
Spite of all foes and every obstacle
I am, and will be sovereign of Milan,
Till death unnerve this arm, and set my brain
Asleep for ever. Now then for bepose. [ Kxit.
SCENE 2. —At in Act I., Scene 2 nd, by day. RAYMOND sitting
pensively. Enter to him MARY DA EOMANA, disguised as a nun,
leading in her infant child.
M. da E. My lord and master—
Eat. ’ Say what wouldst thou have t


M. da B. I have a boon to beg of thee.
Rat. _ Proceed,
If it be such as Justice can allow,
I swear it shall be freely granted thee.
M. dA B. My lord, let not stem justice speak too loud
Untempered by the kinder tones of mercy.
Justice alone is harsh—with mercy godlike —
0 Prince there is a man hath injured thee,
Be godlike, and forgive him.
Rat. And his name,
What is his name f his name, I say ?—Speak!
M. da B. Count Ezzelin da Bomana.
Rat. He, a traitor!
A thrice forsworn scandalous traitor,
A wretch that feeds on lies like daily bread,
A viper that we foster’d in Milan
’Till it could spend its venom on us all,
A cowardly foe to freedom and the state—
\_ln a low voice.] But he hath not injured me.
M. da R. > What never ?
Rat. Never, I say, never ! Tush woman,
1 did not think to terrify thee thus.
But thou didst lay a stress upon the word
That stirred my blood. What wouldst thou ask for him ?
M. da B. Forgiveness—
Rat. —No.
1 did forgive the wretch and he forgot it!—
Aye, stood between him and an angry senate
WTien his treason was most manifest. By heaven,
1 would not save that villain from the axe
For the brightest jewel of my diadem.
I spared him, when a boy, on Adda's banks
From the blood-reeking sword that slew his sire,
The tyrant of Verona, when he came
Like a wolf upon Milan. Since then—
[Abruptly.] —Good nun,
You waste your charitable words in vain ;
This noble is a thrice-convicted traitor,
And he must die.
M. da R. My lord, his child ! his child !
Altho’ thou wouldst not see his hapless wife,
Yet look upon the tears of infancy.
Rat [ tadly ]. Is this her child?—
M. da R. Count Ezzelin’s my lord ?
Rat. Aye, well, yes.
M, da R. It is, it is, 0 mercy! mercy—


Rat. The blessing of a blighted heart be on thee, child,
[Takes up the child in hit armt and carettei it.]
Thou sfaonldst have called me father—have been brought
And by thy lovely mother fondly laid,
As the highest mede that she could give to thee,
Upon my bosom. And this soft golden hair—
(How nature seems to mock my misery !)
Thou art very like thy mother, child, but
Thou hast thy father’s brow.—
[Sets it down abruptly, and turns coldly away.j—Good nun,
Why should I treat thee with discourtesy,—
I say the man shall die.
M. da R. [ passionately .] 0 pardon him !
Rat. Whv what is this t What passion shakes thy frame ?
’Tis not the simple pity of a stranger
That makes thee eloquent like this.
Thou art no nun. A feeling stirs within me
That thrills me to the core ; spite of this robe
And that thick sombre veil—who art thou t Speak.
M. da R. [unreiYiny.] His wife ! his wife! O, my dear, injured
lord,
Look on me as I kneel before thy feet,
A suppliant for a guilty husband’s life.
Alas, 1 fear ’tis dutv brings me here,
For I never knew the value of the heart
f trifled with till now.
Rat. Till now—
M. da R. What do 1 say ?
Alas, I cannot speak to him—
— lam come to thee to plead
For the father of my child. 0, Raymond, Raymond,
If thon hast quite forgotten how I once
Was the unworthy idol of thy soul,
Yet spare the father of my innocent—
O grant me this.
Rat. The father of her child.
She looks as when she pledged her solemn oaths,
And yet the wanton snapt them all like threads..
Fair and false; false, miserable woman !
SI. DA R. As thou didst once support me by this arm
That oft made tyrants tremble for their sway.
By the chaste kiss you left upon my lips -
When last we parted; and by every tie,
Each look, each fond endearment once exchanged,
And by the tale that malice whispered me,
And which from jealousy wrought all this woe,
Grant me his life.


Rat. Thou hast it for thy prayer.
M. da R. Eternal blessings on the princely head
That teems with thoughts like thine. Raymond, Raymond,.
0 my heart bleeds to think of thee !
Rat. Away,
1 cannot, must not hear thee now ;
M da R. My lord,
Give me but one kind word ere I depart.
Rat. Ido forgive thee, Mary, but thou hast
Most sorely tried me; come, my own, my love j—
—Alas, thou art another’s—go, go, go,—
1 am nnhinged ; a sad, dejected man.
East hastening to my grave. My mind is wrecked.
The rock that once repelled the wTath of kings
Hath melted at a woman’s fickle tears.
I would that thou wert gone from me, —farewell.
M. da R. My lord, —
Rat. * Thou torturest me, I say, begone,
I cannot look upon thee without sin ;
And I would not bring a cloud upon thy soul
Like that which darkens mine. This once [kissing her], and now
Farewell for ever.
[Exeunt severally.
SCENE 3. —A Public Place in the city of Milan. Enter Prince
RAYMOND and hit brother Philip together.
Philip. My lord, there is a strange report abroad
Which saith, and with a wondrous confidence,
That thou hast pardoned Ezzelin.
Rat. What then ?
Suppose I have.
Philip. A traitor, an assassin !
That would have ta’en thy life at an advantage—
Raymond, forgive the subject in the brother,
Rut thou hast erred in this.
Rat. Thou thinkest so ?
Phillip. I do.
Rat. If I were Philip Della Torre
This too might be my thought, but I am not,
Philip.' Brother, it was not thus that Martin ruled;
Rebellion never dared to raise her head
When he was Prince as thou art now.—
Rat. No more, —
I warn thee to forbear ; my mood is chafed,
And cannot brook the plainness of thy speech.


Philip [warmly']. I gay thou favourest these conspirator!
Bv such illtimed and senseless clemency.
They seek thy life and yet—
Bat [fiercely]. Silence I say ' —
Enter attendant hastily.
Att. My lord, yon reverend father bade me say
That he would speak to you.
Rat. Is it a Priest ?
What wants the sleek and oily hypocrite ?
I've neither abbey lands nor benefice,
For him to fatten on ; no maiden daughters
Whom he with canting, counterfeited arts,
May teach their orisons. Yet stay, is he
From Borne?
Att. Mr noble liege, ’tis said he comes
A legate from his Holiness the Pope-
Bar. Let him draw near.
[Exit attendant and re-enter with the Cardinal San Carlo.
[Sarcasticly.] How now, good Cardinal,
What saith the Holy Father to his son ?
Card. He sendeth you his blessing by these hands,
Yet not unmingled witn reproof.
Rat. I see.
We send him ours back in return; nothing
For nothing. Pray yon take it carefully.
Card. Proud man, is this thy duty to the Church ?
This the respect thou owest to the Pope ?
Why hast thou dared to till the vacancy
Of this archbishopric ? Knowest then not
His Holiness while he rejects thy kinsman,
This Ambrose whom thou stylest Patriarch,
Hath in his stead ap]>ointed the Visconti.
Humble thyself before the sacred throne
Where none have knelt in vain.
Rat. Else what shall be ?
Card. Else the successor of the great apostle,
That now doth hold the keys, will lay the curse
Of excommunication on thy head.
Recall the mandate and receive Visconti.
Rat. Never; the pious Ambrose is my choice ;
My kinsman hath been duly consecrate,
And I will have no vipers* in Milan.
Go, do v<> ur worst. I care not for your threats,
Strong in the rampart of integrity,
* Alluding to the crest of the Visconti family.


I will abide the consequence of this.
And see if God will shut the gates of heaven
Because forsooth I will not be the slave
Of an ambitions Roman monk ! —I fought
For Freedom and the Pope against the Frank
Ere manhood’s cares ha<f darken'd on my brow;
Long ere these arms could sway the heavy brand
Which like a reed pluck’d from a rivulet,*
Now trembles in my grasp. Yet this, aye this,
Is my return. Speak not. Hence from my sight.—
[The Cardinal seems to go but remains, and (when the Print*
and hit brother are gone) beckone with hie hand.
Philip, come thou with me,
[Exeunt Raymond Della Toree and hie brother PaiLir on
the one eide, and then on the other enter a band of Prieete
with Visconti, who range themselves round the Cardinal v
numbers of the Populace also come upon the stage.
Cardinal. [ producing a deed with seals, £c.] Men of Milan,
and brothers in the Faith,
Attend. Here is the mandate of the Pope,
The Father of all Christendom ; to each and all
Of you it speaks. In virtue of this deed.
Since Raymond Della Torre will not repent.
Nor for the reckless schism he hath caused
Make due atonement, since he dares reject
The clemencv of th’ Apostolic See,
A Cardinal driest of Rome, do here pronounce him
An excommunicated man, cut off
From all the faithful; and his crown,
Together with the mitre of Milan,
Do give to the Visconti.
Visconti. , Thus I bow,
[lie kneels to the Cardinal and does him homage, by kissing
his hand.
In humble deference to that holy See
Which thou dost represent.
A Priest. —He comes !
Re-enter Prince Raymond with his guards.
Ray. How now, what pageant have we here ?
Card. Who's this ?
That like an Uzza shamefully profanes
A solemn rite of faith.
Ray. Sir Priest, ’tis I,
By God’s good favour and this trusty sword,
Raymundo Della Torre, Lord of Milan,


And all her rich dependencies; come, come,
Give place, I’ll have no mummery here.
Card. By that obedience to the Church of God
Which once became thy sword so well, stand back—
And let not heavier corse light on thy head.
Proud man, respect the faith—
Rat. 1 do; but thou
Art its disgrace.
Card. Thus saith the Church of God—
Rat. [ abruptly .] —My lord, 1 had a vision yesternight,—
Methought that I was wafted through the air
And stood wrapped in a cloud that midway bung
O’er the Eternal City. Ear below
Lay the majestic nuns of that state
Which once could awe the world. It was a corpse,
The body of the mighty and the dead.
And though its very name when whispered once
Had made its millions tremble, it had now
No life, but what ’twas death to look upon ;
With vile things crawling fast where kings had knelt,
And weeping begged for mercy.
Caro. Ha.'
Rat. Upon
The cross of that vast pile which is
The pride and boast of Christendom, aloft,
And shrouded in the sombre pall of night,
Alone and still, with an unchanging brow,
That darkly frowned on the dim mass beneath,
I saw a spirit.—
A chaplet round his head
Of flowers once beautiful, now faded hung,
Wreathed serpent like around his diadem ;
And tho' the gems beneath were brilliant once
They seem'd but poor dim things. Not power but guilt,
And that false pride that struggles on with shame,
Sat on his pallid features stained in blood.
It was a fearful vision. On his wings,
Shorn now alas ! of all that brightened them,
No rainbow glories played. Hadst thou said I,
Who wilt not enter into heaven thyself
Nor let those in that linger by the gate ;
But used thy more than mortal power with skill,
Thou mightet have trod upon the necks of men
’Till earth had been no more. But no, his hand
Clutched with a grasp that nothing could undo,
Not Peter’s Keys of Knowledge, but the bag
That bribed the traitor Judas. Gold, gold, gold ;


It thirsted still for Mammon’s filthy cup,
And as it sat all motionless beside me,
1 heard a solemn voice of mockery
Saying, “ ho, the Spirit of Rome !”
Card. Heresy !
Rav. Peace.
“ Woe,” said the voice, “to Rome. I sent in wrath
The Goth, the scourge of an offended God ■'
Send now a warrior nation from the North.
Behold, as rapid as their native Rhone
Shall be their angry course. Strike and spare not.” —
—Soldiers, remove these men at once.—
i_ Tu his guards, who moot towards the ecclesiastics.
Card. I go;
But thou shall answer for this insolence.
The Torriani were made kings by Rome ;
By Rome too they shall fall. Anathema !
Priests, <tc Anathema!
Card. Thy house shall ho so fallen, ,
•That the poor remnant at the last shall come,
And kneeling at the Pontiff’s feet shall say, —
“I am thy worthless slave. O, Father, place me
I' the office of a Priest that I may eat
A morsel of bread.” Anathema !
Priests, &c. Amen.
[.Exeunt Cardinal and his train, resiat Visconti.
Viscokti. Raymond, Prince of Milan, a word with thee
Alone. Bid these give place to me awhile—
[Raymond signs to his guard to retire a little.
What is it come to this ?
Hath Rome rejected her most valiant son,
And sold him to the treacherous Ghibelliu %-*■
Are nil his victories and gallant acts
Forgotten ?—No : thou hast yet one way left i
Give me this mitre and be mine ally,
Then mayst thou turn on those that injure thee.
WHt thou not yield to this ?
Rav. * And what my gain ?
Visconti. The dearest privilege that earth can offer thee,
Revenge. ’Tis the prerogative of gods—
Kay. Well, well.
Visconti. I have a heartfelt bitterness
Against the low-born and plebeian Priest,
This Urban, whom the brain-sick Cardinals
Chose when they passed me by. If we were once
* Tide I. Samuel, chap ti., v. 3d.
G


To join our factions in a mutual league
We soon might reign unchecked, thou in Milan
And I in holy Rome.
Rat. ~ 1 thought as much—
A plotting, double knave .-—once more, begone.
I spurn with loathing all thy proffered aid
Not less than I despise thy enmity.
Guards, watch this churchman closely, and at dawn
If he hath not departed from Milan,
Bring me his head.
[Exit Visconti with guards and Raymond on the other side.
SCENE 4. —The Courtyard of the Ducal Palace at Milan, next
the street. A clamorous mob of Milanese in the foreground.
RAYMOND appears on the battlements of the barbican during the
scene.
People. Ov<l Principe ? II Principe ? H Principe ? [Oroans.]
Rat. What's that that cries so lond, and roars beneath
[Approaching on the battlements.] Like full fed ignorance and
anarchy ?
Who calls the Prince ?—I am here.
Feo. No king ! no king !
Liberty ! liberty ! Down with the tyrant Guelf! [ They groan
loudly.]
Rat. Silence! be still.
I am not come to listen to the yells
Of some few discontented Ghibellins.
I stand to answer any question here
Propounded by the men of free Milan.
A Voice. Free, free, no longer free, if thou art King.
Rat. Yes, free; Milan is free but must be ruled.
Else the reaction of past servitude
Will generate license, —license anarchy,
And anarchy (as ever) resolve itself
Back again into slavery.—
—Young nations must be taught
The wholesome bitter duties of obedience.
Walk ere they run—learn ere they can dictate,
For trust me states that cannot rule themselves
Will never govern others. Look at Rome, —
She toae the Queen of nations; sea and sky
Alone gave limits to her mighty sway,—
The world in chains lay crouching at her feet; —
Resistless, awful, and invincible,
Whene’er she rouzed herself in giant strength,


Victory smiled on her; where is she now ?
Her sons—restive and filled with jealousies—
Soon laid on her the fetters forged for others,
Made her a captive on her throne, and drew
The swords that should have guarded her, to plunge them
Each in the bosom of a freeborn brother.
The envious, the ambitious, and the wicked
Spurned at a government enfeebled by
Division ;—traitors, cut-throats, then arose,
And Scylla, Marins, Catiline, and Ceesar
Fed on the bowels of a tortured country
Like the carrion-birds* of hell. Disunion, discord,
And an impatience of all just oontronl,
Factionsly fretful where no evil was.
Brought Borne to this. I hear yon are displeased.
Because, when Richard sent to maim the crown,
I did refuse, declaring it my own.
Where is the fool that cavils at a word ?
Let him stand forth, I'd see him.
People. None, prince, none.
Rat. Aye, I did place the bauble on my bead
Felt yon less free from that f Not until some
Who wish net well to freedom made yon think
How much yon were aggrieved; did your hearts beat
Less buoyant in the tide of free-born blood ?
Did you not howl, and act as you well know
You and your fathers never durst have done
I’ the times of Swabian tyranny t Remember
The times yon were delivered from by us.
The bouse of Torriani have devoted
To you their lives, their swords, and energies
From Cortennova until now. Go to,
How basely shews this black ingratitude !
Who here hath suffered since I was bis prince
By the rapacious band of avarice,
Of tyrannous hate ? If there be such, 1 say
Let him stand forward now. [A pause.]
What none ?
None here that can accuse. 'Tis ever thus:
Fickle as women, faithless as the sea,
You easily follow with childish eagerness
The gust of passion without knowing why.
Alas! my countrymen, wherefore thus yield
To such vain angry impulses t—Beware;
If we are disunited, we are lost.
* Tide the story of Premethsui.


A king!—What if I were the king yon chose ?
’Tis but a name. One of yon must he head
To give the laws reverend authority,
One chief to represent you to the world.
The many-headed monster is less terrible
In fact than sight -, ever a Hercules
Will rise in crude, distracted times like these,
To be its certain death ; —strife, discontent.
Envy, and private hatred, with ambition,
Will else soon overthrow the fairest state.
Therefore I’ll keep the power the people gave me,
Wielding it for their good. I will not be
A prince of stars and coronets,—a thing
For all mankind to point the finger at.
You made me pater patriae. —Be it so.
Thus, thus, I’ll govern you. With tightened hand
You guide a courser by a precipice,
If ’tis uncurbed, its wildness nnrepressed,
The gallant steed will dash itself to pieces,
And perish in its rider's fall. Begone,—
Shame, shame upon yon all; hence to your homes,
And leave the city quiet, Your brawling thus,
Giving a new excuse for tyranny,
Hath cast a needless blot upon us all.
You have disgraced the sacred cause to-day ;
Go, go, go. [Exeunt sutler ally.
SCENE 5. —The Courtyard of a Prison, Enter OTTONE VISCONTI,
disguised as a layman, and a gaoler, conversing.
Visconti. And so I may not see Count Esselin—
Gaoler. Ido entreat your pardon, gentle Sir,
But in this thing we dare not pleasure yon.
The mandate laid on us in this behalf
Hath been of strict severity. The Prince—
Visconti. Aye, aye, aye;—thou bast it all by heart,
Thine honor and tbine office are at stake ;
Here think on this ; [Oive* Aim a purse of money.]
Gaoler [dashing it away}. • A curse upon your gold !
Visconti. What! slave—
Gaoler. No slave—a free-born citizen ;
And one who looks upon a traitor’s par
As something far too filthy to be touched,
E’en though it bore the benison of Rome.
Thou shalt not see the prisoner.
Visconti. Ha!


Gaoler. Even so,
Visconti. I would thou wert not so beneath my blade,
[Laying kit hand on kit sword.] That it might teach thee how
to speak.
Gaoler. What, dost thon wear a sword ?
Visconti. Insolent hind !
Gaoler. Go to; I should be loath to strike a priest,
Although the chastisement were merited.
Visconti [in confusion], A priest ?
Gaoler. —Wilt thou deny thyself
Because enshrouded in the counterfeit
Of such a poor disguise ? Begone, begone j
Thy life is menaced with a shameful death
From the just wrath of an offended Prince.
Visconti. Alas ! lam betrayed—
Gaoler. Say rather known .>
This folly might deceive a child, whose eyes
Unused to the deceit of human guilt,
Have not yet learnt distrust. I knew thee, priest.
At once.
Visconti [soothingly], My worthy friend—
Gaoler. Hence while you may.
Thus to be lingering in Milan is death.
The Prince’s emissaries follow thee,
And are approaching now. Had I not served
One of thme ancient race in the old times,
I'd not have told thee this. f Knocking heard.
Visconti. Who is it comes ?
Gaoler. I know not, stand behind yon pillar straight.
[ Vitionli goes behind a pillar.}
Gaoler. Who is it knocks without?—Come in. i/infer‘a
Milanese noble.]
Noble. Art thou
The keeper of this prison ?
Gaoler. Aye.
Noble [shewing a document]. Behold,
1 have the hand and signet of the Prince
Whose ’best you must obey. By this he sends
A full free pardon unto Ezzelin,
Lately imprisoned here on charge of treason.
Conduct me to his cell right speedily,
That I may set him free.
Gaoler. This way, my lord.
[Exeunt noble and gaoler ; Visconti comes forwerd,
Visconti. “ A full free pardon !”—This is news indeed—
And at a time too when the populace
Would not have balked his vengeance. There must be


A deeper reason for this clemency
Than that which meets the eye. Romans’s wife—
Aye, true, there lies the mystery. And yet
If Ezzelin consented he must still
Loathe the fool degradation, for revenge
Is often keenest in a coward's breast.
[Listening.] What noise is that upon the stair ? They eome ;
1 will await him in the street below
And torture him with jealousy, i
[Exit hastily, and enter Salebmo on the other tide.
Salebmo. A heavy curse upon the tyrant cause
Which brings ns hither with no other end
Than this unfruitful sympathy for one
Whom we should rescue by the sword ! Julio—
Why surely he was by me as I enter’d
I’ tie gate of this dark prison;—Julio—ho—
renter Julio, a noble conspirator .)
f thought thou nadst forgotten me—bast seen
Aught of the thrice-damned skulking fiends
That guard this hell on earth !
Julio. Yes, one, my lord,
Whom I encounter’d even now, and staid
To question briefly : thus he spake—the Count
Ezzelin, the traitor, is discharged.
Salebmo. Romans ?
Julio. Aye.
Salebmo. Come, this is idle jesting, Sir ;
Julio. He spoke it solemnly, mv lord, and shewed
(For hardly could his words my credence gain)
The i ardon from the Prince j signed, countersigned,
And sealed.
Salebho. Why this is strange indeed.
Julio. I saw
Besides the great Visconti.
Salebmo. Him that's banished T
Julio. Aye,
So changed and muffled in a gay disguise
That had he not return’d the secret sign
Which we have privily agreed npon
1 had not known him to have been the man.
Salebmo The fool! be must be mod.
Juno. Not so, for when
With w< nder half suppress'd 1 spake, he said
“ I know it well—my risk is for Milan,
When freedom is in peril who is safe?’—
Salebmo. False metal! 'lhere’s deception in his eye,
A deep, designing devil in the man


That likes me not. “ lit ritkt all for Milan."
Ah ! true, true, true—he doe*—body and soul.
Dost think—but what said be of this strange news ?
Julio. That it was treachere*’*
Saeeuo. —Vital was the truth,
Whatever was the thought that prompted it.
Julio. I think not so, my lord, this Karelin
Deserved to die. What stab at unawares !
The act is cowardly most base assassin-like.
1 too love liberty, and in her cause
Would dare, if ’twere my destiny to die;
In her great cause we are sworn brothers both.
And look for freedom to Milan. But ah !
The name of Brutus is no potent charm
To purify Bomana’s deed. Fight on
Under the arch of heaven if blood must be.
So that ye strike for freedom then—'tis well.
But curse on him that with a stealthy hand
By the sharp steel makes man his prey. No hell
Can from his treacherous fingers burn away
The blood so shed—no sea wash out the stain.
Sal, Thou givest me the echo of my thoughts,
Their very aspect dost present to me,
In every thing but this that thou hast cast
Malignant odium upon Ezzelin ;
As if the charge by the false despot laid
On him were true. Thou dost not dare to say
That like a bravo he did stab the Prince ?
Julio. I do.
Sal. Thou liest!
Julio. Thy choler makes thee mad,
Hear me awhile. This foe to tyranny
When even now freed from the jaws of death
By the rash goodness of a generous prince,
Confessed his guilt to Ottone Visconti.
“ A curse upon the blow,’’ the monster said,
“ Had it been true I should have grasped a crown,
“ And placed a mitre on thy brow.” He stopped ;
For turning be beheld me by bis side,
And with a muttered oath of grave surprise
The patriot moved away—
Sal. [<n grief] ■ And I
I loved this wretch, and thought him honorable.
Julio. Come, come, bear up; we were deceived—
Sal. O t boa
The aspiration of all honest hearts 1
The object of first hope in childhood’s hours,


And the last phantom that unweariedly
With rainbow glory flits around our death-bed—
Pair Freedom! Tie in dreams alone we see thee
Near, in our arms in all thy loveliness,
We wake to find thee vanishing. Stay, stay—
And if thou hast existence—if thou art
An essence and a principle of life—
Not in the breasts of a dishearten'd few
But art indeed a goddess, hear me now.
Are all these crafty men your chosen sons
The antagonists of earth oppressing tyranny ?
Suv dost thou not impatiently disown them
With anger, grief, and tears?—l know thou dost.
And yet day after day the world drags on,
Men palming off on fools their shining dross
For thy pure gold ; always discrediting
Thee ana thy holy cause.- 0 Julio, let us hence.
1 have an aching sorrow at ray heart
That death alone can lighten. [Hreunt together.
Exn or Act 11.
ACT III.
SCENE I.— Night. A chamber in EZZELIN'S house, splendidly
furnished. A small lamp burning. MARY DA ROMANA it seen
asleep on a sofa, in which she moves occasionally at if dis-
turbed. Enter DA ROMANA, followed by a page.
Da Ron. Sirrah, go fetch your mistress.
Page. She is here ;
Nature hath sunk into repose at length.
My lady did not rest last night, my lord,
But sat, where now she sleeps, in silent tears,
With my young master on her knee.
Da Ron. [angrily] Hence, fool !
You overact your pvt most shamefully.
Page. I only spoke the truth, my lord—
Da Ron. Begone!
[Exit Page. Da Romana walks softly acton to the sofa and
gazes upon hit wife for tame 1 moments.


Aye, smile again, nature hath made thee well.
From the sou outline of thy rounded form,
Delicate arm, and swanlike arching neck, —
To the least feature of that angel face,
I know that thou art beautiful. Thy voice
Is like the warbling of a bird. O, Mary, Mary....
Ma«t da R, [in her sleep] Yee.. yes..
Da Rom. ’ She sleeps uneasily
And as hath been her wont when indisposed,
Utters her inmost thoughts. Are they of me f
Or is it true, as the Visconti said,
That my dishonour hath been consummate,
And thus my safety purchased ? No. ■ For why,
Seeking a paramour, should she attempt
Thus to prolong my life 1 And yet the Priest,
The wily dark Visconti, did say mnch
As to her motives in mere supposition.
Women oft do a seeming generous act
Toward those that are victims of their lust,
And by it lull remorse. I’ll speak to her
Again, and learn the worst.
[ln a low and plaintive voice..'] Mary, Mary,—
M. nA R. [in her sleep.] Alas ! my injured one, my earliest love~r-
lam fast bound in misery. Raymond,
I cannot come to thee. See a deep gulf
Hath burst asunder at my feet j—l cannot—
-1 cannot come to thee.
[A pause in which she moves uneasily, while Da Romama
looks at her with jealous fury.
Da Rom. [in a low stifled voice.] ’Tie even so.
Mart da R. [rising suddenly and stepping forward in her
sleep.] An angel, not a man !—fill of great thoughts,
High aspirations, godlike, and sublime.
How glorious is the air of majesty
That sits enthroned upon his princely brow !
He wears the sword to succour the oppressed.
He reigns but to forgive—and yet—O misery....
Da Rom. [in a low voice.] Thy husband....
M. da R. [in her sleep, with animation.] Yes, it was my
husband's life!—
I begged it of him on my bended knee,
Anddid adjure him by the broken vows
Wherein I was forsworn.
Da Rom. Bo calm.
M. DA R. [in her sleep] I am.
My heart hath grown as heavy and as cold
As the pale marble of a monument....


0, God, hit heart was mine ; yea, mine, mine, mine....
And yet I threw it carelessly away
And rave up gold for dross....
[Da Roxana clutches hit dagger for a moment, and then
tpeakt at above.
Da Rox. Mary, my love!—
M. da B. [in her sleep] Alas! (das ! how grief hath altered
thee.
Thy voice hath lost the joyous tone it had
When in the orange grove at Claravalle
We wandered hand in hand. Thy smile alone
Is still the same.
Da Rom. Then love me as thon didst,
Not with the feelings of an amorous girl.
Which melt away as clouds at summer’s eve.
No; give me all thy heart, breathe on my lips
The burning kisses of undying love.
And pillow on thy breast this aching bead.
M. da B. [in her sleep'] My lord, this ia not spoken like your-
self, —
Such language is the voice of sordid lust.
[/n terror.] Raymond ?—lt cannot be the prince;—help ! help !
There is a something hovering over me
That makes my blood run cold !
Da Rom. [catching her by the arm.] Damned wretch !
M. da R. [awakening] Ha ! what is this T Tell me why art
thou here i
Why do yon terrify me thus ?
Da Bom. You slept.
And walking as at times yon do, it seems
I rouzed yon somewhat suddenly.
M. da K. It was
That I might bid you welcome home,
My lord; —
Da Rom. For that I thank yon heartily.
M. da R. And yet you speak as if offended—
Da Rom. No.
I am no angel, yet am not ungrateful,—
The hnsband of a broken vow, if that.
Cannot be more.
M. DA R. What mystery is this f
Da Rom. Mystery ? there’s none; there can be none.
'Tis a brief tale; I heard it bnt to-night.
A certain dame once loved her lord so well
That she gave np her very chastity
To ransom him from death.


M. DA R. Sir, your rile jest
Is brutal and unmannerly.
Da Rom. [furiously] It is ne jest;
I say yon have dishonoured me. Damnation ! speak !
it. da Boh. [shewing her bosom ] I hare—where is your dagger,
reptile—strike;
In very sooth I have deserved all this,
Why aid I warm a viper in my breast.
Until it shewed its nature t
Da Rom. [ hesitating ] Thon’rt guilty—
U. da R. True, true, most true. Coward, liar, assassin,
Thou bast there stumbled on the truth.
[Da Romana paces up and down in excitement.
M. da R, [ ironically ] Come, come, thou miracle of gratitude—
Da Rom. I spoke impatiently—
M. da B. Oh ! no; yon are too good,
A little hasty perhaps when out of tune,
But nothing more.
Da Rom. Forgive me, I was mad.
My brain was all on fire with jealousy,—
When I heard thy words in sleep.
M. da R. Indeed ?
Da Rom. Alas!
Forgive me, 0 forgive me.
M. da. R. Wouldst thou kneel
To me thy injured wife ?
Da Rom. Behold me here.
M. da R, [ spits at him] And look I spit upon thee thus:—
farewell!
[Exit M. da Romana. Scene closes.
SCENE 2. —Another room in the house. Present, the Conspirators,
VISCONTI, JULIO, and SALERMO.
Ist Const. He comes not; and the hour is long o’erpast
Whereat he bade us to assemble here ;
All are beneath his roof and his power—
Our doubts are thus become a certainty ;
Unsheath your swords—we are betrayed !
2nd Consp. Not so,
Be patient.
Ist Consp. [fiercely] Wretch ! if I thought that you —
Visconti. Good sirs, be calm. We hare no time for this;—
Tour very selfishness should make you one,
And teach you to dissemble now.


J clio. [aside to Salermo} There spoke
The meek and holy priest his inmost thought!
Salermo. [oeirfe] Hist, Julio, hist, stand by ; he's watching yon.
Visconti. And what is it Salermo counsels us t
Salermo. To lay aside your groundless jealousy, <■
For see Romans comes.
Enter Ezzf.li.n da Romaka frowningly.
Da Rom. .Good even, sirs.
Why is there gloom upon your features here,
As though distrust tormented you ? Go to,
Am I not here amongst you all, alone ?
1 waited hot to gain intelligence—
And, thanks to gold, have Seen successful. Come,
Be re-assured... It shall be done to-night.
Several Voices. Viva Italia < viva !
Da Rom. Hist! my friends.
[ While he speakt they crowd round him eagerly, and Marv
da Romana appears at the tide scene listening.
You must suppress your transports for a while,
The hour has not arrived. At midnight—
A Consp. Well ?
Da Rom. [ suddenly ] I thought 1 heard a footstep at that door—
A Consp. Fear nothing. ’Twas the mastiff sleeping there
That stirred. 1 passed him as I entered.
Da Rom. Good.
Brief, let me be in what I have to say;
'Twas on this night some twenty years ago
That Raymond's father died. And as his death
Came on him (so the churchmen said) in sin,
His son, privy to more than many know,
Has had a yearly requiem duly said
For the pardon of his soul. At midnight then
He will he met with on the lonely road
That leads you to the chantry of Saint Mark—
Ist Consp. And will he be alone 1
Da Rom. Yes, unaccompanied.
Save by the aged Priest whom he hath named
Archbishop of Milan.
1 si Consp. What Ambrose ?
Da Rom. Yes.
This have 1 beard from the lord chamberlain,
Who hath lieen warped from his integrity
By promisee and bribes. Thus then success
Is' now undoubted, and our daggers all


Bed with the blood of Raymond shall atone
For that which he hath shed.
[A groan from Mart da Bohan a, and she staggers hurriedly
away ; they look upon each other in terror.
Ist Consp. . Did yon not hear 7
It was a groan as though one of the damned
Had uttered it.
Da Bom. Fie ! this is womanish
’Twas but the fantasm of our heated thoughts
Which often ape reality.... There is
A mask and seeming joyance at the palace,
’Twere good that some of yon were there; it would
Lull all suspicion. Some of yon must go
Wait there until the Prince withdraws, and then,
At a full hour before the midnight bell
Shall sound, meet here. Be cool, be vigilant;
You that are for the palace,—come with me;
For yon that star there's wine within. Bemember:
An hour before the midnight—come.
[Exeunt E. da Bomana, Salerno, Julio, and others on the one
side, and Visconti with the remainder of the conspirators
on the other.
SCENE 3. (Dumb show.)
I —The Sail of Audience at the Palau
brilliantly lighted, with a chair of etate at the upper end.
Preeent the Court of Milan, noblee, and ladiee with masks.
Mueie and dancing. During the dance. Prince Raymond enters.
Salerno and Julio are seen trying to communicate with him,
but are watched by the Conspirators, who (after their first
attempt) throw themselves in their way as if by chance. At
length as the Prince retires the scene closes .
SCENE 4.—The Courtyard of the Palace at before in Act II.,
Scene 4th (by night.) A sentinel pacing to and fro with a
halbert.
Sentinel. 1 never knew a guard set here before,
The Prince of late has grown so fanciful.
He seems to dread a traitor Obibellin
In every corner.—Who goes there 7
Enter officer.
Offices. A friend.
Sentinel. The word 7
OrriCßß. Be itrkt for good elate reaeone.
Sentinel. Pass.
o


Offices, So ; this is well. Yon must keep watch to-night
As if you looked for bloodshed. What it is
I know not. Kumours are afloat
Among the people of the town below,
Which seem not qnite unfounded....My lord Philip
Was in an ecstacy of rage, because
Our captain lacked his sword. Hind, Joan, mind:
You must not give a passage here to-night
T» any stranger under pain of death.
Sentinel. But the guests, Signor?—
Offices. Will be all dismissed
By the south postern; so he vigilant.
Sentinel, I shall not fail.
[Exit officer. The eentind continues hie walk. Hast da
Bohana {veiled) enters hastily and runs towards him.
Sentinel. Wlio’s there ? Stand, woman ; stand, I say—what
now.
H. da B. Sir, I must see the Prince—
Sentinel. Impossible.
Lady, 1 dare not let yon enter here.
H. da B. Yon must not, cannot, dare not hinder me,
1 bring intelligence of highest note
Winch even may affect his life—
Sentinel. Nay, that
May heaven forbid. And yet—l dare not leave
Thu post I am as guard upon.—There stands
About two hundred footsteps from this spot,
The guard house of the garrison. See; there.
Turn to your left, and ask for Gaetan,
The captain. —
M. da B. Thanks.
Sentinel. Out lady be your speed.
[He retires to the back of the stage and continues his walk.
Hart da Bouana is seized whilst hastily quitting the
stage, and hurried away by two conspirators in masks.
Then enter Julio and Salebmo on the other side.
Sal. Thou couldst not speak to him ?
Julio. No.
Sal. Then, alas !■
I fear that all our efforts will be vain
To save him now. It seemed that our attempts
To give him warning were not unobserved.
Didst thou not mark it, Julio. Ezzelin,
And afterwards all the conspirators.
Threw themselves in our path. Is't late ?
Julio. It wants an hour of midnight.
Sal. Ha!


Go then to the lone chantry of St. Mark,
The Prince moat now be there; hence speedily,—
And see him if thon canst before he leaves
The church. Give him this scroll, and then he may
Escape ; Meantime I go to rouse the guard.—
Julio. Farewell then for awhile. {Exit Julio/
Sal. Farewell for ever.
These devils are too hungry for my blood
To let me pass them now. Alas! how hard
When we have wandered from the narrow path
Of common duty to retrace our steps,
And undo all the evil caused! And yet,—
Fool that I was, led captive by a name.
And ignorant of their murderous intent,
I thought the cause was holy. Let none hope
That crime can ever be the instrument
Of good.
Enter two eompiratore.
Ist Coksp. Sir, you must come with ns.
Sal, And what-
If I should possibly refuse to go ?
Ist Coksp. Yon dare not do so-
Sal. Draw, you filthy knave!
[JTe engaget the firet conspirator and they fight. The other
attache him and stabs him behind—he falls mortally
wounded.
Sal. That was a felon’s blow that struck me down
Where yet I never had a wound. Cowards 1....
It is indeed a bitterness to tall
By such degraded hands. O, Italy !
O, my poor weeding country ! from thy veins
The life-blood welters as from mine.
Ist Coksp. Stab him.
Quick ! quick;—he's dead. [They stab him.
Sekiikel. [advancing] Who’s there ?
2kd Coksp. The guard ! the guard !
Ist Coksp. Away ! they are upon ns.
[Exeunt hastily bearing off the body. The rest of the scene
is in dumb shew. After some shew of uneasiness and
doubt, the sentinel resumes his walk; during which enter
Batmokd from the Palau, hastily, muffled in a long black
cloak, and accompanied by Ambrose, the Priest. The
sentinel challenges them, on which the Prinu discovers
himself. The soldier sums surprised and tries to catch
him by the cloak. The Prinu, motioning silence, throws
him money, and moves rapidly across the stage with
Ambrose. The scene closes.


SCENE 5. —A room in DA BOMANA’S house. The conspirators
in conclave, but VISXCONT I and JULIO absent. MARY DA ROMANA
among them as a prisoner. Enter to them Da RO MANA, at
sight of whom they give signs of fierce excitement.
Ist Coksp. See, he comes !
2nd Con Sp. Down with the traitor !
3rd Consp. Kill him !
He has deceived ns. We are not
Pent np like sheep within a slaughter house
To fall without resistance. Ha! is’t thus.
That thou the bastard spawn of Frederic
Wouldst set us free !
Da Ron. Be still you prating knave.
And tell me one of yon what worthy cause,
Hath lashed yon all into this frantic rage ?
3rd Coksp. What cause ?—Hast thou not given ns to the axe,
And, as a trusty agent, sent thy wife—
Da Ron. My wife! my wife ! how cameshe here ?
[in eurpriee and anger , teeing her for the firet time.
Ist Coksp. Why thus.
Seeing a woman go forth secretly
We who remained, soon after you were gone,
Dogg&l her quick footstep* to the palace gate,
That lies toward the east; saw her repulsed,
And straightway brought her thence. If thou dost know—
And hast oeen privy to a jot of this.
For that thou art a traitor to thine oath,
Thou shalt most surely die.
Conspirators, Death, death to both !
Stand by the door.—
Da Ron. What ho there, peace I say.
Bring her before me presently.
[They bring her before him .] How now ?
Is this charge true ?—Woman, you answer not,
And silence ever is supposed assent.
Yet if thou didst but seek to injure me,
And hast therein tried to defeat the plot;—
i However thou didst come to know of it.)
swear by all the spirits of the damned,
By slighted love, dishonour, and ambition,
Thou art upon the threshold of the grave....
Thy blood te on thy head. Speak, woman, speak.
Why went you there ?
M. da R. To save a noble Prince,
From the base death that now is to be mine.


Da Rom. A malison upon thy harlot head !
It was to save a noble paramour.
11. da B. [calmly,] Thou liest! Thou art a living loathsome lie
From head to foot!
Da Bom. Enough, we lose our time.
Why should a woman keep yon from the plot.
Whereby a glorious destiny is yours.
No more. Drag her into the other room
And silence her at once. Do it, and do
It speedily.... There is no drawback now.
[He covert hit fact with hit hands at they drag her away.
M. da R. Help ! Treason ! treason ! Murder! murder ! Help !
[ They itrike at her savagely with their daggers, and the failt.
Touch me not, villain, touch me not; I would
Avoid pollution in my death. And yet,—
Alas ! that I should sacrifice my all
For that vile shrinking thing that shudders there,
And think it had the spirit of a man,—
O, Raymond, Raymond, now thou art avenged.
Thou art—help! darkness is upon me. Help!
I die. [Dies.]
Da Rom . Now are you satisfied ?
Some Voices. We are.
Da Rom. [to two conspirator!.] Alonzo and Gonzago take the
corpse—
Wrap a thick sheet around it for a shroud.
And then go fetch some monks to bury her;
To-night—at once—before this hour liath passed.
Wash off all stains of blood; —it must be thought
The plague did cause her sudden death. Be bold, —
Fail not—for your reward shall be
Past your most sanguine dream. [They bear out the corpse.
Now then the honr
Fraught with the doom of tyranny hath come.
For tno’ Visconti hath abandoned'us,
And, as I hear in cowardice hath fled ;
Yet comrades strong—if not invincible,
Your efforts can obtain the wished for end.
A Consp. Salermo did refuse to come with us—
Da Rom. And then, what then ?
Ist Consp. We slew him.
Da Rom. Good ; come or.
Before defection further weaken us.
T te blow once struck the fickle populace
Will join us to a man. Come, come, away ! [Eecant.


SCENE 6. —Environ s of Milan. Wooded and mountainous
country. The chantry of St. Mark in the back ground, lighted
up as if for tervice. Enter AMBROSE, — and Prince RAYMONG in
a cloak.
Ambrose, 'Tis & bright night, my lord.
Raymond. It is indeed.
Nature seems bushed in absolute repose,
As if aweary of her thousand sounds
Which mingle during day. The distant town,
Thtf many a restless spirit waketh there,
Seems like a mighty tomb, on which the stars
Look down in silent grief. How beautiful'
How wonderful—is every thing we see,
In this dim light. Above us are the the heavens, —
That miracle of an Almighty hand,
Whose meaning none can ever know. 801 l on,
801 l on, ye glorious worlds of happiness ;
Your brilliance never hath been dimmed by guilt.
Unceasingly, untiringly ye run ;
As though a thousand years of weal and woe,
Such ashy you are measured unto ns,
Were but a moment past. Can it be true, —
That in your spheres you influence the doom
Of the poor children of the dust ?—Not so ;
A greater, grander destiny is yours.
I’ll look no more.
Ambrose. My lord, be comforted,
Y'ou were not guilty m your father’s death ;
Why then let sorrow weigh upon yon thus ?
Bat. Ido not grieve: but lao feel within
Such sober certainty that death is nigh
That my lone heart leaps in me to behold
What I shall never look upon again.
[A low and mournful strain of music.
What means that wailing chant ?
Ambrose. 'Tie for the dead;
Borne on the shoulders of the brotherhood,
A mortal moves to the last resting place
Appointed for us all. Behold them now,
Passing the cross beside yon holy well; —
See how their torches flash amid the gloom,
And glare on every object in their path !
How silently and rapidly they come—
Alas ! my country, what is this I see ?
A victim’to the plague; Stand by, my lord, and let
Tbem pass on to the chapel.


[Enter a funeral proctteion of monk) with torchet, bearing
the coffin of Mast da Romana with a pall. The foremost
monk carries a light wooden cross having a small yellow
flag on it as a mark of the plague.
Monk. [To Ambrose and the Prince] Christian men,
Out of your charity pray for the soul
Of Mary da Romans....
Ray. [tn a paroxysm of grief] Dead ?—dead ! what, dead ?
0, Mary ! Mary! long loved, but loved in vain !
Ambrose. Move on, and take away that scene of death,
Or this wild burst of sudden agony
May be his death blow, haste,,,, [Exit the funeral procession.
My lord and prince—
Ray. I prythee leave me quiet for awhile—
I’ll speak to thee anon; —my soul surcharged
And big with mighty grief is powerless now.
My only one ! My Mary ! art thou dead,
Lost, lost to me for ever t—Dead, yes, dead.
The only daughter of the human race
I ever loved. Poor frail one rest thee well.
Henceforth my journey in this world of woe
Hath lost its guiding star.
[A bell sounds in the distance.]
Whence is that new and gloomy sound I hear ;
The tocsin of the citadel I—lt is.
Why doth it toll to raise the citizens
At this dead hour of night ?
Ambrose. Alas! my lord,
I dread to hear some new conspiracy
Hath raised its head.
[Bell rings again.]
Rat. Again and lender.. Come—
Father, this is no time for private grief;
That signal speaks of danger to Milan,
And 1 must go to share in it.
[As they are going, enter Jolio SroMA hastily.]
Julio. Back ! back !
There is a plot, a new conspiracy—
Fly ! fly ! my lord, they come—
Ambrose. My lord and Prince,
Retreat we to the chapel for awhile,
The city is alarmed, and we shall be
Soon rescued.
Rat. No ; you may go there and pray ;
But by the princely honors of mv house,
As I nave never yet fled from a foe,


I'll not turn backward now.
[He drawt hit word and ttandt with Jclio at the tide scene.]
What, ho there ? stand.
And tell me, traitors, what is it you seek
Upon this mountain path by night ?
A Voice, [behind the scenes] ’Tis he J
[Enter the conspirators in a body; they attack and kill Jclio
Sporza and the Prince, and make Ambrose their prisoner.
While they are binding him, enter Ezzelik da RomakA as
in haste .
Da Bom. A curse upon this rocky mountain track !
Tell me how have you sped ?
Ist Coksp. The Prince lie* there.
Together with a man who fongbt for him.
Da Bom. ’Tis well. Thus then the tyranny of years
Is set aside for ever. Shout, men, shout!
And let the city hear of onr success.
Cokspirators. Viva Milan !
Voices, [behind the scenes] Viva Milan !
Da Bom. What’s that ?
Ist Coksp. It can but be the echo as I think.—
Da Bom. Juan, go and look down from vender crag—
[A conspirator goes to the tide scene.] What dost thou see ?
Ist Coksp. A band of men at arms,
With angry horsemen clad in burnished steel,
Bushing up hitherward.
Voices, [os before ] Viva Milan !
Da Bom. Stand to your arms there all of y0u.... Who leads ?
Ist Coksp. They bear the pennon of the Prince that’s slain, —
’Tis Philip that oommandeth them, Alas! [a shout heard.]
They see me—Death—I’m slain. [Falls dead slain by an arrow.
[Enter PnniP Della Torre and hit followers who attach and
speedily overpower the conspirators. Philip assaults and
slays Da Bomaka. The soldiers attempt to recover the
Prince, and his brother Philip kneeling beside him supports
hit head.
Eat. [reviving] Art thou not Fbilip ?
Philip. Woe is me—l am.
Bat. Why so ?
Philip. Because my fell delay hath caused
Tby death. Alas! alas ! my brother ! —live
And bless thy sorrowing subjects. See, they come—
[Enter people as in grief.] And bend in sorrow by thy side with me,
Like sons that mourn a father’s loss.
Eat. ’Tis well.
God bless you my good people. On your heads


Shower down great gifts from his high treasury,
Yoor welfare hath been ever at my heart.
[To Philip.] Bomana?
Philip. Yes.
Rat. It was a coward’s act
Philip. Let that not vex thy soul —he hath his mede.
Rat. Listen, my people; this shall he your Prince, —
See on his brow I set the diadem,
[He flout hit coronet on the head of hit brother.]
So, so ; be vigilant be wary Philip
And keep the haughty Swabian from our land.
But if there shall arise in Peter's chair
A pontiff that will seek that holy end,
Love, honor him, obey him, fight for him, —
Otherwise copy me. Soon, soon, I trust
These chains that some would heap on Italy
Shall all be swept away.... I’m weak—
Death’s giant grasp is heavy on me now; —
Yet raise me up a moment—that I may
See the cold moonlight on the distant spires
Of our thrice noble city.
[They raite him.]
So, ’tis well;
I shall die gazing on her. Had I lived
She should have been most glorious and great
Past what the world e’er saw. Although I die,
It yet doth fill me with a thrill of joy
To think she must survive me—good Philip,
Lay me—lay me by my brothers—that sleep at
Claravalle. Viva, viva Milan ! [Diet.]
[The people and toldiert rite and uncover their heads tn
homage to Philip at they file patf him ;—the curtain falls.
End or Act lIL
Sydney: Printed by HswUley snd Cunnloghtme, King-It. Ea«.
