

Through this sermon being published in the A ustralian Christian World,
the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate of Jerusalem translated it for circulation
in the Holy City •and Palestine amongst Oriental Christians. The Bishop of
Fond du Lac, one of the prime movers in the World Conference on Faith and
Order, wrote of it that “ it is the best thing I have seen on the re-union of
Christendom,” and others have spoken to me about it ; therefore I venture
to print it as a humble contribution to the great question of re-union. Its
only value is my testimony to the eager desire of Oriental Christians from
Patriarchs downwards for a complete and speedy union with the Church of
England. The kind reception given to a priest of no account is an indication,
of the welcome which would be lavished upon those in higher positions in
the Church, and who indeed have been invited to visit Jerusalem, and are
ardently awaited there. \ ’
Re-Union of Christendom
BY THE REV. CANON GARLAND.
Notes of an address delivered in St. John’s Cathedral, Brisbane,
on the second Sunday after Epiphany, 1920, from our Lord’s words
in His great Intercessory Prayer contained in St. John’s Gospel,
chapter 17, verse 21: —“That they all may be one; as thou.
Father, art in me and I in Thee, that they also may be one in us ;
that the world may believe that Thou hast sent me.”
HE said that they had just finished prayers of intercession for
the Union.of Christendom, and for the welfare of “ The
World Conference for the consideration of questions touching
faith and order,” which prayers would be continued for a week
throughout the world among a great multitude of Christians.
The basis of the conference is the admission of all who believe
in the incarnation of the Lord Jesus Christ as God. It is not a
question of episcopacy, church government, or sacraments. No
church coming in is asked to surrender anything it holds, but to
come in at its own spiritual value of itself, to meet and discuss
the relationships of all these churches in the spirit of our Lord’s
prayer “ that they all may be one,” in order that the world may
believe in Him.
This was a remarkable proposal, audacious and unique.
Audacious because it was humanly impossible to accomplish it,
but, he stated, it was humanly impossible for the individual to
live without sinning, humanly impossible to abolish sin, and
disease, and war ; yet we had to aim and work at the accomplish-
ment of all these things, impossible though they seem. So the
humanly impossible in the re-union of Christianity was still our
duty, and the accomplishment of it would, he believed, prove
easier than the things he had just mentioned, because of our
Lord’s prayer for the unity of the Church, and His prayer must
be answered.
It was unique because never in the history of Christianity had
such a gathering taken place. There had been general councils,
but they were of the undivided Church. Since schism had
occurred there was no such movement as this world-wide con-
ference. In it were to gather episcopal and non-episcopal, east
and west, ancient and modern, black, brown, red, and white, a


great- multitude of all nations and kindreds and peoples and
tongues assembling before the throne of God and the Incarnate
Lamb to seek His will. In this conference substantially all
Christendom, with one exception, has agreed to join.
Initiated before the war, by the daughter, now a sister,
communion (the church of America) ; the Church of England
throughout the Empire, the ancient churches of the East repre-
sented by the patriarchs of Constantinople, Antioch, Jerusalem,
and Alexandria ; the Coptic Church, the independent Eastern
Churches of Greece, Roumania, and Servia ; the Catholic Native
Church of Japan ; the Catholic Native Church of China ; Modern
Protestant Churches, such as the Baptist, Congregational,
Methodist, Presbyterian, Quakers, Lutherans, isolated churches,
such as the Moravian and the old Catholic, all are taking part
on an equal basis. The only one church in Christendom that has
refused is Rome, which with a distinct courtesy, but equally
distinct arrogance, maintained its claim, not of unity with
Christendom, but of submission on the part of all Christendom
to that claim. This meant, of course, that all other Christians
throughout the world were meeting in the spirit of Christ to
consider how the breaches in the walls of the Holy City of God
could be repaired —one Church alone was standing aloof.
He believed that the conference is the first great result of the
work of the Holy Spirit, who had stirred Christians visibly to
long and pray for the healing of the divisions of Christendom.
As older hearers would remember a generation ago, it was freely
expressed that competition among churches was good—but we
have learned differently in Australia, with half-a-dozen little
shanties in a country town, each badly attended, and the minister
of each unable to cope with his work, and badly supported. Not
many generations ago the spirit still prevailed which led to bodies
breaking away, not only from the Mother Church, but sub-
sequently repeating the|break from the new bodies formed.
Now that spirit had disappeared, and there was distinct evidence
of a desire to come together, and to unite these smaller bodies.
A few generations ago the note amongst earnest Christians if
things did not seem to go right was “ separate/’ now the note
is “(’unite.”
He believed the time had arrived for those churches whose
faith and order are similar to enter into negotiations for inter-
communion. For example, there were the non-episcopal churches,
such as Presbyterian, Methodist, Congregational, and Baptist,
which had much in faith and order that are similar ; there was a
movement already amongst them in Canada and Australia to
come together in organic union. He wished that movement every
blessing and success. He would far rather not see these individual
churches unite with the Church of England separately. He did
not wish to’see them absorbed. That would be no re-union of
Christendom. But he believed that if all the Protestant Churches
found their common ground of agreement and came together


into one church, then tha right time would approach for union
with the Church of England.
Eastern Churches.!
Western Christendom is too accustomed to divide Christians
into Papists and Protestants (he used neither term in an offensive
sense), and is ignorant or forgetful of the fact that there are one
hundred and twenty millions of Oriental Christians, who are neither
Papist nor Protestant, who are more ancient than either, who gave
us the Faith. The Bible was written by Orientals, and those who
wrote the New Testament were Oriental Christians. Indeed, let
us say it with all reverence, the Founder of our Faith was of
Oriental human birth. The creeds we profess to-day were drawn
up by Oriental Christians. The ancient Church hymns we sing,
such as the Te Deum, were written by Oriental Christians. Nay,
we English-speaking people have chosen as our patron saint
St. George, an Oriental Christian. The Oriental Christians were
capable of teaching both Papist and Protestant many valuable
lessons.
From Oriental Christendom hands had been stretched out
occasionally to the Church of- England for several centuries past,
but in later years were stretched out, with increasing frequency
and longing, and he was thankful to say were clasped by the
Church of England with increasing fervour. In our generation
the war, so full of evil and sorrow in other respects, has intensified
the longing of Oriental Christians to be in direct union with the
Church of The Patriarch of Antioch, Gregory of
Damascus (one who seemed to him a saint come out of the early
centuries of Christianity), the Patriarch of Jerusalem (who seemed
to him to represent an apostle of old), had both said to him how
much they longed for union with the Church of England as dis-
tinguished from the claims of Rome, or the Protestant Churches.
Many of the Greek Orthodox clergy had spoken to the same
effect, saying that to-day the Church of England and the Greek
Orthodox Church stood side by side ; to-morrow, please God,
they would be joined hand-in-hand. And it was not mere talk.
His hearers knew that Oriental archbishops and bishops had lately
been taking part frequently in services in St. Paul’s Cathedral,
London, and r other churches in England, and there had been
reciprocal action by our own bishops. For instance, thfe Bishop
of Fond du Lac last year had celebrated the Holy Eucharist at
the High Altar in Belgrade Cathedral, Servia, according to the
use of the Book of Common Prayer, in the presence of the metro-
politan and assembled bishops ; and likewise had administered
confirmation to some English people in their presence. That was
one among other similar acts in which Australians had shared.
The Rev. Maitland Woods, senior chaplain A.1.F., in Egypt,
Christmas, 1918, had celebrated the Holy Eucharist in the Greek
Orthodox Cathedral at Homs, surrounded by a large body of
Australian soldiers, in the presence of the Greek Orthodox Arch


bishop, who stood at the altar, took part in the service, and
blessed the congregation of Australians. That day twelve months
ago the preacher had the great privilege of celebrating the Holy
Eucharist on an altar somewhere about 1,200 years old, in the
underground church of St. John the Baptist, in Jerusalem, assisted
by a body of Australian troops, a celebration which the Patriarch
of Jerusalem had said was the first celebration in that place of the
Holy mysteries for 1,000 years. Christmas a year back he had
the wonderful privilege of being received by the Patriarch of
Antioch at the Christmas Eucharist in the Damascus Cathedral,
by direction of the Patriarch he was vested in their sacred vest-
ments, placed at the altar amongst the priests, and given the
Holy Communion as a priest. Then in Jerusalem, at the Church
of the~Holy Sepulchre, with only a wall dividing the altar from
Calvary, there was an altar erected by the Patriarch some 35
years ago in order that Church of England priests might celebrate
the Holy Mysteries according to the use of the Book of Common
Prayer, and where he had celebrated many times.
A generation ago the Greek Orthodox Church would not have
allowed a priest of the Church of England to use their altar, now
there were these instances, which meant that the Onental churches
were looking to the Church of England for union.
He, for one, believed that the Church of England occupied
such a situation that it could be the chief factor in the re-union
of Christendom independently of Borne. ■ That on the one side
the ancient and Oriental churches were longing for corporate
union with the Church of England, and on the other side the
Protestant Churches were coming more and more together, and,
finally, would be in a strong position to negotiate w ith
of England.
Our duty, of course, was to pray, but not to allow our prayers
to evaporate in talk. Our next duty was to learn and study the
history of Christianity and its movements to-day, not to be so
much absorbed in our passing.politics, and in things which did
not matter. To have wide vision, not to be excited over the
colour or shape of the handle of the parish pump, and yet each
one to do in his ow r n church his share of whatever work came,
and to do it as part of the work of the Church of the wdiole world.
The churches would never overcome the evil of the world that
would be done only by The Church, which is not to be limited by
human ideas, but to embrace all tho«e who love the Lord Jesus
Christ in sincerity. When we had done our duty then the day
would come that our Lord’s prayer would be answered, “ That
they all may be one in order that the w’orld may believe that
Thou hast sent Me.”
H. J. Diddams & Co., Printers, 367 George Street, Brisbane.
