

REAPING
THE
WHIRLWIN D.




REAPING THE WHIRLWIND


HELEN. Then, Doctor, tell my husband whether he bears a Russian numeral — a murderer’s brand upon
the right shoulder? Tell him the truth.
Reaving the Whirluind. Act III.. Page 56.


Reaping the Whirlwind
AN AUSTRALIAN PATRIOTIC DRAMA
FOR
AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE
by
F. R. B. Hop[?]
SYDNEY
mi»TBD BY
WEBSDALE, SHOOSMITH LTD.
1909


Reaping the Whirlwind
AN AUSTRALIAN PATRIOTIC DRAMA
FOR
AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE
SYDNEY
PRINTED BY
WEBSDAIvK, SHOOSMITH LTD.
1909


[ Copyright. All Rights Reserved .]


DEDICATED
TO
AUSTRALIA:
Nearest and Dearest :
THE
Jewel oe the South.




Prom jealous lip and alien mouth
The whisper passes, horde to horde;
“A handful holds the Sunny South
With peaceful men who lack the sword!”
“Shall teeming millions Hunger face?
Or countless children, squalid die ?
The tireless sons of Eastern race,
A brighter destiny must buy!”
Lone gem, set in a sapphire sea,
The fairest that the world has known,
When Pagan hands stretch forth for thee,
Be all thy enemies—o’erthrown.
List to the warning, while ye may,
Ye dwellers in the danger zone —
Cast not the precious hours away,
But hold AUSTRALIA, FOR THINE OWN!
Lord God of Hosts, whose mighty hand,
Can turn back steel, or stem the tide:
Have mercy on our goodly land,
And fight upon the weaker side!




TO THE READER.
The number of theatrical managers in Australia is a
limited one, and the production of a play often depends
upon many circumstances entirely outside the realm of
its intrinsic merits —or demerits.
The successful playwright is the one who, simultane-
ously, hits the moment, the manager and the public. Even
in London an experienced author may discouragingly
have his work refused on all sides, and be compelled (if
he is persistently bent on getting as far as the footlights)
to find the necessary funds for production.
A few words may not be out of place to the conser-
vatively-inclined, who are sure to object to the ending of
my play. I refer directly to those persons who are
always cocksure that everything in this world will happen
exactly as they anticipate. Is it not in real life the
unexpected that generally happens? Quite apart from
that, I consider ancient conventionalism the curse of
modern stage craft.
In conclusion. To the average reader, the best of
printed plays are “Caviare,” and lack vitality; it may,
therefore, be naturally asked why I have elected to run
the risk of submitting this one, in its present form? My
answer is twofold. I love Australia —no man better —
and I feel sure that the lessons which “An Englishman’s
Home” brought to the other side of the world require to
be vividly impressed upon the multitude here.
THE AUTHOR.


NOTE.
All applications for the production of this drama
should be addressed to THE AUTHOR,
care of the Printers.


PERSONS OF THE DRAMA.
Baron Kokura - - - Chief of the Bureau of Secret
Instructions.
Sameda ------ His Secretary.
Gerald Douglas- - - (AfterwardsHaroldJohnstone.)
An Englishman. The workers’
friend, champion of the down-
trodden and oppressed.
Helen Douglas - - - (Afterwards Helen Hammer-
ton) His wife.
Colonel Koyada- - - Minister for External Affairs.
General Mosaku - - Governor of the Military Gaol.
Wong ------ A Mongolian — not deaf but
dumb.
Dorothy Grahame - - Sister to Helen Hammerton,
young and charming.
Wallace Hammerton - An Australian —every inch of
him.
George Wyndham - - In love with Dorothy.
Johnny Elbtcher - - A man about Town.
Gordon Warwick, M.P., One who has made politics a
profession.
Rev. Silas Wood - - A man of deadly peace.
Hon. Percy Mills - - Travelling in Australia—not
long from England.
Mrs. Vincent - - - (A Friend of the Hammertons)
a wealthy widow.
Doctor Crane - - - Mrs. Hammerton’s medical ad-
viser.
Arthur Maitland - - Chairman of a public meeting.
Andy Dixon - - - - Leader of the rioters.
Jane ------- A servant.
Messenger, Soldiers, Salvation Army Captain, Large
Assemblage attending Public Meeting, Police.




SYNOPSIS.
Act I. —In the near East. In an Asiatic Capital.
An East Wind Blows.
Act II. —In Australia. In a Suburban (Sydney) Town
Hall.
The Whirlwind Threatens.
Act lII.—In Australia. In a Sydney Suburb. At
Wallace Hammerton’s House.
Drinking the Bitter Dregs.
Period.—September, 1915.
One year is supposed to elapse between the first
and second Acts.
One month between the second and third Acts.
The stage directions “right” and “left” are from the
point of view of the actor, facing the footlights.
Time.—2 hours (approximately).
Act 1., 35 minutes.
Act 11., 40 minutes.
Act HI., 45 minutes.


Wallace Hammerton,
Fair complexion, medium height,
40 years of age.
Dorothy Grahame -
Brunette, short, handsome,
dresses smartly, 28 years.
Harold Johnstone -
No beard, only moustache, Cri-
mean shirt, serge suit, felt hat,
36 years.
George Wyndham
Fair hair, clean shaved, 25 years.
Johnny Fletcher
Dark hair, very tall, 40 years of
age, prides himself on his
tailor.
Mrs. Vincent - - -
Brown hair, stout, short stature,
50 years, elegantly dressed and
bejewelled.
Gordon Warwick - -
Tall, thin; dress a speciality,
prominently has flowers in his
coat, 30 years.
Rev. Silas Wood - -
Gray thin hair, lean and cada-
verous. Wears spectacles. A
typical religious extremist, 70
years.
Hon. Percy Mills -
English “Johnnie” in dress. 25
years.
Andy Dixon - - -
Clean shaved, curly hair, dark,
red face, wears moleskin trou-
sers, tweed coat and vest, no
collar, felt hat, 30 years.
Jane ------
Brunette, neatly dressed, tasteful
cap, 20 years.
Doctor Crane - - -
Short, stout, grey, middle-aged,
wears spectacles.
Arthur Maitland -
Portly, 50 years.
PERSONALITIES IN ACTS II. AND III.
NOTE.—In Act 111. Helen Hammerton wears light cloak ; she is plainly
but impressively dressed.


ACT I.
Place - An Asiatic Capital.
Scene - Interior of the Offices of Baron Kokura.
Time - Morning.
As curtain rises, Baron Kokura, sixty years of age,
grey and bald, is seated at his office table at B. Sameda,
the Secretary, twenty-five years old, is sitting writing
directly opposite to him at L. Table is covered with
documents and papers. Sofa at B along wall. On wall
behind them is a large map, on a spring roller. Strongly
barred windows between map and L corner of room. At
L corner a folding screen. Side door on the left. Apart-
ment luxuriously furnished, heavy carpet, large safes,
pigeon boxes full of documents. Bell on table, also
photographic album. Appointments mainly of a
European character, but the screen, ornaments, and deco-
rations are Asiatic.
kokura. Sameda!
sameda [looking up and ceasing to write]. Yes, your
Excellency.
kokura. What time did the Minister for External
Alfairs say that he would call?
sameda. At half past eleven. He wishes to see you
urgently.


kokuea. Inform the messenger, immediately on his
arrival, that I am not to be disturbed. [ Sameda
touches bell, Messenger enters at L.]
sameda {to Messenger], His Excellency will see no one
while the Minister for External Affairs is here. You
understand 1 [ Messenger exit door L, closing same.]
sameda. The Military Commandant of the Second For-
tress has furnished me with the papers which your Excel-
lency required. They only arrived this morning. [Z7m-
ties large bundle of documents.]
kokuea. Read me the confidential particulars in the
third batch.
sameda [looking over papers, selects one]. They are
here, your Excellency. [Beads slowly.] “Gerald Doug-
las, British-born, naturalised Russian subject—age thirty-
five —height five feet seven and a half inches, blue eyes,
fair hair, beard and moustache tinged with grey, walks
with a slight stoop. Has old scar on left cheek. Branded
with Russian numeral on the right shoulder. Sentenced
to deportation for life on the Island of Karafuto or
Saghalien—date nine years ago. Escaped on board a
fishing boat to the mainland —was captured, and secretly
sent by order of the Chief of Police to the custody of
the Governor of our Military prison of Emo—has been
confined there two years. Conduct exemplary.”
kokuea. Married or single?
sameda [looking carefully through various docu-
ments], There is no mention, your Excellency.
kokuea. Strange, to say the least of it. A curious
omission. [Pause.] It does not matter, however. The
information can be easily obtained.
sameda. There is an indorsement. [ Goes on reading .]
“This man is to remain a close prisoner and hold com


munication with no one, except under an order from the
Minister for External Affairs, countersigned by the
existing Head of the Department of Justice.”
kokuea. Have you obtained the authorisation?
sameda. With the greatest difficulty.
kokuea. What objections did they raise?
sameda. That the man is dangerous, your Excellency,
but I do not believe a word of it.
kokuea. I will form my own opinion. What languages
does he speak?
sameda [turning over fresh folios ]. English, French,
Russian, German, and a little of our own.
kokuea. He is certainly dangerous. If a man can
only think properly, in half of these, he is to be reckoned
with. [Messenger knocks outside door L.]
sameda. Come in!
messenger. His Excellency Colonel Koyada, Minister
for External Affairs.
kokuea. Very well. [Exit Messenger door L .]
[Kokura and Sameda stand up. Enter Colonel Koyada
door L in undress uniform, he is ushered in with im-
portance. Messenger closes door. Kokura bows form-
ally. Sameda places chair for him at C, near to that of
the Baron. The Colonel is about thirty years of age,
keen and alert. All become seated. Sameda goes on
writing rapidly, turning over sheets of paper, occasion-
ally taking files from pigeon boxes, replacing and alter-
ing their positions .]
kokuea [sitting back leisurely in his chair]. Glad
to see you again, Colonel; you are ahead of the appoint-
ment, but it doesn’t matter. We are busy to-day.
[Pause.] Anything new?
A


koyada. Not much. The debate in the House last
night on the failure of the rice crop in the Northern
provinces is going to give us trouble. There’s a lot of
disaffection showing up.
kokura. Like water, it will find its own level.
koyada [ thoughtfully ]. I don’t think so. We are
going to have bother —and plenty. The cities and towns
are congested with population to the very overflow. The
country districts are worse. Our people must have out-
lets. Expansion is the word that sums it up. They will
have to emigrate, Baron, or starve. And the question
is, where are they to go to? Every door seems closed
against them. [Pause.] It’s hard on an industrious,
law-abiding people.
kokura. Ground down by taxation, and heavier Army
and Naval estimates every year. Colonisation is the
word, I should substitute, Colonel, for that of expansion.
However, that is only splitting straws. It should come to
the same thing. By the way, has the new treaty with
England been signed?
koyada. On the 22nd instant. Everybody is aware
of its general provisions. They contain nothing new,
except that our support extends beyond the East —if re-
quired. There is, however, a secret clause, which will
not be communicated to the Powers. I can let you see it.
[Sameda looks up thoughtfully, then resumes his writing.
Koyada lakes from his breast pocket a thin document
and hands it to Kokura.]
kokura [taking the paper]. Thank you, Colonel.
[Carefully reads and re-reads document.] A master
stroke of diplomacy. It solves one of the greatest diffi-
culties we have ever had. If it were only known •


koyada. Not till the time is ripe. One can’t forecast
the future, and say with certainty that IT will ever be.
[Kokura hands back document, and Koyada puts it into
his pocket again.] Yet [musing], who knows? Who
knows? [Pause.]
kokuea. Are you still of opinion that the Englishman
Gerald Douglas should be made use of, in the manner
indicated in your last letter?
koyada. Undoubtedly! but it will be left to yourself
to decide, whether he can be trusted.
kokura. He will not be working as a spy?
koyada. There is no necessity. Besides, no English-
man could be induced to become a spy.
kokuea. What if he should refuse to undertake the
business ?
koyada. There is not the slightest danger. The man
won’t elect to die in prison. He’s had quite enough,
already.
kokuea. Some supervision over his movements will be
necessary.
koyada. Not after he lands in Austral Asia. The pay-
ment of the money, from time to time, will be quite suf-
ficient. He will know very well that if he makes
a false step, his income will immediately cease.
The business of a democratic country, labour-ridden,
is an open book. Its newspapers will tell us all we want,
and how he is getting on. We shall know even every-
thing he says.
kokuea. If he has half the success he had in Russia,
it should be enough.
koyada. Undoubtedly. In Austral Asia, his field will
he easier tilled. The propaganda only requires to be
strong. There are no lengths to which he can not go.


Freedom of speech is practically unlimited there. The
masses are easily stirred, when it is for their own bene-
fit; but impress strongly on him the necessity of peace-
ful measures. Not a drop of blood must be spilt. Evo-
lution creates social revolution. Time will effect the
remainder.
kokura. In my mind’s eye, Colonel, I have the small-
est details. To-day, the Governor of the Military Gaol,
acting on the Departmental orders, is to bring the Eng-
lishman to this room under an armed escort, for the pur-
poses of interrogation. I will officially inform you of
the result, as soon as possible. Is there anything further
you require?
koyada. Nothing, except that I would urge upon you
the absolute necessity of getting everything carried
through, without a hitch. The results may be momentous.
[.Rises to go. Kokura gets up from Ms chair. Sameda
goes to door L and opens it.']
kokura [bowing]. Then for the present, Colonel, I
will bid you farewell, till progress is reported. [They
all bow. Koyada takes his departure, exit door L, then
Kokura and Sameda become sealed as before.]
kokura. You have noted everything in writing that
the Minister said?
sameda. To the very letter. It is all in black and
white. [Knock at door L. Enter Messenger.]
messenger. The Governor of the Second Fortress and
two soldiers with a prisoner from the Military Gaol, are
awaiting instructions.
kokura. I will receive the Governor, first. [ Messenger
bows, and exit door L, leaving door open—slight pause,
then General Mosaku enters. He is a little very old
man, full uniform.]
kokura [ns/»g]. My salutations, General!


mosaku. We are at your Excellency’s service. The
order for the prisoner to be brought here has been duly
carried out. He is in the corridor, in custody of my
soldiers. Is there anything you want to know before they
bring him in? [Kokura and Mosaku remain standing .]
kokura. I have practically all the information I de-
sire. However, it is the man I wish to see, and alone.
When I say alone, my secretary will of course be present,
to make any notes that may be necessary. [Pause.] I
understand he is not violent, General?
mosaku. Oh! dear no. If it were not for his record,
one could scarcely believe him to be all he is; but you
can never trust criminals of any sort. [Looking round.]
The windows, I see, are barred. There is only the one
entrance to the room. He can be safely left with you.
How long are you likely to be?
kokura. Half an hour, at the outside. The escort
could stop in the passage. It will have to allow the other
two people—you know who I mean —to pass.
mosaku. Quite so. While you are busy, I will remain
in the waiting room and have a look at the last Gazettes.
I will instruct the [They how. Sameda shows
him out with great ceremony door L. Door is left open.
Sameda returns to his writing. Kokura sits down.]
kokura. Sameda! [Sameda looks up from papers,
ceasing to use his pen.] Take note of the most trifling
particulars when I am interviewing this prisoner. Be
sure to watch him closely, when I am asking whether he
is married or single.
sameda. Yes, your Excellency.
kokura. Here he comes. [Enter soldiers with Gerald
Douglas between them. They are in hybrid uniforms,
half-Japanese, half-Chinese. He is in rough canvas


clothes and bareheaded. He is gaunt and wretched look-
ing. Beard and moustache. His hands are hound be-
hind his back. The Messenger is in the rear till he goes. The
soldiers salute, retire, and leave Douglas standing at C.
He looks distractedly round the room, and then fixes his
gaze on Kokura. Sameda takes key from his desk and
locks the door, then returns to desk, and becomes appar-
ently absorbed in work and oblivious of all else.]
kokura [to Gerald Douglas], Your name?
geeald. Gerald Douglas.
kokura. Nationality?
geeald. A naturalised Russian subject.
kokura [severely and with emphasis]. An English-
man found guilty of murder at St. Petersburg, and by
the clemency of the White Czar, deported to the island of
Sagh alien.
Gerald. Pound guilty—a gross injustice—without a
trial, but innocent as I stand before God, to-day.
[Pause.] My hands have never yet shed blood, but I
have suffered worse than twenty deaths. Saghalien!
Saghalien! Yes. A hell of all the hells upon this earth.
I have been there —the murderers’ and assassins’ den—
the tiger’s lair. Oh! the burning heat —the frozen cold!
I wonder that I am not stark, staring, raving mad.
[Overcome. A pause.] What do you want with me?
kokura. Some information. [Pause, looks at him
fixedly, leaning over desk.] There may be hope for—
even you.
Gerald. Hope, hope? Hope has long since departed.
I don’t know what it means. I understood it —long ago.
kokura [suddenly]. Answer me. Are you a married
man? or a single man —which? [Sameda, looking up,
keeps his eyes intently fixed on Gerald Douglas. Doug-
las is strangely moved.]


Geeald. What good can it do you to know? I thought
no one in the world took so much interest in an outcast
wretch like me. [ Long pause.] lam not married. If
ever I was—my God !—I must have forgotten it.
kokuea [sternly]. Listen. You have been two years
in the Military gaol.
Gerald [flaring up]. Without a trial —without a word
—without being even brought before a Court of Justice.
Perhaps you do not have any in your country?
kokura [hotly]. You can thank somebody or some-
thing, that you have not been shot We want no mur-
derers here. It is proposed to deliver you up to the
Russian authorities, immediately. [Sameda goes on writ-
ing once more.]
geeald. My God ! Not that! Not that!
kokura. Unless I intervene — [roughly] —pay careful
attention. Your whole history is known to me, from the
time you left England as an agent of the International,
to stir up discontent among the working classes of Rus-
sia. You did your work secretly—and well—but you
were watched.
geeald. Betrayed—persecuted—hounded down.
kokuea. You took the risks. You played a dangerous
game—and lost. The loser always pays. He should not
complain.
Gerald. I want to know again, what do you want with
me?
kokuea. You’re impatient, like the people of your
race. I will keep you no longer in ignorance. It is
desired [with emphasis] that you should work out your
own salvation and become free
Gerald. Eree? Free? Impossible


kokuea. Not so. All you will be asked to do is to
take things up at the stage you left them when you weie
arrested at S't. Petersburg.
Gerald, To—go—to work —in Russia? No. Never
again.
kokuea. In another country.
Gerald. Where? [Pause.'] Where?
kokuea. That is my business. [Pause.] Sameda, un-
fold the map. [Sameda goes across to tvall—pulls cord
—displaying immense map on wall at C., labelled AUS-
TRAL ASIA. He stands beside it.]
kokuea [pointing to map]. There —and only there!
In Austral Asia, the greatest country of the globe. A
land of magnificent distances, of incalculable wealth —a
practically unoccupied continent; the only one where
Nature begs and entreats for population, to-day. Sameda,
what is the extent of that part marked Northern Ter-
ritory ?
sameda. Five hundred and twenty-four thousand Eng-
lish miles, or about one-sixth of the whole country, your
Excellency. [Pause.] Population four thousand per-
sons —mostly Asiatics.
kokuea [musingly]. And it would keep five hundred
million people! And the capital of Austral Asia —what
is it, Sameda?
sameda. Here, your Excellency [puts Ms finger on
map] —the City of Sydney.
kokuea. There you are wrong. It is either Melbourne
or a place—let me see—called Yass Canberra [To
Gerald] Austral Asia also is a country, remember, where
labour is master, and [significantly] may yet, be King.
Had you gone there, instead of to Russia, what a bril


liant future you might have had! What a truly great
man you could have been! What conquests you might
have made for the International, instead of hovering be-
tween life and death —the sport of miserable fate.
Gerald. Your authorities may treat me as an assassin,
but they shall never make of me—a spy.
kokuba. My country wants no spies. The price of
your liberty is continuing the work of the International,
on congenial soil.
gebald. For what object 1 ?
kokuea. The good of the greatest number! [Patcse.]
Decide at once. The chance will not come again. If you
return to the Military gaol, your existence may not be
worth a minute’s purchase.
gebald. One thing is clear. You have interested mo-
tives. You are not a Member of the Society. You do
not know its secrets, and you have not recognised “the
sign.” There is some hidden object.
kokuba. You are mistaken. No reports will be re-
quired, and no communication held with you, by either
myself or anyone in this country. As long as you con-
tinue your work strenuously and vigorously, and while
you are faithful to the compact, a sum of one hundred
English pounds per month will be paid to your credit at
the Bank of New Exchange, in Sydney. Should you not
adhere to these simple conditions, the subsidy will be
immediately withdrawn, and your life will be, to use a
mild expression—in instant jeopardy. You are not re-
quired to sign any undertaking. It would not be worth
the value of the paper used. The secrecy of the project
carries everything, including your own protection. You
will only have to change your name.
gebald. If I accept, when shall I be released?


kokuea. This very day. A steamer sails for Austral
Asia to-night. You will be placed on board with suffi-
cient money for the voyage. The remainder is in your
own hands, but —whatever you do, there must be no
shedding- of blood. Remember that, and recollect it
more than always.
Gerald. What guarantee is there that I may not be
handed over, or fall into the hands of the Russian police 1
kokuea. I will show you. [Pause.] Sameda
[Sameda goes to a safe, unlocks it, hands parchment to
Kokura.]
kokuea. It is this. [Unfolding document.] The par-
don for your offence, signed by his Majesty the Czar.
Gerald. It will be given to me —now?
kokuea. Not so, but at the last port of call. It will
then become your property.
Gerald. I accept. [With resignation.] There is no
other course open. I will do your bidding. God help
me in this dire extremity!
kokuea. Certain formalities will have to be gone
through, but the transaction can be considered complete.
For a short time you will remain in this room. I shall
provide you with a seat behind that screen [indicating
screen]. Remember [authoritatively] that under no cir-
cumstances must you betray your presence. Your life
depends upon it.
Gerald [bows his head]. So be it. You are master
here.
kokuea [to Sameda]. Take him across. [Remains
in deep thought. Gerald Douglas follows Sameda to the
screen. He places a seat behind, and the prisoner dis-
appears from view. One of the windows close by is


■partly open. Sameda goes over to table and touches
bell, then unlocks door L. Messenger enters door L.]
sameda. His Excellency wishes to see Wong at once.
Has he arrived?
messenger. Only a few minutes ago.
kokura. Let him come in, when we ring again. [ Exit
Messenger door L. Pause.] This old Wong’s the great-
est and richest scoundrel in Asia.
sameda. To look at him, your Excellency, one would
not think he was worth a single candareen.
kokura. Let me glance over his record, to refresh my
memory. [Sameda hands him documents from a shelf.
Kokura turns them over, then apparently finds what he
is looking for — reads slowly .] “Wong—Mongolian—age
uncertain —extra pock marked —native of Kien Sie, pro-
vince of Lew —height normal—false pigtail. In his
youth supposed to have been concerned in acts of piracy
—has amassed great wealth in contraband trades —be-
lieved to be principal member of the Syndicate which
ships enormous quantities of opium to Austral Asia —
purchases, and also forges naturalisation papers—has
surreptitiously introduced over five thousand coolies into
the Commonwealth —has seven so-called missionaries edu-
cating pupils into the so-called language test —afflicted
with dumbness, but possesses wonderful powers of hear-
ing.” [Pause.] Touch the bell. [ Sameda complies.
To Sameda] You had better do the talking. He under-
stands you best. [Enter Wong, door L. Tie is old,
shuffles along, is in ordinary Chinese walking attire; has
a horn pair of spectacles on —very large pigtail. He
bows low many times, in the most obsequious manner.
Messenger outside, close door. Wong stands not far
from door L.]


sameda. His Excellency desires me to tell you that lie
understands you have been frequently employed by the
War Department on —confidential—missions. [Wong
nods.] This paper [lifting document from table] will
explain to you how your services are required by him;
what is expected of you, and how much you will be paid.
[Hands Wong paper. Wong looks over it carefully,
then shakes his head. Sameda comes close to him. Wong
points to an item with his finger.]
sameda [to Kokura], Tour Excellency, he asks for
double payment.
kokura. Try him with three-quarters—the rest at the
journey’s end. [Wong follows Sameda to table. Sameda
goes to a safe, takes two small bags of gold coins from it,
puts them on table, cuts string round each, and counts
out a number of pieces to Wong. When he has finished
Wong pushes them away, shakes his head. This occurs
several times, then Sameda adds more and more till the
bags are emptied. Eventually, with a feat of sleight of
hand Wong sweeps them all into one bay, and nods his
satisfaction. He seems much pleased.]
sameda. You must be prepared to start to-night
[Wong assents], and take care of this. It’s more valu-
able than the money [hands Wong the Czar’s pardon].
If you lose it, you may as well jump ovei'boai'd. His
Excellency considers that you have lowered the Science
of cheating by making it [scathingly] a fine Art. In
order that there shall be no mistake, look well at this
photograph. [Hands him picture from table, Wong
looks at it intently for a few moments and nods three
times.]
sameda. I may say, your Excellency, that he never
forgets. It is useless giving him the picture. He has it
indelibly fixed upon his brain. [Takes back photo., look


ing it in drawer.] Another matter. Did you find the
Okusan, as you were ordered to do? [Wong nods, points
to the door by which he had entered, then holds up five
fingers.]
sameda. He means, your Excellency, that the English
lady came five minutes before he entered the room. He
brought her, exactly to time— [looking at watch. To
Wong] And she has seen nobody? [Wong shakes his
head. To Komura] He can be well depended on—if
he gets his price.
kokura. Let him go. The English okusan must not
be kept waiting, nor the Governor either. It will only
take a few minutes to deal with her. [Sameda points to
door, exit Wong L., door is closed, pause, he opens it
again, walks up to table, points afresh to another item
in his written instruction.]
sameda. The scoundrel asks for a further advance.
kokura. The robber. Tell him he’ll get no more. Not
a candareen.
sameda. His Excellency [severely] will employ some
one else [angrily]. Hand back the money and the
papers. [Wong smiles blandly, nods three or four times,
bows in a servile way, grins, and exit door L.]
kokura. See if the prisoner is all right. Whisper to
him not to move. Tell him he will soon be going from
here. [Sameda retires behind screen, long pause, during
which Kokura passes his hand a number of times over
his forehead. Sameda returns.]
kokura. Now for the English lady. [Sameda touches
bell. Enter Messenger door L.]
sameda. Inform the okusan that His Excellency is
ready. Let her come in at once. Tell her not to be
frightened at the soldiers. [Messenger bows, exit door
L.]


sameda. The prisoner has never moved. [Pause.
Sameda settles down at his work again at table. Door
is again opened by messenger. Enter Helen Douglas,
who shrinks back timidly. She is about thirty-two years
of age, a blonde, very beautiful, dressed in plain English
morning costume.]
kokuea [rising]. Be seated, oknsan. There is no
cause for alarm. You are among friends, who may
prove of service to you. [Points to chair at front.]
sameda. His Excellency, whose channels for obtaining
information are large and varied, has been informed thar
you are seeking to learn the whereabouts of an English
gentleman, supposed to be in this country.
Helen [ interrupting ]. My husband, who has been lost
to me for the past nine years, and who, I have reason
to believe, is illegally confined in a Military prison
kokdra. I can assure you, okusan, that an incident of
that kind could not possibly occur, in this country. Civi-
lians are never sent to such places. If you can give me
a little information for guidance, I may be able to help
you.
Helen. My name, your Excellency, is Helen Douglas,
and lam an Englishwoman. My husband, Gerald
Douglas, and I, lived for some time in Russia. He was
a man who laboured for the masses, to uplift them from
the misery 'in which they grovelled, night and day. His
ideals were great, and he spent his all in trying to realise
them. Misfortune, however, overtook him. He was un-
justly and falsely charged with a dreadful crime
kokura [ interestedly ]. Conspiracy against the Go-
vernment ?
Helen. Worse than that. The murder of a fellow
creature. He was found guilty, and sent to pass the


remainder of his life on the dreadful island of Saghalien;
but he was a man of indomitable courage —of the great-
est perseverance, and I learned, through a letter from a
fellow convict, who had escaped and once more reached
Russia, that he had, among a party of five, swum to a
fishing boat off the harbour of Menashi, in a fog. He
was the sole individual who was neither shot nor drowned.
When he arrived on your shores, he was arrested, and all
trace of him disappeared. [Long drawn sigh from be-
hind screen .] What was that?
kokura. Nothing, okusan. Only the wind blowing
through the shutters. Close the window, Sameda. The
English lady must not catch cold. [Sameda closes win-
dows.] You were saying——
helekt [regaining composure ]. Oh! Yes; that all my
efforts have been fruitless, and it is possible I have been
deceived.
kokura. More than so ; okusan. I have in this Bureau
the photographs of every European who is incarcerated
or has been for ten years past, incarcerated in our gaols.
lam pleased to say they are few in number. [Kindly.]
Would you recognise your husband’s portrait, if it were
among them?
Helen [brightening up]. Undoubtedly. Oh! show me,
your Excellency, whatever you may have. I shall be so
grateful. I feel you are a friend.
kokura [to Sameda]. Let the okusan have the book
of duplicates at once. [Sameda takes large album from
table, hands it with deference to Helen Douglas. She
opens it, rapidly turns over leaves, one after the other,
Kokura watching her with a slight smile throughout.]
Helen [disappointedly closing the book puts it on
table]. His portrait is not there!


kokura. You may have failed to recognise him? So
many years have passed away.
Helen [feelingly']. It would be impossible. I could
never forget him. [Pause.] Perhaps after all, you are
right, and he may, alas! he dead. [Brokenly]. lam
almost weary of a fruitless search. [jS'ofos.]
kokuea. I regret exceedingly, okusan, that I have not
been able to assist you. It is very certain your husband
cannot be here. The name is not in the register of any
of our prison records, or I should be aware of it. I
would strongly advise you to give up the search, as far
as this country is concerned —indeed, altogether. Have
you no friends, abroad ?
Helen. I have a sister who is a hospital nurse in Aus-
tralia. [Here her eyes catch sight for the first time of
the map, near the screen. She rises to go over towards
•it. Kokura and Sameda both interpose and prevent her.]
Helen. Why, there it is—the dearest country in the
world —whatever does it interest anyone like —like your
Excellency? [Sameda pulls cord. Map closes with snap
of spring. Kokura is seated.]
kokura [flippantly]. Merely commerce, trade —
nothing more. [Pause.] Be seated again, okusan.
[Pause.] Have you no relatives in England? [Sameda
sits down.]
Helen. None. They are long since dead.
kokura. Our people are not allowed to land in Aus-
tral Asia —they cannot come and go —so we have no
moneys devoted to the purpose of assisting them to get
there. Though it is part of the Great and mighty Brit-
ish Empire, Asiatics have to suffer the indignity of a
language test which many Austral Asians would fail to
pass. [Pause.] Passages to other countries —to Ame-
rica, to Great Britain, we have, in urgent eases, funds


available for —even for strangers. I could recommend
your case, to favourable considerat : on.
Helen-. Why not to Australia? What reason can your
Excellency have in trying to dissuade me from going
there ? [ suspiciously ].
kokura. None, okusan. I merely suggested a way out
of your difficulties. Your best course will be to apply to
the British consular service. It may be able to help you
—but I doubt it. Your husband’s career will, I fancy,
be a bar to gaining much from it. [Rising.] A passage
to England will be available for you, at any time, okusan,
should you elect to accept of it [bows].
Helen. I have nothing to thank your Excellency for,
so it is useless, on my part, to prolong the interview.
[Gets up from seat, hows, and goes towards door. Sameda
rises.]
kokura. See that the lady finds her way. The mes-
senger must show her to the street. [Exeunt Helen
Douglas and Sameda by door L, closed behind them. Long
pause.]
kokura [reseated]. Exactly as I expected! [Pause,
rises, looks towards screen.] Now for the prisoner.
[Goes to screen, suddenly pulls it away, rushes to bell,
strikes it rapidly.] Sameda! Sameda! [Sameda enters
hurriedly. Soldiers enter; then stand at attention.
Gerald Douglas lies prone in chair, as if dead.]
kokura. The man, I’m afraid, is dead.
sameda. Water, water. He has only fainted. [Enter
General Mosaku, soldiers salute.]
mosaku. A long half-hour. What’s the matter? Has
the prisoner committed suicide ?
kokura. No, General. Simply a bit unstrung. Pro-
bably weak on the prison fare —not enough rice.
B


[Soldiers hurriedly bring sofa in front at C., near foot-
lights. Gerald Douglas is carried over and placed on it.
Sameda applies water to Ms temples. Kokura unbinds
Ms hands. The General looks on immovable.]
sameda. He’s coming to. [ Gerald Douglas slowly re-
covers consciousness, stares wildly around Mm.]
Gerald. Nellie —Nellie —Where are yen'!
kokura. His mind is wandering. He does not know
a word of what he says.
Gerald [ putting Ms right hand to Ms forehead]. I
thought—l thought my wife was here ——
mosaktt. The heat must have overcome him, through
the windows being closed. He’s getting better by de-
grees.
sameda. I’ll unbutton his jacket. [Loosens clothing.]
kokura [to Mosaku, aside]. This man’s life is of great
importance to us. The order for his release will be signed
this afternoon and sent you. The fullest information
will accompany it. [Gerald Douglas slowly recovers and
staggers to Ms feet.]
Gerald. I must have been dreaming!
mosaku. This is the last place for anything of that
sort.
kokura [to Gerald Douglas]. Do not forget what you
have been told to-day. In spite of the fact that you have
made one false step by deceiving me at the outset, I will
still retain confidence in you. To-night you will be abso-
lutely free, and the future as you elect to make it, nothing
but your own. [Soldiers prepare to remove Gerald
Douglas, group picture, Messenger at open door all look-
ing towards him. (E) Mosaku, Kokura, Gerald,
Soldiers (L), Sameda in background. PICTURE.
Curtain {Quick).


ACT II.
NOTE. —The audience should be asked to make no demonstrations
of approval or disapproval during the entire progress
of this Act.
IN AUSTRALIA, (one year after).
Place - In a Suburb of Sydney.
Scene - Interior of a Town Hall —well lighted
throughout.
Time - Night.
(For stage purposes the setting should be what is known as
“ oblique,” in order that the backs of the persons comprised in
the assemblage are not turned to the spectators witnessing the
play.)
Large assemblage awaiting the opening of public meet-
ing. Entire stage occupied by spectators; at extreme
limit of space C, raised platform, table, chairs. At back,
flags of Great Britain and Australia. Press reporters
directly below platform. Water bottles and glasses on
table. Chair occupied by Arthur Maitland, seated to his
L Gordon Warwick and Rev. Silas Wood, on his right
Wallace Hammerton, Hon. Percy Mills, George Wynd-
ham, Johnny Fletcher, and others. In centre of assem-
blage Helen Hammerton, Dorothy Grahame. Doors for
exit below platform on right and left. When curtain
rises, people are crushing to get standing room at corri


dors along whole length of stage capacity R. and L.
Policemen on duty, here and there, in corridors.
Assemblage noisy, cries of “Cock-a-doodle-do,”
“Chookie, chookie,” and “Order, Order,’’ as curtain rises.
maitland [/ Mt/t//]. Ladies and gentlemen. This meet-
ing has been convened, as you are aware, to obtain an
expression of opinion on the all important and absorbing
subject of defence, as far as this country is concerned;
and I trust that the speakers to-night will be received
with that courtesy and consideration which they should
have every reason to expect, at the bauds of a fair-minded
and unprejudiced, Australian audience, [//car, hear.]
The time limit has been fixed at five minutes, for the
mover and seconder of motions and amendments. With-
out further detaining you, I will call upon Mr. Wallace
Hammerton, the well-known athlete, to address you in
support of the first resolution. [Sits down, applause .]
hammerton [ coming in front of table], Mr. Chair-
man, ladies and gentlemen. The large gathering which I
have the honour, as first speaker, to address this evening,
has shown unmistakably by its very presence that the
defence of our hearths and homes is a subject that at last
appeals to the entire community, and is one of paramount
importance. The old saying, that self preservation is
the first law of nature, is one that in the past we have
largely forgotten or ignored. Truth to say, we have
tempted Providence and the alien and jealous hordes of
the whole world, to try the conclusions of deadly grips
upon our own soil. We are an utterly unprepared
people, occupying the richest and greatest continent on
the face of God’s earth. [Applause.] A continent, let
me repeat, of capacity and resources beyond the imagi-
nation of its most enthusiastic advocates. [Applause.]
This glorious heritage is in more than deadly peril; and


we, who have, with almost a magician’s wand, built up a
great nation
voice [from assemblage]. A blooming handful you
mean.
hammeeton. A great nation, created in a marvellously
brief period, living under the freest conditions the world
has ever known — [dissent] —governing ourselves, and
showing the paths of progress to older countries, are
neglecting the safety of our own firesides.
voice [in assemblage]. Leg before wicket —bowled out
—why, we couldn’t show them how to shoot
maitland [rapping table]. Order —Order.
voice [in assemblage]. Order yourself. Australia for
the Australians! [Loud cheers.]
hammeeton. I agree with that, but I say emphatically,
that our first duty to ourselves —to our children, to their
children’s children, is for ever to put our house straight,
and make the name and shame—the horrors of invasion—
an utter impossibility. From the day that Captain
Cook -
voice [in assemblage]. Give the old buffer a breeze!
hammeeton. Set foot upon this soil, a foreign foe
has never touched its shores. [Applause.]
voice [in assemblage]. What about the Chinkies 1 ?
[Laughter.]
hammeeton. Not a battle has been fought, not a single
life lost in war, upon this Great Continent. [Applause.]
Now that Old England is engaged in a bitter struggle,
with an enemy at her doors, the time has arrived for
conscription to be rigidly enforced, and every man (and
woman if it need be) compelled to shoulder a rifle in the
sacred cause of Liberty. [Dissent.] Is it possible that
any one who has been born in Australia —who has reared


a family in Australia —who has made his money in Aus-
tralia, and who LOVES Australia can be so despicably
mean as to take any other view?
voice [in assemblage]. We want peace, peace—not
war. No more Soudan goats and Boers for New South
Wales.
HAMMEETON. What you want, it seems, is peace
at any price. I am not with you. [ Applause from one
part of the hall only.] What has made Australia?
voice [in assemblage]. Labour. [ Some applause.]
hamkeeton. Labour is said to conquer all things, I
know; but [forcibly] all the Unions in Australia could
not bar the passage of a hostile fleet, five single minutes,
if it ever hove in sight. [ Slight applause.]
voice [in assemblage]. That’s all you know about it!
hammerton. What army has Australia?
Salvationist [standing up in assemblage in uniform].
The Salvation Armyl
Maitland. Order! Order! I can’t allow this sort of
thing to go on.
hammebton. That gentleman, I am afraid, will, like
many a thousand more in my unhappy country, be
brought to his senses only, when he smells a whiff of
grape shot on a Sunday morning, going to his Salvation
Army barracks. I pray to God that it will never come,
but I know —I feel that it must and will, unless w T e act
quickly. Oh! wretched day when the corn comes to be
trampled by invading feet, when the children, on their
way to school, are turned back to find their class rooms
hospitals, and their parents and themselves starving, be-
cause an enemy has turned the whole fair land into a
howling wilderness!
voice [in the assemblage]. Don’t cry, Baby!


hammerton. I say boldly, that action, and not words,
is what we require. Too long have we slept in a Fool’s
Paradise. The day of reckoning is at hand. There is
only one course open, and it is that of going to work
with a National Patriotic Fund, to which every adult in
the community shall be compelled to contribute his or her
full share. [Dissent.]
many voices [in assemblage ]. Not a bit of it. Too
much taxation here, already.
hammerton. What unutterable nonsense! .We spend
more money in amusements than any nation in the world
of its size! These amusements are not taxed. We earn
more money than any other people in the twentieth cen-
tury —[ loud dissent ] —and we are not satisfied to pay a
miserable premium against invasion—the paltry insurance
of every house and home.
voices [in assemblage ]. Time! Time!
hammerton. You are right. Time is the one thing I
lack to bring it all directly home to you. I will have,
therefore, to move my resolution [takes sheet of paper
off table and reads], “That this meeting, fully recognising
the serious position of Australia and its inability to pro-
perly protect its shores against threatened invasion, is
unanimously of opinion that Federal Action should be
immediately taken, to impose a National Patriotic Tax,
and enforce conscription, without exemption.” [ Uproar ,
dissent. Discussion among assemblage, Hammerton sits
down.]
maitland. Order, order. If this continued disturbance
goes on I shall have to call upon the police to remove
some of the worst offenders, who it appears to me are
at the bottom of nothing else than a systematic and or-
ganised attempt at enforcing mob rule. [Tumult sub-
sides somewhat. Maitland sits down.]


WARWICK [rises from his chair and comes to front of
platform. He is well received ]. Mr. Chairman, it was
my intention to have seconded the resolution, but before
going so far as to do so, I desire to put the position
clearly and definitely before my hearers. As a member of
the House, and as one who has always endeavoured to
serve his country to the best of his ability, never having
missed a single attendance when Parliament has been in
session—as one who is well known to you as a faithful
representative of government by the people, for the
people, I have come to the conclusion that it is only by a
reference to the people—the great people of Australia—
that such a question as this should be settled. As you
well know, I am a member of no party
voice [in assemblage]. Good old Yes—No.
Warwick. Belonging neither to the direct Opposition,
nor to the Ministry. I give my support when and where
I feel that it is honestly due, and I have never betrayed
you, nor will I ever betray the confidence reposed in me.
[Uproar, “800-hoo! 800-hoo!”] Am lin the Zoolog-
ical Gardens, Mr. Chairman?
voice [in assemblage]. No. You’re in Parliament.
Warwick. There is much to be said on both sides of
every important public question. I am no alarmist. I
am no panic monger, no advocate of public scares. I
am not the puppet of newspaper sensations. I am all
for cautious and careful measures —measures for the
public good—measures for the public safety. We should
go slow. When Parliament meets —which it will do in a
few months’ time, you can rely on my best, my most
energetic efforts to represent the best interests of your-
selves. For the present, I think you should rely upon
your legislators to take the proper steps, and at the
proper time. [Applause, sits down.]


rev. silas wood [walks to table, carefully puts down
his umbrella, pours himself out a glass of water, and on
taking same seems refreshed; mutters “Ah.”]
voice [in assemblage]. Be steady with the gin, old
Nebuchadnezzar. [Laughter.]
rev. silas wood. Mr. Chairman [speaking very slowly,
pause] and [looking round] Friends. I am a man of
peace. I preach peace, and I practise it
voice [in assemblage]. Go back to your pulpit, old
chap. You’re not wanted.
maitland [rising with great sternness]. Order, order.
If that man at the back says another word I will have
him arrested. [Sits down.]
rev. silas wood. War is a very dreadful and a very
horrible thing, Friends, a nightmare to be shunned and
dreaded by us all, but there are as bad things and catas-
trophes as that of war itself —I am not referring to the
evils of strong drink —and one of them is the specious
and barbarous idea of turning our people into a race of
soldiers and sailors, to be trained and brought up in the
disgusting art of civilised and legalised murder. [Ap-
plause.] OH! my friends, what nation, what people
can have a blessing when it adopts as one of its first
principles the destruction of human life, the hurrying
into Eternity of its fellow creatures! [Applause.] It
is too awful to contemplate, too terrible to enlarge upon!
Mr. Hammerton has shown that we are a peaceful people.
Let us always continue so. [Renewed cheering.] There
may be danger to England in the present situation —but
there may be none to ourselves. We are thrice happy
in the possession of legislators and counsellors who have
hitherto steered us carefully through all the whirlpools
of statecraft. Can we not rely upon them to exhaust
diplomacy, before we imagine that the enemy is at our


very gates. [Applause.] Though we are part and
parcel of the Great British Empire we have no quarrel,
dear friends, with that Empire’s foes. We need not take
a hand in those regrettable troubles. We are far re-
moved from the nations of the earth, and their jealousies
and bickerings. We want none of them. We are splen-
didly isolated
voice [in assemblage]. He’s touched the button there.
By heavens! We are!
another voice. Order.
people in audience. Turn him out. [37ie offender is
removed. Pause.]
rev. silas wood. We are seeking no conquests, and
why should the enemy of Britain be our enemy 1 ? [Powse.]
I regret that I cannot see my way to second the resolu-
tion. [Loud applause. Sits down.]
hon. peect mills [rising]. Then, Mr. Chairman, if
no one can be got to support the resolution, I am here
to do so [slight applause], to stand or fall by it.
voice [in assemblage]. You’ll fall by it, right enough.
mills. And if the British Empire falls, Australia will
fall, as well as every one of you. [Applause from one
quarter.] It is true that I have not been long out from
England, but in a very short time I have seen the beauty,
the richness, and the greatness of Australia, brought
vividly home to me, every hour, that I have spent in it.
[Applause.] It is a grand country, THE country of
the future, the one above all and beyond all, that has the
greatest of futures, but it is vacant, and wants its vacant
places filled with people, people who will stand shoulder
to shoulder to maintain the best traditions of the British
race. [Applause from one quarter only.] lam address-
ing many who have never experienced anything except


the greatest freedom [dissent]. I trust they may never
know what the iron hand of despotism and tyranny can
do, as I have seen it in other countries, paralysing,
corroding, and destroying the lives of the people.
woman’s voice [in assemblage]. The women have got
a vote out here. [Laughter.]
mills, I am appealing to women, «ho have the worst
to fear, as well as to men ; to everybody, whether they
have votes or not. It is no use saying that trouble is
going to be met half way, it will, in this instance, have
to be met the whole road. In the far East, the Asiatics
are our friends. [Loud dissent. ]
voice [in assemblage]. My word! you want ’urn cab-
bagee?
another voice [in assemblage]. We want no blessed
piebalds here! [Disturbance. Several men ejected.]
Chinaman [in assemblage]. Wha’ for? Wha’ for?
[Further agitation.]
mills. The Asiatics are not merely our friends, but
hound to us by an alliance, which Great Britain, in her
foresight, has cemented for the protection of this coun-
try’s trade, and the lives of its inhabitants. [Uproar.]
Who knows but that the presence of their peaceful fleets
in the South Pacific may not yet prevent some frightful
crisis, and prove the salvation of Australia? [Uproar.]
Your miserable flotillas —and I don’t believe you have
got a two-penny-halfpenny submarine, are mere toys,
that would hardly frighten little children. In the day of
reckoning, they will be of little use. Let me urge upon
you, this is no period for hesitation. If you hesitate, you
are entirely lost. Sink all political or personal differ-
ences, pull solidly together, be true to Great Britain, to
the Empire, and to yourselves. Show unmistakably that


the last drop of blood in your veins, the last shilling in
your pockets, will go out ungrudgingly for Australia.
{Uproar.] Whether it be too late or not, events can
only show 7. The best can only do their best, and your
best, our best, and my best will be by unanimously passing
the resolution already submitted to you, and which, with
mixed feelings of pride, of pain, and of anxiety, I now
heartily, second. [Yi<s down. Uproar.]
some persons [in assemblage gesticulating wildly ].
Mr. Chairman! Mr. Chairman!
Maitland. Order, order!
voice [in assemblage ]. There will be no amendment.
Put the resolution to the meeting. Let us get it through.
maitland. You have all heard the resolution, duly pro-
posed, seconded, and debated. I now put it, as read, to
the meeting. Let those who are in favour, say “Aye.”
[Anxious looks over and over assemblage, a few “ayes”
from platform, only two or three from the hall.]
maitland [after a dead silence]. Those to the con-
trary —“No” ?
whole assemblage [apparently thunder out]. No.
No. No. No. [Great cheering when it subsides.]
maitland. The “noes” have it. [Some disorder; those
on platform leave it by doors R. and L. Very few in
body of hall go out.]
voice [in assemblage]. Put out the lights.
andy dixon [standing up]. I’ll put out your lights.
Keep quiet. The meeting’s not over. Let us have Harry
Johnstone.
many cries. Harry Johnstone, Harry, Harry John-
stone. [Johnstone is forced by a number of the people
to the platform. The seats vacated on it by the former


holders are speedily filled. People crowd on to it, and
fresh arrivals pack the hall, more closely than before .]
johnstone [on standing at the front is received with
great cheering. He nods several times, when the noise
subsides he speaks]. Comrades. Fellow-workers. Fel-
low countrymen. Fellow country women! Not a single
speaker here this evening has struck the right note, or
touched the proper chord. There has been a lot said
about the country being in danger from outside sources,
but its greatest peril lies, as I shall clearly show, within
its own borders. [Hear, hear.] We all want a White
Australia —white as the driven snow — [loud cheers] —
but there are men in this country who would like to see
it filled with unemployed. [Hear, hear.] God knows
we have enough of them. They are thick as leaves upon
a tree. These parasites would like to tax the poor man
to build ships and raise small armies. Where would you
come in? I say boldly—nowhere. [Loud applause.]
Are you going to man those line of battle ships and graft
as recruits for a miserable pittance per day, like they do
in England? God forbid. [Loud applause.] Are you
going to be the slaves of the Fat Man to defend his life
and property, when he is utterly unable to do the thing
himself? No! a thousand times, no! [Cheers.] You’d
be worse than the mercenaries of ancient Rome. [Ap-
plause.] This magnificent country was never made by
you to be turned into slaughter-house machinery. [Ap-
pfause.] We want no conscription. [Applause.] We
want no fleet. [Applause.] We are a peaceful people.
We want to be left alone. [Applause.] All men are
brothers
voice [in assemblage]. What about our black brud-
ders ?
johnstone. Back numbers —rotters, the whole lot of


them. All white men are brothers, except the capitalists.
[Cheers.] They are our foes, your foes, and the worst
of it is, they are of our own household. In time, they will
disappear, but while they exist, I repeat, they are not
our brothers. Who dares to talk about a blackman’s
rights? He has none. We want no black or yellow here
— [loud applause] —but these people—these taskmasters
who are wallowing in the wealth you have created, and
which has been robbed from you, their very slaves
voice [in assemblage]. Rule Britannia!
johnstonb. They are burning to fill Australia with
anything that may be called human beings, black, white,
or yellow, in order to bring down the living wage; in
order to defraud everyone of you of the proud victories
you have secured after so many hard fought fights for
simple justice—the right to live. It shall never be.
[Cheers.] We hear of Great Britain’s enemy, and are
told that enemy is ours. I say, no. Great Britain’s enemy
is the man that wears a murderer’s uniform. The man
that would shoot you like a dog, no matter who or what
you might be —for paltry recompense. The masses, the
workers of every country in the world, they are our
friends. [Loud applause.] They will stand to us in the
hour of need. The world-wide federation of Labour with
its enormous voting powers must “down tools” imme-
diately, and stop this insanity that is sapping our life
blood, everywhere. The greatest lever that was ever
known since the world began, the Archimedean lever
that can send it off its axis, is the one that you possess—
the power of a universal strike! [Loud cheers continuing
some time.]
man [in body of hall stands up in his seat]. Rubbish!
Mr. Chairman. I insist upon being heard. I am not
going to be put down.


voice [from platform]. There’s no chairman. He’s in
bed.
man [ continuing ]. This oily-tongued fellow is no Aus-
tralian, not even a little one. [Pause.] He’s a damned
Anarchist. [Confusion, speaker is pulled down, scuffle.]
voices. Out with him. [Police intervenej he is
promptly removed from the meeting.]
johnstone. The present generation will see that great
power exercised, and before many days. Tyranny and
Conservatism shall tremble. When the railways cease to
run, when the telegraph and the telephone are useless;
when the flour mills grind no more; when the factories
are deserted; when the coal remains below the surface,
the very wheels of Time will stop. [Loud cheers.] The
worker needs no battle axe, no powder and no shot. His
passive resistance is like the mighty earthquake.
[Applause.]
voice [in assemblage]. Good boy, Harry!
johnstone. The day of the down trodden and
oppressed has come. The protest will be simultaneous,
and world wide. The social uprising of the Proletariat
may do some little harm at first, but its effects will be
lasting good. [Applause.] Future generations can take
care of themselves. If we truly lay the foundation stone
to-day, they can build, and build well, hereafter. Think
now of your wives and your little ones. Remember that
every drop of sweat from your bodies helps others to
become rich. Recollect, there has been enough of this
sorry business. Your toil henceforth must be made a
blessing to yourselves, and not the curse of past ages.
Coming to stern business, I am authorised to tell you
that arrangements have been made for mass meetings
throughout the entire country. They will be held in other
countries, too, by our brethren over the Ocean [loud


cheers], but in our own land we have an advantage over
all. In this grand climate of Australia, the snow and
fog, the chilling blasts, the frightful weather of other
places, are not ours to contend against. Nature itself,
all the year round, fights upon our side. [Applause.] So
the Might of Labour and the Right of Labour must stand
before all and before everything. [Loud applause.]
Militarism, Jingoism, Land Monopoly, political feuds —
these will disappear when the hands of the workers meet
across the seas. [ Loud applause.]
voice [where there is a sudden stir among the people
in centre of the hall and where Helen Hammerton has
fallen back in a hysterical state on Dolly’s shoulder], A
woman’s ill. Take her out. Take her out. [Johnstone
sits down.]
Helen. Yes, take me away—take me away anywhere
out of this hall—out of this place. [Collapses—is being
hurried away as whole assemblage rises to go.]
Curtain (Quick.)


ACT III.
IN AUSTRALIA (One Month Later).
Place - A Suburb of Sydney.
Scene - Interior of dining room at Wallace Hammer-
ton’s house.
Time - Night.
Comfortable and well furnished room; everything
showing taste and luxurious appointments. Pictures on
walls. No fire in fireplace L. Facing C. bay windows
looking out on a verandah and opening on to same.
Entrance from hall at L. Door into bedroom at B.
Telephone on wall fixed at L. corner of room, large
table; plenty of chairs in bay windows; many plants and
ferns ranged along each side; blinds down, lamp on
table. As curtain rises, Dorothy Grahame and Georgie
Wyndham are seated at C. Dorothy is busy with needle-
work.
■wyndham. Nice thing this strike, Dolly, isn’t it?
Dorothy. It’s lasted a long time; I’m heartily sick of
it. I hate it. No gas to begin with, and we haven’t had
a scrap of meat for a week. Not an egg to be got, for
love or money.
wyndham. Hens gone on strike too, Dolly?
Dorothy. I snppose so. I never was good at house


keeping, but Nellie’s been ill so many weeks, the weight
of everything falls on poor little me. Only one servant
in the house now.
wyndham. How is Nellie to-day?
dorothy. Much better, but far from strong. She is
getting up this evening, and you will see her. Wally had
to go into town on business in the afternoon —had to
walk of course —no trams, no busses, no anything
[sighs]. Oh, dear, how tiresome life is!
wyndham. I’m finding it pretty tough myself. Beastly
nuisance having to shave yourself, but that’s not the
worst. You’ll have to cut my hair one of these days,
Dolly.
dorotht. Not in my line, Georgia. You’ll have to get
someone else, to saw it ofl.
wyndham. Never mind. I’ll let you have a try, and
put up with the consequences.
doeothy. You’re incorrigible. Try and be good for a
little while. [Pause.] What a dreadful tease you arc!
[Enter Jane, door L.]
jane. Please, Miss, Mr Fletcher’s here and wants to
know if you’re at home. [Dorothy and Wyndham
hurriedly take fresh chairs and sit apart as far as pos-
sible.]
Dorothy. How silly you are, Jane, to have kept him
waiting. You should have shown him in at once. [Exit
Jane, door L. Pause, then enter Johnny Fletcher, door
L.]
fletcher [taking Dorothy warmly by the hand as she
goes to meet him], Hulloa, Doll. [Sits down in easy
chair to 8., near her. Suddenly notices Wyndham, they
both rise and shake hands.] Didn’t see you, Georgie,
you’re generally a bit nearer —the light.


wyndham. No gas yet you know; getting quite used
to the darkness [laughs] ; see what you mean, old man.
Dolly and I were talking about the strike, when you
came in.
fletchbr. Lord! I thought you’d be talking of other
things. What a lot of time you waste, Georgie!
doeothy. Tell us about the strike, Johnny. You al-
ways know the latest.
fletcher. I think the whole thing’s going to fizzle
out. Good job if it does. Some telephones working to-
day. That fellow Harold Johnstone has been at the
bottom of the whole mischief. He’s proved himself a
bad egg; an agitator of the worst type, but they’ll rend
him to pieces soon. Some call him an Anarchist. The
strike pay’s hanging fire. They’d want millions for their
exchequer. Friends in Europe, for over ten days, have
sent them nothing. Australian money’s running short.
The public are dead against the crowd. [Pawsc.] Seen
the evening paper?
wtndham. Didn’t know that one had come to life
again. They must have got a starved out comp, or two.
fletcher. Started afresh to-day. Only the “Southern
Star,” you know. Haven’t looked at it yet. Got it in my
pocket. It’s one sheet —so far —here you are. [Hands
Wyndham folded paper. To Dolly. ] How is your sister?
dorotht. Better, thanks; still weak, but improving.
We can’t get her to go out. I’ll bring her in presently.
The doctor says she must not be excited.
wyndham [who has been reading newspaper, ex-
citedly]. Look here, Doll, listen to this [reads], “London,
Friday,”—three days coming through—“in the naval en-
gagement off Flamborough Head yesterday, six Dread-
noughts were sunk. It is anticipated that at any moment
the enemy may land simultaneously, on the East Coast of


Scotland and in the neighbourhood of Scarborough.
Troops are being mobilised in all directions.”
doeotht. How dreadful!
wyndham. But that’s not the worst. Here is another
message—one from Thursday Island —communication
just re-established. It concerns us more intimately.
[Reads.'] “The Asiatic Meet, consisting of twenty-three
line-of-battleships, was off New Guinea this morning,
and is steaming south, towards Australia. It shelled and
destroyed the whole of Apia in Samoa on the outward
voyage.”
DOROTHY [excitedly]. Oh, Johnny, are they coming to
take Australia? [Pause.] Georgie, Georgie, what if
they should interfere with our beautiful harbour?
pletcher. Is that all?
wyndham. Yes. Good God! Don’t you think it is
enough ?
Dorothy. Perhaps they are coming to protect us.
wyndham [quietly], I don’t like ’em, but they might
do some good—if it were only to put an end to this
accursed strike.
fletchbr. Damn the strike!
dorothy. Mr. Fletcher!
Fletcher [humbly], I beg your pardon, Dolly. I
couldn’t help it.
dorothy. So this is what we’re coming to! [thinking
distractedly] No. No. I can’t tell Nellie. We must keep
it from her. [Pause.] Poor Nellie! [Goes on sewing.]
This is her birthday, too.
pletcher. Poor Old England, too! Bad for her.
wyndham. Bad for Australia.
pletcher. We can put the shutters up. Wally Ham-
merton was right when he thought it’d come to that. The


country would never listen to him. He’s preached de-
fence since the first day I knew him, but the stronger
crowd preached football, cricket, golf, the Federal Capi-
tal, Free Trade, the other sort of Protection, land scan-
dals, and the Lord knows what besides. [Dorothy puts
down her sewing.']
doeothy. I know you’ll excuse me. I hear Nellie.
[Rises, exit door E.]
Fletcher. How are you getting on, Georgie?
wyndham. Just so-so, old fellow.
Fletcher. She hasn’t fixed the happy day? [Pause.]
Never mind, Georgie, you are a lucky chap; sorry I
wasn’t in the running myself. Fair play’s bonny play.
Two is company, three is none—l ought not to be here.
wyndham. Don’t know what you mean!
fletcher. I’ve often been in the same sort of circum-
stances myself. I congratulate you. She’s a splendid
girl, but not a patch on Nellie. Hammerton ought to be
the happiest man in the world, but there seems to be just
a rift in the lute —and they’ve only been married four
months. [Enter Helen, supported by Dorothy, door E.]
Ah! here comes the sweet woman herself. [Fletcher and
Wyndham grasp her warmly by the hand one after the
other.]
fletcher and wyndham [together]. Many happy re-
turns of the day, Mrs. Hammerton!
fletcher. Glad to see you looking so improved.
[Places easy chair for her.]
Helen [sitting down]. Thank you both very much.
It was good of you to remember, when times are so bad,
and everyone has other things to think about [motioning
them to chairs]; sit down. I know you’re a smoker,
Johnny. Don’t stand on ceremony, I don’t mind tobacco


in the least. I rather like it; and as for Dolly, she
smokes a little now and then —upon the sly.
DOROTHY. Don’t you believe her, Georgie. I only tried
—just once, to see what it was like.
Fletcher. Tobacco is too great a luxury, these times.
Isn’t it, Georgie I
wyndham. Right oh ! I’ve sworn off myself. Amn’t
I good, Dolly?
Dorothy. For once, I suppose —yes. I never heard of
you saving money before.
Helen. Any news? [To Fletcher ] Is the city quiet?
Fletcher. What with closed shops, and little business
—very quiet, Mrs. Hammerton. Everybody’s playing a
waiting game. The only satisfaction is the police are
still on duty, so life and property are safe. Then
[thinks], let me see, there hasn’t been a case of plague
for weeks. Things will look up. One train a day is
running West on wood, instead of coal, and the Home-
bush market is being supplied with sheep and cattle,
continuously, by road. Half the people are sick of living
so long on fish.
Helen. I positively hate to go out, even as far as the
verandah, so I have to depend on Dolly to tell me what
is going on. [Pause.] She doesn’t tell me much.
Dorothy. Because I hear so little, Nell, and things are
so quiet here. When I was at the hospital, it was dif-
ferent.
Helen. Wally is very late. Perhaps he is at a meet-
ing. He won’t give up his crusade about protecting
Australia. He thinks and dreams of nothing else. The
more hopeless the task appears, the more determined he
gets.
wyndham. It’s a pity we’ve not got ten thousand like


him. He’s real bosker—that he is. [ Knock at door L.
Enter Jane.]
jane. There’s some one on the verandah, Ma’am. He
won’t go away. He won’t give any name, but just asks
for the lady of the house.
doeothy. A tramp, perhaps. We must be careful,
Jane.
jane. No, Miss. He looks respectable. He’s not
drunk. He says he’s met with an accident, and injured
his arm. It’s sort of bound up —he seems to be suffering
pain.
Helen. Poor fellow! Bring him to the door, Jane.
I am not afraid. [To Wyndham and Fletcher.] You
do not mind, do you 9
wyndham and fletchee. Not at all. Not at all.
[Exit Jane, door L.]
fletchee. Still, it is best to be on the safe side.
Helen. I can’t bear to hear of others suffering.
[Pause.] I have suffered so much myself; but Dolly,
she has always been where plenty exists, and is made of
sterner stuff.
fletchee. Listen to that, Georgie—sterner stuff. [Jane
opening door, as Harold Johnstone walks in painfully,
and stands in doorway L.]
johnstone [as Jane retires, looking round]. I beg
everybody’s pardon. May I ask who is the lady of this
house 9
Helen [looking fixedly at him], I am. [Johnstone
has some blood on his face. His clothes are torn in
places. His right arm is roughly bound with a hand-
kerchief stained with blood. He shows signs of severe
treatment. He holds hat in his left hand.]


johnstone. Then I am forced —against my will —to
appeal to you.
wyndham. I felt sure he was on the begging tack.
johnstone. You’re wrong. I have met with a bad
accident, and am in distress. In fact, I’m afraid
[breathing hard and drawing himself up] I have broken
my arm. It hurts me terribly. I wouldn’t have come
here [looks fixedly at Helen] if I had not been compelled.
I think I was run over by a motor car. A man in the
street told me, in the darkness, that the lady who lived
here, never turns the unfortunate from her doors,
dorothy. Nor will she.
pletcheb. You have not said who you are —your name
even ?
Helen. While we are talking, he may be bleeding to
death.
johnstone [with great meaning]. Does no one recog-
nise me? [Pause.] Have none of you ever seen me
before? [Pause.] lam Harold Johnstone.
wyndham [getting up fiercely to eject him]. How
dare you? You scoundrel! You infernal blackguard I
It’s a pity that you’re not dead.
fletcher. Let’s put him out, Mrs. Hammerton; it is
not safe.
Helen. He will be perfectly safe in my house. Take
him to my room, Dolly. We will send for a doctor.
Georgie, touch the bell. [He complies. Jane enters,
Johnstone allowing her to pass.]
Helen [to Jane]. Bring Miss Grahame some hot
water, some linen, and some bandages. Quick —and take
them round to my room, by the verandah door. Johnny
[to Fletcher], in the meantime, will you go for Doctor
Crane ?


Fletcher. Whatever you wish, Mrs. Hammerton; but
just think for a moment who you are giving a helping
hand to.
Helen. No one realises that better than myself. It is
my birthday, too, when everyone is kind. Surely, I may
return a little, even to a helpless man. While you are
away, Dolly will do all she can. Say nothing about it.
[Exit Fletcher, door L. Before he goes out Harold
Johnstone, as Dolly waves her hand to him, walks to-
wards door B. Helen is seated throughout .]
wyndham:. I’ll stand by the door. I may be wanted.
[Dolly takes candle from sideboard and lights it.]
dorothy [to Johnstone]. I will lead the way. [She is
followed by Johnstone, then Wyndham. Exeunt door
R. Helen is left alone.]
Helen [in deep thought a moment, then rises]. What
fatal chance has brought him here 1 ? He, whom all the
world thinks dead, and I—l dare not by a look or even
gesture show—that it is true. [Pause.] Heaven help
me, and give me strength to play a part that’s false—
and Wally—Wally, what if he should come, and suspect
—the truth! The very thought’s enough to drive me
mad ! Any moment, I may hear his footsteps on the
gravel. [Pause.] Let me think. Whatever —shall —I
do? [Listens, tries to collect her energies, goes and looks
out at each window, peering through the blinds. Pause.]
I would be worse than a criminal if I turned him out, as
the others wished. No, no. A woman who has slept side
by side with another man, and loved him —could never
do the like. [Listens again. Goes to the door of bed-
room.] How are you getting on, Dolly? Is —is the
man’s case a very bad one?
dorothy [in room], I can’t tell yet. I hope it’s not
a compound fracture. Jane has brought round every


thing 1 . He will not let me properly get at it. I want a
little brandy for him. He is terribly done up.
Helen [takes decanter and glass from sideboard,
passes it through door to Wyndham]. Here, Georgie; I
doubt if he’ll take it.
dorothy [ inside bedroom]. Why do you think that?
Helen. Nothing. It was only my idea. Make him
take it.
Helen [to Wyndham, through door]. Thank you,
Georgie. All this is not too pleasant for you, but I am
grateful, I will not forget it. [Helen listens anxiously
again. Laughing and talking going on outside the house.
Noise of many people.]
Helen. What’s that? [Pause.] Wally returning?
Doctor Crane? No—Johnny Fletcher would take him
round the other way. It’s none of these. I’d better keep
Jane on watch. [Goes to door B.] Jane, Jane. [Pause,
Jane comes to door L.] What is the matter?
jane. I don’t know, ma’am. Such a lot of people—
and they’re carrying baskets.
Helen. Don’t let anyone know who are in my room —
watch for the Doctor and Mr. Fletcher; take them round
by the French windows on the verandah. I will see who
these people are—myself. [Jane leaves. Crowd of vis-
itors, laughing and conversing, approaching door L.]
Helen. A surprise party! [Buns to door B.] Georgie,
Georgie, lock the door. Don’t let anybody in, on any
account. I’ve told Jane about the Doctor.
wyndham [through door]. He’s a lot better, Mrs.
Hammerton. You can depend on me.
Helen [runs to door L., just in time to receive visitors
who crowd in]. Oh!


mes. vincent [hissing her affectionately]. Don’t be
angry, Nellie. This is the way your friends have of wish-
ing you many happy returns. It’s only a little surprise
party. [ They all shake hands.]
all [to Helen]. Many happy returns of the day!
Helen. Thank you—thank you so very much. You
are good; and I am glad to see you. It is really very
kind, and I am all alone. Wally is in town, and Dolly
is not in. Now you’ve got this far, make yourselves at
home. [Crowd fall into chairs, some open baskets, others
clear flowers and sundries off table. They lay cloth, put-
ting down delicacies and viands.]
mes. vincent. We have most things, Nellie, down to
knives and forks —or corkscrews, so don’t worry —that’s
a dear. We’ve come to entertain you, but we’re not
going to have dancing. We’ll just have supper in the
best of a food famine, and drink your health, instead.
[Champagne and wines are being ranged on sideboard.
Enter Wallace Hammerton door in bay window at C.]
hammerton. Good evening, all! Better late than
never. lam glad to see everybody [shakes hands here
and there], but a bit fagged. Had another big meeting
at Balmain, but couldn’t stir them up. The disaster to
the Dreadnoughts was known early in the evening.
Helen. What disaster?
hammeeton. Hasn’t anyone told you? Well, I sup-
pose I must. The British flag’s gone down for once—
the enemy has sunk a lot of ships. [Pause.] Australia
is not too safe, and if we don’t lose the country itself,
we’re in for a thundering subsidy!
mbs. vincent. But, my dear Wally, we are over twelve
thousand miles away! We’re all right, I’m sure. See
what a lot of torpedo boats we’ve got.


hammeeton. Useless —quite useless! The country is
paralysed with strikes, and if the Asiatic Fleet coming
to our shores were to turn its broadsides on, we should
be blown to Kingdom Come —and they’d have a clean
walk over. The strikes have well prepared the way for
them.
MBS. VINCENT. But the Asiatics are said to be our
friends!
hammeeton. They may be the friends of England—
unless she falls. Nothing will make me believe they have
good intentions towards Australia.
Helen. You’re prejudiced, Wally. They’re the allies
of England, and are forced to be our friends.
hammerton [to visitors ]. For a little while perhaps.
[Pause.] It will be bad, if it is for long. [To Helen]
Where’s Dolly?
Helen. Gone out, I think.
hammeeton. Where?
Helen. I suppose for a walk up the road. There’s
moonlight; isn’t there?
hammeeton. A little. Still it’s not good enough to be
out alone.
Helen. Dolly is seldom alone. She has generally a
safe escort.
hammeeton. The strikers are abroad again, and the
police quite insufficient. Several riots have occurred
[Helen seems troubled], but don’t be alarmed, Nellie.
It’s quiet here. [ Turning to several of visitors ] You
heard nothing as you came along ?
visitor [gentleman]. All quiet; but there’s been some
trouble at Manly; so a constable said.
hammeeton. It’s nothing. [Pause.] What are you


going to have to drink? Oh! [ suddenly recollecting
something ] bother it —I forgot. It seems you are our
hosts, and we are only guests.
mes. vincent. Sit over, sit over—everybody! lam
to preside. Nellie, you sit here [pointing to her It],
Wally, here’s your place on my left. No ceremony.
Everybody is to help themselves. [ Enter Johnny Flet-
cher, doov.L.]
voices. Welcome, Johnny, just in time. Plenty of
room —here’s a chair. Don’t bother about shaking hands.
Helen. Excuse me showing Mr. Fletcher where to wash
his hands.
pletcher. Pray do not trouble.
Helen. I insist. He has had to go a message
hammeeton. A message ? I did not know he had been
here?
Helen. Of really no importance—the message.
Helen [ goes to door L., whispers to Fletcher ]. As you
value my friendship, not a word of anything that’s hap-
pened here to-night.
fletchee. It shall be so.
Helen [loudly]. The lavatory is just up that passage
to the left. [Exit Fletcher door L. Buzz of conversa-
tion.]
Helen [seated again], I hope you have excused me.
I know it was rude.
MRS. Vincent. It is just an unconventional little bit
of business of your friends, Nellie, who have long re-
gretted your being so ill. We’re glad to see some of the
roses back in your cheeks, and we wish you many happy
birthdays in the future. [Applause.] May Wally and
yourself have the best of luck and all that fortune can
shower upon you. There —I am no speaker, but I mean


what I say, a hundred good times over. [Pause.] The
health of Mr. and Mrs. Hammerton. [All rise except
Helen and Hammerton, they have charged their glasses
and drink the toast enthusiastically. “Mr. and Mrs.
Hammerton — Mr. and Mrs. Hammerton.” When they
have become seated again Hammerton stands up.]
hammerton. My kind friends, I have done so much
speechifying the last month that my voice is hoarse, and
I am hardly able to thank you in reply. My wife and I
are both deeply sensible of your kindly feelings towards
us. An ounce of sympathy, while one’s alive, is worth
more than a ton of it when one is dead. We trust that
this is not the last occasion we shall meet for such a fes-
tive purpose. [Fletcher returns and sits with the others.]
I can’t help saying that I hope my Nellie’s next birthday
will come in better and more hopeful times, and that the
clouds which hover over our own country will then have
for ever passed away. [Applause.] lam going to ask
you to drink to the integrity of the British Empire, and
its brightest possession—Australia. Charge your glasses.
[All rise.] The British Empire and Australia! Aus-
tralia! [Suddenly noise outside. Increasing tumult.
They all put down their glasses, and are in expectation
looking towards door L.]
hammerton. What’s that? [Listens.] There’s some
disturbance going on! [Visitors in consternation. Many
trampings of feet. Some voices singing “We’ll hang
Harry Johnstone on a sour apple tree.”]
first visitor [gentleman]. The rumbling thunder of
the mob! Listen to how the mighty come to grief—and
this fellow Johnstone was a god among them, not a week
age!
Helen [alarmed]. A second surprise party! [Crowd
rushes in L., then falls back a little.]


hammerton. Stand back! Stand back! Where are
you going to? [Pause. No answer .] What do you
want? [Fletcher goes to telephone and starts working
it, unnoticed by the others .]
Fletcher. It’s working! Good business.
andt dixon. We want to search the house!
hammerton. A nice lot of burglars you are! How
dare you —and what for?
dixon. A man that came in a little while ago. He was
seen to enter here. It will be short shrift with him if
we get him, though.
hammerton. What man?
dixon. The man that’s betrayed us: Harry Johnstone
—the traitor. Damn him [Singing outside, “We’ll
hang Harry Johnstone on a sour apple tree.”]
dixon. Let us have him and we’ll go. Not till then.
rioters. Don’t budge an inch, boys!
Helen [approaching rioters] . I tell you he is not here.
rioters. We don’t believe you.
dixon. Let us start to go through the place, lads. These
toffs drinkin’ their champagne is not going to stop us.
That’s the first room [pointing to door at B.].
hammerton. That is my wife’s bedroom. There is no
one there.
dixon. Then you can’t object to us going in.
hammerton [advancing]. Do you know what happens
to people who try to enter a married woman’s bedroom
after night? I’ll tell you [pulls revolver from pocket].
It means a bullet through the first man’s brain. [Points
revolver at rioters.]
helen. Wally, Wally.
fletcher [leaving telephone]. It’s all right, Wally.


I’ve just rung up the police station. This crowd will be
taken in the rear.
rioters. The traps! The traps! Look out, boys.
There’s barely time to clear! [ They scamper out helter
skelter.]
hammerton [lowering revolver ]. You bally cowards!
Slink into your holes like a gang of rats. The man that’s
on my doorstep a minute later will be arrested. [ Crowd
disperses.]
hammerton. So much for that lot! A fair sample of
some that we’ve got to defend Australia with.
MRS. Vincent, A nice conclusion to our little party .
helen. This excitement has got upon my nerves!
mrs. vincent. No wonder. Poor Nellie! You ought
to go to bed. We’ll all be going.
hammerton. Not till the police arrive. I promise you
a proper escort home. Sit down for a little while. Com-
pose yourselves. Sit down.
mrs. vincent. No, no, Wally, we’ll just go out on the
verandah till the constables come. It’s not a bit cold.
[Kisses Helen.] You have had worry enough for one
day.
hammerton. Perhaps it’s not all over yet. [They all
go out through doors at hay window C. Helen remains.]
Helen [going to bedroom door 8., softly]. Are you
there, Dolly?
dorothy. Yes [opening door a little], we’ve been lis-
tening to everything.
Helen. What does the Doctor say?
Dorothy. The man’s had a terrible shaking, but he is
not severely injured. He thinks he should go to the hos-
pital, but he refuses. We have had a time of it.
Helen. Is he conscious?


Dorothy. Quite conscious.
Helen [listens]. I can hear Wally talking to the
police. The crowd are all going away. Wally is seeing
them to the gate. That is it. Tell the Doctor to come
and see me a moment. [Pause, then enter Doctor Crane
from, bedroom B.]
doctor. Ah! Mrs. Hammerton, good evening. I'm
afraid I must scold you. You haven’t been taking my
advice. [Shakes hands. They sit down.]
Helen. But I have taken all your medicine!
doctor. Like naughty children, you should be in bed.
Helen. One moment, Doctor. I want to talk to you a
little, before my husband comes in. See what a state of
topsy-turvey this room is in! I needn’t apologise.
Doctor, I am interested —somewhat —in your patient.
What do you think about him?
doctor. Nothing serious. His arm is not really broken
—he’s had a severe handling, presumably from the
strikers. If they get hold of him, his life won’t be worth
that [snapping his fingers],
Helen. Yet he was their idol a little while ago!
doctor. I am afraid, like the most of idols, he has
come to grief.
Helen. My husband may be back at any moment. We
will have to let him know. [Enter Hammerton, door C.,
low windows.]
hammerton. They’re gone. [Sees Doctor.] Hulloa!
Doctor. How are you? Didn’t see you amongst the
crowd —the surprise party are under escort of three con-
stables. Safe home —most of them haven’t far to go.
The sergeant tells me Andy Dixon and two of the ring-
leaders—well-known rascals—are caught, and will face
the police court in the morning. I wouldn’t have been
d


sorry, bad as these strikers are, if they had got hold of
Harry Johnstone.
Helen. What has he done, Wally, that is so very bad?
hammeeton. What has he not done?
doctor. Give a dog a bad name, and it will hang him.
hammeeton. He’s a dog, and got the bad name too.
Helen [to Doctor ]. My husband is hard, isn’t he,
Doctor? [To Hammerton ] What would you think,
Wally, if you were told that he is in this house?
hammeeton [flaring up ]. Think? I should start to
break things. I wouldn’t be answerable for what I’d do.
[Pause.] Have you deceived me?
doctor. Not a bit of it, old man. Your bark is worse
than your bite. I have known you since you were a kid,
and you are incapable of a dirty action. Your wife —
God bless her —your sister-in-law Miss Grahame, George
Wyndham, myself [enter Fletcher door L.]
fletcher. And Johnny Fletcher, all plead guilty of
this dreadful crime of harbouring a hunted man.
Helen. Hunted for the courage of his opinions, no
doubt, and probably guilty of no offence.
hammeeton. Don’t excuse people you are, perhaps,
not acquainted with.
Helen. Doctor, will you see the patient before he
comes in, and send Dolly and Mr. Wyndham here?
doctoe. With pleasure. [Goes up to Hammerton .]
Take it coolly, old man. [Aside] Remember, your wife
is in indifferent health and requires a little humouring.
Now, recollect. [Exit Doctor, door J?.]
Helen [to Fletcher]. Would you mind touching the
bell? [Fletcher touches hell. Pause. Jane enters
door L.]


Helen. Jane, clear the things away. Miss Grahame
will help you—by and bye. [Jane commences to clear
things off table.]
hammerton [to Helen]. I am going to
Helen. Wait till the things are cleared away
fletcher. Come out for a moment, Wally, and we’ll
have a cigar. [Hammerton hesitates, then they go out
by door at bay window C. They are only absent a very
short time, when they return. Jane has removed nearly
everything by placing the dishes, etc., on the sideboard
or in the baskets, ranged in one corner of the room.]
Helen [vexed]. You can go, Jane. Leave the re-
mainder. [Hammerton appears greatly annoyed. Flet-
cher and he sit down. Exit Jane, door L.]
hammerton. I am going to ask this fellow some ques-
tions before we let him go. [To Helen] Nellie, lam
astonished beyond everything at your want of discretion.
[Helen puts her pocket handkerchief to her eyes.]
fletcher. If there’s any one to blame, it’s me. I
insisted that the injured man should be taken to the near-
est room. [Enter Dorothy and Wyndham, door R.]
dorothy. And so did I, and so did Georgie. It was
common humanity. What is a nurse for t There was
nothing else for it, Wally. Pile all the blame on me;
I’m always catching it. [Enter Doctor with Harold
Johnstone, door R. Dorothy removes remainder of
things on table and cloth.]
johnstone [bows slightly, arm in sling, remains
standing about half way to door L.; he is evidently suf-
fering, and now and then leans against a chair for sup-
port], I want to thank the ladies for their kindness. A
friend in need, is a friend indeed. I have known that,
ever since I was a boy. It is true I did not meet with
an accident. I am sorry I didn’t say so, when I sought


refuge here. I had been roughly used by some, whose
interests have been the study of my life, and who should
be the last to raise their hands against me. I hardly
knew what I was doing when I reached your door
hammerton. It was lucky I was not here when you
arrived. Let me tell everybody, if they didn’t know it
before, that you are Harold Johnstone, the areh-agitator,
the extreme Socialist, the damnable mischief maker, the
champion stirrer up of strife and the worst enemy Aus-
tralia ever knew!'
Johnstone [ staggering towards Hammerton ]. You
lie! [ Hammerton rises to strike him.]
Helen [interposing rapidly]. I will not allow, weak
as I am, even my own husband, to strike a helpless man!
[Johnstone goes hack to where he stood before.]
hammerton [confronting him]. Let him answer the
questions I shall put—if he can speak the truth. [Helen
sits down.]
Johnstone. lam not afraid. Fire off your powder.
hammerton. Not all at once. Are you an Australian?
johnstone. No. I’m a Britisher, and not ashamed of
it.
hammerton. How long have you been in Australia?
johnstone. It has got nothing to do with you.
hammerton [viciously], Perhaps it has. At one time
I thought you were an Asiatic spy [Johnstone starts
slightly], but I am now satisfied you’re simply an
inflated gas bag.
doctor. Keep your temper, Hammerton.
hammerton. Mind your own business. [To John-
stone] I have been told your name’s not Johnstone, but
Gerald —somebody. [Helen seems slightly moved; her
eyes are downcast, hut she gives no other sign.] Listen


to me. One day a curious incident happened. I was
walking along a street after one of my meetings, when a
man asked me —a poor waif he was —if I had lost some
papers. I thought I had. I gave him half a crown,
after handing me a most peculiar thing [turns round to
all ]. None of you would guess what it really was. It
was the pardon of a criminal. I glanced rapidly over
it. The man had then disappeared. The recipient had
been a murderer, transported to the island of Saghalien,
one of the most out of the way places in the world It
described him clearly, but was many years old. The
surname was illegible, but I recollect that it stated, for
identification purposes, that the malefactor had a Rus-
sian numeral branded on his right shoulder. [Pause.']
The same night the document, strange to say, was stolen
from my house, and my wife was the only person who
had access to where I had placed it. I had not told her.
I have never mentioned it, and she could not have known,
I suppose, anything about it. [Helen immovable .] I
believe you are that man. [Sternly] Look me in the
face. Answer me: Yes or No? [Stares wildly at John-
stone.]
Johnstone. You are worse than mad. [Pause.] I
am not. I have never been in Russia. [Helen relieved,
sinks back in chair.] I defy you, or anyone else, to
prove it.
hammeeton. I have reason to suspect why you came
here.
Johnstone. A man like you would suspect his
shadow!
hammeeton. Come Nellie. Stand there
doctoe. Be careful, Hammerton. [Helen gets up re-
signedly, Hammerton takes her over close to Johnstone,
who is rigid.]


hammerton [to Johnstone]. Look well at this lady.
She is my wife. On your word of honour, if it is worth
anything
fletcher. Wally!
hammerton [proceeding]. Have you ever, previous
to this evening, seen her—anywhere?
Johnstone [looks fixedly at Helen, then turns to all
in the room, emphatically], I never saw her in my life
before. She is an utter stranger.
Helen [falls into chair again]. I am faint!
doctor [going towards Helen], Hammerton, in your
wife’s state of health, you have no right to behave like
this
Helen [recovering]. Thank you, Doctor. I have
strength to bear far more.
hammerton. I’m not done yet. I have another test
to make, Doctor. [Turning round] You examined this
man for his injuries ?
doctor. Yes. Oh! yes.
hammerton. You had to take off his clothes; had you
not?
doctor. Certainly.
Helen [rising with effort]. Then, Doctor, tell my
husband whether he bears a Russian numeral —-a mur-
derer’s brand upon the right shoulder? [Pause.] Tell
him the truth.
doctor. I have carefully examined him. [ Boldly ]
He has nothing of the kind.
Johnstone. I trust you are all satisfied! [Telephone
hell rings.]
doeothy. Someone ringing us up. See who it is,
Georgie. [Wyndham goes over to telephone and works
it.]


Johnstone. I have no further right or business here.
[To Doctor ]. Doctor, I left your fee upon the dressing
table. [ Meaningly ] You are poorly paid for your ser-
vices to me. You have been guilty of a kindly action.
I will never forget it. [Slight pause ] As soon as my
health is recovered I shall leave the country. I did what
I could for the oppressed, but my message came, too
soon. The greatest kindness I have ever received has
been from the lady of this house. I shall never forget it,
either. [Turns to go towards door at L.]
hammerton [approaching him]. Perhaps I was mis-
taken. [Pause.] Let us shake hands.
Johnstone. My right hand is useless. It would be
unlucky with my left. It can do no good.
wyndham [comes away from telephone in great ex-
citement.]
dorothy. Anything wrong? What’s the matter,
Georgie ?
wyndham. Terrible news. [They all stand round ex-
cept Johnstone, who is still in doorway L.] I hardly
dare to tell you
Fletcher. Speak out, man. Don’t be a fool. [Wynd-
ham takes decanter and glass from sideboard, hurriedly
pours out wine and swallows it rapidly.]
doctor [supporting Helen], Don’t keep them in sus-
pense.
wyndham. A cablegram has been received in the City,
that the Asiatic Fleet
all [except Johnstone]. Yes! Yes!
wyndham. Has been sighted off Townsville. Two of
their vessels sank the enemy’s raiders at Port Darwin —
Palmerston, you know
hammerton. Anything besides


wyndham:. The British Government, this morning,
issued a proclamation suspending the operation of the
Aliens Exclusion Act throughout Australia!
hammerton [falling in chair at C. of table and facing
audience, the table being between him and the footlights].
The Asiatics will enter this country without firing a shot!
Oh! My God! [Throws his head on table and stretches
his arms on it. They crowd round him.]
johnstone [at door L. The interest of the charac-
ters is to the last centred on him as he turns to go.]
PICTUEE.
{R) Doctor. Helen. Wyndham. Dolly. Hammerton.
Fletcher. Johnstone. (L.)
Curtain {Slow).
Websdale, Shoosmith Ltd., Printers, 117 Clarence St., Sydney.


