

i§ii®i 4| Religroa
RECONCILED,
PROM A
PHRENOLOGICAL
SIGNOR P, BESOMO,
|)jjwnoloj|ist, f Igsiopomist & PonuEoptjjist,
123 ELIZABETH STREET,
SYDNEY,
PRICE - - - - SIXPENCE.
SYDNEY
it'o£D & Booth, Printers, 66 Batliuret Street Y est.




rjp*" — —-
||l iHE problem of man’s nature and destiny is the moat important
theme on which the human mind has ever been exercised. For
bg ages reason and religion have battled for the mastery over each
-c> other. The greatest minds of the world have engaged in the
warfare between religious faith and human reason. The perversion
nf reason has led to doubt, infidelity and licentiousness. The perversion
of religion has produced superstition, bigoted intolerance, and perse-
cution. In this unparalleled contest no hero has ever achieved a com-
plete victory (as shown from Mr. Bright and the Bev. Mr. Spicer’s
late discussion, which is yet continued). Men distinguished for learn-
ing and talent, thoroughly convinced that man is endowed with reason
—that the laws of nature are uniform—that there is much ignorance,
prejudice, and superstition in the prevalent system of religious faith
and worship—reject all religious forms and doctrines and contend
that there is no reality in any religion whatever. They teach that
religion originated in priestcraft, and was spread over the-world by
fraud and violence during the dark ages, end that it is now used in
order to hold the masses of the people in subjection to the powers of
government, civil and ecclesiastical. Many well-meaning men,
cherishing an indescribable horror of infidelity in all its forms and
phases, are unfavourable to progressive ideas and radical reforms.
Long and fierce has been the conflict between the philosopher and the
theologian, neither class of combatants having been guided by a reliable
system of mental science. I believe that phrenology is destined to
reconcile the contending parties. During the many ages from Aristotle
to Glall, the world made but little progress in the knowledge of the
human mind. Philosophical investigation and metaphysical speculation
fail to impart adequate instruction concerning the functions of the
brain. The discovery of Dr. Glall inaugurated an era in the history of
mental philosophy. The observations, experiments, investigations, and
teachings of Gall, Spurzheim, Yimont, and the immortal George
Combe, with others of a more recent date, have established tde principles
of a new, correct, simple, thorough, and reliable system of mental
science for all ages to come. And now appears to be a favourable
time for effort to advance the cause of phrenology and humanity. This
is an age of progress, and thousands of people have a desire for know-
ledge of the truth of phrenology. They look to the numerous daily
and weekly publications for some exposition of its truth or fallacy, and
they find none. No science has been so sadly neglected by the press
of Australia as this, 'they have treated phrenology with either a stolid
indifference, or marked contempt. The pulpit has done about as
much. I would remind them that science is dispelling the darkness
which has enshrouded the intellectual and moral world for ages ; that
the knowledge of the mind’s construction will yet be considered essen-
tial as a part of our state-school education.


You cannot rightly apprehend any intricate or important religion,
in morals or philosophy, unless you first acquire a correct knowledge
of the human mind and the laws by which it is governed. If your
mental philosophy is defective or wrong, your ideas of character will
be unreliable, your judgment of morals will be false, and your theory
of religion will be faulty. Hence we can easily account for all the
erroneous views and teachings of those who reject or ignore the dis-
tinctive principles of phrenology. All difficult questions must be
adjusted by a true mental science, and phrenology being the key to
universal knowledge, I feel no little surprise at the press and the
pulpit having done so little towards the advancement of such an im-
portant science as that of the mind. It is sometimes objected
to phrenology that scientific men do not give it a cordial support. I
reply that it has met with a degree of tacit acceptance that is most
surprising and gratifying, both among the savants and the people. Its
acceptance has been greater, considering the time it has been before
the world, than that of discoveries of similar magnitude and import-
ance. Witness the treatment accorded to the discoveries of Copernicus,
Kepler, and Gralileo, by the older scientists ; of Harvey and Jenner,
by the latter ones; and you will marvel that Grail’s discovery has met
with so little opposition. Indeed, the fundamental principles of
phrenology are accepted by almost the entire learned world, as well as
by the people. It is true that the average scientist gives it but little
thought. He is occupied with other branches of science less complex
and difficult, and which do not, as phrenology, involve every principle
of moral and intellectual philosophy. Astronomy, geology, paleon-
tology, zoology, entomology, &c., are merely objective science and
subjective philosophy, commanding the highest functions of reason
and observation. All scientists, however far removed from the border
line of metaphysical philosophy, have made sufficient casual or special
observations in the direction of objective phrenology to convince them
lhat the brain is the organ of the mind ; that a large brain—other things
being equal—indicates superior mental ability ; t hat disease of the brain
produces insanity, and that we need not expect a very high grade of cha-
racter in one wffiose brain is chiefly at the back of his ears.
The fundamental facts and deductions of phronology are as gener-
ally accepted as are those of geology and astronomy. That the science
has been brought to the peifection in detail that some of those giving it
special attention claim, is doubled by many, and perhaps with reason.
But, do not people also question the pretentions of specialists in other de-
partments of science ? Do we accept, without mental reservation, all that
Procter tells of the stars—all that Tyndall tells us about chemistry, or
all that Haiwin and Huxley tell us of evolution? Yet we do not, if we
are wise and modest, assert that Prcctor, Tyndall, Darwin, Huxley and
Denton are mere pretenders, To doubt is both a right and a duty ; to
deny, is presumptuous It is believed by none, claimed by none —unless
it be some impudent quack —that phrenology is perfect either as a science
or a philosophy. Neither are astronomy, chemistry, or- geology complete
and rounded sciences, but progressive ones. The noble science of the


mind— the teaching and nomenclature of the phrenologists will elucidate
all questions pertaining to the human mind, and harmonize all the or-
gans, faculties and functions of the human constitution. It will reconcile
reason and religion, and unite all the conflicting sects of Christendom.
The people must learn that man’s religious and intellectual functions are
performed through the cerebral organization, and that there are estab-
lished relations between the religious and the intellectual organs. The
vexed question of religious and mental philosophy cannot he properly
adjusted without the general recognition of this important teaching of
phrenology.
We know that matter exists. We take cognizance of its forms and
qualities. We are endowed with various faculties which adapt us to
the different properties, forms, and forces of the natural world. Mental
phenomena—the diversified manifestations of thought and affections—de-
monstrate the existence of mind and personal idemity. Every man of
sane mind is conscious that he performs various functions of perception,
reflection, and affection : consequently it is just as impossible to doubt
the existence of mind as the existence of matter, thought, affection or any
mental functions, as an operative exercise or process. The pet son, mind or
entity that thinks, and the thought produced are different and distinct.
The actor is not the act and vice versa ; the brain is the organ of thought,
hut not the thinking person. I see and hear—the eye is the organ of
sight; hut not the person who sees ; the ear is the organ of hearing but
not the person who hears. The brain is the organ of thought but not
the person who thinks. Man is therefore a complete organism. In the
present slate of existence man is endowed with many organs. He is
constituted with mind and body. He is adapted to the material and spi-
ritual world and the laws by which it is governed. All his functions,
whether physical or mental, are performed hy means of material organs.
Locomotion, respiration, circu'ation, and digestion are performed by phy-
sical organs. The functions of hearing, sight, taste, smell and feeling are
.lerformed through the organs pertaining to the nervous system ; and the
various functions of thought and affection are performed by different
cerebral organs or parts of the brain. Reason is the power or capacity
)f man to reflect upon objects, facts, and principles, and form conclusions.
There are two elements of reason that phrenologists define—comparison
aid easuality. Religion is the right exercise of man’s spiritual faculties.
There are learned men in the history and literature of the world who re-
gard philosophy and science as antagonistic to the distinctive principles,
and teachings of religion, and as calculated to subvert the faith ot orthodox
churches; they oppose phrenology and other scientific investigation, and
■etard the progress of useful knowledge. That those men are well-
meaning men I have not the faintest shadow of a doubt, hut is it reason-
able ? All truths bear umniffakable evidence of their divine origin in
their philosophical consistency, fitness, and beauty ; whereas all untruths
ire grossly and palpably deformed. All tiuths harmonise with all otlu r
jruths and conflict with errors only. Therefore, to find out what is
-rue, and detect what is false, must be perfectly easy.


It is now universally admitted that the 1 rain is not only the organ
of the mind, the dome of thought, and the paiace of the soul, but that it
is equally the organ of the body, over which it exerts all potent influence
for good or evil—to weaken or stimulate, to kill or make alive. Religion,
then, is the right exercise and use of man’s spiritual organs; and feelings
towards God cannot be right if not according to reason, and Clod cannot
be rightly comprehended without the exercise of the reflective faculties.
Religion is a man’s feeling towards God, hat the right exercise of the
affections depends upon the intellect. All the affections are to be guided
by the reasoning faculties, enlightened by truth. Religion is not the
work of God upon the human spirit—it is the exercise of the human
spirit towards God.
We experience our own religious feelings, and exercise our spiritual
devotional faculties, and are sensible of our affections. Religion is a
constituent part of human nature. Its elements, or essential parts, are,
in phrenological language, spiritualify, veneration, conscientiousness, and
benevolence. Each organ performs its own proper function, or class of
functions. The size of the cerebral organ, other things being equal, is
the measure of the mental power. Man’s character corresponds with his
organisation. The religious character depends upon the elements of the
above-mentioned organs. That heads differed in size and shape, and
people .differed in talents, disposition, and morals, were recognised facts
before the advent of Grail; hat that these classes of facts were related to
each other as cause and effect was unknown and unsuspected until
lie taught it. Rescratos, Cobbr, and Locke wrote learnedly about the
human mind; hut they treated it as an abstraction —hence their essays
were mere speculations, having no basis in scientific facts. They were
logical acrobats, whose performances were entertaining rather than
instructive. Riolemy and the Alexandrian pliilo.-ophers constiucted a
system of astronomy which was both ingenious and erudite ; but it was
false, therefore worthless. Kepler, Copernicus, G-alileo, and Newton
gave ns a system based upon facts, and this is reliable and practical.
Gal! has given to the world a mental philosophy having its foundation
in facts, and is scientific and reliable. By phrenology, psychological
phenomena are explained as readily as eclipses are calculated by the
astronomer.
The older mental philosophers believed that man possesseed two
classes of faculties, virtuous and vicious. Phrenology teaches that man
has no bad faculties. There is no organ of theft, of murder, or licentious-
ness. That some are gluttons is not accepted as a proof that the
siomach is a had organ or appetite a bad thing, per se ; nor is it a proof
that acquisitiveness or destructiveness are vicious faculties that men
sometimes kill and steal. No, it is only proof in either case that the
propensities are not as they should be, enlightened by the intellectual
faculties, and regulated by the moral sentiments. Herein lies the philo-
sophical and scientific—hence rational —remedy for the depravity of man
and the ills which afflict society. Put the reins of Government into the
hands of the moral faculties, guided by the reflective reasoning, and


progress will be certain, and the ignorance of morals will end, and yon
will gain the final triumph of knowledge. Compared with the past ages
this is the age of the brain ; but the true age of brain is yet to come ; and
when it does come civilization means not only intelligence and culture
but honesty, honour, purity, fidelity, fraternity, and justice. So long as
the nations are for war, and the people honour military chieftains with
positions of power and profit; so long as wealth is worshipped and villainy
applauded; so long as politicians are partisans rather than patriots ; so
long as men are slaves to passion and appetite, and women to fashion
and folly; so long as depravity stalks abroad at noonday, and theft and
murder prowl at midnight ; so long as gibbets throw their ghostly shadows
across the green earth, and prisons yawn on every hand; so long as the
lawyer, sheriff, and policeman fatten on the crimes and misfortunes of
their fellows ; so long as editors cater to depraved tastes and stupid pre-
judices, and preachers dare not tell the whole truth; so long as the idea
prevails that it ever pays to do wrong : the claim that we are civilized is
presumptuous.
Man is the noblest of Grod’s creatures —the ultimate of earth. In Him
rest possibilities which, when fully realized, will not only indicate wisdom,
but glorify the beneficence of his Creator. He is tbe prince of the world.
The sceptre of universal mundane dominion is his by right of inheritance.
This sceptre is the magic wand of science, before which, the forces of
nature are yet to how in absolute obedience. The history of the 19th
century contains wonderful records of wonderful triumphs and marvellous
progress it is true, but man’s victory over nature is not yet complete.
What has been acheived serves chiefly to show us what is yet possible.
Everv new discovery in science—every new invention in mechanism—
every new improvement in art —are prophetic voices penetrating the veil
of tbe future, and proclaiming the possibilities yet in store —telling us to
be of good cheer, and relax not our efforts, and we shall yet grasp the
sceptre of absolute power—shall tread tbe earth, its sovereign lords.
Will future generations sit supinely down, content with what has
been achieved ? Or will they, like Alexander of Macedon, sigh for other
worlds to conquer? If they will reverse their method of vision, they will
discover hitherto unknown worlds —unknown to the average man—the
world of ideas, the realm of philosophy.
This beautiful world lay all about us from the beginning, but the
smoke of battle through which we have passed has obscured our
vision, and the din of strife has lulled the hearing, so that we neither
see its transcendent beauties nor hear its divine melodies.
The facts of science are discovered by external observations ; the
truths of philosophy by internal perceptions —yet both are dependent on
the organ of the mind —the brain. Neither facts nor idea can make any
impression upon a man, save through the nervous system, or the brain.
The nerves feel, the brain thinks. Through the nerves tbe brain is put
in commnnication with objective phenomena, and thus the mind is able
to study and comprehend the universe, and subdue it —for all power is
primarily mental. Through the moral organs of the brain man s mind


is put en report with abstract ideas of truth, justice, liber!y, fraternity,
etc. Through these organs we receive impressions, get ideas, from the
moral universe—the subjective world. The scientist may with truth
exclaim—as Professor Proctor did at the close of one of his lectures —
** Te can not by knowledge find out G-od.” But the philosopher,
through these organs of which I speak, dwells continually in His imme-
diate presence, and enjoys constant communion with Him. "When men
become a race of philosophers as well as scientists, when the moral facili-
ties rule supreme in all departments of society —then will injustice dis-
appear and love have its perfect work ; then will peace and plenty pre-
vail throughout the world, and happiness sit enthroned in every home.
To develope and quicken the intellectual faculties of our rising genera-
tion and neglect their moral culture, is to make trained villains of those
who would have been blundering scoundrels, and the native sneak-thief
is thus converted ini o a public plunderer. If you leave them in ignorance
they gravitate to the penitentiary; educate them intellectually, and they
go to parliament and join every plundering ring that promises to put
money into their purses, no matter at whose expense. Moral education
is the inculcation of kindness, benevolence, gentleness, faithfulness, sin-
cerity, justice, friendship, candour. &c., &c. Mo book, no sermon, no
ecclesiastical organisation, can impart its teaching equal to maternal
instruction and example.
Those who have had no mother for early moral training are unfor-
tunately situated. Moral training and education is the domain of
mothers exclusively ; the new-born babe is like the potter’s clay; the
skull, almost plastic, reveals an interior still more delicate ; and if nature
moulds the body, she intends the mother to he the matrix of the soul.
She will make the moral, the ornamental vessel susceptible to resist all
vice and crimes, as well as the palliation of bigoted intolerance and perse-
cution on the one hand, and infidelity and licentiousness on the other ;
and preserve the flowers of Heaven in the limpid crystal of his mind, or
cause this beautiful vessel to he so fragile as to crack in all directions
with vice, crime, and plunder. The character inherited from our mother
I believe to be almost beyond our absolute control. "We are elevated,
enslaved in superstition or free from its shackles, selfish or geneioua
nearly as our mother has been. Our moral freedom is the amount of all
our individual energies to emerge from all vicious influences and to work
out our own individual character so difficult to develop. A child inherits
a body and a head at the top of it, and the future man must live in those
bequeathed habitations he has inherited somewhat from his father and liis
mother, and his character will be manifested accordingly, therefore the
shape and qualify of his ordinary character will resemble the shape and
quality of his immediate inheritance, Man’s body is inherited like a
dwelling-house, and he must live in it whether he likes the shape or not.
The facilities are the furniture, also inherited with the habitation, while
it is impossible to make a radical and sudden change of a single faculty;
and while it is hard, even superficially, to make alteration, thanks be to
the moral remedies which a Divine Dispensator has in store for human
rectitude; the gross misrepresentations of and injustice to the Divine


character bigotry and superstition is gradually vanishing away ; but of
the true religion and moral education the mass of humanity are yet
ignorant. The moral education of children commences before birth. If
during pregnancy the mother is contemplating in her offspring, the
pledge of a beloved husband, she imparts to the foetus the sublime essence
of purity ; but if associated with an uncongenial partner she apprehends
that her involuntary maternity will thrust upon her an unwelcome in-
truder, she commences to hate the unborn, and thus conspiring against
the moral attributes of the future man, dooms him to hatred. All wrongs
done to mothers by improvident husbands during gestation is an out-
rage perpetrated upon the new comer. Husbands exercise a fearful in-
fluence over the mental condition of their wives during gestation, for
good or evil, and in spite of all systems of salvation the character and
destiny of the unborn is faithfully stereotyped As the favourable growth
of a tree requires a fertile soil and a calm and even temperature, hus-
bands should always surround their wives during nursing with all
comforts and happiness possible because from the same breast the infant
draws life he may also draw jealousy, hatred, bad temper, and other
defects too easily developed into a bad member of society. We have now
come to the fact that there is in the element of mind within us, that
which is called conscience. There is also a portion of brain mapped out
by phrenologists which correspond with this element. Every one of us
has this faculty or monitor, v\ Inch watches over all our actions, and
speaks in tones almost audible, to inform us when we have done right and
when we have done wrong. Children as a rule have large conscience,
but too many neglect the care of it. Suppose we would plant seeds in
the garden and when they raised their tiny heads above the ground we
should let the weeds grow all around their tender plants, they would be
killed by them. Precisely the same is true if we neglect the moral
training of our children. Conscience is like a sheet of white paper,
every time we disregard its voice it is like a spot of ink dropped on the
paper, it can never be entirely removed ‘ the paper will never be so clear
and white again as before. So if we do wrong once we may feel it very
badly ; the second time it will be easier for us to refuse to listen to
monition of conscience, and finally a person can take the life of another
and scarcely feel any sorrow or guilt. Those who commit murders and
do other wicked acts were once pure, playful, and happy children. They
were fondled and caressed as much by a fond mother, were nestled as
closely to her bosom of love, and feel as badly as any of us the first sin.
Ah! most all our abandoned criminals have moments when they think of
the day's of their innocence and purity —they would be willing to give
worlds, if they had them, if it were possible that the remembrance of
their guilt could be blotted out from their memory.
To reflect what has been done to retard the sublime science of
phrenology, (which knowledge of their excessive animal nature would
probably have made them bright stars of the firmament) by insensible
legislations tyranical theologians, legalized medical quacks, to degrade
and brand its advocates—it is more than cruelty. But thanks to the


energy o£ the many liberal minded men it is now spreading fast all over
tbe earth.
Phrenology is not only destined to reconcile reason and religion,
but it will place each person in such pursuits as nature has adapted
him. It will teach men to respect mothers and sisters who adorn the
family circle ; and facilitate the selection of husband and wife natur-
ally adapted to each other. That man is made for happiness, phrenol-
ogy and physiology teach, and all the laws of nature are adapted to
that end. The structure and functions of the physical organization
prove that man is designed for happiness. When all the organs of the
human constitution are rightly performing their functions no pain or
physical suffering is felt. Nothing but pleasurable sensations accom-
pany life. Every organ of the body —every faculty of the mind—every
element of man’s being, is made for and adapted to happiness. It is
the violation of law that produces pain or misery. Suffering is the
natural necessary consequences of sin. Suffering is contrary to the
laws which should govern the human constitution. Man is to acquire
happiness by the right exercise, use and gratification of his natural
powers.
Benevolence disposes us to seek the good of others. It makes us
grateful for favors, and is an important element in religious devotion.
It renders us charitable, liberal, and forgiving.—lt gives the genuine
missionary spirit,' and makes us, as has been accorded of Christ, go
about doing good. There can be no trait of the human character more
christian-like than benevolence.
What might be done if men were wise :
WTiat glorious deeds my suffering brother
Would they unite in love and right,
And cease their scorn of one another ?
Oppression’s hearts might be emhued
With kindling drops of loving kindness,
And knowledge pour from shore to shore,
Light on the eyes of mental blindness.
All slavery, warfare, lies and wrongs—
All vice and crimes may die together,
And wine and corn, to each man born
Be free as warmth in summer weather.
The meanest wretch that ever trod —
The deepest sunk in guilt and sorrow,
Might stand erect, in self-respect,
Ami share the teeming world to-morrow
What might be done ; This might be done.
And more than this, my suffering brother,
More than the tongue, e’er said or sung.
If men were wise and loved each other.’
There is a piece of brain, mapped out by tbe phrenologist—called
benevolence, and from observation and experience lit is known that
those who have abundance of this faculity are kind-hearted, ready to
sympathise with objects of distress, and are ever ready to do little acts
of kindness, and to share what they have with others. Benevolence
exhibits itself in various ways. Sometimes it springs from true, gen-
erous hearts, and at other times it seems to be promoted by selfishness.


Some benevolent persons who have no money give their time; they
visit the sick and distressed and often comfort them more than what
money would. Little words of kindness contributes more to our
happiness than we imagine. Some persons give a great deal of money
to institutions, when they know the world will hear and know how
much they have given, and refuse to give poor families around them
even the crumbs from their well-spread table. This reminds me of a
lady who once gave £lO to an institution, where all the donors names
were published in the newspapers, and the amount they gave. Her
name was omitted from the list, she called at once at the office to have
it inserted, so that the world might know what she contributed. This
is not true benevolence.
I will now introduce to your notice the organ of spirituality, faith
and belief. It is often said that children believe everything, and it is
well that they should do so ; if they did not believe what they are
told they would never learn anything, as they have no experience to
guide them: hence it is not wise for parents to sophisticate their
children with incredulous nonsense. The superstitious belief of ghosts,
goblins, and fortune-telling is the outcome of this faculty, but mostly
amongst the uneducated and hippish women. This city is pestered
with fortune-tellers. There is a general acceptance of phrenology ;
especially when it is based and combined with physiognomy and physi-
ology, and when seperated from the absurd claims and teaching of those
ignorant charlatans, who advertise in the daily newspapers —“Phren-
ology gives advice to travellers.” Thoroughly bad themselves, they
attempt to drag down the sublime science of phrenology to their own
low level. That there should be dupes enough in this nineteenth cen-
tury to support such ignorant quacks, can only be the outcome of a bad
system of education. Phrenology claims no such presumption.
We cannot believe anything which is contrary to our senses, or
reflective qualities. We cannot rightly acquire contrary to good evi-
dence. Everything we believe should be in accord with the laws of
human nature. We cannot receive as truth any assertion or doctrine
contrary to the established laws of nature. We are forced to reject
everything that does not accord with our senses and reasoning faculties.
Earth is spurious if contrary to science and reason.
In matters of religion, the masses of the people are too credulous,
they either do not use rightly, or are not capable of rightly using their
reflective faculties.
Man is more liable to credulity and superstition than to sceptism
and infidelity; he is entirely too credulous —believes without reliable
evidence, and receives as true that which is contrary to common sense,
science and reason. He believes the most unreasonable dogmas of
Hects and clergymen. In fact, there are few people who rightly use
their reflective faculties in matters of religion. I here is nothing in the
moral exercise of spirituality, which is contrary to casuality. Eaith
in a future state is not contrary to reason. Spirituality is given us for
use. Eaith in a future state is a normal function of man’s religious


nature, and therefore right. Spirituality induces a better state and a
higher life than the present; and its premonitions should be heeded.
Still we should believe nothing unrr asonable or self-contradictory. We
should test all things and adhere to the good. Hope gives us bright an-
ticipations, and inspires us with the expectation of a future state and
glorious immortality; it imports strength in the day of trial, and gives
courage, and self-reliance in the struggles with our physical and animal
wants, and makes us bold in the cause of what we may regard as truth,
God and humanity; It renders us cheerful in the times of adversity,
and directs us to a blissful future. Hope adapts us to a future state
of happiness, and proves that such a state exists. Hope and Spirit-
uality combined, gives man strong assurance of life after death. For
every want there is a supply. —Man desires God and Immortality —
therefore God and Immortality exist.
Phrenology settles the question concerning'.the existence of God
and the reality of religion. Experience proves to my mind that man is
religious by nature. He is endowed with a phrenological organ called
veneration, which inclines and adapts him to worship God, Every
faculty given us should be reasonably exercised and gratified, but not
perverted. Where there is a natural faculty or instinct in either man
or animal, requiring for its normal and appropriate exercise or gratifica-
tion any object whatever, we find that such an object exists. This law
of adaptation prevails throughout nature. If there be an eye, there is
light and other objects adapted to it ; if there are ears, there are
sounds—there are the kind voices of our nearest and dearest friends,
and all the intelligence that we should learn —or, in other words,
adapted to the organ of hearing. If there is hunger or a desire for
nutriment, there is food, and nature intends that it should be eaten.
Consequently, if we find in man, as a race, a natural organ and ten-
dency to worship, there certainly is a Being who is the proper and
intended object of adoration and worship. Grant that man is naturally
inclined to pay homage to some Power superior to himself, it follows
that either there is a God to be worshipped, or else Nature, in this one
instance, has departed from her established law of procedure, and has
given a faculty, and yet has provided no suitable object for its exercise
and gratification. Nature never would deceive her children. All our
faculties, if I am not too presumptive, I venture to say were made for
our use and gratification. In nature there are provisions for every
normal want and desire of man. Our religious faculties were intended
to be exercised and gratified in the worship and praise of a Supreme
Being. It would be absurd to say that Nature has made any organ or
faculty of the mind for no use or purpose. The fact that man has by
nuture a phrenological organ which adapts him bo the worship of God
proves that there is a God to worship ; we should therefore praise and
worship him. Man is religious by nature, and is as rational as religious.
Some persons are destitute of reason ; yet man is always considered a
rational being Although there are cases of mental deformity as well
as physical deformity, we naturally conclude that man is endowed with


reason, and although there may be few persona who have no tendency
to worship, and never manifest the least disposition to pay homage to
any superior Power, yet it is true that man as a rule, has always and
everywhere given the most convincing proof that he is by nature a
worshipper. Idolatry, superstition, sectarian bigotry, each is a perver-
tion of man’s religious nature, and that the pervertion of a faculty
proves that the faculty exists, and that it should be rightly used.
Let philosophers, theologians, infidels, materialists, spiritualists,
rationapst and the rest of mankind learn that each mental faculty
is naturally good, but liable to perverson, and that each organ is
capable of a normal and abnormal action. Religion was not invented
by priests, or others who make it their business or mission to attend
to the ordinance of worship. No! Ignorant priests have perverted
religion. Corrupt priests and politicians have made religion an engine
of oppression and cruelty; but religion is a part of our nature.
Spirituality indicates a higher life; hope, a future state of happiness ;
veneration, a God or power to be worshipped; conscientiousness, a
standard of right to be observed ; benevolence, happiness to be con-
conferred to others. Is there anything contrary to reason in these
sentiments ? Do they not perfectly accord with reason ? Are they
not in harmony with science, and demanded by reason ? Are
they not the deductions of scientific analysis ? Reason and religion
are not opposed, but they are in harmony with each other.
They are intimate friends, and give each other a mutual
assistance, and reiprocate each others services. Both ele-
vate man far above the animal. Reason elevates religion ; reason
guides religion. The religious organs are above the intellectual func-
tions. The intellectual organs are in front of the religious faculties-
and direct the religious feelings. The religious organs cannot reason,
but they furnish data for the reflective faculties. The reflective
faculties are incapable of emotions ; but they can rightly direct the
religious emotions. The intellectual faculties both serve and guide the
religious affections.
Unperverted religion conforms to reason. The normal actions of
the religious organs are in harmony with the reflective faculties. The
religious organs take cognizance of God, immortality, moral obligation,
and good will to all men. The reflective organs form conceptions and
conculsions concerning these important matters of thought and affec-
tions —reason guides them, and hence, most well informed and rightly
organised people are disposed to be unsectarian and progressive
religionists.
Man’s view of religion is like his organization, hence it is easy to
account for the various sects, and sects will continue to multiply until
man comprehends his own nature. A religious man may be immoral,
and a moral man may be irreligious. A man with large veneration,
deficient in all other respects may pray and manifest much .devotional
feeling, yet be destitute of honor and moral rectitude. If a man have
a large conscientiousness, with but moderate veneration, spirituality
and hope, he may be very honest and upright in his dealings with other


men, and yet reject religion. A man with large veneration, conscien-
tiousness and benevolence only moderate comparison and casuality, may
be devotional, honest and charitable, and yet be superstitious, for want
of general knowledge to guiae his religious affections.
Knowledge is more valuable than gold, and self-knowledge is the
greatest of all knowledge.
If the philosopher desire a knowledge of nature, he should acquire
a knowledge of man. The theologian should study man —especially
his religious and rational nature; for how can they benefit humanity
by preaching or teaching, if they misapprehend man’s nature ? How
can they acquire a knowledge of God the Creator, while remaining ig-
norant of men the creature.
If the theologist, or the progressive moralist, spiritualist, ration-
alist, phrenologist, and philosopher want to accomplish their missions,
they should first learn their own natures —that they may be better
able to learn and teach how to develope, exercise and use all the powers
in their complete being.


ASIATIC CHOLERA.
FERNET BRANCA
The most celebrated specific for Cholera, and more
especially the
ASIATIC CHOLERA SYMPTOMS,
Painless Diarrhoea, Cramps, Vomiting, Purging, Severe Spasms,
and Griping, Cramp in the limbs, Unquenchable thirst, _and cold-
ness and dampness of the body.
For these symptons PEENET BRANCA is the last Asiatie
Cholera epidemic in Italy, proved to be a golden specific—saving
thousands of lives —and it has ever since been held in the highest
estimation, and highly recommended by all celebrities.
With the Asiatic Cholera epidemic staring us in the face, no wise
family should be without a bottle of
FEE NET BEANEA,
it acts like Magic
SOLD BY ALL CHEMISTS, DRUOOIBTS,' and HOTEL KEEPERS.
Beware of Imitations.
Sole Importer—G. B. MOBINI, 602 George-st, Sydney.
Orders left with SION OR P. BESOMO, 128 Elizabeth-street, Sydney,
will be promptly executed.
DIRECTIONS FOR USE ON EACH BOTTLE.


KFTOW THYSELF.
A PREEN ©LOGICAL CHART
SIGNOR P. BESOMO,
Phrenologist and Physiognomist,
123 ELIZABETH STREET , HYDE PARK,
SYDNEY,
