

REASONS
Against LOWERING the
INTEREST
Of the Redeemable
NATIONAL DEBT,
From 4 to 3 per Cent.
SHEWING
This SCHEME to be Detrimental
to the PUBLICK.
LONDON:
Printed for A. MILLAR, at Buchanan's-Head
against St. Clement's- Church, in the Strand .
1737.
(Price Sixpence.)
In a LETTER to a Member of
PARLIAMENT.




REASON sagainst Lowering
the Interest of the redeem-
able National Debt, from
4 to 3 per Cent.
SIR,
t g H E Scheme for reducing the In-
-1 tereft on the redeemable Funds,
from 4. to 3 per Cent . and mak-
ing thofe Funds irredeemable for fourteen
Years, being the common Topic of De-
bate; the Importance of the Subjeft
warmly defended' by fome, and oppofed
with equal Warmth by others, naturally
engaged my attention. I mentioned the
Refult of my Thoughts to a Friend or
two, who not feeming difpleafed with
them, I the mote freely venture to com-
mit them' to writing, and to fubmit them
• E to


to your Confute. I truft to your Candour
and Love of Truth fo much, that I am
not only perfuaded, that Prejudices whioh
might naturally arife from the Abilities
and Experience of forae of your Friends
Admirers of this new Scheme, will not
have the leaft Sway over you; but alfo
that you will overlook any Negligences
of Style, in a Letter writ, as you know,
in a great deal of hurry. If what 1 fay be
true, unadorn’d as it is, it will meet with
your Approbation: If I err,you will corred
my Errors; in either cafe, any little Pains
I may have been at, mcetswith a Reward;
the only one I can propofe to my fclf muft
be of this nature, for whatever becomes
of the Scheme, my Intcreft is not con-
cern’d, to the value of one Farthing.
It is agreed on all hands, and exprefted
in divers Ads of Parliament, that the pub-
lick Debts and Incumbrances ought to be
leflened as fall as conveniently may be,
with regard to Jufticc and common Faith ;
and indeed, fo long as the Nation labours
under fo great a load of Debt, it is impof-
fibie it fhould maintain its Honour and
Rights, with the fame vigour as formerly.
The End propofed is obvious; but many
Doubts and Debates have arifen as to the
Means. A juft Examination ofanyScheme
for


For this purpofe, requires Attention to more
than one thing. The immediate Eafe of
Taxes is not the only Thing to be valued ;
if this were the Cafe, neither Principal
not Intereft would ever, be paid,' at lead,
no more than a low Intereft, and the Sink*
ing Fund intended to pay the Capital,
would always be applied towards the cur-
rent Service of the Year. If again, the
Eafe of Taxes were not attended to, a great
deal oj Mifchief might arife. Laftly,
Juftice, Companion, and National Cre-
dit, muft not be neglefted s if ever they
Ihould, a Spunge would be thought the
fhort Method with the publick Creditors.
From confidering the Expedition, Eafe,
and Juftice of a Scheme, variety of Opi-
nions, as to its Goodnels, will always a-
rife, as People attend to, orarebiafled by
one of thefeConfidcrarions, more than by
the others. Eafe and Expedition muft necef-
farily lie in oppofitc Scales. Low-Intereft,
if brought about by Force or Fraud, may
not only be contrary to Juftice and Hu-
manity, but, what may feem a Paradox
to fome, retard the Payment of the Ca-
pital. Low Intereft promotes a quick
difcharge of our Debts, only by increafing
the Sinking Fund, andretaining the fame
Annuity, and confequently, the fame
B 2 Taxes;


Taxes j whereas, if you only retain the
fame Sinking Fund or that part of thcAn-
nuity which goes to difehargethe Princi-
pal, but lower the Annuity in the whole, by
the Sum arifing from lowering the rate of
Intereft, it is certain you will be longer
in paying off your Debt: for the Sinking
Fundincreafing naturally, in a geometric
Progreflion, if the firftTerm be the fame,
and the Ratio or Rate of Intereft lefs, .a
greater number of Terms or Years muff be
taken to pay off the fame Sum. I men-
tion this, becaufe I find a great many
People, upon hearing that Intereft is to be
lower’d, immediately conclude, the Na-
tion will be fooner out of debt; which
is not neccffarily true; , unlefs the fame
Taxes continue 5 and even then, the Dif-
ference is Often very inconfiderable. The
Difference of time in payingoff aDebt of
fifty Millions, by an Annuity of three
Millions, at the' rate of 2 per Cent, or
x per Cent, is not two Years and a quarter,
it being ao| in one Cafe and iß.i. in the
others and if no Intereft at all were paid,
it would require Years to pay the
Principal. This leads me to ask, what
muft be thought of a Scheme, that by giv-
ing no certain, or if certain, yet very in-
confiderable Eafe, for a few Years, not
only


only detainsthe Nation many Years longer
in debt, but makes your ncceflary Burden
at the end of fourteen Years, greater than
it would' otherwife be. I, cannot help
thinking this a bad Scheme i whether the
new one be within the Defcription, I muft
fubmit to your Determination, after you
have perufed what follows.
The


The National 'Debt, as fat at lean learn *
(lands nearly thus:
Debts at 4 per Cent.
I.
S.S. Stock and 7 „ 0 „„„
Annuities, I" 28 >3 02 .*°3
Bank, - - - ' 8,560,000
India, - - - -3,200,000
Plate Ad, - 312,000'
40,314,203
at 6 per Cent.
Bank, ------ 1,600,000
37 per Cent. Annuities of 1731, - 400,000
at 3 per Cent.
Bank An- 7 D
> - 800,000
nuities, 3
Nevis Deb. &c. - 37,821
Exchequer Bills, 483,600
Sinking Fund, - 600,000
- -
Total of the Redeemable Debt,44,235,624
Annuities onlong Terms and Lives, 2,342,673
46,578,297
Civil Lift 7
Debt, S 1)0003000
Unpaid 7
onSalt,3 1,000,000
Navy Debt, 500,000
- - - - 2,500,000
49,078-,297


The Total of the Debt is 49,078,297 1.
from which taking of 1,000,000/. to
be paid this Year, the Remainder is
48,078,297 /, and the Sinking Fund
1,150,000/. fome part of this Debt being
at 6 per Cent, other parts at 4, 34, and
3 per Cent, and there being fome Annu-
ities on long Terms and Lives } recalcu-
late when the whole might be paid off
with the utmoft Accuracy, would be te-
dious : I ftiall therefore fuppofe it equiva-
lent to a Debt of 47,000,000/. the whole
of which bears , 4 per Cent. Intereft; this
you fee is over-rating it. Now, the In-
tereft of this at 4 per Cent, amounts to
1.880.000 /. per Ann. this added to
1.150.000 /. the Sinking Fund, gives
3,030,000/. for the Annuity, by which
the Debt muft be paid. And, by the
known Methods of Computation it ap-
pears, that by this Annuity, your Debt
may be paid off in lefsthan 244 Years.
In twelve Years you may pay off
17.240.000 /. fo as to reduce the Debt to
29,760,000/. the Intereft of which, being
1,190,400/. deducted from the Annuity,
3,030,000/. leaves 1,839,600/., for the
Sinking Fund, at the end of 12 Years.
At the end of 14 Years you may pay off
21,03 5,000/. fo that the Debt will then
be


be reduced to z 5,965 ,000/. the Intereft
of which is 1,038,600 /. This gives you
1,991,400 /. for the Sinking Fund, at the
end of 14 Years.
Now, Sir, let us fee how matters hand
with the new Scheme ; Here Hhall like-
wife fuppofethe National Debt equivalent
to 47,000,000 /. and fuppofe it bearing
Intereft at 3 per Cent. This Eftimate you
fee, Sir, is too low, the Debt being equi-
valent to above 48 ,000,000 /. at 3 per Ct\
but this I do onpurpofe tofhow, that to
prove the Preference of the old Scheme,
I need not objeftagainft a trifle of a Mil-
lion or more; befides this, I (hall fup-
pofe the new Scheme to take effeft im-
mediately, or rather at the fame time as
by the old' Scheme, the Sinking Fund
would produce 1,150,000 /. Then, Sir,
47,000,000 /. at 3 per Cent, gives
1,410,000/. this deducted from the An-
nuity 3,030,000/. leaves 1,620,000/. for
the Sinking Fund on the new Scheme,
Now, fuppofing this Sinking Fund ap-
plied as foon as pollible to the Debts not
riiade irredeemable by the new Scheme,
which, according to my Suppolition, do
not amount to 5,700,000 /. you’ll find this
Sum may bepaid off in lefs than 34 Years 5
fo that in this Time your Debt will be re-
duced


duced to 41,314,203 /. at 3 per Cent, the
Intereft amounts to 1,239,426/. This
gives a Sinking Fund, applicable to the
current Service ofthe Year,of 1,790,574 1.
which cannot encreafe till after 14 Years;
if then you apply yourfelf to pay off the
whole of your remaining Debt, with this
Sinking Fund, you’ll find or nearly
18 Years neceflary for that purpofe. Thefe
18 Years added to the firft 14 Years, du-
ring which, Part of the Debt is made ir-
redeemable, make 32 Years ; the TimQ
in which, according to the new Scheme,
the Debt may be paid off. But I have
ftiown, that, by the Old Scheme, you
may pay off your Debt in lefs than s
fo that there is above 7 Years Advantage
in point of Expedition on the fide of the
Old Scheme.
I muft next compare the two Schemes
with regard to the Eafe of the Subject.
This may juftly be eftimated by the Large-
nefs of the Sinking Fund at any time, for
that, in cafe of Exigency, being applica-
ble to the Service of the Year, muft ei-
ther prevent the levying new Sums, or
make lefs ferve the Turn, and may enabl e
you to eafe other Taxes in Times of
Peace. Now, Sir, on the hew Scheme
you’ll find, that, as foon as it takes place,
C your


your Sinking Fund being 1,620*000/.
exceeds the old one of 1,150,000 /. by
470,000 /. (Obferve, Sir, that the Advo-
cates of the new Scheme make it but
430,000/. which fhows, that I give them
fair Play enough;) and in 3 Years and a
half, or 4 Years at raoft, your Sinking
Fund will be encreafed to 1,790,574 /.
and remain fo conftantly for id or 12
Years; whereas by the old Scheme, your
Sinking Fund, at the End of (even Years,
.could not be above 1,51-3,300/. This
appears advantageous to the new Scheme 3
the Advantage in this Gafe is 277,274/.
per Ann . after 7 Years, and greater any
time before that. After 12 Years, let us
fee how Matters hand; Upon the Old
Scheme, the Sinking Fund will then be
1,839,600 /. whereas on the New, it will
be but 1,790,574 /. the Difference is
49,02 6 I. in favour of the Old one. Here,
Sir, your new Scheme lofes ground, and
will continue to do fo ever after : For in-
ftance, in 14 Years, by the Old Scheme,
the Sinking Fund will be 200,826 /.more
than by the New one; here the two
Schemes ftahdin a good Point of View.
In 14 Years, by the Old one, you will
be enabled, in cafe of Neccflity, to apply
above 200,000 /. more to the current
Service


Service of the Year, and be above
15,3 49,00 o /. lefsin Debt 5 this laft Sum be-
ing the Difference between 41,314,203 /.
and 25,965,000/. the fefpe&ive Totals
of the National Debt upon the New and
upon the Old Scheme at the End Of 14
Years. Before the End of 24 Yeairs, you
may be out of Debt by the Old Scheme,
and confcqucntly apply (if need be) up-
wards of three. Millions to the current
Service 3 whereas by the New, you’ll
Bill have 18 Millions of Debt, and your
Sinking Fund will not be two Millions
and an half. Plcafe to conlider this, Sir,
and I fancy you'll oWn the immediate
Eafe arifing from the New Scheme is
dearly purchas’d.
I think, it appears, that if the new
Scheme takes place, you cannot poflibiy
eafe the- Subjeft for 3t ot 4 Years to
come, unlefs' you pleafe to protradl the
Payment of that Part of die Debt that is
left redeemable. • For it is plain, by the
foregoing Computation, that the An-
nuity of 3,030,000/. 'is fuppofed to con-
tinue,- and to be applied foleiy to pay the
Intereft: and Part of the Principal'of the
National Debt j if you : apply it to other
Putpofcs, you retard the Time of Pay-
ment, and this muff inevitably happen in
C z any


any Scheme whatfoever. It founds grand
I confefs to fay, that, by your New
Scheme, you may eafe the Subjeft by
near 1,800,000 /. after 4 Years s but then,
as I before obferved, you protradt the
Payment of the Capital: if this be thought
no Evil, apply it to the Old Scheme, and
you’ll find, that, in 6 Years, you may eafe
the Subjed near 1,500,000 /. and in 12,
may eafe him more than by your New
one j with this further Advantage, that
you’ll be near 12,000,000 /. lefs in Debt.
In comparing the two Schemes, it will
be well to confider, whether we remain
in Peace or not; if you have a War any
time within 11 or 12 Years, you have
fome Advantage in carrying it on eafily
by the new Scheme; but this Advantage
grows continually lefs and lefs; and if a
War fhould not begin till after 12 Years,
it is certain the Advantage lies on the
Jideof the Old Scheme.
I have tired you, I doubt, with Com-
putations, which, not being carried to
the greatefl: Nicety, may, by fome, be
thought little to the purpofe; but I beg,
you would remember, that I having under-
valued the Old Scheme,and overvalued the
New, they ferve my purpofe, as well as the
moftaccurate Calculation. Ithink,! have
fet


ftt the Advahtages of the New Scheme in
a fufficiently ftrohg Light. I have fup-
pofed it ready executed; nay, I am wil-
ling to fuppofe the pofllblc Eafe arifmg
from this Scheme adually given. Many
would think this a very large Conceflion,
Experience Ihowing that other Caufes,
befides War, can fruftratethe beft Parlia-
mentary Defigns. But after all, what
does the Benefit amount to ? You eafe
yourfelf a little now, to fmart the lon-
ger hereafter do what you will, if you
continue to ad with a conftant Regard to
Parliamentary Faith and Credit, (as I
hope and believe) this prefent Eafe will
one time coft you above 3' Millions an-
nually for feven Years ; if you pay lefs
yearly, you mult pay the longer.
From what has been faid, I may venture
to conclude, that the Advocates of the
New Scheme have been far from proving
its Excellency, or indeed, that it will on
the whole do; any good at all. I may
alfo lay it down as a Maxim, in found
Politicks, that all Alterations of Property,
deftitute of good Reafons, are wrong ;
and that this Confideration alone furnifhes
a fufficient Reafon for continuing things
as they are. This makes me entertain
ao Value for the New Scheme. The
Good


Good is precarious 5 the Private Evil, if
not thePublick, certain. But as its Ad-
vocates have expatiated much in its Praife,
it may be worth while to confidcr a few
more of their Topicks.
They fail not to enlarge much on the
Benefits of low Intereft, calling it the
Parent of Art and Induftry j and hence
of Riches. I cannot help thinking, there
is a fmall Miftake in this political Genea-
logy. I imagine it (lands thus * Liberty
is the Parent of Art and Induftry ; Art
and Induftry of > Riches; and Riches of
low Intereft: fo that low Intereft, where
it is naturally and really fo, and-not no-
minally by the Force of Laws, may be
taken as the Effed or as a Sign of prefent
Riches, but not as the Caufe 5 and as
to the Continuation or Increafe of Ri-
ches, it is not fo much as a Sign. If low
Intereft were aneceflary Caufe of increa-
fing Riches, as fome have aflerted, it is
plain, a rich Nation could never grow
poor. This: Confcquertce, tho’ contrary
to Experience, will not ftartle the Advo-
cates for low Intereft, becaufe they may
attribute growing Poverty to other Cau-
fes. Beit fo; but-will they fay, that
lowering of Intereft, either naturally or
artificially, in whole, or in part, will ne-
-1 ccflarily


ceflarily dcftroy thofe other Caufes, if not,
from what Principles do they venture to
affert, a Nation muft be enriched by low-
ering its Intereft ?
It would lead me too far, or elfe I
fhould be very much difpos’d to maintain
a political Paradox, that a Nation may
poflibly be fo rich, that, in the courfe of
things, it muft grow poorer, unlefs it for-
bids all Commerce whatfoever with its
Neighbours; but I wave this. From
Experience, it appears, that England and
Holland made the fwifteft Progrefs in
Riches, when Intereft was high. With re-
gard to Holland , no body, who has read
their Hiftory, can be ignorant of this;
and as to England, befides other Evidence,
I have an Advocate for the New Scheme
on my fide, who aflerts, the Balance of
Trade to be againft us, and confequently
that we grow poorer, altho’ Intereft be
lower now than it was fome Years ago.
Thefe general Pofitions concerning In-
tereft may poflibly feem impertinent to
the Point in hand, becaufe it isnot about
low Intereft in general, but about lower-
ing of Intereft on the National Debt,
that the Debate arifes: however, as I fuf-
peft, many are mif-led by vague and ge-
neral ACfertions of this kind, I thought
it


it not quite amifs to trouble you with
a few Lines on this Head.
Lowering of Intereft on the redeema-
ble National Debt, is faid to be for the
Benefit of the Pubiick, which no Man
can oppofe, but through Selfifhnefs and
want of pubiick Spirit. . lam fure, Sir,
if I deny the Benefits of this Reduction,
and am miftaken, it is from neither of
thefe Caufes, but only from pure Igno-
rance andDulnefs of Apprehenfion. To
clear up the Point, I defire to know
what is meant by the Term ‘Pubiick ;is
it taken for all Natives of this Ifland col-
lectively ? be they Creditors to the Go-
vernment or not ? or ,is nothing meant
but thofe who are not Creditors to the
Government ? If it be taken in the firft
Senfe, I deny the Reduction fo far as it
affects Natives, or thofe that live in Eng-
land, to be a pnblick'Benefit, and muft
infifton good Proofs; till this is done, I
can have no Reafon for affenting to the
Reduction. If the Word Publick, be
taken in a Senfe cxclufivc of the Creditors,
I only defire a good Reafon, why they
fhould not be confidered as Part of the
Pubiick. Once more, Sir, I muft beg
leave to trouble you with Numbers; the
Friends of this Scheme ftate the Sayings
by


by the Reduction, to be 430,000 /. of
which 100,000 /. is fuppofed to go to
Foreigners; (howtruly I knovvnot;) their
Cafe being different from that of the Na-
tives, it fhall be confider’d feparately
by and by. The .remaining 330,000 /. is
paid by the Natives, who are Creditors
at the Expence of .5 ,s. in the /. each, for
this, it is fuppofed, Tome equivalent Tax
is to be immediately eafed. What Tax, is
hotfaid; fuppofethe Land-Tax. Then
330.000 /. is the Amount of that, at Bd.
in the Pound valued Rent, that is not
above 4d. of the real Rent; fo that to
fave the Land-Holder 4 d. in the L you
take 5 s. in the/, out of the Creditors'
Pocket. This would be very unequal and
bard, fuppofing they could all afford it;
but as many would be ruined by it, lam
perfuaded, there are few Land-Holders
in England , that would not be afham’d
to call this a Publick Good. l r ou fee,
Sir, I don’t compute the Eafe of
1.800.000 /. per Ann. that is the pre-
tended Effed of the New Scheme, hav-
ing already taken notice of that, and
fhown it equally attainable by the Old
Scheme.
This will ferve to fet what is Paved by
the Reduction of the Native Creditor in
D a


a clear Light ; as to the ioo 5 00 01. faved
from Foreigners, it muft be allowed its
Weight: however, 1 cannot agree to the
Neccflity or Expediency of it, without
further Proof. As to the Neceflity, thofe
who maintain it, have unwarily entangled
thcmfdves with a Contradiction ; They
pretend, that, by faving this Money, you
may regain the Ballance of Trade, which,
with Mr. Jofhaa Gee, and fome eminent
Merchants, is fuppos’d, of late Years, to
have been again ft us 5 and they add, that
the Intereft of the National Debt ought
to be lowered, becaufe the natural Ufe of
Money uij England, is now Jefs than it
was fome Years ago. If fo, it is plain,
that Money muft be more plentiful now
than formerly ,• and as Money does not
grow in England, it muft come in by the
Balance of Trade. Confequcntly this
muft have been on our lide, and that very
confiderably, to reduce Money, in a few
Years, from 5 and 4 to 3 per Cent, as
they pretend it is now. But the fame
Gentlemen fay, the Balance'is againft us,
tho' it was for us not many Years ago.
Tifiis, Sir, you fee, is a plain Contra-
diction. Therefore either the Balance of
Trade is not againft us, and confequent-
Jy any Arguments drawnfrom theTopick
of


of the neccffity of regaining it incondu-
five , or if the Balance of Trade be a-
gainft us, the natural Ufe mud be rifen
and not fallen; fo that the Neceflity of
a Reduction, from this reafon, difappears:
let them take which fide, they will, this
Sheet-Anchor of the Caufe is loft.
The Argument brought for the Necef-
fity and Pofiibility of a Reduction to 3
per Cent, is,That the natural Ufe of Mo-
ney is no more than 3 per Cent. By an
Argument ad hominern, l ean prove it
above 4 ; becaufe it was 4 at Icaft,
a few Years ago ; and the Balance of
Trade having, according to thefe Gentle-
men, been againft us, the plenty of Mo-
ney is decreafed, and the Intereft of Mo-
ney rifen, therefore it muft be above 4 per
Cent. But the 3 per Cent. Annuities bear-
ing an advanced Price, fay they, the natu-
ral Ufe cannot be above 3 per Cent. I
muft ask, Is the whole Price of the 3 per
Cent. Annuities owing to the natural Ufe
of Money, or is it not? If it be, explain
why, when the 3 per Cents, were at par,
104,106, the 4 per Cents, were not at
*33t> j 3 B T’ i 41, or nearly fo, if the
whole Price be not owing to the Intereft
they hear, but to other Caufes j then, till
D 2, you


you prove how much is owing to pnQ
Caufe, and how much toothers, nothing
is proved concerning the value of
reft therefore the Principle is preca-
rious, and all that is built thereon falls
to the ground.
The Value of Money muft be different
to thofe who live on their Income, and
to thofe who muft have Money bn de-
mand, or at a fhort warning to anfwer
the Calls of Trade ; in this laft Cafe, Peo-
ple will be content with a lefs Intereft,
and a Security which afforded no Intereft
at all, might, for the fake of Safety and
Eafe'of Transfer, bear a Premium. This
is the Cafe of the Bank at Amjterdani\
he that puts in his Money there, gets no
Intereft, nor can he demand the Princi-
pal after a fhort term (fix Months, I think)
but he may carry his Obligation to Mar-
Jeer, and fell it at an advanced Price. I
know, a great part of the advanced Price
isowing to the difference of the Bank,
and common Computation; but this is
a fixed Caufe, and if I am rightly in-
formed, amounts to no more than 4 per
Cent, whereas'the Agio of the Bank is
higher, arid fluctuates as the Price- of ogr
Stocks in England ; tho’ not fo confide-
rably


jably. Difcounting Bills of Exchange at 3
per Cent, altho’ it were very common,
yvould not prove the natural life of Mo-r
ney to be but 3 per Cent, a good Bill of
bcfides the Intcreft got by dif-
counting it, will ferve, on occafion, for
ready Money j and by the frequent turning
the Stock in this kind pf Bufinefs, a Man.
may get more than by lending it to the
fjovernment.
Some Arguments might be brought to
confirm what I advance concerning the
Kate of Intcreft, from the Price of other
Things regulated by that rate; as Money
lent on Mortgages, Jewels,Platc,and other
Pledges, the value of Annuities forYcars,
Life, or Lives, sfr. Thefe, I fhould think,
would be better Standards to judge of the
natural Rate of Intcreft, than the Price
pf Stocks fluctuating much from other
Caufes. From this it would feem, as if
the natural Ufe of Money in moft parts
of England, were rather above than under
4 per Cent. So that the Complaint made
by Tome, that the Creditors enjoy far be-
yond the natural Rate of Intereft in Eng-
land, feems groundlefs.
The Promoters of the New Scheme, I
fancy, are confcious that Intcreft is not
To


fo low as they pretend* by their Offer of
making the Sums fubfcribed irredeemable
for 14-Years. Where would be the ncccflity
of this, if Money was at 3 per Ct? I have
already obferved, that the making the Debt
irredeemable for that Term, is likely to
over-balance all the Good, faid to arlfe
to the Publick, from the lowering of In-
tereft, and limagine it muft prove a con*
fiderable Lofs to the Creditors, in cafe
we fhould be engaged in a War, before
the 14 Years areelapfcd. So that if we
have a War before 12 or 14 Years, the
new Scheme, from this and other Con-*
federations, is bad for the Creditor ; and
if the War happen after that Term, it is
bad for the Nation. This I hope, will be
fufficiently evident from what has been
already faid.
It has been aflerted that the new
Scheme will eafc the Manufacturer, and
by that means encrcafe the Trade and
Riches of the Nation. I fhould be glad
to fee a Computation of the Difference
of the two Schemes in this Article. It is
plain from what has been faid before,
the one has the Advantage at one time,
and the other at another. But 1 would
"humbly fubmit it to the Confederation
of


of the Legiflaturc, whether throwing
Trade open to all, and abolifhing many
old Laws and Culloms that reftrain
would not do more good in this Refped,
than can be expe£ted from either Scheme.
Some few other Reafons have occurr’d
to my Memory, not unufuaily alledged,
to engage Land-holders to wilh for, and
the Creditors to acquiefce in the Reduc-
tion. The Price of Land will rife, fay
many: They may find themfelves mif-
taken, dpccially if they imagine by the
New Scheme’s taking cfFed, that the
Price will rife to 3 3 or 34 Years Purchafe.
Mr. Locke has already expofed the like
vulgar Error. JBcfides, if the Price of
Land fliould increafe, who would be the
better ? not he that does not fell his Eftate ;
and he that does, if he gets more Money,
at the fame time muft have it at lefs In-
tereft; which, if his Land fells at 334;
Years Purchafe, leaves him but where he
wasj if he fells it for Ids, his Income
decreafes. As to the Publick, it is plain
it gets nothing by raifing the Price of
Lands, unlefs Foreigners were to buy;
but a high Price would never be a Temp-
tation to them,even tho’ there were no bad
Titles for want ofßegifters, nor any lesjal
Im-


Impediments to their purchafing. If the
Imereft of out Funds were to fall to \ or
£ perCent. he would be mightily miftakeri
who fhould exped 200 or 400 Years Pur-
chafe for his Eftate.
The Motives ufed to perfuade the Cre-
ditors of the Advantages of the New
Scheme, have no better Foundation!
The Annuitants are told, that by be-
ing paid off 1,000,000 /. every other Year,
and buying in at an advanced Price,
they would lofe as much as by the New 1
Scheme: This is a Miftake, unlefs the
Premium were 25 per Cent. In that Cafe,
indeed, an Annuitant who has 1,000/.
Stock, and is paid off too/, can re-pur-
chafe but So /. fo that he lofes 20 /. every
two Years, which is equal to what he will
lofe by the Redudion of Intereft from 4
to 3 per Cent. But if the Premium be
lefs than 25 per Cent, as it is at prefent,
and as it will in all probability continue
fome time, and may be much lower, in
cafe of a War, it is obvious that the An-
nuitants mud lofe more by the Redudion
than by being paid off a Million, every
two Years.
In fhort. Sir, let me turn this ne r &-
Scheme which way I will, the Sum to'tal
of


pf the Good appears to be the i per Centl
laved from the foreign Creditors, and this
is not fo confiderable as it may feem at
firft light; for to engage the Creditor to
accept of a lefs Intereft, you contrive a
Method to keep your felf longer in debt.
I cannot help thinking, that the evil Con-
fequences arifing from making upwards
of 41,000,000/. irredeemable for 14
Years are fo great, as not to be compen-
fated by the Reduction of Intereft. This
leads me to take notice, that the firft
Scheme propofed in the ’Daily Journal,
is not near fo bad as that which fomc
have imagin’d an Improvement on ir.
In a word, the lefs irredeemable Debt you
have, the better.
Hence I ftiould imagine, it would in
every relpeft be better, if Books were
opened to take in Subfqriptions at 34 per
Cent, you might, without allowing any
thing to be irredeemable, foon get a large
Sum of Money* iffo, let it beapply’d, as
faft as pollible, to reduce the Debts Hand-
ing out at an higher Intereft. This
would improve the old Scheme, and
might naturally, and by eafy degrees,
bring the Intereft of the National Debt,
E a


a few Yeats hence, even lower than 3 per
Cent, I doh't in the leaft queftion, that
if this Method was elofeiy purfued, and
the finking Fund applied as it ought,
that in fourteen or fifteen Years, the
National Debt might be reduced to
26j060,000 I. at an Intereft of 24, or at
moft 3 per Cent. This Debt would fit
fo eafy upon us, that it would be no great
matter, tho’ it Were reduced no farther.
Some arc of opinion, that a further Re-
duction would do more Harm than GOod 5
how well they are grounded in this, I
know not.
Another Motive for a Reduction of no
more than i per Cent, arifes from Com-
panion; large and precipitate Reductions
of Intereft caufe great Diftrcfs and Ca-
lamity. To fay that this ought not to
be confidered, fincc what the one lofes,
the other gains, is talking much too
loofely; for, altho’ in this Cafe, the Sum
total of Money remains, it is certain,
the Sum total of Happinefs does not.
I am fure, Sir, I have tired your Pa-
tience. If I had more Time, I would
tranferibe my Letter, and abridge and
polifli


polifh it as I went on 5 but rude as the
Draught is, I hope you will receive it as
a Mark of the Efteem of,
SIR,
Tour Mofi Obedient,
and Mofi Humble Servant'.
£ z POST-


POSTSCRIPT.
UPON fecond Thoughts, I find, I
have allowed a great deal too much
in favour of the New Scheme, by ad-
mitting 100,000 /. per Annum faved to
the Nation from foreign Creditors; on
the contrary, I find, that the New
Scheme will carry out more Money on
the whole than the Old. This will feem
a Paradox, but Figures will Ihow it true.
I fhall ftate the National Debt as before
at 47,000,000 /. and the Annuity paid to
difcharge it, 3,030,000 /. Then if, for in-
ftance, the foreign Debt, reduced from
4 to 3 per Cent. be 10,000,000 /. you’ll
find, that as 47 is to lo,fo is 3,030,000 /.
to 644,681 /. the Annuity paid to Fo-
reigners ;wiiich, by the Old Scheme go-
ing out of the Kingdom, annually for 25
Years, makes in all 16,117,025/. By
the New Scheme, 10,000,000 /. being
irredeemable for 14 Years, nothing goes
out but the Intereft on 300,000/. per
Annum. This multiplied by 14, gives
4,200,000/.


4.200.000 /. but the National Debt, at
the End of 14 Years, will be above
41,000,000/. and the Annuity muftbc
3.0 3 0,000 /. (If you make it lefs, you muft
poftpone the Payment of your Debt, which
may as well be done on the Old Scheme.)
Then as 41 isto 10, fo is 3*030,000/. to
739,024 /. This multiplied by 18, the
Time neceffary to pay off the Debt ac-
cording to thisSchemc, gives 13,3 02,43 2 /«.
adding this to the 4,200,000/. that mull
go out during the fitft 14 Years, you’ll
find 17,502,432 /. for the Sum carried
out by the New Scheme, which is
I>3 85,407 I. more than by the Old. So
that it appears, this much extolled Saving
to the Nation, is a negative Quantity.
Let no Man objeft, that this is but an
imaginary Evil, the Money of foreign
Creditors being advantageous to the Na-
tion 5 or that on the Old Scheme, the
Sinking Fund will not be applied as it
ought ; or that you will get Money
cheaper than 3 per Cent, at the Expira-
tion of 14 Years. Thefe, and the like
things, may be faid on both fides, and
therefore cannot fairly be brought againft
cither.
I


I conclude with obferving, That the
Way of Reafoning here made ufe of*
lays the Advocates for the New Scheme
under a Dilemma, with regard to the
Native Creditors. Either they ought to
be efteemed Part of the Publick, or not j.
if they be Part, there can be no pecunia-
ry Lofs,on cither Scheme s but the New
will produce a great deal of private Cala-
mity 5 if they be no Part of the Pub-
lick, then the Publick lofcs upwards of
4,000,000 /. by the New Scheme, befidcs
1,385,407/. exported to Fqreigners. As
to the Lofs indeed arifing by the Native
Creditors, I readily agree with any one,
that it is merely nominal j but for the
1,385,407 /. to be exported to Foreigners,
I muffc inlift, that it is real, unlefs it can
be proved, that, by the New Scheme,
the Nation will be enabled to gain an
equal Shim. If the foreign Debt, ro be
made irredeemable, exceed 10,000,000 /.
it will ftrengthen my Argument.
F I N I S.


