

GOLD AND COAL,
WALKER, MAY & CO, PRINTERS, 9 MACKIELOP-ST
(OFF 56 BOURKE STREET WEST).
ONE SHILLING.




REASONS SUGGESTIVE
MINING ON PHYSICAL PRINCIPLES
GOLD AND COAL.
A l|c»itiii of % (t tfitolojislo,
“An unreflecting and implicit faith is as fruitful of error as too bold a spirit of curiosity can be."
By J, WOOD BEILBY,
flay Me
Author oj “The True Theory of the Earth, and Philosophy of the
Predicted End,” “Auriferous Drifts in Australasia,”
“Facts from the Arcana of Nature,” &c.
MELBOURNE:
WALKER, MAY AND CO., AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1875.
[All Rights Reserved.


MELBOURNE:
PRINTED BY WALKER, MAY, AND CO.i
9 MACKILLOP STREET.


CONTENTS.
Dedication .
Introduction
PAGES
.. 5
CHAPTER I,
Assumptions in Mr. Brough Smyth’s Report of the Progress
of Geological Survey in Victoria, of the uniform action of
trivial causes of denudation, with crumpling of strata—
Development of a Force, or motive power in Nature,
necessarily productive of such phenomena, as a sequence
of its operation—On Polar ice accumulation, and its
effect upon the Earth’s equilibrium, as that of a spheroid
equably poised in space—Hypothesis as to open unfrozen
polar seas, and natural production of rock salt, and its
occurrence as an evidence of former glacial conditions at
its site—Some prominent oppositions of authorities in
science to exercise of common sense in deducing opinions •
and “ oppositions of science, falsely so-called,” to the
statements of Scripture ~ ~ ~ .. 9-22
CHAPTER 11.
Theory of the Earth’s central heat, causing upheavals,
combated—Results of a loss of equilibrium by the Earth
as to_ change in position of sites of defined latitude and
longitude—Theories of the Precession of the Equinoxes,
and of the Oceanic Tides, and a new interpretation of
these phenomena—A recession of the sea from certain
coasts, not a silting up of their harbours—Hypothesis as
to the date of erection of the Great Pyramid, and as to
the intention of the stone-coffer in the King’s Chamber
New ideas as to age of the “ cave-men ” and animals
Hypothesis as to ancient drifts, and deposits therefrom
Questions of deep importance to navigation, in securing
the safety of all mariners at sea .. .. M 23-45


CHAPTER 111.
Existing aspect of geological or theoretical assumptions to
mining —On the formation of Coal by drift and
concretion of marine vegetation ; its place of deposit,
and the mode of search for it suggested—Variance of
our Victorian geologists’ ideas as to occurrence of
payable auriferous drifts, with the results of Californian
and Victorian experience in mining—Encouragement to
mining on physical principles in search of lost reefs and
gutters, in old as well as new claims—Description of an
economical boring apparatus
Concluding remarks
PAGES-
45
5a


DEDICATION.
R. BROUGH SMYTH, F.G.S., &c., &c..
Secretary, and virtual Head of the Victorian Mining Department;
and Arbiter of the Gold Discoverers Reward
Appropriation Fund,
To whom the Author is indebted for the Department’s per-
sistently inconsiderate denial of his claims to recognition for
public services to Mining ;
Ist. As the first publisher to Government (June 7, 1851)
of the discovery (by another, then deceased) of a stated
locality disclosing a deposit of payable alluvial gold in Vic-
toria : and this at the critical period when an alarming exodus
of Victorian population to the Bathurst gold-fields, and con-
sequent paralysis of Victorian industries, was imminent ;
the priority of publication of the then cheering news being
amply demonstrable by incontrovertible evidence recorded in
the Chief Secretary’s archives, and by reference to the
Melbourne daily press of its stated date. But while R.
H. Hargreaves, the abundantly-rewarded discoverer of gold in
New South Wales, who drew off our population to foreign
diggings thereby, has been rewarded by the Victorian Legis-
ture with honours and a grant of £5,000 ! the well-meant
-attempt of the local discoverer (that is, the first publisher of


the discovery) to encourage prospecting for gold in Victoria,
has been, in every reference of the question to the Secretary
of Mines, persistently ignored by him, and declared in no
way meritorious !
2nd. As being the first prospector (with two others), in
April, 1864, of the Red Hill Creek (now named the Cross-
over) gold-field, Gipps Land ; and as having located thereon
a population—the nucleus of the Buln-Buln agricultural
settlements—in what was previously a desolate and almost
inaccessible mountain region, by drawing public attention
to facts of gold discoveries by (duly published) letters to
the nearest wardens and the Melbourne press ; as, also,
with sketch of the gold-field—to the Hon. J. F. Sullivan,
the then Minister of Mines, yet the vote of £lO,OOO for gold
discoveries in 1864 lapsed to the Revenue as being unclaimed
by bona fide discoverers.
In acknowledgment, therefore, of these and other encou-
raging modes of promoting mining enterprise in Victoria,
conducive to its existing state of depression, characterized by
the honourable Member of Parliament for Ballarat, as that
of an “industry fast dying out,” this little work is inscribed
(without permission) by
THE AUTHOR.
p.S. If Victoria were but blessed with a Minister and a
Secretary of Mines, and some few liberal-minded mining
capitalists, having the clear-sightedness, energy, forethought,
and indomitable perseverance of that enterprising and model
colonist, Mr. Murray Ross, of Rosstown, the present and
future state of Victoria, in every phase of prosperity dedu-
cible from successful mining, might be the glory of the
Southern Hemisphere,—a focus to which population from all
parts of the world would eagerly be attracted.


“An unreflecting and implicit faith is as fruitful of error as too
BOLD A SPIRIT OF CURIOSITY CAN BE.”
INTRODUCTION.
The following Essay having been written some months ago
for the Victorian Royal Society, and handed to its President
for perusal before its submission to the Council of the Society,
that gentleman expressed his hope that it would be read on
a stated day of meeting of the Society, and “be dealt with
in manner conducive to the interests of science, and at the
same time satisfactory to its author,” —who had protested
against the pooh-poohing of such subjects as the physical cause
of the recession of the sea, and apparent rise of the land, on the
coasts of Australasia, by a member of the Council of the
Society, who had asserted that “such changes were common,
and easily understood,” without any attempt on his part to
explain them. With this protest before them the Council
of the Society rejected the paper.
But if learned societies decline to discuss unaccepted
opinions, based on researches in nature, either because they
are opposed to those held and taught by some of their
members, or else fear that they may compromise themselves
as a body, by seeming for a time to endorse views which are
not put forth by an acknowledged scientific authority, but
can only be tested by such a searching inquiry as it is in
their power to institute, it becomes evident that they are
falling away from the end proposed in their institution, and,
instead of aiding, render themselves real impediments to the
advance of science. The writer, desiring that his opinions


may be examined, in order, if they are incorrect, that their
fallacy may be demonstrated, now publishes them that science
generally may scrutinize them. Recognized facts forming the
common store from which all must draw the bases of scientific
inductions, every established fact added to the general stock
is an actual gain ; and so long as a possibility of error exists
in preconceived opinions, every new system of interpretation
of natural phenomena by an earnest investigator, untrammelled
by rigid adherence to authoritative opinions, where absolute
proofs are wanting, is entitled to a hearing.
In this Essay, as recently re-written for publication, will
be found allusions to questions not submitted to the Royal
Society, but of interest alike to the scientist and theologian.
In the lecture on Science and Scripture, by the Bishop of
Melbourne, he avowed his belief that “ much of what is
called science is nothing else than arbitrary and unphilqso-
phical hypothesis,” yet, as “ not possessed of extensive
scientific knowledge, he implicitly believed, and had no more
doubt of” certain theories of science than he had of the most
important passages of the Divinely inspired narration of
Gospel truths. Yet these theories may be but feasible
explanations of natural phenomena, perhaps, therefore,
misinterpreted; and, but for this mode of shelving such
questions, by assuming their position as on a basis of truth,
analysis of them by earnest investigators, might result in
discovery of facts pointing to wholly different conclusions.
Leaders in theology, especially, should be careful to take
nothing for granted without adequate proofs, when militating
against any apparent assertion of the Deity, conveyed by
inspiration to the writers of Sacred Scripture. If they do,
they abandon their high prerogative as casuists.
Bangholme, Dandenong, July , 1875.


“ Like the flood which tests the security of every founda-
tion that stands in the way of its onward rush, overthrowing
the house built only on the sand, but leaving unharmed the
edifice which rests secure on the solid rock; so does a new
method of research, a new series of facts, or a new applica-
tion of facts previously known, come to bear with im-
petuous force on a whole fabric of doctrine, and subject it to
an undermining power, which nothing can resist, save that
which rests on the solid rock of Truth.”— Dr. W.B, Carpenter,
F.R.S.
CHAPTER I.
Contents.— Assumptions in Mr. Brough Smyth’s Progress Report of uni-
formity of action of trivial causes of denudation, and the crumpling
of strata—Development of a Force in Nature necessarily productive
of such phenomena—On Polar Ice accumulation audits effect upon the
equilibrium of a spheroid poised in space—Hypothesis as to unfrozen
polar seas and production of rock salt —Opposition of authorities in
science to common sense opinions—Oppositions of science, falsely so
called, to Scriptural statements.
In the recently published Report by the Secretary of Mines
of the Progress of Geological Survey in Victoria, he alludes
to auriferous gravels being found under marine fossils
(page 11), and asserts evidence of enormous denudations
across the central third of the Australian continent.* His
“ desire is that the result of his mapping out of strata from
surface indications may give a view of their configuration,
not as separate and distinct, but as having close connection
with each other.”t And his stated “primary object is to
make known observed facts relating to the structure of the
earth’s surface, and to place in due order of succession the
several rock formations which present themselves to view; ”
and he “ alleges that the maps compiled by him give for the
first time the lines of strike of upper and lower Silurian
rocks. ”t Mr. Brough Smyth has evidently most assiduously
and carefully compiled from many sources of information,
and if he ignores physical laws as tending to alteration of
structure of sections of rock formations, and thus affecting
the accuracy of his delineations of their strike and dip, and
occurrence of marine or other fossils in them, or in drifts
composed of their detritus, it is doubtless because his train-
ing, like that of nine-tenths of other geologists and palaeon-
tologists, did not contemplate necessity for consideration of
Nature’s laws as to the development of forces tending to
dislocation, denudation, and disintegration of rock forma-
tions, and to the drift and deposit of their particles. The
object of the writer of this paper is to endeavour to demon-
* Page 20. t Page 14. t Page 15.


strate the action of natural laws in evoking a force of
irresistible energy in accomplishing changes of structure of
the crust of the earth, by decomposition of rock formations,
and re-arrangement of their particles. But in advocating the
conjunction of physical knowledge with purely geological
science, the writer trusts it may not be supposed that he seeks
to derogate from the value of the labours of the Secretary of
Mines towards progress of knowledge of geological facts,
but to evoke caution in formation of hypotheses, or theories,
intolerant of the views of other investigators of natural phe-
nomena, resulting in varied local deviations from the regular
sequences of stratifications, conjectured as accurately defined,
by the Secretary of Mines and other geological authorities.
It must be absolutely impossible to construct a reliable
geological map of any district, not to speak of a province or
country, unless the extent of dip and dislocation of strata,
and of areas, within which are subversions and crumpling of
previously horizontal stratifications, can be definitely ascer-
tained, or reasonably deduced from consideration of physical
agencies, necessarily operating in the extension or limitation
of such effects. Attempts to define consecutive strata from a
here and there view of outcropping edges, without regard to
natural features indicating the probability of strata receiving,
by violent causes, varied inclinations or subversions, and
rendering it problematical whether such supposed sequences
of rock formations justify the hypothesis current with some
geologists that a total depth of consecutive formations to the
amount of 10,000 feet is thus predicated, result in a charting
of suppositions, assumed to be ascertained scientific facts.
Hence, perpetuation of the false bases upon which already
too much crude assumption has been built, standing anta-
gonistic to discovery of truth by being taught as fact, and
thus turning aside efforts of earnest investigators to search,
otherwise than in the ways heretofore accepted by science*.
These crude speculations when set forth as facts become,
indeed, a most dangerous barrier to progress of scientific
truth. Mr. Brough Smyth, while generalizing on his one-
sided view thus of noted outcrops, admits that “ a large part
of the colony is for all practical purposes unsurveyed geolo-
gically, and discoveries are made from day to day quite
altering our views respecting the areas supposed to be occu-
pied by certain formations. ” I may therefore, perhaps, be
pardoned for a few suggestions which may pave the way for
reception of facts attainable by investigation, and lead to a
new interpretation of these as disclosures of geological truths
subverting some former hypotheses.


In examining the structure of any section of the earth’s
superficies, copious evidences present themselves of the former
action of large waterflow ; its general course, as denoted by
diluvium, being nearly north and south, the course of
existing stream beds being modified by the trend of the
mountains, and their ravine cleavage. It appears that
immense valleys have been excavated, refilled by sedimen-
tary deposit, and re-excavated again and again, deep gorges
eroded, and hillsides torn down, and their strata crumpled
or subverted. Here, huge masses of granite crop up. There,
basalt reposes between beds of alluvium, containing organisms
of recent age, side by side with water-rolled fragments of gold
and minerals. According to current theories of production
of such aspects of the earth’s crust by a uniformity of almost
quiescent degeneration during countless myriads of years,
the geologist, from the limited data open to view, maps out
the depth, and dip of the disclosed strata, the imaginary
course of lava streams, and of igneous upheavals of molten
volumes of primary rocks, on the assumption that only such
upheavals can have formed the mountains, or distributed
masses of granite and some other rocks to the site of their
present outcropping. Evidences of the abrading action of
tumultuous volumes of water in eroding the hillsides of vast
valleys among the mountains, by lines apparently of parallel
horizontality, termed striae, (though miniatured in every
feature precisely by the markings on new straight cuts, in
small stream beds, denuded of protecting sward and vege-
tation),* are asserted as only explainable as having been
grooved by ice. Coal deposits are defined as agglomerated
layers of tropical forest verdure, without due consideration
of the necessity for some vast fluviatile or other aqueous
agency, to tear away, drift, and deposit en masse , in natural
basins, the tree stems and foliage, and overlooking the fact
that a precise counterpart of such (supposed tropical) foliage
presents itself in certain submarine forests and sea meadows
in various parts of the world, and that the assumption that
accumulations of the latter description of vegetable matter,
tom from its place of growth, and drifted to its site of
deposit by the throes of a convulsed ocean, and therein
subjected to enormous pressure by the superincumbent ocean,
and deposits therefrom, more feasibly accounts for formation
of coal. Geologists too often theorize on igneous action as
one agency of concretion of earths, but the permeating
element of rock concretion is as yet a problem unsolved.
Many stratified rocks, composed of minute particles of hard
* For instance, the Dandenong Creek at the Dandenong Bridge.


material without a natural tendency to be attracted to, or
adhere to each other, are found concreted into a dense, and
sometimes crystallized mass. One species of rock, nummulitic
limestone, the material of which the Egyptian Pyramids are
built and of great durability, consists mainly of the perfect
shells and shields of a molluscous animal, which would cer-
tainly have been decomposed by heat So also would most
minerals ascribed to igneous origin. It acted
the acrent of concretion is mineralized water, probably actea
upon in the laboratory of nature by curreints el^ ct ™^
add thus that metals and minerals are elaborated frommasse
of earths in a fine state of comminution and water com
mingled, the metals concreted in veins, or nodules, and the
minerals into their incasing rocks. Some geologists consider
basalt as lava ; others, and earnest investigators to Regard
it as an aqueous concretion. Its appearance in detached
blocks in the quarry favours the latter view Ihe Arctic
explorers, Dr. Kane and Sir John Richardson, both mention
the basaltic crystalline arrangement of columns ot ice
In the words of Dr. Brande, F.G.S., “Geology is thronged
with records of strange and mighty changes
of revolutions of climate, ... of periods when our
present continents were at the bottom of the ocean, from
which they seem to have been elevated sometimes by the
slowest degrees, and at other times by a more rapid and
violent cause.” Other geologists admit that the science dis-
closes evidences that, times and again, while frigid, tropical
and temperate zones have been transposed “1 alm °J
part of our earth’s surface, the ocean has alt J^ te ly sub-
merged and withdrawn from every quarter of the known
world, even rising and leaving traces of presence ofits sea be
to vast altitudes on the highest mountains. But our Vl ctonan
geological authorities assert that these phenomena are the
simple result of an (imaginary) system of upheaval, eas y
understood ; ” and that the changes traced by investigators
as resulting from tidal waves during these periods of oceanic
overflow, in subversion of masses of strata, torn down from
lofty plateaux, or rifted out of the solid mountains by land-
slips on a stupendous scale ; excavation of vast valleys an
precipitous glens ; collection of water-worn fragments-often
of huo-e, boulder-like dimensions—of the crystalline rocks, in
ancient valleys, and their depositation in the eroded gutters of
current flow ; the mechanical commingling of earthy matters,
held temporarily in suspension in the agitated ocean until de-
posited (as we see them presented in our railway cuttings), the
coarser rubble first, in varied layers or strata, surmounted


by the finer particles, longer of precipitation, and forming
our surface soils ; —are each and all but evidences of action
of such trivial causes as rains, atmospheric abrasion, and
action of streams or petty brooks during an infinity of ages
of time. . . .
By such reasoning, and deducing from observations ot
relics of man and other organic matters, being commingled
in deposits, deemed thus of vast antiquity, the hypothesis
that man’s age upon earth far exceeds the stated (i,OOO years
of the Mosaic history, a grievous doubt of the accuracy, and
an obloquy of a wilful perversion of truth is thrown in regard
to the narratives of Holy Writ. Yet geologists of this
school professedly reconcile their theories with the authen-
ticity of Scripture, while undermining its veracity as the
revealed Word of the Great Aiithor of Nature, by assertions
that it was not revealed in the interests of scientific teaching,
and that to the minds of savans, designated authorities in
science, the disclosures of geology do not support but disprove
its domnas of the period of man’s advent on the earth, and
the fact of occurrence of Noah’s mighty desolating flood over
the historically-noted “face” of the earth. And they
farther build up theories as to development of faculties ot
civilization in man from his supposed originally savage state
when a dweller in a cave, co-existent with the more ancient
animals,' now extinct on the known portions of our globe.
Our theologians unfortunately are, almost to a man, now
that Peter Menzies has gone from us, disinclined to grapple
with such questions. They, like many geologists and
palaeontologists, are not read up in general data of science,
and therefore take far too much for granted the accuracy
of assumptions, set forth as the asseverated facts of scientific
demonstrations of accredited scientific authorities. Hence,
they are insidiously led into derogation of the works anc
primary designs of the all-wise Creator, and thus they too
virtually uphold the supremacy of Nature, and side with
those who atheistically say of the one Author of Nature and
the sacred Word, “He hath no hands.
To geologists of this school, time is all they want to accom-
plish, by the most ephemeral agencies acting in succession,
all changes of surface —the result of denudation and deposit-
ation, and time they demand, the Scripture accounts ot
creation notwithstanding. Mr. Brough Smyth asserts that
the change in aspect from that of a vast plateau to a deeply
furrowed mountain chain, abounding in lofty peaks, deep
gorges, almost lost in haze,” and broad valleys, has been
fashioned only by rains, snows, and streams, during vast


periods of time. Yet the physicist may trace the links of
operation of natural phenomena now in progress, yielding a
force productive of catastrophic action at epochs alternating
with periods of such uniform action.
But we must proceed in our search after this primary
Cause, out of the realm of Geology, and call upon its sister
sciences to divulge their secrets of workings in Nature, and
Meteorology, and Mechanical (Natural) Philosophy, come
amply to our aid. Meteorology discloses—first, that certain
natural laws must be obeyed in the elevation to high regions
of the atmosphere, and conveyance therein by currents, of
vapour, drawn by solar heat from areas of yield ; and—
secondly, that natural laws must be obeyed in the circum-
stances of precipitation of this air-borne vapour. These laws
are that tropical vapours proceed polarly, and are only
liable to condensation and precipitation by contact with an
atmosphere cooled to the degree necessary by surrounding
circumstances. Hence, it is ascertained by the meteorologist,
that next to the tropics, the higher latitudes have the largest
precipitation of condensed cloud vapour in the various forms
it assumes, and that such precipitation is largely influenced
by presence of lofty and snow-capped summits, in areas
between the largest vapor-yielding surfaces, and its ultimate
destination, or the point within the margin of the circles of
frigidity wherein the continuance of vapour in an uncon-
gealed or uncondensed state is practically impossible. Now,
in the aspect of Nature displayed on the superficies of the
earth, we behold a contrast between one quarter and another
as to area of vaporization, and its reverse, or radiation of
dry heat from land surfaces, and also as to the occurrence of
summits inducing precipitation from impinging masses of
air-borne vapour en route for the poles, as abounding in one
quarter and wholly wanting in another. Delineate a hemis-
phere, for instance, according to Mercator s projection. Let
the periphery of the sphere be delineated as having its
margin in longitudes 170° west of Greenwich and 10° east.
Here we have in the west the vast evaporating area of the
Pacific, with scarce a point of attraction to precipitation
between the tropics and Behring’s Straits ; while on the east
we have the heat-radiating and non-evaporating surfaces of
the continents of Europe and Africa, upon portions of
which there are snow-clad summits inducing precipitation
either by direct contact with impinging clouds, or by
imparting the necessary chill to the atmosphere. The
sequence of this contrast of circumstances, or conditions,
is the transference of a vast volume of vapour, chiefly


raised in the tropical regions of the Pacific, to, and its pre-
cipitation and ultimate congelation in, Arctic regions, from
which, where land-locked, there can be little or no waste
by offshoot of icebergs. But no conditions tend to augment
equally the ice accumulations north of the Atlantic, wherein
icebergs, the offshoots of the Arctic glaciers, abound. Lieut.
Parry estimated the weight of one such offshoot from the
Polar ice, a berg aground in Baffin’s Bay, to be 1,292,397,673
tons, being 4,169 yards long, by 3,689 yards broad, and 51
feet over water level. Another contained 900,000,000 cubic
feet, and others of even vaster dimensions have been noted.
What aspect, then, may we expect these opposite segments
of the arctic circle to present as the result of these varying
conditions 1 In Behring’s Straits the channel is choked by
ice-floes, and shipping are in constant danger of being
blocked in by ice as far south as 66° N. lat., while we have
no record of open sea, even temporarily available for naviga-
tion, beyond four degrees north of this. But north of
Spitzbergen an open sea to latitudes 82° to 84-|° has been
many times recorded, and deer are said to thrive in Spitz-
bergen to latitude 80°, proof of a mild climate. Science,
wrongly interpreting the fact of this open area of sea, has
recently speculated on the probability of finding an open sea
even to the pole. But although ice-girt seas in polar regions
may be partially or wholly open as to their midst, that may
arise from the fact that such areas have been ice-girt for
centuries ; and as the superficial stratum has remained in an
almost stagnant state, exposed to a frosty atmosphere, and
the fresher, and less dense molecules, rising to the surface,
have been successively frozen, the residue of water is pro-
bably of an intense saltness, resisting congelation even in
extreme temperatures, in fact, in its lower depths a concen-
trated brine precipitating or crystallizing into massive rock
salt. The occurrence of beds of this material may therefore
be deemed prima facie evidence of the former occurrence of
an arctic climate, —not merely a local glacial condition similar
to that of Alpine summits, —in localities affording as yet no
other evidences of this to the observation of geologists.
Now, as to the accumulation of precipitated vapour, era masse,
within arctic regions, and especially in the south-western
quarter of the outer confines of frigidity around the arctic
pole, north of which natural laws would prevent vapour being
borne atmospherically, my views were, some years ago, op-
posed by the scientific critic, writing under the nom de plume
of (Edipus. But research into observations by explorers of
arctic regions, leaves no doubt of the fact, that accumulation


progresses for centuries under no natural condition of dimi-
nution, but by the offshoot of bergs, and their transference
southwards by ocean currents. Local circumstances of thaw
in the brief polar summer, though resulting in evaporation,
yet only cause local rains, haze, or snow, rendering ice sur-
faces more glassy, reflective of solar rays, and impervious to
wasting influences.
The Arctic voyager, Dr. Kane, remarks that “ the Alpine
glaciers have engrossed the field of scientific dissertation
somewhat unduly. Those which crowd the western coast of
Greenland have perhaps a higher interest, growing up as
they do in a climate which is independent of altitude, besides
being altogether superior in magnitude of scale.” He
defines the glacier to be “amass of ice, derived from the
atmosphere, sometimes abutting on the sea: ” and he thus
describes the Great, or Humboldt glacier. “ This line of cliff
rose in a solid glassy wall 300 feet above the water level, with
an unknown unfathomable depth beneath it, and its curved
face vanished into unknown space. The interior with which
it communicated was an unsurveyed mer de glace, an ice
ocean to the eye, of boundless dimensions. Greenland is in
mass continental, having a length of more than 1,200 miles,
not materially less than Australia from its north to its
south cape. Imagine now the centre of such a continent
occupied through nearly its whole extent by a deep
unbroken sea of ice, that gathers perennial increase from
the watershed of vast snow-covered mountains, and all the
precipitation of the atmosphere upon its own surface. . . .
You walked as over a terrestrial surface, met by every
diversity of configuration, valleys, gorges, hills, plains, and
precipices.” Again, “the mer de glace which occupies the
central plateau of Northumberland, is completely isolated
and washed by the sea, and is necessarily dependent for its
increments upon the atmospheric precipitation of a limited
surface, yet it sustains in its discharge, no less than seven
glaciers, one of which is half a mile in diameter by 200 feet
in depth, —a startling instance of the redundance of Arctic
ice growth.” “The circumstance of the glaciers’ offcasts
being so numerous seems to indicate a continuously pro-
truding influence,” doubtless from the superincumbent
pressure of ever-increasing accumulation. Captain Sherard
Osborne described the Antarctic ice barrier to be “the
seaward edge of an enormous continental glacier.” How
can vapour precipitated and locally congealed upon accumu-
lated piles of drifted ice floes, attain to the aspect of a
continent ? Dr. Maury observes, “To evaporate water


enough annually from the ocean to cover the earth on the
average five feet deep ; to transfer it from one zone to
another, ... is one of the offices of the grand atmos-
pherical machine. This water is evaporated principally
from the torrid zone. Supposing it all to have come thence,
we shall have encircling the earth a belt of ocean 3,000
miles in breadth, from which this atmosphere evaporates
a layer of 16 feet in depth annually; and to hoist up as high
as the clouds, (convey polarly) and lower down again all the
water in a lake 16 feet in depth, 3,000 miles broad and
24,000 miles long, is the yearly business of this invisible
machinery.” Maury further observes “The heating sur-
face on the north side of the Equator within the torrid°zone,
yielding the largest evaporation, is twice as extensive as it is
on the south side.” We may, therefore, fairly assume that
one-sixth of the whole of the water actually raised from this
evaporating area is conveyed thence by the polar air current,
and that a large proportion falls, and is congealed, in the
western segment of the Arctic regions. In 1867 statistics
were furnished of one snow-storm in the United States.
The cloud covered an area of 1,500 miles by 300. The
snow averaged one foot deep, and was estimated to weigh
about five tons to the acre, or 3,200 tons to the square mile, or
a grand total of 1,410,000,000 tons of snow. It must be an
unreflecting mind that could contemplate such causes of ac-
cumulation without seeing that in course of centuries, if not
continuously, a power or force must necessarily be evoked, con-
trolling the position of the Earth as tilted or inclined on the
plane of her orbit, —the extension of a radius, and deposit of
dense material on its apex being mechanically capable
of alteration of the centre of gravity of an equably poised
sphere. Change of the Earth’s centre of gravitation in-
volves re-arrangement of her oceanic envelope, as regards
the position of its surface level, over the whole area it
occupies on the sphere. The sea recedes from some coasts
to deepen upon others. This transference of volume I con-
ceive to be the motive force raising the tide waves, beino-
the naturally appointed mode of transmission of successive
films of ocean surface (probably regulated as to their syn-
chronism, or the maxima or minima of their elevation, by
lunar attraction, but not necessarily caused thereby) from
areas of redundancy, to re-adjust the equilibrium endangered
by such change of centre of gravity. The circulatory move-
ments of the diurnal tide-flow, inflex and reflex, probably
check subverting tendencies, which might precipitate a
catastrophe, or secular geological convulsion. Every cause


of change of density of portions of a sphere exquisitely
adjusted as to equipoise, and having a fluid envelope,
which must obey the laws of gravitation, (and therefore
aid by its movement in accomplishing a definite change
in the centre of gravity), must tend towards alteration of
such centre. As in the toy, the water-clock, the passing
of water from one compartment to another alters its
centre of gravity, and causes it to tilt over, and revolve,
so in regard to our globe, such causes as disruption on a
large scale of ice barriers, and their drift to lower lati-
tudes, or the transference of fluid matter in the bowels or
crust of the earth from one compartment to another, or its
decomposition and dissipation as gas or vapour ; encroach-
ment of the sea by earthquake breach, or subsequent to a
long-continued elevation of sea surface, and its amassing
within depressed areas of formerly dry lands ; accumulation
of ice, or sea water, as gravitating to a changed position; are
each and all conditions demanding change of our globe’s
centre of gravity. Men of scientific renown, holding posi-
tions of authority as teachers of science, object to this idea
that the necessary action of the rotation of the earth upon
her axis is to accumulate a belt of watery volume upon her
equator, and that this tendency of equatorial accumulation
abrogates the action of all other natural laws demanding
equable dispersion of sea volume in accordance with the laws
of gravitation. It is a startling fact, after all that has been
based upon it, and considering the long and disgraceful
apathy of theologians as to this primary denial by science of
the truth of the inspired Word of God, that there is no absolute
proof of the earth's rotation , and even less proof of its revolu-
tion round the sun. The doctrine is but a feasible mode of
accounting for apparent changes of position of heavenly
bodies, deemed too vast to gravitate at varied focal distances
to the centre of our little spot of earth. But “whether the
earth be small or large in comparison with the remote bodies
of the starry heavens is a matter of not the slightest moment.
Yalue and excellence are not even with us estimated by
magnitude ; and no one would think of bringing into com-
parison, with a view to such estimation, the Kohinoor
diamond and a block of granite or the scene of the vica-
rious sacrifice of the Son of God, with the mass of combus-
tible matter granted by the Almighty as a mere luminary.
Incidentally the Word of God declares certain matters as to
the subordinate conditions of the starry sphere, with reference
* Professor J. R. Young, in “ Science and Scripture.”


to this little globe, as inspired truths ; and however adverse
the mere hypotheses of scientific men may be as to these
being matters of fact, we have, as believers in the Sacred
Word, in absence of positive and incontestible proof of their
error, no option, in due reverence of the Word and its Divine
author—omniscient as to the works of Nature, as their sole
Designer—but to receive such assertions as truths explainable
in Nature, were we but adequately acquainted with it.*
Geologists hold, also, on the merest conjecture, that the
earth was originally a mass of fluid matter in igneous fusion
which assumed its globular form in virtue of the mutual
gravitation of its parts, and subsequently taking the form of an
oblate spheroid in virtue of the centrifugal force attending
its rotation. But may we not as reasonably conjecture it to
have been a mass of mud propelled into space at the fiat of
the Almighty Architect, and assuming a globular form by
transmission from its matrix hither, as drops of melted lead
are rounded into spherical shot by fall from a height. In
the beginning, the inspired Word declares “ the Earth was
■without form and void. It is now the finished handiwork
of the Almighty,—His work, perhaps the model for the after
construction of vaster worlds, as imperfect as to fitness for
residence by a human and intelligent creature,—rapidly pro-
gressing Godward, as our earth was at its beginning. The
scientific problem has heretofore apparently been, in discard-
ing the record of the inspired Word,—Given molten matter,
a sufficiency of time, and asserted laws of Nature, —based on
feasibility, not on absolute proof of their action, —to con-
tract the crust of the earth as we now find it, without aid of
a Deity. The great Sir Isaac Newton, though he submitted
* “ The apparent phenomena of the heavens must be the same whether
the latter complete an entire revolution from east to west in 24 hours,
the earth remaining fixed, or whether the earth itself performs an
entire revolution in the same time. This proposition is true if the
transmission of light he instantaneous, however great the distance
through which it has to pass. But if the velocity of light be not infinite,
that is to say, if the rays take some perceptible time to travel to us from
the stars, then the proposition does not hold good, as Arago has proved
by the following ingenious method of reasoning ‘ A star can only be
seen in the horizon, or meridian, by means of those rays, which it
emitted when actually in the prolongation of those planes.’
But the determination of the velocity of light pre-supposes a knowledge
of the true system of the world. The fact is, the apparent aberration of
the stars, the reason being unknown to us, leads to the hypothesis of
the translatory motion, or rotation of the earth. No instruments can
be made of adequate delicacy to interpret to us the answer to the
question by experiment on the earth.” From the Rotation of the
Earth, by Henry Worms, F.R.A.S,, F.G.S., &c., London, 1862.


the hypotheses of a fluid earth, evidently believed that it
was originally a solid. In his Optics, page 378, he observes
“ It seems probable to me that God in the beginning, formed
matter in solid, massy, hard, impenetrable, movable particles,
of such sizes, and figures, and with such proportions, and in
such proportions to space as most conduces to the end tor
which He formed them. These hard and solid particles were
variously associated in the first creation by the councils of an
intelligent agent, for it became Him who created them, to set
them in order; and if He did so, it is unphilosophical to seek
any other origin of this world, or to pretend it might arise out
of chaos, by the mere laws of Nature, though, being once
formed, it may continue by those laws for many ages. the
inspired Word states that “God divided the waters which
were under the firmament from those above the firmament,
and separated those below from the dry land, gathering the
waters into seas, and causing the dry land to appear. There
is therefore a measure of probability that the primary state ot
our globe was that of mud, or commingled earths and water,—
none whatever that it was a molten mass, still in igneous fusion
internally. If on due investigation of the reasoning submitted
the theologian would but scrutinize the asserted theories ot
science, and, “ proving all things, hold fast only such as are
( rood ” a firm stand-point might be gained, on a basis ot
truth, instead of on the assumptions presently rife, derogatory
to the great Author of Nature, whose handiwork is practically
denied daily. If the hypothesis of an igneous core, or
central furnace in our globe be discarded as without proof
in Nature, or the inspired history of creation, some other
force in nature than volcanic upheavals on the grand scale
must be searched for, to account for the movements of the
waters of the globe, and their re-arrangement as to surface
level, causing, as in the beginning, new lands to appear ele-
vated above ocean surface, and the waters to be re-gathered
into newly assigned positions. There is an utter inconsis-
tence in the ideas set forth by the upheavalists, in that the
same expansive force can be at once propelling and tractile
in its influence on the crust of the earth. In N ature we
have occasional evidence of petty local upheavals, and cle-
pressions, by volcanic agency, but as limited as to the
superficies of the earth as the upburst spot of earth, the site
of a school-boy’s experiments upon a combination of sulphur
and iron filings, is to the area of his playground.
Now, how does science, by its accredited teachers, reason
upon these questions ? One eminent geologist thus attempts
to silence doubts upon them, by putting forth ideas, which,


notwithstanding that they may have been unhesitatingly
accepted by science in former years, as the deductions from
alleged facts, are now daily called in question as to their
accuracy. He observes, “It has been well remarked that
when two opposing explanations of extraordinary natural
phenomena are given, one of a simple, and seemingly
common-sense character, the other complex, and apparently
absurd, it is almost always safer to adopt the apparently
absurd, than the seemingly common-sense one"! ! !"*" Again,
the same author remarks, “ Common sense, in questions of
natural science, is tantamount to common nonsense. ” Sub-
sequently to this exposition, the eminent geologist we quote
illustrates his meaning in a way that would “make angels
weep,” to observe Truth thrust aside, and the God-like
powers of mind with which man is endowed, debased in
supporting the merest conjectures in lieu of ascertained
facts thus recklessly misinterpreted. He states it as “a well-
established fact that while the medium level of the ocean is
one of the most fixed lines in nature, the level of the great
continents, with their table lands and mountains, is an ever-
fluctuating line. It may seem strange,” he remarks, “that
land should be less stable than water. We see
the tide rising and falling twice every twenty-four hours,
and the rock ever remaining in its place ; we speak
of the fixed earth and the unstable sea ; and yet, while we
have no evidence whatever that the sea level has changed
during the ages of the tertiary formation, and absolutely
know that it could not have varied more than a few yards,
or at most a few fathoms, we have direct evidence that,
during that time, great mountain chains, many thousand feet
in height, such as the Alps, have arisen from the bottom of
the ocean, and that great continents have sunk beneath it
and disappeared. The larger part of Northern Europe and
America have been covered by the sea since our present
group of shells began to exist. . . . On the Indian
coast ” (during the Chilian earthquake of 1822) “ the sea
seemed to be rising at nearly the same time when it appeared
to be falling on the American one ; and on the latter such
was the actual impression entertained by the people —‘ it was
the general belief of the fishermen and inhabitants, not that
the land had risen, but that the ocean had permanently
retreated. ’ But if it had retreated from the Chilian shore,
how could it have risen on the Indian one ? In like manner
the sea appears to be receding from the shores of Sweden at
the rate of nearly four vertical feet in the century, while it
seems to be advancing on the western coasts of Greenland


at, apparently, a rate more considerable. . . . All the
time, however, the actual motion—upwards in one region,
downwards in another —is in the solid earth, not in the sea,
which merely serves as a kind of hydrostatic level to indicate
the fact of subsidence or elevation of the land. ” * Shade of
the illustrious Newton! must we acquiesce in such monstrous
fallacies, and tacitly aid in trampling upon Truth thus
ruthlessly hurled from its pinnacle, despite the evidence of
facts in Nature pointing to totally opposite conclusions, if
science would but read them intelligently ? Such hypotheses
as the foregoing are but “ oppositions of science, falsely so
called ; ” to be repudiated, with wonder that such could
ever be advanced by the late Hugh Miller, or acquiesced in
by contemporary geologists. The style of reasoning reminds
one of that of the inebriate laird, who, after vain attempts
to preserve his equilibrium in the saddle, succumbed to a
sudden lurch in crossing a ford, and became a squatter in the
stream. Hearing the splash, perhaps, but oblivious as to
his change of position, apparently, he hailed his servant with
“Wattie, my man, there’s something fallen in the burn.”
To which that worthy replied, judging from appearances, like
the Chilian fisherman, “I’m thinking, laird, its yoursel’.”
The inebriate, —like the geologist, who ignores the principles
of mechanical philosophy, blind to the results of a loss of
equilibrium in moveable matter, in redisposition of its
volume in accordance with the natural law of gravitation,
could not see the matter in that light, remarking, “How
can it be me, when I’m here?” How could the margin of
the ocean rise on the Indian shores, asks the geologist,
though appearing to recede from those of Chili? The
surface of the ocean is, he tells us, inflexibly level, and
merely indicates elevation or depression of the land ! Such
is the crumbling foundation upon which much of what is
termed scientific geology has been reared, inducing an ever-
extending series of assumptions as to formations of strata, and
ages of fossils, and other relics of organisms therein embedded,
involving the assumed antiquity of man as coeval with mam-
malia now extinct, which will not bear exhaustive scrutiny as
to being based on facts, and are therefore unworthy of the
name of philosophy. Of the influence the disrupting and
drifting agency of water may have in conveyance and deposi-
tation of commingled earthy matters and organisms, brought
together fortuitously, and not as having local and contempo-
rary origin, instances will be submitted in a second chapter.
* “Testimony of the Rocks,” lecture on the Deluge, by Hugh Miller.


CHAPTER 11.
Contents.— Theory of central heat, causing upheavals, combatted—Results
of a loss of equilibrium by the Earth, as to change of position of sites
of defined latitude and longitude—Theories of the Precession of the
Equinoxes, and of the Tides, and a new interpretation of these
phenomena—Recession of the sea from coasts, not a silting up of
their harbours—Hypothesis as to age of the Pyramids, and intention
of the coffer in the King’s Chamber—New views as to age of the
« cave-men ’’—Hypothesis as to drifts and deposits therefrom—
Questions important to the mercantile marine and navy.
The theory of igneous upheavals of portions of the earth s
crust, of continental area, is still maintained by some geolo-
gists, and palaeontologists, to account for the apparent
elevation of lands above sea surfaces. This theory is based
upon the mere assumption that the primary state of the
globe was that of a mass of molten and incandescent matter,
and that this seething mass, though cooled and hardened
into a crust externally, still exists beneath this crust, not
only ready for volcanic action, but actually and simul-
taneously upheaving and depressing continuously segments
of the earth’s crust at the present day, so that lands are
raised and depressed, as to the level of the seas upon their
coasts, while the sea ever retains a “ fixed hydrostatic surface
level.” There is, however, absolutely no proof of this
igneous theory, nor any corroborating fact, but that_ in
localities —possibly areas of exceptional volcanic or chemical
affinities —an increase of heat, registered by thermometers
sunk within borings, has been noted at successive depths.
But heat, so tested, might result from disengagement of
latent caloric during the friction of the tools used in boring.
The result of a boring more recently undertaken at St. Louis,
U. S., to a depth exceeding 3,840 feet, contravenes the accu-
racy of the data assumed from earlier experiments, of a
relatively proportionate increase of temperature at successive
depths from the surface, and points to similar conclusions to
those deduced from deep sea soundings, that, most probably,
a fixed low temperature is attained at great depths, and
prevails even equatorially. That a gradual increase of heat
at descending depths is not the experience of practical miners,
may be inferred by the fact, that the assumed proportionate
increase of heat, from the mean quantity deduced by earlier
experiments, of 87° at the depth of 1740 feet, has not militated
against the working of the deeper coal mines, by natives of a
cool climate. The Rose coal mine at Ince, near Wigan, pos-
sesses the deepest known shaft in the world, yet is short of
half a mile in depth. Poor puny finite man, what data hast
thou for authoritative assumptions as to the internal struc-
ture of a globe of which thou canst as yet but scratch the


rind of ? only having penetrated in some few localities to a
depth of one-six or eight-thonsandth part of the radius
from centre to surface. By perpetuation of the crude hypo-
theses, current among geologists, that the disrupted aspect
of mountain chains, as well as the alternate elevation
and depression of vast areas of the earth’s surface, are the
result of mysterious movements of an incandescent mass
beneath its crust, necessity for investigation as to principles
of causation is practically denied. But the earnest student
of physics, and investigator of the agencies in nature effecting
terrestrial changes, as well those of the position or inclination
of the earth’s poles, to the actual or assumed plane of her
orbit, as of the waste, renovation, or alteration of aspect of
her external crust, must scrutinize even accepted theories, and
absolutely reject every assumption unbased on veritable
facts. “ Prove all things, hold fast that which is good,”
should be the motto of the scientific investigator. More espe-
cially, no theologian, or recognized orthodox preacher, should
accept as undoubted scientific truth, assumptions based on
conjectural data, affecting, by a hair’s breath, the strict
veracity and accurate statement of fact contained in the
inspired Word, whose Divine Author is at once the Architect
and Almighty Controller of Nature, and who doeth according
to His will throughout the vast universe, yet probably by
operation of designed natural laws effecting predetermined
sequences.
Mallet observes that “ an earthquake, however great, is
incapable of producing any permanent elevation or depression
of land whatever, unless as secondary effects. Its functions
of elevation and depression are limited solely to the sudden
rise, and as immediate fall, of that limited portion of the
surface through which the great wave is passing momentarily. ”
I submit that the phenomena of earthquakes may be but
notifications in nature of effectuation of a change—of
exceptional energy—in the earth’s centre of gravity. At sea,
earthquakes cause apparently a shock of vertical impulse to
the superincumbent oceanic surface, uplifting and throwing
off a wave, or film of volume, directed by the course of
impulse, or the tend of the change thus being effected ; the
usually noticed primary action upon surrounding coast lines,
—the receding wave, being probably caused by the rush of
water to fill the vacuum, or depression of surface, resulting
from the ejectment of the wave of impulse, prior to the
reflex of the succeeding waves, of devastating characteristics.
In noted phenomena of the past occurrence of earthquake
waves, there is presumptive evidence in favour of a con-


tinuous progression of change of the earth’s centre of gravity
in one general direction, augmenting, by impulse to transfer
of oceanic volume, the condition involving such change.
But if the oceanic envelop must inevitably, in obedience to
the natural law of gravitation, transfer portions of its volume
from the coasts of the Southern hemisphere, and the eastern
half of the Northern hemisphere, to accumulate in the
Northern Pacific, as scientific observation proves to be the
actual fact, we have d priori testimony to actual sequences
of the force thus evoked. And when we find in nature
existence of a semi-diurnal wave of transmission of successive
films of water in course of such transfer, and the flex and
reflex of said waves, from impingement on opposing coasts,
affords a marked general coincidence of action with what, on
scientific principles, we must deem necessary action under
influence of exciting force, and in effect restraining subverting
tendencies of the loss of equilibrium evoked, we perceive evi-
dence of an All-wise design, and conceive that the exciting cause
of the oceanic tides is, in this way, more rationally accounted
for than by the popular theory, (regarded by the Astronomer-
Royal of England as “contemptible”) of referring the
■cause to planetary, or solar attraction, upon an wholly
imaginary (coined for the purpose) belt of accumulated
waters within the tropics. Change in the centre of gravity,
is by mechanical law, change of line of axis, and perpen-
diculars thereto, with all their parallels, termed, as regards
our earth, degrees of longitude and latitude. It is currently
asserted by astronomers that such changes are physically
impossible ; that the rotatory motion of the earth accu-
mulates, or has accumulated, a tropical enlargement, or
band of the originally molten matter, and that this regulates
her equilibrium as to her position in space while performing
her mighty revolutions, daily upon her axis, and yearly
around the sun, and by now amassing waters equatorially, pre-
vents their gravitation elsewhere. But, as yet, science only
adduces these as plausible hypotheses, for there is no one
absolute proof of either the axial or orbital revolutions, and
many facts in nature cast doubt as to the fact. The moot
points as to the sun’s distance, and the actual time, if any,
required for transmission of light, and as to what stellar
bodies are dependent on our, or other suns, for light, render-
ing them luminous to us, if ever satisfactorily resolved by
science, may be revolutionary in effect upon the hypotheses
of to-day. Our little globe-—the initial stand-point, perhaps,
of a new creation of intelligent beings, and of preparation
of stellar worlds for their future homes, and progressive


advancement Godward—may yet prove to be the central
point around which a universe revolves in circles or ellipses
with varied focal distances, and the impulse 0/ attraction
binding stellar worlds thereto electric current, or what-
soever°it may be, may perchance afford the concentrating
force of gravitation, as acting terrestrially by evident
natural law, the nature of which impulse is as yet dark
to science. But I must apologise for this digression.
Expression of honest doubt of truth of hypotheses, built upon
assumptions, may induce deep thinkers to investigate alleged
facts in science, and, if these are unproved, search out a true
basis of theory. The observations to set at rest the Sun’s
distance, taken in connection with the recent transit of
Yenus, may be marred as to accuracy, by apparently wrong
definitions of the longitude of the observing stand-points,—
a check to accuracy in all previously noted observations.
At the March meeting, a few years ago, of the Royal Geo-
graphical Society, it was stated, that observations during
recent South Sea explorations had conclusively proved that
all the recorded nautical positions defined by Morrell, in his
Four Voyages to the Antarctic, were entirely untrustworthy.
And it is a singular confirmation of the theory I submit of
the deflection south-westerly of the Arctic polar apex, and
opposite indication consequently of the Antarctic extremity,
to find seven years after I first published my ideas, that
Sydney is discovered by the Admiralty to be some distance
west of its assigned degree of longitude, and it is also affirmed
of the 141° of East longitude, defined in 1849 as having
a stated and land-marked position, that it is now encroaching
easterly within the confines of Victoria. In other words,
the Sun’s period of attaining meridian altitude has apparently
been protracted since the observations were made, whereon
the definition of the locality of the 141° of East longitude
was computed twenty-five years ago.
It has been erroneously stated that my views are those set
forth by M. Adhemar, a French mathematician, and author
of scientific repute, and his pupils. But I claim to have
traced the links of a chain of natural operations, till view of
the consummation broke upon me ; and subsequently I found
that Adhemar had promulgated somewhat similar ideas. In one
important point 1 wholly differ from M. Adhemar, who holds
that the declension of climate caused by excess of the period
of winter in either hemisphere alternately, during half the
period assumed by Astronomy, as requisite for a revolution
of the ecliptic, or some twenty-six thousand years, results in
disproportionate polar ice accumulation ; and ultimately the


leverage of this, on end of an extended radius, acting on the
centre of gravity of the fluid sphere, or oceanic envelop of
the globe, causes such centre to become eccentric from that
of the solid sphere, and thus accomplishes a physical con-
vulsion, and change of place of the oceans and continents,
with a primary devastating flood or deluge. I hold that the
equilibrium of the globe as poised in space, is so finely
adjusted (by Him “ who weighs the mountains in scales and
the hills in a balance ”), that its centre of gravity is suscep-
tible of change, by occurrence of the varied natural pheno-
mena previously denoted, including alterations in density
of sections of the material of the earth, arising from chemical
affinities of contained matter inducing combustion, gaseous
emanation, or combinations in new forms ; passage of fluids
—molten rock, water, &c.—from internal compartments to
others ; displacement—catastrophically by earthquake, or
placidly by the constant tide wave, continuously transferring
films—of oceanic volume, and its amassing in certain areas ;
as well as by the disproportionate accumulation of congealed
matter at either pole. In a rotatory spheroid, change of
centre of gravity is necessarily by mechanical law, change of
axis. But leverage of an extension of radius, by a weight
of material on its extremity, is in itself a force capable of
re-adjustment of the position of the sphere as regards Her
inclination or tilt. Hence ensues a movement altering
relative positions of any given points of defined longitude
on the earth’s contour with reference to their meridianal angles
of intersection of the plane of the ecliptic. Hence I submit
that precession of the equinoxes is the sequence, and- in no
way the cause of polar accumulations ; and hence that no
calculation of a period of revolution of the ecliptic can be
based upon hypotheses of that being a primary movement,
which is but a sequence of a force dependent on natural
laws, constantly operating, but with variable intensity.
The phenomena termed the precession of the equinoxes is.
stated by astronomy, to consist in a minute annual decrease
in the time occupied by the sun in reaching the several
points or meridians of longitude marking one complete
revolution, while there is an apparent increase of longitude
in the position of celestial orbs in relation to the extension
towards space of the polar axis. Astronomers account for
this by certain abstruse hypotheses, apparently supported by
mathematical demonstrations, though based on merely con-
jectural data of fanciful amounts of perturbing influences of
the sun, moon, or planets. These bodies while moving
through space in view of the earth, are assumed to be so-


affected by her (imaginery) girdle of redundant matter
around her equatorial waist, that they cannot permit her to
pursue the even tenor of her way, either rotatorily, or in her
orbit, without exercising their imaginarily attractive powers
thereupon. This purely fanciful idea may, however, be
driven into the shade, in view of the mechanical necessity
for causes of terrestrial origin affecting the earth’s equili-
brium, inducing change of its centre of gravity, not once in
ages as conjectured by M. Adhemar, but continuously.
Polar accumulation, when of vastly disproportionate amount
upon one segment of the Arctic circle, is one adequate cause,
aided, the effect maintained, and the amount definitely
registered in sight of science, by the continuous transfer of
the fluid envelope of the globe, resulting in relative eleva-
tion and depression of all coast lines with reference to
adjacent sea surfaces. Barometric observations of relative
altitudes of sea surfaces at prolonged intervals, by an
instrument of extreme nicety, having a gnomon of extended
radius, or being otherwise specially adapted for the purpose,
would test the accuracy of the data upon which I base my
theory as to the continuous increase of the changes hereto-
fore recorded. The initial points of longitude being repre-
sented by defined positions of observatories at European
capitals, the westerly deviation of the northern apex of the
polar axis has not yet been definitely traced, the astro-
nomically conjectured causes affecting precession of the
equinoxes being held to account for the annual change com-
puted in the obliquity of the angle of intersection of the
plane of the equator —which must ever be perpendicular to
the axis - with the plane of the earth’s orbit. It rests with
science in the southern hemisphere to follow up the solution
of this great problem. If the northern apex of the polar
axis deviate south-westerly, there must be variations in the
angle of intersection of the plane of the ecliptic (which I
submit is the phenomena of precession), and a deflection
north-easterly of the antarctic axial extremity, causing an
easterly change of position of southern longitudes with
reference to previously defined points on the earth’s surface.
That there are still difficulties to be got over by hypotheses
of action of natural phenomena as to the cause, and results
of continuance of the precession of the equinoxes, as popu-
larly explained by astronomy, may be inferred from the sub-
joined extract from a paper laid before the Royal Astro-
nomical Society, by Colonel Dray son, F.R.A. S., a few years
ago:—“For many years it has been accepted, without ques-
tion, that the pole of the ecliptic was the centre of the


circle traced in the heavens by the pole of the heavens.
Consequently, the actual course of the pole could be traced
out, and we could prophesy where the pole would be at any
date in the future, and could state where it was in the past.
Geometry, however, is a science which admits of no contra-
diction ; all must be in harmony, or else some part must be
in error. By a geometrical investigation of this problem, it
can be shown that, if the pole of the ecliptic were the
centre of the circle traced by the pole of the heavens, these
two poles must of necessity remain always at the same dis-
tance from each other. But it is a geometrical axiom that
the distance in degrees between these two poles is the
measure of the angle between the planes of the ecliptic
and the equinoctial. Consequently, if the angle between
these two planes is found to vary, it follows that
the pole of the ecliptic is not the centre of the
circle traced by the pole of the heavens. The recorded
observations of the past 1,600 years prove that there
is a gradual decrease in the angle between the planes referred
to, consequently, under such conditions, it is impossible that
the true centre of the circle can be the pole of the ecliptic.
. . . The proper motion of the fixed stars, and the
moon’s changeable rate, as indicated by eclipses, are problems
affected by this discovery, as are also various other important
facts. . . . The period when the pole traced its circle
does not seem to be at present known by astronomers. At
present, astronomers merely subtract a certain value from
year to year in order to obtain the value of the obliquity for
the future. Considering that we have had no real original
fact brought forward in geometrical astronomy during the
past 100 years, this problem is one which must attract the
attention of all astronomers.” Its exhaustive investigation
may pave the way for admission of the discovery I have sub-
mitted, superseding efforts to define specific annual results of
a cause of variable intensity. The longer continuance of
solar rays upon the arctic than upon the antarctic apex of
the earth’s contour, affords annually an extension of season
favourable to precipitation of snow beyond that afforded in
the antarctic, —snow storms being induced by a milder tem-
perature than that of intense congelation, hence a relatively
greater accumulation in arctic regions. Whether this cause
augments the effect or not, certain it is that the sea is
amassing in the North Pacific, and on West Greenland,
while receding,—its volume shallowing, upon the coasts
throughout the Southern Hemisphere, and upon the shores
of Europe, where the lands appear to be gradually elevat-


ing and removing inland from sea margins, except in a few
localities, where, from action of the tide-ripple, or the surface
waves, readily-breached formations are undermined, and the
sea advances on portions of the land; though actually
shallowing on the same coast, and the rock sea bottom rising
to view. This phenomenon is constantly presented to our
notice on Victorian coasts, but is referred, by shallow rea-
soned, and non-observers, to “silting up” of harbours,
&c., and an imaginary progressive growth or elevation of
the land. The test question to be answered is this. Be
the land rising, or the sea receding, and leaving the land,
where does the water go ? We may note a most remarkable
change of aspect on the shores of Port Phillip within the
last fifteen or twenty years. The sands are denuded from
the bed rocks at bottom at all points subject to shallow wave
action. The rocks disclosed have sharp, unwater-worn
points, and angles, when first bared, proving them to have
been long protected from littoral tide action by a coating of
sands. The sand is amassing itself in hummocks above the
reach of high water. This is no “silting up” of sea
bottom ; and again I ask those who glibly condemn new
ideas based on deep researches in Nature, and assert that
the “land is rising throughout Australasia, and that these
are common changes, and easily understood,”* Where does
the water, formerly of noted depths, but now greatly
shallowed, recede; to and how, and by what natural laws
does it maintain a spherical outline elsewhere on the globe's
exterior, if so “easily understood”? and not subject to gravi-
tation to an altering centre of gravity, maintained, and aided
also, as I submit, by this movement of oceanic volume,
Avhich researches in nature prove to be accumulating in the
North Pacific, while diminishing elsewhere throughout the
world. We may, however, feasibly conclude that the earth’s
centre of gravity is shifting northerly, and that ice accumu-
lation in Arctic regions is greatly disproportionate to that of
the Antarctic, which wastes by numerous bergs cast oft’
annually, which are more and more frequently met with in
comparatively low latitudes, and probably by their presence
within a few hundred miles of the Australian coast, give rise
to the cloud masses which unseasonably chill our summers,
and oftimes deluge us with their aqueous contents. The
central point of arctic cold is ascertained to be consider-
ably south-west of the astronomically assumed position of
the arctic pole, and if precipitation and congelation, without
* Professor McCoy.


waste, by offcast of bergs, largely predominate in the region
north of latitude 66° at Behring’s Straits, while to latitude
84° north of Spitzbergen, areas of clear sea are noted, and
the North Atlantic and North Sea abound in ice-bergs, the
central point of the ice continent, that is the actual centre
of the circle of frigidity, within Arctic polar regions, must be
south-westerly, as assumed scientifically on different data to
those I submit as the cause, from the assumed astronomical
position of the Pole.
In the present state of science the reasons inducing the
construction of those stupendous marvels of ancient times,
the Pyramids, are not perceived. The great Pyramid of
Ghizeh, built of solid blocks of stone into a dense mass, and
dovetailed into solid rock, is only accredited as the tomb of
some Egyptian monarch, at a date long subsequent to that
of Noah’s Deluge. I conceive it to have been erected for a
wholly different purpose, and prior to that catastrophe. In
the narrative of Piazzi Smith (Astronomer Royal for Scot-
land) of his exploration of the Great Pyramid, it is stated
that “in and upon the coffer there is not a shadow of
carving, painting, or writing, as there would have been upon
a sarcophagous, and there is no lid. From considerations of
its size, and proportions to the chamber and the Pyramid, it
cannot be other than the original vessel for which the chamber
was anciently built. . . . It has a distinct reference in
its size and cubic contents to the capacity and density of the
matter contained in the crust of the earth, and it is only by
physical science, rightly applied, that this ancient and
weighty message of old to the present day can be read.”
Since the construction of this Pyramid, some force other
than atmospheric action and rains has levelled beneath the
surface surrounding the edifice the vast piles of debris con-
sequent on the builders’ operations. “The excavated
material is not to be found. The building seems as if
dropped from heaven in a perfect state.” I have submitted
that this Pyramid is one of those built, according to Josephus,
by the descendants of Seth, son of Adam, to record their
discoveries in physical science, and that the purpose of the
solidly constructed Pyramid, and of its coffer, and accurately
proportioned markings of the chiselled stones of vast dimen-
sions forming the walls of the coffer chamber, was to investi-
gate and note the changes, in constancy of relative position,
of the polar axis, and deviations of the earth’s centre of
gravity, as indicated after long lapses of time, by an altera-
tion of the surface level of water, when placed in the coffer,
with reference to the finely adjusted horizontality of the


huge 30 feet long and 90 tons weight blocks of stone when
first placed in the walls of the chamber. And I submit that
records of the domestic life of ancient Egyptians, as also of
the prediluvian inhabitants of the American continent, and
their progress in other arts than revealed by sculptures, and
paintings on their edifices, is to be found by exhumation of
entombed relics, as done in the case of Herculaneum and
Pompeii, from beneath the loam covering, or diluvium
deposited by the Flood. The depth of necessary excavation
cannot be great, not probably beneath the level of the lower
part of the Sphinx. Already minor explorations have
revealed various relics, pottery, &c., at depths of from thirty
to sixty feet. But the upward pressure of water-springs
throughout the Yalley of the Nile renders the task there
difficult.
What would be the result to our present race of man in
his highest state of civilization, progress in arts and inven-
tions, if prophetic allusions to “the end being with a flood
and desolations,” which “they that escape shall flee from
to the mountains,” were to turn out to be literal truths,
and some sudden catastrophic influence caused loss of equi-
librium to our globe ? Natural law would impel her to
seek to regain it after the convulsing primary shock, and she
might “reel to and fro,” or slightly oscillate, sending her
ocean waters in vast tidal waves over continents. Still there
might be time to flee to the mountain tops, and a small
remnant of our race might be saved thereon, sheltering in
caves and rugged hollows.* Would they, in their hasty
flight, take up with them proofs of their progress in art, and
supplies of useful implements? No! it would be a rush for
dear life only.f For days, and perhaps weeks, these unfor-
tunates, like shipwrecked mariners, would wander over the
tops of the mountains, now become islands, foraging for
food. Carcases of drowned animals would be drifted ashore
by the swelling flood —some, borne from distant points of
the earth’s contour, are as unknown to them as animals
existing now on the Antarctic continent (with a race of man
perhaps thus saved, as in many people’s traditions) are
undreamed of by us —or, if ever heard of, as former denizens
of some spots from whencte their carcases have drifted, or
have been deposited, till disclosed by geology, are deemed
by palaeontological science as only of ancient type, and now
wholly extinct-still, want of other food renders their flesh
acceptable, and happy those who can make fires to cook such
* Revelations vi. 15. t Matthew' xxiv. 16-2 i.


food. Breaking the bones for the marrow, modelling frag-
ments of bone into needles to repair garments with sinews,
as our natives used to do ; making stone axes and spear
heads; and indulging in such recreations as carving bones, or
scratching the cavern walls with drawings of animals coming
to their recollection, would be employments resorted to by
the most cultivated of mankind, if thus bereft of all advan-
tages of civilization. And yet the science of our day ignores
occurrence of such floods as Noah’s, and asserts that the
“cave man” was necessarily a pre-Adamite, or pre-historic
resident on the earth, ages before the Word of God testifies
to his creation. Much of what is asserted by palaeontology
as to age of drifts, period of their depositation, antiquity of
organisms found therein, and the certainty as to their
species being extinct, and the connection between deposit of
such drifts and disintegration of gold-bearing formations, is
as utterly devoid of any sure basis of scientific truth. We
are as yet but on the threshold of scientific knowledge.
Pity it is when our teachers shut to the door of access to it
by asserting their own knowledge or assumptions, as all that
is necessary ; and imperatively demand that the student
adopt their hypotheses as scientific facts necessary to entitle
him to a diploma, or license, as a mining surveyor, &c. In
the Mosaic history of the flood, it is said to have abated
“ingoing and returning,” implying ebb and flow of tidal
waves. The oscillatory motion may have prevailed through-
out the whole phenomena of the deluge, and the points of
highest mountains have afforded safety to families of man,
the nuclei of subsequent nations. Other individuals—the
cave-men of the deluge—may have existed in safety for a
time, but as the flood rose higher and higher, their place of
refuge may have been submerged, and by subsequent
depositation of loam, when the troubled waters precipitated
the earthy matters held in mechanical solution, the entrances
to the caves may have been entombed, until disclosed now
to the investigations of the palaeontologist, and used by him
as a foundation for very erroneous reasonings ; in every
important point hurling defiance to the simple narrations
of fact vouchsafed to man in the Scriptures, penned by
inspiration from the Designer, and primeval Architect of
Nature in all her aspects.
Geologists maintain that the local discovery of accumu-
lated bones and teeth of mammoths and other extinct
animals prove that these formerly existed in extraordinary
abundance in Britain ; and yet the vastness of these accumu-
lations militates against such an hypothesis, and suggests


that deposit to have originated in the drift from a deluge.
Again it is affirmed that fossils and flint implements have
been found associated with the bones of an ancient type of
mammalia, including the cave hyena, the cave tiger, the
hippopotamus, and the elephant. But the occurrence of the
Noachian deluge, if regarded as brought about by a change
of the earth’s centre of gravity, when the oceans would yield
to the temporary oscillation produced, and suddenly overflow
lands with desolating force, would account for all noted
disintegration, drift, commingling, and ultimate deposit of
the fossiliferous debris of strata of ancient type, with relics of
the then existing creation. In Derbyshire, plates of smelted
copper and relics of art made of slate, stone, bone, bronze,
and pottery have been discovered, in caves. In caves in
Devonshire, the first floor consists of boulders, then black clay,
then stalagmite, or stony brecia, then cave earth, embedded
in which, to several feet in depth, are bones of now extinct
animals. Above these are found terrestrial and marine
shells. In other caves, marrow bones, broken by man, and
bearing marks of knives, lie with bones of beasts of prey.
Hitherto, although large sums have been, at various times,
expended in the cause of scientific discovery within Arctic
regions, exploration of the Antarctic shores has been
strangely neglected by science. There is every probability
that a race of man may exist there, whose traditions of their
origin, or salvation through an overwhelming deluge, might
confirm those of many other parts of the world. And, pro-
bably, relics of the last great overflow of the habitable parts
of the world, by waves in the direction denoted by deposits
of diluvium, or from north to south, may be readily avail-
able to search along the shores from which the icebergs break
off the enveloping ice at certain seasons. It was thus the
wondrous deposits of elephant tusks and mammoth bones—
the supply to the manufactories of the world during the last
century—were discovered amidst the regions of hyperborean
oblivion, as fresh, and in such good state of preservation as
if natural decay was unknown there. No relics of man,
however, are reported ; and this is negatively corroborative
of the Scriptural account of the period of man’s advent on
the earth. The Antarctic shores may teem with the debris
swept off the northern continents during Noah’s flood. The
disclosures of geology as to the strange association of beasts
of prey with refugees of mankind, temporarily seeking shelter
from the elements, in caves of the mountains, is but a
counterpart of the narration of unimpeachable travel-
lers on the South American prairies, as to the occa-


sional enforced fraternization during local inundations,
and prairie conflagrations, of wild animals, such as bears,
pumas, jaguars, &c., with deer and other ruminants,
and man, upon isolated spots of apparent safety. Beasts
of prey, driven from their dens by hunger, would
seek along the diminishing shores of their rugged fastnesses
for carcases of drowned animals, and the gnawed bones of
such as drifted within their reach would be left to transmit to
future ages collateral evidence to the truth of the wondrous
tale, recorded in Scripture, that at one period since the
advent of man upon the earth, the waters rose to the tops of
the mountains. Icebergs are stated to have been met with
interstratified with soil containing mammoth and other
bones. The stranding of a whale ship upon such a berg is
not an impossible contingency, for facts are on record of
abandoned ice-bound ships, loosed by the annual break-up
of the ice floes, being drifted off amongst ice attached to a
floating berg. Carried into lower latitudes by the polar
currents conveying streams of dense and gelid water to
replace the waste caused by the vast evaporation from sea
surfaces in the tropics, the berg might ground upon any
coast line, and gradually melt and disappear, leaving local
evidences, similar to those now relied on by geologists, of
association of man’s remains, or relics of his handicraft, with
bones of ruminants and other animals long deemed extinct
upon such shores, to prove the vast antiquity of man beyond
the period assigned by Holy Scripture. What wonder is it
to find traces alleged to conflict with Scriptural truth on such
subjects —of results of successive landslips, undermined from
lands exposed to the raging waves and overwhelming torrents
of a displaced ocean; causing the disintegration of sedimentary
strata; or, excavation of vast ravines, gorges, and valleys; with
any deposit therein of the heterogeneous contents of the then
chaotic confusion of materials, riven from the solid crust of
the earth 1 What wonder is it when forests of fir, beach,
and oak are disclosed as successively deposited in substrata
of a country not now producing such varieties of timber ?
What wonder is it to find beneath such layers of drift, that
—as with gold drifts —substances of great specific gravity,
such as flint implements, have sunk to the lowest stratum of
the mechanically-commingled earthy debris of the “ mud of
great waters ” ? is not the agency of irrupted oceans seeking
to re-arrange their volume in conformity with the law of
gravitation, and oscillating in vast tidal waves over the face
of the earth, adequate to accomplish, by the one catastrophe
of Noah’s Flood, much that geologists represent as the work


of nature during countless ages, under the uniform action of
minor agencies 1
For the accuracy of the views now submitted we have the
analogies presented in the Sacred prophecies, the records of
previsions accorded to the inspired writers by the Great
Author of Nature, as to events in the future of our earth’s
destinies, when “the end shall be with a flood and deso-
lation,” “ and there shall be rivers and streams of water on
the top of every high mountain, and every high hill,” which
“ they that escape shall be upon the mountains,” fleeing to
the dens and the tops of the rugged rocks, when “ the earth
shall reel to and fro like a drunkard,” and shall be “ over-
turned,” or “ turned upside down,” and the stars appear to
fall from heaven, all being the changes symptomatic of the
earth’s loss of equilibrium, and change of position, as inclined
upon the plane of her orbit; and the disruption of her
oceanic envelope, as to its previous barriers, or land-locked
limits. As to discoveries of ancient beaches, with accumu-
lated banks of remains of shell fish, interspersed with human
relics, in various maritime countries of Europe, is it any
wonder that the oceanic envelope, if formerly concentrated
to a different centre of gravity, should have stood higher on
some coast lines, or lower on others, than now 1 How other-
wise could it obey the imperative natural law of terrestrial
gravitation 1 And as regards the kind of natural classifi-
cation of drifted materials shown in the heaping up of the
lighter portions of shells, bones, &c., of the “ kitchen
middens ” of the Danish coasts, what is it but analogous to
what we observe on our own coasts, where action of the surf
or waves sometimes separate the shingle, shells, yellow sand,
black sand, sea foam, sea weeds, and bulkier particles of
drift, from combination with each other, and deposits each,
even to each kind of shell sometimes, in distinct banks or
layers. The laws regulating such separation, drift, and
aggregated deposit of varied materials, of little relative
difference as to specific gravity, may not be clear to us, and
are probably those relating to shore currents, which, on the
larger scale of the incoming rush of the waves of a deluge,
would classify and accumulate the triturated debris, washed
from many lands, on coast lines, as now on the lesser scale
above noted. There is much that is as yet unintelligible to
us, even as to the movements of the rippling wavelets, as
they gently lap the sandy beach on the calmest day. How
comes it that in some cases the marginal sands are eroded
even up to the cliffs, and elsewhere accumulated 1 Some
areas of sand are washed smooth and flat, others are indented


with ripple marks, while others again are raised in little
mounds, with intervening hollows 1 Whence arise these
changes in arrangement of what is to all appearance the
same material, under the apparently uniform action of the
gentle ripple of the advancing tide of a placid sea 1
“ Most of the sea-port towns of Great Britain and Ireland
are built on a flat terrace of unequal breadth, which runs
around the shores, backed by an escarpment of varied height
and character, which is known to geologists as the old-coast
line. No geologist can or does doubt that this escarpment
was at one time the coast-line of the island—the line against
which the waves broke at high water in some distant age,
when either the sea stood from twenty to thirty feet higher
along our shores than it does now, or the land sat from
twenty to thirty feet lower.” . . . “Shells, not now
British, are found in many parts of Britain at heights vary-
ing from 200 to 1,400 feet over the existing sea level.” .
“ The table lands of the country were submerged in a sub-
arctic sea, and Great Britain existed as but a scattered archi-
pelago of wintry islands. ” *
“ Nearly the whole of England would be under water,
with, however, a few islands representing the higher peaks
of Cornwall; others scattered over the site of the West
Riding of Yorkshire ; and a hilly tract of land over what is
now Wales. A thick set archipelago would represent the
Cheviot Hills, and the country south of the Forth and
Clyde ; north of which would intervene a broad strait, with
a comparatively large area of undulating land beyond,
stretching across what is now the area of the Grampian Hills,
in Scotland. ”t
In Dr. Lardner’s “ Popular Geology ” there are diagrams
of the supposed relative positions of land and water upon the
continent of Europe and the British Isles during successive
geological epochs, taken chiefly from the maps of M. Elie de
Beaumont and M. D’Orbigny. The epochal variations are
too numerous to be quoted. The evidence furnished by the
sedimentary formations upon which the charts are based
demonstrate that “the geological convulsions which took
place between period and period, completely deranged the
successively pre-existing outlines of land and water. One
fact in the illustration may be noted, viz., that entire
mountains in the Pyrenean chain are almost wholly com-
posed of the fossiliferous remains of a minute conchiferous
* “ Testimony of the Rocks.”
t “ Gleanings from the Note-Book of a Field Geologist,” by A.
Geikie, Esq.


animal, designated nummulites planulata, whose habitat,
during existence, must have been remote from the coast, at
the bottom of a deep sea. It is a striking fact, also, that it
was of like materials that the pyramids of Egypt were built. ”
Fossils found in sedimentary formations in England, prove
that at one epoch of cataclysmal revolution, elephants,
rhinoceroses, and other monstrous land animals were depo-
sited amid pine forests, over which, when at a subsequent
epoch submerged, an accumulation of the carcases of whales,
nar-whals, and sea-horses, swept by oceanic overflow, were
arrested, and fossilized, amidst the new sediment of another
convulsion of nature, resulting in addition of their remains,
entombed in an earthy deposit, to the continuously aug-
menting strata. “ Belemnites, fossils of the oolite, have
been dug out of the sides of the Himalaya mountains 17,000
feet over the level of the sea.” “It is clear that all rocks
which were formed at the bottom of the sea, and which are
now dry land, must have gained their present situation either
by the sinking of the sea level, or by the uplifting of the sea
bottom. We find aqueous rocks on the summits of some of
our highest mountains ; and if these had been laid dry solely
by the sinking of the sea, it is difficult to understand what
can have become of a shell of water ten or twenty thousand
feet deep enveloping the whole globe,” unless, by change in
the earth’s centre of gravity, this was elsewhere equably
disposed around the new centre. Sir C. Lyell remarks,
“ Geology demonstrates that the persistency of subterranean
movements in one direction has not been perpetual through-
out all past time. There have been great oscillations of
level, by which a surface of dry land has been submerged to
a depth of several thousand feet, and then, at a period long
subsequent, raised again, and made to emerge. ” Why must
we longer ransack Nature in search of powers of igneous
elevations, co-extensive with a hemisphere, when the hypo-
thesis of change of centre of gravity furnishes a solution to
the problem! Why! Because, as La Place remarked, “The
simplest truths are usually those which are the last to force
themselves upon us.” “It is,” observes Sir C. Lyell, “by
assuming such reiterated variations of level, each separately
of small vertical amount, but multiplied by time, till they
acquire importance in tbe aggregate, that we are able to
explain the phenomena of denudation. By such movements,,
every portion of the surface of the land becomes in its turn
a line of coast, and is exposed to the action of the waves and
tides.” By what agency of elevation, can we conceive the
upward motion, if applied beneath the land, so equable and


gradual 1 ’Tis passing strange that philosophy should so
persistently regard the unstable element, which must indicate
upon its superficial contour any change of the equilibrium
maintaining a given centre of gravity, as “ a fixed hydrostatic
level,” by which to measure the supposed elevations or de-
pressions of the solid land. If the case were reversed in this
age, and Newton’s theory of solar attraction, acting unequally
upon an otherwise unaccounted for, and but —imagined equa-
torial bulge, held to corroborate a notion hazarded that the
globe was, and is, a ball of liquid fire, upon which our earth is
but the hardened crust, —how incredulous would philosophy
display itself !
The North British Review, No. Ixix., page 77, states that
“in a raised beach at Leith, fragments of Roman pottery,
along with bones apparently of deer, and littoral (sea-
margin) shells have been discovered at a height of twenty-
five feet above the sea,” and suggests that “so great a
change within so recent a period tempts us to pause before
we give assent to the enormous intervals of time which
some geologists demand for the accomplishment of other
changes that have elapsed since the advent of man.”
“ The discovery of the Mastodon Giganteus in Orange
County, State of New York, now in Dr. Warren’s museum,
in Boston, with five or six bushels of pine and maple twigs
in excellent preservation in the cavity of its abdomen, and
with the vegetable fibre still undecayed in the hollows of its
teeth, settled the question of the remote antiquity of that
mastodon’s last meal. . . . The tradition of the Indians
is explained, who report that their fathers had seen in the
forests large deer, never lying down, but leaning against a
tree while they slept —tree-eaters with a hand (trunk) on
their faces. ”
In the Book of Enoch, rescued from oblivion by Bruce,
the traveller, in Abyssinia, there is evinced on the part of
its author acquaintance with astronomical phenomena. Its
authenticity has been denied on the ground that it has
apparently been composed by two individuals, one of whom
must have resided south-west of the Erythrean Sea, that is,
of the Persian Gulf, Red Sea, and that part of the ocean
which washes the shores of Arabia; therefore the place
delineated by him must have been south of the Abyssinian
mountains, and in or about north latitude 9° and longitude
36°. He describes the longest days as containing twelve
parts out of—eighteen, the whole number into which the day
was then divided. Now twelve are to eighteen, as sixteen
to twenty-four hours in our mode of computation. Ergo,


the theologian reviewers of the Book of Enoch hold that
the book could not have been written in latitude 9°, but
that one of its authors must have resided farther north, a
distance of not less than 36° of latitude, or in 45° to 49°
north latitude, where the longest days are from fifteen and a
quarter to sixteen hours.* But if a point south of the
Pyramids, now in north latitude 9°, was, when the Book of
Enoch was written (accepting its authenticity as the work of
Enoch), prior to the Noachian Flood, in north latitude 45°,
the position of the Pyramids then must have been in or
about the latitude of Archangel, a position of great astro-
nomical importance as a site for observations of the increas-
ing tilt of the globe on the plane of the ecliptic, and com-
putations of the period when its progressing change must
necessitate a physical catastrophe, as the result of an
inevitable loss of equilibrium and overturn. The climate also
of 66° north woidd be one conducive to energy in labour far
in excess of that of semi-tropical Egypt of the present time.
But the disclosures of geology lead to the belief that prior
to the Noachian flood, Great Britain was in a climate of
glacial severity, while our southern coast of Australia was in
one of tropical characteristics, which would be the relative co-
incidences of change of the latitude of the Pyramids from lat.
30° N. to lat. 66° N. ; and that such changes have recurred in
the past antiquity of our earth is amply unfolded by geology.
Sir R. I. Murchison remarked that “the commence-
ment of the first glacial period in the history of the Alps
was synchronous with an enormous dislocation and up-
heaval of that chain, and coincident with a vast change
in the level of materials constituting the then existing lands,
and their debris, which had previously lain beneath the
waters. . . . Such dislocation was of the same date as
that which submerged a pre-existing northern continent, and
brought it under the influence of a glacial sea.” Cuvier
observed that, “if there be anything settled in geology,
it is this—That the surface of our globe has been sub-
jected to a great and sudden revolution, the date of
which cannot be carried much farther back than five or six
thousand years; that that revolution broke down and made
to disappear the countries which had been before inhabited
by men, and the species of animals with which we are now
best acquainted; that, on the other hand, it laid dry the
bottom of the immediately preceding sea, and formed
* “ Enoch Restitutus.” By Rev. Edwd. Murray. London, 1836.
See page 66 and ante on the comparison of the chronology of Enoch
with the Hebrew computations.


the countries which are now inhabited. . . . But the
countries now inhabited, which had been laid dry by that
last revolution, had been inhabited before, if not by man,
yet at least by land animals. It follows that preceding
revolutions—one at least—had buried these regions beneath
the water.” May not all the phenomena disclosed by
Geology—in denudation of surface ; alternate depression
and elevation of vast areas ; depositation of layer after layer
of sedimentary strata ; erosion of the great valleys ; in fact,
formation of our mountains, as the macerated bones of
primeval plateaux, disrupted, torn down, and excavated by
aqueous action, with all noted climatal revolutions, including
glacial epochs,—be referable to, and, on sound principles of
natural philosophy, only lucidly explained by the simple
though heretofore overlooked material first cause—change of
the earth’s centre of gravity ? The earth being spherical,
having an unstable fluid envelope, resting within the
hollows and irregular surfaces of the external crust, which
is apparently “standing in the water, and out of the water,”
is subject, as to the extent and relative position of its areas
of land surfaces, to the interchanges of position and re-
arrangements of volume of its oceanic envelope, tending to
apparent elevation or depression of land with reference to
ocean level, which must result inevitably from operation of
the imperative natural law of gravitation of the fluid enve-
lope, so as that its exterior shall present a surface, horizontal
at each point of radius vertical to the earth’s centre of
gravity, and thus only maintains an equilibrium ; —continuous
change of centre calling into action the diurnal tide wave.
It has been frequently asserted by those delighting to turn
the edge of reasoning aside by flippant jestings, that I hold
and assert the idea of such an extended polar apex as to
constitute a pear or lemon-shaped earth, by polar ice accu-
mulation. But such extension of apex is an unnecessary
fiction. Any extension of the polar radius by ice would
necessarily affect the equilibrium of the sphere, though of
small bulk compared with the equatorial bulge assumed by the
astronomer, as causing the earth’s tilt by stellar attraction.
Altitude of ice continents, and of sea surfaces, are ascertain-
able by the barometer, and it would be a most interesting
subject for scientific investigation, if, by competent observers,
and finely graduated instruments, the relative rise and de-
pression of oceanic surfaces, at rest, all over the world, could
be contemporaneously recorded, at successive periods, after
lapse of stated numbers of years. ‘ ‘ The assumption that the
earth is an oblate spheroid, or orange-shaped, was suggested


by the consideration of its diurnal motion, which is supposed
to generate a centrifugal tendency, and thus originate the
abnormal figure. And yet, with reference to this view, the
physics of the earth show that this centrifugal tendency does
not exist at its equator now, for the equatorial oceanic cur-
rents, and cloud ring, are passing continuously from east to
west, or receding upon the axial motion; whereas they should
be advancing upon it, or passing from west to east were
centrifugal action in operation. It is held to be fully esta-
blished by the satisfactory way in which it accounts for pre-
cession, nutation, and recession, the very phenomena it is
required to explain. ”* In fact, it “is a necessary assumption
with modern science, for without a protuberant equatorial
ring, the moon, planets, and sun would have no displaced
matter through which to exercise perturbing force ; and
therefore precession, nutation, and recession would be un-
accounted for. Hence, if the earth is not an oblate spheroid,
modern science has failed to explain the cause of these phe-
nomena, ”t or of the oceanic tides. The hypothesis of occa-
sional change of the earth’s axis, has been brought forward
very frequently of late years by some of the first authorities
in science. Amongst these may be mentioned Professor
Haughton, of the Dublin University, Sir Henry James, and
Mr. John Evans, Fellows of the Geological Society. Alleged
astronomical difficulties, which may not bear a sifting analysis,
have heretofore too readily quelled a thorough scrutiny of
the question. Sir Thos. Airy, the Astronomer-Royal, in his
report to the Board of Visitors for 1861, regarded such a con-
tingency as not impossible, however, stating “ The Transit
circle and Collimators still present those appearances of
agreement between themselves, and of change with respect
to the stars, which seem explicable only on one of two sup-
positions, that the ground itself shifts with respect to the
general earth, or that the axis of rotation changes . ”
Sir J. F. Herschel asserts, as proof of the astronomical
assumptions that the polar axis is a fixture, and that the solid
earth participates with the fixed axis in the motion of rota-
tion, as if the axis “ were really a bar of iron driven through
it,” “ That the latitude of places on the earth, or their situa-
tion, with respect to the poles, have undergone no change
since the earliest ages. 2nd, that the sea maintains its
level, which could not be the case if the motion of the axis
were not accompanied with a motion of the whole mass of
* Dr. Pratt. “Astronomical Investigations.” London, 1865.
t Ibid.


the earth ; local changes of the sea level, arising from purely
geological causes, being easily distinguished from that general
and systematic alteration which a shifting of the axis of
rotation would give rise to. ” But our investigations demon-
strate the untenable character of these assumptions ; for,
Ist, Herschel elsewhere indirectly admits that existing
calculations of latitude may be proved erroneous, that a
“ more exact knowledge of the physical structure and figure
of the earth will render a different manner of considering it
necessary. ” And, 2nd, The level of the sea, or the position
of its surface at quiescence with reference to elevation of
lands “standing in the water and out of the water,” we
demonstrate by the phenomena disclosed by Geology, to be
subject to just such alterations as change of the centre of
gravity of the globe itself, and consequent ‘ ‘ shifting of the
axis of rotation, would give rise to.” Observations in
astronomy appear to indicate that, while the magnetic pole may
continue to point to, or retain the same direction with
reference to the celestial sphere, there is an inherent motion
pertaining to the earth itself, as mere inert matter controlled
by the law of nature, —termed terrestrial gravitation, and
hence that its retention of its position of inclination upon
the plane of its orbit, or its aspect relatively to the
sun’s path, depends on the continuance of its component
matter throughout its whole structure in a state of absolute
and perfect equilibrium. If, however, changes recur from
time to time, either of external symmetry, or in the density
of large portions of its volume internally, or by unequal
prolongation of a section of its contour by deposit thereon of
dense material, the over-weighted apex of a finely poised
sphere must over-balance it, when it must proceed to
re-adjust itself in equilibria, assuming, as to its equator, a
new angle of lean, or tilt, towards the plane of its previous
position. Thus celestial points, such as the Pole Star, and
other constellations, will consecutively appear to relatively
increase or decrease in longitude as computed heretofore,
and tropical time will vary accordingly. Astronomers
recognize these changes under one grand chain of phenomena
termed the Precession of the Equinoxes, whereby the
equinoctial intersects the ecliptic with a progressively varying
angle, yielding a result of a continuous change of time of the
sun’s apparent altitude. Such time lessening, or, rather
hastening, in the northern hemisphere, but being protracted
or retarded in the southern hemisphere, relatively, though
not affecting the actual or sidereal time, so that when the
phenomena of the Precession of the Equinoxes shall be read


aright, and freed from the erroneous assumptions now
current as to their cause and immediate and ultimate results,
it will he seen to give such changes of the periods of high
noon in both hemispheres, as must necessitate new computa-
tions for the guidance of mariners to ascertain latitudes, and
afterwards the longitudes of their positions at sea. Presently,
longitudes are computed by chronometer time from definite
initial points, the sites of European Observatories. At first
sight, it appears easy to define meridians of longitude east or
west of these sites, calculating 15 degrees for each hour of
the difference of the local time of high noon with that of the
initial point selected. But if the action of the phenomena of
the Precession of the Equinoxes,—that is the operation of
terrestrial causes, in tilting the Earth upon the plane of the
Ecliptic, and thus constantly altering the relative position of
points upon the Earth’s surface with reference to the Sun—
is to hasten the time of high noon in the northern hemi-
sphere and retard it in the south, by ever so small an annual
fraction of time, the result is a progressing variation in
position of latitudes and longitudes, as previously defined,
so that as there will be a continuously minute retardation of
the time of high noon in the Southern hemisphere, there
must be an apparent corresponding diminution of longitude.*
Hence, the eastern boundary of the province of South Aus-
tralia will be found at each adjustment of it (if continued as
the 141st degree of East longitude) to overlap in an increasing
amount its previously defined limits, and extend into Victoria.
The writer submitted this view of the question several years
ago, and now the re-adjustment of the boundary being called
for, the actual facts corroborate the accuracy of his prognos-
tications, and demonstrate necessity for a fixed line of
demarcation. At same time, no question can vie in impor-
tance with one so absolutely bound up with precautionary
measures for ensuring the safety of mariners throughout the
world ; and no time or expense should be spared in its
thorough investigation, and in the computation and publica-
tion of data, whereby apparent variations in position of pre-
viously defined points in latitudes and longitudes, such as
islands, reefs, shoals, &c., may be ascertained by the mariner,
and the causes of apparent discrepancy of observations taken
now, as compared with previous ones, duly accounted for.
The use in the present day by Science of the coffer in the
Great Pyramid for the purpose I submit as its original design,
and renewals of the experiment at successive periods of years,
* That is, the defined site on the 141° east longitude, will in after
•observations be in longitude 140° so many minutes.


and comparison of the levels of the striae of Scottish valleys,
with the local surface level of standing water, investigated with
most scrupulous regard to accuracy, might furnish data for the
geometrician to frame computations of the subverting energies
still at work, by natural law, to disturb the earth’s equili-
rium, and accomplish an aqueous catastrophe, similar to the
only one traditionally known to our race, but of the recur-
rence of which, at many successive periods of the earth’s
antiquity, some geologists have largely treated, and submitted
many proofs.
CHAPTER 111.
Contents. -Existing aspect of geological or theoretical surmises to mining
On the formation of Coal, place of its deposit, and suggested mode
of search for it—Variance of Victorian geologists’ ideas as to occur-
rence of gold, with results of Californian and Victorian experience—
Encouragement to mining on physical principles—Description of an
economical boring apparatus—Concluding remarks.
Belief, when accorded, as to existence of a cause of loss of
our sphere’s equilibrium, and hence overflow of her oceans,
is practically tantamount to admission of certain necessary
sequences of effect upon the crust of the earth ; and these are
amply evidenced, though ascribed by some geologists as
emanating from simple causes, acting uniformly thoughout
an infinity of time with no such catastrophe intervening as
the Noachian Flood. Hence its action in denudation, disin-
tegration, or disruption into masses, and deposit in new
strata, of the primary rocks, is not duly explained to the
miner, who might materially profit in his enterprises by
intelligent reasoning on such premises. He often suffers
loss by abandonment of mining claims, because Geology
affirms certain varieties of rock to be the bed, beneath
which it is vain to search for gold, not seeing that aqueous
disruption may have torn away sections of former hills,
and precipitated huge masses of stratifications into the
positions presented as beds to the miner, and thus the most
ancient strata may be locally subverted, and may be superin-
cumbent upon recently deposited payable gold drifts. Again,
the position of quartz lodes may be affected by denudation
of supporting walls, and the disintegration, and deposit of their
particles, or of large masses, apart from their position in situ.
Here, in this ancient valley, the miner carries expensive
shafts, and drives, almost at random, in search of the aurife-
rous gutters. There, on yonder range, he has “worked
out ” what he deems a flat reef, but which is a portion of the
lode in situ, broken off, and precipitated downwards, in some
land slip, from excavation, and denudation by torrents,


oceanic, or other, in a former period of our globe’s history.
The local characteristics of a landslip, when recent, may
have been long obliterated, by the levelling action of water-
flow ; and sedimentary deposits may have hidden the aspects
of processes we are left to discover by the operations of the
intelligent miner. In such cases the reef in situ should be
sought for, on physical reasoning on the conjectured position
in the hill, or valley side, adjacent, from which the mass has
fallen. Our alluvial miners, again, are often perplexed by
theories of lava flow, reef washes, &c. Hence, good and
extensive alluvial claims, largely productive for a time, are
too often abandoned. Boring to moderate depths by im-
proved machinery is by no means so costly as of itself to
induce capitalists either to work their mines expensively, by
shafts and drives, while only prospecting, or to abandon
them. But though our most valuable nuggets, and much
good gold has been got very near the surface, the geologist
assures the miner that he must sink through some four
series of basaltic layers before he can reasonably hope to
reach truly payable wash. In Mexico and California the
very richest drifts have been traced from pits sunk on the
outflow of almost surface drifts, and several successive layers
of payable wash are regularly worked in very many mining
claims. By amalgamation of adjacent claim-holding companies
on the Ballarat gold field, similar discoveries of successive
layers of auriferous, and amply payable drifts, throughout
all, or most of the areas now deemed worked out, might be
made by boring, which should supersede the groping in the
dark, with hap-hazard aims, at expense destructive to the
enterprise in very many cases, as the shareholders soon
withdraw confidence, and withhold necessary calls.
Coal is also too often prospected for on false principles of
mining by shafts or bores, at haphazard, in what is deemed
“likely looking ground” for yielding carbonaceous strata.
But if catastrophic aqueous action at successive epochs be
admitted, as also the origin of coal, as being from drift into
amphitheatre-like hollows of sea bottom, of sea-meadow
foliage (and the marine palm-like trees of the southern
ocean, adjacent to Terra del Fuego, some of which are stated
to otow 1,500 feet in length, with soft woody stems and
leaves, are similar to the foliage of palms in the tropics),
which I suggest as the origin of coal formation, we must
examine the dip of the more ancient stratifications, and bore
towards the former beds of depressions in the earth’s crust.
A late article on “ Marine Flora ” in Chambers's Journal states
that “a curious fact is found in the intimate relation which


exists between the dimensions of the seaweed and the large-
ness of the seas which they inhabit, thus In the Mediter-
ranean the smaller kinds are found ; in the Atlantic Ocean,
larger ; in the Arctic Ocean, the long-leaved laminaries ; and
in the Antarctic, the vastest body of water in the world, are
seaweeds which have been compared to marine trees, such as
the gigantic Durvillea. Among the most remarkable forms of
the marine flora, sailors have noticed some, the importance of
which is out of all proportion with what is seen in other
seas. These banks of fucae spread over the surface of the
water like meadows, on the green sward of which the foot
might seem safely to tread, so thick and solidly bound
together are they. Every sailor knows the one which is
situated between the Azores, the Canary Islands, and the
Cape de Verd. . . . Another mass, nearly as consider-
able -that is, about six times the size of France—extends
itself in the Pacific Ocean, not far from the California coast.
The seaweeds come from all parts, torn from the shores of
many lands, and carried by marine currents, or the action of
the waves, they form enormous vegetable banks, which float
on the surface of the waters. ” Search should be made by
boring only in natural amphitheatres, or localities defined by
the geologist as having apparently possessed those charac-
teristics, before being denuded of the surrounding eminences,
and filled with sedimentary deposits after each period of
oceanic submergence. Rock-salt might, probably, be also
found by boring in localities of similar features, possessing
surface brine springs or salt lakes.
In the Argus summary for England of date October 7th,
1874, it is stated, that “Of the large deep lead alluvial
mines of Ballarat, most of them appear to be now worked
out. ” I differ from this idea in toto, and believe that more
gold will be found yet in many of those claims—Ay boring,
as a preliminary mode of search for the ancient gutters,
previous to the sinking of shafts, and making the drives,
necessary to bring the treasure to the surface,—than has yet
been found in even the richest leads below the fourth rock ;
and leads or gutters will yet be found at levels approxi-
mating to the shallow depth from the surface, of the old
Golden Point lead, as worked in 1851, at the depth of only
18 to 25 feet. If prospecting be now initiated upon physical
principles, our early mining glories will soon (I firmly
believe) be far eclipsed by the result attained. As the
Argus summary has it, “for many years past there have
been no discoveries of any such large leads as formerly gave
employment within a week or two of their discovery to


thousands of miners, at once enriching many of those who
bottomed on the gold, and forming the nuclei of mining
townships.” Yet we hcive held & Department of IVlineSj cind
a so-called Progressive Mining and Geological Survey of
Victoria! A learned geologist as Secretary of Mines ! ! and
£IO,OOO, voted for prospecting, lying inert for many months
of a’seriously depressing crisis in mining ! ! !
Geology, however, when its theories are based on a tissue
of hypothetical surmises, discarding the physical agencies
ever at work in re-modelhng the external aspect of the
earth’s crust, is often painfully at fault as regards its assumed
disclosures ; or, rather, these are too often misinterpreted by
those professing to be thoroughly versed in the science.
Hence mining enterprise is sadly discouraged. The working
miner has not capital to enter upon claims, requiring, accord-
ing to geological theories, very deep workings to reach the
o-olden drift ; and the capitalist withholds aid, usually, until
prospecting has given a clue to the position of a payable
wash. With the discouragement to mining for alluvial gold,
there has resulted a diminution in the number of experienced
miners at work. Let but a reaction take place, by discovery
by boring, that gold leads of payable quality are attainable
by mining industry in nearly every one of our great valleys,
and can be payably worked (and re-worked) at several succes-
sive levels, and an immense stimulus to increase of population
must ensue. The writer, in his work on £ c Auriferous Drifts,
published in 1868, now out of print, combated the assertion
of the then Victorian Geological Surveyor, Mr. Selwyn as to
the improbability of discoveries of gold drifts in Gipps Land.
Mr. Selwyn had published a letter dissuasive of search in
that district south of <£ the Moe to Hayfield ; thence to Ben
Cruachan and Mount Wellington ; and thence south-easter y
to Lindenow and the coast ; ” alleging that it was high] j
improbable, if not indeed impossible , that rich leads would be
found inside, or south of the line indicated. • • • Under
the country referred to, the gold rocks are buried far beyond
the reach of the prospector’s pick or boring rods. The
author’s prognostications, however, proved to be correct as
to a great probability of auriferous drifts being found within
this proscribed area, considering that the rivers had for ages
brought down debris from the mountains; and he is convinced
that startling discoveries will yet be made of richly payable
drifts or beds of wash-dirt, at depths beneath the Gipps
Land plains, much more shallow than as yet sought for or
discovered. He is also convinced, from the numerous evi-
dences afforded by disclosures of water-worn quartz, and varied


wash-dirt yielding gold, in the valley of the Yarra, at many
parts of its course, and from the enormous deposits on the
shores of the Bay of Port Phillip of black sand, an indication
of a vast amount of rock-disintegration, that an enterprising
me i r A °P ol JL tan gold-mining company, mining between the City
and the Domain, would meet with such satisfactory results
as would encourage mining in ancient channels in every
promising river of the Australasian colonies, having a per-
manently defined bed, or course between escarpments of
rock, ihe author has, in former years, had it in view to
apply for a lease of that ground, but the illiberally of the
Victorian Government to him, as the first publisher of the
early discovery of gold in Victoria, at date of June 7th
1801, and the manner in which his claim for this and a later-
discovery of a gold-field, the nucleus of the settlement of a
large population in the Gipps Land ranges, has been evaded
by the permanent head of the Department of Mines has
deterred him from personal action ; though, as having been
an early and enterprising Victorian colonist, in establishment
of new industries, he would willingly devote (as he hereby
does) a part of his leisure to promote the prosperity of his
adopted land. J
Professor Silliman, of the United States, has visited and
described many of the Californian gold deposits. He
remarks—“ We find it impossible to admit the existing river
system as a cause adequate to the spreading of such vast
masses of rounded materials ; the facts plainly point to a
much greater volume of water than any now flowing in the
valleys.” Professor Hitchcock, in his “ Geology of Massa-
chusetts” observes, that “ all the diluvium which had been
previously accumulated by various agencies, has been modi-
fied by a powerful deluge sweeping from the north and
north-west, over every part of the State, not excepting its
highest mountains.” Similar evidences of action of a
tumultuous flow of water are traceable throughout Australasia
and in our Victorian mining enterprises, the fact should be
admitted, and operations conducted, as in view of such fact.
Masses of formations of concreted water-worn gravels
upwards of 1,000 feet thick, upon a granite bed, are worked
by mining enterprise in California. Gold is said to be
obtainable throughout the entire mass, but in greatest
quantity near the bed rock. The ancient river channels are
clearly marked by a line of rock on either side, containing a
blue cemented gravel, requiring crushing, but very rich.
“ Bangor is on an old channel, the bed of which is about 60
feet below the level of the lowest ravines in the neighbour-


hood. This channel was discovered in 1857, by some miners,
who, while running a cut in a ravine, found the bed rock
dipping down, and after following it as far as they could
in the cut, they went off some feet, and sunk a shaft,
which in 66 feet struck a rich stratum, which paid 100
dollars a day per man. The existence of a channel being
proved, the outcroppings of the vein rocks at the ravines,
and on the hill sides, showed its course, and it was claimed
for miles.” . . . “In the spring of 1861 three French-
men found an extremely rich old channel high up on the side
of French Hill, north-east of the town of Mokelumne Hill,
and in a few days they took out 180,000 dollars worth of
gold ; one piece weighing eleven pounds.” . . . “ The old
channel at Springfield was discovered in 1852 in a shaft (only)
eight feet deep, on a flat from which the basalt had been
washed away.”* In view of such discoveries in California,
and a similarity of structure of our hills, and ravines here,
capped with lava or basalt, and containing substrata of alter-
nate series of quartz gravels, sand, and pipeclay, I have
repeatedly urged search for gold in drifts in the sides and
bed of the Bacchus Marsh valley, as also the valley of the
Moorabool, and others. But the head of the department of
Mines replies, that as yet certain fossils are unknown in
the vicinity, and until these are discovered, it would be
premature to anticipate payable gold ! In the doubt thus
promulgated, mining energies evaporate. The worker cannot
afford to prospect unadvisedly, the capitalist disowns such
enterprises, and mining languishes. Even with the great
aid proposed of a large parliamentary subsidy, the experience
of results from official prospecting is far from encouraging.
But if attention be now devoted to questions as to the
physical agencies resulting in modifications of the structure
of the earth’s crust, and deposit of the weightier particles
of matter in the furrowed channels of ancient valleys, and
retention there under subsequently deposited agglomera-
tions of earths,—the precipitated sediment from a super-
incumbent ocean, until re-excavated by renewed aqueous
action, and here and there deposited in other channels, the
oeneral course of which (when not diverted by obstructing
escarpments of rock), being of an approximately north
and south trend—it must be admitted that Victoria pre-
sents an almost unlimited scope for mining energies, and
enterprise, with largely payable results in prospect. Mining
enterprise has disclosed the fact of there having apparently
* “Resources of the Pacific Slope.”


been a succession of surfaces, each displaying a layer of
mould, or surface soil, apparently the last slowly deposited
sediment from a volume of superincumbent water, hold-
ing earthy matters in suspension. Each successive surface
must have had its own channels of river flow. Thus leads may
be discoverable at each level of these successive surfaces,
though widely separated as to their position and trend in an
extensive ancient valley, from the locality of present pros-
pecting shafts and drives. Hence propriety of extended
boring operations, as the preliminary to sinking shafts. Mr.
R. Brough Smyth, in his recent “ Progress Report,” page 12,
observes that “at Freestone Creek, Gipps Land, the miners
have found gold in the bed of the stream which intersects
rocks marked on the maps as of upper palaeozoic age, and
heretofore regarded as non-auriferous. ” It is a great mistake
to sink through superincumbent strata past the indications of
former surface levels, each having its own system of water-
shed, and deposit of disintegrated formations, and their
water-rolled gold, without an effort to trace such ancient
channels, solely because geologists, in face of the fact that
■water-worn gold, and our heaviest nuggets have been found
within a few inches or feet of the surface soil, affirm that
certain layers of rock must be passed through. The ‘ ‘ worked-
out ” block claims on Ballarat should be tested at new levels,
by bores every 50 or 100 yards, from west to east of their
areas before being abandoned. The first bores I would advise
being put down only to the depth of 120 feet, a by no means
expensive operation.
To quote from my pamphlet of 1868,* “ The discoveries in
and adjacent to the great Ballarat valley, are but in their
commencement. If the great interest of mining in these
colonies, as the chief attraction to population, the proper
source of revenue, and dispenser of wealth, and prosperity,
—as well to the future nations, of which the early colonists
are but the nuclei, as to the commerce and industrial pro-
duction of the world, —receives its due share of legislative
support ; and research be directed upon scientific principles,
and by adequate appliances,—which may henceforth exer-
cise the engineering skill of the world to profit—there need
be now no limit to the wealth realizable from shallow or
deep leads. Boring operations . . . are especially
indicated. ” ’Tis strange that seven years should elapse since
these sentiments were published, before the Legislature are
moved to duly subsidize mining explorations by boring.
♦ “ Auriferous Drifts in Australasia.”


But seeing that action of physical agencies other than the
very trivial operation of “those of which we have ex-
perience,” are denied by Mr. Brough Smyth, or “that
nature worked at times convulsively,”—notwithstanding
the evidences there are of revolutions of ocean surface,
yielding a vast denuding, disintegrating, and drifting force ;
and an unintelligent and prejudiced mode of reasoning,
induces disregard of the labours of the student of physics to
discover and disclose the primary cause evoking epochal
displays of such force, the present depression fallen upon
mining enterprise, and reduction of the number of working
miners now in Victoria, alluded to in the Argus summary
quoted from, is only what we have had reason to expect.
In his Progress Report Mr. Brough Smyth, in advising as
to a locality near Coleraine suitable for a search for coal,
remarks, “Weare guided more by the lithological character
of the rocks than by the dips yielding conclusions respecting
the structure of this part of the trough.” This is an instance
of the difference of our opinions as to the several conditions
under which coal is produced, and the circumstances which
should guide us in the search for it. I hold, on physical
principles, that the dip is the main point. The deposit of
vegetable matter transformed into coal, if there be any local
deposit thereof, will be in the bed or deepest hollow of the
original trough, or depressed surface. This, at every suc-
ceeding epoch of oceanic submergence, would be more or
less filled up with sedimentary deposits, including, possibly,
layers of vegetable accumulations, drifted and precipitated
from the superincumbent ocean, as filled with mechanically
suspended debris of the lands over which the tumultuous
waves of an ocean, broke loose from its barriers, had swept.
So long as a depression remained, so long would there be
deposit therein, whether of earths, sand, or vegetable
matter —the latter, now lignite, or coal, according to age.
But where the surrounding structure of the rocks indicates
a depression, similar at a former epoch to the characteristics
of an amphitheatre, or lake, the finding surface, or shallow,
indications of a seam of lignite, or coal, would appear to me
prima facie evidence of thicker deposits, to be searched for
beneath by boring. In the Atlantic Ocean, some 1,200
miles west of the Irish coast, there is said to be
an abrupt depression of the ocean bed to the depth
of some 7,000 feet. If the present ocean presents,
as is probable, as varied an aspect of bottom surface
as our mountains, valleys, and plains do superficially,
there must still be depressions of many hundred feet deep


to be filled up by deposits. And as similar operations in
Nature have in all probability been progressing during ages
of the antiquity of our globe, coal, could we but reach to,
and work it, without flooding, may be in store in these
depressions, in consecutive layers, to the depth of thousands
of feet. We have seen that in English coal mines it is
worked to the depth of nearly half-a-mile. When apparently
worked out at one level, it may, on physical pxinciples,
reasonably be prospected for at a lower one, and practically
there is no limit, but by flooding, or difficulties as to venti-
lation, to mining operations being executed by men and
horses, to any depths man’s energies can reach.
Whenever gold-bearing formations, or quartz reefs, have
been noted, adjacent to depressions, characteristic of former
excavation by water, though not now stream-channels,
auriferous gutters may be confidently searched for by boring,
as the heavier portion of the disintegrated debris of such
formations remains in the ancient channels, stored up as it
were, until broached by the miner’s pick or boring tools.
Mr. W. Mather, of Manchester, appears to have invented a
boring apparatus of great utility, described as “ingenious
in its simplicity, and very effective, and much more expedi-
tious than the former practice of using iron rods, the weight
of which, at great depths, becomes enormous. A steam-
engine, a flat hemp rope, a few boring tools, lifts, and
grapnels of various forms, constitute the working apparatus.
A hole is bored in the ground in the usual way, then the
boring tool, attached to the end of the rope, is let down, and
made to give a succession of blows on the bottom, being
turned slightly round at every stroke. In this way the
bottom, whether clay, gravel, chalk, schist or rock of any
kind, is broken and penetrated ; the tool is wound swiftly
up, the lifting bucket is hooked on, and speedily brings up
the lessened material.” By this apparatus, bores of 18 to
24 inches diameter have been executed to depths of many
hundred feet, sinking “through chalk and flints, at the rate
of one foot eleven inches per day. The number of men
employed, including a smith to sharpen the cutters, never
exceeded six. ”* This apparatus might accomplish, cheaply,
all the purposes of the diamond-faced borer brought under
the notice of the Government by Mr. Woods, M.P.
The late revered Dr. Chalmers remarked that the philo-
sopher, “ the great Sir Isaac Newton, the highest man in the
accomplishments of philosophy which the world ever saw, sat
* Chambers’s Journal of May 28, 1870,


at the Bock of Nature in the humble attitude of its interpreter
and pupil. ” In such attitude we must work, in searching
for truth as for hid treasure. Dogmatism is wholly out of
place where theories are merely based upon assumptions,
especially if overlooking the sequence of action of natural
laws.
The possibility of maintaining and propagating error, by
permitting ourselves to be deluded, or partially convinced,
not to say prejudiced, by one-sided reasoning, and neglecting
subsequent investigation of the matter submitted, should
impose caution upon teachers of science. Piazzi Smith, the
Astronomer-Royal of Scotland, admits that there is a long
felt physical doubt as to the want of perfect constancy in
relative position, throughout long ages, between the crust of
the earth, and the direction of its axis of rotation, and also a
probable error of the best modern determination. Some
geologists look to the possibility of change of axis, as the only
solution of the difficulty presented, in demonstration of an
adequate force, productive of the revolutions disclosed by
geology. Here , to our teachers, it is all plain sailing. _ All
things continue as they were from the beginning of creation.
All is known, and “easily understood,” and there is no
necessity for innovation of new ideas, or re-interpretation of
ascertained facts. Such is the view asserted by our Victorian
authorities. Nevertheless, I again submit my ideas, for
Magna est veritas et prevalebit eventually. And I conclude
with the memorable and noble words of Schiller : “New
discoveries in the field of his activity, which depress the
mere Trader in Science, enrapture the true Philosopher.
Even should a new series of ideas, a new aspect of Nature,
a newly discovered law in the physical world, overthrow the
whole fabric of his knowledge, he has always loved Truth
better than his system, and gladly will he exchange her old
and defective form for a new and fairer one. ”
Walker, May & Co., Printers (off 56 Bourke-street west), Melbourne.








