

m ■ ... ■ • ■ ■ *
algg'isg 3| W M as;ll' M M miBS M'fg B§ BS '£ f& y ? 4 K
liiiiiiiiiii mm
|j| 9 v iji 9$- Hi A.wS(iillllik
■ ;\
REASONS
FOR
FOR
CSPTICiSBS-i
V - v ,.; A
IN REGARD TO THE
.aspiration of the Bible,
etc.


i i






REASONS
SCEPTICISM
IN REGARD TO THE
INSPIRATION OF THE BIBLE
ETC.
Lindlky Child,
“If we cannot set up truth, it is something to
pull down error.” —Macaulay
SYDNEYj
G*o. Slatyer and Co., Printers, 24 Clereland-streefc.




PREFACE.
Scepticism is not so much a system
as the absence of one, “ Scepticism
(Greek sceptomai, I consider) strictly
denotes that condition in which the
mind is before it has arrived at con-
clusive opinions—when it is still in the
act of reflecting, examining, or pon-
dering over the subjects of thought.
Scepticism is, therefore, the opposite of
dogmatism. The notion of ‘ disbelief ’
is quite a secondary meaning of the
term.” (Chambers’s Encyclopaedia, art.
Scepticism.)
Scepticism not being properly a
system of doctrine, the Sceptic has


nothing to prove. For to ask him to
prove that he does not know, or that
he doubts, would be absurd. Yet he
might be asked to give some reasons
for doubting. And if the matter were
the alleged superhuman origin of die
Bible he might answer that the evi-
dence did not convince him ; and he
might point out the weakness of the
evidence for it, or the strength of the
evidence against it; but there would be
no necessity for him to do so, the burden
of proof being with those who assert its
superhuman origin. And if the Sceptic
had not studied the subject, either for
want of time, money, or any other good
reason, he might answer that those who
had studied it their whole lives could
not agree, and that the matter appeared
to him to be one that could be left an
open question, for the time being at
least, if not until those who have time*
and make it a special study, agree on
the matter.
Preface.


Thus, Sceptics do not credit,
trust, or have faith in their ism as dog-
matists do. Doubt is not accepted by
the Sceptic, but forced upon him, either
by evidence or the absence of it; as in
the case of a person “ found dead the
doubt as to whether it is a case of murder,
suicide, accident, or natural causes ”
may result either from conflicting evi-
dence or the absence of evidence; and
the jury’s verdict is an “ open ’ r one—
“ found dead.” With ourselves it is
similar, though partly vice versa. It is
a case of found alive, whence and whither
being the mystery, and with complete
theological Sceptics an open question.
And they—i.e., the honest ones—only
accept their ism in that they do not
profess to believe what they really doubt
—are not either so absurd or hypo-
critical as they might be. For, to
worship even the Creator (ceremonially)*
and at the same time, in hymns, prayers,
etc., express doubts as to the govern-
Preface.


ment of the Universe and the destiny of
man after death, would be absurd, and
to hide them hypocritical, and, if moral
at all, on account of good intentions,
still, not so moral as not being dishonest
and hypocritical on the matter, with
good intentions.
Finally, even complete theological
scepticism does not exclude investigation
into any alleged supernatural revelation.
Neither does it exclude hope with regard
to the government of the Universe and
the destiny of man after death. We
may still not only hope that (dogmatic)
atheism is not true, and that the horri-
ble doctrine of endless torment is not
true, but also that the narrow doctrine
that only a few will be saved is not
true. And partly because the Bible
is the main authority for those doc-
trines, and partly because it is also
the authority for other doctrines and
precepts that are not useful in this world
Ppkfacb.


to either believers ” in particular or
mankind in general, and partly for other
reasons too numerous to mention, this
little book gives some of the reasons
for Scepticism in regard to the many
contradictory alleged supernatural re-
velations in general, and the Bible in
particular.
Preface.




CONTENTS.
THE SECTS.
Their alleged supernatural revelation only sup-
plementary to natural revelation—They do not
agree as to where or what the supplement is—
Every doctrine belonging to it rejected by
some sect or other as well as by Sceptics—The
ideologists consider the Bible to be entirely of
human origin—Some of these men of powerful
talent and prodigious learning on the subject—
Honesty—The alieged superhuman origin of the
Bible at least very doubtful ... ... 1-12
THE BIBLE.
Scientific errors Historical contradictions—
Doctrinal contradictions—False prophecies—Un-
reasonable doctrines —Deficiencies—Useless pre-
cepts —Against progress The doubt about its
superhuman origin confirmed ... ... 18-52
CONCLUSION
Useless harmonising and excuses—The burden
of proof lies with those who assert they have
a Divine mission or a supernatural revelation—
Many contradictory alleged supernatural re-
velations—We must reject some—The absence
of proof for the Bible admitted Scepticism
necessary from a future life point of view, i.e.,
for our “ probation ” or moral development
53


The rational attitude of a thinking mind towards
the supernatural, whether in natural or in revealed
religion, is that of scepticism as distinguished from
belief on the one hand and from atheism on the
other. . . . The indulgence of hope with regard
to the government of the universe, and the destiny
of man after death, while we recognise as a clear
truth that we have no grounds for more than a
hope, is legitimate and philosphically defensible. —
J. S. Mill.


||es»ssotts for
THE SECTS.
It is admitted l?y a majority of Christians that
their alleged supernatural revelation is only
supplementary to natural revelation —i.e., to what
we know, or may know, by instinct, sense, reasons
conscience, etc. And there are no doctrines be-
longing to this alleged supplement that are com-
mon to all believers in it—not one but some
Christian sect rejects as well as Sceptics. Neither
are they agreed as to where this supplement is to
be found, nor as to the guide that is to aid us in
discovering it. , Roman Catholics contend that it
lias been handed down in certain books and (un-
written) tradition, but that we require an infallible


church to guide us to the right tradition, the right
books, and the right interpretation of them, and
that the true church must continue to work
miracles to prove that it is the true church. (Rev.
C. F. Smarids, Points of Controversy, Lect. iii.)
They also differ much in their doctrines from
Protestants, and include more books in the Bible.
Protestants, on the other hand, not only deny the
infallibility of the Roman Catholic Church, but
assert that she has erred even in matters of faith.
(Church of England, Book of Common Prayer }
art. xix ) They also reject tradition and some of
the books received by Roman Catholics, and do
not believe in their alleged miracles. But, although
Protestants are so far agreed as to where the alleged
supplementary revelation is not, they are by no
means agreed as to where it is, nor yet as to what
it is. As to what it is there is very great differ-
ence ; in fact, even amongst them, without men.
tioning Roman Catholics, there is not a doctrine
(belonging to the supplement) received by one
but what is rejected by another. And as to where
it is, somereceire all the books in the “ Anthorhed
Version,” others only receive some of them ; and
what one receives another either rejects or doubts.
\gain, others receive so little of the Bible as
divinely inspired, and explain inspiration away so
much, and reject so much of the Bible as contra-
2
Reasons for Scepticism.


dictory and unreliable, that it is hard, or rather
impossible, to distinguish them from mere Theists.
And in between these Theists, who cling to the
name Christian, and the Roman Catholics, there
is an indefinite number of shades of belief, so
much so that, as with the different shades of color,
it is impossible to tell where one leaves off and
the other begins.
According to the Bible Educator (1., 335),
“the divergences of doctrine drawn from the
Bible have been infinite in scope. ” And, says
Smatius, “The ‘ G-azette ’of Berlin, in Prussia
wrote a few years ago : — 1 It is easy to prove, yea,
it has been proved more thai once, that there is
not one of all our pastors, who believes what
another believes.’” (Points of Controversy,Lect. i.)
And many of those who accept Christianity as of
more than natural or human origin admit that
there is no “ overpowering evidence ” for their
view (Palev, Evidences, part in., ch. vi.) ; and
some also admit that there is no overwhelming
conviction (Faebar, Bible Educator, i., 335);
whi'e others, who are only Theists, and yet insist
on calling themselves Cbri-tians, merely “ hold
Christianity to be, on the whole, the best among
the natrr.il earth-born religions of the world. ’’
And the degro< sby which this has been arrived at
since the Reformation are well shown in the
3
The Sects.


following from Encyclopaedia (art.
“Rationalism”); —“To rightly comprehend the
struggle between Rationalism and Siipernatural'srd,
in modern Protestant theology, one must look at
it from a historical point of view. The German
and Swiss divines, in maintaining their polemic
against Roman Catholicism (after the original
enthusiasm of the Reformation had cooled down),
took their stand on the absolute authority of the
Bible as a purely divine book, containing no ad-
mixture of error of any kind, either in form or
substance —the very vowel points of the Hebrew
(an innovation long posterior even to Christianity)
being held to be inspired. This, the oldest and
most stringent kind of Protestant orthodoxy,
gradually fell to pieces, partly on account of its
unscientific character, and pirtly because it was
demonstrated that the Bible itself put forth no
pretensions to such infallibility. The first con-
cessions to Rationalism were the admissions that
the biblical writers differed in regard to their style
and literary merit; next, as a logical inference
from the foregoing, that tney exercised a certain
amount of independent power in the composition of
their works. But gradually other points were as-
sailed, some of which have been surrendered, while
others are still tenaciously held ;as that in matters
of physical science, the sacred writers spoke ac-
4
Reasons for Scepticism.


cording to the conceptions and beliefs prevalent
in their age, and not according to any supernatural
enlightenment ; that in historical points their in-
formation might be eitheir erroneous, or defective,
or both ; that they might err in anything except
religious doctrine or sentiment; finally, that they
might err in such too, and that the Bible is not
the ‘ Word of God,’ but only contains that ‘ word ’
which it is the province of human reason to dis-
cover, and to separate from whatever accretions of
fable, myth, symbolism, or error have grown over
it through the agency of man or the lapse of time.
This is properly the theological Rationalism of
modern times, and is held in Germany, France,
Holland, England, and America, by many divines
who, nevertheless, look upon themselves a 3 essen-
tially Christian in their creed. But as most in-
vestigators that proceed so far take yet a further
step, arid deny the presence of any element other
than human in the Bible, or that there is anj T
satisfactory evidence of the truth of its alleged
supernaturalism the word Rationalism, has, in
vulgar parlance, come to be synonymous with
infidelity.”
Some of those who take “ the further step*
remain in the pulpit; and, says Smarius, ü by
some the miracles [of the Bible, etc.] are said to
be that mythology which must attend every reli-
5
The Sects.


gion to gain the attention of the multitude ; by
home the common and well-known ribaldry of
the infidel is unsparingly used ; by one or more
high in station in the church, some artifice, and
probably magnetism, has been within the last ten
years suggested. Others go so far as to attack
the whole body of the prophets as impostors in
most outrageous and revolting terms. This doc-
trine is taught by divines from the pulpit, by
professors from the chairs of theology. It is
addressed to the old, to free them from ancient
prejudices, and to the young, as the knowledge
which can make them truly wise.” (Points of
Controversy, Lect. ii.)
Again, some of the Rationalists are men of
“ powerful talent ” and “ prodigious learning ” on
the subject. “It has happened to be allied in
Germany to prodigious learning and powerful
talent. . . . English infidelity flung the Bible
from it, but eastward of the Rhine the German
spirit clings to that book whose divine origin it
denies, and labors upon.it with unwearied assiduity,
framing grammars and lexicons for its language,
and writing commentaries for its elucidation.”
So says the Rev. John Eadik. And then he
seems to charge them with dishonesty, he con-
tinues :—“ The German Rationalism was thus only
a modified form of English Deism. . . . The
Reasons for Scepticism.


oldest theory of Rationalism, that Christianity is
but a republication of the religion of nature, we
have in Tindal’s book ‘ Christianity as Old as the
Creation.’ If we survey the early objections
against miracles and prophecy, we find them in
Woolston and Collins. Bahrnt, Laffler, Lessing,
Remarus, Jerusalem, Damm, and Paulus, were
mere imitators of the English Sceptics, or at most
only so adorning their tenets as to recommend
them to the German people. In its first form
Neology was English Deism in a German dress,
and jet busying itself with the interpretation of
the sabred records. Men were installed as teachers
of theology m the universities solely for their
scholarship and acquirement. It was not required
of them to he religious themselves that they might
the better unfold the science of religion to others.
Christianity was thus given over to the keeping
of its enemies, and they kissed and betrayed it.
For thirty pieces of a professor’s salary Christ was
betrayed in schools of divinity, the chairs being
filled by infidel Hebraists and pantheistic meta-
physicians, by godless historians and sceptical
antiquaries. They taught the language of Abra-
ham as the readiest means of scoffing at Abraham’s
faith, and descanted on the tongue of apostles as
the most effectual way of undermining that religion
which they had founded And they
7
The Sects


brought together the records and manners of
bygone ages and other people to throw discredit
on the Scriptural narrative as a collection of
Oriental fables and bigoted traditions.” (Ecclesi-
astical Cyclopaedia, art. “ Rationalism.”)
Now this must be read between the lines, and
the reader must remember that the writer of it
was a Protestant who rejected the infallibility and
traditions, etc., of the Roman Catholic Church,
and tome of the books which the Catholics include
in their Bible. But because German Rationalists
went a little further than he did, denying the
supernatural origin of his Bible, yet trying to
preserve what they thought good in it, he neither
gives them credit for honesty nor good intentions,
bat instead compares them to Judas Iscariot, and
pours forth as much abuse on them as if they were
on his favorite corn. Of course it is possible that
they clung to the Bible for what they could make
out of it, but it is a dangerous suggestion for any
paid parson to make. He lives in the same sort
of a glass house himself, and had better not throw
stones. In fact it is more probable that a man would
profess a religion he was not convinced of than
that he would deny or reject one he was convinced
of—profess it either for a personal advantage or
on the bogey-man principle. Nay, that a man
would reject a religion he was convinced of the
8
Reasons for Scepticism.


truth of appears to me impossible ; and when I
ask anyone if they would they always answer in
the negative. Hence, we must give the Rational-
ists credit for honesty as well as for prodigious
learning on the subject. And then it follows that
the supernatuial origin of the Bible, or any part
of it, is at least very doubtful.
9
The Seets


THE BIBLE.
have seen that the belief that the Bible,
or any part of it, had a supernatural origin,
is, if not certainly false, at least very doubtful.
And although it is impossible to deal with every
part of the Bible in a little book like this, still the
following will further show the probability, if not
the certainty that those who take the “further
step, and deny the presence of any element other
than human in the Bible,” are right.
It says (i.e., I understand it to say, or agree
with those who think it says, and moans) that the
world was made in six days a few thousand years
ago, and that since then it has been covered by a
flood which destroyed man and all other land
animals except those in the ark. (Gen. i.-ii., 3;
Ex. xx., 8-11 ; Gen. vi.-ix., especially vii., 21-23.)
It sa\ s and assumes that there is a solid cover
to the earth a firmament—that can be “rolled
10
Reasons for Scepticism.


together as a scroll,” and that has “doors” and
“windows,” etc. (Gen. i., 6-8, vii., 11 ; 2 Kings,
vii., 2 ; Psa. Ixxviii., 23 ; Isa. xxxiv., 4 ; Mai.
iii., 10 ; Rev. vi., 14.)
It assumes that the earth is flat, and only in-
habited on the top. (Rey. i., 7, etc., etc.) See
also such phrases as “under the heaven,” “ends
of the heaven,” “ends of the earth,” etc.
It says and assumes that the Babylonian
Empire was world-wide, and that the Gospel had
been preached in all the world in the first century
of our era, before America, etc., were discovered.
(Jer xxvii., 5-7 ; Dan. ii., 37-b9 ; Rom. x., 18>
xvi, *26 ; Col. i., 6, 23.)
These views, as we learn from the Talmud and
other sources, were held by the Jews and the early
Christians, but the first and second are contradicted
by modern science, and are at least probably false,
while the others are certainly false. And the last
three points are admitted, but orthodox believers
attempt to get over the difficulty by supposing
that the writers of the Bible did not mean exactly
what they said any more than we do when we
speak of the sun rising. There is, however, no
proper analogy. We still use the language of
former times —the language of our forefathers who
did mean what they said ; while in the case of the
Bible and the later Jewish and Christian writing*
11
The Bible.


it is the earlier writers who, on the orthodox sup-
position, do not mean what they say. But, as
other Christians ” admit, it is at least more pro-
bable that the earlier writers meant what they
said as much as the later ones, and consequently
that they were not inspired on those matters.
It contains many historical contradictions, of
which the following are a few examples, and the
first an easy one.
In 2 Chron. xxxvi., 9, it gives “eight” aa
the age at which Jehoiachin began to reign ; and
2 Kings, xxiv., 1, gives “ eighteen.”
In 1 Kings, vi., 1, it says that the fourth year
of Solomon’s reign was the 480th after the children
of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt;
while Acts, xiii, 20, with the forty years in the
wilderness, the twenty of Samuel, the forty of
Saul, and the forty q£ David, make the fourth year
of Solomon the 594th after the coming out of
Egypt,
Acts, vii., 15, 16, contains two contradictions
of Genesis, xxxiii., 19 and l, 13. That Abra-
ham bought the piece of land of the sons of Emmor
in Sychtm. (2) That Jacob was buried there.
Iu Mat. xxvii., 3-7, there are several contra-
dictions of Acts i. ? 18-20.
12
Reasons for Scepticism.


Matthew.
1. When the morning
whs come all the chief
priests and elders of the
people took counsel against
Jesus to put him to death.
2. And when they had
bound him, they led him
away, and delivered him to
Pontius Pilate, the gover-
nor.
3. '•’hen Judas, which
had betrayed him, when
he saw that he was con-
demned, repented himself,
and brought again the
thirty pieces of silver to
the chief priests and elders.
4. Saying, I have sinned
in that I have betrayed the
innocent blood. And they
said, W hat is that to us ?
See thou to that,
5. And he cast down the
pieces of silver in the tem-
ple, and departed, and went
and hanged himself.
6. And the chief priests
took the silver pieces, and
said It is not lawful for to
put .them into the treasury,
because it is the price of
blood.
7. And they took counsel,
and bought with them the
potter’s field to bury stran-
gers in.
8. Wherefore that field
was called the field of blood
until this day.
Lcto;
tXoCf
16. Men and brethren,
this Scripture must needs
have been fulfilled, which
the Holy Ghost, by the
mouth of David, spake
before concerning Judas,
which was guide to them
that took Jesus.
17. For he was numbered
with us, and had obtained
part of this ministry.
18. Now, this man pur-
chased a field with the
reward of iniquity ; and
falling headlong, he burst
asunder in the midst, and
all his bowels gushed out.
19. And it was known un.
to all the dwellers at Jem-
salem: insomuch as that
field is called in their pro-
per tongue Aceldama, that
ip to say, the field of blood.
20. For it is written in
the book of Psalms, Let bis
habitation be desolate, and
let no man dwell therein.
The Bible


9. Then was fulfil led that
which was spoken by Jere-
my, the prophet, saying:
And they took the thirty
pieces of silver, the price
of him that was valued,
whom they of the children
of Israel did value :
10. And gave them for
the potter s field.
Matthew says that Judas, when he saw that
Jesus was condemned, repented, and brought again
the thirty pieces of silver and cast them down in
the temple; and Acts says that Judas purchased
a field with the reward of his iniquity. Matthew
says that Judas departed (from the temple) and
went and hanged himself; and Acts says, partly
by express statement and partly by implication,
that the field he puichased became his habitation.
Each also sees a prophecy fulfilled in the affair.
Matthew in llnowing the money down in
the temple, and the priests buying a field with it
for a burial-}, lace, and the writer of the Acts in
Judas buying a fielding with it, and “ hi* limita-
tion becoming ” desolate. Matthew also in fulfilling
prophecy says: “Then was fulfilled that which
was (spoken by Jeremy the prophetand there is
no such prophecy in Jeremiah, nor any other part
of the Old Testament; for that in Zechariah (xi,,
12-13) only partly corresponds. Again, Papias
(125 a.d.), one of the “ Fathers,” and the first who
14
Reasons for Scepticism.


says that Matthew the apostle wrote a gospel,
gives another account of the end of Judas, entirely
different from our Matthew, and only partly the
same as that in Acts. He says : “ Judaa walked
about the world a sad example of impiety ; for his
body having [providentially] swollen to such an
extent that he could not pass where a chariot
could pass easily, he was crushed by the chariot,
so that his bowels were emptied out.” (Frag
ments of Papias, Anti-Nicene Christian Library,
vol. i., p. 442.) Apparently “ Matthew ” has
been added to even since Papias wrote. More-
over, these three contradictory “ orthodox ”
accounts of the end of Judas are not all. We
learn from Irenseus (Against Heresies, i,, xxxi.)
and Tertullian (Against Heresies, ch. ii.) that
there were in their days sects who believed that
Judas in betraying Christ acted with good inten-
tions. They said that be understood the truth
better than the other apostle*, and being aware of
the necessity of the death of Christ for the salva-
tion of mankind, and fearing that the multitude
would prevent it, he betrayed him to the priests,
i.e., helped them to take him, in the absence of
the multitude. They also had a gospel which
they called the “ G-ospel of Judas.” Evidently
then they could not have believed that he repented,
and went and hanged himself, as the gospel of
The Bible.


Matthew eays ; nor yet that he walked about the
world a sad example of impiety, as Papias says.
They must have had a very different account of
him. And if one sect could have a “ Gospel of
Judas” that was neither written by Judas, n<»r
according to Judas, another could have a “ Gospel
according to Matthew ” that was neither written
by Matthew nor according to Matthew.
John (the fourth gospel) says that Jesus
preached, worked miracles, claimed to be the
Christ, cleansed the temple—i.e., drove out the
moneychangers, etc. —and mad- and baptized more
disciples than John the Baptist before the latter
was cast into prif-on ; and Matthew says that
Jesus began to preach after John the Baptist
was cast into prison ; thus excluding the preaching
and miracles narrated by John as having taken
place before the Baptist was cast into prison.
(John, i.-iv., especially iii, 22-24; Matthew, iv.,
12-17.)
The whole of John, from vii., 2-xi., or twelve
months preaching, miracles, etc., is excluded by
the other three gospels, Matthew Mark, and Luke
—i.e., they so connect their events by such phrases
as “at the same time,” “ on the next day,” “after
six days,” “ and he sent the multitude away and
took ship and came into,” etc. (Mat., xv.-xx..
16
Reasons for Scepticism.


Mark, vii.-i. ; Luke, ix , 18-xix., 28) —as to leave
no place where the twelve months’ preaching, etc.,
of John vii., 2-xi. can be inserted.
Matthew, in his account of the resurrection
and appearances of Jesus, says that Jesus met the
women as they returned from the sepulchre, and
told them to tell his disciples to go into Galilee,
and that there he would appear to them, and that
the disciples did so ; and Luke, omitting this, say*
that Jesus appeared to the disciples the same day
in Jerusalem, and told them to tarry in Jerusalem.
(Mat. xxviii., 1-16; Luke xxiv., 1-58; cf. Acts
i.-il., 3.) I add Matthew in full and sufficient of
Luke.
Matthew xxviii.
1. In the end ot the Sab-
bath, as it began to dawn
toward the first day of the
week, came Mary Mag-
dalene and the other Mary
to see the sepulchre.
2. And, behold, there
was a great earthquake :
for the angel of the Lord
descended from heaven,
and came and rolled hack
the stone from the door,
and sat upon it.
3. His countenance was
like lightening, and his
raiment white as snow .•
■4. And for fear of him
the keepers did shake, and
became as dead men.
Luke xxit.
[Luke differs entirely from
Matthew except as to
the women visiting the
sepulchre, but the other
contradictions cannot be
briefly dealt with. This
shows the contradictio*
mentioned, viz., “Go in-
to Galilee” and “tarry
in Jerusalem hence it
begins with the appear-
ance to the disciples in
Jerusalem on the evening
of the resurrection day.]
36. And as they thus
spake Jesus himself stood
in the midst of them, and
saith unto thorn. Peace b®
unto you.
17
The Bible


5. And the angel an-
swered and said unto the
women. Fear not ye ; for I
know that ye seek Jesus,
which was crucified.
6. He is not here : for he
is risen, as he said, Come,
see the place where the
Lord lay.
7. And go quickly, and
tell his disciples that he is
risen from the dead : and,
behold, he goeth before you
into Galilee: there shall
ye see him : 10, I have told
you.
8. And they departed
quickly from the sepulchre
with fear and great joy,
and did run to bring his
disciples wo”d,
9. And as they went to
tell his disciples, behold,
Jesus met them, saying.
All hail. And they came
and held him by the feet,
and worshipped him.
10. Then said Jesus unto
them, Bo not afraid: go
tell my brethren that they
go into Galilee, and there
shall they see me.
11. Now when they were
going, behold, some of the
watch came into the city,
and showed unto the chief
priests all the things that
were done.
12. And when they were
assembled with the elders,
and had taken counsel.
37. But they were terri-
fied and affrighted, and
supposed that they had
seen a spirit.
38. And he said unto
them, Why are ye troubled?
and why do thoughts arise
in your hearts ?
39. Behold my hands and
my feet, that it is I myself.
Handle me and see : for a
spirit hath not flesh and
bones as ye see me have.
40. And when he had
thus spoken, he shewed
them his hands and his
feet.
41. And while they yat
believed not tor joy, and
wondered, he said unto
them, Have ye any meat P
42. And they gave him a
piece of a broiled fish, and
of an honeycomb.
43. And he took it, and
did eat before them.
44. And he said unto
them. These are the words
which I spake unto you,
while I was yet with you,
that all things must be
fulfilled which were written
in the law of Moses and iu
the prophets and in the
psalms concerning me.
45. Then opened he their
understanding, that they
might understand the
Scriptures,
56 And said unto them,
thus it ia written, and tbui*
18
Reasons for Scepticism.


they gave large money
unto the soldiers.
13. Saying : Say ye. His
disciples came by night,
and stole him away while
we slept,
14. And if this come to
the governor’s ears, we will
persuade him, and secure
you.
15. So they took the
money, and did as they
were taught: and this say-
ing is commonly reported
among the Jews until this
day.
16. Then the eleven dis-
ciples went away into Gali-
lee, into a mountain where
Jesus had appointed them.
17. And when they saw
him, they worshipped him,
but soma doubted.
18 And Jesus came and
spake unto them, saying:
All power is given unto me
in heaven and in earth.
19. Go ye, therefore, and
teach all nations, baptizing
them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost:
20. Teaching them to ob-
serve all things whatsoever
I have commanded you:
and, lo! 1 am with you
alway, even unto the end
ef the world. Amen.
it behoved Christ to suffer,
and to rise from the dead
the third day :
47. And that repentance
and remission of sins should
be preached in his name
among all nations, begin-
ning at Jerusalem.
48. And ye are witnesses
of these things.
49. And, behold, I send
the promise of my Father
upon you ; but tarry ye in
the city of Jerusalem until
ye be endued with power
from on high.
50. And he led them out
as far as te Bethany, and
he lifted up his hands, and
blessed them.
51. And it came to pass,
while he blessed them, he
was parted from them, and
carried up into heaven.
52. And they worship ped
him. and returned to Jeru-
salem with great joy ;
53. And were continually
in the temple, praising and
blessing God. Amen.
Tbctae who believe the whole Bible “ her*
19
The Bible.


monise ” these and all other contradictions; and
it may be as well to show here how it is done in
the case of historical contradictions.
First we will take chronological contradic-
tions. Tatian, the first who “ harmonised ” the
gospels chronologically, or made a continuous
history out of the four, “harmonised ” the contra-
diction 1 have just given by inserting ver. 16-20 of
Matthew (the journey into Galilee, etc.) in be-
tween “ you ” and “ but ” of ver. 49 in Luke —in
the middle of a sentence ; and as that is not satis-
factory to other harmonists they insert it in be-
tween ver. 43 and 44. Thus Matthew’s account is
forced into Lake’s. I say forced, because, as
other “Christians” admit, Luke’s account is con-
tinuous, or does not admit of that journey being
inserted without the use of force. And this is a
fair example of how chronological contradictions
are “harmonised.”
As to other kinds of historical contradictions,
the way the, contradictory accounts of Judas are
“ harmonised,” will be about as good an example
as can be given. Some argue that “ now this man
purchased a field with the reward of iniquity ”is
a figure of speech, implying indirect agency.
(Smith's Dictionary of the Bible, art. Judas, small
edition.) And the Rev. Canon Elliott, enlarging
•n this, suggests that Judas, after, ha had co»a-
20
Reasons for Scepticism.


nanted with the priests to betray Jesus, made “an
agreement” “ with the owner of the potter’s field
for its purchase,” adding that this “is the utmost
that can be inferred as being involved of necessity
in the words of St. Peter—“now this man pur-
chased a field with the reward of iniquity,” and he
supposes “Let his (Judas’s) habitation be deso-
late” to mean let his destined habitation be
desotate. (Bible Educator, vol. ill., 146.) No
wonder the Rev. Dr. Giles, disapproving of such
harmonising, says “It is puerile to argue that
Bt. Peter’s stat< mert of the purchase of the
potter’s field is in agreement with that of St
Matthew. The one says that the chief priests
bought the fidd, the other that Judes him-e’f
purchased it with the thirty pieces of silver. The
former statement is in harmony with the despair
of the traitor, his rejection of the money, and his
hasty suicide. The alter implies that he was
satisfied with his conduct, invested the money in a
mitable purchase of land, etc, ’ (Apostolical lb*,
cords, ch. xxvi., p. 299.) Dr. Giles of course did
nut believe that St. mer really made the speech
recorded ia Acts, nor that that boo* was written
by Luke, or any other companion of the Apostles
nor diat the apostle Matthew wrote the gospel.
He believed them to have been compiled in the
latter half of the second century from other
writings and traditions-
21
The Bible,


It teaches (i.e., its different writers teach)
contradictory doctrines—as clearly as it teaches
any.
the kighteous pbospebous (here).
Psa. xxxiv. 7. The angel of the Lord encampeth
round about them that fear him, and
delivereth them.
8 0 taste and see that the Lord is
good ; blessed is the man that trusteth
in him.
9. 0 fear the Lord, ye bis saints ; for
there is no want to them that fear him.
10. The young lions do Jack and
suffer hunger, but they that seek the
Lord shall not want any good thing.
~ Ixxx.x. 11. For the Lord God is a sun and
shield ; the Lord will give grace and
glory. No good thing will he withhold
from them that walk uprightly,
Prov. iij. 1. My son, forget not my law, hut let
thine heart keep my commandments :
!?. For length of days, and long life
and peace shall they add to thee.
„ x. 6. Blessings are upon the head of
the just; but violence covereth the
mouth of the wicked.
>» xii. 21. There shall no evil happen to
the just, but the wicked shall be filled
with mischief.
, xvi. 7. When a man’s ways please the
Lord he maketh even his euomies to
bo poace with him.
22
Reasons for Scepticism


THE RIGHTEOUS NOT TROPEKOUS.
Psa. cxix. 110. The wicked have laid a snare
for me; yet I erred not from thy
precepts.
145. Trouble and anguish have
taken hold on me • yet thy command-
ments are my delights.
153. Consider mine affliction, and
deliver me, for i do not forget thy law.
„ xciv. 3. Lord, how long shall the wicked,
how long shall the wicked triumph ?
4. How long shall they utter and
speak hard things 1 and all the workers
of iniquity boast themselves ?
5 They break in pieces thv people,
O Lord, and afflict thine heritage.
Isaiah Ivii. 1. T e righteous pensheth, and no
matt layeth it to heart.
Ilab. i. 12. Art thou not from everlasting,
O Lord my God, mine Holy One ? We
shall not die. O Lord, thou hast or-
daned them for judgment; and, 0
mighty God, thou hast established
them for correction.
13. Thou art of purer eves than to
behold evil, and canst not look on
iniquity : wherefore lookest thou upon
them that deal treacherously, and
boldest thy tongue when the wicked
devoureth "the man that is more righ-
teous than he ?
23
The Bible


THE WICKED PROSPEROUS.
24 The ear'h is given into the
hand of the wicked.
xxi. 7. Wherefore do the wicked live,
becomr old, yea, are mighty in pocver 7
8. Their seed is established in their
sight with them, and their offspring
before their eyes.
9. Their houses are safe from fear,
neither is the rod of God upon them.
Ixxiii. 8. For I was emious at the foolish,
when I saw the prosperity of the
wicked.
4. For there are no hands in their
death, but there strength is firm.
5. They are not in trouble as o her
men ; neither are they plagued like
other men.
6. Therefore pride compaa*eth them
about as a chain; violence cuvereth
them as a garment.
7. Their eyes stand out with fat-
ness ; they have more than heart
cou’d wish.
THE WICKED NOT PROSPEROUS.
Psa. vii. 11. God judgeth the righteous, and
G>dis angry with the wicked every
day.
15. He made a pit, and digged it,
and is fallen into the ditch which he
made.
23. But thou, O God, ahalt bring
24
Reasons for Scepticism.


them down into the pit of destruction :
bloody and deceitful men shall not lire
out half their days.
Prov. x. 27. The fear of the Lord proloageth
days: but the years of the wicked
aha ! l be shortened.
„ xiii. 25. The righteous eateth to the
satisfying of his soul; but the belly
of the wicked shall want.
Isai. xlviii. 22. There is no peace, saith the
Lord, unto the wicked.
BOTH ALIKK.
Job ix 22. This is one thing, therefore I
said it. He destroyeth the perfect and
the wicked. ,
Eccl viii 14 There is a vanity which is done
upon the earth ; that there be ja»t
men, unto whom it happeneth, accord-
ing to the work of the wicked: again,
there be wicked men, to ahom it hap-
peneth according to the work of the
righteous. 1 said that this also is vanity
BOTH NOT ALIKK.
Jer. xvii. 10, I the Lord search the heart. I
try the reins, even to give every man
according to bis ways, and according
to t he fruit of hi* doings,
xxii. 16. He judged the cause of the
poor and needy; then it was well
with him. , ,
Pb». Ixii. 12. Also unto thee, O Lord, be-
longeth mercy ; for thou renderest to
every mtn according to kis work.
The Bible.


The Dead U nconscious.
vi. 4. R« turn, O Lord, deliver my soul:
O save me for thy mercies’ sake.
5. For in death there is no remem-
brance of thee.
~ civi. 12. The dead praise not the Lord
neither any that go down into silence.
Isaiah Ixiii. 16. Doubtless thou art our Father,
though Abraham be ignorant of us, and
Israel acknowledge us not. Thou,
0 Lord, art our Father.
Eccles. ix. 5. For the living know that they
shall die; but the dead know not
any thing There is no work, nor de-
vice, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in
the grave [Heb. “Sheol”], wither
thou goest.
THE DEAD NOT UNCONSCIOUS.
Luke xxiii. 43. And Je-us said unto him. Verily
I say unto thee, To-day ?halt thou b©
with me in Paradise.
46 And when Jesus had cried with
a loud voice, he said, Father, into thy
hands I commend my spirit; and
having said thus he gave up the ghost.
Acts vii. 52. And they stoned Stephen, cal-
ling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus,
receive my spirit.
Phil. i. 21. For to me to live is Christ, and
to die is gain,
r-r 22. Bat if I live in the flesh, this is
26
Reasons for Scepticism.


I the fruit of ray labour ; yet what I
shall choose I wot not.
23. For I am in a strait betwixt
two, having a desire to depart, and.
to he with Christ, which is far better.
24. Nevertheless, to abide in the
flesh is more needful for you.
1 Pet. iii. 18. For Christ also hath once suf
fered f<T eras, the just f r the unjust
that he might bring us to Cod, being
put to death in the flesh, but quickened
by the Spirit:
19. By which also he went and
preached unto the spirits in prison ;
20. Which sometime were disobe-
dient, when once ihe long suffering
0 f q o( j wa ited in the clays of Noah,
while the ark was a preparing.
NO ttKSUKEKCTION OF THE WICKED.
Psa. xlix. 14. Like sh»ep they are laid in the
grave ; death shall feed on them ; and
the upright shall have dominion over
them in the morning ; and their beauty
shall consume in the grave from their
dwelling.
ef. The following from 2 Mac., Josephus, and the
Talmud “ Thou [the wicked] shall have no resurrection
to life.” (2 Mac., vii., 14.) “ They [the Pharisees] also
believe that souls have an immortal vigour in them, and
that under the earth there will be rewards or punish-
ments. according as they have lived ivrrtuously or
viciously in this life, and that the latter are to be do-
The Bible


15. But God wiil redeem my soul
from tbe power of the grave; for be
■hall receive me. Seiah.
19 He sha'l go to the generation of
his father*; they shall never see light.
20. Man that is in honor and un-
derstaudeth not, is like the beasta
that perish.
Pro?, xxi. 16.. The mao that wandereth out of
the way of understanding shall re-
main in the congregation of the dead.
BESUBBKCTION OP TIIK WICKED.
John v. 26. For as the Pather hath life in
himself, so hath he given to the Son to
have life in himself:
27. And hath given him authority
to execute judgment also, because he
is the Son of Man.
28. Marvel not at this: for the hour
is coming, in the which all that are
in the graves shall hear his voice,
29. And shall come forth ; they that
have done good, unto the resurrection
of life ; and they that have done evil,
unto the resurrection of damnation.
tained in an everlasting prison, but that the former shall
hare power to revive and live again.” (Jos. Antiq.,
xviii.-i., S.) “ The gift of rain is so far better than the
revivification of the dead,as the former benefits both the
righteous and the wicked, whereas the latter is only for
the righteous. (Taanith, fol. 7, col. 2 r quoted from
Hershou's “.Genesis with a Talmudical Commentary "
p. lit.) J
28
Keasons for Scepticism


Acts
xxiv. 14, But this I conf-ss unto thee,
that after the way which they call
hereby, so worship I the God of
fathers, believing all things which art
written in the law and in the prophets :
15. And have hope toward God,
which th* y themselves also allow, that
there shall be a resum ction of the
dead, both of the just and unjust.
16. And herein do I exeiose myself,
to have always a conscience void of
ofh nee toward God, and toward men.
ANNIHILATION OF THE WICKED.
xxxvii. 1. Fret not thyself because of evil-
doers, neither be thou envious against
the workers of iniquity :
2 For t hey shall soon be cut downlike
the grass, and wither as the green herb.
9. For evil-doers shall be cut off; but
those that wait on the Lord, they
shall inherit the earth.
10. For vet a little while, and the
wicked shall not be : yea, thou shalt
diligently consider his place, and it
shall not be.
20. But the wicked shall perish, and
the enemies of the Lord shall be as
the fat of lambs.
cxlr. 20. The Lord preserved all them
that love him : but all the wicked will
he destroy.
29
The Bible


Ouad. 13. For the day of the Lord is near
upon all the heathen; as thou has
dune it she. 11 be done unto thee ; thy re-
ward shall return upon thine own head.
IG. For as ye have drunk upon my
holy mountain, so shall all the heathen
drink con innally ; yea, they shall
drink, and they shall * wallow down,
and they shall be as though they had
nut been.
EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT OF THE WICKED.
James ii. 19. Them belitve*t that there is one
God: thou doest well. The devils
a ! so believe, and tremble.
Mat. vii, 28 And when he was come to the
other side, into the country of the
Gerge-enes, there met him two posses-
sed with devils, coining out of the
tombs, exceeding fierce, so that no
man might passed by that way.
29. And, behold, they cried out,
saying, What have we to do with thee,
Jesus, thou Son of God? Art thou
come hither to torment us before the
time ?
„ xxv. 31. When the Son of Man shall
come in his glory, and all the holy
angels with him, then shall he sit upon
the throne of his glory :
32. And before him shell be gathered
all nations ; and tie shall separate
them one from another, as a shepherd
divideth his sheep from the goats :
30
Reasons for Scepticism.


33. And he shall set the sheep on his
right hand, but the goats on the left.
34. Then shall the King say unto
them on his right hand, Come, ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the king-
dom prepared for you from the foun-
dation of the world :
41. Then shall he say also unto them
on the left hand, Depart from me, ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared
for the devil and his angels :
46. And these shall go away into
everlasting punishment; but the
righteous into life eternal.
Rev. xx.
10. And the devil that deceived them
as cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone, where the beast and the
false prophet are, and shall be tormen-
ted day and night for ever and ever.
11. And I saw a great white throne,
and him that sat on it, from whose
facethe earth and the heaven fled away;
and there was found no place for them.
12. And I saw the dead, small and
great, stand before Gk»d ; and the
books were opened ; and another book
was opened, which is the book of life ;
and the dead were judged out of those
things which were written in the
books, according to their works.
13. And the sea gave up the dead
31
The Bible.


which were in it; and death and hell
delivered up the dead which were in
them; and they were judged every
man according to their works.
15, And whosoever was not found
written in the book of life was cast
into the lake of fire.
All the doctrines I have dealt with are be-
lieved by Christians (different sects, of course), and
the texts I have given are the texts they quote in
“ proof ” of their doctrines. And several more
contradictions on doctrines could be given—e.g.,
on the millennium. Some believers say the Bible
teaches that there will be a millennium, or a thou-
sand years reign of Christ, before the lait judg-
ment, and others that it teaches that when Christ
returns the last judgment will take place, thus ex-
cluding the millennium ; and I say that it teaches
both. And since the reader may be surprised at a
number of books being considered inspired, and
yet contradicting each other on doctrines, it may
be as well to deal with this matter. The Old
Testament books were collected and selected from
their old writings, or writings under old and vener-
able names, by the J ews before Christ, and those
who collected them were not agreed on doctrines.
Moreover, there is no proof that when the books
were first collected they were considered inspired
Reasons for Scepticism.


books in their then existing form, any more than
the present printed Bible, much less the old manu-
scripts. The New Testament hooks were collected
and selected out of a great number by the Chris-
tians who called themselves “orthodox” and the
“ Catholic Church.” And some say that the col-
lection was completed before all the Apostles were
dead. But there is no proof for this. The history
of the Church to the middle of the second century
is almost a blank, and especially as regards the
New Testament books. And such as it is it favors
the opinion that the collection was made long after
the Apostles were dead. Papias, as we have seen,
appears to have had a different Matthew from
ours, and Justin Matter (150 a.d.) differs from
the “Acts of the Apostles,” and entirely ignores
St. Paul’s Epistles, and quotes from his Gospels
many things not found in our Gospels. We also
learn from Tertullian (200 a.d.) that the churches
held councils and dealt with the “ Holy Library
that was being formed. In speaking of the shep-
herd of Hermas he says that it had been “habitu-
ally judged by every council of the churches among
apocryphal and false [writings].” (On Modesty,
cb. x.) This probably is a little exaggerated, for
he afterwards (ch. xx.) speaks of the (or an)
epistle of Barnabas being “ more generally re-
ceived among the' churches than that apocryphal
33
The Bible


shepherd.” The Rev. S. Davidson says that books
“ were accepted or rejected by the churches ac-
cording to the prevailing opinion of the persons
composing the churches. Common usage led to
the authorisation of some; others were neglected.”
(Canon of the Bible, ch. vi., 162.) And even with
the whole “Catholic Church,” even if a general
council was held, and the matter dealt with, since
even the so-called “orthodox” believers differed
on many doctrines (including the millenium, the
state of the dead, etc., etc.), and as they inter-
preted mystically and literally, the same as now,
they would be able to admit almost any book into
the Holy Library. Moreover, it is not necessary
to suppose that the compilers of the Bible were
strictly honest on the matter, even if they were
in other respects. “ Not long after the [alleged]
Saviour's ascension, various histories of his life
and doctries, full of impositions and fab'es, were
composed by persons of no bad intentions perhaps,
but who where superstitions, simple, and piously
fraudulent; and afterwards various other spurious
writings were palmed upon the world, falsely in-
scribed with the names of the Holy Apostles.”
(Mosheim, Eclles. Hist., Cent. i„ part ii., ch. ii,
sec. 17.) The Platonists and Pythagoreans deemed
it not only lawful but commendable to deceive and
to lie for the sake of truth and piety. The Jews
Reasons for Scepticism.


living in Egypt learned from them this sentiment
before the Christion era, as appears from many
proofs. And from both this vice early spread
among the Christians. Of this no one will doubt
who calls to mind the numerous forgeries of books
under the names of eminent men, the Sibylline
verses and other similar trash, a large mass of
which appeared in this and the following centuries
I would not say that the orthodox Christians
forged all the books of this character. On the
contrary, it is probable that the greater part of
them origit ated from the founders of the gnostic
sects. Yet, that the Christians who were free
from [so-called] heterodox views wore not wholly
free from this fault is too clear to be denied.’’
(Ib., Cent, ii., p. ii., ch. iii., s. 15.) “ The greater
part of mankind, being influenced by the authority
of names . . the writers conceived they
must prefix names of the greatest weight to their
books in order to oppose successfully their adver-
saries.” (Ib., Cent iii., p. ii., ch. iii., s. 11 ) Thus
orthodox writers are compelled to admit that their
own party did forge books in the “ names of the
Holy Apostles.” It would he useless to depy it,
for many of these works have come down to our
day. It is remarkable, too, that in some of these
forgeries we find the forging of books condemned.
(Apostolic Constitutions, b. vi., sec. iii.)
The Bible.


Again, besides the forging of whole books,
there was much corrupting of those that had be-
come of some authority ; and it was easy to do so
in those days when copies were written out. The
following are a few examples : —l. The passage in
Josephus (Antiq. xvni., iii., 3.) which bear testi-
mony to the miracles and resurrection of Jesus is
now given up as spurious even in Christian evi-
dence works. The Rev. G. Rawlinson says : “ I
regard the arguments which have been brought
against the famous passage in our copies of Jose-
phus concerning our Lord’s life and teaching as
having completely established its spuriousness.”
(Bampton Lectures, Lect. vii, note 14 ) 2. The
Pagans had some prophetic books called the
Sibylline Oracles, and the Christians “ palmed on
the world” copies very much interpolated, the
predicting and otherwise bearing testi-
mony to the Christian religion. They were long
used by the Christians, but are now universally
rejected. (Eadie’s Ecclesiastical Cyclopaedia :
Justin Martyr, First Apol., xx.; Hortatory Ad-
dress, xvi. and xxviii,: Theophilus to Autolycus,
xxxvi.: the Rev. Dr. Giles, Hebrew Records, ch.
vii., p. 57 ; ib,, Apostolical Records, ch. viii., p.
102.) 3. Justin Martyr charges the Jews with
having removed several passages from the Old
Testament because they clearly referred to Jesus
36
Reasons for Scepticism


Christ. In one place he says: “ And from the
ninty-fifth [96 a.t.] Psalm they have taken away
this short saying of the words of David, 1 from the
wood.’ For when the passage said, ‘ Tell ye
among the nations the Lord hath reigned from the
wood ’ they have left ‘ Tell ye among the nations
the Lord hath reigned.’ (Dial., Ixxiii.) But, says
the translator, quoting Otto, “ These words [from
the wood] were not taken away by the Jews, but
added by some Christianand then they were used
as a prophecy of the cross. Tertullian on the same
passage says: “Gome now, when you read in the
words of David, how that ‘ the Lord reigneth from
the tree,’ I want to know what you understand by
it. Perhaps you think some wooden king of the
Jews is meant! and not Christ, who overcame
death by his suffering on the cross, and thence
reigned !’’ (Against IVEarcion, b. in., ch. xix.)
Justin also accuses the Jews of having removed
the following passage from Jeremiah. —“The
Lord God remembered His dead people of Israel
who lay in their graves; and he descended
to preach to them his own salvation.” (Dial,
Ixxii.) This was a useful passage for Christians,
and it is quoted by Irenams (Against Heresies,
in., xx., 4, iv.; xxii., 1, v., xxxi., 1.) “ But,” says
the translator, “it is to be found in no ancient
verson or Jewish Targum, which fact may be re*
37
The Bible.


garded as a decisive proof of its spuriousness.” 4.
The Ebionites did nob believe in St. Paul. They
also said that the law of Moses was still binding,
and that Jesus was not God, but a man born in
the ordinary way —the real son of Joseph,—and
that he became the Son of God by his righteous-
ness. (IrenjEUS, Against Heresies, b. i., ch.
xxvi.; Hippolytus, Refutation of All Heresies,
b. vii., ch. xxvii.) They, of course, rejected the
epistles of St. Paul and the orthodox Acts of
Apostles, and the only Gospel they received was
somewhat like the orthodox Matthew, yet consi-
derably different. The orthodox accused them of
having adopted Matthew’s Gospel and falsified it,
and of course they returned the compliment. 5,
The Marcionites believed in St. Paul, but they
only received ben of his epistles and Luke’s Gospel,
and then much shorter than the orthodox had
them The orthodox said the Marcionites had
shortened them, and the Marcionites said the
orthodox had lengthened them. (Ireuseus, Against
Heresies, in., ii. and xii.) And the probabilities
are that both were guilty. 6. Irenseus (ib. v.j
xxx.), in dealing with an important passage, men-
tions that the manuscripts differed, and argue 8
that his view had the support of “ the most apt
proved and ancient copies,” thus showing that
even in his day they had no standard copy, much
38
Reasons for Scepticism.


leas the originals. 7. The Jews before the Baby-
lonian captivity corrupted the law. (Jer. viii., 8,
K.v.) The Samaritan, the Hebrew, and the Sep-
tuagint versions differ very much from each other,
and it is clear that all of them have been corrupted.
The Septuagint often agrees with the Samaritan
version when it differs from the present Hebrew,
showing that the latter has been altered by the
Jews. The Septuagint also “ often indicates read-
ings more ancient and more correct than those of
the present Hebrew MSS. and editions, and often
speaks decisively between the conflicting readings
of the present MSS.” (Smith’s Dictionary of the
Bible, art. Septuagint.) I might go on with this
indefinitely, but instead I will only add one more
example of interpolation. In 1 John, v., 7 a pas-
sage has been interpolated in support of the
doctrine of the Trinity ; and it is remarkable how
late it was done. It is so late (about the fifth
century), and so certain that it is an interpolation
that it has beenleft out of the Eevised Version.
In Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, along with
(alleged) prophecies of the destruction of Jerusalem
by the Babylonians, and the captivity of the Jews
and their return after seventy years, we find fur-
ther prophecies that Jerusalem should be destroyed
no more, which turned out false when six hundred
The Bible


years later it was again destroyed by the Romans.
Isa., xxxix., 5-8 ; Eze,, v„ 9, (cf. xxiv., 24-27,
xxxiii., 21, etc.), xviii., 3, xxxiv., 28 ; Jer., xxix.,
10, xxx, 18, xxxi., 40; Lam., iv., 22; Isa., xl., 2
(c£. xliv., 28, xlviii, 20), li., 22, lii., 1,
Again, the (real) predictions of the speedy
return of Christ and end of the world, etc., have
also turned out false, —Mat., x., 16-23, xvi., 27-28,
xxiv., 1-34 (with ver. 14 cf.; Rom., x., 18, xvi., 26;
Col., i., 6-23) ; Rom., xiii., 11-12, xvi., 20 ; 1 Cor.,
vii., 29 ; Phil., iv., 5 ; 1 Thes., iv.. 15-17; 2 Thes.,
ii., 1-8 (with ver,, 3 cf., 2 Tim., i., 15); Titus, ii.,
13; Heb., ix., 28, x., 25, 37 ; James, v., 8 ; 1 Pet.,
iv., 7 ; Rev., i., I, 3,7, xxii, 6,7, 10, 12, 20.
As this is very important, and as, unlike most
of the alleged prophecies in the Bible, some of the
above texts can be given in full, and understood
without much introduction or argument, I give
them.
[Jesus is commissioning the twelve. |
Mat. x. 16. Behold, I send you forth as sheep
in the midst of wolves : be ye therefore
wise as serpents, and harmless as dove*.
17. But beware of men ; for they will
deliver you up to the councils, and they
will scourge you m their synagogues :
18. And ye shall be brought before
governors and kings for my sake, for a
testimony against them and the Gen -
tiles.
40
Reasons for Scepticism.


19. But when they deliver you up,
take no thought how or what ye shall
speak; for it shall be given you in
that same hour what ye shall speak.
20. For it is not ye that speak, but
the Spirit of your Father which speak-
eth in you.
21. And the brother shall deliver
up the brother to death, and the father
the child: and the children shall rise
up against their parents, and cause
them to be put to death,
22. And ye shall be hated of all men
for my name’s sake: but he that en-
dureth to the end shall be saved.
23. But when they persecute you in
this city flee ye into another; for
verily I say unto you, Ye shall not have
gone over the cities of Israel till the
Son of Man be come.
[Jesus is speaking to his disciples privately.]
Mat. xvi. 27, For the Son of Man shall come
in the glory of his Father, with his
angels; and then he shah reward
every man according to his works.
28. Verily I say unto you, there be
some standing here which shall not
TASTB OF DEATH TILL THEY SEE THIS
Son of Man coming in his kingdom.
xxiv. 1. And Jesus went out and departed
from the temple, and his disciples came
to him, for to show him the buildings
of the temple.
41
The Bible.


2. And Jesus said unto them, See
ye not all these things ? Verily I say
unto you, there shall not be left here
one stone upon another that shall not
be thrown down.
3. And as he sat upon the Mount of
Olives the disciples came unto him
privately, saying, Tell us, when shall
these things be ? and what shall be
the sign of thy coming, and thk
END OF THE WORLD ?
4. And Jesus answered and said
unto them [then follows the alleged
prophecy of the destruction of the
temple, wars, famines, etc, and of
Christ’s second coming in the clouds
of heaven with power and great glory,
and of the end of the world; and in
conclusion we have]
34. Verily I say unto you, this
GENERATION SHALL NOT PASS TILL ALL
THESE THINGS BE FULFILLED.
Acts i.
9. And when he had spoken these
things, while they beheld, he was taken
up, aud a cloud received him out of
their sight.
10. And while they looked stead-
fastly toward heaven as he went up,
behold, two men stood by them in
white apparel;
11. Which also said, Ye men of
Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into
heaven ? This same Jesus, which is
42
Reasons for Seeptieism,


taken up from you into heaven, shall
SO COME IN LIKE MANNER AS YE HAVE
SEEN HIM GO INTO HEAVEN.
Rom. liii
11. And that, knowing the time,
that now it is high time to awake out of
sleep ; for now is our salvation nearer
than when we believed.
12. The night is far spent, the day
is at hand ; let us therefore cast off
the works of darkness, and let us put
on the armour of light.
20. And the God of peace shall
bruise Satan under your feet shortly.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you. Amen.
„ xvi.
28. So Christ was once offered to
bear the sins of many ; and unto them
that look for him shall he appear the
second time, without sin, unto salva-
tion.
Heb. ix.
24. And let us consider one another,
to provoke unto love, and to good
works ;
25. Not forsaking the assembling of
ourselves together, as the manner of
some is, but exhorting one another;
and so much the more as ye see the
day approaching.
~ i.
35. Cast not away therefore your
confidence, which hath great reccm-
pence of reward.
36. For ye have need of patience,
43
The Bible.


that after ye have done the will of God
ye might receive the promise,
37. For yet a little while and he
that shall come will come, and will
not tarry.
James v.
8. -He ye also patient; establish
you hearts ; for the coming of the
Lord draweth nigh.
1 Pet. iv,
7. But the end of all things is at
hand. Be ye therefore sober and
watch unto prayer.
Rev i.
1. The revelation of Jesus Christ,
which God gave unto him to show unto
his servants things which must shortly
come to pass, and he sent and signified
it by his angel unto his servant John;
2. Who bare record of the word of
God, of the testimony of Jesus Christ,
and of all things that he saw,
3. Blessed is he that readeth, and
they that hear the words of this pro-
phecy, and keep those things which
are written therein, for the time is at
hand.
[Then follows the alleged prophecy
of events to “shortly come to pass,”
including wars, famines, etc, and the
persecution of the Christians, and their
triumph at the return of Christ; and in
conclusion the apparently false or mis-
taken prophet says]
6. And he said unto me, These say-
ings arc faithful and tine; and the
„ xxu.
44
Heasona for Scepticism,


Lord G-od of the holy prophets sent
his angel to show unto his servants the
things which must shortly be done.
7. Behold, I come quickly. Blessed
is he that keepeth the sayings of the
prophecy of this book.
8. And I John saw these things,
and heard them. And when I had
heard and seen I fell down to worship
before the feet of the angel which
showed me these things.
9. Then saith he unto me, See thou
do it not; for lam thy fellow-servant,
and of thy brethren the prophets, and
of them which keep the sayings of
this book : worship God.
10. And he saith unto me, Seal not
the sayings of the prophecy of this
book; for the time is at hand.
11. He that is unjust, let him be
unjust still; and he which is filthy, let
him be filthy still ; and he that is righ-
teous, let him be righteous still; and
he that is holy, let him be holy still.
12. And, behold, I come quickly ;
and my reward is with me, to give every
man according as his work shall be.
The epistles of the “Apostolic Fathers” show
that they also believed in the speedy return of
Christ. Barnabas said : “ For the day is at band
on which all things shall perish with the evil £onej.
The Lord is near, and his reward ” (xxi., cf. iv.).
And Clement, speaking of the Apostles, said:
45
The Bible.


“ Having, therefore, received their orders, and
being fully persuaded by the resurrection of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and established in the Word of
God, with full assurance of the Holy Ghost, they
went forth proclaiming that the kingdom of God
was at hand.” (xlii) And in another place,
apparently referring to those who were beginning
to doubt, he said: “ Wherefore let us not be
double-minded Far from us be that
which is written, ‘ Wretched are they who are of
a double mind and of a doubting heartwho say
‘ these things we have heard in the times of our
lathers.’ Ye foolish ones, compare yourselves to a
tree. . . Te perceive how in a little while the
fruit of a tree is brought to maturity. Of a truth
soon and suddenly shall His will be accomp-
lished, as the Scriptures also bears witness, saying,
‘ Speedily wi l l He come, and will not tarry.’ ”
(ixiii.) See also Ignatius, Mag. xi. (long version);
Eph. xi.
Now, it appears to me that “at hand,”
“ shortly,” “speedily,” “little while,” etc., are to
be understood or taken in the ordinary human
sense, not in some spiritual or mystical sense that
would make “at hand ” mean far off, and
“shortly” more than eighteen hundred years.
“ Language is simply meaningless if it is to be so
manipulated by every successive commentator as
46
Reasons for Scepticism.


to make the words ‘ speedily ’ and ‘ near ’ imply
any number of centuries of delay.” (Rev. F- W.
Farrar, “ Early Days of Christianity/' vol. n., p.
229.) Again, the Fathers and the New Testa-
ment writers are not writing mystical'y, nor even
symbolically, where the “at hand,” “shortly.”
etc., occur, but in the ordinary way, and, there-
fore, the words are to be taken in the ordinary
sense, as in 3 John, 14, 2 Tim., iv., 6. etc., etc.
Nay, even in “prophecy,” “shortly,” “little
season.” etc., are used in the ordinary sense. See
Eze. vii., 8, xii., 1-23, Rev. vi, 11, xx., 3, etc.
That Jesus was to return in a short time is
so clear that most of those who believe the New
Testament to be inspired also believe that he did
come, but they take the coming mystically; while
those (believers) who take the coming literally
interpret the “at hand,” “shortly,” etc. mysti-
cally. Thus some believers say that “at band,
<< shortly,” etc., must be taken in the literal or
ordinary human sense, and others say that the
“ coming ” must be taken in the literal sense ;
and I think that, so far. both are right But if
both are right it follows that the New Testament
is not Divinely inspired. And, in any case, the
literalness of the coming, and the shortness of the
time to the coming are the clearest teachings in
the Bible, and, consequently, if they are of doubtful
meaning all is doubtful from beginning to end*
47
The Bible.


It says we must (in this life) believe the
gospel,” and be baptized, or be “damned.” *
EXAMPLES.
Mk. xvi. 15. And he said unto them, Go ye
into all the world, and preach the
‘‘ gospel ” to every creature,
16. He that believeth, and is bap-
tized, shall be saved; but he that
believeth not shall be damned.
Epb. ii, , 11, Wherefore remember, that ye
being in time past Gentiles in the
flesh, who -are called Uncircumcision
by that which is called the Circum-
cision in the flesh made by hands :
12. That at that time ye were with-
out Christ, being aliens from the
commonwealth of Israel, and strangers
from the covenants of promise, having
no hope, and without God in the world.
• Jews and Mahometans (i.e., some) also believe
their isms to be of absolute importance. One of the;
daily prayers of the Jews is : —“ Let the defamers of
thy law [the law of Moses] have no hope.” (Daily
Prayers, morning service). And in the same book
(Ethics of the Fathers) we read “He who profanes
holy things despises the solemn feasts. . . scoffs at
the covenant of our father Abraham, or expounds the
law-contrary to its true sense ; even though he should
be learned in the law and habituated to good deeds will
have no share in the world to come and that he who
“ neglets the Study of the law in the end must inherit
Gehinnam ” [Hell], And in the Talmud we read—“ The
Holy One, blessed be He, banished Israel among the
nations with no other object than that proselytes should
be added'to them.” -fPsachim, fol. 87, col, 2.) “Three
Reasons for Seepfibism.


Rom. x. 9. That if thou sbalt confess with thy
mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe
in thine heart that God hath raised
him from the dead, thou shalt he saved.
10, For with the heart man be-
lieveth unto righteousness ; and with
the mouth confession is made unto
salvation.
v * 14. How then shall they call on
him in whom they have not believed?
and how shall they believe in him of
whom they have not heard ? and how
shad they hear without a preacher ?
2 Cor. iv, 3. But if our gospel be hid, ; it is
hid to them that are lost.
And yet it does not tell us clearly what the
“ gospel ” is, or the particular doctrines we must
believe. And since even “believers ’ differ on
the point, and cannot know that they have the
precious gifts has the Holy One, blessed be He, conferred
upon Israel, and all through chastisement :• the law. the
land of Israel, and the world to come.” (Berachoth, fol.
5, col. 1.) “ A Gentile who offers to submit to ail the
words of the law, except one, is not received.” (Ib. fol,
30, col. 2.) “ Whoever separates himself from the woids
of the law falls into Hell : for it is said (Prov. xxh, 16) :
‘ The man that wanders out of the way of understanding
shall remain in the congregation of rephaim. (Bava-
Bathra, fol. 79, col 1.) “So great is circumcision that
but for its observance heaven and earth could not exist.
(Nedarim, fol, 5, col. 1.) “ These are they who have no
part in the world to come. . . . . for ever, even for
ever and ever, the heretics and the epicureans, and the
deniers of the law. There are three classes of deniers
of the law. He who says that the law is not from God,
yea, even one verse or one word: or if ho says that
49
The Bible.


right belief, and since the majority of mankind
have no chance at all, we may reasonably hope
that it is not necessary to believe in the gospel at
all ; and also that the narrow doctrine that only a
“ few ” will be “ saved ” (Mat. vii,, 18-14) is not
true; while as to the doctrine of everlasting tor-
ment for the “ lost,” it is not only one we may
reasonably hope is not true, but blasphemous and
horrible, beyond expression.
It not only reveals nothing on the useful
sciences, medicine, electricity, steam, labour-
saving machinery, etc., etc., but in its later books
repudiates politics, or, as Paley says, “ declines
every question on the subject (Evidences, part 11.,
Moses gave it of his own authority. Such an one is a
denier of the law. Thus, also, he who denies its inter-
pretations : that is, the oral law, and rejscts its Agadoth
as Sadok and Baithos : and he who says that the Creator
has changed one commandment for another, and that
the law has long since lost its authority, although it was
given by God, as the Christians and Mahometans, each
of these three is a denier of the law.” (Hilchoth, c. iii.,
8.) —From M‘Caul’s Old Paths and Hershon’s Genesis
with a Talmudical Commentary. As to the Mahometans,
in the Koran we read :—“ They who believe not, and die
in their unbelief, upon them shall be the curse of God.
. . . They shall remain under it for ever: their pun-
ishment shall not be alleviated.” (Ch. ii.) “Whoso-
ever followeth any other religion than Islam it shall not
be accepted of him, and in the next life he shall be of
those who perish.” (Ch. iii.) And, as with Christians,
many sects assert the necessity of holding their particu-
lar views.
tteasons for Scepticism,


ch. ii.), and gives precepts unsuitable for ordinary
life, aod against “ progress,” scientific, political,
and social. Examp es :
Mat. v. 38. Ye have beard that it hath been
said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth
for a tooth:
89. But I say unto you, That ye re-
sist *not evil; but whosoeier shall
smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to
him the other also.
40. And if any man will sue thee
at jaw, aod take away thy coat, let
him have thy cloak also.
„ vi. 19. Bay not up for yourselves trea-
sures on earth.
Luke vi. 30, Give to every man that asketh
of thee, and of him that taketh away
thv goods ask them not again.
1 Oor. vii. 20 Let every man abide in the
same calling wherein he was called.
21. Art thou called being a servant
[slave] care not for it.
1 Tim. vi. 8. And having food and raiment let
us be therewith content.
1 Pet. ii. 18. Servants, be subject to your mas-
ters with all fear ; not only to the good
and gentle, but also to the fioward.
Yet these precepts are suitable for a “ peculiar
people,” as the early Christians considered them-
selves to be (Titus ii., 14; 1 Pet, ii., 9), expecting
the “end of the world” in “a little while,” as the
early Christians did —and were wrong.
fhe Bible.


CONCLUSION.
The Bible can, be r ‘ reconciled,” or made
to “ harmonise,” with science, itself, reason, and
secular usefulness, but only by means of “subter-
fuges, evasions, distortions of plain language,
avoidance of clear inferences, suppositions of im-
possible ellipse and impossible construction, tam-
perings with simple fact and simple record, which
in any other criticism would be branded with dis-
honesty ” (cf. Bible Educator, vol. i. p. 335). and
by other means that would “ harmonise ” anything,
even all the alleged supernatural revelations in the
world, but make all doubtful from beginning to
end, and leave us no reason for believing one more
than another, or even any at all; in fact, with
only a reason for Scepticism.
I have given some examples of such “ har-
monising,” but there are other ways of dealing with
contradictory stories, etc , which are excuses for
receiving them rather than reconciliations of them.
Dean Alford said of the two (N.T.) accounts of
Judas that they cannot be reconciled “ consistently
with common honesty unless we know more of the
facts than we do.” (Bible Educator, vol m.,p. 147,
note.) This amounts to saying that the two ac-
counts would or might have been in agreement if
the writers had given more particulars. But then.
Reasons for Scepticism.


on the other hand, they might have contradicted
each other more. We have a case of this sort in
Luke xxiv., 1-34. If Luke had only as briefly
mentioned the appearance to the two disciples on
the way to Emmaus as Mark has he would not
have contradicted Matthew so much about the ap-
pearance to the women as they returned from the
sepulchre ; but in giving ‘ ; more facts,” or details,
be represents the two discip'ea as being aware
of the women visiting the sepulchre, and yet as
unaware that Jesus had appeared to them ; see
especially ver. 24—“ him they saw not.”
Again, some in dealing with what they admit
to be “ apparent contradictions ” argue that they
may be “ trials of faith,” and believe reconcilia-
tions to be always possible even when we have no
datum to discover them. ’ (Bible Educator, i.,
261.) And the Rev. E. Garbett, in dealing with
one of these apparent contradictions, one that was
a little too apparent for him, goes so far as to say :
“ Supposing this instance to lie wholly beyond
explanation, we should fall back on the belief that
some ignorance or misconception of our own was
really the cause of the difficulty ” (God’s Word
Written, ch. xv.) Put, “ sauce for the goose is
sauce for the gander,” any other supernaturalist, as
a Mahometan, could make the same excuse. Gar-
bett says the Roman Catholic Church has contra-
dicted herself over and over again (ib., ch. ii.) ;
but how could he prove it to them if they consi-
dered the apparent contradictions “ trials of faith,”
or fell back on the “ belief that some ignorance or
misconception of their own was really the cause of
the difficulty ?” It is evident that he could not,
53
The Bible.


but, also evident that it is a “ lame excuse.’’ Yet
there is an element of truth or reasonableness in
this excuse—i.e., there are cases in which some-
thing of the sort may be said. When we know
(not merely “believe”) something, and something
else is brought forward that appears to contradict
it, we know that there is something wrong about
its appearance ; and we are entitled to say that
that which appears to contradict that which we
know to be true has a false appearance, even
though we cannot remove the false appearance.
But, although some believe in the inspiration of
the Bible, no one, so far as I am aware, even claims
to know that it is inspired; and consequently they
are not entitled to deal with the apparent, clear-
as-anything-else, contradictions as if they knew
the Bible was inspired—are mot entitled to make
the above excuse. And when one does—when the
dogmatist thus retires into his kennel, and has no
more to say on the point, we may reasonably leave
him with his “ ignorance or misconception.” And
that is not all. The Sceptic may make all the use
that can be made of this excuse, and mainly
because he knows that there are spurious alleged
Divine supernatural revelations, and does not
know that there are any real ones. All but one
of the many contradictory alleged supernatural
isms must be false; no matter how apparent their
truth. And thus this excuse turns out to be, if
not worse for believers in the Bible, at least no
better than their methods of “harmonising,” which,
when applied to all the many contradictory alleged
supernatural isms, leave us with only good reasons
for Scepticism. > .
54
Reasons for Scepticism.


Again, even when the Bible is thus “ har-
monised ” with itself, or the views of some particu-
lar sect, and these excuses made, there still remains
the question of its Divine inspiration ; for a book,
or alleged supernatural revelation, may be in har-
mony with reason, etc., and not be self-contradic-
tory, without being Divine ; and the burden of
proof lies with those who assert * its Divinity. To
illustrate, suppose some one claimed to have a super-
natural revelation that the world will come to an
end obortly, and on that ground commanded some
extraordinary and —apart from the alleged revela-
tion —unreasonable conduct for us, such as that
we should make no provision for next year, nor
even for to-morrow, but spend our time in prayer
and fasting, the mere absence of proof, his not
proving that it is a Divine revelation, without our
being able to prove that it is not, is a sufficient
reason for taking our ordinary guides—sense,
reason, and conscience—and going on with the
ordinary affairs of life, making provision for
to-morrow, next year, and even old age, and dis-
regarding the alleged revelation. And if the
alleged revelation did not require us to spend our
time in prayer and fasting, but only that we should
* Onus Probandi. —When anyone makes a positive
affirmation, the burden of proof undoubtedly lies on
him, and his evidence should be such as can stand the
laws of evidence in the particular department. . . .
But if he has failed to give sufficient proof, he is not
entitled to insist on those who may not give in to his
affirmation proving the contrary of it. They may very
properly content themselves with suspending their judg-
ment till proof is adduced.—Dr. McCosh, Logic, p. 190.
55
Conclusion.


not spend any time making provision for next
year, and instead spend the time in learning from
the prophet, or from his book, what will happen
after the end of the world, we would still be
justified in keeping to our ordinary guides, and
making provision for next year, etc., etc., and dis-
regarding the alleged revelation, or, at least, in
making it a secondary spare-time matter, to be
accepted when he who gave the alleged super-
natural revelation gave the proof.
Thus it is clear (hat the burden of proof IT'S
with those who claim to have a Divine mission or
revelation. And since there are many contradic-
tory alleged Divine revelations it is also clear that
we have to reject some —99 if there are 100. And
not- only this, and not only are we justified in
postponing our acceptance of the Bible as Divinely
inspired as well as our acceptance of any other
alleged supernatural revelation, or, in making the
question of its inspiration a secondary spare-time
matter, but also justified in taking for ordinary
purposes as much of it as commends itself to our
reason, or, in other words, justified in dealing
with it as Avith human books, or as if it had a
human origin, until those who assert its super-
human origin prove not only that it “ may be ”
supernaturally inspired, but that it is. And this
they not only do not do, but are not likely to do,
as we find admitted even in works published by
the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge.
Paley says : “We do not deny that we can con-
ceive it to be within the compass of divine power
to have communicated to the world a higher degree
56
Reasons for Scepticism.


of assurance, and to have given to his communica-
tion a stronger and more extensive influence. For
anything we are able to discern God could have
so formed men as to have perceived the truths of
religion intuitively, or to have carried on a com-
munication with the other world, whilst they lived
in this, or to have seen the individuals of the
species, instead of dying, pass to Heaven by a
sensible translation. He could have presented a
separate miracle to each man’s senses. He could
have established a standing miracle. He could
have caused miracles to be wrought in every age
and country. These and many more methods,
which we may imagine, if we once give loose to
our imagination, are, so far as we can judge, all
practicable.” (Evidences, part m., ch. vi.)
Now, since we do not perceive the truths of
religion intuitively, nor carry on a communication
with the other world, nor see the individuals of the
species pass to Heaven by a sensible translation :
since there i» not a separate miracle to each man’s
senses, nor a standing miracle, nor even miracles in
every age and country : since these and many more
evidences which we can imagine, and which so far
as we can judge are all practicable, are not given
us, it is evident that if the world is governed by
a Divine Being He intends even that and the
destiny of man after death to be doubtful as well
as the inspiration of the Bible.
Finally, it is clear to me, and, although
inconsistent with dogmatic theology, is partly
admitted even by orthodox Christians, that
6?
Conclusion,


Scepticism—i.e., theological Scepticism—is ne-
cessary from a future life point of view.
It is necessary for our “probation” or
moral development ; there being no moral de-
velopment in laying up treasure in heaven for
the interest thereon ; or, at least, probably no
such development, and certainly none in leaving
evil undone for fear of punishment. “It would
be no trial or thanks to the most sensual wretch to
forbear sinning if Heaven and Hell were open to
hi« sight.” (Palet, Evidences, part in., ch. vi.)
“ Probation and moral discipline would be impos-
sibilities if our lives were passed among cer-
tainties.” (Bible Educator, vol. n., 374.)
And this not only confirms the reasons for Scep-
ticism, but leaves little, if any, room for super-
natural revelation in this world. And although
Scepticism does not affirm, any more than deny,
that this life and this world are pmbatioiary, it
admits that they may be, and also that they may
not be the only ones—admits of “ hope with re-
gard to the government of the universe and the
destiny of man after death.”
FINIS,
68
KeAsotti (or scepticism.








. y v ■■'
■
