

Stent Jiatonmcs in gnstptia.
Six years ago we knew nothing of the far interior of Australia, beyond
what we had learned from Captain Sturt, who reached in 1844 a point
half-way between Spencer?s Gulf and the Gulf of Carpentaria. His
discoveries considerably misled our speculations, for they lay in a belt of
the most barren description, which geographers were too ready to accept
as a fair representative of the country to the right and left of it. Sturt?s
sufferings in endeavouring to cross the far-famed stony desert, were fearful.
There is perhaps no traveller who has shown more vividly than he,
the horrors of the desert, or a more determined courage in facing them.
Hence his reports, more than those of any one else, have given a bad re-
pute to the interior of Australia.
During the gold fever, discovery on a large scale was idle; numerous
small additions were made to our geographical knowledge, but their effect
on the map of Australia might be compared to the crystallized border that
grows gradually within a chemist?s evaporating bath. It timidly pushes
out tiny spiculas here and there, always towards the middle, each new
crystal becoming established for ever and serving as a foundation for
further growth. So the process extends itself, until the time is ripe, and
then long spikes dart right across from side to side, and all the interstices
rapidly close up. One, we may almost say two, of these long spikes have
now darted across Australia. Two lines of route have virtually joined
north to south and established themselves henceforth on our maps. They
were made almost simultaneously. The first was that of A. Gregory,
from the north, whose route was overlapped and almost reached by
McDouall Stuart, in his great journey from the south; the second
was wholly successful in traversing the continent, and was that of
Burke. Nor are A. Gregory, Stuart, and Burke the only prominent dis-
coverers of the last six years. A great deal has been also done in Western
Australia by F. Gregory. In fact the Gregorys are a wonderful family of
four brothers, who have left their marks as explorers on every side of
Australia. But West Australian discovery is more like the crystallized
border, of which we have been speaking, progressing at a rapid pace, than
ihe far-darting spikes, which so captivate our imagination. We must,
however, give one word of recognition to a dashing exploit just made by
a party of young men, the Messrs. Dempster and others, whose route will
be seen on the south-west of the diagram, p. 355. Another strange district
yet remains to be alluded to; it is marked b, and is the site of that half
imaginary feature of all but the most modern maps, called Lake Torrens.
A host of people have travelled there, from whom we will hereafter
select Mr. Babbage, and sheep stations are now spread over a territory


Newest \ Tea )/ ' i'9RiseA!:8
whence Eyre was repulsed by drought, and whose chief feature is that
mountain, which, despairing of the land, he named Mount Hopeless. It
should have been Mount Hopeful.
The result of the manifold explorations of late years can be discussed
in two ways only. One is to pore over a map on a very large scale,
where the routes of all the explorers are inserted, with their daily notes
of the country they traversed, written at the side; thin spider lines
crowded with minute detail, separated from one another by vast blank
areas, which show the scantiness and broken character of our knowledge:
the other is to generalize, but to do so in so rude and broad a manner,
that a miniature map like that which is given here, can easily show all
El Squatting Districts. C Carpentaria Gulf. T Lake Torrens of old maps.
V Victoria River. B Country explored by Bab-
|H|j Settled Districts. CC Cooper Creek. _ bage and others.
we have to say. If we attempted a greater refinement of generalization, we
should be aiming at more than we have facts to warrant. Proceeding on
these premises, we may say that we have obtained a fair knowledge of the
eastern half of the continent, and that it is generally habitable, not by any
means over its entire area, but sporadically, in the same way that Arabia
is inhabited by the Arabs. Of the western half of the continent we know
much less; but our knowledge, so far as it goes, is equally favourable.
The south-eastern corner is the most favoured of all. The Lake Torrens
district is altogether peculiar: it is an alternation of brackish lagoons
with saline desert and good pastoral country.
Aridity during summer is the great drawback to Australia. Enough
rain falls on the average of the year to support a fair vegetation, but the
features of the country are not decided enough to drain the water into
channels, or to form perennial springs. The water either lies in shallow
lagoons, each representing the drainage of a trifling area, or in miserable
creeks; and by far the greater part of it evaporates during the heats.
There is no grandeur in the framework of Australia; it is a vast exten-
sion of a series of little features such as scrub and grass, lagoon and
creek, sandy and muddy plains. It supports very little life; few creatures
exist that do not migrate. The marsupials pack their broods in their
pouches, and travel for their lives; the waterfowl disappear when the


waters are low. The physical character of Australia makes it easy
to understand how intelligent explorers like Sturt, Eyre, Kennedy, and
many others, brought disheartening accounts which our modern know-
ledge contradicts : it is worth while to examine the causes of such mistakes.
First, then, it appears hopeless to ascertain the habitable qualities of any
district in Australia by seeing it only once. The arid plains, dancing with
mirage, swept with dust-storms, void of life, and bare of all but some
miserable shrub, seem the abomination of desolation, while the same
plains, after a month?s soaking showers, are wholly altered. Lagoons
form, tall grass springs up abundantly, waterfowl make their appearance,
and the traveller is charmed with the goodly land he has the fortune to
discover. .Not only do the seasons differ one from another, but the total
rainfall of different years is probably a fluctuating quantity, and again,
the showers fall unequally over the country. Another fertile source of
misconception of the qualities of a district arises from the unequal
character of adjacent belts. A mere accident may lead a traveller along
a line where hardly a day shall pass without his finding water, or he may
fall upon an arid strip and nearly perish of thirst. It is wholly beyond
belief that a cursory traveller should discover all the watering-places in
his neighbourhood; the records of McDouall Stuart?s journeys give
remarkable examples to the contrary. An unexpected fact still remains?
it is, that wherever a sheep-station is by any means established, the
country becomes rapidly improved by its influence. It is a subject for
Darwinian speculation. The grazing is said to improve the grasses, and
to introduce or foster new species. The mere cropping does.something;
the manuring and the stamping of the sheep?s feet have an effect. Then
the occupier gf the station makes the most of the watering capabilities of
the place: he dams up a creek, or deepens a water-hole. Perhaps the
grasses and bushes around it flourish permanently through its moisture;
the roots of the vegetation will then form a natural matting that checks
evaporation, while the long fibres of the roots encourage rain-water to
enter deeply into the soil. In this fashion, causes may be reacted on by
their effects, until originally trifling influences produce considerable im-
provement.
A very curious feature exists throughout the Lake Torrens district
(b of the diagram) which w r ould have vastly altered Eyre?s opinion of that
country if he had been aware of it. In numerous places over an other-
wise waterless area, mounds are seen of various heights, up to 100 feet or
more. On their top is a crop of verdure, not necessarily visible from the
plain, and a diminutive streamlet may be discovered trickling or oozing
over one part of its edge. On climbing one of these hillocks its top is
found to be a basin brimful of water, a most extraordinary prize to a
thirsty traveller. It must seem like a magical creation of some good fairy
in his behalf. Obviously the hillocks are of travertin, or some such mineral
deposit, which has settled from the spring from the time when it first
broke through the ground, and has thus in long years been moulded into


a case that encloses the water and reaches the highest level to which it
can rise. Where springs of this description are frequent, one would think
an artesian well might be sunk anywhere with success.
We will now follow up these introductory remarks by a short narrative
of the most prominent of the recent expeditions. Let us first make it
deafly understood that the difficulty of Australian travel does not lie so
much in the trouble of obtaining water as in the necessity of carrying
food. A traveller in that land cannot shoot his dinner. The Australian
wilds do not supply subsistence to a white resident, much less to a white
traveller. A native who is gathering roots or seeds all through the day,
having leisure, and knowing where to look for them, and who also has a
stomach capable of digesting those things, is master of his situation. A white
man is fully as dependent on the load of flour and dried meat carried by
his horses, as are the crew of a vessel on the stores they have shipped.
Judicious arrangement in commissariat matters is the first essential of
successful Australian travel.
The first of the great modern Australian journeys, in order of time,
was that of A. Gregory, in the north. It was felt scandalous that we
should remain in wilful ignorance of our own territory, and abandon
British settlements to increase on the spot where hazard had planted
them, instead of finding out the best places in the land and colonizing in
an intelligent way. For instance, the Victoria Kiver, qn the north-west
coast, urgently demanded examination; it had been ascended for nearly
200 miles by the officers of the Beagle , and its promises were great.
Again, the middle of Australia was generally supposed to be a dried-up
basin: but how much land was there north of that basin, sloping towards
the coast ? Did rain fall abundantly on that more favoured belt ? was it
backed by mountain ranges of importance, which cut off moisture from
passing southwards, by condensing it on their flanks and turning it back
into the Northern Sea ? The determination of these points was the object
of the Government?s North Australian expedition of 1856, under the com-
mand of A. Gregory.
We will dismiss the latter part of his travels with a few words, for
although they were the most protracted, yet they were barren of favourable
results. He found the water parting of the country to be low, and little
distant from the coast; consequently his route lay along a line drawn
closely parallel to that travelled over by Leichhardt, some years previously.
Gregory has satisfactorily proved that no broad belt of humid, tropical
land exists in Australia. The former part of his route led more directly
towards the interior, and to a certain degree tapped the continent. He
traced the Victoria to its source, then crossed the water parting, and went
down a creek that ran south-east, -till it lost itself in dry salt lakes. His
route lay through the usual type of Australian country, such as we have
described it; that is to say, a constant alternation of pastoral land and
worthless land. If all the good parts were summed up, the total would be
immense ; the sum of the bad parts would be vastly greater. It was a


country that might starve the cattle of an explorer, but it could sustain
millions of sheep after its choicer patches had been discovered and
stocked.
We will now go south, to the discoveries made in the Lake Torrens
district: there are crowds of travellers who have assisted in them. Step
by step it was found that Eyre?s ill report, though most conscientiously
made, was not justified by closer examination. The imaginary Lake
Torrens was cut up into numerous separate lagoons, and its formidable
horseshoe barrier has disappeared from our maps.
The Governor of South Australia takes a legitimate rank among the
explorers of his colony; for though a heavy weight to bestride a grass-fed
hack, he made a dashing ride to view the latest discoveries of others and
to make new ones himself. However, the greatest South Australian effort
was the equipment of Mr. Babbage. That gentleman was a truly zealous
and scientific man, and did good work as a traveller; but his principle
of carrying on explorations proved erroneous, and he was recalled. He
wished to vanquish the desert by slow approaches, making sure of each
step before taking another, and thoroughly surveying the neighbourhood
of every successive depot. His plan was far too cumbrous and complex to
succeed. While he was laboriously and accurately examining the land,
there was time for one or two men to scour far ahead and sufficiently open
out the country to make it immediately available to sheep-farmers. Such
was the plan of McDouall Stuart. Starting in search of pasture, in a single
short season, he rode in a great sweep far beyond and right round Mr. Bab-
bage, and his successful return excited a furor of applause in Adelaide.
No desert had been seen to stop his onward progress. He returned simply
because he had been unprovisioned for a longer journey. In 1860, Mr.
Stuart started again with only two companions, endeavouring to penetrate
right through the continent. His dash and sustained energy were mar-
vellous. To his right lay the Lake Torrens district, which he avoided,
keeping along the higher ground, which possibly forms a north and south
water parting between two great Australian basins. He met no serious
obstacle : it was the old story so often told, of a few hours? scrub, then a
few hours? grass, and so on; ringing the limited changes of Australian
scenery in every possible combination.
He passed what he considers to be the centre of the continent, where
fortunately there is a mountain ?Mount Centre?(we sadly want some
marked features in Australia to feed our imagination) ?and a little after-
wards became entangled in breadths of dense scrub. Here, he found a
numerous tribe of natives, who attacked and repulsed him. Again, in
1861, he follows his old route, starting early and travelling, though
laboriously, even through the driest season of the year, in order to be early
at his goal. This time he extends his route until it far overlaps Gregory?s
on the Victoria, as may be seen in the diagram. His efforts to break
through the 100 miles of impracticable country that hemmed him in were
repeated on nearly a dozen occasions, until he was utterly beaten, and


compelled to retire. Either he was checked by scrub ? like a wall,? or by
dry plains fissured with deep cracks and overgrown with grass, forming
natural pitfalls in which a horse might break his leg. Yet he Avould be
the last person to say that plenty of excellent roads might not be found;
and we trust he may yet find one: for so small is the distance between
success and failure that we read how frequently he stumbles on a great
lake or set of springs hidden in the bushes, when the aridity of the country
is driving him to distress. The reader lays down Stuart?s narrative, con-
scious of the blindness with which every traveller is compelled to feel
his way, and aware how largely the best among them must be indebted
to hazard in bringing their journeys to a fortunate issue.
We now conclude with the last, the greatest, and the most tragical of
all Australian explorations?that of Burke. It is remarkable in many
ways, and in none more so than in its means of transport. Leichhardt and
Sturt of olden times, and Babbage of more recent ones, travelled with
wheeled vehicles. A. Gregory led a large and rigorously disciplined body
of horsemen in his principal journey, Stuart slipped through the land
on horseback, almost alone; but Burke, for the first time in Australian
history, was to lead a party of camels, imported from Asia for that especial
purpose. His expedition was planned on an unusual scale. It was first
set on foot by the patriotic offer of I,OOOL from a wealthy individual, in
the event of other sums being subscribed, and was afterwards liberally
supported by the government of Victoria, and organized by the Royal
Society of Melbourne. It enlisted the sympathies of all classes, in the
same way that the sympathies of England were enlisted in behalf of
Franklin during the flourishing days of polar exploration. Neighbouring
colonies had long sent their pioneers into the field, but this was the first
great expedition from the rich colony of Victoria.
The camels were bought in India, and in June, 18GO, upwards of
thirty of these quaint, slow-paced associates of Old World history stalked
out of their vessel into the land of the kangaroo, to lend their much-
desired aid to a dashing enterprise of one of the newest colonies of the
modern Anglo-Saxon race. There, let us hope their breed may be esta-
blished, and do future good service in a land and climate sufficiently
resembling their native Arabia to make their usefulness probable.
Burke?s plan was to reach the boundaries of civilization upon the
Darling, and thence to strike northward across comparatively unknown
country, to Cooper?s Creek, marked C. C. on the map. Cooper?s Creek is
an historical name in the annals of Australian discovery. It was a
famous halting-place in Sturt?s expedition, and had been ever since the
most distant of the known watering-places where cattle could subsist all
the year round. Burke was there -to establish his depot, and thence he
was to make tentative efforts with a light party to reach the Northern Sea;
travelling as long as the provisions he could carry would allow, and always
falling back on the depot when they were on the point of being exhausted.
The establishment at Cooper?s Creek was to be the rock of his safety; its


failure, as will be seen in the sequel, proved the cause of his disastrous
end.
When Burke arrived at the Darling with his cumbrous impedimenta ,
he was too late. Summer was advancing with rapid strides, sure before
many weeks were over, to lick up the puddles and sheets of shallow water
due to the last rains, and to convert the now green plains into an arid,
desolate waste. Of immediate danger there was none, but by the
time he could hope to reach Cooper?s Creek and enter the dreaded stony
desert, the sun would be nearly vertical. Government expeditions are
generally behindhand, not from any want of zeal in the officials who
direct them, but from the slow way in which business necessarily filters
through a series of authorities. Burke?s was no exception ;he had chafed
at the delays in Melbourne, and he now found himself on the Darling, at
the commencement of his actual journey, with a cumbrous slow-moving
retinue, disunited associates, and already tired cattle, while the fatal
words too late stared at him in phantom letters, in the far distance.
Burke did what those who judge by the issue are pleased to blame as
ill-advised. He left the mass of the party behind, and took an excellent
bush-man, Mr. Wright, who knew the way, to guide him and seven com-
panions on the road to Cooper?s Creek, As soon as he had satisfied him-
self that the road was perfectly practicable by riding over the half of it,
and also being thoroughly confirmed in his high opinion of Mr. Wright?s
ability, Burke incorporated his guide into the expeditionary party, made
him its third officer, and sent him back to bring the heavy detachment in
easy stages from the Darling to Cooper?s Creek, while he himself rode on
with the rest. There can have been no fair cause for anxiety in Burke?s
mind when he did so. There were no wayside difficulties to check the
advance of those behind ; water and grass were in such unusual abund-
ance, that as he rode on, at the rapid pace of twenty miles a day?very
rapid for bush travelling?his camels and horses actually throve on the
road. He reached Cooper?s Creek with perfect ease, having also accom-
plished some lateral expeditions of importance, according to the instruc-
tions with which he was furnished in Melbourne. Thus far all was
excellent. He stayed two days at Cooper?s Creek, wrote a long account
of what he had seen and done, enclosing a report from Wills on the
geography of the district; and then, subdividing his pai?ty, he left four
men, well provisioned, on the Creek, with orders to remain there, in
company with the daily expected detachment under Mr. Wright, as long
as their food permitted, and went straight a-head to Carpentaria. He was
accompanied by Mr. Wills, the second officer of the expedition, and two
men. They had six camels and a horse, and carried as large a store of
provisions as they were able.
It was now December 14, 1860 (we must recollect the December of
the Antipodes is their summer). Burke, and his three companions were
off to Carpentaria; four men were established on Cooper?s Creek; and
Wright, with the heavy stores and larger portion of the expedition, was sup-


posed to have long since left the Darling, and to be approaching the depot
in easy stages. But unfortunately they were doing no such thing. A
stupid mischance had occurred, which threw everything out of gear,
cost in the end the lives of many zealous men, and raised a storm of
troubles, which even now has not subsided. It was simply this, ?Long
after Burke had left the Darling, a messenger came with news from Mel-
bourne that McDouall Stuart had almost crossed the continent. This was
important intelligence for Burke to receive, because if he failed to find a
road in the direction he was about to explore, he might with advantage
turn to the left, and striking upon Stuart?s track, continue it on to the
sea. Accordingly, away started two volunteers in a most unfortunate
chase after him; the others awaited the issue, encamped upon the
Darling. Days and weeks passed by, and the men never returned; the
camp grew alarmed, scouts scoured the country, and the end was, that the
two blunderers failed in their object, lost their way, and nearly killed
themselves and their horses; and more, the rest had also exhausted them-
selves and their cattle in looking after them. Burke was well on his way
to Carpentaria, confident that his depot on Cooper?s Creek was securely
established, when Wright?s party was still on the Darling, knocked up by
an ill-judged escapade. Burke?s party had travelled far beyond those
plains where summer drought is overpowering, when the heavy detach-
ment, under the leadership of Wright, entered upon their now fearful
route. They traversed the first section of the road to Cooper?s Creek,
where all had been so green and luxuriant three months before, with
difficulty and anxiety, but it was on February 12th that the full horror
of Australian aridity came upon them. They were then virtually cut off
from Cooper?s Creek, at a time when poor Burke and Wills and the rest
had actually reached and turned back from the sea at Carpentaria, and
weak with scantily eked out food, were often thinking, as we may well
believe, of the good cheer and joyous welcome they hoped to find awaiting
them at Cooper?s Creek?their well-stored depot in the desert oasis.
Let us, before the interest of the impending catastrophe leads us aside,
take a rapid glance at what the travellers saw and wrote down in their
note-books, which they buried when they were dying, and which have
since been recovered and preserved. From the Darling to Cooper?s Creek,
the country was at first excellent both for food and travel; it then became
stony, but by no means impracticable ; and Burke indicates a still better
route than that which he followed. Cooper?s Creek itself is as permanent
a watering station as it had been reported, but a disagreeable place to stay
at, owing to the quantities of mosquitoes, and a perfect plague of marsupial
rats. Proceeding northwards (not N.W., as Sturt went,) the country is
good for a few days, but remarkable for stony ridges running across the
plain. These expand and form the stony desert of Sturt. The party
travelled across the desert, without the slightest difficulty as to water or
grass : indeed they found a large shallow lagoon in the midst of it. Still
proceeding, they crossed into the tropics, and the character of the country
VOL. v. ? no. 27, 18.


rapidly changed. The vegetation was richer and ranker, and the water-
courses were exceedingly abundant. In their entire journey from Cooper?s
Creek to Carpentaria, and back to the stony desert, they appear on no
single day to have failed in reaching water. In fact, their results quite
overturn the usual accounts of Central Australia. When they approached
the sea, they had to wade marshes, and push through brushwood, leaving
their camels behind them with the two men. The natives were far too
numerous to warrant the division of their party for long together, and in
consequence, they never succeeded in getting a fair view of the open sea
though they passed some days within influence of the tides. The estuary
which they reached was that of the Flinder?s River. Their route has
made us acquainted with no striking geographical features, such as moun-
tains, or rivers, or deserts ; its interest lies in its vast span, and in its
probable influence on future colonization. Natives were frequently met,
and were peaceable, and even courteous to them, pointing out the best
ways unasked.
They turn back from the sea about February 10th, and henceforth
toil and insufficient food, added to indisposition produced by the hot
humid air of the coast, makes havoc upon them and their cattle. They
arrive on April 21st at Cooper?s Creek, with two worn-out camels and
the horse, themselves barely able to walk, and one of their small party dead.
Where they expected greetings, there is absolute silence; not a soul to
be seen; they reach the encampment: it is deserted; a mark on a tree
directs them to dig; they do so, and learn their awful situation. That
very morning the men they had left behind had quitted the creek; them-
selves ill and disheartened, but their cattle in good travelling condition.
No one had ever come to them from the Darling. The natives had been
troublesome; their rations were running low; they felt their position
untenable, so they buried what trifling food they could spare, and de-
parted south. Burke was utterly unable to overtake them. He, his two
companions, and his cattle, had done as long a day?s work as their strength
would admit. The trifling interval which separated them from their
retreating friends?it was only fourteen miles?was an impassable gulf.
They were utterly cut off from present help. In this terrible position they
did what they could; they dug up the food and the letter buried in the
bottle by its side, and determined to travel down the creek to try and
reach the settled districts about Bin the map. Finally, they buried an
account of their own proceedings in the same bottle which they had dug
up, replaced the earth as they had found it, and by some fatal oversight
made no alteration in the simple indication of DIG which the retreat-
ing party had cut in the tree by its side. They re-made the cache too care-
fully, and went their way. A few days of slow travel made it obvious
that the strength of the whole party, men and animals, was failing them.
They could not reach the settled districts; nay, the animals died, and
they had to walk, carrying what they could. The last resource was to try
to live like the natives, who subsist mainly on the seeds of a fern called


nardoo, which they pound and cook. The travellers endeavoured to
associate with the natives, to learn how to find this nardoo, and to obtain
support from them, but with little success. At length King discovered
the plant in abundant patches, and they collected the seeds and lived upon
them. But food may have nutritious qualities, and yet be of so indiges-
tible a character that the stomach cannot extract its nutriment. The
natives are reared upon food of coarse descriptions, which are stubborn
in the laboratory of European stomachs, and much more so in those of
men like our travellers who were ill and worn out. So they gathered tho
nardoo, and pounded it, a wearisome and exhausting task, with such
savage means as were at hand, and they grew weaker day by day. At
length Wills begged the others to leave him, and push on, and try to get
assistance from the natives. They did so, and Wills remained alone.
Writing his diary to the last, and looking death steadily in the face, he
describes his daily weakening without complaint. He does not suffer
from hunger, but finds starving on nardoo an easy death. He compares
himself to Dickens?s character of Mr. Macawber, ? waiting for something
to turn up,? writes some practical and noteworthy suggestions about the
sort of food with which Australian expeditions should be provided;?more
of the saccharine or heat-giving elements, and not meat and flour alone, as
heretofore. He writes with humour and good sense to the bottom of the
very last page in his note-book, and then this brave man, way-worn and
hunger-worn, to whose notes we mainly owe our knowledge of what the
expedition achieved, whom we would have so gladly greeted on his return,
appears to have laid himself down, and died quietly, on June 28th,
Burke and King struggled on, growing weaker daily; and then Burke?s
time came, and with resignation and without pain, the gallant leader of
the first party who ever crossed Australia, passed away. All honour to
his memory. King, now lonely and forlorn, wanders back to Wills? hut;
and then the savages take strange compassion on him, and he wanders and
lives with them, until aid from the South comes to him, on September
loth, in the form of a fresh and well equipped party of rescue under
Mr, Howitt. We cannot here relate the long story of sufferings and
deaths which befel both the heavy detachment from the Darling and
the retreating party from Cooper?s Creek. They met on the way, exhausted
and broken down. At length the leaders of the two parties, who were
almost the only men among them fit for the undertaking, rode on to
Cooper?s Creek for the chance of finding Burke?s party returned, and
reached it early in May. They had indeed returned, and were at that
moment no great distance off; but the cache was apparently in the same
state in which they had left it, the inscription on the tree was unaltered;
and again, though assistance was so near, it never reached the heroes of
our story.
As in the annals of arctic voyages, one missing party sets a train of
others in motion, each of which in its turn may do the same, and heaps a
growing burden of embarrassment on the nation who sends them: so this
18?2


party of Burke, whose failure in each of its three detachments was solely
due to two messengers losing their Avay, has caused two missions to be
sent by sea to Carpentaria and another overland to the same destination
from Queensland. In addition to these Mr. Howitt was also equipped,
who succeeded, as we have seen, in his search, and is now under instruc-
tions to proceed on new explorations.
The camels did their duty well across the desert country of which
Cooper?s Creek is the northern metropolis: plenty of them are reported
to remain alive and in good health. But the sphere of their usefulness
is limited ; in the more northern parts of the continent, horses are clearly
the most useful animals for an exploring party.
There is thus a great movement of discovery in various parts of
Eastern Australia. The sheep-farmers on their side are not idle, for
parties have pushed westwards from Queensland in search of good
grazing-land, until they reached to within two hundred miles of the line
traversed by Burke. The chief inquiry now is whether the country
bordering the northern shores of Australia will be a profitable site for
English colonists. The fear is, lest it be too hot and humid for a pastoral
country, and not humid enough for a valuable tropical settlement. The
question is still unsolved, whether sheep of any breed productive of
wool can thrive continuously far within the tropics. Experience both of
Queensland and of South Africa is more negative than positive; it simply
shows that no sub-tropical latitude has yet been reached, where wool is an
impossibility. Again, as for sheep, so for men: it is still an open question
how far to the northward the Anglo-Saxon racte can thrive in the peculiar
climate of Australia. There are abundant data for argument; but the
history of our settlements is too limited and the world is too small for
instances to be adduced which are truly apposite. If our race and our
sheep succeed in Australia as well as the Dutch Boers have succeeded in
Southern Africa, we shall have little cause to complain.
