

£fe*TH P'PrWS'
lUu fk
|~For the information of Ministers on Deputation .]
RECENT INTELLIGENCE
FROM
THE WESLEYAN MISSIONS IN AUSTRALASIA AND
POLYNESIA.
AUSTRALASIA.
Extract of a Letter from the Rev. John Eggleston , General Secretary of the
A ustralasian Wesley an-Methodist
July 30 th, 1801.
It was with much regret that I had
to leave an honoured name off the draft
—one that has been so long and so use-
fully associated without Mission affairs.
This mail, however, brought us the sad
intelligence of Mr. Farmer’s death, and
we cannot but feel, that “ a Prince and
a great man has fallen in our Israel.”
I had not the honour of his personal ac-
quaintance, but I have long revered him
for his princely munificence, and for his
powerful religious influence in the ex-
alted position which he occupied. On
his account his departure cannot be
regretted. He now moves in a higher
sphere, and reaps the benefit of his con-
sistent devotion to his L *rd and Master;
but his bereaved family deserves the
sympathies of all God’s Israel.
I have not yet had time to read the
“Watchman” papers, having had to
make up a mail for the islands since the
English mail arrived; but by a glance
I see you have had a glorious anniver-
sary, and announced the fact as a year of
unprecedented prosperity. Blessed'be
God, he appears to be rising in majesty
to maintain his own cause—he is power-
fully dashing to pieces all dynasties
that oppose his truth, and evidently
ripening his church for the final struggle
of the earth’s conquest to Christ.
The intelligence from China is most
stimulating. We have a large Chinese
population in these colonies open to
Christian effort; but lam sorry to say,
we lack agents. We hare been com-
pelled to suspend our Mission in
Victoria. Leong-a-Toe, who was use-
Missionary Society, dated Sydney,
fully engaged there, has returned to
China, and is labouring in connexion
with the London Missionaries in his
native land. Were it possible for us
to have a native agent or two sent from
China, the Chinese here seem willing to
receive instruction. They contributed
liberally towards the erection of a chapel
in Victoria ; but that place of worship
is now closed for want of one who can
conduct service in it. Can you do any-
thing for us ?
The New-Zealand intelligence re-
ceived since my last is contained in the
Quarterly Notices I sent you. The
native meeting has ended in worse than
nothing. The Governor’s ultimatum
was cast aside as inconvenient to consider
and reply to. and a document was sent
back, covertly intimating, that they
could not submit to British rule, but
asking the Governor to wait awhile and
argue the case instead of fighting, as the
one would last so much longer than the
other. There seems to be every pro-
spect of a destructive war.
Colonel Smythe, Her Majesty’s Com-
missioner to Fiji, has returned. He
expresses great respect for the Mis-
sionaries, and admiration of their work.
In the July Notice, you will find the
copy of a letter sent to the Chairman of
the District, on leaving, thanking him
and the Missionaries for their courtesy
and assistance. He stated to me that
all Fiji seemed to be open for our efforts,
and he rejoiced when I informed him of
the reinforcement that had been sent,
but said he wished it had been double


the number. The Missionaries have left about a fortnight since, intending to
been gratified with the evident effort of
the Colonel to give every sanction to
them in the eyes of the natives. Mr.
Binner, in referring to the Commissioner
and his lady, says, “A more agreeable
and interesting couple it is impossible to
associate with. The Colonel seems to
be well informed on almost every subject,
and we have found his conversations
both interesting and instructive. He is,
moreover, a devoted Christian, and his
lady is in every respect worthy of him.
Should the British take possession of
these islands, I hope they will make him
the Governor. Religion and morality
would then be respected, and vice in its
varied forms, both among the natives
and whites, would be frowned down.”
I have thought it well to record the
above for your information, as the
Colonel will soon be in England. He
return by way of Panama.
Yesterday, the “ Yarra ” arrived from
Fiji, and brought the pleasing in-
telligence that the “John Wesley ” had
safely arrived in Fiji. Mr. Calvert
wrote a short note from Bau to say,
that the Mission party were all well; the
date is June 11th. It contains no
particulars, the “Yarra” being about
to leave from another part of the group.
Messrs. Whittley, Royce, and Baird,
have come in the vessel. The latter
two are greatly emaciated by protracted
and severe affliction. A medical man
from Melbourne, who was passing
through Fiji, urged the Chairman to
have them removed at once, as the only
possible means of saving their lives.
The voyage has done them good ; but
they are very weakly.
Copy of a Letter addressed to the Rev. Joseph Waterhouse, Chairman of the Fiji
District , by Colonel Smythe, Her Majesty's Commissioner to Fiji, dated
Levuka, Ovalau, May loth, 18(51,
On the eve of my departure for Eng-
land, I fulfil a very agreeable duty in
expressing to the Wesleyan-Methodist
Missionaries in Fiji my acknowledg-
ments for the ready and valuable as-
sistance I have received from them in the
prosecution of the inquiry entrusted to
me by Her Majesty’s Government; and
I beg you will do me the favour, as
Chairman of the District, to convey to
these gentlemen this expression of my
sentiments, and to accept, at the same
time, my particular thanks for having
accompanied me round the coasts of
Viti-levu and Yanua-levu, at, I fear,
much personal inconvenience.
The satisfactory reception which I
have everywhere received from the
native Chiefs, I attribute in a great
measure to the favourable impression of
England and its Government, produced
by the loyalty and patriotism for which
the Missionary body in Fiji is so dis-
tinguished.
In sincere admiration of the zeal and
devotion of those who have been, and
who are, engaged in the great work of
the evangelization of Fiji,
Believe me to be,
&c., See.
FIJI.
Our friends will read with interest the following narrative of a tour
in Fiji. The Missionaries have felt it to be their duty to afford every
assistance to Colonel Smythe, as Her Majesty’s Commissioner. The
narrative has been forwarded by the Rev. Joseph Waterhouse, and is
dated Lythville, Rewa, Fiji, September 27th, 1860.
I have just returned from a five
weeks’ tour as interpreter to H.B.M.
Commissioner, Colonel Smythe, R.A.
UNCOMFORTABLE PLACE OF WOR-
SHIP.
On Saturday, August 18th, I em-
barked on board a small double canoe,
and ran along the coast to Toguru, where
we slept for the night. The people in
the adjacent towns and villages are all
Heathen, though so near to our Rewa
station. But there are two or three
small villages near Toguru where the
people have embraced Christianity, and
I was desirous of visiting them prior to
the arrival of the Commissioner. The
next day was Sunday, and on account of
the arrangements I had made I was
sorry to find that a heavy rain was fall-'


ing, with no prospect of cessation. It We landed, and I told our crew to put
was too wet and cold to remain out of our goods on shore; but they wished
doors, and the house was so full of
smoke that I could scarcely see or speak.
But we contrived to have two services
in the house, and one marriage was
celebrated. It was so stormy that we
feared to venture amongst the mangrove
swamps to any of the towns.
MORAL DARKNESS OF A HEATHEN
CHIEF.
On Monday the weather cleared up,
and we hastened to Navua, and landed
without delay to pay our respects to
Kuruduadua, the principal Chief. He
is a most ferocious, cruel, and warlike
Chief, by reputation well known to me,
but I had never seen him. He received
me very graciously, and made several
inquiries respecting my brother Samuel.
He said that he himself had given up
cannibalism, but that his people continued
its practice. In conversing on the subject
of religion, he expressed himself as being
almost a Christian. Measuring about
the sixteenth part of an inch on one end
of his finger, he remarked that between
the customs of his tribe and those of
Christians, there existed a little differ-
ence, as small as that on his finger,
which difference was caused by the
trifling matters of cannibalism and
polygamy.
FIJIAN TRAVELLING.
On Tuesday Colonel Smythe’s party
started for Namosi, the inland capital.
Dr. Seeman and Mr. Consul Pritchard
were of the company. Colonel Smythe
and I took our seats on a small single
canoe, on which our luggage had been
placed. Dr. Seeman’s party embarked
on another canoe. The Chief and some
of his people accompanied the expedi-
tion, being, conveyed in other canoes.
We proceeded up the river at a tolerably
rapid rate, considering how decidedly
opposed to our advance was the great
and continuous fall in the water. .It
was a lovely day, and we enjoyed the
beautiful scenery, which, in the opinion
of the Commissioner, surpassed that on
the Rhine. Forcing our canoes up the
rapids was very exciting work, and re-
quired skilful management. Often were
we saved from mishap by some of our
crew jumping into the water to keep the
canoe “ head on ” to the mighty rush.
At length we arrived at a rapid that was
worse than one at which we had pre-
viously unloaded in order to secure the
safe transit of our stores and luggage.
to save themselves from the trouble this
would occasion, and, before I could for-
bid them to run the risk, I saw them
heading the rapid. In an instant the
torrent swept away the little vessel, and
dashed it against a precipitous rock
which overhung one of the banks of the
river, breaking the outrigger, swamping
the canoe, and leaving the stores, clothes,
bedding, and crew swimming in the
water. Congratulating Colonel Smythe
on his personal escape, we hastily col-
lected our traps, and secured almost all
the packages, though their contents were
by no means improved. By means of
another canoe we succeeded in reaching
the town where we were to spend the
night, and then we tried to dry some of
our clothing. We found the people en-
gaged in war with the adjacent towns.
The “ soldiers ” had returned from an
unsuccessful ambush, and fortunately
had not succeeded in pouncing upon any
unlucky traveller. In the evening the
customary honours were paid to the
Chief. The knva was prepared in due
form amidst the chanting of a piece of
music, the rehearsers of which performed
various evolutions with their hands, fin-
gers, and heads. The gods were then
invoked, and the beverage handed to the
Chief. Afterwards we had family prayer
in English, amidst the silent attention
of several Heathen.
FIJIAN IDEAS OF GOOD GOVERN-
MENT.
In the morning we resumed our task.
When we could make no further advance
by water, we travelled by land, walking
as usual in single file, the Chief cleverly
taking the lead to prevent Colonel
Smythe from going too fast for him.
He showed us the sites of the various
towns which he had destroyed, and
related the history of an exploit in
which he had cut off a hundred of his
enemies, pointing out the very spot.
He modestly informed us that he was
the best ruler in all Fiji. “ I allow no
thieving here,” said he; “I club to
death all thieves—they don’t do that at
Rewa or Bau.” During our walk we
had occasionally a fine bird’s-eye view
of the country. We saw no plains, but
series after series of undulating ranges.
We were much pleased with the situa-
tion of Namosi, at which we arrived
during the afternoon. It is in a valley
surrounded by romantic scenery, and
watered by the river which runs towards


Rewa, and then empties itself into the listened very attentively and respectfully.
EVIDENCES OF CANNIBALISM.
On Thursday we rambled through
the town and suburbs. In front of the
large Strangers’ House we noticed a
long row of small stones, each of which
had been placed there on the occasion of
a human body having been there cooked
and eaten. A sad page in the ledger of
Namosi cannibalism ! All scepticism
of this Fijian custom that may have been
lurking in the minds of visiters vanished
as we found tree after tree bestudded
with the bones of those who had been
eaten, whilst grinning skulls looked
down on us as though to confirm our
faith.
PREACHING TO THE HEATHEN.
On Friday, whilst the party ascended
the loftiest peak in sight, I endeavoured
to scatter a little seed amongst the
Heathen who were collecting in the
town, in anticipation of the state audience
with H.B, Majesty’s Commissioner.
Before a large company of Chiefs and
people I gave an account of the Great
Creator, and of the original state and
subsequent fall of man. They loudly
applauded Adam’s cleverness in blaming
the woman, and Eve’s in accusing the
serpent. I was afterwards requested to
tell them about “Noah and the flood,”
with which demand I complied. Before
I left the house, the Chief said to those
present, “ These Missionaries are our
true friends; they want us to live in
peace and quietness, and to cultivate the
soil; but you slaves can’t understand
these matters.” Many referred in glow-
ing terms to the visit of my brother
Samuel, and Kuruduadua gave a vivid
description of his visit to the house of
the Rev. William Moore.
On Saturday Colonel Smythe met the
Chiefs in the assembly-ground. At the
close of the official interview a native
war-council was held. One of the
native orators made the remark that the
town against which they were about to
war must be conquered, that peace might
be established, which would enable them
to cultiva’e cotton and yams to clothe
and feed the British.
PREACHES TO THREE HUNDRED
HEATHEN.
On Sunday I preached on “God now
commandeth all men everywhere to re-
pent,” to a congregation of about three
hundred male adults, all Heathens, who
Now and then one or another would say
aloud, “ Very good ; ” or, “It’s true.”
When I had concluded I requested the
audience to maintain perfect quietness
for a few moments whilst I engaged in
prayer to the true and only God. They
granted the favour, and not an individual
made the slightest disturbance. As I
was leaving, one of the Chiefs thanked
me publicly for my “ instruction.”
At noon we started for another town,
at which it was thought advisable that
we should rest for the night, leaving Dr.
Seeman to pursue his professional re-
searches. In the evening I had the
opportunity of conversing with several
other Heathens, the majority of whom
bad also never before seen a Missionary
or Teacher.
On Monday we travelled rapidly, and
reached the “ Pegasus ’’about four p.m.
Shooting down the rapids required
steady nerves ; but so soon as our crew
had secured our confidence by exhibiting
their ability, we quite enjoyed the ex-
citement, Colonel Smythe carried on
board a wooden fork used for eating
man-flesh, and a stone hatchet, as
mementos of his visit to Namosi.
FIJIAN THEOLOGY.
O, how my heart warmed with pity
for these people, enthralled by the vain
traditions received from their fathers]!
Every man’s father is his god ! Though
drowned, or killed and eaten, yet he is
deified after death. I saw a Chief sur-
rounded by his three sons. Perceiving
that one of his legs was diseased, I in-
quired into the nature of the complaint
“It has been afflicted,” said he, “for
several weeks, and ray god has not re-
stored it, though I have presented costly
offerings.” “And who is your god?”
I asked. “My father—yonder is his
grave,” was the reply. “ Did you leave
your gifts on the grave, or resume them
for your own use ?” “Of course, I left
them on the grave,” was the answer.
He was then interrogated as to whether
he could, while now living, heal the leg
of one of his own sons in the event of
its becoming diseased. He confessed
that he could not. “ Then,” inquired
I, “how can you, when dead, save your
son from affliction?” He saw and felt
his dilemma; but pleaded, as an excuse,
the sanction of antiquity.
NATIVE AGENTS REQUIRE OVER-
SIGHT.
August 30th,—At Nadroga, a district


in which war now rages, in addition to to go far towards healing the sores
hostilities confined to the Heathen popu- inflicted by a pine-apple club. The
lation, there is a large force combining
to drive the Christian natives into the
sea. In reality, the latter is a conflict
between barbarism and incipient civiliza-
tion. The people were glad to see a
Missionary. I was sorry to find that
some of our native agents had not
maintained neutrality between the
Christians and Heathens, which, they
were obliged to confess, was not only
against orders, but had proved to be, so
far as they were personally concerned,
bad policy. Since my visit in 1851 the
bones of those human beings who had
been eaten have been collected together
and buried. The evening was spent in
examining and instructing the School-
masters and Scripture-readers. Mr.
Moore has done a noble work in prepar-
ing so many agents for these benighted
parts of Fiji; but they are so far from a
Missionary, that their progress in indivi-
dual acquirements is scarcely possible.
INSECURITY OF LIFE IN FIJI.
Though in some danger, yet I felt it
my duty to sleep on shore to encourage
my native colleagues to abide by their
post of honour. Only last Tuesday a
man was killed by a “ kidnapper.”
There is no safety in going outside of the
house after dark. In some cases the
kidnappers enter the house, close or
surround the doors, dispatch the inmates,
and make their escape. In the event of
an occurrence of this sort, I suggested
that, instead of allowing the intruders to
kill us, we should close in on them and
bind them.
COLONEL SMYTHE’S EFFORTS TO
PROMOTE PEACE.
31st Busy all the morning with the
Teachers, &c. At noon the Com-
missioner held his meeting. Anxious
to arrest the war between the Heathens
and Christians, Colonel Smythe sent a
native messenger to request the Heathen
Chief to pay him a friendly visit. The
man performed his errand, and delivered
his message. The enemy then clubbed
him, and sent him back with the remark,
that if two had been sent, one would have
been killed and eaten, and the other
allowed to return and report the fate of
his comrade. Under these circumstances
they only half-killed him, and sent the
other half of the poor man to tell a .very
sad tale and show his wounds. The
Colonel was so pleased with the way in
which this man had discharged his duty,
that he made him a present which seemed
stand which H.M. Commissioner took on
this occasion, as an advocate for peace,
was peculiarly gratifying to me as a
Missionary, and made a great impression
on the native mind. The Colonel now
returned home, whilst we proceeded to
visit other tribes.
FIJIAN CHIEF “ WITHOUT NATURAL
AFFECTION.”
Sunday, September 2d.—At Vundah.
When last here it was not considered
safe for me to land. We had Hnglish
service on board in the morning; at the
close of which Colonel Smythe politely
sent me on shore in the ketch’s boat.
The day was spent in conversing with
the people, and preaching to a very few
recent converts. As I held intercourse
with the Chief, I could scarcely bring
my mind to believe that he was so blood-
guilty as 1 knew him to be. But he
said he was becoming a better man, and
that without the help of the Missionaries,
and he thought that if I would visit him
occasionally, he would soon become a
Christian. Yet when asked as to the
welfare of a brother, he confessed he had
just ordered him to be killed, and given
his body to be eaten. Another “ almost
Christian,” truly !
4th. Went up the Ba river. “A
Chief like a god ! ” was the exclamation
with which they greeted Colonel Bmythe.
We could get very little information
from the Chief in charge. The Colonel’s
dress, and the Colonel’s present, had
quite turned his head.
sth.'—Held a meeting at Vatia. The
Chief was very uneasy on account of
having heard that there was some plot
arranged to effect bis assassination. Some
Vewa people have been making improper
use of the name of the British Consul;
but the Commissioner succeeded in as-
suring him that his fears, so far as the
British were concerned, were groundless.
7th.—Arrived at Na Vatu, Rakiraki,
Here again we found wais and rumours
of wars. The evening was taken up in
administering counsels of peace.
Bth.—l preached out of doors to about
two hundred and fifty people. Daring
the service the Chiefs were assembled in
another part of the town “ making peace ”
with the powers that be. The principal
Chief seemed thankful for a settlement
of these long-continued disturbances. I
hope no enemy will sow “ lares.”
11th At Na Duri, Muthuata, We
found the town in a state of great ex-
citement. Retova, the ex Chief, had


made his appearance on the coast, an- stopped us, and for a few moments I
nouncing that he was authorized by the hesitated as to whether I ought to ven-
Consul to declare war.
Here I spent four days among the
people, and found full employment.
Elilzer was with me, and evidently en-
joyed my company. He is one of our
best native Missionaries, yet he requires
occasional advice.
15th.—The meeting took place in the
morning. To the surprise of many,
Colonel Smythe commended the policy
of the Chiefs who had not retaliated on
Retova. At noon we set sail.
Sunday, 16th.—Early In the morning
I preached at the beautiful island of
Tavea, Being ferried across the main
land, we walked over to Bua, a distance
of about sixteen miles, over which we
found but few trees to shade us. It was
a very hot day; but I bore the journey
better than poor Eliezer. 1 again
preached at Lekutu to about three hun-
dred people, half of whom could not find
room in the church. When within three
miles of Bua, a deep and broad river
ture into it, until I had waited to cool
myself first; but the sun was setting,
and it would soon be dark, so, without
further ado, I swam across, and thank-
ful am I that I sustained no injury. A
good night’s rest at Bua was truly
welcome.
17th.—Colonel Smythe held his meet-
ing, and then parted with Eliezer. I
regret exceedingly that Bua remains
unoccupied by an English Missionary.
2lst -Arrived at home in the even-
ing, after twenty-four hours’ incessant
toil in our faithful little canoe. Found
all well; but was grieved to hear of the
serious illness of Mrs. Whittley: may
it please the Lord to stay His afflictive
hand!
28th All were well when last we
heard from Lakemba and Somosomo.
Our devoted brother Langham has
been laid aside, but was recovering
by last advice.
The following letter is from the same Missionary, and should
encourage prayer for the safety of the agents of the Society.
Extract of a Letter from the Same , dated Lythville, Rewa, November 2Gth, 1860.
I wrote you a few lines last month,
announcing the distressing intelligence
of Mrs. Whittley’s death, and acquaint-
ing you with Mrs. W aterhouse’s danger-
ous illness.
Since then we have had much domestic
affliction. Joseph was seized with ery-
sipelas, accompanied with delirium and
high fever, and was confined to his bed
for a fortnight. The other children have
also been ill.
So much sickness, with the known
fact of our cottage being unhealthy, on
account of its low situation, decided me
to erect a bamboo cottage on some mound
whilst our house could be rebuilt on
piles, or removed to a drier locality. In
the pursuit of this undertaking, I un-
fortunately became the subject of one
of those episodes, providentially so rare,
that sometimes occur in Mission history.
About eight miles up the Rewa river
you meet with the first rising ground to
be found on its banks. There is a small
mound called Davui Levu standing per-
haps seventy or eighty feet high, and
furnishing a summit large enough for
one good-sized house. As the adjacent
tract of country has become the property
of Mr. Swanston, late acting-Consul, I
jpade arrangements with him to enaole
me to erect a temporary summer retreat;
but as the mountaineers are in the habit
of coming to the hill to attack Nausori,
a town exactly opposite, with which they
are at war, I had to make the way plain
with them also.
On my first visit to them they said
they would not object if certain inland
Chiefs consented. Having negotiated
with those to whom I was referred, as I
thought successfully, and a messenger
having come on Monday, the 12ch in-
stant, from the adjacent village, affirming
the general willingness of the Heathen
to help me, I resolved on losing no more
time, as the summer was advancing. I
was struck with the apparent anxiety of
the messenger to gain full possession of
our intended proceedings, and remarked
to Mr. Moore that I thought that I had
better return with him to see the people
again; but he said that I had better
build at once, as they evidently quite
understood the affair, so I named the
Wednesday following at noon as the
time when we would begin the building.
At four o’clock in the morning of that
day, I started with two lads in my boat,
and we were to be followed by the
builders in their canoes. Before six
a.m. I was opposite the hill, and called


at Nausori to see that the people there fairly concluded, the Chief said, “ The
would not fire on my workmen, in accord-
ance with our arrangements. Taking
the Teacher on board, we hurried on
towards Waila. Leaving a native-in
charge of the boat, we proceeded towards
the town—myself and two natives. Our
walk required the greatest care and.
vigilance, on account of the little bamboo
pits which bestrew the path, prepared
for the feet of an enemy. The town is
encircled with double rows of high
bamboo fencing and closed gates. So
soon as we called for admittance we
heard the fguards say, “It is the Mis-
sionary—he will be killed to-day.”
TREACHERY OF THE HEATHEN.
The thought of treachery had never
entered my head. Mr. Moore and I had
been on most friendly terms with the
Heathen, and had endeavoured to secure
their good-will and co-operation. The
fact of going to live amongst them for a
season ought to have been a proof of our
willingness to place ourselves in their
power, and appeared to be a likely means
of gaining their confidence; but from
the nature of the conversation that was
going on whilst the gate was being
opened, I saw reason to apprehend
danger. My two native companions
wished me to turn and flee ; but I could
not believe that any injury was intended,
and I knew that we wtre so far from the
boat that we could not make our escape.
The Teacher said, “ Sir, let us flee;
hear what they say—we shall be killed.”
This he repeated three or four times in
a low tone; but it was too late. We
should be caught in the pits, seized
before our boats could be got out of the
narrow creek which leads into the river,
or secured before we could repass the
hill; besides, to retreat would sanction
the idea that we were on an unfriendly
errand. To my unfortunate companions
I said, “ It is too late,” just as the outer
gate was opened.
PERILOUS CIRCUMSTANCES.'
We were immediately surrounded by
a band of musketeers with blackened
faces, whose very appearance bore
evidence of evil intentions. I demanded
to be conducted to the friendly Chief of
Waila, Our ferocious guards conducted
us to him. We found him surrounded
by evil counsellors, strange mountaineer
warriors. I made known my errand—
that we had come in accordance with his
message, and that a number were follow-
ing on to build the house. Before I had
mountaineers fear that your residence
here will lead to peace, and they are
descending in great numbers to oppose
by force the building of your house.”
1 replied, “ Why use force ? Only say
they object, and I will withdraw.”
“ Withdraw ! ” said one, “you must die
to-day. We know you. You lived at
Bau. We hate the Chief of Bau. You
have come on his behalf to lay a trap
for us, and we will kill you to day. No
Bau traps for us.” Another added,
“Yes,the Missionary must die to-day.”
I stood up, and said, “Well, as you
object, I will wait till you are willing,
and shall return to the boat, to go and
order the builders to return back.”
They then clamoured for my death.
Ten additional musketeers now arrived
—the advance-guard of an approaching
torce. The cowards deliberately loaded
their muskets with ball to kill me. One
stood up and played with his club at the
back of my skull. I knew that the very
hairs of my head were numbered—it
seemed as though the falling of one of
them would have been the signal for a
slaughter. Full of most serious appre-
hension, I retained a bold face. Mes-
sengers were sent to kill the lad in the
boat. But I cannot describe the scene.
I am told that I betrayed no fear, and
that I spoke wisely, kindly, and firmly.
About a hundred cannibals with loaded
muskets, declaring they would and must
kill me, proclaimed that there was but a
step between me and death. I involun-
tarily thought of the martyred Williams,
and of the delivered Calvert, and won-
dered what would be my fate. A
moment would decide. I opened out
my hands, and asked them what weapons
I had brought. But reasoning was out
of the question.
EXTRAORDINARY DELIVERANCE.
In a peremptory tone I requested the
Waila Chief to lead me to the boat.
Ten times I repeated my request, and
ten times he remained silent, intimating
by that act our impending fate. Once
a noisy mountaineer forbade him. Then
I told the mountaineer to conduct us,
and, to my astonishment, he said, “Let
the Waila Chief take you.” He rose
with his musket, and led the way, and
I followed him closely with my trembling
companions. The crowd roared with
unconcealed rage; but the watchful eye
and unseen arm of Omnipotence pre-
vented any from touching me. When
we reached the boat the Chief said,
“ Haste for your life,” and you may be


sure we strained every nerve to get
away.
Just when out of reach of their mus-
ket-range a volley was poured forth.
We remained out of range for two or
three hours to prevent any stray canoe
from proceeding. The lad, whom we
had left in the boat told us they went to
kill him, and waited to hear first of our
destruction. The few trifles that were
in the boat were seized.
What a wonderful deliverance ! How
encouraging to a Missionary’s faith !
What an answer to the prayers of the
church lor our protection I
I attribute our salvation, under God,
to our unexpectedly early arrival. One
hour later the plot would have been
carried out. Two or three Rewa Chiefs,
who were following, were detained at a
town that was privy to the treachery,
and it is supposed that they would have
been killed so soon as it was known that
the Missionary was secured.
The next day I found that my system
had received a shock, but it is over, I
hope. I am now erecting a cottage on
the first mound on the coast west-
ward.
Extract of a Letter from the Same to the Editor of the Melbourne “ Wesleyan
Chronicle ,” dated Rewa, April 30 th, 1861.
Rev. and dear Sir, —You will
be pleased to hear that, amidst many
localized re-actions, our great work is
prospering.
War is still the order of the day
amongst the Heathen tribes. The
largest cannibal feast that has occurred
since my last consisted of seventy poor
fellows who were treacherously mur-
dered by the mountaineer clans, lately
visited by Her Majesty’s Commissioner,
Colonel Smythe, R.A., and myself. On
the occasion of our visit a war-con-
ference amongst the heads of native
departments closed the proceedings
of the day. Shortly afterwards the
Chief of Na Vua attacked the town
that was at enmity with him ; but was
unable to take it, though he succeeded
in killing a few of the enemy. Contrary
to custom, the bodies were left on the
field of battle. In consequence of this
unusual clemency, the enemy proposed
terms of peace, which were granted. A
few months afterwards the Chief’s bro-
ther mustered a large army, under the
pretence of molesting another town
which was at war with them. When
the forces were collected, instead of
being led to the town supposed to be the
object of attack, they were conducted to
the town with which peace had been
recently concluded. The town was
taken by surprise, and about one hun-
dred of the inhabitants massacred in
cold blood.
At present we are able to pay but
little direct attention to the Heathen.
Our converts require all our labours;
but their influence will tell on their
Heathen friends.
We are now in the midst of our Mis-
sionary Meetings. We expect to raise
£1,300 this year. This is very gratify-
ing; and, as you will acknowledge, is
really munificent, considering the cir-
cumstances of the people. We are
training our native churches to support
their own Native Teachers, to erect their
own churches, to pay for their own
books, and to contribute towards the
support of their foreign Missionaries, so
as to enable the churches of Christen-
dom to enlarge their sphere of labour in
Heathen countries. South Sea Missions
may, comparatively, soon be rendered
self-supporting. Unlike New-Zealand,
we have the cocoa-nut to fall back upon;
and the sooner we are financially inde-
pendent, the better for China and India.
But shall we not then want a Conference
of our own, “ affiliated,” of course, with
that of Australasia ? And why not a
Conference for Fiji ? We shall need
three or four hundred good Native
Ministers, and a few English Ministers
to train and lead them.
The present year has been character-
ized by a most important movement,
namely, the establishment of self-sup-
porting schools for the education and
training of Preachers and Schoolmasters.
A scheme I proposed in our December
Quarterly Meeting was unanimously and
enthusiastically adopted ; and we imme-
diately started an institution at Benga,
and another at Rewa. The students
were to clothe and feed themselves,
build their own houses, and erect
the school-room. At Benga we
have now seven houses, a school-
room and Teacher's house. At Rewa,
surrounding the late Mrs. Cargill’s
grave, have been built sixteen houses, a
school-room, and Tutor’s dwelling-
house. In the two institutions we have
about fifty under instruction. These
establishments would have cost, for the


items already named, at least £2OO per rendering it more cool, but perhaps not
annum. All this, then, is clear gain
to the Mission fund. We shall only
want tables, forms, and stationery from
the Committee. The Teachers will
impart a knowledge of writing, arithme-
tic, &c., whilst the theological training
will be under my own more immediate
superintendence.
My esteemed friend, the Rev. J.
Carey, has also commenced one in his
Circuit; and the Rev. Messrs. Royce
and Baird are arranging for one at
Kandava.
The first year will be the most diffi-
cult, owing to the erection of buildings,
and the management required to secure
the articles of food. Afterwards there
will be comparative ease, especially as
the students will have their own planta-
tions to support them. Two or three
large bells would be acceptable.
The summer has been unusually wet,
so healthy. You will be very sorry to
hear that the Rev. C. J. Baird has been
very ill for several months, and remains
in a critical state. The climate does not
agree with him; and I fear that a return
to Australia will be necessary. This I
shall much regret, as I hoped to have
the pleasure of his company and assist-
ance during the current year.
The Missionaries expected, per
“John Wesley,” will be a seasonable
and acceptable re-inforcement; but as a
set off we shall be losing two or three of
our number. You will fully endorse
the remark of Colonel Smythe, that
“ it is surprising to contemplate by what
frequent arrivals it is necessary to keep
up only a moderate establishment of
Missionaries in these seas.” For obvi-
ous reasons, the church must depend
upon Native Ministers for the work of
evangelizing the world.
Copy of a Letter addressed to the “ Athenasum ” by Dr, Berth old Seemann, the
Naturalist appointed by Her Majesty's Government to accompany Colonel
Smythe, Her Majesty's Commissioner, in his visit to Fiji.
( Extracted from the “ Sydney Empire ” newspaper, of March 7th, 1861.)
The sight of the “Athenaeum,” at
this out-of-the-way place strongly re-
calls a promise made before my depar-
ture from England to send occasional
tidings of my wanderings in Fiji. 1 have
now been several months in this group,
exploring it in various directions ; and
though much has been written on it, and
that, too, by competent hands, there is
still abundant material for observation,
and a fine field for making collections in
all branches of natural history. My
head-quarters for the first month were at
Somosomo, in the island of Taviuai,
where I stayed under the hospitable
roof of Captain Wilson, who has
formed there a cocoa-nut oil establish-
ment ; cocoa oil, tortoise shell, and
beche-le-mer forming the staple export
of these islands, to which cotton will
soon be added, several species of this
all-important production having become
naturalized in various parts. Taviuni
is a rocky island of secondary magnitude,
girded by cocoa-nut palms, and densely
covered with forests, full of fine timber,
and abounding in wild pigeons and a
species of paroquets highly valued by
the Tonguese, and still more by the
Samoans, on account of the red feathers,
with which they ornament their mats.
ASCENT OF THE MOUNTAIN", AC-
COMPANIED BY THE QUEEN OF
SOMOSOMO.
The island is about two thousand five
hundred feet high, and the ascent to its
summit very steep. The first time I
went up, a numerous suite attended.
The Queen of Somosomo, hearing of
my intention, joined the expedition with
her whole court. At daybreak we found
her train waiting for us, at the banks of
a river, all fully equipped for the journey.
A few strokes of the pen will describe
their dress. The queen wore two
fathoms of white calico around her loins,
fresh fern-leaves around her head, the
purple blossom of the Chinese rose in a
large hole pierced through one of her
ears, and a bracelet made of a shell.
No other garment graced her stately
person, and yet she looked truly majestic.
Her attendants dispensed with the calico
altogether, and were simply attired in
portions of banana and cocoa- nut leaves,
fresh from the bash. In our European
clothes we had no chance to keep up
with them, and they were always a long
distance ahead of us, waiting for our
coming up, and enjoying themselves
in opening cocoa nuts and smoking
cigarettes, which they made with dried


banana leaves. The summit of the
island was found to be an extinct crater
filled with water, and on the north-
eastern part covered with a vegetable
mass, so much resembling in colour and
appearance the green fat of the turtle as
to have given rise to the popular belief
that the fat of all the turtles eaten in
Fiji is transported to this lake by su-
pernatural agency; one of the numerous
spirits with which the wild fancy of the
natives has peopled the group taking it
at night out of their stomachs and plac-
ing it there. This jelly-like mass be-
longs to some of the lower Alya, and is
several feet thick. We were not aware,
until it was too late, that this singular
production was only floating on the top
of the lake, forming a kind of crust, or
else we should not have ventured upon
it. On the contrary, we took it to be
part of a swamp that might safely be
crossed, though not without difficulty ;
for we were always up to our knees, and
often to our hips, in this vegetable turtle-
fat, and had to save ourselves oc-
casionally from sinking into inextricable
positions by crawling along like reptiles.
Where the lake was free from this Alga,
the water was limped and cool, and we
freely partook of it when eating the cold
yams, taro, and fowls which formed our
dinner. The sides of the lake were
covered with hollies, scarlet myrtles, and
a fine feathery palm, closely allied to
that of New-Zealand and Norfolk-
Island, but different. It was night be-
fore I regained Somosomo, all the
natives being home long before me ; for
as soon as they saw the sun getting low,
there was no retaining them any longer.
Having to be in the forest after nightfall
is to them something terrible. They
see ghosts and demons starting up in
every direction, and fear to fall victims
to their anger.
CHANGE EFFECTED BY THE GOS-
PEL IN SOMOSOMO.
The town of Somosomo was, until a
few years ago, the most notorious place
in Fiji for cannibalism ; and the early
Missionaries, after much discourage-
ment, had to give up their station, it
was then a place of some importance ;
but constant feuds have reduced the
number of its inhabitants considerably,
and the few that are left have for the
most part become Christians, —it being
now more than three years since the last
man was eaten. The Chief himself,
certainly the finest Fijian I have seen,
both in regard to stature and features,
still remains a Heathen ; but his Queen
(who holds a higher rank than himself)
is a devout Christian. The people are
very well behaved, and, although they
had plenty of chances of stealing, I did
not lose anything of consequence. For
knives, Jew’s-harps, calico, and other
trifles, they readily assisted in making a
fence for an experimental cotton plant-
ation I established, felling trees, and
going into the forest with me. From
Somosomo I shifted my head-quarters
to Port Kinnaird, on the south-eastern
side of the island of Ovalau, where I
was kindly received by Mr. Pritchard,
the British Consul, and where I hoped
to find Colonel Smythe, whom I had
been directed to join by Her Majesty’s
Government. Owing to the war in
New-Zealand, the gallant Colonel had
not yet arrived, and Mr. Pritchard and
myself therefore determined to proceed
eastward, to explore the little known
parts of Yiti Levu, one of the conti-
nents of the Fijian world. W e set off on
the 28th of July, in the consular gig, and
on the same day reached Bau, the capital
of Fiji, where we stopped at the house
of Mr. Collis, a gentleman connected
with the Mission.
GREAT CHANGE IN BAU.
Until 1854, Bau was opposed to the
Missionaries, and the ovens in which the
dead bodies of human victims were
baked were scarcely ever cold. Since
then, however, a great change has taken
place. The King and all his court
embraced Christianity; the Heathen
temples are in ruins ; the sacred groves
in the neighbourhood cut down; and in
the great square, where formerly the can-
nibal feasts took place, a large church
has been erected. It was not without
emotion that I landed on this blood-
stained soil, where, probably, greater
iniquities were perpetrated than ever dis-
graced any other spot on earth. It was
about eight o’clock in the evening, and,
instead of the wild noise that greeted
former visitors, one heard nearly from
every house family prayers. To bring
about such a change has, indeed, re-
quired no slight efforts, and many valu-
able lives had to be sacrificed.; for,
although no Missionary has ever met
with a violent death, yet the list of those
who have died in the midst of their
labours is proportionally very great.
The Wesleyans, to whose disinterested-
ness the conversion of these most de-
graded of human beings is due, have, as
a Society, expended £75,000 on this
object; and if the private donations of
friends to individual Missionaries are


added, the sum swells to the respectable
amount of £BO,OOO. From Bau we
proceeded to Rewa, by way of Nakelo,
one of the great rivers of Viti Levu,
and connected by a canal with the Rewa
river. The canal is probably the greatest
piece of ingenuity ever executed in these
islands ; affording a proof of how thickly
the land must have been populated to
allow of such an undertaking, when
there were nothing but staves to dig the
ground, and baskets to carry it away.
It has not been ascertained how long
ago this canal was cut; all that can be
elucidated from inquiries, is, that it was
cut long ago, and for the purpose of
carrying out a military stratagem. We
passed the town of Rewa, and, dropping
down the river, took shelter for a few
days in the Mission at Mataisuva, where
there is an institution for training Native
Teachers, under the superintendence of
the Rev. W. Moore, who, as an apt
Fijian scholar, devotes some of the few
leisure moments he can snatch to a
subject hitherto much neglected, that of
collecting the old songs of the natives,
now fast fading away. A coasting
voyage of several days, which afforded
ample opportunities of seeking places
of interest and enriching my collection,
brought us, towards sunset on the sth of
July, to the Navua, one of the largest
rivers in Viti Levu, and not yet explored
by any scientific man. There are several
extensive deltas at its mouth, composed
of rich alluvial soil, and exceedingly
well adapted for cotton. From infor-
mation gathered, I was led to conclude
that the sago-palm was a member of
the Fijian Flora, My inquiries com-
menced in the eastern part of the group,
and I was always directed westward,
and assured at every place that I should
find the object of my search a few
miles further on ; but that not proving
the case, I began to look upon it as a
mere phantom, when at last, after
a search of several hundred miles,
GROVES OF FINE SAGO-PAL JUS.
whole groves of fine sago palms greeted
me on the banks of the Navua river.
This is an interesting discovery—
botanically, because no sago-palm had
ever been found so far south; phi-
lologically, because the plant is here
termed Soga, calling to mind the
names of Sagu, or Sago, by which it is
known in other districts peopled by the
Papuan race; and commercially, be-
cause it adds an important article to the
export list of these islands. The
Fijians made no use of the farinaceous
pith the Soga contains, though that of
the Cycas circinalis of the district is
converted into cakes eaten by the Chiefs.
VISIT TO THE HEATHEH CHIEF
KURUDUADUA.
We were soon at Navua, a town some
three miles up the river, and the resi-
dence of Kuruduadua, the great Chief
of this district. A messenger having
been despatched from our last halting-
place to announce our visit, we found
the Chieftain seated in his large house,
surrounded by councillors and attendants,
awaiting his guests. As this Chief and
his territory are but little known to the
whites, our arrival created a great
sensation. The ceremony of present-
ation is novel. On entering the house,
Wise, our Interpreter and guide, as
already schooled, addressed the Chief to
the effect that the Consul had come to
introduce a Chief from England, who
had been sent to explore the country,
and that we purposed doing ourselves
the honour of being his guest for several
days. After a few minutes silence, the
chief orator replied, in the name of
Kuruduadua, that the stranger Chief
and the Consul were welcome, for their
presence conferred a distinguished
honour on Navua, and the neighbouring
tribes should know the fact as soon as
the great drum could send forth its
rolling peals. As he concluded, all the
men in the house clapped their hands,
and exclaimed, Mana, mana, mana ! At
the same instant the great drum, or lair,
was beaten lustily, and our presence in
Navua was heralded throughout the dis-
trict. The Chief’s eyes glistened, and a
proud smile of exultation gleamed over
his face as we threw ourselves at full
length on the clean mats spread for us.
Our loquacious interpreter here began to
describe a huge iron pot that was near
the door, and to tell how wickedly it
had been appropriated to boil the car-
cases of slaughtered men instead of
beche-le-mer. A rather unpleasant feel-
ing stole over us, and we thought of
friends and homes far away. Our peace
of mind, however, was soon restored,
when the Chief proposed that we should
join him in a bowl o t'yagona, a beverage
prepared from the root of the South Sea
pepper, by being masticated by young
men, and tasting like soapsuds, jalap,
and magnesia! A baked pig and some
half-dozen baskets of yams were next
brought in by women, headed by the
Chief’s favourite wife, all crawling on
their hands and knees. Hungry as we
were, the story of the big pot made us


revolt from this frugal meal. But
Kuruduadua is not now a cannibal, and
summoning courage, and ascertaining
that it was a real pig we beheld before
us, we dined. It is a curious fact, that
Fijian etiquette does not permit the host
to partake of that which he provides for
his guests; and the Chief eyed us
askance as we ate. About this time a
carronade, that guarded the entrance to
the house, was discharged, emphatically
to demonstrate the Chief’s delight.
Yagona was masticated and drunk every
half-hour. We observed that the string
by which the bowl is suspended when
not in use was always thrown towards
the Chief. The object of this is to dis-
tinguish the “ great man ; ” for if any
one incautiously walked upright in his
presence, the club was his fate. Kuru-
Uuadua has ttn wives; and as he himself
does not exactly know the number of his
children, we are left ignorant on this
point. The great drums were beaten
every hour of the night, in honour of the
guests, but much to our annoyance, for
they kept us awake some time after we
retired. Our bed was made of several
layers of mats, and over us was a large
musquito screen, about twenty feet long,
made of the bark of the paper mulberry.
As many as eight or ten natives some-
times sleep together under one of these
screens. Before retiring, the Consul
presented various articles, as knives,
axes, prints, &c., to the Chief; and the
usual complimentary speeches expressive
of mutual confidence and good-will
ensued.
HENRY HANFORD, OR “ HARRY
THE JEW.”
On the following morning “ Harry
the Jew ” presented himself, the only
Englishman who has lived for any
length of time in the wild and unknown
regions of the interior, and has managed
to throw a halo of mystery around him-
self. His real name is Henry Hanford,
and he has been sixteen years with
Kuruduadua, living like a Fijian. His
story is full of adventure. Born in
London, he was early apprenticed, first
to one, then to another, trade ; but his
employers being all men with whom he
“ could not agree,” he then left in dis-
gust, and took to the sea. This brought
him to the South Pacific, where he dis-
covered that the Captains he had to deal
with were disagreeable men ; and, after
changing from vessel to vessel, he finally
ran away at Tonga. There, after
twelve months residence amid many
privations, partly caused by a general
famine, he perceived the Tonguese, too,
were disagreeable people, and at once
took passage in a canoe for Kadavu, in
this group. Arriving at that island in
distress, from heavy weather, the canoe
was seized, and the crew condemned to
the oven ; thus finding the Kadavu peo-
ple more disagreeable even than the
Tonguese. By strategy, however, he
succeeded in making his escape to
Kewa, where he remained some time
with other white men. To one Charles
Pickering, a celebrity of Fiji, and the
hero of some capital anecdotes, he sold a
pinchbeck watch, that only went when
carried. Whence he got this precious
article he says it is unnecessary to tell;
enough for the history, that, as soon as he
received the price thereof from Pickering,
he jumped into a boat and started off for
a distant part of the islands, condemning
the white men as a disagreeable set of
fellows. In his peregrinations, he met
one “ Flash Bob,” for whom he acted
as amanuensis in the selection and pur-
chase of a lady-love from a native Chief.
This brought him once more into con-
tact with the disagreeable whites. He
now commences a beche-le-mer estab-
lishment, in conjunction with his friend
Pickering, who had given him the name
of “ Harry the Jew,” in consequence of
the watch-transaction. After being
some months in his new business, his
house is burned by a party of natives.
He quarrels with Pickering about bis
share in the purchase of Flash Bob’s
wife. Pickering takes everything away,
leaving him once more penniless, shirt-
less, and friendless on the beach.
Kuruduadua, hearing of his forlorn con-
dition, sent him an offer to reside at
Namusi, his mountain fortress, which
offer was accepted. On reaching the
town he was met by messengers, who
carried him on their shoulders. The
Chief then gave him wives,—how many
we shall not say,—yam-plantations, taro-
gardens, pigs, and all the etceteras of
Fijian life. He was also raised to the
dignity of a brother, and allotted slaves
to attend upon him. Our hero—happy
man !—now, for the first time in his life,
found an agreeable companion in Kuru-
duadua. in return for the dignities
heaped upon him, Harry was to repair
the muskets of the tribe, and to tell the
Chief stories about the white men and
their country. Having, for about a
week, been an errand-boy to a London
apothecary, he was able to dispense
bread-pills to the sick, and thus to assume
another important stand in his new life.


I'he Chief appears to think much of this
man, and consults him upon all matters
respecting both natives and foreigners.
Like most of the whites, who have lived
like natives, he looks a shrivelled-up
specimen of mortality, and thinks him-
self a man of mighty importance.
FIJIAN CUSTOMS ARE CRUEL.
We were struck with the fact, that all
the young lads were in a state of abso-
lute nudity; and, on inquiry, learned
that preparations were being made to
celebrate the introduction of Kurudua-
dua’s eldest son into manhood; and
that, until then, neither the young
Chieftain nor his playmates could as-
sume the scanty clothing peculiar to the
Fijians. A rebellious town, consisting
of about five hundred people, was des-
tined to be sacrificed on the occasion.
When the preparations for the feast
were concluded, the day for the cere-
mony appointed, Kuruduadua and his
whole tribe were to make a rush upon
the town, and club the inhabitants indis-
criminately, The bodies were then to
he piled into one heap, and on the top of
all a living slave would lie on his back.
The young Chief would then mount the
horrid scaffold, and standing upright on
the chest of the slave, and holding in his
uplifted hands an immense club or gun,
the Priests invoke their gods, and com-
mit the future warrior to their especial
protection, praying he may kill all the
enemies of the tribe, and never be beaten
in battle, a cheer and a shout from the
assembled multitude concluding the
prayer. Two uncles of the boy were
then to mount the human piie, and to
invest him with the malo, or girdle of
snow-white tapa, the multitude again
calling on their deities to make him a
great conqueror, and a terror to all who
breathe enmity to Navua. The malo
for the occasion would be, perhaps, two
hundred yards long, and six or eight
inches wide. When wound round the
body, the lad would hardly be pefceiv-
able, and no one but an uncle can divest
him of it.
CRUEL SLAUGHTER PREVENTED.
We proposed to the Chief that we
should be allowed to invest his son with
the malo, which he at first refused ; but
to which he consented after deliberation
with his people. At the appointed hour
the multitude collected in the great
house, or lure. The lad stood upright
in the midst of the assembly, guiltless
of clothing, and holding a gun over his
head. The Consul and I approached,
and in due form wrapped him up in
thirty yards of Manchester print, the
Priest and people chanting songs, and
invoking the protection of their gods.
A short address from the Consul suc-
ceeded, stirring the lad to nobler efforts
for his tribe than his ancestors had
known, and pointing to the path to fame
that civilization opened to him. The
ceremony concluded by drinking yagona,
and chanting historical reminiscences of
the lad’s ancestors, —and thus we saved
the lives of five hundred men ! During
the whole of this ceremony, the old Chief
was much affected, and a few tears were
seen stealing down his cheeks. Soon,
however, cheering up, he gave us a full
account of the time when he came of
age, and the number of people that were
slain to celebrate that occasion. Find-
ing that Kuruduadua was a man in
whom confidence could be placed, we
made arrangements for going to Namusi,
so as to connect the discoveries of
M‘Donald and Waterhouse with the
southern coast of Viti Levu ; but as the
weather had become extremely boiste-
rous, and heavy rains had rendered
travelling in the interior impossible, we
determined to wait for more favourable
weather, and direct our steps to other
parts of the group. We are now again
on the road to Kuruduadua’s dominions,
and I hope to be able on a future occa-
sion to send a few lines about the doings
of the mountain tribes of Fiji.
Berthold Seemann.
Extract from the Journal of the Rev. F. Langham, Lakemha, Fiji.
Let me give you a short account of
my visiting some of the out-islands :
On the 16th of September, I went on
board our beautiful little schooner the
“ Dove,” to visit the Kabara and Ono
branches of our Circuit. After a good
run of about seven hours, we got to
anchor at Kabara, where we had intend-
ed to stay for the night. It being the
quarterly fast-day, I conducted the
afternoon prayer-meeting; and then
arranged to call here on my way home,
and meet the Societies, &c. Early next
morning, weighed anchor, and started
for one of the islands, well up to wind-
ward ; but the sea was very rough, and
the wind was so strong, that we made
but little head-way, and by dark were


near enough to see the passage at Ogea,
but too late to enter, so had to wait till
next morning.
EARLY SABBATH SERVICE.
Early in the morning we got to
anchor, and I soon went on shore, ex-
pecting to get up to the chapel in time
to preach, it being the Sabbath ; but the
people do not regulate their time by our
watches or clocks ; and when I reached
the chapel I found service was nearly
over, though only a quarter-past nine.
In the afternoon, I preached from John
iii. 14, 15, and next morning met the
classes, &c. Our Society here is but
small, only thirty-five members, and ap-
parently not in a very satisfactory state.
I preached again, as some were to be
present who were at another island the
day before; and at the close of the
service baptized an old man, and then
administered the sacrament to all the
members. Next day we sailed for Vatoa,
where we arrived early in the afternoon,
but could not enter the passage, the wind
being against us. Leaving the “ Dove”
to follow next morning, I started for the
town, distant about three miles. The
man who came from the town to guide
us in, thought we had better “jump the
reef,” so we pulled to where it could
most easily be done. When we got
close to the reef, I began to feel con-
cerned about the success of this move-
ment, and wanted to tie my carpet bag
to the boat’s painter, so that I should
not lose my valuables. The natives
seemed very much amused at this.
However, in a few minutes, we were
safely over and in smooth water. By
dark we got to the town. It contains
about eighty-seven persons, young and
old. In the morning I went through
the usual work, and at noon preached
from 1 Tim. i. 16. By three o’clock
we had started for Ono. This is the
most distant island in our Circuit, one
hundred and fifty miles from Lakemba.
EXTENT OF CIRCUIT.
By nine o’clock next morning we
were at the passage, but here also were
prevented from entering, wind and tide
being out. Took the boat and made for
the shore. Got to the town of Doi,
where I found our Native Assistant
Missionary, Nathan, who had just
come to meet the Society and preach in
the afternoon, it being the day for
preaching. We immediately started for
Ono Levu, the principal town. We
had to cross a small bay, and then to
walk along the shore for about three
miles.
GOOD STATE OF THE WORK.
In the afternoon I visited the adult
school, nearly fifty were present. I
heard most of them read the New
Testament, and was much pleased with
the attention they paid to what they
were reading. After dark I met the
Local Preachers and Class-Leaders, and
was cheered while listening to the clear
and satisfactory statements they made in
reference to the work of God in their
own souls, and the steadfastness and
growth in grace of the greater part of
the Society. We had an interesting
and, I believe, profitable meeting. Next
morning I examined the school; sixty-
seven children were present. I should
think the school is well conducted ; the
children were very orderly and attentive,
and have a tolerably correct acquaint-
ance with the plan of salvation. After
school was concluded, I met the classes,
eight in number; the members are
apparently in a good and healthy state.
The venerable King of Ono, and his
excellent wife, with several others,
clearly testified that “the blood of Jesus
Christ cleanseth from all sin.” And
their conduct is said to be quite in
accordance with their profession. In the
afternoon I took the boat and went to a
small town (Waini) about three miles
distant. Here I met the Leaders and
members, (twenty-six,) and afterwards
preached to them. In the evening I
walked home to Ono Levu, but was too
tired to meet the trial-class as I had
arranged to do.
Saturday.—Met the trial-class; nine
persons present, eight of whom were
backsliders. Then went to Matokana,
a small town nearly three miles distant;
met the Local Preachers and Class-
Teachers, and afterwards the members,
about forty-five, and returned home.
Sunday morning lied the early
prayer-meeting, and at nine o’clock the
chapel was well filled ; congregation
very attentive while I pressed the
inquiry, “ Why will ye die, O house of
Israel?” In the afternoon walked to
Matokana, and addressed another atten-
tive congregation from Luke vii. 14, 15.
Monday.—Made preparations for sail-
ing, and then took a small canoe, and
paddled across to Doi, that I might
finish the work there while the “ Dove ”
was getting round to the passage ready
to sail in the evening. M hen I reached
town, went through the usual work, and
preaching from Acts xvii. 30, 31.


DANGEROUS SAILING.
When service was over I was ready
to start; but the clouds began to gather,
and bad weather appeared to be setting
in, so I deemed it prudent to remain for
the night.
Tuesday.—Weather rather unsettled,'
but, unwilling to stay any longer, I made
a start: wind very strong, and sea
rough. Before I got out of the passage
saw a squall coming on, so we ran back
to our anchorage, threw out both anchors
just as the squall caught us ; but we
were quite safe.
Wednesday Sea still very rough,
but wind moderate and favourable—
sailed. When we got outside the pas-
sage, I wished myself back again ; but
our little boat mounted the rough waves
in beautiful style, and we dashed along
nicely. At midnight we came in sight
of Vulaga, and ran down under the lee
of the island, where we were nicely
sheltered till daybreak, when we beat up
for the passage. Having heard this was
a rather dangerous one, I was on the
look-out; but the wind was in the right
quarter, and we had no difficulty. By
nine o’clock we were at anchor, and
soon after I went on shore; a rather
tiresome walk of two miles over a stony
hill, and then along the soft sandy
beach, I reached the town. Commenced
at once to meet the officers and members,
many of whom appear to be much in
earnest to secure the salvation of their
souls. After an exhortation from Col.
i. 12, I administered the sacrament to
the members of Society in this and
another town. We had a precious
season—many I believe felt it good to
be there—it was dark when I dismissed
the congregation. Next morning, after
meeting the trial-class, I started for
another town, Naividamu, where we
arrived after a long but pleasant journey,
partly by land, and partly by water.
Here I went through the usual work,
meeting Preachers, Leaders, and mem-
bers ; preached, baptized a young
woman and some infants, administered
the sacrament of the Lord’s Supper, and
then prepared to return home. It was
nearly dark when we started, and, the
tide being out, we had some difficulty in
getting along. When we reached home,
I examined three young men, Local
Pteachers on trial; but the answers were
not satisfactory, so they are on trial still.
Next morning, met the members from a
small town near, and then prepared to
sail for Kambara; at. ten o’clock we
got under-weigh, and having a fair
wind, got to anchor late in the after-
noon.
Sunday.—Conducted the morning
prayer-meeting, and at nine o’clock ad-
dressed a small inattentive congregation.
In the afternoon walked to Lomaji, and
preached from 1 Peter hi. 12.
Monday.—Met the members, &c. :
many of them, I am afraid, know little
of the power of godliness. I felt very
much dissatisfied with them. The
adult-school too, which I had visited on
the Sabbath, was far from being orderly:
of course the attention of the Native
Assistant Missionary was directed to
these things. In the evening I started
for one of the larger towns, four or five
miles distant. After dark I met the
Teachers, Preachers, and Leaders, who
seem to be quite alive and zealous to
promote the interests of the Redeemer’s
kingdom. In the morning I examined
the classes. With the trial-class I was
much pleased; eight of the members
were young persons, and certainly ap-
peared in earnest to obtain the Divine
favour, and live in the enjoyment of
Gospel blessings. I preached to a good
congregation, and had a very good time
myself.
Wednesday morning..—Sailed for
Lakemba, and by four in the afternoon
was on shore, thankful to be again at
home, especially as I found my wife had
been very poorly, and was, therefore, far
from being as strong as she usually is.
I have now given you a brief sketch
of my first visit to some of the islands
in our Circuit. I returned this week
from my second sailing, having visited
several islands in another branch of my
Circuit; particulars I will send in my
next.
f Extract of a Letter from the Rev. William Whittley, dated York-Villa , Levu-Ra ,
Ovalau, April 2 Oth, 1861.
Feeling, as I do, the necessity of
help from on high, to enable me to bear
up under the great trials I have been
called to pass through, I venture
to write you, beseeching you to re-
member me at a throne of grace. My
trials have been great indeed ; great,
in that 1 have been deprived of one


whose advice and prayers have often
cheered me, and induced me to struggle
on, when the probability is that I should
have given up in despair. I never went
to preach but I knew my dear wife was
pouring out her soul to God on my
behalf; and at an appointed hour each
evening (no matter how far separated in
body, or how we might be engaged) we
met each other at a throne of grace. O
those happy hours ! What power and
faith were exercised in those prayers !
how great the blessings received in
answer to them ! But she is gone. Her
prayer has been turned into praise; her
sufferings are past, and she has gained
an immortal crown. Her last advice to
me was to press on, to preach Christ
with all my heart, and to my latest hour
to try to bring sinners to the Saviour. Her
last prayer was that I might be a Minis-
ter eminent for personal piety and great
success, and that when my work was
done, she might have the happiness of
greeting me on the other side of Jordan.
This, Sir, is the kind of wife I have
lost. Is not the loss a serious one to
me and my dear children? But ray
God has been my help ; I have always
found comfort at a throne of grace.
“What I desire is, that I may bow with
submission to His will. Satan often
tries me on account of my afflictions; but
I try to meet with the sword provided
for me, and say, “ The cup which my
Father hath given me, shall I not drink
it?”
Another trial awaits me. My be-
reavement necessitates my removal from
Fiji; from the place and people I love.
As it respects the great work to which
it has pleased God to call me, I must
say my time in Fiji has been a happy
one; and now that I am well able to
speak to the people in their own tongue,
I feel very happy indeed. When I
consider the comparative ease with
which I have acquired a knowledge of
the language; the unspeakable happi-
ness which my dear wife and myself
felt on our arrival in Fiji; the ever-
increasing assurance that we were just
where God would have us be; in
abort, when I think of the wonderful
way in which God led me, first into the
ministry, and then into this field of
battle and of conquest, I can only say,
“ How mysterious are the ways of Pro-
vidence.” But God knows what is
best; he has some gracious end in view.
I leave the future in his hands.
FRIENDLY ISLANDS.
Letter from the Rev. IV. G. R- Stephinsnn , dated Lifuka , Haahai, Friendly
Islands, April 23 d, 1861.
GRATITUDE FOR THE SUPPLY OF
LABOURERS.
Our hearts have been gladdened ex-
ceedingly by the information contained
in the list of Stations, which informs us
of the appointment of the Rev. W, J.
Davis for Haahai. Mr. Davis, and his
excellent wife, still live in the affections
of our people, and will have a cordial
reception amongst them. His healthy
and robust frame renders him well fitted
for the arduous duties of our extensive
Circuit, and I have no doubt that, coming,
as he will, “in the fulness of the bless-
ings of the Gospel of Christ,” he will
be made the means of great good to the
inhabitants of our isles.
PROSPERITY OF THE WORK.
Our work still continues in a flourish-
ing state. We have had, of late, many
added to our church, who we trust will
be gems in the crown of our rejoicing in
the day of the Lord. Our Local
Preachers and Leaders are also alive to
God, and are being rendered abundantly
useful, so that the ark of the Lord moves
steadily. Our ticket contributions for
December and March (the two quarters
since the sailing of the “Wesley”)
amounts to twenty tuns of oil, so that I
have no doubt we shall raise forty tuns
this year, as our annual offering to the
cause of our blessed Redeemer.
Wesleyan Mission-House, London, October, 1861.
LONDON ; PRINTED US JAMES NIOHUL3, HOXTOH-SQBARB.
