

Since this paper was in type, the Society has had the pleasure of
listening to Mi-. Markham’s luminous essay on the explorers of Now
Guinea, treated mainly from an historical and biographical stand-point,
which, the present writer hopes, will lend some additional human interest
to the comparatively dry details now submitted.
Becent Explorations in South-Eastern New Guinea.
By the Eev. W. G. Lawes.
Map, p. 244 (Inset Map).
I have the pleasure of forwarding to you with this two tracings of maps
describing recent journeys of my colleague, the Eev. J. Chalmers. The
first was that to the Gulf, and was made in one of the large native
trading vessels. The district west of Maclatchie Point is but little
known, and before Mr. Chalmers’s visit had never been visited by a
white man. The natives of Port Moresby make periodical visits to it
for sago and canoes. Many and marvellous were the stories of this
cannibal territory, its horrors and its wonders. All, however, gave the
people, cannibals though they are, a good name for kindness and
hospitality.
Until this year no opportunity has offered for visiting them. Mr.
Chalmers, who has travelled more than any one else in New Guinea,
and seen more of its tribes, was particularly anxious to add this district
to those he already knew.
A large fleet of trading canoes left Port Moresby and neighbourhood
for the west last October, and in one of these Mr. Chalmers took his
passage. He landed at Maclatchie Point, and from there made a number
of journeys and voyages to the west. He found the people generous
and hospitable. They are certainly cannibals, but only as concerns
their enemies. Sorcery and superstition have their home amongst these
tribes. One dubu, or sacred house visited, is described by Mr. Chalmers
as the finest he has ever seen. Two large posts, 80 feet high, support
the large peaked portico which is 30 feet wide, while the whole
building is 160 feet in length, and tapers down in height from the
front. A large number of skulls of men, crocodiles, cassowaries, and
pigs ornament it. The human skulls are those of their victims who
have been killed and eaten by them. They speak of this as the greatest
luxury, and think those are fools who despise it.
The whole district from Orokolo to Panaroa is one great swamp, the
villages all surrounded by the muddy water. Canoes are a necessity in
making morning calls ; bridges of logs or trunks of trees form the streets,
and the roads are more easily traversed barefoot than in boots. The
houses are really well-built, and in front of many of them are small
g ardens, raised ten feet from the ground. In making them, a well-built


platform is covered with soil, in which flowers and tobacco are planted
and cultivated, the whole carefully fenced.
From the natives Mr. Chalmers learnt that the Alele, Aivei, and
Panaroa are the mouths of one and the same large river, which unite
about five miles inland. He himself went up the Alele to its junction
with the Aivei. This large river he named the Wickham, He is strongly
of opinion that the Wickham, the Aird, and other rivers about Bald Head,
are a part of the Fly, or rather that they are all mouths of one large river,
of which the delta extends from the Alele to the Fly. Large lakes may
be found, of which these large rivers are the outlet. There is no river
of any size on the opposite part of the northern coast, and the drainage
of the north side of the Mount Owen Stanley range is unknown.
To solve all these questions would be a most worthy object of geo-
graphical exploration. The Wickham and Aird have never been ascended
beyond a few miles. A good steam-launch in capable hands might do
much good work in this district.
You will have heard of the two newspaper expeditions for the
exploration of New Guinea. The Argus and Age of Melbourne both sent
this year correspondents at a great expense. Captain Armit was the
representative of the Argus, and being a Fellow of your has pro-
bably sent you an account of his travels. He left the coast on the 14th of
July, and went in a north-easterly direction to Sogeri (Sogere), of which
place I sent you an account last year,* when Mrs. Lawes, Mr. Chalmers and
I visited it. He made this for some time his headquarters, visiting from
there the surrounding district. After leaving Sogeri, he travelled in a
south-easterly direction, until he was compelled by fever and the death
of his fellow-traveller, Professor Denton, to return. His farthest point
was about lat. S. 9° 35', long. E. 147° 38', i. e. 39 miles in a straight lino
from Port Moresby, and about 22 from the sea-coast at the nearest point.
Mr has been the farthest yet into the He has
been as far as lat. S. 9° 2' and long. E. 147° so that the English
flag has travelled farthest inland in the hands of the missionary.
The Age expedition took a more westerly course than Captain Armit.
Mr. Morrison, who conducted it, left here on the 21st July. He took
horses, and after a very difficult and trying journey, he reached the point
on the Goldie river marked on the map I now send, “ Junction.” Here he
was attacked by natives, and wounded. He was obliged to return, and
reached Port Moresby on the 14th of October, his party hungry, fever-
stricken, and disheartened. As the inland natives have always been
friendly, and the very best of all tribes to travel amongst, we were
anxious to know the real cause of attack, and also, if possible, to restore
the former friendly relations. With this object, Mr. Chalmers left this
on the 4th of this month (December), intending to go to Yarigadi, from
which place the attacking party were known to have come.
It was late in the season for inland travel. Mr. Chalmers found both
* 4 Proceedings,' 1883, p. 355.


the Larogi (Laloki) and the Goldie much swollen, and running with a very-
strong current. On the third day his party camped about five miles from
the place where Morrison was attacked. They left his track there, and
took a more easterly direction to the villages of Yarigadi. The villages
were there sure enough, but empty and deserted. Soon after the attack
on Morrison, the natives all left, and went to Eikiri, a district further
to the east. They shared the plunder of Morrison’s goods with the
Eikirians, and so secured their favour. After some weary hours of search
for signs of human life, Mr. Chalmers and party returned to their camp
-of the previous day.
From the Nagila people who live about half-way to Yarigadi, they
got the following information, which may be relied on as correct.
There was no trouble with the foreigners until a tomahawk was stolen ;
this was returned, and next day a knife was stolen. Morrison shot the
thief as he was running away. He happened to be the son of the
Yarigadi chief Gomaradaure, a man who has always been friendly
with the white man, and who warned Morrison to return by laying a
spear and shield on the road in front of him. The friends and com-
panions of the young man attacked Morrison in revenge, but it was not
a united attack, neither was any other tribe involved in it. The goods of
the party were left behind when they retreated, and to these the natives
helped themselves.
The country about Yarigadi is exceedingly rough, and travelling
very hard and difficult. This is one route to Mount Owen Stanley and
was thought to be the best approach for the ascent of that grand moun-
tain. But it is far too rugged and seems indeed to be impracticable. The
easiest way of getting to the base of the mountain is by Doura, which
■can be reached by water, and is an extensive tract of level country.
Mr. Chalmers was accompanied on this trip by my son, Mr. F.
Lawes, who took the positions marked on the map I now send you.
They were from cross bearings taken with prismatic compass from well-
known points. He was also accompanied by Messrs. Lawrie and Horsley,
two young gentlemen on a visit here. They were all back at Port
Moresby on the morning of the 11th, having been absent a week. They
walked about 100 miles, rested on the Sunday, and did in the one week
what occupied Morrison three months.
No well-organised party need fear anything from the natives in the
Koiari district. They would find them everywhere friendly and
helpful. I should have said above that the young man shot by Morri-
son is not dead, but may recover.
The rainy season has now fairly set in, and until next May at the
earliest it would be folly to attempt travelling in the interior. With
kind regards, I am, &c.,
W r . G. Lawes.
Bates, f.r.S. Pert Moresby, New Guinea,
Lcccmhcr 19 th, 1883.
218
RECENT EXPLORATIONS IN SOUTH-EASTERN NEW GUINEA.
