

westward of the Hydaspes ; and to the eastward of Lahore, where
they are said to predominate, they do not certainly compose a third
of the population. The Punjab, indeed, is a poorly-peopled
country in proportion to its fertility, though it is probable that it
has increased in population under the present ruler.
X.— Recent Accounts of the Pitcairn Islanders. Communicated
by John Barrow, Esq., F.R.S. Read 10th June, 1833.
As the public have not ceased to take a great interest in the
little colony of Pitcairn’s Island, though no account of its proceed-
ings has been published since that given in the Narrative of
Captain Beechey’s Voyage, the following extracts from official
documents regarding it will probably be found interesting. The
first is from a private Journal kept by the Honourable Captain
Waldegrave, who visited the island in H.M.S. Seringapatam, in
1830, shortly before its inhabitants were induced to emigrate to
Otaheite. The second is a despatch addressed to the Lieutenant-
Governor of New South Wales, by Captain Sandilands, of H.M.
sloop Comet, who was employed to remove them. The remainder
describe them since their return.
Pitcairn's Island , March, 1830. —We arrived here in the Se-
ringapatam on Monday the 15th March, 1830, about seven
o’clock ; soon after eight, Edward Young, a native, came along-
side in a small canoe guided by one paddle ; he wore a European
waistcoat and trowsers, and breakfasted with me, saying grace
before and after. About nine several others came on board in a
jolly boat; the senior native, Thursday October Fletcher Christian,
was one. After breakfast many of them accompanied us to the
shore ; we landed about noon. At the top of the first level,
seated in a grove of cocoa-nut trees, were assembled many of the
wives and mothers. “ I have brought you a clergyman.”—“ God
bless you, God bless you!” was the universal answer. “To stay
with us ? ” —“ No!" “ You bad man, why not ? ” — u 1 cannot
spare him, he is the clergyman of my ship. I have brought you
clothes, which King George sends you.” “We rather want food
for our souls,” &c. The welcome was most affecting; the wives
met their husbands and greeted them with joy as if they had
long been absent; —they received us most cordially, but more
particularly the chaplain, Mr. Watson, —the men sprung up to
the trees, throwing down cocoa-nuts, and tearing off the husks with
their teeth, offered us the milk. When we had rested they took
us to their cottages, where we dined and slept.
In the evening we walked to see Christian’s and Adams’s graves.


They are at some distance from each other, —the grave of the
former near the spot where he fell, murdered, about one-third
from the summit of the island; the latter is buried by the side of
his Otaheitan wife, at the end of his cottage-garden. An hour
after sunset we supped, and at nine o’clock retired to bed,
Pitcairn’s island was surveyed by Captain Beechey, in 1826,
therefore I shall only state what I saw. It is very high, with pre-
cipitous sides, and without anchorage; its basis is sandstone rock,
mixed with particles of iron ; occasionally there are volcanic rocks.
The soil is clay, mixed with sand, very rich, and of great depth.
There are three landing-places, two in smooth water ; one of
these is on the west, the other on the south-east side ; near this
last Mr. Sayer seems to think there is anchorage, half a mile
from the shore. The ascent from the beach at these places is so
steep that the natives object to land there. The third, and usual
landing-place is directly under the village, on the north side of the
island ; the approach to it is very dangerous, and cannot be at-
tempted in safety without the guidance of a native. There is no
cove, —a rock projects about seventy feet to the sea ; beyond this,
about thirty fathoms from the shore, a ridge of rocks runs parallel
to the beach. There is but one opening, and that not fifteen feet
wide : they watch the surf, and observing one unusually high, they
row the boat on this, and guide it within a foot of the rock,
then pull due east to avoid another ; both cleared, the boat lands
on a sandy beach, about ten feet wide. Outside of this rock the
Bounty was anchored and burnt. There is a well, not of very
good water; and here, also, begins the path leading to their vil-
lage,—it is almost perpendicular, the thermometer at 90°. This
continues two hundred feet, beyond which the path becomes more
level, undulating with the land, passing through groves of cocoa-
nut trees, yam, and potato grounds.
Their houses are of wood, some of two stories, which are
called double cottages, thatched with palm leaves, rolled on sticks,
leaving a projecting end of one or two feet. These sticks are
placed horizontally on the rafters, beginning with the dropping
eaves, and as they are ranged above each other, the loose end of
the palm-leaf lies over them beneath, and forms a very thick
thatch, lasting about seven years. They have no windows but
shutters, all of wood, about a foot wide, so that seated, a free cir-
culation of air passes over the head without being in a draught.
If the cottage is double, the beds are placed upstairs, and the
shutters are fitted the same as below ; —their furniture, four post-
beds with mattresses, sheets of the paper-mulberry cloth, large
chests, benches, a table, knives and forks. They cook out of
doors; to each house is attached a work-shop, where the cloth is
made, a pig-sty, and we saw the beginning of a flower-garden.


They appear to be careless about other fruits or vegetables than
yams, sweet potatoes, cocoa-nuts, plantains, and bananas. The
yam grounds are cropped successively four or five times, then
neglected, and other land cleared. Calavances, peas, Irish pota-
toes, tobacco, and wheat, have been brought, once raised, and
neglected. The bread-fruit from neglect was becoming scarce.
Gourds, water-melons, sugar-cane, pumpkins, and calabashes,
were raised for use and barter; we saw one citron and one
orange tree, both very young and not in bearing.
The best well of water is called Brown’s well, two hundred
yards above the village—soft water. Another just below the
school-house, is used for culinary purposes, stock, and washing.
Other wells have been sought by digging, without success.
The animals are goats, pigs, and fowls. We gave them three
ewe-sheep, a duck, drake, goose, and gander. The trees are
cocoa-nuts, bread-fruit, banyan, and poplar-leaved hibiscus.
It was with very great gratification that we observed the Chris-
tian simplicity of the natives. They appeared to have no guile.
Their cottages were open to all, and all were welcome to their food;
the pig, the fowl was killed and dressed instantly—the beds were
ready, each was willing to show any and every part of the island ;
and to any question put by myself or Mr. Watson, as to the cha-
racter or conduct of any individual, the answer “ If it could
do any good to answer you, I would, but as it cannot, it is wrong
to tell tales.” They repeatedly informed me that there were
eighty-one souls on the island; but after frequent counting, we
only reckoned seventy-nine. 4 One quietly gave the Christian names
of tw r o others, but declined saying w’ho the parents were, as “It
would be wrong to tell my neighbours’ shame.” Before they
began a meal, all joined hands in the attitude of prayer, with eyes
raised to Heaven, and one recited a simple grace, grateful for the
present food, but beseeching spiritual nourishment. Each an-
swered, Amen ; and after a pause the breakfast or supper began—
water or the milk of cocoa-nuts was the only beverage. At the
conclusion, another grace was offered up. Should any one arrive
during the repast, all ceased to eat —the new guest said grace, to
which each repeated Amen, and then the meal continued.
The children were fond and obedient, the parents affectionate
and kind towards their children —we did not hear a harsh word
used by one towards another.
After the English were retired to rest, the natives assembled in
a cottage, and the evening service was read by Mr. Watson. On
the l6th, at night, all again assembled. The afternoon church
service was performed, and a lecture given by Mn Watson.
They all made the responses with regularity, and it was a most
striking scene. The place chosen was the bed-room of a double


cottage —that is, one of two floors; the ascent was by a broad
ladder from the lower room, through a trap-door. The clergy-
man stood between two beds, and at his back the only lamp was
placed. On his right in the bed, three infants were soundly
sleeping; on his left three men sat at the foot of the bed—on
each side and in front were kneeling the native men, some in the
simple mar a displaying their gigantic figures—others partly clothed
in trousers and jacket, the neck and feet bare—behind were the
women in their modest cloth dresses, entirely concealing the form,
leaving the head and feet bare ; the girls wore in addition a sheet
knotted as a Roman senator’s toga, thrown over the right shoulder,
and under the left arm. When the general confession commenced,
each knelt facing the clergyman, with hands raised to the breast in
the attitude of prayer, slowly and distinctly repeating the confes-
sion. Each was absorbed in the solemnity of the service. The
text was most happily chosen :— il Fear not, little flock, for it is
your Father’s good pleasure to give you the kingdom.” At the
conclusion of the service, theyTequested permission to sing their
parting hymn, when all the congregation, in good time, sang
“ Depart in peace.” Their voices were all tenors and of the
same key.
The women are clothed in the paper mulberry white cloth,
extending in folds from the shoulders to the feet, and so loose as
entirely to conceal the figure. The mothers nursing carry their
infants within their dress, with frequently an older child of a year
old, seated across the hip, with its little hands clinging to the
shoulder, the arm passed over its body keeping it in safety.
The men and boys, except on Sundays, when they put on a
European dress, wear nothing but the mara —a waist-cloth pass-
ing over the hips and through the legs. The climate is too hot
for more clothing. The men are from five feet eight inches to
six feet high, of a dark copper complexion, great muscular
strength, in good condition, and of excellent figures ; we did not
see one cripple or defective person, except one boy, whom, after
much laughing, they in the most good-humoured way brought to
me, saying, ‘ You ought to be brothers; you have each lost the right
eye.’ I acknowledged the connexion, and for the future he will
be called Captain.
Unhappily the scene is not without alloy. Three Englishmen
have arrived, and had wives given to them. Their names are
George Hunn Nobbs, John Buffet, and John Evans. The first
has married a daughter of Charles Christian, and calls himself
pastor, registrar, and schoolmaster; he has sixteen scholars. Two
of these titles, however, are claimed by John Buffet, —hence a
source of division; and since their arrival, dissension, heretofore an


unknown evil, has appeared. Buffet, a native of Bristol, a
ship-vvright and joiner, a very useful mechanic, arrived first ; he
has eight scholars ; and to him land has been allotted. Evans
enjoys land through his wife, a daughter of John Adams, an
heiress. The two last maintain themselves, but Nobbs claims
exemption from labour as pastor; by law he is to be maintained
by the community. His information is superior to the natives,
therefore he wishes to become the chief, —in which he will be dis-
appointed ; they do not like a superior. As education increases,
also, their minds will expand, when native talent will appear
which will claim and obtain superiority. Had the family of
Christian possessed but a moderate share of sense, one of its
members would have been chief by general consent; but Thursday
and Charles Christian, the sons of the mutineer, are ignorant,
uneducated persons, unable to maintain superiority. In time,
Edward Quintal, the best understanding in the island, will be chief;
he possesses no book but the bible, but such knowledge has he
drawn from it that he argues from facts stated therein, and thence
arrives at conclusions, which will in time place him much above
his fellows. His wife, also, possesses a good understanding;
and their eldest boy, William, has been so carefully educated,
that there is no boy equal to him on the island. The descend-
ants of Young are also promising persons, possessing good under-
standings.
One of the remarkable circumstances is the correctness of their
language and pronunciation. The general language is English ;
their divine service, also, is in English ; but they frequently con-
verse in Otaheitan, the language of the mothers. Two of the
women who left Otaheite in the Bounty are alive ; both childless,
but well taken care of by the others.
The whole island has been portioned amongst the original pro-
prietors, therefore a foreigner cannot obtain land except by mar-
riage or grant. Eleven-twelfths are uncultivated. Yet popula-
tion increases so rapidly, that in another century the island will be
fully peopled. I think one thousand souls would be its limit of
inhabitants. The island at present is covered with trees, called
the bush, yet only one good well has been discovered. Trees at-
tract rain, and when these are removed the showers of rain will not
be so frequent.
Since the death of John Adams, the patriarch, laws have been
established against murder, theft, adultery, and removing a land-
mark. The penalty to the first is death ; to the second, three-fold
restitution ; to the third, for the first offence, whipping to both
parties, and marriage within three months, —for the second offence,
if the parties refuse to marry, the penalties are forfeiture of lands and


property, and banishment from the island. Offenders are to be
tried before three elders, who pronounce sentence.
Marriage and baptism are celebrated according to the rites of
the church of England. Confirmation and the Sacrament of the
Lord’s Supper are unknown to them.
They consider the King of England as their sovereign, and pray
for him at divine service. I never was so forcibly impressed with
the blessings of a liturgy as I was at Pitcairn’s Island. Adams,
the patriarch, could read, but until the latter days of his life he
could not write; yet, after the slaughter of his shipmates and
the Otaheitan men, he reared up all the children in the fear of God,
through the instrumentality of the bible and prayer-book. He
could not compose prayers, but he could read them to the little
assembled flock; he read those beautiful prayers found in the
prayer-book of the church of England ; from it, also, he taught
the catechism, the commandments, and all the Christian duties.
So strongly attached are they to this service, that no dissenting
minister could be admitted ; they draw from it as the well-spring of
life, and will not obtain water from another source.
They have only two meals, —breakfast, between ten and eleven
o’clock in the forenoon, consisting of yams, potatoes, plantains,—
supper, an hour after sunset, is the same ; with three times a-week
a pig, fowl, or fish, baked as at Otaheite.
John Adams died in March, 1829. During his life all obeyed
him as a parent, —“ Father ” was his only title. Shortly before
his death he called the heads of families together, and urged
them to appoint a chief; but they looked up to him whilst living,
and have appointed none since his death.
Ships may obtain flre-wood at Pitcairn’s Island in abundance,
with a certain quantity of yams, cocoa-nuts, and plantains, but not
a large supply ; poultry, pigs, they object to part with ; it would
be impossible to water a man-of-war, as the water is to be carried
from Brown’s well on the shoulders of the natives.
The following is a list of plants found at Pitcairn’s Island in
March, 1830, made by Mr. Andrew Matthews, late chief-clerk to
the Horticultural Society, whom I engaged to go with me as bo-
tanist. The specimens of some of these may be seen at the
British Museum, whither they Mere sent: —
Introduced. —Artocarpus incisa, Gossypium vitifolium, Poin-
ciana pulcherrima, Gomphrena globosa, Capsicum frutescens,
Nicotiana tabacum, Cucurbita citrullus, Cucurbita pepo, Citrus
limonum, aurantium.
Indigenous. —Musa paradisiaca, sapientum, Dioscorea sativa
and aculeata, Convolvulus Batatas, Cocos nucifera, Ficus indica.
Moms chinensis, Dracaena, Hibiscus tiliaceus, Pandanus fasci-


Asplenium
2 species
. undescribed.
Polypodium .
3 ditto
. ditto.
Euphorbia
1 ditto
. ditto.
Triumfetta
1 ditto
. ditto.
Zingiber
Corchorus echinatus .
1 ditto
. ditto.
Bumelia
I ditto
. ditto.
Cerbera
1 ditto
. ditto.
cularis, Arum species, Cucurbita lagenaria, Piper species, Sola-
rium nigrum, Neplirodium, Davilla, Polypodium aureum.
Tree-fern, one species, fourteen feet in height, not in flower,
probably a Cyathea.
His Majesty's Sloop , Comet , at Sea , April 9th, 1831.
Sir, —On my arrival at Port Jackson, in the month of Octo-
ber last, I had the honour to make known to your Excellency
that I was especially ordered by Rear-Admiral Sir Edward W.
C. R. Owen to communicate and arrange with your Excellency
for the removal of the inhabitants of Pitcairn’s Island, or such of
them as should be found desirous of removing, to the island of
Otaheite; which service having been executed, I have now the
honour to detail to your Excellency my proceedings in this duty.
Your Excellency having placed the colonial government barque
Lucy Anne under my orders, 1 sailed to the Bay of Islands, in
New Zealand, on the 27th December last, at which port we ar-
rived on the 21st January, and both ships having completed their
water, we put to sea on the 26th, and arrived off Pitcairn’s Island
on the 28th February.
Attended by three natives, who came off in their canoes, I
landed in the afternoon, accompanied by Captain Walpole, of his
Majesty’s 39th regiment.
Having made known to the inhabitants the object of the expedi-
tion, on (he second day 1 assembled all the heads of families,
and having most fully explained to them that they were perfectly
at liberty either to remove to Otaheite or remain where they were,
I directed Mr. Henry, whom your Excellency appointed to pro-
ceed with me, to give them every information in his power, and
which he wuis well calculated to afford, being a son of one of the
missionaries of Otaheite, a native of that island, and having been
present at the meeting held by King Pomarre and his chiefs, when
the promise of land, protection, and assistance was made to Cap-
tain Laws, of H.M.S. Satellite, as set forth in his letter to the
Secretary of the Admiralty.
One-half of the inhabitants gave in their names immediately
as resolved to remove to Otaheite, and on the following day the
remainder came to the same resolution.


The whole immediately commenced preparations for embark-
ing, by carrying down to the landing-place potatoes, yams, fruit,
and household goods, which were continued to be embarked on
board the ships until the 7th, on the morning of which day all
the inhabitants were embarked without accident on board the
Lucy Anne, being eighty-seven in number, men, women, and
children.
Your Excellency will perceive that this service was performed
in the short space of four days, the merit of which is entirely due
to Lieutenant Peake of this ship, whose zeal and judgment in di-
recting the embarkation, under the great natural difficulties he
had to contend with in the face of a most perilous surf, entitle this
officer most fully to this public expression of my acknowledg-
ments.
I arrived at Otaheite, and anchored at Papute harbour, on the
23d March, and found the island under the government of Queen
Pomarre, daughter of the late King Pomarre, and I regret to say,
on the very eve of a civil war? This, however, I have great plea-
sure in making known to your Excellency, terminated without the
opposing parties coming to actual hostilities ; and previous to my
leaving Otaheite, the governors of provinces, and the chiefs op
posed to the queen and her parly, having amicably arranged their
differences, had retired from Papute to their own provinces with
their numerous followers.
Although the island was in this distracted state on my arrival,
I was greatly relieved from anxiety respecting the inhabitants
of Pitcairn’s Island, by receiving from the queen and chiefs on the
one side, and the hostile party on the other, assurances that the
promises made by her father, the late King Pomarre and them,
would be most strictly executed.
I therefore, at the request of the queen, landed the people of
Pitcairn’s Island at the residence of the queen, about three miles
from the anchorage, where houses were provided for them ; and
at this place they remained until the contending parties had re-
turned to their houses, when the queen gave up for their use a
large dwelling belonging to herself in the town of Papute. Pre-
vious to their removing, also, a beautiful tract of very rich land,
belonging to the government of the island, was well examined by
the missionaries, myself, Captain Walpole, and Lieutenant Peake,
and determined to be a very eligible territory for their future resi-
dence.
The queen, at the same time, assembled the chiefs of districts
in my presence, and formally communicated to them that she
had assigned this land to the inhabitants of Pitcairn’s Island,
giving orders also, that her people should immediately commence
the construction of houses when they had made selection of a site


suited for a town ; and the materials for erecting these houses Were
in a considerable state of forwardness on my departure.
It will be gratifying to your Excellency to know, that a feeling
of great regard was universally manifested to the strangers by the
Otaheitans, who anxiously endeavoured to find out those among
them who were their relations; in which they were often suc-
cessful ; in one instance, in particular, a woman having come a
considerable distance and discovered, in one of the four remaining
Otaheitan women, a sister. I mention this in order to show on
what grounds I conclude that the change from Pitcairn’s Island
to Otaheite will be attended with advantage to them.
On my arrival off Pitcairn’s Island, 1 found them exceedingly
distressed for water, what they had even being procured with
great difficulty ; and although the fertility of the island has reared
a comparatively numerous population up to the present period,
yet this very circumstance, from their increasing numbers, ren-
dered the necessity for emigration more obvious.
1 have also the honour to report to your Excellency, that in
order to provide for the subsistence of the inhabitants of Pitcairn’s
island, I concluded a contract for their supply with a sufficient
quantity of food for the space of six months, at the expiration
of which time, from the information I obtained, they will be in a
situation to support themselves on the produce of their own
grant of land. Having had no instructions on this head, and his
Majesty’s vice-consul for the Society Islands being absent, I
placed this contract under the superintendence of the three mis-
sionaries nearest to their residence, who all agreed most willingly
to see it faithfully executed; and for liquidating its expense, I
allowed bills to be drawn on the colonial government of New
South Wales, addressed to the honourable the colonial secretary ;
which mode of repaying the contractor I was forced to adopt, in
the absence of any government naval-agent in New South Wales,
or nearer than the East Indies.
I have the honour, &c,
A. A. Sandilands.
His Majesty's Sloop Challenger, at Sea , 30 th May , 1833. (From
Captain Freemantle, R.N.)
At Otaheite, I understood that all the Pitcairn islanders had
returned to their island, having been assisted by the missionaries
and the Europeans on the island to freight* an American vessel to
convey them, they being very discontented and unhappy, and a
* It may be remarked, by the way, that many of the copper bolts ot the Bounty,
which had been brought to Otaheite from Pitcairn's Island by the islanders, were taken
by the master of the vessel as part payment for their freight, 1 believe to the amount
of two hundred dollars.


sickness having become prevalent amongst them, which had car-
ried off twelve of their number.
Having, therefore, as far as lay in my power, settled all the
complaints which came before me, and tried to impress upon the
authorities of Otaheite the necessity of preventing the recurrence
of the piracies which have recently taken place among the islands
to windward, I proceeded to Pitcairn’s Island, off' which I arrived
after a passage of twelve days. The ship was immediately visited
by most of the men of the island, who came out in their canoes
to invite the officers on shore ; they were all well-dressed, and in
every respect had the appearance of Englishmen. I was sorry,
however, to find that they were not improved by their visit to Ota-
heite, but on the contrary, as I had reason to think, were much
altered for the worse, having, since their return, indulged in in-
temperance to a great degree, distilling a spirit from the tee root,
which grows in great quantities on the island. I interrogated the
most intelligent of the men respecting their return to the island,
and they unanimously agreed* that they had never been happy or
contented since they quitted it, and that nothing would have in-
duced them to do so, excepting the fear of displeasing the British
government, which they thought they might have done, had they
not profited by the means offered to remove themselves. Now,
however, being re-established there, they would ever remain ; they
had nothing to complain of respecting their treatment at Otahite,
but disliked the characters of the people, and were alarmed at
the sickness which prevailed among themselves, and which alto-
gether carried off seventeen, five having died since their return.
I found on the island a Mr. Joshua Hill, a gentleman nearly
seventy years of age, who appears to have come from England
expressly to establish himself amongst these people as a kind of
pastor and monitor. He had not been on the island more than
two or three months, and was officiating as schoolmaster, having
quite succeeded in supplanting the Englishman who had acted
previously in that situation. He informed me that on his arrival
he had found the island in the greatest state of irregularity. He
landed on a Sunday, but found most of the islanders intoxicated,
and the Englishman “ Nobbs,” who acted as their pastor, in such
a state, from the effects of drunkenness, as to be incapable of per-
forming his duties ; he had consequently taken them upon him-
self, wishing to render as much service as possible to the islanders.
And though it appeared to me at first so extraordinary a circum-
stance, that a gentleman of Mr. Hill’s age, and apparent respec-
tability, should come from England for the express purpose of re-
siding on Pitcairn’s Island, that I thought he must be some adven-
turer, more likely to do harm than good in the cause he had
undertaken, yet, from the papers which he showed me, and which


proved that he had been in communication with the Admiralty,
the Colonial Office, Captain Beechey, and many respectable gen-
tlemen, offering his services in the first instance to remove the
people from the island when it was first proposed, I was induced
to think he must be interested about them. And as he had suc-
ceeded in restoring them to some kind of order, by putting a stop
to the intemperance which existed, had broken up all their stills,
and had formed them into a “ Temperance Society,” I gave
him all the assistance in my power to support him in his situation ;
the other Englishman, who had clearly proved himself by his con-
duct to be unfit for it, 1 recommended to quit the island, which
he promised to do.
The number of people in the island at present is seventy-nine,
and there appears to be an abundance of vegetables of every de-
scription. They are not themselves either under any alarm re-
specting a want of water, saying, that as their numbers increase
they must dig more reservoirs and w'ells. With respect to food,
I am satisfied the island is capable of supporting nearly a thou-
sand persons ; the soil is particularly good, and most part of it
being as yet uncultivated, there is little fear of scarcity. On
their return from Otaheite they found the island overrun with wild
hogs, by which their plantations were destroyed, and they had only
Just succeeded in hunting these down ; but even in then present
state they were able to supply the Challenger with a large quantity
of yams, potatoes, sweet potatoes, plantains, fowls, with a few
pigs ; and nothing could exceed the kindness of the people in
offering everything they had which they thought would be accep-
table. _ .
It is impossible for any person to visit this island without being
pleased with a people generally so amiable, though springing
from so guilty a stock, and brought up in so extraordinary a man-
ner. And although 1 have no hesitation in saying, that they have
lost much of that simplicity of character which has been observed
in them by former visiters, they are still a well-disposed, well-be-
haved, kind, hospitable people, and, if well-advised and instructed,
would be led to anything ; but I fear, if much left to themselves,
and visited by many ships, which now is not an uncommon occur-
rence, that they will lose what simplicity they have left, and will
partake of the character of their neighbours the Otaheitans. I
found even now that it was a most difficult matter to obtain the
truth on any point which told at all to their prejudice ; and it was
only by cross-questioning them that I could arrive at it. The
present generation of children is the finest I ever saw; and out of
the whole number, seventy-nine, there are fifty-three under twenty
years of age, who appear to have been well-instructed, many of
them being capable of reading, and nearly on a par with children


of the same age in England. It certainly is desirable that this
system of instruction should be kept up, and that a clergyman
should be sent to them, who would be most acceptable. The
Englishmen who have been on the island have on the contrary
done much harm, particularly Buffett, who, although a married
man, has seduced one of the young girls, by whom he has two
children.
I enclose a list of the articles of which these people are most
in want; and from the kindness that has hitherto been shown
them by his Majesty’s government, it may be hoped that they
may be induced to supply them. Some of these articles they
require very much. The Challenger took some few things from
Sydney for them, but the allowance was so scanty that very little
benefit will be felt from it. I remained off the island two days,
the ship being under way the whole time, there being no anchor-
age, and the landing particularly hazardous, so that it is very rarely
that a ship’s boat ought to attempt it: the natives themselves,
however, are very clever with their canoes, and will land in almost
any weather. Having given them all the assistance and advice
in my power, and arranged their little disputes to the best of my
ability, I left this little colony, much prepossessed in their favour
by every thing I had seen ; and sincerely trusting that they may
continue to live in that state of innocence and contentment which
they enjoyed previous to their departure from Otaheite, —which
it is to be hoped that they may, if they do not return to the use of
that spirit which they have so well learned the art of distilling. I
obtained a specimen of it; it is not unlike whisky, and very good.
From the above-named Mr. Hill to the Earl of Ripon:—
Pitcairn's Island, 28 th December, 1832.
My Lord, — I have the honour to inform your Lordship that
I arrived here from Otaheite on the 28lh October last, and found
the state of things upon this little island very unsettled on my
landing, owing principally to the presence of three Englishmen,
whom, unfortunately, the natives have allowed to settle among
them ; they are runaway sailors. Drunkenness, and other bad
vices, were introduced by them ; and had I not arrived, I know
not what might have been the consequence, even before this, as
they were in the greatest confusion, from the youngest to the
oldest, —fighting, and everything wicked, going on. 1 have, how-
ever, been so fortunate as to put down, in a great degree already,
the use of ardent spirits, and the means of making any more of it.
I have established, at the outset, a temperance society, and caused
the greater number to sign thereto. 1 have also established a set
of laws, as best suited for them, and placed three of the most
efficient natives as a committee of elders, to superintend their


affairs ; and the only difficulty I have to contend against is the
presence of these three bad characters upon the island. I hope
that before long one of his Majesty’s ships of war may come and
take them off, when 1 should have but little if any difficulty in
bringing the natives back again to their duty and best interest.
Although I have, perhaps, effected more than could have been
expected in so short a time, under the circumstances, and not pos-
sessing any public authority thus to keep in check these men,
I shall continue to maintain peace and quietness among them
in the best way I can, until I can have the honour of hearing from
your Lordship, as to whether his Majesty’s government would not
be pleased to nominate me its agent for good here, the object
being merely to have authority to keep things in order among
these poor people. lam now acting as their minister (preaching
twice on each Sunday, besides a lecture), their doctor, school-
master, &c. ; and, with the sanction and assistance of your Lord-
ship, I have no doubt that I could make of these natives one of the
most happy people whatever.
1 want very much a medicine chest and instruments, and books
to accompany it. 1 have the honour, &c. Joshua Hill.
From the same to the same :
Pitcairn’s Island, May , 1833.
His Majesty’s ship Challenger, under the command of Captain
Freemantle, has just arrived here, last from Otaheite, and pre-
viously from Sidney, bringing the duck, soap, &c. which the
British government has been so kind as to send for these people,
and for which they feel highly grateful. But I lament to say that
Captain Freemantle does not feel himself authorized to take off
the three Englishmen ; which is the more to be regretted as con-
siderable time may elapse before another ship of war may come
here. But he has done for the best. I will look forward, and
do the best I possibly can in the interval. &c., &c.
J. Hill.
XL— Extracts from a Private Journal kept on hoard H.M.S.
Seringupafam, in the Pacific, JB3O. Communicated by Captain
the Hon. W. Waldegrave, R.N. Read 24th June, 1833.
Marquesas. — Nouhevah —The only island we visited w-as Nou-
hevah. It is mountainous and rugged, with precipitous sides;
the mountains are high, and appear to bar communication to the
inhabitants, separated from each other by these high ridges. The
whole island is of volcanic origin, and its soil is rich ; in the val-
leys, it is clay mixed with vegetable mould; on the hills, it
