

RECIPES MADE WITH
BREAD.
WITH COMPLIMENTS FROM
GOLDEN CRUST BAKERY
SOUTH AUSTRALIA'S LARGEST
AND MOST MODERN BAKERY


Acknowledgement
To the many hundreds of our customers who
submitted recipes for our recent competition
for "Dishes using Bread" we tender our
sincere thanks.
The booklet contains a representative selection
of the recipes submitted and grouped under
various headings. Please accept this booklet
with our compliments and the sincere wish
that it will be a welcome addition to your
Recipe Library.
GOLDEN CRUST BAKERY
North Adelaide
1944


FOOD VALUES
Price
Food Units
Food Units
per lb.
per lb.
per penny
Bread . . .
.. 3d.
1,170
390
Potatoes ..
1/2
378
315
Cheese . .
1/8
1,500
75
Eggs
. . . 2/-
695
29
Bacon . .
1/9
1,543
73.4
Meat . ,
1/3
1,500
100
Apples . .
5d.
195
39
Cauliflower
9d.
160
17.77
Peas
1/-
250
20.8
BREAD
Mileage for the Human Machine
THE production of energy is our main reason for
consuming food. Since this is so, it is interesting to
note that for a given outlay, we receive more calories
(energy food) in bread than in even potatoes at the new
subsidized price of 5 lbs. for 6d‘.—and, of course, many
times more food units than you get in several other kinds
of food in daily consumption.
A table of food units received per penny expenditure
on various products is shown hereunder:—
Eat an extra slice of bread every day


BREAKFAST DISHES
BREAD OMELETTE
A good way to use stale bread. Take 2 eggs, separated; i cup
of milk; \ cup of bread; salt and pepper to taste. Crumb the
bread and soak in milk, add beaten yolks of eggs. Then season
and fold in beaten whites. Put a tablespoon of butter in omelette
and cook as for omelettes.
MOCK BRAINS
Take 2 eggs, separate yolks from whites; to the well beaten
yolks add large tablespoon parsley (finely chopped) ; salt and pepper
to taste; tablespoon milk (little more if necessary); 3 tablespoons
fine breadcrumbs; and lastly, fold in lightly stiffly beaten whites
of eggs, fry golden brown; serve with bacon an improvement.
Take 2 sets sheep brains, clean thoroughly, and cook 2 minutes
in milk; add milk and brains to above mixture using a little more
breadcrumbs, then fold in beaten whites and fry. Serve with bacon.
BREAKFAST SURPRISE
Toast 6 slices of bread on one side. Butter untoasted side and
keep warm. Take i lb. of cold meat and put through mincer. Mix
with one beaten egg. Melt i oz. of butter in saucepan, stir in meat
and egg, also 1 tablespoon of milk, and seasoning to taste. Stir
until it thickens. Serve on prepared toast, and sprinkle with a little
finely chopped parsley.
BRAIN PIE
Take 3 sets sheep brains, soak them in salt water for an hour.
Drain and skin. Place in a saucepan and cover with cold water.
Bring to boil, and chop them lightly. Butter a piedish and cover
bottom with thick layer of breadcrumbs.
Then put in a layer of brains, season with pepper and salt, and
add layer of breadcrumbs. Repeat this until dish is full, bread-
crumbs being last layer.
Beat 2 eggs with half pint milk, pour over breadcrumbs and
brains. Dot with small pieces butter and bake in hot oven for
20 minutes.
BRAIN CUTLETS
3 sets of brains, soak in strong salt water for about 1 hour, drain
and put on the fire in fresh, cold water, bring to boil, then strain
and chop finely. Add a breakfast cup of breadcrumbs; 2 table-
spoons of butter; 1 dessertspoon finely chopped parsley; a little
grated lemon rind; salt and pepper to taste.
Mix all together with a beaten egg. Take a tablespoon at a time
and fry in boiling fat. Fry a few rashers of bacon and serve with
the cutlets.
THERE’S ENERGY IN EVERY SLICE OF BREAD


Cleanliness is encouraged by the provi-
sion of spick and span change rooms
equipped with modern toilet facilities and
individual steel lockers for all employees.
What the School Children thought of it —
After a recent visit of High School Children to the
Golden Crust Bakery they were asked what was the chief
thing noticed-—almost unanimously they said "How clean
everything was."


EGGS—GOLDEN
4 eggs hard-boiled; 2 tablespoons brown breadcrumbs; 1 tea-
spoonful parsley (chopped) ; 1 tablespoonful white breadcrumbs;
herbs; 1 egg (uncooked) ; 1 oz. margarine or butter; brown sauce.
CRUMBED TOMATOES ON TOAST
1 lb. tomatoes; 1! cups breadcrumbs; a little milk. Pour boiling
water over tomatoes to remove skins, cut tomatoes in half, dip in
milk, then in breadcrumbs. Drop into boiling fat; serve on buttered
toast.
STUFFED BACON ON TOAST
1 cup stale breadcrumbs; 3 sheep kidneys; beaten egg; salt and
pepper; i tablespoon parsley; 6 rashers bacon; i small onion;
tomatoes and breadcrumbs to garnish; buttered toast.
Mix crumbs with chopped onions, and add parsley. Season to
taste, moisten with beaten egg, then spread mixture on bacon slices,
cut in halves. With small skewers fasten each piece round a quarter
of sheep kidney. Bake in hot oven 15 to 20 minutes. Serve on
rounds of hot buttered toast. Garnish with halved grilled tomatoes,
sprinkle with breadcrumbs, pepper and salt.
CHEESE CUSTARD
Take 6 very thin slices of bread and butter and some rather dry
cheese; 1 egg; and \ pint milk. Butter a fireproof dish, lay in
slices of bread and butter and cheese alternately, and season lightly
with salt and pepper. Beat up the egg, add milk, and pour over
layers of bread and cheese. Bake 15 minutes.
GRILLED EGGS
Cut some slices of white bread (rather thick), remove any hard
crust, then toast lightly under a griller on one side only. Remove,
and spread the other side with a thick layer of a mixture of raw
egg (not beaten) into which you have stirred 2 tablespoonfuls of
grated cheese and a little melted butter. If liked, thin sippets of
bacon can be placed on top. Grill very gently until golden brown;
serve at once.
This is a very popular dish for a quick lunch or a light supper.
One egg makes two good serves.
GRANNIES’ TOAST
Slices of bread; 2 eggs; 1 cup of milk; salt and pepper to taste.
Beat eggs and milk slightly as for scrambled eggs, and add seasoning.
Cut thin slices of bread and dip in mixture; when well covered
fry until golden brown. Very little fat in pan.
THERE’S SUNSHINE IN EVERY SLICE OF BREAD
Breakfast Dishes — continued.


ROAST BEEF ACCOMPLISHMENT
Cup of breadcrumbs; 1 layer tomatoes; 1 layer onions; 1 layer
tomatoes; little thyme; little salt and pepper; slice of bacon (diced) ;
another cup of breadcrumbs; little butter. Cook in oven for 45
minutes.
CHEESE CUSTARD
2 heaped tablespoons breadcrumbs; 3 oz. grated cheese; i oz.
butter; 1 pint milk; 2 eggs; pepper, salt, mustard to taste.
Boil milk and pour over breadcrumbs, add grated cheese, pepper
and salt, and stir well. Beat eggs and add. Bake in buttered pie
dish for about 20 minutes.
BREAD STEAKS
i doz. rounds bread; 1 teaspoon chopped parsley; 1 egg; a little
milk; 3 oz. breadcrumbs; teaspoon herbs; salt and pepper.
Remove the crust from bread, moisten with milk, beat up egg
and add it to the seasoning, herbs and parsley. Dip the pieces of
bread in this, roll in breadcrumbs and fry a nice brown in hot
butter or dripping. Dish in a ring with fried tomatoes, mushrooms,
or onions in centre.
Food of the Sturdy Pioneers:
Our sturdy forefathers ate bread and milk—they knew
nothing about vitamins, but actually they were eating a
much more nourishing food than most of us eat to-day in
patent cereal breakfast foods.
BREAD AND MILK IS BEST FOR BREAKFAST


SAVOURIES
SCALLOPED SPAGHETTI WITH MUSHROOMS
One pound tomatoes; i cup finely grated cheese; I cup spaghetti;
salt and cayenne; 2 tablespoons breadcrumbs; I lb. mushrooms; 2
dessertspoons butter.
Method; Cook the spaghetti in fast-boiling salted water for 20
minutes. Drain; chop the tomatoes and steam slowly in a little but-
ter until tender. Rub through a sieve. Peel and chop the mush-
rooms, and saute, Place layers of spaghetti, cheese, tomato puree
and mushrooms in greased oven-proof dish. Cover the top with
breadcrumbs, dot with butter and bake in a hot oven until well
browned. Serve at once.
CHEESE STICKS
Cut some slices of bread, about a quarter of an inch thick, and
spread with butter; sprinkle thickly with grated cheese; flavour
with cayenne pepper. Bake in a moderate oven until crisp and a
golden brown.
TOMATO SAVOURY
3 large tomatoes; 1 onion (large) ; 2 cups rolled breadcrumbs.
Grease small piedish; cut onion and tomato in alternate layers; each
layer sprinkle with breadcrumbs, pepper, and salt; last layer dotted
with butter and bake in medium oven. Serve with roast meat.
BEAN CUTLETS
Ingredients; J lb. beans (Butter or Haricot) ; 2 ozs. breadcrumbs;
li ozs. butter; 1 large tomato; 1 oz. flour; i pint vegetable stock
or water; \ oz. curry powder; salt; pepper; 2 ozs. chopped raisins;
maitre d’hotel butter.
Method: Soak and boil the beans and pass them through a sieve.
Heat the butter in a frying pan or saucepan and fry in it the sliced
tomato. Add the flour and curry powder; stir and fry for a few
minutes. Add the water or stock, stir and boil. Add the salt, pep-
per, sieve<l beans, raisins and breadcrumbs, and mix well together.
Turn on to a floured plate and allow to cool. Cut into 12 pieces
and shape into cutlets. Place on the cake tray; brush over with egg
and bake in the oven for 15 minutes. Alternately, brush with egg
and dip in crumbs. Press the crumbs on with a knife and fry in
hot fat. Serve with maitre d’hotel butter.
MAITRE d’HOTEL BUTTER
2 ozs. butter; salt and, pepper; 2 teaspoons chopped parsley;
lemon juice.
Method: Pick parsley carefully; chop finely and mix thoroughly
with the butter, seasonings and lemon juice.
THERE’S ENERGY IN EVERY SLICE OF BREAD


The sifting of flour through a fine screen
to aerate and assist in the hygienic
production of Golden Crust Bread.
"A great reward for time and patience displayed by
manager and staff; reflects special credit for progressive
movement to secure better conditions for employees and
consumers generally." —Prominent Master Baker.


CURRIED VEGETABLE PATTIES
1 cup any cold vegetables; 1 oz. sultanas; 1 onion; i oz flour;
2 oz. curry powder; i teaspoon salt; gill vinegar; 1 gill water;
deep frying fat; 3 or 4 slices bread about 2 inches thick; butler;
parsley.
Mince onions and fry in butter for 5 minutes. Stir in flour,
curry powder and vinegar; add water and sultanas and stir until
boiling; season to taste. Chop the cold vegetables and add. Keep
hot on low heat. Cut bread into rounds and scoop out centres. Fry
in smoking hot fat for about 3 minutes until golden brown. Drain
on paper and fill with hot vegetable mixture. Serve garnished with
parsley on paper d’oyley. Cold meat or fish may be added to
vegetables if liked.
A delightful method of combining left-overs and supplying a
hot, appetising and energy-packed winter dish.
OYSTERS IN A CRUST CASE
1 loaf bread; 1 quart oysters; \ cup melted butter; 2 tablespoons
butter; 2 tablespoons flour; 1 cup milk; salt and pepper to taste;
1 lemon; parsley.
Cut top from loaf of bread, remove crumbs, brush inside of
case with melted butter and place in slow oven to become crisp.
Prepare top in same way and fasten it to the crust. Dry oysters
and chop them. Keep ten) of the oysters whole. Blend butter and
flour into a saucepan over the fire; stir in milk and keep stirring
until it boils; season nicely with salt, pepper and lemon juice.
Add oysters; make very hot, then turn into bread case. Heat
whole oysters and lay them on the top. Garnish with parsley and
serve at once. Creamed cooked chicken may be used in place of
oysters.
CURRIED APPLES
Take 6 large a<pples; 2 large tablespoonfuls each of grated cheese
and breadcrumbs: 2 teaspoonfuls curry powder; a little cream to
moisten and some squares of buttered toast.
Peel the apples, take out the cores; mix cheese, crumbs and
curry powder together and moisten with cream. Fill centres of
apples with mixture. Place in buttered tin and bake until fruit
is done. Serve hot on squares of buttered toast.
TOMATO PIE
Take as many tomatoes and onions and breadcrumbs as will fill
a piedish.
Slice tomatoes and onions finely. Put in a layer of tomatoes,
onions and breadcrumbs; season with salt, pepper and a few dots
of butter; repeat layers until dish is full. Bake in moderate oven
until brown and onions tender.
THERE’S SUNSHINE IN EVERY SLICE OF BREAD
Savouries — continued.


CELERY ROLLS
Ingredients; Fresh bread (sandwich loaf) ; 2 small celery hearts;
butter; 4 cup cream; salt; cayenne; 1 tablespoon grated cheese;
i teaspoon chopped chives.
Method: Place celery in water till crisp. Add pinch salt and
cayenne to cream; beat till thick; mix in cheese lightly, but
thoroughly. Butter bread, cut in thin slices; remove crusts, sprinkle
with salt. Cut celery in lengths to ht the bread. Spread cheese
cream along each piece of celery. Sprinkle sparingly with chives.
Place on bread and roll, press lightly and rut each roll in half.
CHEESE WAFFLES
1 cup soft breadcrumbs; 14 cups milk; 14 cups self-raising Hour;
3 eggs; 1 teaspoon baking powder; 1 teaspoon salt; 4 cup grated
cheese; 2 tablespoons melted butter.
Soak breadcrumbs in milk, to which the beaten egg yolks have
been added. Stir in flour, baking powder and salt sifted together;
grated cheese and melted butter. Fold in the stiffly-beaten egg
whites.
MOCK TURKEY SANDWICH FILLING
1 teaspoon butter; 1 small onion; 2 teaspoons cheese; 1 large
soft tomato; 1 slice Golden Crust bread; seasoning.
Cut the onion and tomato up very finely, grate cheese, crumb
the bread, add the butter and seasoning and boil all together for 0
minutes.
BAKED TOMATO, BREAD AND CHEESE
6 slices of bread; 1 cup of cheese cubes; 2 cups of tomato
juice; 2 eggs; 4 teaspoonful salt; 4 teaspoon pepper; 1 tablespoon-
ful minced onion.
Method: Butter bread and cut into cubes; put cubes of bread
and cheese in bottom of baking dish iru alternate layers. Beat eggs
slightly; add tomato juice, salt and pepper and minced onion.
Pour over bread and cheese and bake in moderate oven at 350
degrees F. for 50 minutes.
SCALLOPED PARSNIPS
2 parsnips; parsley; breadcrumbs; i cup grated cheese; 4 pint
milk; 1 tablespoon ofj butter; 1 dessertspoon of cornflour.
Cook two parsnips cut into dice. Put in buttered piedish,
sprinkle wilh breadcrumbs, parsley and grated cheese; pour ovei
white sauce made with milk, butter and a little common flour;
repeat these layers, finishing with breadcrumbs and cheese; sprinkle
over sauce; dot with butter and bake till brown.
IF YOU NEED MORE ENERGY, EAT MORE BREAD


ALMOND AND CELERY
Butter some thin slices of bread. Blanch and chop some almonds.
Shred stalk young celery and mix both together, adding pepper and
salt to taste. Make into a paste with cream. Spread thinly on
buttered bread. Trim edges and cut into fancy shapes.
GHERKIN CROUTES
6 rounds fried bread; 2 hard-boiled eggs; 2 tablespoons butter:
h pickled gherkins; salt and pepper to taste.
Method: Cut slices of bread, then divide into rounds with a
cutter. Fry them a nice golden brown, either in butter or in good
beef dripping (the former for preference). Drain them for a
minute on a piece of paper. Separate the yolka and the wdiites of
the eggs. Chop whites finely. Beat the yolks with butter and
season nicely with salt and pepper. Spread a layer of this egg
butter on each croute. Cut the gherkins into strips and arrange
them in a lattice on the egg mixture. Put chopped whites in a
border around; edge of each.
BREAD RAMEQUINS
2 ozs. grated cheese; 1 oz. melted butter; 1 anchovy; l the yolk
of 1 egg; a little pepper. Mix well; spread thick on fried bread
and brown under the grifler.
ENGLISH MONKEY
1 cup breadcrumbs; 1 cup milk; i cup grated cheese; hot but-
tered toast; 1 egg; 1 tablespoon butter; i teaspoon salt; few
grains red pepper.
Soak the breadcrumbs 15 minutes in milk; melt the butler and
add the cheese. When cheese has melted add the soaked crumbs
and seasoning. Mix well together and add the beaten egg. Cook
3 minutes and pour over hot, buttered toast. Serve at once.
A SAVOURY NUT ROAST
1 lb. breadcrumbs; 1 lb. chopped nut meats; 2 cups chopped
celery; 1 lb. fresh or 1 can tomatoes; i cup chopped onions; 2
tablespoons melted butter; 2 eggs; 1 teaspoon salt; 1 teaspoon
white pepper; tomato sauce; \ cup chopped parsley; 1 lemon.
Toast whole wheat bread and grind it fine; add chestnuts
rubbed through a sieve, celery, tomatoes, parsley, onions, butter,
salt and pepper and eggs well beaten. Turn into buttered fire-
proof dish and hake in moderate oven for 1 hour. Decorate with
lemon. Serve with tomato sauce.
SAVOURIES
Small pieces may be used for savouries. Cut them into small
fingers, dip; in melted butter, spread the tops with meat extract or
fish paste, roll in grated cheese, and bake till crisp.
THERE’S ENERGY IN EVERY SLICE OF BREAD
Savouries — continued.


The dough for Golden Crust Bread is
entirely mixed by machinery—ingenious
mixers which imitate the motion of human
hands of the most expert bakers and far
more hygienic.
"Wonderful" .aptly describes the whole of activities and
appliances attached to a Model Bakery.
A City Councillor.


FRENCH TOAST
Cut stale bread into squares; dip in egg and milk; salt and
.pepper and fry in boiling fat. Serve with fried eggs, bacon or
tomatoes.
SAVOURY MEAT
1 cup cold minced meat; 1 cup bread and milk fairly thin and
previously boiled;, 1 beaten egg; pepper and salt; 1 teaspoon curry
powder and a little chopped onion; mix together in piedish.
Sprinkle dry breadcrumbs on top and a little butter. Bake an
hour. Serve hot with gravy.
SAVOURY RISSOLES
6 tablespoons mashed potatoes; 2 ozs. soaked bread; 1 dessert-
spoon finely chojpped parsley; 1 teaspoon finely chopped onion;
yolks of 2 eggs; 1 whole egg; breadcrumbs; pepper and salt.
Mix potatoes, bread, parsley and onion and season with pepper
and salt; moisten with yolks of eggs and add a little milk if at
all dry. Form into round, flat cakes; coat with egg and bread
crumbs and fry in hot butter till nicely brown.
SAVOURY FOUNDATION
1 egg; little milk; stale bread; pepper and salt.
Beat up egg with milk, pepper and salt. Cut bread into fingers
and dip in egg and fry in boiling fat till nice and brown. Can be
served with sliced tomatoes and shredded lettuce as a savoury, or
with fish, bacon, fried tomato, sausages, etc.
A GOOD SAVOURY
Soak sufficient bread (in a little water) to fill a pint basin;
add 3 tablespoons finely chopped suet; 3 onions boiled and chopped;
1 dessertspoon oatmeal; i teaspoon dried sage; pepper and salt to
taste; 2 eggs and enough milk to make a thick batter. Bake 3
hour. Serve with roast meat.
Vitamins:
Australian Flour is richer in Vitamin Bi than any in the
World.
THERE’S SUNSHINE IN EVERY SLICE OF BREAD
Savouries — continued.


MEAT DISHES
LIVER ROLLS WITH LEMON SAUCE
i lb. lamb’s liver; 1 cup fine breadcrumbs; yolk of 1 egg; 1
tablespoon finely chopped parsley; grated lemon rind; pinch of
thyme; salt and pepper; bacon rashers.
Wash liver, place in saucepan and barely cover with water. Sim-
mer until tender, about 20 minutes. Drain and mince liver. Add
the breadcrumbs, lemon rind and seasonings. Bind together with
lightly beaten egg yolk. Cut the rinds from bacon and spread
liver thickly on each. Roll up and skewer. Bake in a moderate
oven 30 minutes.
Lemon Sauce: Melt 1 tablespoon butter and stir in 1 table-
spoon of flour. Blend until smooth and cook for 2 minutes with-
out browning. Stir in U cups milk and simmer for 3 minutes,
stirring well. Add tablespoon chopped parsley and \ teaspoon
grated lemon rind and good pinch of salt. Just before serving
flavour with 1 tablespoon lemon cheese.
VEAL MOULD —SPECIALLY NICE FOR PICNICS
Required; 4 ozs. of chopped cooked veal; 2 ozs. of chopped
cooked ham; 3 ozs. of fresh breadcrumbs; 1 teaspoonful chopped
onions; 1 teaspoonful of grated lemon rind; 1 teaspoonful of made
mustard; 4 teacupful of nice gravy, sauce or stock; 1 raw egg;
3 hard-boiled eggs; salt, pepper and nutmeg.
Method: Boil the 3 eggs for 15 minutes, then shell them and
cut them into slices. Well butter a plain round mould, then line
it with the slices of egg,, pressing them gently on to the buttered
mould, so that they will be held in position. Mix together the
veal, ham and crumbs, onions and lemon rind and mustard. Beat
up the egg, add the gravy, then stir these into the other ingredients.
Season the mixture carefully and press it gently, but firmly, into
the mould, taking care not to disarrange the pieces of egg. Cover
the top with pieces of greased paper. Put a lid or plate over it
and on this place a weight to keep the mixture pressed well
together. Steam it for about I of an hour; then turn it out of
the mould and leave to go cold. It is then ready to replace in
mould for the picnic purpose.
LAMB CHOPS EN PAPILLOTE
6 lamb chops (fairly thick) ; 2 tablespoons of milk; 1 egg; 2
hard-boiled eggs; 4 cup breadcrumbs; 1 teaspoon minced onion; 1
tablespoon minced ham or bacon.
Method: Glaze these chops with beaten egg. Combine bread-
crumbs, onion, ham, grated egg yolk and sieved egg white. Coat
the chops thickly with the mixture. Wrap in thickly-greased paper
and place on greased tray. Bake with oven dinner. Remove from
paper before serving and garnish with parsley and cutlet frills.
BREAD is STORED ENERGY READY for INSTANT USE


MEAT LOAF
3. cups of minced cold meat; 1 cup of breadcrumbs; 1 egg; i
teaspoon salt; sprinkle of pepper; pinch of ground cloves; I tea-
spoonful nutmeg. Mix all together and steam for 3 hour. When
cold cut in slices.
JELLIED LOAF
Cut a Golden Crust sandwich loaf in halves lengthwise. Scoop
out some of the crumbs from inside of each half and spread the
wells thus made with butler and potted meat. Now melt a packet
of savoury jelly, using only half the quantity of water directed so
that it will be fairly stiff. Allow to cool and when beginning to
jell put a few spoonfuls into each bread well and press in some
slices of hard-boiled eggs and skinned tomatoes. Then add some
more jelly, then some slices of ham and cooked pork sausages.
Then fill up with jelly and more tomato and lettuce; have a very
little jelly as a top layer. Close the l two halves of the loaf together
and tie with a clean tea towel. Served cut in slices it is delicious.
SPAGHETTI AND KIDNEY PIE
4 ozs. spaghetti; 11 ozs. butter; 1 oz. flour; \ pint milk; a little
seasoning; 2 kidneys; Golden Crust breadcrumbs.
Method: Boil spaghetti in salted water for 20 minutes; melt
butter and flour; mix well; add milk, mixing it slowly and smoothly.
Let sauce boil for 5 minutes; season; add strained spaghetti. Pul
into piedish; chop up kidneys; fry in dripping and spread over
spaghetti; then sprinkle breadcrumbs thickly. Put a little batter
on top and bake in oven until brown. A little cheese and chopped
onion may be added if desired.
GRILLED ROLLS
Ingredients; Cold rabbit, liver or any meat; tomato; mashed
peas or beans; a little milk or sauce to flavour; salt and pepper to
taste.
The Filling: Prepare the liver or rabbit by chopping finely.
Cooked bacon added gives flavour. Add chopped tomato if avail-
able; chopped peas or any “left-over” vegetable. Flavour with salt
and pepper. Make this mixture into a thick paste by moistening
with very little milk or, if desired, Worcestershire, or any other,
sauce. Other cold meats can be made just as tasty by the addition
of a little grated cheese and a pinch of cayenne pepper.
The Roll: Cut fairly thin slices of bread; spread thinly with
butter. Place a large tablespoon of mixture on to each slice. Make
into a roll, then skewer or tie firmly. Grill these lightly on the
griller. turning 2 or 3 times. Serve hot with sprigged parsley.
Delicious for week-end teas. Can be prepared previously.
THERE’S ENERGY IN EVERY SLICE OF BREAD
Meat Dishes — continued.


Air conditioned Dough Proving Rooms
with automatic temperature control ensure
the perfect loaf of Golden Crust Bread
—always.
"A bakery South Australia can be proud of."
—A City Businessman.


BEEF PUDDING
* lb. beef steak; 1 egg; -1 lb. uncooked ham; i cup Golden
Crust breadcrumbs; seasoning.
Mince the beef and ham; add the breadcrumbs and seasoning;
break egg whole into the mixture and mix thoroughly. Wrap in
a scalded, floured cloth; put into saucepan and cover with boiling
water and boil 2 hours. May be used hot or cold.
BEEF STEAK AND KIDNEY PUDDING
1 cup flour; 1 cup of breadcrumbs; 1 cup finely chopped suet;
salt to taste. Mix to a stiff paste with water. Put through a mincer
U lbs. of beef steak and 2 sheep’s kidneys; add 1 teaspoonful of
chopped parsley and salt and pepper.
Cream a pudding basin and line with two-thirds of the pastry;
place a small onion, stuck with cloves in the bottom; put in meat
and roll out the remainder of the pastry and cover the top of the
basin. Tie with a well-floured cloth over the top and boil for 2\
to 3 hours.
FRITZ SAUSAGE
H lbs. chuck steak; 1 lb. bacon; U cups (large) breadcrumbs;
1 small teaspoon of salt; 1 small teaspoon pepper; 1 dessertspoon
of Worcestershire sauce; pinch of thyme; 1 egg. Mince steak
and bacon very fine; add breadcrumbs and the egg (well beaten).
Mix well together; make into a roll and tie in floured cloth. Put
in boiling water and boil li hours. Turn out and roll in bread-
crumbs and eat cold.
CAMBRIDGE SAUSAGE
1 lb. steak; \ lb. bacon; 2 cups breadcrumbs; 2 eggs, or 1
egg and a little stock or water; 1 dessertspoon sauce (Worcester-
shire) ; pinch salt.
Mince steak and bacon; add crumbs, sauce, salt and beaten
eggs. Form into a roll; tie in a floured cloth; boil 2i hours. Re-
move cloth when cold; sprinkle thickly with brown breadcrumbs.
GRANNY’S ENGLISH SAUSAGE .
1 lb. meat; \ lb. bacon; i lb. breadcrumbs; i lb. red lentils;
seasoning to taste; 1 egg.
Method: Mince meat and bacon; add breadcrumbs well crumbled;
seasoning. Boil red lentils in water until soft mash. Add to
minced ingredients. Beat together well; allow to stand for few
minutes, then add 1 egg and mix well' together. Press into greased
basin and steam 2 hours.
Fresh meat can be used, but takes longer to steam. To be
used cold. Is delicioua for sandwiches and makes very nice sausage
rolls.
THERE’S SUNSHINE IN EVERY SLICE OF BREAD
Meat Dishes — continued.


GIPSY SAUSAGES
Wash and remove mid ribs from the big, firm leaves of a cab-
bage. Cook in slightly salted wateii until tender, but firm. Remove
and allow to dry.
Mix H cups breadcrumbs; \ cup grated cheese; 1 cup chopped
apples; 1 cup stoned prunes; 1 cup chopped, cooked veal. Add 2
tablespoons melted butter; moisten with a little gravy and season
with salt, pepper and a pinch of marjoram.
Place 2 tablespoons stuffing on each cabbage leaf; roll into
neat rolls 4 inches long and pack together in a casserole. Pour
over a cup of cream or milk. Cook slowly until sausages are
lightly browned. Serve with tiny bacon rolls fried crisp.
DIXIE COMBINATION
This “meat stretcher” recipe combines the energy value of bread,
with meat economy, and the family will enjoy the ‘Combination.”
4 tomatoes; salt; pepper; 4 pork chops; 4 potatoes; 1 table-
spoon butter; 2 large ripe apples; brown sugar; cinnamon; 24
cups of breadcrumbs; 1 egg; minced onion; 1/3 cup melted butter.
Wash tomatoes, remove centres, dust with salt and pepper, in-
vert to drain. Wipe pork chops, season lightly with salt and pepper,
dredge with flour. Place chops in large baking dish; peel pota-
toes, cut them in halves (lengthwise), and rub them over with
the tablespoon of butter previously softened. Place potatoes in
dish around chops; cut apples in halves (crosswise) without peel-
ing; remove centre core carefully without cutting through outer
skin. Place apples, cut side up, in dish with chops and potatoes.
Fill centres of apples with brown sugar and dash of cinnamon.
Mix together onion, breadcrumbs and lightly beaten egg; season
with salt and pepper; add melted butter and mix thoroughly.
Spread small amount of dressing on top of each chop; fill the
drained tomatoes with remainder of dressing. Bake chops, potatoes,
apples in hot oven for 15 minutes; add small amount of water to
prevent burning. Reduce heat to moderate and continue cooking
45 minutes longer, basting occasionally and adding a little more
boiling water if necessary. Half an hour before removing chops
from stove, place filled tomatoes in same dish to bake. Gravy may
be made by thickening 2 tablespoons of the fat in dish with 1
tablespoon flour and adding \ cupful of hot water.
BREAD AND RABBIT PIE
Joint a young rabbit and fry the pieces brown; then place in a
piedish. Crumble 2 large slices of white bread into a basin; add
salt, pepper and favourite herbs; mix with an egg and place in
spoonfuls between the portions of meat; pour over 1 cup of milk.
Bake f of an hour in moderate oven. Serve with gravy made from
the frying pan.
BREAD Provides the Greatest FOOD VALUE for MONEY SPENT


SUPREME LAMB’S FRY
Carefully slit a lamb's fry along the thickest side for about 3
inches and fill with the following mixture: —One cup breadcrumbs:
'I cup stewed apples; i grated onion: sprinkle of thyme and sage:
pepper; salt; 1 tablespoon grated cheese.
Bind mixture with one egg; pack well in and fasten slit securel)
with small skewers. Lay in flat dish with a little fat; sprinkle fry
well with flour; add a layer of bacon and cover all thickly with
sliced tomatoes. Bake slowly 1 hour.
WHEN MEAT IS SCARCE
If you have only a very little cold meat in the house and you
think you cannot possibly make it do for another meal, mince it
finely, including fat, soak a good thick slice of bread in cold
water; squeeze dry and mix with meat. Add a finely chopped
onion and a sprinkling of sage, pepper and salt; add a little water
or stock. Put mixture in a dish; cover with the potatoes and bake
until the potatoes are cooked and nicely browned.
MOCK GOOSE
Line a dish with stale bread; pour over boiling water; mix in
a couple of tablespoons nice, dripping. Cut up fairly fine a couple
of onions and a layer of bacon. Sprinkle in some thyme, pepper
and salt to taste and bake about [ to 1 hour.
MEAT FRITTERS
2 cups Iresh breadcrumbs: 2 cups chopped cold meal; 1 teaspoon
soda; 2 beaten 1 cup milk; salt and pepper to taste, and
flour.
Method: Mix the ingredients well together with flour to make
a baiter that can be dropped from a spoon. Drop by tablespoonfuls
into hot fat and fry a delicate brown. Serve hot.
HOT ROAST BEEF SANDWICH
Slices of bread; roast beef; brown gravy.
Method: Slice hot roast beef thinly and place between slices
of bread. Pour over it brown gravy and serve hot. This is a very
attractive and appetising dish.
MACARONI AND TOMATO PIE
1 lb. cold meat; 3 ozs. macaroni; 1 tablespoon butter; 2 table-
spoons stock;. 4 or 5 tomatoes; 2 ozs breadcrumbs; seasoning.
Boil macaroni in salted water; cut the meat small and slice the
tomatoes. Butter a piedish; put in alternate layers of macaroni,
meat and tomatoes with seasoning between; add a very little water
or stock. Sprinkle breadcrumbs over the top and put bits of but
ter over them. Bake of an hour.
THERE’S ENERGY IN EVERY SLICE OF BREAD
Meat Dishes — continued.


General view of the Golden Crust Baking
Hall which is scientifically ventilated and
provides ample floor space to encourage
orderly and hygienic manufacture.
"All members agree that it is just as you would expect
from Golden Crust in always leading the way with
cleanliness and modern processes of Baking.
—Members of a Cycle Club.


POINT PIPU TOAST
Finger-shaped pieces of toast; 1 tablespoon boiled rice; 3
tablespoons tomato sauce; 1 cold cooked sausage; salt and pepper
to taste.
Method: Skin sausages and cut into s’ices an ith of an inch
thick. Put tomato sauce into small pan with rice and season to
taste. Arrange some of the slices of sausage on each piece of
toast; let them slightly overlap each other. Spread the sauce on
them; heat in the oven for a few minutes and serve at once.
Cooked vermicelli may be used instead of rice.
CAMP PIE
Ingredients: 1 lb. topside steak; 1 egg; 1 cupful breadcrumbs;
a little chopped onion and parsley; salt and pepper to taste;
grated nutmeg.
Method: Mince the steak, add egg, breadcrumbs, pepper, salt,
onion, parsley and a little grated nutmeg. Mix well. Put into a
greased pudding basin and steam for 1 to li hours. Serve cold
with salads.
Energy:
Bread provides the greatest immediate need of the human
body—the “fuel” to provide energy, for which about 85
per cent, of our food is consumed. We can do without
many items of food and not miss them, but we cannot do
without bread.
THERE’S SUNSHINE IN EVERY SLICE OF BREAD
Meat Dishes — continued.


MISCELLANEOUS
A DELICIOUS WAY TO SERVE LENTILS
Required: 1 pint red lentils; 4 ozs. of bacon; 1 quart slock; 2
ozs. of dripping; 1 large onion; 1 tablespoonful flour; salt; pepper;
chopped parsley; fried bread.
Method: Soak lentils overnight. Put in saucepan with dripping
and stir over fire for 5 minutes; add the stock and hoil till the
lentils are soft, stirring them well. Meanwhile slice onions in thin
rings; fry brown after having fried bacon in the remaining fat.
Rub the lentils through, a sieve. After pouring off and saving any
liquid not absorbed, mix the flour with a little of this liquid, using
about i a pint of it; mix this with the sieved lentils and stir
over fire till boiling. Season carefully; heap on hot dish and gar-
nish with heaps of fried onions and the bacon and neat shapes of
fried bread. Lentils are just as nourishing as meat.
ANOTHER LENTIL DISH—CHEESE AND LENTIL
SAVOURY
Required: 1 lb. stale cheese; 6 ozs. lentils; 1 large onion; 3
ozs. breadcrumbs; 1 oz. dripping: 3 teaspoonfuls parsley, chopped - ,
salt or pepper to- taste.
Method: Wash and look over lentils; remove all bits from
them; chop onion; put in pan with lentils and enough water to
cover them. Partly cook them; drain off the water; grate the
cheese; add it to the lentils, also the breadcrumbs, parsley, salt and
pepper to taste. Add enough stock or gravy to moisten and mix
to a smoothj paste; put this in a greased piedish; cut the dripping
in small bits and put on top. Bake in an oven until it is firmly
and is a pretty golden colour. Have with it some gravy or sauce.
BACON PIE
Take 4 lb. bacon; 2 or 3 tomatoes; cheese; breadcrumbs. Place
slices of bacon (or ham) in greased piedish alternately with layers
of cheese and tomatoes till dish is full. Cover with buttered bread-
cruumbs and bake in hot oven 10 to 15 minutes. Serve with green
peas and mashed potatoes. Tinned tomatoes will do instead of fresh.
MOCK DUCK
Wash and peel a marrow of medium size and cut off a piece
from one end. Scoop out seeds and fill centre with a mixture of
2 onions (parboiled); 3 sage leaves; 1 cupful of breadcrumbs; 1
oz. dripping; pepper and salt to taste; moistened and mixed
thoroughly with 1 well beaten egg. When marrow is full put the
end on again; tie with tape and bake on a well greased tin for
about 2 hour.
BREAD AND MILK IS BEST EOR BREAKFAST


South Australia’s Largest and most Modern Bakery
THE output of Golden Crust Bread now exceeds 80,000 loaves per
week, 27 times greater than at the end of the first year's history
of the Golden Crust Bakery 25 years ago. It now requiures over
43,000 acres of Australia's wheat land to produce the annual flour
requirements—truly a huge Bakery.
It is hard to visualise the production of 80,000 loaves a week, and
it is an interesting fact that if placed end on end, this regular weekly
output of Golden Crust Bread would make a chain of loaves ten
miles long.
Under bread delivery zoning conditions, many districts are now
deprived of Golden Crust Bread unless it is purchased from city
shops. The Golden Crust Bakery hopes that at some future time
it will again have the privilege of delivering bread to your door,
meanwhile, you can depend upon it that improved methods for
hygienic production of best quality bread will be the constant study
of the Golden Crust Bakery. When the Golden Crust man again
calls at your door, your bread will be better than ever.
GOLDEN CRUST BAKERY, North Adelaide.


SEASONING FOR FOWLS
6 tablespoons breadcrumbs; 1 tablespoon chopped parsley; 1
teaspoon herbs; grate of nutmeg; grate of lemon rind; salt and
pepper to taste; 1 egg.
Method: Mix all together and bind with a well-beaten egg.
VEGETABLE LOAF
1 gill cooked green peas; 3 gills milk; 1 gill cooked French
beans; i pint breadcrumbs. Mix well, stand for an hour; put in a
buttered baking dish and bake for i hour in a moderate oven.
Before baking cover the top with fried breadcrumbs and shavings
of butter. Serve with tomato sauce.
LENTIL ROLLS
1 lb. puff paste or short crust; 1 lb. cooked lentils; 2 ozs bread-
crumbs; 3 ozs. mashed potatoes; egg yolk for glazing; 1 oz. but-
ter, melted; 1 dessertspoon tomato sauce; 1 teaspoon chopped pars-
ley; a parboiled onion, chopped fine; 1 beaten egg; salt; pepper.
Method: Roll out pastry in a long strip. Mix all the other
ingredients together and place mixture along the centre of the
pastry Damp the edges, fold over and press together. Glaze with
egg; cut in convenient lengths as for sausage rolls. Bake on a
wet baking sheet in a hot oven, with the temperature lowered
slightly when the rolls are put in till the pastry is risen, set and
browned.
CAULIFLOWER AND BREADCRUMB PIE
Cook 1 cauliflower, divide into sprigs; cover with 1 cup baked
breadcrumbs, mixed with 1 tablespoon grated cheese, and pour
over all 1 cup white sauce.
Make this Crust: i lb. S.R. flour; \ lb. mashed potatoes; rub
in 2 dessertspoons butter and season to taste; mix with little milk.
Roll out on floured board to i inch thick; cover pie and bake in
moderate oven \ hour.
FISH AND MACARONI PIE
i cup fresh breadcrumbs; lb. cooked fish; 1 cup broken
macaroni; I cup grated cheese; i cup melted butter; 1 cuip milk;
salt and pepper to taste.
Method: Remove all skin and bone and break fish into flakes.
Break macaroni into pieces of i an inch long and boil until
tender in boiling salted water and drain. Butter fire-proof dish,
then put in layer of fish; then sprinkle in a littla butter, salt, pep
per, tablespoon cheese; then put in a layer of macaroni. Next put
in layer of fish, and so on, till dish is full. Put breadcrumbs over
top, then remainder of cheese and butter and pour in the milk.
Bake in moderate oven 30 minutes.
THERE’S SUNSHINE IN EVERY SLICE OF BREAD
Miscellaneous — continued.


BROWN SAUCE
1 tablespoonful brown flour; 2 onions; 2 ozs. margarine; 2 pint
hot water; 1 teaspoonful Worcester sauce; salt and pepper.
Melt margarine; chop the onions quite fine; add them and the
flour; mix well. Heat until dark brown; add the water gradually,
Stir well over the fire until the sauce is thick enough. Add sauce,
salt and pepper. To serve with eggs —golden.
CHESTER CAKES
Soak 2 loaf stale bread in cold water until soft; squeeze dry
and beat with a fork until light, then add 1 teaspoon baking powder;
1 packet mixed spice; 1 cup currants; 1 piece of lemon peel, cut
up fine, and 1 cup sugar.
Pastry: 3 cups S R. flour and pinch salt and rub in J cup of
good dripping and add enough water to make a light dough; cut
in half and roll out very thin; place one layer on baking slide and
spread the mixture over it and then place the other layer of pastry
on top. Brush ovei< with milk and sprinkle with cocoanut or castor
sugar. Bake 1 hour in a moderate oven and cut in squares when
cool.
CHESTER SQUARES
Soak 2 loaf stale bread; \ cup sugar; 2 cup golden syrup; 1
cup currants; 1 cup sultanas; 1 cup seeded raisins; ] lb. chopped
almonds: 1 teaspoon spice and 1 teaspoon cinnamon. Mix with
1 egg.
Make a pastry with 2 cups wholemeal S.R. flour; 4 cup drip-
ping; a little water. Divide and roll out thinly. Put one piece
in a flat tin; add the mixture; then the other piece on top. Bake
1 hour. Ice the top and sprinkle with chopped nuts.
RECIPE FOR USING BREAD
Soak in cold water 2 slices (or that quantity) of bread. Squeeze
quite dry and flake with fork; mix in 1 tomato, parsley, grated
cheese or carrot, pepper and salt. Mix all together with well-
beaten egg. Fry in a little butter till lightly cooked. Put in a
mould; add =ome Davis’ gelatine: turn out and serve when quite
cold.
BREAD MACAROONS
Dip fingers and small rounds of bread in sweetened condensed
milk (neat), roll in desiccated cocoanut or ground almonds and
brown in oven. Store in air-tight tin.
IF YOU NEED MORE ENERGY. EAT MORE BREAD


BREAD CRUMBS FOR DECORATION
An excellent substitute for cocoanut can be made fmni bread
crumbs.
Bread not less than three days old. rubbed to \ery tine crumb'.
|)iit into oven til] delicately browned; cool and pul them into jar
with a small piece of paper which has been lightly sprinkled with
vanilla or lemon essence, and shake a little nutmeg or spice over.
Keep lightly closed until ready lor use. This can he used for sponges.
CRUMB DROP BISCUITS
1 cup sifted breadcrumbs; i cup desiccated cocoanut; U cups
sweetened condensed milk; r cup chopped raisins; 8 chopped stoned
dates; 8 chopped glazed cherries; i teaspoon essence of lemon.
Place the breadcrumbs in a dish in the oven. Bake until light
brown. Turn into a basin; gradually stir in condensed milk. Then
add remainder of ingredients. Drop in teaspoonfuls on a greased
baking sheet. H inches apart. Bake in moderate oven from 10 to
12 minutes. This makes 36 biscuits.
DELICIOUS RUSKS
Cut some fingers of bread about an inch thick (white Procera
for preference I ; dip them in sweetened milk, coffee, cocoa or
Oval tine and bake in a slow oven until brown and crisp. They
must be dry throughout; break one and test it before taking from
oven. They are also excellent baked plain and most suitable for
babies at the commencement of educational diet.
LIGHT DUMPLINGS FOR BROTH
1 cup breadcrumbs; tablespoonful S.R. Hour; pinch of salt;
i teaspoonful nutmeg; mixed with one egg, well beaten. Half a
leaspoonful dropped in clear broth.
NUT BREAD
Soak a cupful ol dried peas in water overnight; drain, cover
with water and boil until tender, then pass them through a sieve.
Add a cupful of finely chopped roasted peanuts; three cupfuls of
stale breadcrumbs, pepper and salt; one cupful of milk and one
well beaten egg. Put into a greased baking dish. Bake for about
1 hour.
ALMOND ICING
3 ozs. fine breadcrumbs; 6 ozs. icing sugar; i egg; almond
essence.
Mix breadcrumbs and icing sugar together; add beaten egg
and the almond essence to flavour. Spread evenly over top of cake
wdth a knife.
THERE’S ENERGY IN EVERY SLICE OF BREAD
Miscellaneous- -continued.


One of the two Automatic Bread-making
Plants which contribute to the huge
weekly output of over 80,000 loaves of
even textured Golden Crust Bread.
'An education in organisation, cleanliness and foresight.
A credit to its management."
Director of City Emporium.


JELLIED FINGERS —FOR TEA
Mix jelly so that it will set fairly stiff. Cut bread slices, not
too thin (cut as for rusk, only smaller) ; dip in cool jelly. When
nearly set gprinkle with hundreds and thousands, or coloured cocoa-
nut or chopped nuts and let set.
BREAD SOUP (WHITE)
i lb. stale breadcrumbs; 2 oz. dripping; 1 quart white stock;
£ pint milk; 1 egg; 1 teaspoon finely chopped parsley
Break or cut the bread into very fine pieces; fry it in the
dripping for 5 minutes, but do not let it brown at all. Then put
the bread into a bowl; bring the stock to the boil; pour it on the
bread. Cover and leave until quite soft. Beat out the lumps with
a fork. Put it into a saucepan. Beat the egg; mix the milk with
it. Bring the soup to boiling point; take it off the fire and strain
the egg and milk into it. Stir over a gentle heat until very hot,
but do not let it boil after adding egg. Serve with a sprinkle of
parsley in each serve.
HERRING AND TOMATO BAKE
1 tin herrings in tomato sauce; 2 eggs; 1 tablespoon chopped
parsley; 1 cup soaked brown bread; 2 tablespoons melted butter;
1 teaspoon lemon juice; paprika and cauliflower and chilli.
Bone and mash herrings and tomato sauce; add bread (soaked),
parsley, lemon juice and melted butter; then eggs slightly beaten.
Form into a fish shape, about 6 inches long and 3 inches high.
Bake in shallow fire-proof dish in hot oven for 20 minutes till
well browned. Before serving place end of chilli in head of fish
for eye and use strips of chilli for tail. Frill around with hot but-
tered cauliflower, lemon slices and parsley.
Experts tell:
Rich and poor alike spend too much money on sweets and
devitaminised “luxury” foods. Both classes would he better
off nutritionally if they ate more bread. —Report of Com-
monwealth Nutritional Experts.
THERE’S SUNSHINE IN EVERY SLICE OF BREAD
Miscellaneous — continued.


SWEETS
CARROT PUDDING WITH LEMON SAUCE
i lb. carrots; 2 eggs; 4 ozs. margarine; 4 ozs. chopped dates or
sultanas; 2 ozs. sugar; 8 ozs. fresh breadcrumbs; powdered cinnamon.
Wash and scrub carrots; boil in slightly salted water until
tender. Drain and rub through sieve. Cream margarine and sugar;
add egg yolks, beating these well in, then mix in carrot purree,
breadcrumbs, fruit and little cinnamon. Whisk up egg whites stiffly
and stir in very lightly. Pour into greased mould and steam 2i
hours. Turn out and serve with lemon sauce.
LEMON SAUCE
1 teacup water; 2 ozs. sugar; 1 teaspoon cornflour; rind and
strained juice of 1 lemon. Boil sugar, water and lemon rind together;
strain, add lemon juice and thicken with blended cornflour. Boil
for a few minutes until sauce is quite clear.
FRUIT SHAPE
Line a basin or mould with bread. Fill with stewed sweetened
fruit (highly coloured fruit for preference). Cover fruit with more
bread, about 2 inch thick. Press with heavy weights over night.
To be used with custard or cream.
RUSSIAN BREAD PANCAKES
i lb. stale bread; i lb. plain flour; 1 pint milk; 3 eggs; butter
or dripping; pinch of salt.
Soak the bread about 1 hour in milk; rub through a sieve. Beat
the eggs, add salt, half of the bread mash and flour; heat well,
then add the rest of the bread and again beat well. Make frying
pan (with some butter or dripping) hot; put small heaps of the
batter and fry on both sides. Serve hot with jam
PIEMELON CHARLOTTE
li lbs. of melon; rind of i a lemon; 1 gill of water; 6 tablespoons
of sugar; 1 teaspoon of ground ginger and pinch of tartaric acid;
2 ozs. of butter; thin* slices of stale bread.
Method: Peel and seed melon, cut into dice, put into saucepan
with water, sugar, lemon rind, ginger and acid. Simmer gently
till cooked. Grease piedish, melt butter and dip slices of bread in
same, and line dish; pour in the cooked melon and cover with
more bread and butter. Bake in moderate oven till bread is browned,
turn on to dish and sprinkle with castor sugar and cinnamon. Serve
hot or cold with cream or boiled custard.
BREAD IS A RICH SOURCE OF ESSENTIAL VITAMINS


FROSTED LEMON TART
Line a dish with short pastrv and then make a filling with 1
cup stale breadcrumbs; 1 cup sugar; 1 cup cold water; yolks of
2 eggs (beaten,*; 1 oz. butter; rind and juice of two lemons and
fill the lari and bake 2 hour. Beat whites stiffly and add a little
sugar and put back and bake till golden brown.
RUFFERTY PUDDING
1 cup breadcrumbs; 3 eggs; 2 cups milk; 2 tablespoons sugar;
1 tablespoon cocoa; 1 tablespoon butler; vanilla; salt.
Heat milk and pour on to crumbs; butter, sugar, cocoa. Mix
lo smooth paste. Then add yolks of eggs, vanilla and salt. Bake
until set in buttered piedish.
Bear egg whites lo stiff froth with a little sugar; pile on top
and slightly brown. This sweet can be used hot or cold.
NEAPOLITANS (STALE BREAD)
Cut thick slices of bread and wdth a sharp cutter make circles
2 in. in diameter; spread one thickly with good jam—apricot or
herry fruit, and put one plain to make a sandwich. Make a good
rich batter with 1 egg, flour anil milk.
Put on frying fat to Foil and when blue smoke is rising take
(he circles of bread and jam and dip quickly in mixture of milk
and water, then dip in batter and drop in boiling fat for 6 or 7
minutes. Serve with a good sauce or creamy custard.
APPLE DESSERT
Cut white bread into slices and dip them into milk, in which
an egg has been blended with a flavouring of sugar and cinnamon.
Soak each slice until soft. Take a deep fireproof dish; moisten with
butter and perhaps a sprinkle of breadcrumbs to prevent the pud-
ding from sticking. You need 2 lbs. of apples, peeled, cored and
sliced thinly.
Into the dish put first a layer of the soaked bread, then some
apple slices; sprinkle with sugar and raisins and a few almonds.
Then put another layer of bread and another of apples until dish
is full. Sprinkle breadcrumbs on top and a few dabs of butter.
I hen bake till pudding is golden brown, which takes about 2 hour.
A PLAIN BREAD PUDDING
4 ozs. bread; 1 pint milk; 1 egg; 3 tablespoons sugar; 4 ozs.
raisins, sultanas or currants; a little candied peel; a grate of
nutmeg; a pinch of salt.
Soak the bread in the milk until thoroughly soft; beat it smooth;
add other ingredients and put in a buttered piedish. Bake in a
very slow oven for at least 4 hours. The long baking adds richness
and colour, which are the main features of this pudding.
THERE’S ENERGY IN EVERY SLICE OF BREAD
Sweets continued..


Close up view of some of the Steam Pipe
Ovens, draw-plate, Vienna and Peel type,
with hygienic glazed tile fronts, all
indirectly fired to ensure even baking.
"Remarkably impressive because of its intelligent planning
and cleanliness." —Visitor from I .S.A.


HONEYED RHUBARB CHARLOTTE
1 bunch rhubarb (approx. 1 lb.) ; 1 orange; thin slices of stale
bread; melted butter; i cup sugar; 2 cup honey; i cup water;
nutmeg; castor sugar.
Method: Wash the rhubarb and cut into 1 inch lengths. Com-
bine the sugar, orango rind and juice, honey and water, and bring
to boil. Add the rhubarb and simmer gently until tender. Cut
the bread into finger lengths, brush with melted butter and line a
cake tin or piedish. Add the rhubarb and cover the top with the
remaining bread fingers, brushed with butter. Dredge with castor
sugar and dust with nutmeg and bake in a fairly hot oven (400
degrees F.) for 30 minutes. Chill, turn out of cooking mould and
serve cold with or without cream or custard.
COFFEE PUDDING
2 cups breadcrumbs; 3 eggs; coffee; 1 oz. sugar; 1 oz. butter;
a few chopped almonds.
Method; Soak breadcrumbs in strong coffee; beat yolks of eggs
with sugar, melted butter and almonds. Squeeze out breadcrumbs
and beat in other ingredients. Have whites of eggs well beaten
and stir in lightly, Pour mixture in buttered dish or basin, either
bake or steam about 1 hour—a little less for baking. Coffee must
be made with water.
APRICOT HONEY BETTY
i lb. dried apricots; \ cup honey; \ cup brown sugar; I tea-
spoon nutmeg; i teaspoon cinnamon; i teaspoon lemon rind; 1
tablespoon lemon juice; 3 cups breadcrumbs; 1 tablespoon melted
butter.
Wash the apricots well and soak over night with sufficient water
to barely cover. Place a thick layer of crumbs in a greased oven
dish. Cover with the apricots. Cover the apricots with the honey,
brown sugar, lemon juice and rind and spices. Cover with the
remainder of the crumbs. Sprinkle over melted butter and sprinkle
lightly with a little brown sugar. Bake in a moderate oven for 30
minutes. Serve hot or cold.
RASPBERRY PUDDING BAKED
Cream \ lb. of butter and I lb. sugar; beat in 3 eggs, one at
a time, and add i lb. of breadcrumbs. Butter a mould and coat
the inside with brown breadcrumbs; put a layer of mixture at the
bottom, cover thickly with raspberry jam, taking care that it does
not touch the sides. Add more of the mixture and the jam until
the mould is full, the last layer being the mixture. Bake in moder-
ate oven for li hours. Serve with custard or sauce.
THERE’S SUNSHINE IN EVERY SLICE OF BREAD
Streets — continued.


COCOA PUDDING
Ingredients: 6 ozs. breadcrumbs; 1 pint milk; 3 eggs; 2 ozs.
butter; 2 tablesfpoons sugar; 1 tablespoon cocoa; 1 teaspoon vanilla
essence; pinch of salt.
Method: Boil milk and pour over breadcrumbs; add butter and
sugar and cocoa, which has been dissolved with 1 tablespoon of
boiling water. Add beaten yolks and essence; pour into buttered
piedish and bake 1 hour.
Beat whites of eggs to still 1 froth and add sugar and beat again;
decorate on top of pudding and cook a light brown. Leave in
slow oven for i hour to cook the meringue on top.
APPLE CUSTARD PUDDING
1 lb. apples; i cup water; | cup sugar; 2 tablespoons butter;
grated rind and juice of a lemon; 3 cups grated breadcrumbs; 2
tablespoons flour; 2 eggs. Peel and quarter the apples and stew
till soft with \ cup of water; remove from the fire and add sugar,
butter and rind and Juice of lemon; mix together the breadcrumbs
and flour, and add to the apple mixture, then stir in well-beaten
eggs. Put into a well-buttered piedish and bake 45 minutes in a
moderate oven.
A GOOD PLUM PUDDING
li cups of breadcrumbs; 1 cup flour; 1 cup raisins; 1 cup cur-
rants; 1 tablespoonful butter or dripping; 1 cup hot milk; 1 cup
cold milk; brown sugar to taste and lemon 'peel for flavouring; 1
teaspoonful of carbonate of soda. Dissolve soda in cold mdk and
butter in hot milk. Mix all together. Boil 3 hours or more. This
ia a real good pudding.
COCOANUT PUDDING
1 cup cocoanut; 1 pint breadcrumbs; 1 quart milk; i cup sugar;
3 eggs; 2 tablespoons butter; £ a nutmeg; i teaspoon salt.
Soak breadcrumbs and cocoanut in the milk for IS minutes;
beat eggs well and add them, also sugar, salt and butter; mix well
together, put in piedish, sprinkle nutmeg over top and bake in a
slow oven 1 hour.
QUEEN PUDDING
4 ozs. stale bread; 1 pint milk; 1 tablespoon sugar; rind of 1
lemon; 2 eggs; pinch salt; 2 tablespoons castor sugar; raspberry
jam. Bring the milk to the boil; pour it over the sugar and bread;
add lemon rind and beaten yolks; put into a buttered piedish and
stand it in a baking dish containing about 2 inches of water. Bake
in a moderate oven for about i an hour; take out, spread jam over
top; whip the whites of the eggs stiffly; add castor sugar; spread
on pudding and bake till light fawn colour.
BREAD is STORED ENERGY READY for INSTANT USE


CHERRY CROQUETTES
Stone 1 lb. cherries and cook till tender with a cup of sugar
and a little water. Drain off a little of the juice and add 1 lb.
of fine breadcrumbs, and \ lb. of stale cake crumbs, 1 teaspoon
grated lemon rind and a pinch of cinnamon. Spread mixture out
on a dish to become cold, then shape them, brush over with egg and
roll in fine stale cake crumbs. When set, egg and crumb a second
time and wet fry in clarified fat to a golden brown. Drain on
some stale crusts of bread, dish up and sprinkle with castor sugar
and little cinnamon. Bottled cherries may he used.
PRINCESS ELIZABETH’S FAVOURITE
14 cups breadcrumbs; 1 egg; 1 small cup stoned raisins; 1
small cup mashed bananas; pinch salt; 4 teaspoon carb soda, dis-
solved in 1 tablespoon boiling water. Steam 3 hours.
APPLE DARLING
3 cups diced apple, not too big; 2 or 3 slice- stale bread, but-
tered slightly both sides; 1 egg; 1 cup sugar; 1 tablespoon flour;
1 tablespoon butter; pinch of salt and pinch of soda.
Mix the cut apple, sugar, soda, flour, butter and salt. Beat egg
until light and add to apple mixture. Line a tart plate, both bot-
tom and sides, with buttered bread and pour in the mixture; cover
top of dish with long, narrow strips of buttered bread and place
criss-cross. Bake slowly at 350 degrees for I hour, then increase
heat to 375 degrees for 10 minutes to brown egg, which puffs up
between the latticed crusts.
INDIAN PUDDING
5 thick slices wholemeal bread; 34 cups milk; 4 cup golden
syrup or treacle.
Remove crusts from bread; spread generously with butter;
arrange in baking dish; pour over 3 cups milk and golden syrup
or treacle. Bake 2 to 3 hours in slow oven. Stir 3 times during
first hour of baking; then add remaining milk. Serve with cream.
BROWN BREAD PUDDING
3 ozs. butter; 6 ozs. brown breadcrumbs; 2 ozs. shredded peel;
3 eggs; 4 pint milk; 4 ozs. sugar; pinch salt; I teaspoon cinna-
mon ; grated nutmeg.
Heat milk, pour over crumbs; soak not less than 4 hour; cream
butter and sugar; add beaten eggs and milk gradually, bread and
other ingredients. Put into well greased mould; steam 2 hours
and serve with custard.
THERE’S ENERGY IN EVERY SLICE OF BREAD
Sweets — continued.


One of the three double decker Draw-
plate Ovens which ensure perfectly baked
Golden Crust Bread.
"This is more than a modern bakery. It is an institution
remarkable for its layout and cleanliness. It would do
credit to the world's most modern city."
—A Newspaperman.


SNOW PUDDING
cups breadcrumbs; 1 pint milk; 2 eggs; apricot jam; sugar
and flavouring to taste.
Place breadcrumbs in piedish, cover with custard made with
milk, yo’ks of eggs, sugar and flavouring. Bake in moderate oven
till set. Take out of oven, spread apricot jam on top; pile whites
of eggs, stiffly whipped on top, and return to oven to set.
LEMON PIE
4 ozs. breadcrumbs; 1 pint milk; 2 eggs; grated rind and juice
of 2 lemons (small) ; 3 ozs. sugar; rough puff pastry or pastry
trimmings.
Line piedish with pastry. Beat yolks of eggs only with 2 ozs.
of sugar. Heat milk and pour on yolks. Pour this mixture on to
breadcrumbs, mix well, and add juice and rind of lemons and pour
into piedish. Stand in dish containing water and bake in a hot
oven until centre mixture is set. Decrease heat as pastry cooks.
Beat whites stiffly and' fold in 1 oz. of castor sugar. Pile on top
of dish and cook slowly till golden brown.
BAKED PUDDING
i lb. stale bread; 1 cup mixed fruit; i cup sugar; 1 tablespoon
of butter or dripping; 1 egg; 1 teaspoon mixed apice; i cup milk.
Soak bread in water; squeeze dry by placing bread in towel;
mix bread and ingredients together. Bake 2 hour in a moderate
oven.
APPLE BETTY
Stew some apples with a pinch of salt and a little lemon juice,
but very little sugar and very little water. While they are cooking
prepare a dish with bread as follows: Into a small saucepan put
a large slice of butter and 2 tablespoons of golden syrup; cut some
slices of white bread, remove the crusts and cut into fingers. Dip
each piece into the melted mixture and arrange in a small piedish.
Fill the centre with the cooked apples; place more bread on top
and bake until a good brown.
100-YEARS’-OLD RECIPE FOR BREAD PUDDING
Cut the inside of a stale loaf into slices; pour over it a quart
of milk, boiling hot; cover it till bread is well soaked. Beat up
yolks of 6 eggs and whites of three; add a little grated nutmeg,
somo sugar, a little salt and 2 ozs. of butter. Mix all together and
bod for 1 hour. Serve it up with sweet sauce. This mixture can
be baked if preferred. It would serve a large family. Is very good.
THERE’S SUNSHINE IN EVERY SLICE OF BREAD
Sweets — continued.


PUDDING WITHOUT EGGS
1 large cup of Golden Crust bread crumbs; 1 small cup of
sugar; 1 small cup of plain flour; 1 cup of mixed fruit; 2 dessert-
spoons of dripping dissolved in 1 cu'u of boiling milk; then stir in
1 teaspoon of carbonate of soda. Mix into the other ingredients
and steam 2 hours.
SPANISH SOUFFLE
1 cup fresh breadcrumbs; i cup melted butter; 1 cup milk; 2
eggs; 3 tablespoonsi sugar; h teaspoon vanifla.
Melt butter; add crumbs and cook until a golden brown, stir-
ring frequently. Add sugar and milk and cook 15 minutes in a
double boiler. Remove from fire; cool and add the vanilla and
bake in slow oven until firm. This may be served alone or with
stewed fruit.
JELLY BREAD
Take the crumhs of a loaf of bread, cover them with boibne
water and let soak for 2 or 3 hours, then strain and add fresh water.
Place mixture on fire and let boil for 20 minutes or until smooth.
Then press water out and let stand till cool and it will form a thick
jelly. Any flavouring may be added. A good food for infants at
time of weaning: also for children with acute diseases.
DATE PUFFS
2 cups Golden Crust wholemeal breadcrumb-'; 1 cup stoned
dates; 1/3 cup sweetened condensed milk.
Mix together finely chopped dates, breadcrumbs and condensed
milk. Mix thoroughly; form into balls; roll in breadcrumbs. Fry
in deep fat (hot) 1 one minute. Drain and serve. Makes one dozen.
SHERRY FRITTERS
Cut pieces of bread i inch thick and 2 inches square; pour the
wine over and stand for 1 half an hour. Fry till golden brown ; drain
on paper and place a little strawberry or raspberry jam in the
centre of each fritter and sprinkle with castor sugar. Serve
immediately.
APPLE PIKLETS
Soak 4 slices of bread in water until soft; squeeze out water
and beat bread to a mash; add i cup S.R. flour; \ cup sugar; 1
dessertspoon melted butter; pinch of salt; a little lemon rind
(grated) and well beaten egg. Stir into the mixture 1} cups grated
apple. Mix well and drop into hot fat a tablespoonful of the mix-
ture for each piklet. Fry golden brown and serve very hot.
ikREAD Provides the Greatest FOOD VALUE for MONEY SPENT


FRENCH TOAST
Cut rounds about 2i inches across of stale bread; whip up 2
eggs; a teaspoon of brandy, or vanilla; a dessertspoon of sugar.
Soak the rounds of bread in this —they must be well soaked. Then
fry in butter a golden brown and place a good teaspoon of apri
cot or strawberry jam in centre of each and serve.
BROWN BREAD ICE
1 pint brown breadcrumbs; 1 pint milk or custard; i pint
maraschino or any liqueur. Pour hot milk or custard over lh“
Let cool: add liqueur. Mix well and freeze.
Film Stars speak:
Famous film stars of Hollywood and elsewdiere were asked
to tell the truth about the rumour that bread fattens. Many
of them have now publicly slated that they eat bread at
every meal —eat a lot of it—eat it because they could not
do their strenuous work without it.
THERE’S ENERGY IN EVERY SLICE OF BREAD
Siveets — continued.


Hygienic Bread Room. All galvanized
metal equipment ensures hygienic hand-
ling. Bread is here conditioned and
sorted ready for delivery. Over 80,000
loaves of various types pass through this
room each week.
"A wonderful concern. I doubt if there is anything better
in the whole world." —A Seasoned Traveller.


SANDWICHES
AMERICAN SANDWICHES
For each sandwich allow four slices of bread (brown or
white Golden Crust). Butter the slices and on top of the first slice
put thin slices of ham, or other meat. Season, and put a slice
of bread—butter side down on it. Butter the top side of the bread
and cover with thin slices! of cooked beetroot, placing a third slice
of bread on top. Butter as before) and put on it your last filling—
cheddar cheese. Put the fourth slice of bread on top and press
well down. Cut into wedge-shaped pieces.
For an indoor party the sandwiches must be made with very
thinly cut bread and filled; cream cheese, chicken, lettuce, salmon,
cucumber, vegetable extract, ham, thin, slices of well drained tomato,
etc., are good. These sandwiches should be well pressed down
before cutting into finger lengths.
CHICKEN CLUB SANDWICH
Butter* 3 slices of toast and cut across. Cover one cut slice with
a lettuce leaf; spread it with mayonnaise and put on slices of
cooked chicken; cover with second piece of cut toast. On this
lay slices of crisp bacon and another lettuce leaf. Cover with re-
maining toast and lay on top a big slice of tomato, spread with
a spoonful of mayonnaise; sprinkle with a little finely shredded
lettuce and serve with 2 olives and a gherkin on the plate beside
the sandwich.
THE LAYER, SANDWICH
Cut and butter several slices of bread. Take one and spread
with a layer of anchovy paste; cover with a second piece and
spread with tomato pulp; add a third slice, cover with a paste of
pounded sardines; cover as before and spread with pounded egg
mixture; cover again and spread with lettuce. Now place the
final piece on and put the whole pile under a press for 2 or 3
hours, then cut as desired.
SANDWICHES
Open sandwiches are made with untoasted bread and give an
opportunity for originality and colour emphasis.
Cut 1/3 inch slices of sandwich bread in rounds, diamonds or
crescents. (Biscuit cutters are useful for cutting sandwiches in
fancy shapes.) Butter and spread thinly with seasoned sandwich
spread and decorate tops with appropriate garnishes, bits of jelly,
sliced olives, chopped nuts, and candied cherry. Serve on tray
with sprigs of parsley or water cress.
THERE’S SUNSHINE IN EVERY SLICE OF BREAD


VARIEGATED PARTY SANDWICHES
8 very thin slices bread and butter, 6i of which are buttered both
sides. Place on first layer of sliced gherkins, on the next a layer
of sliced cheese; on the next lettuce; on the next corned beef; then
lettuce, cheese and gherkin again. When all is finished press firmly
and slice down vertically and garnish with shredded lettuce.
SANDWICH FILLINGS
VEAL AND HARD-BOILED EGGS
Cold minced veal mixed with equal quantities of hard-boiled
eggs —a cupful of each. Season with a little lemon juice, mustard
and a little melted butter. Spread on thin slices of bread.
EGYPTIAN
Have ready some green butter made with parsley or cress: red
butter made with anchovy sauce; yellow butter made with yolk of
hard-boiled eggs with a little curry powder. Spread just a thin
slice of bread with green butter; next one with yellow butter; last
one with red butter; put another slice on top and cut in fingers
or shapes
SALMON
Tinned salmon, mashed into a paste, spread on thin bread and
butter; a little lemon juice, salt and pepper improves flavour. "Very
thin slices of cucumber cut in fine strips can be added and well
mixed. Spread on thin bread and butter.
CELERY-WALNUT
Shred finely celery and walnuts; mix with cream; season wdlh
pepper and salt and place between thin bread and butter.
HINTS ON CUTTING SANDWICHES
Use a sharp knife.
If bread is crumbly, heat the knife in boiling water, dry it, and
use whilst hot.
Work the butter into a cream before spreading.
With many sandwich spreads it is sufficient to spread one slice
of bread with butter and the other with the mixture.
After joining the two slices together, press well with a broad-
bladed knife.
Remember that a sandwich spread needs to he more highly
seasoned than if the mixture were lo he eaten alone.
BREAD AND MILK IS BEST FOR BREAKFAST


HOW TO KEEP SANDWICHES MOIST
To keep sandwiches moist for picnics, wrap each person’s portion
in waxed paper; then wrap the whole in a damp cloth with a thick
paper wrapping outside.
HOW TO ROLL SANDWICHES
If sandwiches are to be rolled, cut the required number of slices
first, place them in a pile and wrap a damp cloth round them and
leave them to stand some hours in a refrigerator or cold place; this
softens the bread and makes the sandwiches easy to roll.
Our Daily Bread:
Bread is the world’s greatest food and costs only a fraction
the price of prepared breakfast foods which are not nearly
as nourishing as bread.
THERE’S ENERGY IN EVERY SLICE OF BREAD


One of the many Golden Crust horse-
drawn delivery vehicles. Over two-thirds
of the fleet of thirty vehicles on the road
daily are of this type. They are spick
and span like every other unit in the
production of Golden Crust Bread.
"Thank you -for the privilege of inspecting the most
modern and hygienic bakery in the Southern Hemisphere.
—Representatives of Y.W.C.A.


USEFUL HINTS
A crust of stale bread put on top of cabbage which is cooking
helps to absorb the unpleasant odour from the cabbage.
Boiling water poured on to bread forms an excellent poultice if
applied very hot to the affected part.
Stale crusts of bread are very useful for helping to clean soiled
white wool.
Fresh bread will help to remove pencil marks.
Bread is the foundation for most seasonings for meat, fish, game,
poultry, etc.
Most grilled and fried dishes are improved if dipped in egg and
breadcrumbs before being cooked.
WAYS WITH BREAD
Should you have a loaf of bread that has gone stale steam it
over a saucepan of boiling water by placing it on a sieve for five
minutes, then put on a tin tray and put in a moderate oven till
quite hot and then use. It is then as fresh as new bread and can
be enjoyed as such.
For crumbing chops, fish and sausage meat, put odd pieces in
hot oven till dry and a nice brown, take out and break up into small
crumbs with rolling pin or fine cutler or mincer. Place in tin and
they are ready. First dip meat in beaten egg and then roll in
crumbs, which has first had salt and pepper added according to taste.
RUSKS FOR BABIES
Cut slices of bread into strips about I inch thick, dip in sweetened
milk and egg, then place on oven tray (hot) and bake a golden brown
in moderate oven, cool on a cake cooler.
Stale bread is always besU for eating with soups.
It also makes warm food for children for breakfast by breaking
up a piece (as required) in a bowl and pouring hot sweetened milk
over it.
THERE’S SUNSHINE IN EVERY SLICE OF BREAD
