

J\j 1 p 20 rT-
AUSTRALIAN DRIED
FRUITS ASSOCIATION
Recipe
Booklet
Issued for Free Distribution
When buying Dried
Fruits for use with
these recipes ask for
• Sun-ravsed •
the brand adopted
by the Australian
Dried Fruits Asso-
ciation, and which
is a guarantee of
good quality . . . .
VflMtA+ATO* tv iftfllN* dd.tN




- * tU°l
r'Ti ok
“Sun-Raysed” Fruits
In the districts producing SUN-RAYSED
FRUITS healthy families there are the RULE!,
and not the EXCEPTION.
The five main products of A.D.F.A. dis-
tricts are:— •
“CURRANTS,”
“SULTANAS,”
“LEXIAS,”
“APRICOTS,” and
“PEACHES.”
Although, of course, figs, pears, prunes,
almonds, olives, oranges and lemons are
grown there also.
But the main fruits produced in sufficient
quantity to satisfy the ever-increasing public
taste are the vine products just mentioned.
SUN-RAYSED SULTANAS
Are seedless white grapes, very suitable for
use in cakes, scones, biscuits, puddings, curry
and other similar manufactures and tasty
dishes. Australia produces between 8000 and
9000 tons of this class of vine fruit annually.
The berries are dried in the sun, on trays or
drying racks, and are then stemmed and
cleaned by machinery, and are ready for mar-
ket in a thoroughly pure condition, and, hav-
ing no seeds, they are very popular with the
bakers and with the public.
SUN-RAYSED CURRANTS
Are seedless black grapes, whose berries are
much smaller than sultanas, apd should be
so well known as to need no description. The
“SUN-RAYSED” CURRANTS are in a class
by themselves, for they are grown and har-
vested under very favourable weather condi-
tions, and are cleaned, stemmed and packed
by the most modern machinery and expert
workmanship. It is easier to name ways in
which the currants CANNOT be used than
to make a list of the million and one ways in
which they can be applied in a manner grati-
fying to the housewife.
The total production of “SUN-RAYSED”
Currants varies from 6000 to 8000 tons per
year, according to the season.
SUN-RAYSED LEXIAS
The word is another name for the world-
famous “Pudding Raisin,” dried from the


‘"Gordo Blanco” vine. This is undoubtedly
the best flavoured of all vine fruits, having
the popular “Muscat” flavour. This fruit is
used in “plum puddings,” in curries, in raisin
pie, in scones, cakes, sandwiches, and other
ways set out in recipes in this booklet. The
berry of the Lexia is very big and bold, and
contains plenty of “body,” and when put up
as Muscatels, are especially suited to those
who enjoy almonds and raisins.
Raisins and currants are more than deli-
cious fruits. They are a truly great health
food, being 75 per cent, pure grape sugar,
which is all Nutriment, rich in natural Foo—
d and Vitamines, which are vital to physi-
cal and mental well-being, and having actu-
ally greater nourishing capacity than meat,
fish, milk or eggs. Moreover, grape sugar
will not destroy teeth, as does the free sugar
contained in chocolates and lollies; on the
contrary, it contains the necessary elements
for nourishing sound, healthy teeth.
v.-fT..'.
“Sun-Raysed” Recipes
Sunraysed Sandwiches.
Take equal quantities of Sun-Raysed lexias
(seeded), sultanas and currants. Put through
an ordinary mincing machine, spread on bread
and butter, and you have the most delicious,
economical, nutritious and healthful luncheon
dt is possible to provide for growing children.
One lb. of raisins equals in nourishing power
li lbs. of beef steak. Raisins, with currants,
form one of nature’s best laxatives. Sun-
raysed sandwiches are unsurpassed for morn-
ing and afternoon tea, ballroom suppers,
train journeys and motor trips. The sand-
wiches keep fresh and moist, and are always
appetising.
Home Made Raisin Bread.
One pint water, 1 pint sweet milk, 2 ozs.
sugar, 1 oz. salt, 2 oz. lard, li ozs. com-
pressed yeast, 2 lbs. Sun-Raysed seeded raisins
4 lbs. flour (white or whole wheat). Have
milk and water warm. Dissolve yeast in
water, mix dough thoroughly. Let dough
rise well, then punch down and let rise again.
Mould in round loaves, and when raised bake
in hot oven of about 450 degrees. When
potato yeast is used use 1 pint yeast and 1
pint milk and water.


CAKES
Sun-Raysed Apple and Currants Cheese Cakes
1 egg, 2 oz. butter, 2 oz. sugar, 2 table-
spoonfuls stewed apple, lemon rind and juice,
4 oz. Sun-Raysed currants.
Method—Warm the stewed apple, butter
and sugar together, beat in the egg and cur-
rants, flavour nicely with grated lemon rind
and juice. Bake in pastry lined patty-pans.
Sun-Raysed Currant Cakes.
1 lb. flour, i lb. Sun-Raysed currants, i lb.
castor sugar, 5 teaspoonful bi-carbonate of
soda, 1 teaspoonful cream of tartar, 1 oz.
candied peel, I lb. butter, 3 eggs, pinch of salt.
Method. —Sift the flour, soda and cream of
tartar, also the salt. Cream the butter and
sugar in a basin; when well beaten add the
eggs one at a time. Mix thoroughly, and,
lastly, work in the fruit—the peel to be cut
in fine shreds, or chopped very small. If
found too stiff, add a little milk. Bake in a
buttered cake tin, in square frame or in
round hoops, for about 40 minutes.
Sun-Raysed Currant Soda Cake.
1 lb. flour, I lb. Sun-Raysed currants, i lb.
brown or moist sugar, \ lb. butter, 2 eggs, 2
teaspoonfuls treacle, 1 teaspoonful bi-carbon-
ate of soda, i pint of milk.
Method —Mix the flour and soda, rub in the
butter, add sugar and currants, then the trea-
cle and milk and beaten eggs. Beat all well
together, fill into two well buttered cake
moulds, and bake in a moderately hot oven
for about U hours.
Sun-Raysed Molly s Cake.
1 lb. flour, 1 lb. Sun-Raysed currants, 1
lb. Sun-Raysed sultanas, 1 lb. Sun-Raysed
raisins, i lb. lemon peel, 1 teaspoon bak-
ing powder, 1 gill water, 1 lb. brown sugar,
1 lb. butter, \ lb. ground rice, 8 eggs, 1 pkt.
spice, 1 teaspoon cinnamon, i lb. almonds.
Method —Cream butter and sugar, add eggs
separately, then dry ingredients, flour and
fruit alternately. Raisins must be stoned,
■almonds blanched and cut. Bake in mode-
rate oven for 4 hours.


Sun-Raysed Rock Cakes.
1 cup dripping or butter, 3 cups flour,
essence of lemon or vanilla, 1 cup Sun-Raysed
sultanas or currants, 2 cups sugar, 2 tea-
spoons baking powder, 1 egg, S (about) cup
milk.
Method—Rub butter and flour sifted with
baking powder together, then add sugar and
fruit -and mix into a stiff dough with egg
and milk. Put pieces the size of a walnut
on buttered baking sheet and bake a nice
brown.
Sun-Raysed Johnny Cakes.
Make a short pastry, roll out thin; spread
Sun-Raysed raisins or sultanas thickly on. Put
layer of pastry on top; roll just enough
keep together. Mark into squares, and when
baked they will separate easily where marked.
Sun-Raysed Soda Cake.
1 lb. flour, h lb. Sun-Raysed sultanas, pinch
of salt, 2 teaspoons baking powder, 4 table-
spoons milk, h lb. dripping (butter), S lb.
sugar, 1 oz. candied peel, 4 eggs, grated nut-
meg to taste.
Method—Cream butter and sugar, add
eggs, then milk, and dry ingredients. Cook in
moderate oven 1| to IS hours.
Sun-Raysed Tennis Cake.
6 oz. butter, 6 oz. sugar, 10 oz. flour, 4
eggs, 6 oz. seeded and chopped Sun-Raysed
lexias, S lb. Sun-Raysed currants, 2 lb. Sun-
Raysed sultanas, 4 oz. mixed peel, 2
oz. almonds, 1 small teaspoonful of baking
powder.
Method Beat butter and sugar to a cream,,
then break eggs in one at a time. Add the
fruits, peel and almonds, and lastly sift in
the flour and baking powder. Time to bake
2 hours.
Sun-Raysed Fruit Cake.
i lb. butter, S lb. sugar, 4 large eggs, 10
oz. flour, 1 lb. Sun-Raysed currants, J
lb. lemon peel, J lb. almonds, S tea-
spoonful carbonate soda, 1 teaspoonful
cream of tartar. Cream butter and
sugar together. Add eggs one at a time,
beat well after each egg is added. Add cur-
rants and peel, then flour in which the soda
and tartar were well sifted.
Sun-Raysed Cinnamon Coffee Cake.
Beat 1 egg with i lb. dripping, 5 lb. sugar
and cups of sugar; then add IS cups strong
coffee, in which has been dissolved 1 tea-


spoonful of carb. soda. Mix well, then add
d cups of plain flour, 2 teaspoons cream of
tartar, 2 teaspoons ground cinnamon and i
grated nutmeg. Lastly, add 1 lb. Sunraysed
raisins, mix all together, and bake in well
greased tin, with paper at bottom, in mode-
rate oven for H hours.
This cake is very economical, and as good
as a Christmas cake.
PIES AND TARTS.
Sun-Raysed Raisin Pie.
Grated yellow rind of one lemon, remain-
der of lemon chopped; one cupful seeded
raisins, butter size of a walnut, half cup of
molasses, one cupful of brown sugar, two
cupfuls of water. Boil five minutes; add five
tablespoonfuls of flour, and half teaspoonful
of salt. Use two crusts. Sufficient for two
pies.
Sun-Raysed Filling for Pie.
1 cup Sun-Raysed sultanas. 1 cup Sun-
Raysed currants, 1 cup Sun-Raysed lexias,
2 pieces shredded lemon peel, 2 finely chopped
apples, i cup sugar, J cup water, little grated
nutmeg. Place in saucepan and simmer for
15 minutes. Line a shallow pie dish with
short paste, then spread with filling; cover
with paste, and bake in a fairly hot oven.
Sun-Raysed Currant and Apple Tart.
Line a tin plate with pastry (short or
puff) whichever preferred. Peel and core
three or four large cooking apples, then slice
very thinly and put a thick layer of the sliced
apple on the pastry, then sprinkle a handful
of Sun-Raysed currants and seeded Sun-
Raysed raisins or Sun-Raysed sultanas,
and a few very thin slices of lemon peel.
Then sprinkle over a handful of sugar; then
add another thick layer of sliced apples,
sprinkle with sugar, cover with pastry, pierce
the pastry half a dozen times with a fork,
and bake in moderately hot oven for h hour.
A delicious tart.
Sun-Raysed Mince Tart.
2 apples (cut into dice), 2 tablespoons
sugar, i lemon peel, 1 tablespoon Sun-Raysed
sultanas, 1 tablespoon Sun-Raysed currants, a
little grated nutmeg.
Method—Peel, cut up and blend. Cover a
dish with short crust paste, then put fruit
on, put little pieces of butter on the fruit.


Cover with a short crust paste. Brush over
with castor sugar. Bake for about 25 minutes;
lift; sprinkle with castor sugar.
Sun-Raysed Peach Tart.
Prepare h lb. peaches as per recipe
“Peaches for Dessert,” soaking for 24 hours
and removing the skins. Make nice short
crust with i lb. flour, i teaspoon salt, 1 tea-
spoon carb. soda, 1 tablespoon sugar, \ lb.
lard or dripping, yolk of one egg and i pint
water. Line a pie plate or shallow dish with
paste, and fill with Sun-Raysed dried peaches.
When all but baked take out of oven, cover
with meringue made from white of egg beaten
stiffly with 1 small cup of sugar. Return to
oven till baked a very pale brown.
This tart can also be made from dried
apricots.
PUDDINGS AND FRITTERS.
Sunraysed Sponge Pudding.
Ingredients: Two cups flour, \ lb. raisins,
| lb. sultanas, I lb. currants, i lb. dates
(chopped, i lb. Sun-Raysed peaches, 1 des-
sertspoon chopped citron peel, 1 dessertspoon
orange peel, 1 teapsoon spice, 1 cup sugar,
I lb. beef suet chopped fine, 1 teaspoon carb.
soda.
Method: Mix all ingredients thoroughly,
then add enough boiling water to mix stiff.
Boil four hours. Do not allow water to boil
over top of basin when cooking. (No eggs,
needed).
Sunraysed Gelatine Plum Pudding.
(Very Uncommon.)
1 cup of Sunraysed raisins, % cup of Sun-
raysed cooked prunes, well chopped, 1 cup
of cooked and finely chopped Sun-Raysed
dried pears or peaches, h cup of Sun-Raysea
currants, i lb. of chopped lemon peel (oi
less if preferred). Square of chocolate, cup
of sugar, 3 dessertspoonsful of gelatine, li
pints of milk, pinch salt. Place milk, choco-
late and gelatine on fire until dissolved; then
add other ingredients and pour into mould.
When set serve with cream or custard.


Black Tea Pudding (no eggs).
Ingredients: 2 cups plain flour, 1 cup sugar r
1 cup currants, h cup sultanas, 2 tablespoons-
ful butter, 1 oz. candied peel, i grated nut-
meg, 1 teaspoonful carbonate of soda dis-
solved in 1 cup of cold tea.
Method; Sift flour and sugar, rub in but-
ter, add fruit and nutmeg; moisten with the
tea and soda. Boil 2i hours. Serve with
custard or sweet sauce.
Sun-Raysed Apple and Currant Roly-Poly.
6 large cooking apples, \ lb. brown or cas-
tor sugar, 6 oz. Sun-Raysed currants, the rind
of a lemon chopped finely, a little nutmeg.
Method —Pare, core and cut the apples
into slices, put them into a saucepan with the
lemon rind and sugar; cook till soft, and add
the nutmeg. Have ready a rather rich suet
crust, roll it out thinly, spread the apples
over the paste, sprinkle over the currants, roll
the pudding up, closing the ends properly, tie
in a floured cloth, and boil for 2 hours.
Sun-Raysed Currant Marmalade Pudding.
4 oz. bread crumbs, 4 oz. suet, 2 oz. sugar,
4 oz. marmalade, 4 oz. Sun-Raysed currants,
2 oz. flour, 2 eggs, I teacupful milk.
Method —Mix all the ingredients together,
grease pudding basin or mould with butter
and dust with sugar. Put in the mixture,
cover with greased paper, and steam 3 hours.
Sun-Raysed Currant Lemon Pudding.
3 oz. suet, 3 oz. bread crumbs, 2 oz. flour,
6 oz. Sun-Raysed currants, 4 oz. sugar, 1 egg,
rind and juice of 1 lemon.
Method—Mix all the ingredients together;
put in a greased basin and cover with a
greased paper. Steam 2 hours.
Sun-Raysed Plain Roly-Poly Pudding.
Take J lb. shredded beef suet, mix with 3
breakfast cupfuls of flour, sifted with 1 tea-
spoonful of baking powder, and a pinch of
salt. Mix with water to a rather stiff paste.
Roll out, sprinkle with 1 lb. Sun-Raysed
seeded raisins, roll up, folding in ends neatly,
tie up in a scalded and floured cloth, plunge
into boiling water, and cook steadily for 2
hours. Serve with plain sweet sauce or cream.
Sun-Raysed Christmas Pudding.
2 lb. Sun-Raysed raisins. 2 lb, Sun-Raysed
currants, 2 lb. flour, 2 lb. beef suet (chopped
finely), 1 lb. bread crumbs, 6 eggs, 11 lb. trea-
cle. 1 tablespoonful ginger.


Method —Warm the treacle, and add it to
a gill of milk. Mix this with all the other
ingredients thoroughly, the fruit being care-
fully prepared previously. Pour the mix-
ture into greased basins or moulds, and boil
from 4 to 6 hours
Sun-Raysed Boiled Ginger Pudding.
Shred finely h lb. beef suet; mix with it
2 cupfuls of flour, 1 tablespoonful of ground
ginger, 1 cupful of sugar, 1 lb. Sun-Raysed
raisins chopped small, two eggs, a little salt,
and as much warm milk as will moisten the
whole. Put the mixture into a buttered basin,
and, having tied a cloth over it securely, boil
for four hours.
Sun-Raysed Bread Pudding.
To 1 pint of milk add 1 tablespoonful of
sugar, a very little salt, and pour it boiling
on J lb. bread crumbs» Add butter the size
of a walnut, and cover with a plate for half
an hour. Then stir in four well-whisked eggs.
1 lb. of Sun-Raysed raisins, adding vanilla,
lemon or nutmeg flavouring. Pour into a but-
tered basin, place a buttered paper on top,
tie securely in a cloth, and boil for lh hours.
Sun-Raysed Poor Man’s Pudding.
Half cup each of Sun-Raysed raisins, Sun-
Raysed sultanas and Sun-Raysed cur-
rants, 1 cup bread crumbs, 1 cup suet, 3 cups
flour, 1 tablespoon treacle, 2 teaspoonfuls bi-
carbonate of soda, a little lemon peel. Boil
for three hours. Serve with vanilla sauce.
Sun-Raysed Steamed Cream Pudding.
1 cup flour, 3 cup cream, l-3rd cup sugar.
1 teaspoon baking powder, i a grated nut-
meg, h cup Sun-Raysed raisins or Sun-Raysed
currants, little milk.
Method—Put into a buttered basin and
steam for 2 hours.
Sun-Raysed Cocoanut Pudding.
Put half a pound of desiccated cocoanut
and grate a large one, with brown skin pared
off, into a pudding dish. Break in pieces six
small sponge cakes. Over these pour one
quart of boiling milk, with one tablespoonful
of butter melted in it, add four tablespoon-
fuls of sugar. Let it stand an hour covered
close. Mix in 1 lb. of Sun-Raysed raisins,
with four well beaten eggs, and bake in a
slow oven. This is delicious either hot. or
cold.


Sun-Raysed Sultana Fritters.
3 cups flour, i cup sugar, 3 eggs, 3 tea-
spoons baking powder, h cup Sun-Raysed sul-
tanas. Mix to a thin paste with milk. Fry
in boiling fat.
Sun-Raysed Plum Pudding.
\ lb. flour, I lb. bread crumbs, i lb. Sun-
Raysed sultanas, i lb. almonds, h lb. Sun-
Raysed stoned raisins, \ lb. suet, k lb. orange
peel, \ lb. brown sugar, 5 eggs, spices to taste.
Boil 4 hours.
Sun-Raysed Christmas Pudding.
1 lb. Sun-Raysed currants, 1 lb. Sun.-Raysed
sultanas, 1 lb. Sun-Raysed raisins, 1 lb. can-
died peel. 1 lb. suet, 1 lb. bread crumbs, i
lb. blanched almonds, 2 grated nutmegs, 1
lemon, 1 orange (grated rind and juice of
each), 8 eggs, 1 wineglass of brandy.
Method—Mix well together, put in greased
basins and boil for 8 hours.
Sun-Raysed Baked Roly.
2 cups flour, I lb. butter, 1 teaspoonful car-
bonate of soda, 2 teaspoonfuls cream of tar-
tar, 1 teaspoonful salt, \ lb. Sun-Raysed sul-
tanas, i lb. Sun-Raysed currants, 2 oz. Sun-
Raysed lexias, 2 oz. lemon peel.
Method—Mix flour, soda, cream of tartar
together, and mix with water, then spread bat-
ter and roll out 4 or 5 times, and spread Sun-
Raysed sultanas, currants and raisins and
peel. Roll up and bake in a quick oven.
Sun-Raysed Aussie’s Pudding.
2 level cups flour, 1 cup sugar, 1 pinch salt,
k cup fine bread crumbs, 1 egg, 1 large table-
spoon butter, 1 teaspoon carbonate of soda,
little grated nutmeg, few finely chopped
almonds, \ finely shredded lemon peel, h lb.
Sun-Raysed raisins, J lb. Sun-Raysed sultanas,
i lb. Sun-Raysed currants.
Method—Mix all the ingredients (except
the butter and carbonate of soda) thoroughly
together. Put the butter in a cup and fill it
with boiling water. Have ready another cup
in which is the carbonate of soda, fill with
boiling water. Then pour both cups quickly
into the mixture. Stir all well. Put into a
cloth wrung out well in boiling water. Boil
3 hours.


Sun-Raysed Sago Plum Pudding.
1 cup bread crumbs, \ cup sugar, 2 table-
spoons sago (soaked over night in enough
milk to cover), 2 tablespoons butter, 1 cup
Sun-Raysed seeded lexias, 1 teaspoon soda,
dissolved in boiling water. Mix altogether,
with enough milk to make rather slack. Boil
for 3 hours.
Sunraysed Dried Apricot Steamed Pudding.
Two cups Sun-Raysed apricots (soaked over-
night), 2 cups self-raising flour, 1 dessert-
spoon butter, sufficient milk to make stiff
paste, 2 tablespoons sugar, pinch salt.
Method: Sift flour, sugar and salt, rub in
butter lightly; add milk to make stiff
dough; roll out lightly, and cut into four
circles. Place 1 cup of apricots in bottom
of greased basin, add layer of paste; then
layer of apricots sprinkled with sugar. More
paste and layers of apricots till top is reached,
which must be paste. Tie a buttered paper
over basin and steam for three hours. Serve
with sauce made from water in which apri-
cots were soaked overnight (strained), boiled
with I cup of sugar.
Sunraysed Peach Fritters.
Soak required amount of peaches over-
night. Remove skins, drain, allow to cool,
and dip in batter made as follows;
Sift 1 cup of self-raising flour in basin,
pinch of salt, grated nutmeg and little sugar.
Make hole in centre, beat in one egg and
enough milk to form into a pouring batter.
Dip peaches in butter and fry in boiling fat
a golden brown. Can be eaten hot or cold.
RELISHES.
Sun-Raysed Mincemeat.
• Three large lemons, 3 large tart cooking
apples, i lb. stoned raisins, 1 lb. Sun-Raysed
currants, 1 lb. finely chopped beef suet, i lb.
moist sugar, 1 oz. minced candied peel, 1
gill rum or brandy, 2 tablespoonfuls orange
marmalade.
Method—Grate the rind of the lemons,
squeeze out the juice and strain into a basin.
Boil the remainder of the lemons in water
until tender enough to pulp. Bake the apples
and puln them also. Add the remaining in-
gredients to the first pulp, and mix them all'
together. Fill the mincemeat into jars, cover
each closely with parchment paper, and tie'
up. Keep in a cool but dry place, and use'
as required.


Sun-Raysed Mincemeat.
1 lb. Sun-Raysed sultanas, lexias (seeded),
1 lb. Sun-Raysed currants, 1 lb. Sun-Raysed*
prunes, 2i oz. orange or citron peel, i lb.
beef suet, i lb. preserved ginger, 2 lb. apples,.
2i lb. sugar, spice, cup of brandy.
Method —Peel and chop apples finely, stone
prunes and chop finely. Mix all together, and
any spice desired.
Note —Chop suet finely. Cover with bran-
dy paper. Will keep any length of time. Nice
for tarts or boiled roll.
Sun-Raysed Fruit Toffee.
4 cups white sugar, 2 cups water, 2 tea-
spoonfuls of butter, 1 tablespoonful vinegar,
1 cup Sun-Raysed fruit (currants, sultanas
and seeded lexias, mixed).
Method—Butter saucepan, bring sugar and:
water to boil, add vinegar, boil hard (don’t
stir) until it browns, then add fruit and pour
into buttered dish.
SCONES, BUNS AND BISCUITS.
Sun-Raysed Scotch Currant Bun.
2 lb. Sun-Raysed lexias, 2 lb. Sun-Raysed
currants, \ lb. almonds, \ lb. orange peel, 1
lb. flour, 1 teaspoon cream of tartar, 3 eggs,
i lb. sugar, 2 teaspoonfuls ground ginger, 2
teaspoonfuls cinnamon, 2 teaspoonfuls pimen-
to, i teaspoonful black pepper, 1 teaspoonfui
soda.
Method —Mix thoroughly all the above in-
gredients (except eggs) and set aside. (AIL
fruit must be cleaned and almonds blanched).
Make li lb. short crust, roll out thin and
line a square deep tin (keep out a piece to
cover top). Add eggs to the fruit and put
in tin; cover top with pastry and prick. Bake
Si or 4 hours in a moderate oven.
Sun-Raysed Biscuits.
i lb. flour, J lb. butter, 2 oz. sugar, a little
milk, 1 teaspoon baking powder, 1 egg, 2 oz.
Sun-Raysed currants.
Method—Beat butter and sugar to a cream,
add the yolk of the egg, and about 1 table-
spoonful of milk, add flour and Sun-Raysed
currants. Roll out thin and spread with the
following icing:—Beat the white of the egg
well, and add 4 oz. icing sugar (sifted). Put
into strips and bake about I hour, on greased
oven sheet. Strips about 3 inches long. Do
not have the oven too' hot.


Sun-Raysed Lexia Scones.
3 cups flour, 1 cup of mixed Sun-Raysed
fruit, sultanas, currants, lexias, 2 teaspoons
cream of tartar, 1 teaspoon carbonate of
■soda, i teaspoon salt, lh cups milk, or milk
and water.
Method—Sift flour, cream of tartar, soda,
salt together. Rub in the butter, add fruit
and milk. Cut into scones.
Sun-Raysed Southern Sun Biscuits.
1 lb. flour, h lb. butter, i lb. sugar, 1 tea-
spoonful of cream of tartar, h teaspoonful
•of carbonate of soda, 2 eggs, a little milk.
Method—Rub the butter into flour, in which
other ingredients are mixed, drop in eggs
whole and mix thoroughly. Roll out i inch
thick, and cut round, biscuit size. Take h a
cup each of Sun-Raysed currants and lexias,
and a little candied peel, and put through u
mincer. Spread a little of the fruit mixture
on half of the biscuit, and fold over. Bake
in a moderate oven until pale brown.
WITHOUT FIRE.
Sun-Raysed Afternoon Tea Biscuits.
Mince Sun-Raysed raisins, and spread be-
tween two wafers. This is a simple and eco-
nomical form of making a good afternoon bis-
cuit. Once tried always used.
Sun-Raysed Uncooked Fruit Blanc Mange.
Take equal quantities of Sun-Raysed seeded
raisins, Sun-Raysed currants, Sun-Raysed sul-
tanas, and almonds; mix and mince thorough-
ly, moisten with a little lemon juice, and press
into a mould; serve in slices, a palatable and
sustaining dish.
Sun-Raysed Fruit Rolls.
Take equal quantities of mixed Sun-Raysed
raisins, Sun-Raysed currants and Sun-Raysed
■sultanas, and bleached almonds; mix
"thoroughly, and pass through a mincer; roll
out and spread with pink icing sugar; roll in
form of Swiss rolls, and sprinkle icing sugar
over rolls. A good dessert dish.
Sun-Raysed Fruit Sandwiches.
Take a cup of Sun-Raysed fruits (lexias or
sultanas), 2-3rds of a cup of boiled ham, i
■cup of sweet cucumber pickles, and chop small


or put through a mincer. Add 1 tablespoon-
ful of lemon juice, and mix with mayonnaise
to spreading consistency.
“The Good Little Normey.”
Mix equal quantities of Sun-Raysed sul-
tanas, Sun-Raysed currants and Sun-Raysed
seeded lexias. Put through a mincer; roll into
little balls, and coat with desiccated cocoa-
nut.
Preparation of “Sun-RaysecT
Dried Stone Fruits for
the Table.
When you. buy one pound of these fruits,
you actually receive Gi lbs. of choice ripe
fruit with only the moisture and stones
removed.
All the health-giving properties of “Sun-
Raysed” fruit—Vitamines, Fruit Sugar and
Laxative juices, are retained, and soaking in
water only is necessary to restore the fruit
to its original size, colour and flavour.
It is all in the Soaring!
To Prepare Dried Peaches fcr Dessert.
Place i lb. of fruit in roomy dish. Sprinkle
salt spoonful of carbonate of soda on
them and cover with boiling water. Soak for
hour only. Pour water off, cover with cold
water and soak for 24 hours. Remove skins,
which will now readily come off, make syrup,
pour over fruit when boiling, and serve when
cold with cream or custard.
Syrup: i lb. sugar to 1 pint of water. Boil
for ten minutes. The juice of half a lemon
added is an improvement. Soaking for a
few hours in the syrup improves the fruit.
Sunraysed Peach Marmalade.
2 lb. peaches, 8 oz. sugar, 1 oz. butter.
Place peaches in a large vessel and soak
as per “Peaches for Dessert,” removing skins.
Cut the peaches into quarters, place in a
large pie dish with the sugar and butter,,
and set in a cool oven. Cook until tender,
pass through a sieve, and use for filling turn-
overs, topping trifle or for sandwiches.


Peach Jam,
1 lb. Sun-Raysed peaches, 4 pints water, 3
lb. sugar, 2 lemons, 1 oz. blanched almonds.
Wash peaches thoroughly in cold water for
-five minutes. Place in preserving pan and
cover with 4 pints boiling water, Soak tor
24 hours. Cut peaches into four pieces. Boil
lor 20 minutes, adding the juice of 2 lemons
and the rinds; add 3 lbs, sugar, 1 oz. almonds,
and boil quickly for 30 minutes or till jam sets
when tested. Remove lemon rinds after boil-
ing for i hour with the sugar. This makes
6-6£ lb. of jam of remarkable quality and
-flavour.
It is so simple ! A child can make it !
To Prepare Dried Apricots for Dessert.
Place in fresh cold water for 12 hours;
the fruit is then placed in a pan with fresh
water and stewed or simmered over a slow
■fire for 20 minutes, sugar being added in tne
last five minutes only, so that the syrup does
not become thick. Serve when cold without
removing the skins.
Sunraysed Peach Jelly
Ingredients: i lb. peaches, i lb.
sugar, 1 pint table jelly, 1 lemon, 1 oz.
almonds, 1 cup whipped cream, 1 piijt water.
Method: Soak peaches for 24 hours as per
recipe “Peaches for Dessert.” Remove skins
and arrange fruit! in china or glass serving
dish Make syrup from 1 pint of water and
i lb sugar. Boil five minutes, remove from
fire, and dissolve jelly in syrup (lemon or
vanilla flavour), and add lemon juice. While
hot pour half the syrup over peaches. Leave
remainder until it begins to set, then fold
in the whipped cream and place on top of
the peaches. Decorate top with blanched
almonds. (This recipe can be used with
apricots.)
Sunraysed Apricot Pie.
Soak 1 lb. Sun-Raysed apricots _ overnight.
Spread uniformly in pie plate previously lined
with thin pie crust. Sprinkle with sugar
and a little powdered cinnamon. Bake in
medium oven for half an hour.
Apricot Jam.
One pound of Sun-Raysed apricots, 3 pints
water, 3 lb. sugar, 1 oz. blanched almonds.
Wash apricots in cold water, and s°uk for
16-20 hours in 3 pints of water. Boil half an


hour, then add 3 lb. sugar, 1 oz. almonds, and
boil for another half hour, or until jam is
thick enough. After adding sugar keep the
jam well stirred. This makes SJ-6 lb. of
.jam, which surpasses that made from fresh
fruit in colour and flavour.
Why apricot jam on a hot
December day?
Sunraysed Apricot Butter.
Take \ lb. Sun-Raysed apricots, stew in a
very little water till tender, and pass through
sieve. When cool add 1 lb. sugar, \ lb. but-
ter, 4 well beaten eggs, juice and rind of
lemon. Mix altogether, put into a jar in a
saucepan of hot water, bringing water to
the boil. Stir one way till the consistency
of thick cream.
Sunraysed Peach Junket.
2 lb. peaches, \ lb. sugar, 1 quart milk, 1
junket tablet.
Method: Prepare peaches as pdr recipe
“Peaches for Dessert,” soaking for 24 hours
and removing the skins. Place fruit in dish
and dissolve a junket tablet in a tablespoon
of cold water. Put few spoonsful of milk
in saucepan, adding i lb. sugar till dissolved.
Add remainder of milk and heat till blood
warm—no more. Take at once from fire,
add the dissolved tablet, and pour quickly
over fruit. Do not disturb till milk has set,
then put in a cool place. Serve with cus-
tard, whipped cream or meringue heaped on
top adds greatly to its richness and appear-
ance.
Sun-Raysed Peach Betty.
1 large cup bread crumbs, 1 large cup
peaches (Sunraysed), sugar, cinnamon, 1
tablespoon butter.
Method: Grease a pie dist well, then in
alternate layers put crumbs and peaches,
sprinkling each layer with a little sugar and
cinnamon. Finish with a layer of crumbs.
Dot with butter and bake 35 minutes in a
moderate oven.
Apricot Mould with Mock Cream Filling.
1 lb. dried apricots, 2 tablespoons syrup, 4
sheets gelatine. Wash apricots and soak
overnight. Next morning simmer apricots
till tender in water they were soaked in, then
pass through a hair sieve into a basin. Stir
in the syrup to sweeten and the gelatine.
Place in a mould with a pipe in centre. When
set turn out and fill with mock cream.
Mock Cream Mixture: 1 tablespoon cus-
tard powder or corn flour, 1 pint milk, 2 or


3 sheets gelatine, a little almond essence,,
white of 1 egg, sugar or syrup to sweeten.
Make a custard with custard powder and
milk, flavour with almond and sweeten tu
taste. Stir in the gelatine (a few chopped
walnuts or almonds is an improvement), and
when beginning to set mix in the whipped
white of 1 egg and pour carefully into the
centre of the apricot mould.
Dried Nectarines.
Place in fresh cold water for 12 hours; the
fruit is then placed in a pan with fresh water
and stewed or simmered over a slow fire tor
20 minutes, sugar being added in the last five
minutes only, so that the syrup does not be-
come thick. Serve when cold without remov-
ing the skins.
Dried Pears.
Are prepared in the same way as apricots,
and may also be used as a dessert fruit with-
out preparation.
Dried Prunes.
Place in fresh cold water for 12 hours; the
fruit is then placed in a pan with fresh water
and stewed or simmered over a slow fire tor
20 minutes, sugar being added m the last
five minutes only, so that the syrup does not
become thick.
With all fruits care should be taken to
avoid over-cooking, which causes the flesh to
leave the fibre; the fruit should be served
firm, and not mushy, the aim being to restore
the appearance and flavour of the ripe fruit.
The far-famed Sun-Raysed vine products-
currants, lexias (pudding raisins) and su
tanas —need little mention here.
During the drying process the sun con-
verts the luscious grape fruit juices into grape
sugar, and analysis proves that grape sugar
is nature’s own concentrated and energising
food, richest in vkamines, iron and other-
properties necessary for GOOD HEALTH.
To Business Men: A few lexias or sultanas
between meals make a perfect pick-me-up.
To Sportsmen: Take a few raisins to sus-
tain you, as they are concentrated energy.
To Parents: Children like raisins, _ and
remember that grape sugar contains in a
concentrated form the vital properties for
building up sturdy and healthy bodies.
QET THE HABIT, and shake hands
With Health every day.
*.SK YOUR GROCER FOR SUPPLIES.


'IVNOIXVN
31508023314737


