

i / ■ /
I 0 A '
C/'&raL i 0 O tfi ' 5
—
f -■ w
"U cJ ' pr u RpivP
i P/lWi/ir.),
J&-W€44.
| <yiu. Wic/cen
I „ I
j
j
\ lBBB.
I £
•■■ <i v^^4i
Thos. Smith, Printer, Warrnambool.




EE CIEE S.
FILLETS OF BEEF d, la Francaise.
2 lbs. fillet beef, 1 oz. green butter, 1 os. plain do., 2
or three potatoes, \ pint of good gravy.
Cut the beef into fillets, and allow a piece of fat
for each, fry in the plain butter, and arrange on a
round of mashed potatoes; put the gravy in the
frying-pan and reduce to half glaze, brush cutlets once
with this, and pour rest round ; place on each fillet
piece of fat and green butter, and fill in centre with
fried potatoes cut into size of sixpence.
POMPADOUR CUTLETS.
2| lbs. ribs mutton, 1 gill thick tomato sauce, 1 gill
brown do., 1 gill puree of peas, 1 lettuce, pint green
peas, | pint aspic jelly.
Braise mutton, and when cold cut into cutlets and
shape nicely ; cover these alternately with different
coloured sauces, and when that is set brush over with
melted aspic jelly ; boil the peas, mix them with jelly,
arrange the cutlets on a bed of lettuce and the peas in
centre ; garnish with aspic.
GREEN BUTTER.
1 oz. butter, i teaspoonful parsley, 1 do. lemon-juice.
Work these all together.
CHAUD FROID OF CHICKEN.
1 cold boiled or roast chicken, 1 pint thick Bechamel
sauce, \ pint aspic jelly, some cucumber and radish
peel, 1 lettuce.
Skin and joint chicken, dip in the sauce, and
ornament with the red and green peel ; cut into stars
or diamonds, arrange joint on a bed of lettuce, garnish
with aspic jelly, chopped.


BECHAMEL SAUCE.
1 pint milk, 2 ozs. butter, \\ oz. flour, 1 onion stuck
with 6 cloves, 1 earrot, 1 turnip, 1 stalk celery, 20
peppercorns.
Put all these things in the milk and let it stand on
the stove for half an hour, bring to the boil and strain ;
put the butter into saucepan, and when dissolved stir
in flour, mix well and add milk, and stir until it boils.
A little cold butter or cream stirred in after it is
cooked will make the sauce smooth and rich.
RASPBERRY CREAM.
1 lb. raspberries, pint cream, 2or 3 ozs. sugar, £ oz.
gelatine, 1 lemon.
Pick the raspberries and put them in a hair sieve,
sprinkle with sugar and let them stand for an hour,
then rub them through the sieve, mix in the lemon
juice and more sugar if required ; whip the cream, and
mix with the fruit puree. Dissolve the gelatine in
half a gill of water and strain in ; stir well and pour
into moulds.
PINEAPPLE CREAM.
1 pineapple, 1 pint cream, 1 lemon, 2 ozs. sugar, 1 oz.
French gelatine.
Peel and cut the pineapple into small pieces, make
a syrup of the sugar, 1 gill water and the.lemon juice,
put in the pineapple, simmer for about ten minutes, let
it get quite cold, whip the cream until it is very stiff
and mix it with the pineapple, dissolve the gelatine
and strain into it. Put into decorated mould and
stand by until firm.
TO BOIL RICE.
Wash the rice well in cold water, have plenty of
boiling water in a large saucepan, seasoned with
salt ; put in the rice and let it boil fast, without the
lid, from 8 to 10 minutes, or until it is soft, but not


broken, strain all the water away and pour some clean
hot water over it; let it stand by the stove until dry.
STUFFED TOMATOES.
G or 7 nice-shaped tomatoes, 1 oz. butter, \ teaspoonfnl
parsley, 2 ozs. bread crumbs, 1 do. cheese, pepper and
salt, 6 or 7 rounds fried bread.
lake out the centre of tomatoes, mix the ingredients
together, and build into a paste with the butter, put a
piece of this into each tomato and bake for a few
minutes in the oven, take out and stand on the bread.
CHICKEN CREAM.
Pound or chop very small the meat from half a
a chicken ; mix it with some nicely flavored thick
Bechamel sauce into which some aspic jelly and cream
has been stirred. Rinse out some small moulds with
melted aspic j half fill with cream, then strew with
some finely minced ham or tongue; fill up with
chicken cream and let them stand until cold. Turn
out and garnish with chopped aspic.
YELLOW SAUCE.
Half pint milk, half pint white stock, 1 oz. flour,
2 oz. butter, yolks of 2 eggs.
Steep an onion stuck with cloves, and a carrot in
the milk for half an hour, let it boil and mix with
the stock, then make same as Bechamel sauce. When
the chicken has been stewed in this, strain through,
sieve. Beat in the yolks of eggs. Flavour and
season, it is then ready.
FRICASSEE OF CHICKEN.
T cold boiled chicken, half pint yellow sauce, 1 doz.
mushrooms, 1 lemon, 2 ozs. butter.
Joint up chicken and remove skin ; place it in the
sauce and let it simmer for half an hour. Arrange


chicken in hot dish ; heat in yolks of eggs; flavour
with lemon juice and pour over chicken ; peel the
mushrooms, toss in butter and cover down until soft.
Flavour with lemon juice and put in the centre of
Fricassee.
FETED FISH.
Wash the fish and dry in a cloth, mix some flour»
pepper and salt in a plate, and in another beat up an
etrg with half an ounce of dissolved butter and a tea-
spoonful of water, have plenty of bread crumbs in a
paper, dip the fish first in the flour, then brush over with
egg, and well cover with bread crumbs, shake off all
loose crumbs and stand by for an hour, if possible ;
fry in plenty of very hot fat, drain for a few minutes
on kitchen paper and serve on a dish paper, garnished
with fried parsley.
FISH, c% maitre d’Hotel.
I pint maitre d'Hotel sauce, 7 or 8 fillets of fish, juice
of one lemon, 1 oz. butter.
Eoll the fillets up the part that has been the bone
outside, and place them close together on a buttered
tin, squeeze over the lemon juice, cover with buttered
paper, and put them in the oven until cooked enough,
arrange them on a hot dish and pour over them the
sauce.
MAITRE D’HOTEL SAUCE.
Half a pint milk, 2 ozs. butter, 1 oz flour, half a tea-
spoonful parsley, juice of half a lemon.
Make the sauce with half the butter, flour and milk
as before directed, take the saucepan from the fire, put
the butter in in small pieces, then the lemon juice,
and last of all the parsley ; salt if required.
OYSTER PATTIES.
2 dozen oysters, half pint milk and oyster liquor, 2
ozs. butter, juice of one lemon, half ounce flour.


Put half the butter into a saucepan, when dissolved
mix in the flour and cook well, pour in the milk, and
stir until it boils, put in the oysters and cover down
and keep hot for five minutes, then put in the lemon
juice and rest of the butter in small pieces ; put two
oysters and a little sauce into each patty case.
SWEET JELLY.
3 pints water, 1 pint sherry, half pint lemon juice’
4 lb. loaf sugar, whites and shells 3 eggs, 3 or 4 cloves,
ozs. French gelatine, rind of 3 or 4 lemons.
Put all these ingredients into large clean saucepan
stand over the fire and whisk until it boils, let it bod
up, draw back, and stand where it will keep hot for
half an hour, strain through akitchen tea-cloth,the first
few drops that run through will not be clear, remove
that basin, place a clean one and pour that jelly back
into the cloth again. It need only be strained once.
ASPIC JELLY.
1 quart water, half pint sherry, 1 gill vinegar 40
peppercorns, 1 carrot, half turnip, stalk of celery,
half teaspoonful salt, 1 onion stuck with 6 cloves, 2 ozs.
French gelatine, whites and shells of 2 eggs.
Put all these things into a saucepan, and proceed
the same as for sweet jelly.
CHARLOTTE RUSSE.
3. pint of cream, 3 or 4 sheets gelatine, 1 oz. sugar,
1 teaspoonfnl flavouring, 1 dozen Savoy biscuits, half
pint sweet jelly, candied fruits.
Rinse a plain mould in cold water, pour in melted
jelly, and decorate the bottom of mould w ith the fruits j
when set split the biscuits and shape into straight
fingers, line the tin with these, whip the cream to a
stiff froth, dissolve the gelatine in half a gill of water
and strain in, sweeten and flavour and put into the


mould, when firm turn out and put the rest of the
jelly round.
COLD CABINET PUDDING.
1 pint boiled custard, 2 sponge cakes, 1 teaspoonful
candied peel or candied fruits, 1 glass wine or flavouring
of vanilla, half oz. French gelatine, half pint sweet
jelly-
Rinse a mould in cold water, and decorate with
half the jelly, when the custard is cold cut the cakes
into small pieces and put them in with the peel or
fruits and flavouring, dissolve the gelatine in half a
gill of water, and strain in, turn into mould and stand
by until firm, turn out and put the rest of the jelly
round.
BROWN SAUCE.
2 pints stock, 1 rasher bacon, 1 carrot, 1 onion, half
turnip, 1 tomato, 2 ozs. flour, 2 ozs, butter, 1 dozen
peppercorns.
Fry all the vegetables and bacon in the butter till
of a good color, sprinkle with flour, pour in the stock
and stir until it boils, let it simmer gently for an hour,
then rub through a sieve, make hot again and it is
ready.
BRAISED CUTLETS & PUREE OF TOMATOES.
2 lbs. cutlets, 1 lb. tomatoes, 1 pint gravy, plenty of
different vegetables, 1 oz. butter, 1 oz. flour.
Trim off the chops nicely and place them in a sauce-
pan with plenty of fresh vegetables and the gravy,
simmer very gently for an hour and a half, drop in the
tomatoes and cook them for a few minutes, then rub
through a sieve, and thicken with butter and flour, dish
the cutlets, reduce the gravy and strain over, and put
the tomatoes round as a border.


MAYONNAISE OF LOBSTER.
1 lobster or tin lobster, mayonnaise sauce, aspic jelly,
chopped parsley, lettuce.
Put a border of lettuce or salad round the dish,
arrange the lobster nicely, pour oyer the mayonnaise,
garnish with jelly and parsley.
MAYONNAISE.
1 gill oil, yolks of 2 eggs, half gill vinegar, salt.
Put the eggs and salt into a basin, and work .veil with
wooden spoon, add the oil a drop at a time, when very
thick put in the vinegar slowly.
GALANTINE OF TURKEY.
1 turkey, 1 tongue, 1 quart aspic jelly.
Bone the turkey, cut off the roots of the tongue, and
make into force-meat, put the tongue in middle of
turkey and pack the forcemeat all round; fold
carefully up, tie up in a cloth and boil in a stock
pot for two and a half hours, press under weights till
quite cold, take off the cloth, glaze it, and serve with
plenty of chopped aspic.
BOILED MUTTON.
4 lbs. ribs of mutton, half lb. veal seasoning, 1 pint
brown sauce, plenty of vegetables.
Bone the mutton, lay on the seasoning, roll up and
sew firmly, put it into a cloth and cook in a stock pot
with plenty of vegetables, for two hours, take it up and
put it in the oven to brown, pour round the sauce just
before serving.
CURRY.
2 lbs. chops, 1 pint gravy, 1 apple, 1 onion, 1 oz.
butter, 1 oz. cornflour, 1 dessertspoonful curry powder,
juice of a lemon, salt.


Trim off the chops and fry in the butter, take them
out and drain on a paper, and fry the onion and apple,
sprinkling them with the curry powder and corn fllour,
add by degrees the gravy, and let it simmer for half an
hour, then strain over the chops, and let them cook
very slowly for two hours; dish them, reduce the
gravy, squeeze in lemon Juice and pour over; put a
border of rice round the dish.
CHEESE STRAWS.
3 oz. flour, 2 oz. butter, 2 oz. cheese, 1 yolk of egg,
cayenne or pepper.
Rub the butter and flour together, mix in the
cheese and seasoning, and bind into a paste with the
yolk of egg. Roll out and cut into lengths and rings,
allow 6 or 7 straws for each ring, put on to a baking
sheet, and bake a pale brown. Thread the straws
through the rings and serve in a dish paper.
MELTED BUTTER.
Half pint water, half oz. flour, 2 oz. butter.
Put half the butter into a small saucepan, and when
dissolved stir in the flour; pour in the water and stir
until it boils, then take it from the fire and put the
rest of the butter in, in small pieces. Do not put it
on the fire afterwards.
APPLE AMBER PUDDING.
2 lbs. apples, 1 lemon, 1 oz. butter, 2 or 3 ozs. granu-
lated sugar, 3 or 4 eggs, a few glace cherries or candied
peel.
Peel, core, and stew the apples until quite soft f rub
through a sieve or beat up with a fork ; sweeten and
flavour with lemon juice and butter. Beat in the yolks
of the eggs, turn into buttered pie dish and bake until
firm. Whip the whites to a stiff froth, pile on the
top, and smooth over with a knife; decorate with


cherries or peel, sprinkle well with sugar and put
into the oven to get pale brown. Serve cold.
SWEET OMELETTE.
2 eggs, 1 oz. butter, half an ounce sugar, little jam.
Put the jam on a plate to get hot, put the yolks into
a basin with half the sugar and mix well with a spoon,
put the whites into a plate and whip to a stiff froth,
mix these together, put the butter into an omelette
pan, and when dissolved turn in the mixture and cook
for two or three minutes, hold the pan in front of the
fire for a minute, then fold the omelette over, and slip
out on to the jam ; serve very hot.
FRENCH BATTER.
Half a pound flour gill tepid water, 1 oz. dissolved
butter, whites of 2 eggs, salt.
Pour the butter over flour, make into smooth batter
with the water. teat well, whip whites of eggs to a
stiff froth and stir in. This is good for meats or
fritters of any kind.
KIDNEY OMELETTE
1 kidney, 2 eggs, 1 dessert spoonful gravy, half tea-
spoonful parsley, 1| oz. butter, pepper and salt.
Cut the kidney into small pieces, sprinkle with
parsley and cook for a few minutes in half the butter ;
take another pan, put in the rest of the butter, and
when dissolved turn the eggs and gravy well beaten,
and stir until they begin to set, divide into two parts,
lay the kidney on one half and fold the other piece
over ; hold the pan for a minute in front of the fire,
and slip on to hot plate.


KEDGEREE.
Half pound cold boiled fish, 2 ozs. rice, 2 hard boiled
eggs, 2 ozs. butter, salt and pepper.
Boil the rice, flake the fish, chop the whites of the
eggs and put into a saucepan with the butter and
seasoning, make all quite-hot, pile high on a dish and
rub the yolks through a sieve so that they fall equally
all over the kedgeree.
SAVOURY OMELETTE.
3 eggs, 1 oz. butter, half teaspoonful parsley, 1 do. milk
or gravy, salt and pepper.
Beat the eggs lightly for two minutes, and season
them, put the butter into small pan and when dissolved
run in the parsley, turn in the eggs and stir them about
until they begin to set, shape into half the pan, and
hold the pan in front of the fire for a minute or two,
turn on to a very hot plate.
AMERICAN HASH.
Half lb. cold meat, i lb. cold potatoes, half small onion
2 ozs. butter, 1 gill milk and gravy, half teaspoonful
parsley, salt and pepper.
Mince the meat, mash the potatoes, and season, chop
the onion and fry a pale brown in half the butter,
turn in the meat, or pour over the gravy, and make
all thoroughly hot through, pile high on a dish and
put the rest of the butter in the centre.
BUTTERED EGGS
3or 4 yolks of eggs, oz. butter, 1 dessertspoonful
of sauce, 6 pieces fried bread.
Put the butter into a saucepan, put in the eggs
unbeaten, seasoning and sauce, stir until set. Then


take up instantly. Pile on the bread and garnish
with parsley.
EPIGRAMS.
Slices of cold mutton, a little Strasbourg or savoury
meat, frying batter.
Spread slices of mutton with savoury meat dip into
batter and fry in plenty of hot fat.
SAVOURY FISH.
Half lb cold boiled fish, 2 oz. butter, Half teaspoonful
parsley, yolk of hard boiled egg, 7 or eight rounds of
fried bread.
Flake the fish and put into a saucepan with butter
and seasoning. Make quite hot, heap on to the bread,
and cover alternately with parsley and yolk of egg,
both of which should be finely chopped.
SHORT PASTRY.
1 lb. flour, 10 or 12 ozs. butter, juice of lemon, very
little water.
Rub the butter very lightly into flour until quite fine,
mix into very dry stiff piste with lemon juice and very
little water, roll out once and it is ready for use.
FRENCH PASTRY
Is puff pastry cut into strips, about one inch
broad, stood up on end and baked ; spread afterwards
with jam.
CREAM CAKES.
Half lb. flour, half pint water, quarter lb. butter,
4 eggs, half pint cream..


Put the butter and water on the fire, and when it
boils turn in the flour and stir quickly until quite
smooth, cook for a few minutes, take off the fire, beat
in the eggs one at a time, take up in small pieces and
put into slightly buttered tins, and bake for three-
quarters of an hour ; when cool whip the cream and
fill the cakes.
COCOANUT PUDDING.
1 pint milk, 3 or 4 eggs, | lb. of dessicated cocoanut,
little ground ginger, sugar to taste. £ lb. light pastry.
Line a pie-dish with the pastry, make a custard with
the yolks of the eggs and milk, stir in ginger, sugar,
and cocoanut, put into the dish and bake, take it out
of the oven, whip the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth,
and pile in rough pieces on the top, sprinkle with pink
sugar, and stand in the oven for a few minutes ; serve
cold.
PUFF PASTRY.
1 lb. butter, 1 lb. flour, half pint water, juice of lemon.
Sift flour on to pasteboard, put the lemon juice into
centre, and work into smooth paste with water ; scrape
board, sprinkle with flour, and work the paste about
well : squeeze all the water out of the butter, and
roll out the paste just large enough to take the
butter, fold the butter in and leave it for ten minutes,
then roll out into long thin strip, fold into three and
put by for ten minutes—this should be done in all
seven times ; bake in a very quick oven.
Thos. Smith, Ga« Printing Works, Koroit-street, Warrnambool.


3 1508 02236031 2
NATIONAL
I IBRAHY or AUSTRAI IA


