

RECONSTRUCTION
IN AUSTRALIA
An official survey of the organization for planning reconstruction
in Australia and the work that has been done.




RECONSTRUCTION IN AUSTRALIA.
Reconstruction means changing a war-time economy
to a peace-time economy, re-establishing service men and
women and war workers in peace-time occupations and
at the same time ensuring that the two main objectives
for which this war is being fought are achieved —
A high and stable level of employment; and
Rising living standards for our own and other peoples.
The Ministry of Post-war Reconstruction is the planning
centre for Australian reconstruction. It is principally a planning
body in which plans are prepared in collaboration with the other
Commonwealth, State and other authorities concerned.
During 1943 the Ministry has made, or arranged for, preliminary
plans covering—
Re-establishment of service men and women.
Re-housing.
Re-development of primary industries.
National works.
Conversion of war-time secondary industries.
The planning of reconstruction is in the hands of —
The Honorable }. B. Chifley, Minister for Post-war
Reconstruction.
The Ministry of
Post-war Recon-
struction
Department of Post-war Reconstruction.
Rural Reconstruction Commission.
Re-establishment Committees.
Commonwealth Housing Commission.
Co-ordinator-General of Works.
Secondary Industries Commission.
The Department of Post-war Reconstruction. Acton,
Canberra. Box 168 City. Telephone No. 566. Telegrams, Postwar.
Branch Offices.
New South Wales Shell House, Carrington-street, Sydney.
G.P.O. Box 4318. Tel. No. BWIB3B.
530- Telegrams —Postwar, Sydney.


Victoria .. 14 Parliament-place, Melbourne.
G.P.O. Box 495 h. Tel. No. Central 4300.
Telegrams—Postwar, Melbourne.
Director-General Dr. H. C. Coombs.
Assistant Director-General (Re-
establishment) Vacant.
Director of Research Mr. }. G. Crawford.
Senior Research Officer Dr. Lloyd Ross.
The Department provides administrative services for the Ministry,
carries out research into various problems of reconstruction, prepares
plans and maintains contact with the public by providing informa-
tion to organizations and individuals.
The Rural Reconstruction Commission. 14 Parliament-
place, Melbourne.
Personnel:
The Honorable F. J. S. Wise (Chairman).
Mr. J. F. Murphy, C.M.G.
Professor S. M. Wadham.
Mr. C. R. Lambert.
By contacting individuals in the six States, the Commission has
obtained a comprehensive picture of Australian rural economy, and
it is now studying agricultural industries which are capable of
expansion, new areas for land settlement, schemes for soldier settlers,
problems of conservation of resources (soils and forests), develop-
ment of electricity and water supply, improved amenities in rural
areas, including better farm housing and education facilities, and the
whole problem of the living standards of those engaged in farming.
The first and second interim reports of the Commission will be
made early in 1944.
The •Re-establishmenf Committees have been set up to
co-ordinate and plan the work of —
Demobilization, military and industrial.
Training and re-employment of service men and women, and
civilian war workers.


Commonwealth Demobilization Committee. Box 168
City, Canberra.
Personnel: Representatives of —
The Department of Post-war Reconstruction (Chairman).
The Armed Services.
The Repatriation Commission.
The Department of Labour and National Service (Director-
General of Man Power).
Together with the Inter-Service Demobilization Planning Staff
(dealing with service aspects of demobilization) this Committee is
investigating matters such as the rate of demobilization, the period
over which demobilization will be spread, the order in which service
personnel will be demobilized and the organization and machinery
required for demobilization.
Commonwealth Reconstruction Training Committee.
Box 168 City, Canberra.
Personnel includes: Representatives of —
The Department of Post-war Reconstruction (Chairman).
The Repatriation Commission.
The Universities Commission.
The Department of Labour and National Service.
Representatives of the Armed Services and the Treasury are
co-opted.
The Committee will administer a full and part-time vocational
training scheme for ex-service men and women and for civilian war
workers. Service personnel eligible to apply for training will be men
and women who are prevented by war from returning to their
pre-war occupation; who enlisted on or before their 21st birthday;
who require a short-term refresher course; who want to complete a
full-time course which was interrupted by war service; who displayed
conspicuous ability during service; who were self-employed before
enlisting and are unable to resume their former job.
During the training £3 ss, a week will be paid a single man,
l6s. to a man with one dependant, 5 guineas to a man with two
or more dependants. Tuition and examination fees will be free and
an allowance paid for books and instruments.


There will be, in addition, part-time training for which tuition
and other fees will be free up to a limit of for both men and
women members of the services and for widows of servicemen.
Commonwealth Re-employment and Re-establishment
Committee. Box 168 City, Canberra.
Personnel: Representatives of—
The Department of Post-war Reconstruction (Chairman).
Department of Labour and National Service (Director-
General of Man Power).
Repatriation Commission.
Representatives of the Rehabilitation Sections of the Armed
Services are co-opted.
The task of this Committee is to prepare plans and organize for
the re-employment and re-establishment of service personnel and
civilian war workers. Its work will be based on an over-all assess-
ment of post-war employment prospects in industries, trades and
professions.
Commonwealth Housing Commission. Shell House,
Carrington-street, Sydney.
Personnel:
L. P. D. O’Connor (Chairman).
Mrs. M. M. Ryan (Member).
J. S. Gawler (Deputy Chairman).
C. V. Howard (Member),
A. V. Thompson, M.H.A. (Member).
Recommendations based on the first interim report of the Com-
mission were submitted to Cabinet on 7th December, 1943. It was
stated that there would be a housing shortage of 250,000 to 300,000
dwellings in Australia by 1945. Cabinet agreed to provide financial
assistance to State and other approved housing authorities to ensure
that suitable homes are provided for low-income groups and/or those
with large families.
The Ministry of Post-war Reconstruction has invited State govern-
ments to prepare plans for a start to be made in the first post-war
year on the building of 30,000 government-sponsored dwelling units
for low-income families as part of the total housing programme of
50,000 homes in the first post-war year.


A copy of the recommendations made by the Commission in this
Report may be obtained by writing to the Director-General of
Post-war Reconstruction, Box 168 City, Canberra.
National Works Council. Shell House, Carrington-street,
Sydney.
Personnel:
Sir Harry Brown (Co-ordinator-General of Works).
Mr. C. A. Hoy (Assistant Co-ordinator-General).
The National Works Council has been established as a result of
consultation between the Governments of the Commonwealth and
the States to determine an Australian post-war Public Works policy.
The members of the Council are the Prime Minister, the
Commonwealth Minister for Post-war Reconstruction and the
Premiers of each of the six States.
The Council will be concerned not only with the works which
would normally fall within the province of the Commonwealth
and State government departments, but also with projects for which
all semi-governmental bodies, municipalities, shires and road boards
customarily assume responsibility.
The work to be undertaken immediately entails the preparation
of detailed plans so that they can be carried out at short notice.
They will include maintenance work that has been deferred because
of the war and urgent new works. The Council will also give
special attention to the study of comprehensive planning of regional
works to improve existing productive capacity, attract population
and foster industrial development.
The creation of the National Works Council provides for
decentralization of planning and the full use of all administrative
resources of the various governments, semi-government bodies, and
the other public authorities concerned.
To this end the State governments have established an organiza-
tion which will be responsible for the preparation, study and co-
ordination of the proposals from all their administrating authorities.
Similarly, the National Works Council itself has created a central-
ized administration under the Co-ordinator-General of Works for
the study and co-ordination of all these proposals which will be
submitted to it for review preparatory to their final authorization
by the National Works Council,


Secondary Industries Commission. 314 Collins-street,
Melbourne.
Personnel:
J. K. Jenson, 0.8. E. (Chairman).
D. J. Nolan (Deputy Chairman).
F. T. Merrett (Member).
W. D. Scott (Member).
The Commission has been set up to review the war-time indus-
trial developments of the Commonwealth with particular regard
to the government factories, especially munition factories and
annexes, and to plan and recommend measures for the future
industrial development of the Commonwealth.
Advisory panels in various branches of industry, consisting of
employer, employee and technical representatives will be set up as
necessary to advise the Commission on the problems of the par-
ticular industries. The first of these has been established in the
Advisory Panel for Textile Industry, personnel of which is—
G. A. Davis . Controller of Clothing in the Department
of Supply and Shipping (Chairman).
Sir David Rivett Deputy Chairman and Chief Executive
Officer, C.S.I.R.
R. J. Webster ~ Managing Director, Bradford Cotton Mills.
Douglas Boyd . Chairman of Commonwealth Wool Board.
J. Vicars .. Director, J. Vicars & Co. Ltd.
David E. Lark . General Secretary, Australian Textile
Workers Union.
This Commission will naturally work closely with war-time pro-
duction departments and will utilize the experience and the “ fact
finding” facilities of the Tariff Board.
Integration of Work. Throughout all planning contact is
maintained with the public through the taking of evidence by the
Commissions and by the investigations of the advisory panels.
It will have been noted from the list of functions of the eight
instrumentalities of post-war reconstruction that no one of them has


a sphere of activity entirely separate from the others. Each Com-
mission, Committee and Council co-ordinates and plans, the Depart-
ment integrates the whole through regular meetings of the
chairmen of commissions and executive officers, and by constant
contact with each authority.
Through day-by-day contact and representation upon inter-
departmental committees, the Department relies on other depart-
ments to a great extent. This is in line with the main activities
of the Ministry which are to co-ordinate the various elements in the
reconstruction programme.
For Your Information.
Publications which will be available shortly on
post-war problems and planning include —
Social Security and Reconstruction, by the Minis-
ter for Post-war Reconstruction (Mr. J. B, Chifley).
A pamphlet on Australia’s housing problem and
what is being planned to meet it.
A series of booklets containing discussion material
designed to promote the study of post-war issues in
relation to the need for planning in peace.
By Authority ; L. F. Johnston, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra
(Printed in Australia.)






Issued by
the Department of Post-war
Reconstruction
for your information.
