

0% f / t/ i i /
4* f / m fcp- f
ELEVENTH EDITION
jp=o=o=o=^j
2 RECOLLECTIONS p
j GALLIPOLI j
FRANCE
o
AND
FLANDERS
O By E. WELLS £
A RETURNED SOLDIER
Price.: One Shilling
° nr
y <
D Melbourne:
SYD. DAY THE PRINTER LTD. \
103-105 Lonsdale Street
L=o=o=o==a




INTRODUCTION
Dear Reader. —The following sketches of
life in the trenches are a faithful account
of a soldier’s life as it really is, stripped
of all gloss and glamor; the realities of
war are truthfully portrayed; also the
brighter and more human side of the
soldier’s life—the joking, the comrade-
ship, the arguments, and, running
through all, the golden thread of love
for our native land. The writer hopes
that in these few pages you will find
something to interest and amuse you,
and he will not have written in vain.
Yours faithfully,
302. E. WELLS.
2nd Pioneer Batt., A.I.F.


A Night Alarm
THE BEACH AT GALLIPOLI
It is 4 a.m. and a misty morning. The remnant of battalion
had arrived the night before from Cape Helles, where we had
lost half our strength. The men are sleeping as only soldiers
can sleep, in spite of the increasing war of artillery and the in-
cessant ride fire. The inlying pickets, in full fighting order, are
lying in all sorts of different attitudes, blissfully indifferent to
the turmoil in the hills above them.
Suddenly an order comes, quick and sharp: “Stand to!”
Recalled to the realities of existence, we stagger to our feet,
rubbing our eyes. “What’s up?” is the question on each man’s
lips; but again comes the hoarse voice of command: “Fall in!”—
“Quick march!”—“At the double!” And away we go, up rock-
strewn gully, that bears an unenviable reputation. Shrapnel is
falling all around us, and occasionally a man goes down. We
do not slacken our pace, but stumble and struggle on up the
steep incline, eager to be in before the finish; for the Turks have
made a determined attack on our line, and supports have been
called for. As we draw nearer, louder grows the din of rapid
rifle fire, the ping of the passing bullets mixed with showers of
shrapnel. The thunder of our artillery gives us a feeling
security, and we dive into the communication trenches. In a
few moments we are in amongst our own men, who have had a
hot time. The enemy were retiring, having had enough of it
for one night! A few Turks managed to reach our trenches,
but they never returned.
When the sun came out and the mist cleared away, the
Turkish dead could be seen thickly strewn all over No Man’s
Land. It was estimated that our lads had accounted for fully
three thousand of them that night. Abdul was taught a lesson
that he never forgot.
(Cairo street boy to Australian soldier): “Paper? Buy a
paper? Good news, Mr. McKenzie. Thirty thousand Austra-
lians killed!”
Two Tommies were heard criticising the Australian soldier.
This is how one described them:—“l, Chum, they be big chaps,
with wristlet watches and gold in their teeth, and they call their
best friends ”
German Sniper, caught in No Man’s Land: “Mercy, kame-
rad, mercy!” \
Australian: “I’ll give yer mercy, yer ! S’pose
it was you who busted me pipe this morning.”


A View of France
We landed at Marseilles on a fine morning in the early
Spring. The Harbour was crowded with shipping of all nation-
alities. The French people gave we Australians a hearty wel-
come. and provided us with coffee, cigarettes, etc., at every stop-
ping place. For four long and weary days we passed through
smiling fields and well-kept roads, through large towns and
small villages. The contrast between Egypt and this fair land
was remarked by all. “It’s a beautiful country, and well worth
fighting for,” was the general opinion. Armentieres was out-
last stopping place, and we settled down to life on French soil—
or, rather, sometimes on it, and sometimes under it. We took
over the trenches that we were to occupy from the Tommies,
and set to work to make ourselves at home. The German
trenches were not far away, and the first morning after our
arrival Fritz put up a board with the following words on if
“Welcome, Australians! Advance if you can.” Subsequent
events proved that Fritz was a bit too premature with his chal-
lenge, for it was not many days after that some of our boys
went over and bombed him out of his trenches, and brought a
couple of his machine guns back with them. We have met
many times since then, but never again has Fritz displayed any
placards inviting us to come over. He knows the slouch hats a
bit better now than he did at that time. Champagne was two
shillings a bottle when we arrived at Armentieres, but after the
first pay (when we were all millionaires) the demand for it was
so great that it very soon rose to ten shillings. The boys soon
got on good terms with the French population; their free and
easy way, and open-handedness and fondness of children made
them great favourites.
Winter on the Somme
Rain, mud, ice, and snow—all churned up together! In
places it is three feet deep, and never less than over our boot
tops. We struggle wearily along through the rain, which has
never ceased since we started our march, twenty-six hours ago.
We are only ten miles from our last camp, and have taken all
that time to cover the distance. The road is crowded with
traffic of all descriptions, and a wait of two hours is not uncom-
mon when a block occurs. Over-turned waggons, dead horses,
motor bikes, and cars line the road, and amongst these obstacles
we drearily pick our way (when we can move at all!). At last
we leave the “road” and turn off, down a gully, for a mile or so;
then we come to a halt and proceed to camp. It is raining
harder than ever; everything is wet- —pack wet, overcoat wet,
and no blanket; and the wood is wet. It is about 4 a.m., and
there is nothing for it but to walk about until morning. An issue
of rum was served out, and it warmed us up a bit, but we were
very glad to see daylight appearing. All the old trenches and
dugouts were full of mud and water, and the boys started to
bale them out and dig fresh ones. They soon got things “ship-
shape,” and made themselves as comfortable as possible. Tim-


ber was scarce, but the Australians had such a •‘taking way”
with them that they soon got all they wanted. The Tommies,
who were in charge of the timber dumps, had a good deal to
put up with from our chaps. Some of the “hard cases” would
put a couple of stripes on their sleeve, write an order out for so
many duck-boards for “Colonel Jones,” or any name that came
handy, and march six men up to the dump. “Here, Sergeant!
Here’s an order from Colonel , and they are wanted
immediately.” While the Sergeant was arguing with the Aus-
tralians the duck-boards would be half-way to our camp—never
to return. We stopped at this place for three months, and had
several brushes with Fritz during that time.. We left there for
Bapaume, and took that place, and then proceeded on to Bulle-
court.
The Australian
W.H.O.
“THE BRAVEST THAT GOD EVER MADE.”
A DISTINGUISHED BRITISH OFFICER’S OPINION.
The skies that arched his land were blue;
His bush-born winds were warm and sweet;
And yet from earliest hours he knew
The tides of victory and defeat.
From fierce floods thundering at his birth —
From red droughts ravening while he ploughed—
He learned to fear no foes on earth —
“The bravest thing God ever made.”
The bugles of the Motherland
Rang ceaselessly across the sea,
To call him and his lean, brown band
To shape Imperial destiny.
He went by—youth’s grave purpose willed,
The goal unknown,' the cost unweighed;
The promise of his blood fulfilled —
“The bravest thing God ever made.”
[Da. We know —it is our deathless pride—
V'- - ■ The splendour of his first fierce blows:
How reckless, glorious, undenied,
He stormed those steel-lined cliffs we know:
And none who saw him scale the height,
Behind his reeking bayonet blade,
Would rob him of his title right—
“ The bravest thing God ever made.”
Bravest, where half a world of men
Are brave beyond all earth’s rewards,


So stoutly none shall charge again
Till the last breaking of the swords.
Wounded or hale, won home from war,
Or yonder by the Lone Pine laid,
Give him his due for evermore —
“The bravest thing God ever made.”
The Real Anzac
There are plenty of slouch-hatted soldiers in town,
Doughty and debonair, stalwart and brown;
Some are from Weymouth or Salisbury Plain,
Others have “pushed” in the Western Campaign;
Call them “Overseas soldiers,” or down under men,
Declare that each one is as daring as ten;
Call them Cornstalks or Fernleaves, all out for a fight—
But don’t call them Anzacs, for that isn’t right.
The Anzacs I—their ranks are but scanty, all told—
Have a separate record illumined in gold.
Their blood on Gallipoli’s ridges they poured,
Their souls with the scars of that struggle are scored;
Not many are left, and not many are sound,
And thousands lie buried in Turkish ground.
These are the Anzacs! The others may claim
Their zeal and their spirit—but never their name.
When We Return
I call to mind the crowd upon the quay,
A surging crowd that cheered us off to war, t
A girl who waved a farewell hand to me— *
And then the dim, receding shore.
It seems a thousand years of nebulous intent.
They called across the seas for martial men,
And, knowing their sore needs, we went.
We flinched not on those fields of riven red,
Nor called a halt when duty urged us on;
Content, we did our share. Our honoured dead
Define the fields we have fought and won;
And now returning—broken, bruised, and bent —
We know we have done our best. We’ve fought our round
And deep within our breast lies that content
Which comes to men when homeward bound.
But, while we’ve left behind that seething hell,
Where men grow mad for lust of alien blood,
We know not whether all at home is well,
Nor if love’s tide remains at flood.
That trusted heart we thought possessed no flaw
May well revolt at sight of you or me.
When, crippled, maimed, we step upon the shore,
And seek her eyes upon the quay.
PESSIMIST.


Anzacs
The children unborn shall acclaim
The standard the Anzacs unfurled,
When they made Australasia’s fame
The wonder and pride of the world.
Some of you got the V.C.,
Some, the Gallipoli trot;
Some got a grave by the sea,
And all of you got it damned hot.
And I see you go strolling through town,
In the faded old hospital blue,^
And driving abroad “lying down,’’
And, my God! —but I wish I were you.
I envy you beggars I met,
From the dirty old hats on your head
To the rusty old boots on your feet,
I envy you, living or dead.
A Knighthood is fine in its way,
A Peerage brings splendour and fame;
But I would rather have tacked any day
That word to the end of my name.
I count it the greatest reward
That ever a man could attain:
I’d rather be Anzac than lord —
I’d rather be —Anzac than Thane.
There’s a bar to the medal you’ll wear,
There’s a word that will glitter and glow,
And an honour a KING cannot share,
When you are back in the Cities, you know.
The children unborn shall acclaim
The Standard the Anzacs unfurled,
When they made Australasia’s fame
The wonder and pride of the world.


Four Australians
“Johnnie, Johnnie! Hi, Johnnie!”
The speaker is a tall, bronzed Australian soldier, fully six
feet high—a typical remnant of an original battalion.
He is dressed much the same as any Australian soldier was
in the early days of the Gallipoli campaign. His feet are
encased in a pair of heavy military boots, looking none the
better for wear- the nether part of his body in what was once
~°bly sTylis'h pair of Hding breeches that by aU apper-
anres have seen as much wear as his boots, His lett Knee p
mules through a ragged tear, and gives him the a PP earan “-°,
an overgrown schoolboy who is dressed ready for a run \Mtn
Ws mate® The upper par. of his body is covered with some-
thing that by close scrutiny suggests to us as being a tumc
closflv resembling one. His head .s adorned'with.the « >
££* t'.ef
attracts more attention than the wearer does. It is jammed o
h s head at a rakish angle and seems to say to ah fe world
Ses s
to emit it again in the form of “Johnnie! Hi, Johnnie, come
the hill a little way, a small wiry In 4‘ a JJ sol
Qiiddenlv stops short and looks around. Then, as if not quite
catchtag the P meaning of the English words saunters - ilondy
rlr.ivnbill “Hi Johnnie! 4 Come here, will your ine mie
soldier stops again, and, looking up sees the issuer of the half-
tv half-command, who by this time is beckoning vMt
both head and hands. His manner has become a most impenous
pic excitement. The Solution of the problem, Hi, jonn
nie” slowly forming in the Indian’s brain, he solemnly startsi to
cross himself, putting a special, distinct as t his «mg
smartened up; in his face the look of a humble, adding spin ■
As he comes closer to us we see a small, hard- visaged face —
v, fame tint at times betravs a conflict of emotions, sometimes
it is as if'a dark shadow was hiding the finer points of
pyivine it a dog-like, inscrutable expression that could ne\er be
fathomed & lifs eyes seem to say, “I have got heavy burdens
that I will never rid myself of.” His mouth twists into a curious
grimace as he briskly salutes.
The Australian soldier, whom we call “Digger” (because
“Digger” happens to be any Australian soldier) returns me
salufe, and greets the Indian with, “Salaam, Johnnie Salaai \ l ‘
Johnnie!” The Indian mumbles in naughty boy fashion, ibis
conventional greeting over, the two soldiers, vastly different m
aspect and build, stand and survey each other. Ihe txvo stand
ing together give an impression of strength and endurance -e
vond description. The Australian, big-boned, with unknown
strength lurking behind his bronzed, healthy skin, and eyes that
speak of hate and love, and the mouth that seems to work in


conjunction with the mind; the mouth and jaw that give a
sudden, sharp click when the brain speaks and says, “Do it!”
The Indian, small, almost undersized, but not at all badly built,
with small, wiry limbs, that, when moved, show a sea of muscle,
working in perfect unison. His every action betrays a certain
determination of character. The precise movement of the head
seems to say, “I will try to do to the best of my ability.”
The Australian, breaking the silence, asks abruptly, “John-
nie! —you got curry?” The Indian slowly raises his eyes to
Digger’s face, and wags his head as if not quite certain of his
question. To make his meaning more clear, Digger goes
through the action of passing food to the mouth, ejaculating
now and then, “Curry; you know, curry, Johnnie! Jerry?”
Digger’s actions and his earnest appeals have conveyed to the
Indian the thought of something important. His face wrinkles
and breaks into a smile—an honest smile—one good to see. He
mumbles, “Johnnie, Johnnie!” this being the full extent of his
English.
Digger, taking it for granted that “Johnnie, Johnnie!”
means “yes,” and not being far wrong, leads the way down the
hill. They pick their way carefully, slowly, down the hill,
wending and stepping reverently over a little patch of brown
earth that is slightly higher than the surrounding earth. Some
of the mounds are adorned with rough wooden crosses —just
simple little things, branches off some shrub, tied in the form of
a cross with pieces of boot laces or string. A simple little token
to the dead. Digger’s dead; Johnnie’s dead. Just comrades
who have passed out. In British “Tommy” language, “Gone
West.” As the Indian passes these little mounds he makes the
sign of the cross on his body. To him they are dead men—
something to be regarded with superstition. To Digger they
are mates still; mates although dead; mates that are more
sacred and honoured in death than ever in life.
They half-walk, half-slide down the last steep incline.
Straight before them a dark, forbidding hill hides from their
view the Indian encampment. Before ascending the hill, Digger
motions to the Indian to stop. He points to the crest of the
hill, and, speaking in a vernacular that life in a foreign country
has helped to cultivate, soliloquised, “Well, ’ell, and jest to
think old ‘Aller’ was there waitin’; he’s a shrewd ole cow,
though.” He utters the last few words with a finality that does
not need questioning. The soliloquy is not lost on the Indian.
He mumbles, “Johnnie, Johnnie!” Digger smiles; he knows
Johnnie wants to say, “Quite right! Quite right; he is shrewd.”
They start to ascend the hill; the very same hill that made the
Australian soldier famous; the hill that children yet to come
will try and picture in their minds. When within fifty yards of
the crest they start to crawl on hands and knees for fear of
being spied by some wary-eyed sniper, snugly ensconced in his
lair on some adjoining hill. Once over the hill, they are safe,
and they will straighten up to the normal state of walking. It
does not take them long to traverse the slope, and they are soon
on the beach where the Indian encampment is situated. It is
not the sort of military encampment that the reader will con-
jure up. In fact, there is no sign of human habitation what-
ever.
10


Johnnie now takes the lead, and makes for a sheltered por-
tion of the hill. After walking for five minutes or so Johnnie
turns to Digger and exclaims, “Johnnie! breaking off into his
own dialect. He points with his hand, as much as to say, Tha
is where I live.” Digger unconsciously brushes pieces of dried
furze and earth from off his tunic, showing plainly his nervous
excitement at the thought of the meal of curry that will soon be
his Johnnie claps liis hands and calls out something that
Digger does not understand. A strip of sacking that is painted
green and brown to correspond with the surrounding landscape
is moved aside by an invisible hand. From the darkness of the
dug-out another Indian appears, and regards his comrade s
visitor with displeasure. His eyes rest for a moment on Dig-
ger's hat, then his face lights up with a smile of delight. He
has recognised the Australian hat, and is not this their dream o
the “White Gurkha?” Digger, knowing he has been judged
and not found wanting, gives the greeting, “Salaam, Johnnie.
“Salaam Johnnie!” The Indian murmurs with every evidence
of pleasure. “Got curry, Johnnie?” Digger jerks out. tor
answer the Indian beckons him inside and procures an empty
bully beef box for him to sit on. This is the seat of honour.
When a “White Gurkha” is not sitting on it, it is used for keep-
ing foodstuffs in.
The interior of the dug-out is snug and homely, more for
comfort than style. Arranged on each side of the walls are
sets of four bunks, with odds and ends of equipment, bags and
blankets strewn pell-mell on them. Digger sits down con-
tentedly to wait and gloat on the meal that will soon be ready
a meal that, to a man who has had nothing but salty bully beet
and biscuits for weeks, takes the. form of a banquet. The two
Indians, working in conjunction, soon get the stew ready. Kice,
a little goat’s flesh, and curry powder is what they use. While
it is stewing the Indians arrange themselves one on each
of. Digger.
The three gabble away at each other as if they understood
what the other was saying. The first word is always Johnnie.
It is a little distinction conferred by the Australian soldier on
their dark-skinned comrades. It is a word specially reserved
for speech amongst the two sets of brothers. Johnnie, as tic
Indian says it, can mean anything. The Australian version is
“cobber, laddie, mate.” Digger talks, his words interspersed
with sundry nods and grimaces. One of the Indians starts to
tell a story. By the woe-begone expression, and the dull glow
far back in his eyes, it is something that affects him very much.
From what can be gleaned by his actions, a comrade has been
killed lately. He points to the trenches, and goes through the
motion of'loading a rifle; then he hits himself sharply on the
forehead with his finger. His actions are ludicrous as he tries
to imitate how the last breath was drawn. Digger understands,
and remains silent. They have all lost good comrades. It does
not need words to explain ;it needs action to revenge. ihe
silence is broken by the sizzling sound from the direction of
the curry pot.
Digger grants his approval at the looked-for sound; its
suspiciously like, “Oh, hell!” The pot is brought over and
placed at Digger’s feet, and a spoon is produced and handed to


him. The two Indians arm themselves with flat pieces of
wood, roughly cut into the shape of a spoon. The three of
them start to eat out of one pot, having dip for dip. O mores!
All class and convention is dropped over that steaming pot. The
black Johnnie is oh a level with the white Johnnie. This is why
the Indian claims the Australian for his friend. The Indian is
not made to feel that he is the under dgg; he is met on level
terms with a hail fellow, well met, and appreciates it accordingly,
treating the Australian soldier with an almost childish adora-
tion. It is embarrassing to a certain extent, but nevertheless
they cannot be made to act differently towards us.
The meal over, Digger produces some gigarettes and hands
them around. The three comrades then sit back and smoke.
Digger’s eyes are half-closed; what with a full stomach and the
mellowing influences of the fragrant weed, he does not feel dis-
posed to talk. Talk is needless', as it happens. The friendship
between the three is unexplainable; neither understands a word
the other is saying; yet they are friends. The smell of the
strong curry and tobacco gradually fills the close interior of the
dug-out and filters outside. The smell has evidently disturbed
the occupants of an adjoining dug-out. A big, bony figure
makes its way into the dug-out, and then, as if surprised to see
his friends have a visitor, turns to go. lie is stopped by Digger’s
“Salaam, Johnnie! Come in!”
The big Indian turns around and murmurs in laboured but
very good English, “Yass, alright; how are you?” as he grasps
Digger’s hand. “Oh, pretty good,” Digger gasps in surprised
tones. Not being too sure that the Indian can speak English
well, he starts to question, speaking simply and omitting words
likely to make his meaning less clear. “You speak English
talk, Johnnie?” “Yass, a little.” “Where you learn, Johnnie?”
“Me, I learn India. I work one year, two year, three year, Eng-
lish officer. He good man; very good man.” “Oh, you work
for English officer, and he learn you to talk English? Where
you live India, Johnnie?” “I live Rampur—R-A-M-P-U-R,” the
Indian spells for Digger’s benefit. 13igger, not being well
versed in the geography of India, and not having ever heard
anything about it to single it out in his mind, goes on with his
questioning. “You married man, Johnnie?” The Indian looks
at Digger as if not comprehending. Digger’s large vocabulary
of words remains silent. “You know, Johnnie, got a ‘tabby’—
er—l mean a girl. You know, missus, Johnnie; jerry?”
, Johnnie, still not understanding Digger’s large vocabulary of
words, remains silent. “You know, Johnnie, woman?” Digger
goes through a series of actions that are supposed to convey to
the Indian the lovable actions of a wife towards her husband.
“You know,” Digger goes on, and goes through the action of
putting his arms around an imaginary waist, and pursing his
lips as if about to receive a kiss.
Digger’s actions have been so ludicrous that the three
Indians by this time are enjoying a hearty laugh at Digger’s
expense. His actions have seemingly put his words to shame.
The big Indian seems suddenly to understand what Digger
means. His face gradually becomes serious, as if making pre-
paration for the words yet to come. “Yass, I got woman. What
you call woman?” “Ah—er, tabbie, girl, tart.” The three


break off into another fit of laughing. Between the gusts of
laughter the big Indian asks if there are different sorts of
women in Australia. Digger tries to explain that they are all
the same sort, only they are given different names. “Why, you
call some ‘tatt,’ some ‘tuppie’?” splutters the Indian, trying to
hold his laugh. “Oh, I don’t know; some are young and some
er—er old,” Digger explains, groping around in the hope of
turning the subject into safer channels. “What you call old
women?—old tarts?” came thoughtlessly from Digger.
Something has evidently tickled the Indians again. They
jab each other, and the tears literally roll down their cheeks.
Digger, still groping around for some means of escape, asks,
“Johnnie, you got any kids?” The Indians sober down again,
and their interpreter speaks: “Yass, I got ten, twenty kids. My
uncle, what you call farmer, he got nearly hundred kids this
year; before war no good, no kids.” Digger’s eyes open wide in
astonishment. He voices the answer to’ his question, “He got
nearly hundred kids!” Then, as an after-thought, he asks,
“Gawd, Johnnie, he go broke; er—got any money?” “Yass;
plenty. He seel ar-—ar fifty goats this year. Plenty money.”
Digger, not quite realising for the moment that the Indian had
been speaking of the offspring of the goat, remains silent. At
last, after pondering it over in his mind for a moment, he
chuckles himself purple in the face at the unconscious joke.
Digger, recovering himself, expostulates: “No, no, Johnnie;
you don’t jerry; I mean kids—er—er children; you know, nip-
pers, picaninnies?” The word picaninnies and Digger’s descrip-
tion of “so high,” conjures up in the Indian’s mind little chil-
dren. “Ah, yass, yass; one, two leetle wan. Beetle wan, so
big,” raising his hand about two feet from the ground. “Big
wan, he clean boots, Meerat; he sends what you call my ar—ar
old ‘tatt’ plenty money. He big gentleman. You got any leetle
wan?” “Yes, a. couple—er—two—er—youngsters.” “What you
call youngsters?” Digger, suddenly remembering that if he
uses anything but strict English the Indian does not understand,
answers, “Children.”
The next thing to attract Digger’s attention is a potato
lying near the fire. Thinking this a good opportunity of taking
their minds off the subject of women and children, he asks
Johnnie, “What you call this?” picking up the potato. Johnnie
answers something that sounds like “Mallella.” “What English
call it?” Digger questions. “Pertater,” is the answer. “What
you call it?” Johnnie queries. “Oh—er—er—spud.” “Why Eng-
lish give two names?” Digger’s answer is, “Oh, I dunno.”
The conversation slackens now. Outside they hear the
roar of a bursting shell warning them of night. Digger gets up
and stretches his limbs luxuriously. “Well, I’ll have to go,” he
remarks, regretfully. “Be down again some day. Salaam,
‘Johnnie’!” “Salaam, ‘Johnnie’!”
Digger strides out so as to be in his accustomed place in the
trenches before darkness falls. Digger had an enjoyable after-
noon, but it was his last. That night the first stages of the
Lone Pine battle were fought, and Digger is peacefully resting
underneath a dark mould of earth now.


The Great Game
Mud dusk, and a somewhat limited panorama of Flanders!
Flanders’ and mud we have come to look upon as one, and loo<c
on them as an essential to the life of a soldier. Dusk we wel-
come it giving us respite and rest for a few brief hours. Uik
in front, and behind us, a foggy mist rises from the ground,
rising in weird, fantastic shapes as it strikes the uppei air.
-V slight breeze rustles the scanty foliage of a shattered
tree to our left. It makes, to our ears, a hideous, soul-search-
ing cry for vengeance. When the star shells flare in mid-air it
throws the tree out into weird relief, making it cast long,
ragged shadows on the ground. We think of the story t aat
tree could tell if it could only speak. How it has seen the ebb
and flow of battle; how nobly men fought; how they died; how
thev still die—defiant, to the end. Pointing with shattered arms
to their goal, ever onward, up, Excelsior! as the old tree still
points with the remains of its shattered trunk. I hen it could
tell yet another story; how the little children played beneath
its sheltering branches; how they enjoyed the cool, refreshing
shade cast by its branches and thick foliage. Instead of deep
sca-s on the ground, poppies and daisies and hundreds of otner
spring flowers adorned the surrounding landscape. How the
nightingale made the night sweet with his hopeful melody. Ihe
nightingale still gives voice to his song; but it is more broken
than before, and the trills, instead of a light-hearted hopefulness,
take on a haunting, mournful sadness, with a touch of infinite
longing for his old domain.
Far up in the sky a silver sheen shows for a moment and
disappears. Suddenly the dark clouds are riven asunder and the
old moon shines out in all her glory, casting a mellow, tender
light over the torn and tortured ground around the trenches. It
heartens us. We see, by this sign, something bright and good
after that which is before us. Taking advantage of the light ot
the moon, we peer towards our enemy. Big things are afoot
to-night, and one slight slip may mean that some of our com-
rades will not answer the next roll call. But all is-well. In-
tense silence; except, at times, the spiteful, moaning hiss ot a
sniper’s bullet; sometimes a scream of agony.
“Everything ready?” the Corporal questions. “Got the
bombs ready, Tommy?” Tommy, a big, hefty giant, answers,
“Yes!” Then, as an after-thought, he adds, “Corp., guess well
give ’em the king hit to-night.” Hardly are the words out of
his mouth than the answer is given by a swishing roar above
our heads Bang! And what we have been waiting tor has
come.
The second shell comes from half-right, icai. It is an
isolated gun “feeling” for the rest of the battery. Another few


moments of silence, then guns all along the line take up the
cannonade. The air is filled with a hurtling, swishing sound as
the first salvo of shells speed on to their destination. We duck
our heads with the shock of the first explosion. In and out of
the lesser bursting of the small shells we recognise the demoral-
ising roar of the big sixty-pounders. These big shells plough
up tons of earth, spreading death and destruction everywhere.
The roar of our shells gives us a feeling of security. We
well know, by past experience, that “Fritz” will be keeping low.
Perhaps he is even down in his dug-outs, some of them a con-
siderable distance underground. Some of the men, taking a
chance, risk a glance over the parapet to enjoy to the full the
sight of “Fritz’s” discomfort. Those men who have not looked
over get a fair inkling of how things go by the talk of the boys
at the parapet. As the shells strike the earth, sundry ejacula-
tions are heard. “By hell, they are getting it hot now!” “Strike
me pink, that was a beaut!”
Tommy, catching the spirit of the moment, fixes a grenade
to his rifle, sardonically salutes it, and releases the trigger. He
mounts the fire step in order to see where his bomb lands.
“About: five yards out,” he mutters discontentedly; but, never-
theless, he seems to be highly pleased. As he is getting the
next grenade ready, his face creases up into a thousand wrinkles.
He breaks into a broad, good-humoured grin. He sets his rifle
at a more acute angle, kisses, the grenade in grim sarcasm, and
fires.
Our artillery, is working itself into a pitch of fury befora
undreamed of, but we are used to the shriek and hiss of the
shells by this, being more at home in action than silence and
inaction. We glory in the red, raw, hiss of the big shells as
they hurtle on their way to destroy human life. “Out in front,”
“Fritz” has suddenly thought of something happening. Being
too preoccupied gloating on “Fritz’s” destruction, we forget
that he can retaliate. A sudden whizz, bang, thirty yards in
front of us makes us think more of safety and less of gloating.
The Corporal slides down from the fire-step and yells im-
periously, “Keep in the parapet, boys; they will get the range
next shot.” And with a final injunction to our bomber, Tommy,
“Tommy, you overgrown cow, cover yourse+f up, will you?”
Tommy expands his btoad chest, his lovably wicked face lights
up with a wicked, scornful smile, but nevertheless he crouches
into the parapet; not for his protection, but, as he says, “Look-
in’ safer; and being orders, I must.”
We all crouch close together. Somehow we feel safe at the
thought, and the feel of warm, pulsating, human comradeship
beside us, a comradeship before unheard of till the cry of the
“War God” brought us together. “Brothers they were who
found their brotherhood that night, and found it good.”
A swift, sharp hiss like the letting loose of a giant’s pent-up
fury, a dull thud, and we know the shell we have been waiting
for has arrived. The second intervening between the thud and
the burst cannot be explained. A second when the is dead;
yet every nerve and every thought twitch and become vivid and


real; a second when the mind works quickly, turning every
thought into a confused mass of trepidation. It is a second that
helps the body to withstand the shock that will follow —a second'
specially made for those in great danger; to be brief, the second
between life and death.
Our small world of parapet, paradox, and dug-out suddenly
swells like a blister. Then, crash! A stomach-sickening crash,
and the tension is broken. Mind reasserts itself over the body,
and we are suddenly whisked back to the real.
“Who is hurt?” is the silent question asked in every mind.
“Did you get it?” one man questions a comrade, who is feeling
himself all over. “Dunno,” he answers, wondering if his answer
is true or not. “Give us a look.” After looking and seeing no
sign of a wound, lie again asks. “Where do you feel it? ’ ‘ Here
an’ here, an’ here an’ ” “Hold on, laddies, don tbe silK ,
that was some lumps of dirt ’it yer.” "Hell! I forgot; thort i
was knocked a treat.” “Well, I dunno what 11 you 11 think vheu
a lump does ’it yer and knocks yer rotten. Guess you 11 think
all Krupp’s iron foundry suddenly ’it yer under the chin, the
Good Samaritan mumbles cheerfully, as he moves off to help
some less fortunate comrade. .
The Corporal, missing Tommy, asks quickly, “Where’s
that silly cow gone to how?” His words do not speak his innei-
most’thoughts; his face betrays a look of troubled concern. He
does not mean anything when he calls iommy a silly r cow. It
anybody had been listening he would have said, “Where s that
dear old comrade of mine?” As language such as “dear and
“comrade” do not sound well in our primeval surroundings,, a
veneer of slang is generally used. The worse the name the bet-
ter the man.
Tommy is soon found underneath some fallen sandbags,
and is none the worse for his imprisonment, and, after a drink
of water, curses the Germans for fully five minutes. “What are
you swearing at, Tommy? Anyone would think that you had
been half-killed.” “That’s what’s makin’ me swear, to think
that I should get such a ’ell of a fright and not get a wound,
go’s I could get a trip to ’ospital for awhile. Ain’t it rotten ( he
asks of anybody*in particular. We agree with him. It cer-
tainly is a bit hard.
This little excitement over, we start to build up our scat-
tered parapets, preparing for the shrapnel that will follow the
high explosives. We know the high explosive shells are meant
to dislodge us, and, once dislodged, then the shrapnel takes a
heavy toll of victims. We build our parapets up, bag for bag,
hand over head, and then settle down to waiting—the hardest of
•the lot. The order, “Fix bayonets: First whistle, mount fire-
step; second whistle, charge!” is passed along to us from the
commanding officer further up the line. “Make no noise! is
the final order.
“Make no i!oise!” No noise in this fearful din. Uncon-
sciously we speak in whispers. Although the order is funny to
an extreme, it has to be obeyed. The order incessantly tiffs


through the brain, “Make no noise!” You feel as if you want
to tell it to everybody, with the result, if a shell makes a sound
a little bit out of the ordinary you jump unknowingly.
A sudden whipping and crackling in the air above us and
we know the shrapnel shells are coming over. The Corporal
gives the very unnecessary command, “Down!” But we are
down long before the order formed on his lips, for we well
know the result of standing up while shrapnel is whizzing
through the air. One chap went back to hospital with a piece
in his head yesterday.
At last we hear the report, sharp bark of our trench mor-
tars, followed by a rumbling snarl as they strike the wind. Men
clutch their rifles closer to them. It is a little comfort to feel
the sleek, smooth wood-work of the rifle. It is a true friend!
The shells are coming over in hundreds, and we know that every
field-piece from the smallest to the largest is working overtime.
Again we get the order,. “Fix bayonets!” This order is the
height of a soldier’s ambition. What we have all been trained
up to is to take this order. “Fix bayonets!” calmly and as a
matter of course. This is the moment men have waited for
since first enlisting. How many men have tried to picture this
moment when training on the sands of Egypt. It could be fit-
tingly described as the climax of a soldier’s life. What will fol-
low in the next half-hour is what the soldier has been trained
up to; and that, in a nutshell, is to kill, as quickly as possible,
and, at the same time, to be careful of his own life. ~ Is it any
wonder mens hands tremble and shake as they fix the bayonets
to their rifles? Soldiers have been described in the doing of
that act as bloodthirsty; but it is hardly so. Is a prospector,
who, after searching for gold for twelve months, finds his heart’s
desire, greedy? Is a soldier to be described as bloodthirsty
when he cries for vengeance for helpless women and babes, who
have been foully murdered.’' No! So we fix bayonets and get
slightly hot in the head in the doing of it. The heat in the head
gradually develops into an all-consuming flame, scorching and
searing refinement, *mtil we emerge different men. Supermen!
with the lust to kill; the lust to kill those who have killed with-
out cause; they who have murdered women, outraged children,
and slaughtered old men, for lust only— not for any military
achievement.
1 he crashing and banging of the shells make us half deliri-
ous and incapable of thinking properly. Someone tries to raise
a laugh, but fails miserably. Every man is listening to the hiss-
ing, moaning wail of the shells, interspersed with demoralising
crashes. It pulsates and throbs through the brain till it takes
on an unearthly scream that seems to say, “Kill or be killed!
Kill or be killed!! Kill or ”
A cry of, “Ten men, stretcher-bearers! Ten men, stretcher-
bearers!” helps us to gain control over our wandering thoughts.
Still the cry goes on—“ Ten men, stretcher-bearers! Ten men,
stretcher —’ A sharp hiss, a crash, and we find ourselves
repeating the sentence that will never be finished in this world—
“ Ten men, stretcher-bearers! Ten men, stretcher-bearers!”


A shell whizzes just over our heads and fails to explode. “A
dud,” the Corporal jerks out, his voice sounding odd and out of
place. We laugh—a shrill, mirthless laugh, that in ordinary
times could never come from men; a laugh full of ironical
satire, sounding unearthly and unreal.
Again the order comes, “Five minutes; no noise! Section
commanders, keep the men in proper alignment!”
The roar and the din of the shells suddenly abates. From
far behind our lines we hear the sweet music of the church belts,
calling the very old and the very young to early morning Mass.
What memories those bells bring back! Ihe time when
went to church; when we were classed as “good” by the people
of the town; how we used to say our prayers. But all is well;
we are still all right. Instead of prayer, we fight—tight tor
religion! Prayers are useless when not backed up by a firm
resolve. Two strong arms and spirit are worth a thousand
prayers when the -War God is stalking through the land feeding
on men’s blood. Thousands of such thoughts flit and pass
through our minds like so many shadows. At the consoling'
sound of the bells Tommy begins to hum a sarcastic ditty—
“Take me over the sea, where the Germans can’t snipe at me;
Oh, my! 1 don’t want to die; I want to go home ”
The Corporal is putting the final words to a much-begrimed
letter of farewell to his loved ones. It has been in his pocket
for months awaiting this moment. “Good-bye, good luck, dor. t
worry!” he unconsciously murmurs as he writes. “Good-bye,
good luck, don’t worry.” 'it keeps repeating in our minds. The
Corporal looks strangely wan and worried as he replaces the
letter in his pocket.
Tommy asks of a comrade, “ ’Ave you said Good-bye, good
luck,’ laddie?” The answer'comes brief and to the point.
“N’ope; ain’t goin’ to be ‘sloughed’ te-daji.” “How der >er
know?” “Dunuo; something seems ter tell me my Juck’s in.
Then, as if not quite certain, “Hope so, anyway. Thats
right, crack hardy. Why, yer might git floors on yer grave if
yer luck’s in. Yer might! Luck’s a fortune!” “Yes; lucks a
fortune, all right,” answers the man, his face twisting up into a
devil-may-care grin.
From a little to our left a signal is given. “Pheet!” —t ie
signal for us to mount the fire-step. Another minute and we
will be out in that strip of land which has been falsely named
“No Man’s Land!” Another minute before we know our fate!
What a long time it seems—hours, days, years! “Pheet!” We
crawl and slide over the parapet, the Corporal taking the leal
and giving us our pace. “Keep back!” he hisses, through wire.
We advance stealthily, silently, truly; grim men with a
grim dut}'. Every man keeps in line as though on parade. For
a mile each side of us our comrades are doing the same. Men
stumble into old shell holes, recover themselves, and press
steadily on, with never a sound. Much depends on our silence.
If we are heard approaching, before we get anywhere near them
■—well, the game is up! The Germans, knowing full well our


trenches will be packed to overflowing, waiting for the moment
when we wull need reinforcements, will deal with us, and then
turn their field pieces on to the trenches we have just vacated.
We have to be careful!
Hardly are we on to his barb wire, than we are seen. A
sudden, sharp signal from the. enemy’s trench, and then “Swish,
swish, swish!” Two men go down with the first stream of
lead. Luckily they are firing high! The next man to go down
is our Corporal. He slaps his hand to his head, half-turns in
his stride, and drops. We know he is mortally wounded, but
cannot stop to help him.
Tommy darts ahead into the Corporal’s place, yelling as he
does, “By hell, boys, we want the first dozen we come across
for that!” As if for answer, bayonets are lowered, gleaming
wicked and sinister in the early morning light. All caution is
thrown to the winds now we know we are seen.
“Right!” Tommy yells, as he breaks into a run. A long line
of evil-looking men, with bodies crouched as if for a spring, and
with bayonets lowered, sweep after him.
What follows is hidden by a red mist before the eyes. All
you know is that you are amongst the Germans —amongst the
enemy; to kill him; if not to kill him, to be killed yourself, Ten
minutes, maybe an hour, before you regain your normal senses.
No enmity is felt for the dead Germans in the trench. They
fought well; we fought better. A badly-wounded German asks
for a drink of water, or something to that effect. He is given a
drink, and then disarmed.
High up in the heavens we hear the droning buzz of an
aeroplane. We look up to see if it is one of ours or “Fritz’s.”
At last we catch a glimpse of it outlined against the morning
sun. Away up there it looks a mere speck. It is behind our
lines, making towards us, so we surmise it is ours. It is nearly
overhead before we see the red, white and blue emblem on the
under part of its wings.
It is cheering to see it sail along so calmly, sedately. It
may also give our artillery some targets to fire at. We hope so.
It will give us a little respite. The enemy are sure to answer
our guns if they begin to “feel” for his batteries. It will relieve
the strain on the trenches, and may even develop into an artil-
lery duel.
The ’plane is barely half-way over “No Man’s Land” before
the enemy’s “Archies” are flinging shells at it. The light anti-
aircraft shells make a musical sound soaring towards the
heavens—like a deep bass and a shrill treble intermingled into
a musical one.
The ’plane dives, rises, slides over, and rights itself. We
marvel how it escapes, but steady eyes and steady nerves are
guiding it on its way. We are not the only ones in danger, and
that fact, somehow, seems to give us a feeling of security. At
last we see one, two, three smoke balls drop from the aeroplane.
The men up there watching have discovered an enemy battery
are giving its positions away to our gunners.
Tommy hands around his water bottle. We drink sparingly
by wetting our lips and tongues, and passing it on. We have


not got too much water, au,d if the enemy keeps up the barrage
much longer somebody will have to attempt to get back to out-
second line and get some, and that will mean almost certain
death. After replacing his water bottle, Tommy begins to feel
through his pockets. After a lot of hunting and turning out of
pockets, he reveals the object of his search —a cigarette butt and
some matches. He lights the precious portion of cigarette.
Every man, as if obeying an order, puts down his rifle and
watches the owner of the “butt.” We watch him greedily, our
mouths moist with anticipation. He takes a long draw, gulping
the smoothing smoke well back into his lungs, holding it there
as if loth to part with it.
One of the hungry ones begins to ransack his tunic pockets.
He knows full well there are no cigarettes there, but it is some
consolation to search for one. He goes through his pockets
slowly, methodically, his hands trembling. He may find a butt;
one never knows. His face suddenly lights up like a man who
has made a startling discovery. We hold our breath as he dis-
engages his hand from his pocket. At last we see what he has
found —a ten-shilling note. He looks at it in his hand —this note,
this sign of wealth.
Our faces drop. What can money buy here? What is the
use of money when duty, expectant comrades, expects you to
produce something better, even it be a cigarette? What can
money buy? Fame, with the loss of honour? Is money to be
a substitute for a cigarette? Is it any wonder one man sneers
with scorn, and yet cannot tell why it has affected him so?
Up on the fire-step, Tommy lounges, his feet moving lazily
to and fro, his eyes half-closed. We could kill him for his idle
content. “Here, Tommy, I’ll give you this half-quid for a
draw.” Tommy closes his eyes, and leans back, opening his
eyes again to expel a cloud of smoke from his lungs.
This is a worse torture than shell fire. We smell the faint,
haunting fragrance of the precious weed; it bites deep into our
vitals. “Tommy, I’ll give yer this half-qufd for a draw,” in
piteous tones from the “moneyed man.” ,
Tommy takes another draw, then, taking the cigarette lov-
ingly from betweeen his teeth, straightens up and asks quietly,
“Do yer think I’m after blood money, boy? Stick that half-quid
in yer kick, and have a go at this. Give ’em all a go at it, it’s
theirs as much as mine.” And Tommy—big, wicked-looking,
white-hearted Tommy—begins to oil his rifle in preparation for
his next “stunt.”
The artillery have suddenly got tired of what they have
been doing—destroying human life. We sit back for awhile.
Some are drowsing. After the strenuous work of the last few
days everybody is more or less a little fanciful. One man men-
tions Australia! Several men get up and move about aimlessly.
We do not want to awake the old longing for our native land.
But we have lost our Corporal, and we feel a little bit senti-
mental, so we gather together and talk.
One man takes us back to Australia by his talk of the last
walk he had with his sweetheart. Nobody laughs. We have all


been through the same, if not with a sweetheart, a mother.
Someone asks, “Is she a dinkum tart?” The answer comes,
dreary and far away, “Yes, dinkum.” We let it go at that. We
talk of our homes, our hopes, our ambitions.
• A young farmer begins to tell us his story—a story of- ai
greater, silent battle than the one we are now in; a story of
hardships, work, and privation. He carries our minds vividly
back to Australia by his talk of the great Australian bush. He
takes our minds away from the blood-soaked trenches and trans-
plants them on a hill overlooking his homestead. •
He musters his sheep for our inspection; shows us his
cattle, his ploughed land. He points out where the great bush
fire swept through hisUand. The next year a drought. He shows
us the skeletons of his animals. Now, when it is too late, as if
in mockery, long sprouts of grass grow around them. “Even the
rabbits died that year,” he tells us. We see old Dobbin, the
horse who is getting lazy fat for want of work.
We go to the gully at the back of the house. The sun is
sinking. As it sinks still lower .it turns the green of the trees
to darker green, from darker green to a thousand and one shades
of amber. The highest peaks of this, Nature’s own castle, stand
out in vivid relief as the sun dips behind them. A little way up
the gully a little brown rabbit peeps timidly out of its burrow.
The silence giving it courage, it comes out to feed on the fresh,
young undergrowth. From away up on the hill comes the
voice of a lyre bird, as he parades himself,' full of vanity and
love-making.
As we have had enough of sight-seeing for the time being,
we move back to the homestead for tea. As if in reality, we
partake of the good things—brown bread, cream, cakes, and
butter. After tea, we sit around the fire. Two little children
to kiss their father good-night. “Good-night! Nanny;
Jack.” “Good-night, dad, and ‘Dawd’ bless you!”
The clock on the mantelpiece strikes the hour of eleven.
Everything is at rest outside. In the big gum by the side of the
house, a native bear cries out—a human, pathetic cry, full of
sympathy and sorrow. A mopoke’s call rings out, dull and
monotonous. A moth batters its wings against the lamp-glass.
The attractive things are always dangerous. Soon the place is
in darkness. A mischievous ’possum scampers over the stable
roof; the horses stop their contented munching for a moment
and then continue.
Away out here on the hills lies rest. , v . . A cock crows from
the hen-roost; the fowls preen their wings. . . . Morning is
breaking, a calm, peaceful morn, heralded in by the musical lay
of the magpie.


Discipline
Sergeant-Major to a Private who has missed eleven shots
out of twelve:
“What! eleven misses! Good heavens, man, go around the
corner and shoot yourself.”
Hearing a shot around the corner, the Sergeant-Major
rushes around, to be confronted by the bad shot.
“Sorry, sir, another miss,” the Private murmurs.
An Australian, a Scotchman, and an Irishman were walking
along a street in Boulogne.
A pretty French girl passed them.
“Oh,” said the Scotchman, “I wish ’twas wee Mary.”
“I wish it was Bridget,” said the Irishman.
“Um,” said the Australian, “I wish it was dark.”
Frenchman, to British soldiers, as they are parting:
Tommy: “Au Reservoir! Au Reservoir! Mon cher.”
Frenchman: “Tanksl Tanks! Frendt.”
Old Lady (on her first visit to a military hospital): “Well,
my good man, and where did you get wounded?”
Australian: “In Gallipoli, mum.”
Old Lady: “But, my good man, how did you get wounded?”
Exasperated Australian: “ ’Ar stung in the foot by a camel.”
Sergeant (instructing squad of Tommies);
“Now, boys, there is one thing I wish to impress on you.
Be very careful not to get into any arguments with civilians.
For instance, if you are in a public-house and a civilian gets
quarrelsome and starts arguing, each man should finish his beer
and walk out and leave him. Now, Brown, what would you do
if a civilian came in and insulted you?”
Brown: “Why, I’d drink up his beer and hook it.”
Officer, inspecting first line of resistance; “What soldiers
are in this trench, my man?”
“First Sussex Regiment, sir.”
After going along a little further, he questions again: “What
soldiers are in this trench, my man?”
“What the ’as it got to do with you?”
“Oh, is this the Australian trench?” the officer said, quvu"
surprised, v


SUNDRY VERSE
WAR.
Shrieking, swirling, stricken grandeur;
Big shells hurtle overhead;
Moaning wails of funereal sadness,
Crying vengeance for the dead.
Speaking, crawling, creeping gasses,
Nauseating God’s good air;
Like Satan’s ghouls at midnight
Creeping—leaping out their lair.
Whizzing hiss of half-spent bullets:
Bombs explode with hellish crash.
All around the wounded lying,
Wrecks of manhood . . . glorified.
Weird sights and strange enchantments;
Stately trees sigh overhead;
Weeping wails of mournful sadness. —
Wailing, for heroic dead.
Clinging, sodden, mud-soaked trenches;
Poppies, daisies, growing there;
Cursing, shrieking, maddened manhood;
Yes, my God! they all were there.
Silent, now, the battle over;
Silent also are the dead;
Silent breaks the dawn of morrow,
Hark! ... a thrush sings overhead.
GRIM SARCASM
Bill: “Give us a ‘fag.’ ”
Horace: “Garn, yer bot, yer’ll want flowers on yer grave,
yer will.”


Tommy (to Australian): “That was a rare plucky thing you
did this morning, to bring your mate in under that heavy fire.”
Australian: “Yairs, the blarsted cow, he had all me b
tobacco with him.”
RAILWAY STATION IN FRANCE
(Battalion of Australians going from one front to another.
Australian, alighting, to French civilian, on platform):
“Hey! Mushhoor! Where would a bloke get a bottle of
whiskey?”
“Non-compreney!” (shrugging his shoulders).
“Whiskey! YOU know!” (making motions as if drinking).
“Ah! Whiskey no bon! no bon, Messier!”
“Get out, yer cow! I know where there is a pond full of big
green frogs, and I won’t tell you where it is.”
An Australian, in a bar, somewhere in France. Enter three
or four Americans. They order beer all round. After a while,
“Say, Kid, this beer is considerably flat, ain’t it?”
“I suppose it is,” said Australia. “It has been waiting here
three years for you to come and drink it.”
Billjim, in a Tommy Hospital in Blighty.
Doctor, adjusting eye-glass; “Haw, my man. Lost your
eye, I see.”
“Oh, no! I’ve left it in France to watch my kit till I get
back.” , ,
Billjim, with a couple of German prisoners, to Corporal:
“Hey! These silly cows are dopy. This one says he
comes from Brunswick, and he don’t know where the Sydney
road is; and this coot says he comes from Heidelberg, and never
heard of the Yarra.”
